DIRECTIONS for procuring the best FLESH, VEGETABLES, &c. How to choose Flesh. BEEF. The large stall fed ox beef is the best, it has a coarse open grain, and oily smoothness; dent it with your finger and it will immediately rise again; if old, it will be rough and spungy, and the dent remain. Cow Beef is less boned, and generally more tender and juicy than the ox, in America, which is used to labor. Mutton, grass-fed, is good two or three years old. Lamb, if under six months is rich, and no danger of imposition; it may be known by its size, in distinguishing either. Veal, is soon lost---great care therefore is necessary in purchasing. Veal bro't to market in panniers, or in carriages, is to be preferred to that bro't in bags, and flouncing on a sweaty horse. Pork, is known by its size, and whether properly fattened by its appearance. Fish, how to choose the best in market. Salmon, the noblest and richest fish taken in fresh water---the largest are the best. They are unlike almost every other fish, are ameliorated by being 3 or 4 days out of water, if kept from heat and the moon, which has much more injurious effect than the sun. In all great fish-markets, great fish-mongers strictly examine the gills - if the bright redness is exchanged for a low brown, they are stale; but when live fish are brought flouncing into market, you have only to select the kind most agreeable to your palate and the season. Shad, contrary to the generally received opinion are not so much richer flavored, as they are harder when first taken out of the water; opinions vary respecting them. I have tasted Shad thirty or forty miles from the place where caught, and really conceived that they had a richness of flavor, which did not appertain to those taken fresh and cooked immediately, and have proved both at the same table, and the truth may rest here, that a Shad 36 or 48 hours out of water, may not cook so hard and solid, and be esteemed so elegant, yet give a higher relished flavor to the taste. Every species generally of salt water Fish, are best fresh from the water, though the Hannah Hill, Black Fish, Lobster, Oyster, Flounder, Bass, Cod, Haddock, and Eel, with many others, may be transported by land many miles, find a good market, and retain a good relish; but as generally, live ones are bought first, deceits are used to give them a freshness of appearance, such as pepperingthe gills, wetting the fins and tails, and even painting the gills, or wetting with animal blood. Experience and attention will dictate the choice of the best. Fresh gills, full bright eyes, moist fins and tails, denotes their being fresh caught; if they are soft, it is certain they are stale, but if deceits are used, your smell must approve or denounce them, and be your safest guide. Of all fresh water fish, there are none that require, or so well afford haste in cookery, as the Salmon Trout, they are best when caught under a fall or cateract - from what philosophical circumstance is yet unsettled, yet true it is, that at the foot of a fall the waters are much colder than at the head; Trout choose those waters; if taken from them and hurried into dress, they are genuinely good; and take rank in point of superiority of flavor, of most other fish. Perch and Roach, are noble pan fish, the deeper the water from whence taken, the finer are their flavors; if taken from shallow water, with muddy bottoms, they are impregnated therewith, and are unsavory. Eels, though taken from muddy bottoms, are best to jump in the pan. Most white or soft fish are best bloated, which is done by salting, peppering and drying in the sun, and in a chimney; after 30 or 40 hours drying, are best broiled, and moistened with butter, &c. Poultry---how to choose. Chickens, of either kind are good, and the yellow leg'd the best, and their taste the sweetest. Capons, if young are good, are known by short spurs and smooth legs. A Goose, if young, the bill will be yellow, and will have but few hairs, the bones will crack easily; but if old, the contrary, the bill will be red, and the pads still redder; the joints stiff and difficultly disjointed; if young, otherwise; choose one not very fleshy on the breast. Ducks, are similar to geese. Wild Ducks, have redder pads, and smaller than the tame ones, otherwise are like the goose or tame duck, or to be chosen by the same rules. Wood Cocks, ought to be thick, fat and flesh firm, the nose dry, and throat clear. Snipes, if young and fat, have full veins under the wing, and are small in the veins, otherwise like the Woodcock. Partridges, if young, will have black bills, yellowish legs; if old, the legs look bluish; if old or stale, it may be perceived by smelling at their mouths. Pigeons, young, have light red legs, and the flesh of a color, and prick easily - old have red legs, blackish in parts, more hairs, plumper and loose vents - so also of grey or green Plover, Black Birds, Thrash, Lark, and wild Fowl in general. Hares, are white flesh'd and flexible when new and fresh kill'd; if stale, their flesh will have a blackish hue, like old pigeons, if the cleft in her lip spread much, is wide and ragged, she is old; the contrary when young. Leveret, is like the Hare in every respect, that some are obliged to search for the knob, or small bone on the fore leg or foot, to distinguish them. Rabbits, the wild are the best, either are good and tender; if old there will be much yellowish fat about the kidneys, the claws long, wool rough, and mixed with gray hairs; if young the reverse. As to their being fresh, judge by the scent, they soon perish, if trap'd or shot, and left in pelt or undressed; their taint is quicker than veal, and the most sickish in nature; and will not, like beef or veal be purged by fire. The cultivation of Rabbits would be profitable in America, if the best methods were pursued - they are a very prolific and profitable animal - they are easily cultivated if properly attended, but not otherwise. - A Rabbit's borough, on which 8000 dollars may have been expended, might be very profitable; but on a smaller scale they would be well near market towns - easier bred, and more valuable. Butter -- Tight, waxy, yellow butter is better than white or crumbly, which soon becomes rancid frowy. Go into the centre of balls or rolls to prove and judge it; if in firkin, the middle is to be preferred, as the sides are frequently distasted by the wood of the firkin - altho' oak are used for years. New pine tubs are ruinous to the butter. To have sweet butter in dog days, and thro' the vegetable seasons, send stone pots to honest, neat, and trusty dairy people, and procure it pack'd down in May, and let them be brought in, in the night, or cool rainy morning, covered with a clean cloth wet in cold water, and partake of no heat from the horse, and set the pots in the coldest part of your cellar, or in the ice-house. Some say that May butter thus preserved, will go into the winter use, better than fall made butter. Cheese -- The red smooth moist coated, and tight pressed, square edged Cheese, are better than white coat, hard rinded, or bilged; the inside should be yellow and flavored to your taste. Old shelves which have only been wiped down for years are preferable to scoured and washed shelves. Deceits are used by salt -petreing the out side, or colouring with hemlock, cocumberries, or safron, infused into the milk; the taste of either supercedes every possible evasion. Eggs -- Clear, thin shell'd, longest oval and sharp ends are best; to ascertain whether new or stale - hold to the light, if the white is clear, the yolk regularly in the centre they are good - but if otherwise they are stale. The best possible method of ascertaining, is to put them into water, if they lie on their bilge, they are good and fresh - if they bob up on end they are stale, and if they rise they are addled, proved, and of no use. We proceed to ROOTS and VEGETABLES - and the best cook cannot alter the first quality, they must be good, or the cook will be disappointed. Potatoes, take rank for universal use, profit and easy acquirement. The smooth skin, known by the name of Howe's Potatoe , is the most mealy and richest flavor'd; the yellow rusticoat next best; the red, and red rusticoat are tolerable; and the yellow Spanish have their value - those cultivated from imported seed on sandy or dry loomy lands, are best for table use; though the red or either will produce more in rich, loomy, highly manured garden grounds; new lands and a sandy soil, afford the richest flavor'd; and most mealy Potatoe much depends on the ground on which they grow - more on the species of Potatoes planted - and still more from foreign seeds - and each may be known by attention to connoisseurs; for a good Potatoe comes up in many branches of cookery, as herein after prescribed.---All Potatoes should be dug before the rainy seasons in the fall, well dryed in the sun, kept from frost and dampness during the winter, in the spring removed from the cellar to a dry loft, and spread thin, and frequently stirred and dried, or they will grow and be thereby injured for cookery. A roast Potatoe is brought on with roast Beef, a Stake, a Chop, or Fricassee; good boiled with a boiled dish; make an excellent stuffing for a turkey, water or wild fowl; make a good pie, and a good starch for many uses. All potatoes run out or depreciate in America; a fresh importation of the spanish might restore them to table use. It would swell this treatise too much to say every thing that is useful to prepare a good table, but I may be pardoned by observing, that the Irish have preserved a genuine mealy rich Potatoe , for a century, which takes rank of any known in any other kingdom; and I have heard that they renew their seed by planting and cultivating the Seed Ball, which grows on the vine. The manner of their managing it to keep up the excellency of that root, would better suit a treatise on agriculture and gardening than this - and be inserted in a book which would be read by the farmer, instead of his amiable daughter. If no one treats on the subject, it may appear in the next edition. Onions - The Medeira white is best in market, esteemed softer flavored, and not so fiery, but the high red, round hard onions are the best; if you consult cheapness, the largest are best; if you consult taste and softness, the very smallest are the most delicate, and used at the first tables. Onions grow in the richest, highest cultivated ground, and better and better year after year, on the same ground. Beets, grow on any ground, but best on loom, or light gravel grounds; the red is the richest and best approved; the white has a sickish sweetness, which is disliked by many. Parsnips, are a valuable root, cultivated best in rich old grounds, and doubly deep plowed, late sown, they grow thrifty, and are not so prongy; they may be kept any where and any how, so that they do not grow with heat, or are nipped with frost; if frosted let them thaw in earth; they are richer flavored when plowed out of the ground in April, having stood out during the winter, though they will not last long after and commonly more sticky and hard in the centre. Carrots, are managed as it respects plowing and rich ground, similarly to Parsnips. The yellow are better than the orange or red; middling siz'd, that is, a foot long and two inches thick at the top end, are better than overgrown ones; they are cultivated best with onions, sowed very thin, and mixed with other seeds, while young, or six weeks after sown, especially if with onions on true onion ground. They are good with veal cookery, rich in soups, excellent with hash, in May and June. Garlicks, Though used by the French, are better adapted to the uses of medicine than cookery. Asparagus - The mode of cultivation belongs to gardening; your business is only to cut and dress, the largest is best, the growth of a day sufficient, six inches long, and cut just above the ground; many cut below the surface, under an idea of getting tender shoots, and preserving the bed; but it enfeebles the root: dig round it and it will be wet with the juices - but if cut above ground, and just as the dew is going off, the sun will either reduce the juice, or send it back to nourish the root - it is an excellent vegetable. Parsley, of the three kinds, the thickest and branchiest is the best, is sown among onions, or in a bed by itself, may be dried for winter use; tho' a method which I have experienced is much better - In September I dig my roots, procure an old thin stave dry cask, bore holes an inch diameter in every stave, 6 inches asunder round the cask and up to the top - take first a half bushel of rich garden mould and put into the cask, then run the roots through the staves, leaving the branches outside, press the earth tight about the root within, and thus continue on through the respective stories, till the cask is full; it being filled, run an iron bar through the centre of the dirt in the cask, and fill it with water, let it stand on the south and east side of a building till frosty nights, then remove it. (by slinging a roap round the cask ) into the cellar; where, during the winter, I clip with my scissars the fresh parsley, which my neighbors or myself have occasion for; and in the spring transplant the roots in the bed in the garden, or in any unused corner - or let stand upon the wharf or the wash shed. It is an useful mode of cultivation, and a pleasurable tasted herb, and much used in garnishing viands. Raddish, Salmon colored is the best, purple next best - white - turnip - each are produced from southern seeds, annually. They grow thriftiest sown among onions. The turnip Raddish will last well through the winter. Artichokes - The Jerusalem is best, are cultivated like potatoes , (tho' their stocks grow 7 feet high) and may be preserved like the turnip raddish, or pickled - they like, Horse Raddish, once in the garden, can scarcely ever be totally eradicated; plowing or digging them up with that view, seems at times, rather to increase and spread them. Cucumbers, are of many kinds; the prickly is best for pickles, but generally bitter; the white is difficult to raise and tender; choose the bright green, smooth and proper sized. Melons - The Water Melon is cultivated on sandy soils only, above latitude 41 1-2, if a stratum of land be dug from a well, it will bring the first year good Water Melons; the red cored are highest flavored; a hard rine proves them ripe. Muskmelons, are various, the rough skinned is best to eat; the short, round, fair skinned, is best for Mangoes. Lettuce, is of various kinds; the purple spotted leaf is generally the tenderest, and free from bitter - Your taste must guide your market. Cabbage, requires a page, they are so multifarious. Note, all cabbages have a higher relish that grow on new unmanured grounds; if grown in an old town and on old gardens, they have a rankness, which at times, may be perceived by a fresh air traveller. This observation has been experienced for years - that Cabbages require new ground, more than Turnips. The Low Dutch, only will do in old gardens. The Early Yorkshire, must have rich soils, they will not answer for winter, they are easily cultivated, and frequently bro't to market in the fall, but will not last the winter. The Green Savoy, is fine and tender; and although they do not head like the Dutch or Yorkshire, yet the tenderness of the out leaves is a counterpoise, it will last through the winter, and are high flavored. The Yellow Savoy, takes next rank, but will not last so long; all Cabbages will mix, and participate of other species, like Indian Corn; they are culled, best in plants; and a true gardener will, in the plant describe those which will head, and which will not. This is new, but a fact. The gradations in the Savoy Cabbage are discerned by the leaf; the richest and most scollup'd, and crinkled, and thickest Green Savoy, falls little short of a Collisflower. The red and redest small tight heads, are best for slaw, it will not boil well, comes out black or blue, and tinges other things with which it is boiled. BEANS. The Clabboard Bean, is easiest cultivated and collected, are good for string beans, will shell - must be poled. The Windsor Bean, is an earlier, good string, or shell Bean. Crambury Bean, is rich, but not universally approved equal to the other two. Frost Bean, is good only to shell. Six Weeks Bean, is a yellowish Bean, and early brought forward, and tolerable. Lazy Bean, is tough, and needs no pole. English Bean what they denominate the Horse Bean, is mealy when young, is profitable, easily cultivated, and may be raised on wornout grounds; I cannot but recommend the more extensive cultivation of them. The small White Bean, is best for winter use, and excellent. Calivanse, are run out, a yellow small bush, a black speck or eye, are tough and tasteless, and little worth in cookery, and scarcely bear exportation. Peas - Green Peas. The Crown Imperial, takes rank in point of flavor, they blossom, purple and white on the top of the vines, will run from three to five feet high, should be set in light sandy soil only, or they run too much to vines. The Crown Pea, is second in richness of flavor. The Rondekaval, is large and bitterish. Early Carlton, is produced first in the season - good. Marrow Fats, green, yellow, and is large, easily cultivated, not equal to others. Sugar Pea, needs no bush, the pods are tender and good to eat, easily cultivated. Spanish Manratto, is a rich Pea, requires a strong high bush. All Peas should be picked carefully from the vines as soon as dew is off, shelled and cleaned without water, and boiled immediately; they are thus the richest flavored. Herbs, useful in Cookery. Thyme, is good in soups and stuffings. Sweet Marjoram, is used in Turkeys. Summer Savory, ditto, and in Sausages and salted Beef, and legs of Pork. Sage, is used in Cheese and Pork, but not generally approved. Parsley, good in soups, and to garnish roast Beef, excellent with bread and butter in the spring. Penny Royal, is a high aromatic, although a spontaneous herb in old ploughed fields, yet might be more generally cultivated in gardens, and used in cookery and medicine. Sweet Thyme, is most useful and best approved in cookery. FRUITS. Pears, There are many different kinds; but the large Bell Pear, sometimes called the Pound Pear, the yellowist is the best, and in the same town they differ essentially. Hard Winter Pear, are innumerable in their qualities, are good in sauces, and baked. Harvest and Summer Pear are a tolerable desert, are much improved in this country, as all other fruits are by grafting and inoculation. Apples, are still more various, yet rigidly retain their own species, and are highly useful in families, and ought to be more universally cultivated, excepting in the compactest cities. There is not a single family but might set a tree in some otherwise useless spot, which might serve the two fold use of shade and fruit; on which 12 or 14 kinds of fruit trees might easily be engrafted, and essentially preserve the orchard from the intrusion of boys, &c. which is too common in America. If the boy who thus planted a tree, and guarded and protected it in a useless corner, and carefully engrafted different fruits, was to be indulged free access into orchards, whilst the neglectful boy was prohibited - how many millions of fruit trees would spring into growth - and what a saving to the union. The nett saving would in time extinguish the public debt, and enrich our cookery. Currents, are easily grown from shoots trimmed off from old bunches, and set carelessly in the ground; they flourish in all soils, and make good jellies - their cultivation ought to be encouraged. Black currents, may be cultivated - but until they can be dried, and until sugars are propagated, they are in a degree unprofitable. Grapes, are natural to the climate; grow spontaneously in every state in the union, and ten degrees north of the line of the union. The Madeira, Lisbon, and Malaga Grapes, are cultivated in gardens in this country, and are a rich treat or desert. Trifling attention only is necessary for their ample growth. Having pointed out the best methods of judging of the qualities of Viands, Poultry, Fish, Vegetables, &c. We now present the best approved methods of DRESSING and COOKING them; and to suit all tastes, present the following RECEIPTS. To Roast Beef. THE general rules are, to have a brisk hot fire to hang down rather than to spit, to baste with salt and water, and one quarter of an hour to every pound of beef, though tender beef will require less, while old tough beef will require more roasting; pricking with a fork will determine you whether done or not; rare done is the healthiest and the taste of this age. Roast Mutton. If a breast let it be cauled, if a leg, stuffed or not, let it be done more gently than beef, and done more; the chine, saddle or leg require more fire and longer time than the breast, &c. Garnish with scraped horse redish, and serve with potatoes, beans, collisflowers, water-cresses, or boiled onions, caper sauce, mashed turip, or lettuce. Roast Veal. As it is more tender than beef or mutton, and easily scorched, paper it, especially the fat parts, lay it some distance from the fire a while to heat gently, baste it well; a 15 pound piece requires one hour and a quarter roasting; garnish with green parsley and sliced lemon. Roast Lamb. Lay down to a clear good fire that will not want stirring or altering, baste with butter, dust on flour, baste with the dripping, and before you take it up, add more butter and sprinkle on a little salt and parsley shred fine; send to table with a nice sallad, green peas, fresh beans, or a colisflower, or asparagus. To roast Mutton, Venison fashion. Take a hind quarter of fat mutton, and cut the legs like a haunch; lay it in a pan with the back side of it down; pour a bottle of red wine over it, and let it lie twenty four hours; then spit it, and baste it with the same liquor and butter all the time it is roasting, at a good quick fire and two hours and a half will do it. Have a little good gravy in a boat, and current jelly in another. To roast a Breast of Mutton with Forc'd-meat. A breast of mutton dressed thus is very good; the forc'd-meat must be put under the skin at the end, and then the skin pinned down with thorns; before you dredge it, wash it over with a bunch of feathers dipt in eggs. Garnish with lemon; and put good gravy in the dish. To stuff a Turkey. Grate a wheat loaf , one quarter of a pound butter, one quarter of a pound salt pork, finely chopped, two eggs, a little sweet marjoram, summer savory, parsley and sage, pepper and salt (if the pork be not sufficient,) fill the bird and sew it up. The same will answer for all Wild Fowl. Water Fowls require onions. The same ingredients stuff a leg of Veal, fresh Pork, or a loin of veal, How to stuff and roast a Turkey, or Fowl. One pound soft wheat bread, 3 ounces beef suet, 3 eggs a littlesweet thyme, sweet marjoram, pepper and salt, and some add a gill of wine; fill the bird therewith and sew it up, hang down to a steady solid fire, basting frequently with salt and water, and roast until a steam emits from the breast, put one third of a pound of butter into the gravy; dust flour over the bird and baste with the gravy; serve up with boiled onions and cramberry sauce, mangoes, picles or cellery. 2. Others omit the sweet herbs, and add parsley done with potatoes. 3. Boil and mash 3 pints potatoes, wet them with butter, add sweet herbs, pepper, salt, fill and roast as above. To stuff and roast a Goslin. Boil the inwards tender, chop them fine, put double quantity of grated bread, 4 ounces butter, pepper, salt, (and sweet herbs if you like) 2 eggs moulded into the stuffing, parboil 4 onions and chop them into the stuffing, add wine, and roast the bird. The above is a good stuffing for every kind of Water Fowl which requires onion sauce. To smother a Fowl in Oysters. Fill the bird with dry Oysters, and sew it up and boil it in water just sufficient to cover the bird, salt and season to your taste - when done tender, put into a deep dish and pour over it a pint of stewed oysters, well buttered and peppered, garnish a turkey with sprigs of parsley or leaves of cellery: a fowl is best with a parsley sauce. To stuff a leg of Veal, Take one pound of veal, half pound pork (salted,) one pound grated bread, chop all very fine, with a handful of green parsley, pepper it, add 3 ounces butter and 3 eggs, (and sweet herbs if you like them,) cut the leg round like a ham and stab it full of holes, and fill in all the stuffing; then salt and pepper the legand dust on some flour; if baked in an oven, put into a sauce pan with a little water, if potted, lay some scewers at the bottom of the pot, put in a little water and lay the leg on the scewers, with a gentle fire render it tender, (frequently adding water, ) when done take out the leg, put butter in the pot and brown the leg,the gravy in a seperate vessel must be thickened and buttered and a spoonful of ketchup added. To stuff a leg of Pork to bake or roast. Corn the leg 48 hours and stuff it with sausage meat and bake in an oven two hours and an half or roast. To alamode a round of Beef. To a 14 or 16 pound round of beef, put one ounce salt-petre, 48 hours after stuff it with the following: one and an half pound of beef, one pound salt pork, two pound grated bread, chop all fine and rub in half pound butter, salt, pepper and cayenne, summer savory, thyme; lay it on scewers in a large pot, over three pints hot water (which it must occasionally be supplied with,) the steam of which in 4 or 5 hours will render the round tender if over a moderate fire; when tender, take away the gravy and thicken with flour and butter, and boil, brown the round with butter and flour, adding ketchup and wine to your taste. To alamode a round. Take fat pork cut in slices or mince, season it with pepper, salt, sweet marjoram and thyme, cloves, mace and nutmeg, make holes in the beef and stuff it the night before cooked; put some bones across the bottom of the pot to keep from burning, put in one quart clarret wine, one quart water and one onion; lay the round on the bones, cover close and stop it round the top with dough; hang on in the morning and stew gently two hours; turn it, and stop tight and stew two hours more; when done tender, grate a crust of bread on the top and brown it before the fire; scum the gravy and serve in a butter boat, serve it with the residue of the gravy in the dish. To make the best Bacon. To each ham put one ounce saltpetre, one pint bay salt, one pint molasses, shake together 6 or 8 weeks, or when a large quantity is together, bast them with the liquor every day; when taken out to dry, smoke three weeks with cobs or malt fumes. To every ham may be added a cheek if you stow away a barrel and not alter the composition, some add a shoulder. For transportation or exportation, double the period of smoaking . To dress a Calves Head. Turtle fashion. The head and feet being well scalded and cleaned, open the head, taking the brains, wash, pick and cleanse, salt and pepper and parsley them and put bye in a cloth; boil the head, feet and hartslet one and a quarter, or one and an half hour, sever out the bones,cut the skin and meat in slices, strain the liquor on which boiled and put by; clean the pot very clean or it will burn too, make a layer of the slices, which dust with a composition mode of black pepper one spoon, of sweet herbs pulverized, two spoons ( sweet marjoram and thyme are most approved) a tea spoon of cayenne, one pound butter, then dust with flour, then a layer of slices with slices of veal and seasoning till completed, cover with the liquor, stew gently three quarters of an hour. To make the forced meat balls - take one and an half pound veal, one pound grated bread, 4 ounces raw salt pork, mince and season with above and work with 3 whites into balls, one or one and an half inch diameter, roll in flower, and fry in very hot butter till brown, then chop the brains fine and stir into the whole mess in the pot, put thereto, one third part of the fryed balls and a pint of wine or less, when all is heated through take off and serve in tureens, laying the residue of the balls and hard boiled and pealed eggs into a dish, garnish with slices of lemon. To roast a Pig. Spit your pig, and lay it down to a clear fire, kept good at both ends: put into the belly a few sage leaves, a little pepper and salt, a small crust of bread, and a bit of butter : then sew up the belly: flour it all over very well, and do so till the eyes begin to start. When you find the skin is tight and crisp, and the eyes are dropped, put two plates into the dripping pan, to save what gravy comes from it: put a quarter of a pound of butter into a clean coarse cloth, and rub all over it till the flour is quite taken off; then take it up into your dish, take the sage &c. out of the belly and chop it small; cut off the head, open it and take out the brains, which chop, and put the sage and brains into half a pint of good gravy, with a piece of butter rolled in flour; then cut your pig down the back, and lay it flat in the dish: Cut off the two ears, and lay one upon each shoulder; take off the under jaw, cut it in two, and lay one upon each side; put the head between the shoulders; pour the gravy out of the plates into your sauce, and then into the dish; send it up to table garnished with lemon, and if you please, pap sauce in a bason. OF BOILING. General rules to be observed in Boiling. BE very careful that your pots and covers are well tinned, very clean, and free from sand. Mind that your pot really boils all the while; otherwise you will be disappointed in dressing any joint, though it has been a proper time over the fire. Fresh meat should be put in when the water boils, and salt meat whilst it is cold. Take care likewise to have sufficient room and water in the pot, and allow a quarter of an hour to every pound of meat, let it weigh more or less. To boil Beef or Mutton. When your meat is put in, and the water boils, take care to scum it very clean, otherwise the scum will boil down, stick to your meat; and make it look black. Send up your dish with turnips, greens, potatoes, or carrots. If it is a leg or loin of mutton, you may also put melted butter and capers in a boat. To boil a leg of Pork. A leg of pork must lie in salt six or seven days; after which put it into a pot to be boiled, without using any means to freshen it. It requires much water to swim in over the fire, and also to be fully boiled; so that care should be taken that the fire do not slacken while it is dressing. Serve it up with melted butter, mustard, buttered turnips, carrots, or greens. N.B. The other joints of the swine are most commonly roasted. To boil Pickled Pork. Wash the pork and scrape it clean. Put it in when the water is cold, and boil it till the rhind is tender. It is to be served up always with boiled greens, and is commonly a sauce of itself to roasted fowls or veal. To boil Veal. Let the water boil, and have a good fire when you put in the meat; be sure to scum it very clean. A knuckle of veal will take more boiling in proportion to its weight, than any other joint, because the beauty is to have all the gristles soft and tender. You may either send up boiled veal with parsley and butter : or with bacon and greens. Parsley Sauce. Tie parsley up in a bunch, and boil it till soft; shred it fine, and mix it with melted butter. To boil a Calf's Head. The head must be picked very clean, and soaked in a large pan of water a considerable time before it is put into the pot. Tie the brains up in a cloth, and put them into the pot at the same time with the head; scum the pot well; then put in a piece of bacon, in proportion to the number of people to eat thereof. You will find it to be enough by the tenderness of the flesh about that part that joined to the neck. When enough, you may grill it before the fire, or serve with melted butter, bacon, and greens ; and with the brains beat up with a little butter, salt, pepper, vinegar, or lemon, sage, and parsley, in a separate plate, and the tongue slit and laid in the same plate, or serve the brains whole, and the tongue slit down the middle. To boil Lamb. A leg of Lamb of five pounds will not be boiled in less than an hour and a quarter; and if, as it ought to be, it is boiled in a good deal of water, and your pot be kept clean scum'd, you may dish it up as white as a curd. Send it to table with stewed spinach; and melted butter in a boat. To boil a Neat's Tongue. A dried tongue should be soaked over night; when you dress it, put it into cold water, and let it have room; it will take at least four hours. A green tongue out of the pickle need not be soaked, but it will require nearly the same time. An hour before you dish it up, take it out and blanch it, then put it into the pot till you want it; this will make it eat the tenderer. To boil a Ham. A ham requires a great deal of water, therefore put it into the copper cold, and let it only simmer for two hours, and allow a full quarter of an hour to every pound of ham; by this means your ham will eat tender and well. A dry ham should be soaked in water over night; a green one does not require soaking. Take care they are well cleaned before you dress them. Before you send a ham to table take off the rind, and sprinkle it over with bread crumbs, and put it in an oven for a quarter of an hour: or you may crisp it with a hot salamander. To boil a Haunch of Venison. Salt the haunch well, and let it lay a week; then boil it with a cauliflower, some turnips, young cabbages , and beet-roots; lay your venison in the dish, dispose the garden things round it in separate plates, and send it to table. To boil a Turkey, Fowl, Goose, Duck, &c. Poultry are first boiled by themselves, and in a good deal of water; scum the pot clean, and you need not be afraid of their going to table of a bad colour. A large turkey with a forc'd meet in his craw will take two hours: one without an hour and a half; a hen turkey, three quarters of an hour; a large fowl, forty minutes; a small one, half an hour; a large chicken, twenty minutes; a small one, a quarter of an hour. A full grown goose salted, an hour and a half; a large duck near an hour. Sauce for a boiled Turkey. Take a little water a bit of thyme, an onion, a blade of mace, a little lemon-peel, and an anchovy : boil these together and strain them through a sieve, adding a little melted butter. Sauce for a Fowl. Parceley and butter; or white oyster sauce. To boil a Cod. Gut and wash the fish very clean inside and out, and rub the back bone with a handful of salt; put it upon a fish plate, and boil it gently till it is enough; and remember always to boil the liver along with it. Garnish with scraped horse-radish, small fried fish, and sliced lemon. Sauce. Oyster sauce, shrimp sauce, or lobster sauce with plain melted butter, in different boats, and mustard. To boil a Cod's Head. After tying your cod's head round with pack-thread, to keep it from flying, put a fish-kettle on the fire, large enough to cover it with a little water; put in some salt, vinegar, and some horse-radish sliced; when your water boils, lay your fish upon a drainer, and put it into the kettle; let it boil gently till it rises to the surface of the water, which it will do, if your kettle is large enough: then take it out, and set it to drain: slide it carefully off your drainer into your fish plate. Garnish with lemon and horse-radish scraped. Have oyster sauce in one bason, and shrimp sauce in another. For dressing dried Codfish. Put the fish first into cold water and wash it, then hang it over the fire and soak it six hours in scalding water, then shift it into clean warm water, and let it scald for one hour, it will be much better than to boil. To boil Salmon. Let it be well scraped and cleansed from scales and blood; after it has lain about an hour in salt and spring water, put it into a fish-kettle, with a proportionate quantity of salt and horse-radish, and a bunch of sweet herbs. Put it in while the water is luke warm, and boil it gently till enough, or about half an hour, if it be thick; or twenty minutes if it be a small piece. Pour off the water, dry it well, and dish it neatly upon a fish plate, in the centre, and garnish the dish with horse-radish scraped, (as done for roast beef,) or with fried smelts or gudgeons , and with slices of lemon round the rim. The sauce to be melted butter, with and without anchovy; or shrimp or lobster sauce in different basons. To boil Mackerel. Having cleaned the mackerel well, and soaked them for some time in spring water, put them and the roes into a stew-pan, with as much water as will cover them, and a little salt. Boil a small bunch of fennel along with them, and when you send them up, garnish with the roes, and the fennel shred fine. Sauce. --Grated sugar in a saucer; melted butter, and green gooseberries boiled, in different basons; or, parsley and butter with a little vinegar, or lemon. To boil Garden Stuff: French Beans. Take your beans and string them, cut in two and then across, when you have done them all, sprinkle them over with salt, stir them together, as soon as your water boils put them in and make them boil up quick, they will be soon done and they will look of a better green than when growing in the garden; if they are very young, only break off the ends, then break in two and dress them in the same manner. To boil broad Beans. Beans require a great deal of water, and it is not best to shell them till just before they are ready to go into the pot, when the water boils put them in with some picked parsley and some salt, make them boil up quick, when you see them begin to fall they are done enough, strain them off, garnish the dish with boiled parsley and send plain butter in a cup or boat. To boil green Peas. When your peas are shelled and the water boils, which should not be much more than will cover them, put them in with a few leaves of mint, as soon as they boil put in a piece of butter as big as a walnut, and stir them about, when they are done enough, strain them off, and sprinkle in a little salt, shake them till the water drains off, send them hot to the table with melted butter in a cup or boat. To boil Asparagus. First cut the white ends off about six inches from the head, and scrape them from the green part downward very clean, as you scrape them, throw them into a pan of clear water, and after a little soaking, tie them up in small even bundles, when your water boils, put them in, and boil them quick; but by over boiling they will loose their heads : cut a slice of bread for a toast, and toast it brown on both sides; when your asparagus is done, take it up carefully; dip the toast in the asparagus water, and lay it in the bottom of your dish; then lay the heads of the asparagus on it, with the white ends outwards; pour a little melted butter over the heads; cut an orange into small pieces, and stick them between for garnish. To boil Cabbage. If your cabbage is large, cut it into quarters; if small, cut it in halves; let your water boil, then put in a little salt, and next your cabbage with a little more salt upon it; make your water boil as soon as possible, and when the stalk is tender, take up your cabbage into a cullender, or sieve, that the water may drain off, and send it to tables as hot as you can. Savoys are dressed in the same manner. OF FRYING. To fry Beef Steaks. Cut the lean by itself, and beat it well with the back of a knife, fry the steaks in just as much butter as will moisten the pan, pour out the gravy as it runs out of the meat, turn them often and do them over a gentle fire; then fry the fat by itself, and lay upon the lean: -- For sauce, put to the gravy a glass of red wine, half an anchovy, a little nutmeg, a little beaten pepper, and a shallot cut small; give it two or three little boils, season it with salt to your palate, pour it over the steak, and send them to table. To fry Tripe. Cut your tripe into pieces about three inches long, dip them into the yolk of an egg, and a few crumbs of bread, fry them of a fine brown, and then take them out of the pan, and lay them in a dish to drain. Have ready a warm dish to put them in, and send them to table, with butter and mustard in a cup. To fry Sausages with Apples. Take half a pound of sausages and six apples; slice four about as thick as a crown, cut the other two in quarters, fry them with the sausages of a fine light brown, and lay the sausages in the middle of the dish, and the apples round. Garnish with the quartered apples. To fry Beef Collops. Cut your beef in thin slices, about two inches long, lay them upon your dresser, and hack them with the back of a knife; grate a little nutmeg over them, and dust on some flour; lay them into a stew-pan, and put in as much water as you think sufficient for sauce; shred half an onion, and a little lemon-peel very fine, and a bundle of sweet herbs, and a little pepper and salt : Roll a piece of butter in flour, and set them over a clear fire till they begin to simmer; shake them together often, but don't let them boil up; after they begin to simmer, ten minutes will do them; take out your herbs, and dish them up. Garnish the dish with pickles and horse-radish. To make Scotch Collops. Dip the slices of lean veal in the yolks of eggs, that have been beaten up with melted butter, a little salt some grated nutmeg, and grated lemon-peel. Fry them quick; shake them all the time, to keep the butter from oiling. Then put to them some beef gravy, and some mushrooms, or forced-meat balls. Garnish with sausages and sliced lemon, and slices of broiled or fried bacon. Observe, If you would have the collops white,do not dip them in eggs. And when fried tender but not brown, pour off the liquor quite clean; put in some cream to the meat and give it just a boil up. To fry Veal Cutlets. Cut a neck of veal into stakes, and fry them in butter; and having made a strong broth of the scrag end, boiled with two anchovies, some nutmeg, some lemon peel, and parsley shred very small, and browned with a little burnt butter, put the cutlets and a glass of white wine into this liquor. Tost them up together: thicken with a bit of butter rolled in flour, and dish all together; squeeze a Seville Orange over, and strew as much salt on as shall give a relish. To fry Mutton Cutlets. Take a handful of grated bread, a little thyme and parsley, and lemon-peel shred very small, with some nutmeg, pepper, and salt, then take a loin of mutton, cut it into steaks, and let them be well beaten; then take the yolks of two eggs, and rub the steaks all over. Strew on the grated bread with these ingredients mixed together. For the sauce, take gravy with a spoonful or two of claret and a little anchovy. To fry Eggs as round as Balls. Having a deep frying-pan, and three pints of clarified butter, heat it as hot as for fritters, and stir it with a stick, till it runs round like a whirlpool; then break an egg into the middle, and turn it round with your stick, till it be as hard as a poached egg; the whirling round of the butter will make it as round as a ball; then take it up with a slice, and put it into a dish before the fire; they will keep hot half an hour, and yet be soft; so you may do as many as you please. You may poach them in boiling water in the same manner. To fry Trout. Dry them in a cloth, flour them, and fry them in butter till they are of a fine brown; fry some parsley green and crisp, melt anchovy and butter, with a spoonful of white wine. Dish your fish and garnish with fried parsley and sliced lemon. You may pour your sauce over the fish, or send it in a boat which you please. In this manner you may fry perch, small pike, jacks, roach, gudgeons, or a chine of fresh salmon. To fry Flat Fish. Dry the fish well in a cloth, rub them over in the yolk of an egg, and dust over some flour : let your oil, butter, lard or dripping be ready to boil before you put in the fish; fry them off with a quick fire, and let them be of a fine brown. Before you dish them up, lay them upon a drainer before the fire sloping, for two or three minutes, which will prevent their eating greasy. To fry Oysters. You must make a batter of milk, eggs, and flour; then take your oysters and wash them; wipe them dry, and dip them in the batter, then roll them in some crumbs of bread and a little mace beat fine, and fry them in very hot butter or lard. Or, beat four eggs with salt, put in a little nutmeg grated, and a spoonful of grated bread, then make it as thick as batter for pancakes, with fine flour; drop the oysters in, and fry them brown in clarified beef suet. They are to lie round any dish of fish. Ox-palates boiled tender, blanched, and cut in pieces, then fried in such batter is proper to garnish hashes or fricassees. To fry Chickens. Cut your chickens in pieces, half boil them with slices of pork, in water sufficient to cover them, then take the gravy from the pan and fry them in butter till they are a light brown: then add the gravy with a spoonful or two of sweet wine, nutmeg, and salt, thicken it with flour. Garnish with sippets within the dish. OF BROILING. To broil Beef Steaks. LAY your steaks on a gridiron, over hot coals. Do not turn them till one side be done enough; and when the other side has been turned a little while, a fine gravy will lie on the top, which you should take care to preserve and lift it altogether with a pair of small tongs, or carefully with a knife and fork, into a hot dish, and put a little piece of butter under it, which will help to draw out the gravy. The general Sauce for steaks is, horse-radish for beef; mustard for pork, and gherkins pickled for mutton. But in the season, I would recommend a good sallad, or green cucumbers, or cellery , for beef and mutton; and green peas for lamb steaks. To broil Chickens. Slit them down the back, and season them with pepper and salt, lay them at a great distance, on a very clear fire. Let the inside lay downward, till they are above half done; then turn them, and take great care the fleshy side does not burn; throw over them some fine raspings of bread, and let them be of a fine brown but not burn. Let your sauce be good gravy with mushrooms, and garnish with lemon and the livers broiled, the gizzards cut, slashed, and broiled with pepper and salt. To broil Mackerel. Gutthem, wash them clean, pull out the roe at the neck end, boil it in a little water, then bruise it with a spoon; beat up the yolk of an egg, with a little nutmeg, lemon-peel cut fine, shred thyme, some parsley boiled and chopped fine, a little pepper and salt, and a few crums of bread; mix all well together, and fill the mackerel; flour them well and broil them nicely. Let your sauce be plain butter, with a little catchup or walnut pickle. To broil Cod's Sounds: You must first lay them in hot water a few minutes; take them out, and rub them well with salt, to take off the skin and black dirt, and to make them look white; then put them in water and give them a boil. Take them out and flour them well, pepper and salt them, and broil them. When they are enough, lay them in the dish, and pour melted butter and mustard into the dish. Broil them whole. OF STEWING. To stew Beef Steaks. Half broil the beef steaks, then put them into a stew pan, season them with pepper and salt according to your palate; just cover them with gravy. Also put in a piece of butter rolled in flour. Let them stew gently for half an hour, then add the yolks of two eggs beat up, and stir all together for two or three minutes, and serve it up. Garnish with pickles and horse-radish scraped. To stew Chickens. Cut two chickens into quarters, wash them and put them into a clean sauce-pan with a pint of water, half a pint of red wine, some mace, pepper, a bundle of sweet herbs, an onion, and a piece of stale crust of bread. Cover them close, and stew them half an hour. Then put in a piece of butter as big as an egg, rolled in flour, and cover it again close for five or six minutes. To Stew Pigeons. Stuff the birds with seasoning made of ground pepper, salt, mace and sweet herbs : half roast them, then put them in a stewpan with a sufficient quantity of gravy, a little white wine, some pickled mushrooms and lemon peel; when stewed enough, take out the birds, thicken the liquor with butter and the yolks of eggs. To Stew Codfish. Cut your fish in pieces an inch thick, put them into your stew pan with nutmeg, pepper and salt, a few sprigs of sweet herbs, an onion, half a pint of white wine, one gill of water, let it stew for a few minutes: then add oysters with their sauce strained, a slice of butter rolled in flour, a blade or two of mace : when it is done take the herbs and onion from the fish. To stew Pears. Pare six pears and either quarter them, or do them whole; (they make a pretty dish with one whole, and the rest cut in quarters, and the cores taken out.) Lay them in a deep earthern pot, with a few cloves, a piece of lemon-peel, a gill of red wine, and a quarter of a pound of fine sugar. If the pears are very large, they will take half a pound of sugar, and half a pint of red wine; cover them close with paper, and bake them till they are enough. To stew Mushrooms. Take fresh mushrooms, clean them well, let their skins be pulled off, and their gills scraped off, if they happen to be sound, or else do not use them; cut the mushrooms in large pieces, and put them all together in a sauce-pan, without any liquor; cover it close, and let them stew gently, with a little salt, till they are tender, and covered with liquor; then take out your mushrooms, and drain them, or else put some pepper to them, with some white wine, and when they have boiled up, pour off the sauce, and thicken it with a little butter rolled in flour; some will put in a shallot with the spice, but that will spoil the flavor of the mushrooms, which every body desires to preserve. OF SOUPS. To make Oyster Soup. Have ready a good fish stock, then take two quarts of oysters without the beards; bray the hard part in a morter, with the yolks of ten hard eggs. Set what quantity of fish stock you shall want over the fire with your oysters; season it with pepper, salt and grated nutmeg. When it boils, put in the eggs, and let it boil till it is as thick as cream. Dish it up with bread cut in dice. To make Rice Soup. To two quarts of water, put three quarters of a pound of rice, clean picked and washed, with a stick of cinnamon; let it be covered very close, and simmer till your rice is tender; take out the cinnamon, and grate half a nutmeg; beat up the yolks of four eggs, and strain them to half a pint of white wine, and as much pounded sugar as will make it palatable, put this to your soup, and stir it very well together: set it over the fire, stiring it till it boils, and is of a good thickness; then send it to table. To make Turnip Soup. Pear a bunch of Turnips (save out three or four) put them into a gallon of water, with half an ounce of white pepper, an onion stuck with cloves, three blades of mace, half a nutmeg bruised, a good bunch of sweet herbs, and a large crust of bread. Boil them an hour and a half, then pass them thro' a sieve; clean a bunch of cellery, cut it small, and put it into your turnips and liquor, with two of the turnips you saved, and two young carrots cut in dice; cover it close, and let it stew; then cut two turnips and carrots in dice, flour them, and fry them brown in butter, with two large onions cut thin, and fried likewise, put them all into your soup, with some vermacelli ; let it boil softly, till your cellery is tender, and your soup is good. Season it with salt to your palate. Veal Broth. Take about four pounds of scrag of veal cut small, put it in three quarts of water, when the scum rises skim it well, put in two onions, a turnip and three or four blades of mace; stew it gently for two hours, season it with salt, and strain it off; have ready four ounces of rice boiled in water till tender, strain it through a sieve, put it into the broth, and boil it ten minutes; put it in a tureen, with a handful of crispt bread in it. To ragoo a Breast of Veal, called alamode. Put a breast of veal, with an onion, a bundle of sweet herbs, a little black pepper and grated nutmeg, a blade or two of mace, and a very little lemon-peel grated into a large stew-pan, and just cover it with water; when it grows tender take it up and bone it. Put the bones into the liquor, and boil them till they make good gravy; then strain it off. Add to this liquor a quarter of a pint of rich beef gravy, half an ounce of truffles and morels , a spoonful of catchup, and two spoonfuls of white wine. While those are boiling together flour the veal, and fry it in butter till it comes to be of a fine brown. Then drain off the butter, and pour the gravy to the veal, with a few mushrooms. Boil all together till the liquor becomes rich and thick, cut the sweetbread into four, and spread the pieces and forced-meat balls over the dish, having first laid the veal in the dish, and poured the sauce all over it. Garnish with sliced lemon. TO MAKE PIES. A Veal Pie. Raise a high round pie, then cut a fillet of veal into three or four fillets, season it with savory seasoning, and a little minced sage and sweet herbs; lay it in the pie with slices of bacon at the bottom, and between each piece lay on butter and close the pie. When it is baked and half cold, fill it with clarified butter. A Venison Pastry. Raise a high round pie, shred a pound of beef suet, and put it into the bottom; cut your venison in pieces, and season it with pepper and salt. Lay it on the suet, lay on butter, close the pie, and bake it. A Stew Pie. Boil a shoulder of Veal, and cut up, salt, pepper, and butter half pound, and slices of raw salt pork, make a layer of meat, and a layer of biscuit, or biscuit dough into a pot, cover close and stew half an hour in three quarts of water only. A Sea Pie. Four pound of flour, one and an half pound of butter rolled into paste, wet with cold water, line the pot therewith, lay in split pigeons, turkey pies, veal, mutton or birds, with slices of pork, salt, pepper, and dust on flour, doing thus till the pot is full or your ingredients expended, add three pints water, cover tight with paste, and stew moderately two and an half hours. A Chicken Pie. Pick and clean six chickens, (without scalding) take out their inwards and wash the birds while whole, then joint the birds, salt and pepper the pieces and inwards. Roll one inch thick paste No. 8, and cover a deep dish, and double at the rim or edge of the dish, put thereto a layer of chickens and a layer of thin slices of butter till the chickens and one and an half pound butter are expended, which cover with a thick paste; bake one and an half hour. Or if your oven be poor, parboil the chickens with half a pound of butter, and put the pieces with the remaining one pound of butter, and half the gravy into the paste, and while boiling, thicken the residue of the gravy, and when the pie is drawn, open the crust, and add the gravy. Minced Pies. A Foot Pie. Scald neets feet, and clean well, (grass fed are best) put them into a large vessel of cold water, which change daily during a week, then boil the feet till tender, and take away the bones, when cold, chop fine, to every four pound minced meat, add one pound of beef suet, and four pound apple raw, and a little salt, chop all together very fine, add one quart of wine, two pound of stoned raisins, one ounce of cinnamon, one ounce mace, and sweeten to your taste; make use of paste No.3--bake three quarters of an hour. Weeks after, when you have occasion to use them, carefully raise the top crust, and with a round edg'd spoon, collect the meat into a bason, which warm with additional wine and spices to the taste of your circle, while the crust is also warm'd like a hoe cake, put carefully together and serve up, by this means you can have hot pies through the winter, and enrich'd singly to your taste. Tongue Pie. One pound neat's tongue, one pound apple, one third of a pound of Sugar, one quarter of a pound of butter, one pint of wine, one pound of raisins, or currants, (or half of each) half ounce of cinnamon and mace --bake in paste No. 1, in proportion to size. Minced Pie of Beef. Four pound boiled beef, chopped fine, and salted; six pound of raw apple chopped also, one pound beef suet, one quart of wine or rich sweet cyder, one ounce mace, and cinnamon, a nutmeg, two pounds raisins, bake in paste No. 3, three fourths of an hour. Observations. All meat pies require a hotter and brisker oven than fruit pies, in good cookeries, all raisins should be stoned. As people differ in their tastes, they may alter to their wishes. And as it is difficult to ascertain with precision the small articles of spicery; every one may relish as they like, and suit their taste. An egg Pie. Shred the yolks of twenty hard eggs with the same quantity of marrow and beef-suet; season it with sweet spice, citron, orange, and lemon; fill and close the pie. Apple Pie. Stew and strain the apples, to every three pints, grate the peal of a fresh lemon, add cinnamon, mace, rose-water and sugar to your taste -- and bake in paste No. 3. Every species of fruit, such as pears, plums, raspberry, black berries may only be sweetened, without spices -- and bake in paste No. 3. Currant Pies. Take green, full grown currants, add one third their quantity of sugar, proceeding as above. A buttered apple Pie. Pare, quarter and core tart apples, lay in paste No. 3 cover with the same; bake half an hour, when drawn, gently raise the top crust, add sugar, butter, cinnamon, mace, wine or rose-water. To make an Apple or Pear Pie. Make a good puff paste crust, lay some round the sides of the dish, pear and quarter your apples, and take out the cores; lay a row of apples thick, throw in half the sugar you intend for your pie; mince a lemon-peel fine, throw in a few cloves, here and there one, then the rest of your apples, and the rest of your sugar. You must sweeten to your palate, and squeeze in a little lemon juice. Boil the peeling of the apples and the cores in fair water, with a blade of mace till it is very good; strain it, and boil the syrup with the sugar till it is rich; pour it into your pie, put on your upper crust, and bake it. You may put in a little quince or marmalade, if you please. Thus make a pear pie, but don't put in any quince. You may butter them when they come out of the oven, or beat up the yolks of two eggs, and half a pint of cream, with a little nutmeg, sweetened with sugar; take off the lid, and pour in the cream. Cut the crust in little three cornered pieces, stick them about the pie, and send it to table. To make a Cherry, Plumb or Gooseberry Pie. Make a good crust, lay a little round the sides of your dish, throw sugar at the bottom, and lay in your fruit, with sugar on the top. A few red currants will do well with them; put on your lid, and bake it in a slack oven. Make a plumb pie the same way, and also a gooseberry pie. If you would have it red, let it stand a good while in the oven after the bread is drown. A custard is very good with the gooseberry pie. To make Apple Tart or Pear Tart. Pare them first, then cut them into quarters, and take the cores out; in the next place cut each quarter across again; throw them so prepared into a sauce-pan, with no more water in it than will just cover the fruit; let them simmer over a slow fire till they are perfectly tender. Before you set your fruit on the fire, take care to put a good large piece of lemon-peel into the water. Have the patty-pans in readiness, and strew fine sugar at the bottom; then lay in the fruit, and cover them with as much of the same sugar as you think convenient. Over each tart pour a teaspoonful of lemon-juice, and three spoonfuls of the liquor in which they are boiled. Then lay the lid over them, and put them into a slack oven. If the tarts be made of apricots, &c. you must neither pare them, nor cut them, nor stone them, nor use lemon-juice, which is the only material difference between these and other fruit. Observe with respect to perserved tarts, only lay in the preserved fruit, and put a very thin crust over them, and bake them as short a time as possible. Icing for Tarts. Beat and sift a quarter of a pound of fine loaf sugar. Put it into a morter with the white of one egg that has been well beat up. Add to those two spoonfuls of rose water, and beat all together till it be so thick as just to run, observing to stir it all one way. It is laid on the tart with a brush or small bunch of feathers dipped in the icing. Set the tarts when so done, into a very gentle oven to harden. But take care not to let them stand too long for that will discolour them. An Almond Tart very good. To half a pound of almonds blanched, and very finely beat with orange-flower water, put a pint of thick cream, two large Naples biscuits grated, and five yolks of eggs, with near half a pound of sugar; put all into a dish garnished with paste, and lay slips in diamonds cross the top; bake it in a cool oven; and when drawn out, stick slips of candid citron in each diamond. Lemon Puffs. Take a pound and a quarter of double refined sugar beaten and sifted, and grate the rinds of two lemons, and mix well with the sugar, then beat the whites of two new-laid eggs very well, and mix them well with the sugar and lemon-peel; beat them together an hour and a quarter, then make them up in what form you please; be quick to set them in a moderate oven; do not take off the papers till cold. Rice Florendine. Soak half pint of rice and swell it in water : then boil it in three pints of milk, put half pound of butter in it while it is warm, one pound of currants, fifteen eggs well beaten, half an ounce of cinnamon, one nutmeg and one gill of rose-water, sugar and salt to your taste; lay a thin puff paste at the bottom of your dish and a thick one round the rim, put in the ingrediences, cut small pieces of paste and lay in chequers on the top, grate a little sugar over it and bake it half an hour. Puff Pastes for Tarts. No. 1. Rub one pound of butter into one pound of flour, whip 2 whites and add with cold water and one yolk; make into paste, roll in, in six or seven times one pound of butter, flowering it each roll. This is good for any small thing. No. 2. Rub six pound of butter into founteen pound of flour, eight eggs, add cold water, make a stiff paste. No. 3. To any quantity of flour, rub in three fourths of its weight of butter, (12 eggs to a peck) rub in one third or half, and roll in the rest. No. 4. Into two quarts of flour (salted) wet stiff with cold water roll in, in nine or ten times, one and an half pound of butter. No. 5. One pound flour, three fourths of a pound of butter, beat well. No. 6. To one pound of flour rub in one fourth of a pound of butter wet with three eggs and rolled in a half pound of butter. A Paste for Sweet Meats. No. 7. Rub one third of a pound of butter, and one pound of lard into two pound of flour, wet with four whites well beaten; weater to make a paste, roll in the residue of shortening in ten or twelve rollings -- bake quick. No. 8. Rub in one and an half pound of suet to six pounds of flour, and a spoonful of salt, wet with cream, roll in, in six or eight times, two and an half pounds of butter -- good for a chicken or meat pie. Royal Paste. No. 9. Rub half a pound of butter into 1 pound of flour, four whites beat to a foam, add two yolks, two ounces of fine sugar; roll often, rubbing one third, and rolling two thirds of the butter is best; excellent for tarts and apple cakes. PUDDINGS. A Rice Pudding. One quarter of a pound rice, a stick of cinnamon, to a quart of milk (stired often to keep from burning) and boil quick, cool and add half a nutmeg, 4 spoons rose-water, 8 eggs; butter or puff paste a dish and pour the above composition into it, and bake one and an half hour. No. 2. Boil 6 ounces rice in a quart milk, on a slow fire 'till tender, stir in one pound butter, interim beet 14 eggs, add to the pudding when cold with sugar, salt, rose-water and spices to your taste, adding raisins or currents, baked as No. 1. No. 3. Eight spoons rice boiled in two quarts milk, when cooled add 8 eggs, 6 ounces butter, wine, sugar and spices, bake 2 hours. No. 4. Boil in water half pound ground rice till soft, add 2 quarts milk and scald, cool and add 8 eggs, 6 ounces butter, 1 pound raisins, salt, cinnamon and a small nutmeg, bake 2 hours. No. 5. A cheap one, half pint rice, 2 quarts milk, salt, butter, allspice, put cold into into a hot oven, bake two and an half hours. No. 6. Put 6 ounces rice into water, or milk and water, let it swell or soak tender, then boil gently, stiring in a little butter, when cool stir in a quart of cream, 6 or 8 eggs well beaten, and add cinnamon, nutmeg, and sugar to your taste, bake. N.B. The mode of introducing the ingredients, is a material point; in all cases where eggs are mentioned it is understood to be well beat; whites and yolks and the spices, fine and settled. A Nice Indian Pudding. No. 1. Three pints scalded milk, 7 spoons fine Indian meal, stir well together while hot, let stand till cooled; add 7 eggs, half pound raisins, 4 ounces butter, spice and sugar, bake one and an half hour. No. 2. Three pints scalded milk to one pint meal salted; cool, add 2 eggs, 4 ounces butter, sugar or molasses and spice, it will require two and an half hours baking. No.3. Salt a pint meal, wet with one quart of milk, sweeten and put into a strong cloth, brass or bell metal vessel, stone or earthen pot, secure from wet and boil 12 hours. A Sunderlaud Pudding. Whip 6 eggs, half the whites, take half a nutmeg, one point cream and a little salt, 4 spoons fine flour, oil or butter pans, cups or bowls, bake in a quick oven one hour. Eat with sweet sauce. A Whitpot. Cut half a loaf of bread in slices, pour three quarts milk, 6 eggs, rose-water, nutmeg and pound of sugar; put into a dish and cover with paste, No.1, bake slow one hour. A Bread Pudding. One pound soft bread or biscuit soaked in one quart milk, run thro' a sieve or cullender, add 7 eggs, three quarters of a pound sugar, one quarter of a pound butter, nutmeg or cinnamon, one gill rose-water, one pound stoned raisins, half pint cream, bake three quarters of an hour, middling oven. A Flour Pudding. Seven eggs, one quarter of a pound of sugar, and a tea spoon of salt, beat and put to one quart milk, 5 spoons of flour, cinnamon and nutmeg to your taste, bake half an hour, and serve up with sweet sauce. A boiled Flour Pudding. One quart of milk, 9 eggs, 7 spoons flour, a little salt, put into a strong cloth and boiled three quarters of an hour. A Cream Almond Pudding. Boil gently a little mace and half a nutmeg (grated) in a quart cream; when cool, beat 8 yolks and 3 whites, strain and mix with one spoon flour one quarter of a pound almonds; settled, add one spoon rose-water, and by degrees the cold cream and beat well together; wet a thick cloth and flour it, and pour in the pudding, boil hard half an hour, take out, pour over it melted butter and sugar. An apple Pudding Dumplin. Put into paste, quartered apples, lie in a cloth and boil two hours, serve with sweet sauce. Pears, Plumbs, &c. Are done the same way. Potatoe Pudding. Baked. No. 1. One pound boiled potatoes , one pound sugar, half a pound butter, 10 eggs. No. 2. One pound boiled potatoes marshed three quarters of a pound butter, 3 gills milk or cream , the juice of one lemon and the peal grated, half a pound sugar, half nutmeg, 7 eggs (taking out 5 whites, ) 2 spoons rose-water. Apple Pudding. One pound apple sifted, one pound sugar, nine eggs, one quarter of a pound butter, one quart sweet cream, one gill rose-water, a cinnamon, a green lemon peel grated (if sweet apples, add the juice of half a lemon, ) put on to paste No. 7-- Currants, raisins and citrons some add, but good without them. Carrot Pudding. A coffee cup full of boiled and strained carrots, 5 eggs, 2 ounces sugar and butter each, cinnamon and rose-water to your taste, baked in a deep dish without paste. A Crookneck or Winter Squash Pudding. Core, boil and skin a good squash, and bruize it well; take 6 large apples, pared, cored, and stewed tender, mix together; add 6 or 7 spoonsful of dry bread or biscuit, rendered fine as meal, half pint dry milk or cream, 2 spoons of rose-water, 2 do wine, 5 or 6 eggs beaten and strained, nutmeg, salt and sugar to your taste, one spoon flour, beat all smartly together, bake. The above is a good receipt for Pompkins, Potatoes or Yams , adding more moistening or milk and rose-water, and to the two laiter a few black or Lisbon currants, or dry whortleberries scattered in, will make it better. Pompkin. No. 1. One quart stewed and strained, 3 pints cream, 9 beaten eggs, sugar, mace, nutmeg and ginger, laid into paste No. 7 or 8, and with a dough spur, cross and chequer it, and baked in dishes three quarters of an hour. No. 2. One quart of milk, 1 pint pompkin, 4 eggs, molasses, allspice and ginger in a crust, bake one hour. Orange Pudding. Put sixteen yolks with half a pound butter melted, grate in the rinds of two Seville oranges, beat in half pound of fine sugar, add two spoons orange water, two of rose water, one gill of wine, half pint cream, two Naples biscuit or the crumbs of a fine loaf, or roll soaked in cream, mix all together, put it into rich puff-paste, which let be double round the edges of the dish; bake like a custard. To make a plain boiled Pudding. Take a pint of new milk mix with it six eggs will beaten, two spoonfuls of flour, half a nutmeg grated, a little salt and sugar. Put this mixture into a cloth or bag. Put it into boiling water, and half an hour will boil it. Serve it up with melted butter. A Quaking Pudding. Take a penny white loaf grated, two spoonfuls of flour of rice, and seven eggs, beaten up. Put them in a quart of cream or new milk. Season them with nutmeg grated, and white rose-water. Tie it up, boil it an hour, and then serve it up with melted butter, and with sugar and a little wine. A fine Biscuit Pudding. Grate three Naples biscuit, and pour a pint of cream or milk over them hot. Cover it close till cold, then add a little grated nutmeg, the yolks of four eggs and two whites beat in a little orange flower or rose-water, two ounces of powdered sugar, and half a spoonful of flour. Mix these well, and boil them in a China bason, tied in a cloth, for an hour. Turn it out of the bason, and serve it up in a dish with melted butter, and some fine sugar sprinkled over it. Boiled Plumb Pudding. Shred a pound of beef suet very fine, to which add three quarters of a pound of raisins stoned, a little grated nutmeg, a large spoonful of sugar, a little salt, some white wine, four eggs beaten, three spoonfuls of cream, and five spoonfuls of flour. Mix them well, and boil them in a cloth three hours. Pour over this pudding melted butter, when dished. A hunting Pudding. Mix a pound of beef suet shred fine with a pound of fine flour, three quarters of a pound of currants well cleaned, a quarter of a pound of raisins stoned and shred, five eggs, a little grated lemon-peel, two spoonfuls of sugar, and a little brandy. Mix them well together. Tie it up in a cloth; and boil it full two hours. Serve it up with white wine and melted butter. A plain baked Pudding. Boil a quart of milk; then stir in flour till thick; add half a pound of butter, 6 ounces of sugar, nutmeg grated, a little salt, ten eggs but not all the whites. Mix them well, put it into a dish buttered, and it will be baked in three quarters of an hour. A Millet Pudding. Take half a pound of Millet, and boil it over night in two quarts of milk. In the morning add six ounces of sugar, six of melted butter, seven eggs, half a nutmeg, a pint of cream, and sweeten to your taste. Add ten eggs, with half the whites, and bake it. A Poor Man's Pudding. Take some stale bread; pour over it some hot water till it is well soaked; then press out the water, and wash the bread; add some powdered ginger, nutmeg grated, and a little salt; some rose water or sack, Lisbon sugar and currants; mix them well together, and lay it in a pan well buttered on the sides; when it is well flatted with a spoon, lay some pieces of butter on the top; bake it in a gentle oven, and serve it hot. You may turn it out of the pan when it is cold, and it will eat like a fine cheese-cake. CUSTARDS. 1. One pint cream sweetened to your taste, warmed hot; stir in sweet wine, till curdled, grate in cinnamon and nutmeg. 2. Sweeten a quart of milk, add nutmeg, wine, brandy, rose-water and six eggs; bake in tea cups or dishes or boil in water, taking care that it don't boil into the cups. 3. Put a stick of cinnamon to one quart of milk, boil well, add six eggs, two spoons of rose-water -- bake. 4. Boiled Custard -- One pint of cream, two ounces of almonds, two spoons of rose-water, or orange flower water, some mace; boil thick, then stir in sweetening, and lade off into china cups, and serve up. Rice Custard. Boil a little mace, a quartered nutmeg in a quart of cream, add rice (well boiled) while boiling sweeten and flavor with orange or rose-water, putting into cups or dishes, when cooled, set to serve up. A Rich Custard. Four eggs beat and put to one quart cream , sweetened to your taste, half a nutmeg, and a little cinnamon -- baked. A sick bed Custard. Scald a quart of milk, sweeten and salt a little, whip three eggs and stir in, bake on coals in a pewter vessel. Currant Jelly. Having stripped the currants from the stalks, put them into a stone jar: stop it close; set it in a kettle of boiling water half way up the jar; let it boil half an hour; take it out, and strain the juice through a coarse hair sieve. To a pint of juice put a pound of sugar; set it over a fine quick clear fire in a preserving-pan or bell mettle skillet. Keep stirring it all the time till the sugar be melted; then skim the scum off as fast as it rises. When the jelly is very clear and fine, pour it into earthen or china cups, or gallipots. When cold cut pieces of white paper just the bigness of the top of the pot, dip them in brandy, lay them on the jelly; then cover the top close with white paper, and prick it full of holes. Set it in a dry place. You may put some in glasses for present use. Raspberry Giam. Take a pint of currant jelly, and a quart of raspberries, bruise them well together, set them over a slow fire, keeping it stirring all the time till it boils. Let it boil five or six minutes, pour it into the gallipots, paper them as you do the currant jelly, and keep them for use. They will keep for two or three years, and have the full flavor of raspberries. SYLLABUBS. To make a fine Syllabub from the Cow. Sweeten a quart of cyder with double refined sugar, grate nutmeg into it, then milk cow into your liquor, when you have thus added what quantity of milk you think proper, pour half a pint or more, in proportion to the quantity of syllabub you make, of the sweetest cream you can get all over it. To make a fine Cream. Take a pint of cream, sweeten it to your pallate, grate a little nutmeg, put in a spoonful of orange flower water and rose water, and two spoonfuls of wine; beat up four eggs and two whites, stir it all together one way over the fire till it is thick, have cups ready and pour it in. Lemon Cream. Take the juice of four large lemons, half a pint of water, a pound of double refined sugar beaten fine, the whites of seven eggs and the yolk of one beaten very well; mix altogether, strain it, set it on a gentle fire, stiring it all the while and skim it clean, put into it the peel of one lemon, when it is very hot, but not to boil; take out the lemon peal and pour it into china dishes. CAKES. A rich Cake. Take six pounds of the best fresh butter, work it to a cream with your hands; then throw in by degrees three pounds of double refined sugar, well beet and sifted; mix them well together, then work in three pounds of blanched almonds; and having beaten four pounds of eggs, and strained them through a sieve, put them in; beat them all together till they are thick and look white. Then add half a pint French brandy, half a pint of sack, a small quantity of ginger, and about two ounces each, of mace, cloves, and cinnamon, with three large nutmegs, all beaten in a morter as fine as possible. Then shake in gradually four pounds of well dried and sifted flour. When the oven is well prepared and a tin hoop to bake it in, stir into this mixture (as you put it into the hoop) seven pounds of currants well washed and rubbed, and such a quantity of candid orange, lemon, and citron, in equal proportions as shall be thought convenient. The oven must be quick, and the cake will at least take four hours to bake it; Or, you may make two or more cakes out of these ingredients. You must beat it with your hands, and the currants must be plumped by pouring upon them boiling water, and drying them before the fire. Put them warm into the cake. Portugal Cakes. Put a pound of fine sugar, a pound of fresh butter, five eggs, and a little mace, beaten, into a bread pan; beat it with your hands till it is very light, and looks curdling; then put thereto a pound of flour, and half a pound of currants very dry; beat them together, fill tin pans, and bake them in a slack oven: You may make seed cakes the same way, only put in carraway-seeds instead of currants. Dutch Cakes. Take five pounds of flour, two ounces of carraway-seeds, half a pound of sugar, and something more than a pint of milk, put into it three quarters of a pound of butter, then make a hole in the middle of the flour, and put in a full pint of good ale-yeast : pour in the butter and milk, and make these into a paste, letting it stand a quarter of an hour before the fire to rise; then mould it, and roll it into cakes pretty thin; prick them all over pretty much, or they will blister, and bake them a quarter of an hour. Queen Cakes. Take a pound of sugar, beat it fine, pour in yolks and whites of 2 eggs, half a pound of butter, a little rose-water, 6 spoonfuls of warm cream, a pound of currants, and as much flour as will make it up; stir them well together, and put them into your patty-pans, being well buttered; bake them in an oven almost as hot as for bread, for half an hour; then take them out and glaze them, and let them stand but a little after the glazing is on to rise. Uxbridge Cakes. Take a pound of wheat flour, seven pounds of currants, half a nutmeg, and four pounds of butter; rub your butter cold very well among the meal. Dress the currants very well in the flour, butter and seasoning, and knead it with so much good and new yeast as will make it into a pretty high paste. After it is kneaded well together, let it stand an hour to rise. You may put half a pound of paste in a cake. Orange Cake. Take the peels of four oranges, being first pared, and the meat taken out; boil them tender, and beat them small in a marble morter; then take the pulp of them, and two more oranges, the seeds and skins being picked out, and mix them with the peelings that are beaten, set them on the fire, with a spoonful or two of orange-flower water, keeping it stiring till that moister is pretty well dried up; then have ready to every pound of that pulp, four pounds and a quarter of double refined sugar, finely sifted. Make the sugar very hot, dry it upon the fire, and then mix it and the pulp together; set it on the fire again, till the sugar be well melted, but take care it does not boil. You may put in a little peel, shred small or grated; and when it is cold, draw it up in double papers; dry them before the fire, and when you turn them, put two together, or you may keep them in deep glasses or pots, and dry them as you have occasion. Common Biscuit. Beat up six eggs, with a spoonful of rose water, and a spoonful of sack; then add a pound of fine powdered sugar, and a pound of flour; mix these into the eggs by degrees, with an ounce of coriander seeds; shape them on white thin paper or tin moulds, in any form you please. Beat the white of an egg, and with a feather rub it over, and dust fine sugar over them. Set them in an oven moderately heated, till they rise and come to a good colour; and if you have no stove to dry them in, put them into the oven at night, and let them stand till morning. To make Whigs. Take three pounds and a half of flour, and three quarters of a pound of butter; rub it into the flour till none of it be seen; then take a pint or more of new milk, make it very warm, and with a half pint of ale-yeast, make it into a light paste, put in carraway-seeds, and what spice you please; then make it up, and lay it before the fire to rise; after this, work in three quarters of a pound of sugar, and then roll them pretty thin into what form you please; put them on tin plates and hold them before the fire to rise again, before you set them in; your oven must be pretty quick. To make Buns. Take two pounds of fine flour, a pint of ale yeast, with a little sack, and three eggs beaten; knead all these together with a little warm milk, nutmeg and salt. Lay it before the fire till it rise very light. Then knead into it a pound of fresh butter, and a pound of round carraway comfits, and bake them in s quick oven, on floured papers, in what shape you please. Good Fritters. Mix half a pint of good cream very thick with flour, beat six eggs, leaving out four whites; add six spoonfuls of sack, and strain them into the cream; put in a little grated nutmeg, ginger, cinnamon and salt; then put in another half pint of cream, and beat the batter near an hour; pare and slice your apples thin, dip every piece in the batter, and throw them into a pan with boiling lard. Pan Cakes. Take a pint of thick cream, six spoonfuls of sack and half a pint of fine flour, six eggs but only three whites, one grated nutmeg, a quarter of a pound of melted butter, a very little salt, and some sugar; fry these thin in a dry pan. Plumb Cake. Mix one pound currants, one drachm nutmeg, mace and cinnamon each, a little salt, one pound of citron, orange peel candid, and almonds bleached, 6 pound of flour, (well dryed) beat 21 eggs, and add with 1 quart new ale yeast, half pint of wine, 3 half pints of cream and raisins. Plain Cake. Nine pound of flour, 3 pound of sugar, 3 pound of butter, 1 quart emptins, 1 quart milk, 9 eggs, 1 ounce of spice, 1 gill of rose-water, 1 gill of wine. Another. Three quarters of a pound of sugar, 1 pound of butter, and 6 eggs worked into 1 pound of flour. A rich Cake. Rub 2 pound of butter into 5 pound of flour, add 15 eggs (not much beaten) 1 pint of emptins, 1 pint of wine, knead up stiff like biscuit, cover well and put by and let rise over night. To 2 and an half pound raisins, add 1 gill brandy, to soak over night, or if new half an hour in the morning, add them with 1 gill rose-water and 2 and an half pound of loaf sugar, one ounce cinnamon, work well and bake as loaf cake, No. 1. Potatoe Cake. Boil potatoes , peal and pound them, add yolks of eggs, wine and melted butter work with flour into paste, shape, as you please, bake and pour over them melted butter, wine and sugar. Johny Cake, or Hoe Cake. Scald 1 pint of milk and put to 3 pints of indian meal, and half pint flower-- bake before the fire. Or scald with milk two thirds of the indian meal, or wet two thirds with boiling water, add salt, molasses and shortening, work up with cold water pretty stiff, and bake as above. Indian Slapjack. One quart of milk, 1 pint of indian meal, 4 eggs, 4 spoons of flour, little salt, beat together, baked on gridles, or fry in a dry pan, or baked in a pan which has been rubed with suet, lard or butter. Loaf Cake. No. 1. Rub 6 pound of sugar, 2 pound of lard, 3 pound of butter into 12 pound of flour, add 18 eggs, 1 quart of milk, 2 ounces of cinnamon, two small nutmegs, a tea cup of coriander seed, each pounded fine and sifted, add 1 pint of brandy, half a pint of wine, 6 pound of stoned raisins, 1 pint of emptins , first having dried your flower in the oven, dry and roll the sugar fine, rub your shortening and sugar half an hour, it will render the cake much whiter and lighter, heat the oven with dry wood, for one and an half hours, if large pans be used, it will then require 2 hours baking, and in proportion for smaller loaves. To frost it. Whip six whites, during the baking, add 3 pound of sifted loaf sugar and put on thick, as it comes hot from the oven. Some return the frosted loaf into the oven, it injures and yellows it, if the frosting be put on immediately it does best without being returned into the oven. No. 2. Rub 4 pound of sugar, 3 and an half pound of shortening, (half butter and half lard ) into 9 pound flour, 1 dozen of eggs, 2 ounces of cinnamon, 1 pint of milk, 3 spoonfuls coriander seed, 3 gills of brandy, 1 gill of wine, 3 gills of emptins , 4 pounds of raisins. No. 3. Six pound of flour, three of sugar, two and an half pound of shortening, (half butter, half lard ) six eggs, one nutmeg, one ounce of cinnamon and one ounce of coriander seed, one pint of emptins, two gills brandy, one pint of milk and three pounds of raisins. No. 4. Five pound of flour, two pound of butter, 2 and an half pounds of loaf sugar, two and an half pounds of raisins, fifteen eggs, one pint wine, one pint of emptins , one ounce of cinnamon, one gill rose-water, one gill of brandy -- baked like No. 1. Another Plain Cake. No. 5. Two quarts milk, three pound of sugar, three pound of shortning, warmed hot, add a quart of sweet cyder, this curdle, add eighteen eggs, allspice and orange to your taste, or fennel, carroway or coriander seeds; put to nine pounds of flour, three pints emptins , and bake well. Cookies. One pound sugar boiled slowly in half pint watar, scum well and cool, add two tea spoons pearl ash dissolved in milk, then two and half pounds flour, rub in flour ounces butter, and two large spoons of finely powdered coriander seed, wet with above; make rolls half an inch thick and cut to the shape you please; bake fifteen or twenty minutes in a slack oven--good three weeks. Another Christmas Cookey. To three pound flour, sprinkle a tea cup of fine powdered coriander seed, rub in one pound butter, and one and half pound sugar, dissolve three tea spoonfuls of pearl ash in a tea cup of milk, kneed all together well, roll three quarters of an inch think, and cut or stamp into shape and size you please, bake slowly fifteen or twenty minutes; though hard and dry at first, if put into an earthen pot, and dry cellar, or damp room, they will be finer, softer and better when six months old. Molasses Gingerbread. One table spoon of cinnamon, some coriander or allspice, put to four tea spoons pearl ash, dissolved in half pint water, four pound flour, one quart molasses four ounces ginger, four ounces butter, (if in summer rub in the butter, if in winter, warm the butter and molasses and pour to the spiced flour, ) knead well 'till stiff, the more the better, the lighter and whiter it will be; bake brisk fifteen minutes; don't scorch; before it is put in, wash it with whites and sugar beat together. Gingerbread Cakes, or butter and sugar Gingerbread. Three pounds of flour, a grated nutmeg, two ounces ginger, one pound sugar, three small spoons pearl ash dissolved in cream, one pound butter, four eggs knead it stiff, shape it to your fancy, bake fifteen minutes. Soft Gingerbread to be baked in pans. Rub three pounds of sugar, two pounds of butter, into four pounds flour add twenty eggs four ounces ginger, four spooos rosewater, bake as No. 1. Butter drop do. Rub one quarter of a pound butter, one pound sugar, sprinkle with mace, into one pound and a quarter flour, add four eggs, one glass rose water, bake as No. 1. Gingerbread. Three pound sugar, half pound butter, quarter pound ginger, twelve eggs, one glass rose water, rub into three pounds flour, bake as No. 1. A cheap seed Cake, Rub one pound sugar, half an ounce allspice into four quarts flour, into which put one pound butter, melted in one pint milk, nine eggs, one gill emptins , ( carraway seed and currants, or raisins if you please) make into two loaves, bake one and an half hour. Queens Cake. Whip half pound butter to a cream, add one pound sugar, ten eggs, one glaas wine, half gill rosewater, and spices to your taste, all worked in to one and a quarter pound flour, put into pans cover with paper, and bake in a quick well heat oven, twelve or sixteen minutes. Pound Cake. One pound sugar, one pound butter, one pound flour, one pound or ten eggs, rose water one gill, spices to your taste; watch it well, it will bake in a slow oven in fifteen minutes. Another (called) pound Cake. Work three quarters of a pound butter, one pound of good sugar, 'till very white, whip ten whites to a foam, add the yolks and beat together, add one spoon rose water, two of brandy, and put the whole to one and a quarter of a pound of flour, if yet too soft add flour and bake slowly. Soft cakes in little pans. One and half pound sugar, half pound butter, rubbed into two pounds flour, add one glass wine, one do. rose water, eighteen eggs and a nutmeg. A light cake to bake in small cups. Half a pound sugar, half a pound butter, rubbed into two pounds flour, one glass wine, one do. rose water, two do. emptins , a nutmeg, cinnamon and currants. Shrewsbury Cake. One pound butter, three quarters of a pound of sugar, a little mace, four eggs mixed and beat with your hand, till very light, put the composition to one pound flour, roll it into small cakes--bake with a light oven. N. B. In all cases where spices are named, it is supposed that they be pounded fine and sifted; sugar must be dried and rolled fine; flour dried in an oven; eggs well beat or whipped into a raging foam. Diet Bread. One pound sugar, nine eggs, beat for an hour, add to fourteen ounces, flour, one spoon rose water, one do. cinnamon or coriander, bake quick. Lemon Biscuit. Beat the yolks of ten eggs and the whites of five well together, with four spoonfuls of orange flower water, till they of a high froth, then put in in a pound of double refined sugar beat and sifted, beat it one way for three quarters of an hour; put in half a pound of flour, and grate in the rind of two lemons, and put in the pulp of a small one, beat them well; butter your tin moulds and put it in, sift a little fine sugar over them and put them in a quick oven, but do not stop the mouth up at first for fear they should scroch. Spunge Biscuit. Beat the yolks of twelve eggs for half an hour, then put in a pound and an half of fine sugar beat and sifted, whisk it well till you see it rise in bubbles, then beat the whites to a strong froth, and whisk them well with your sugar and yolks; beat in a pound of flour, with the rind of two lemons grated, butter your tin moulds, put them in, and sift fine powder sugar over them; put them in a hot oven, but do not stop the mout of it at first; they will take half an hour baking. Biscuit. One pound flour, one ounce butter, one egg, wet with milk, and break while the oven is heating, and in the same proportion. Butter Biscuit. One pint of each milk and emptins, laid into flour, in sponges; next morning add one pound butter melted, not hot, and knead into as much flour as will with another pint of warmed milk, be of a sufficient consistance to make it soft--some melt the butter in the milk. RUSK. -- To make. No. 1 Rub in half pound sugar, half pound butter, to four pound flour, add one pint milk, one pint emptins ; when risen well, bake in pans ten minutes, fast. No. 2 One pound sugar, one pound butter, six eggs, rubbed into five pounds flour, one quart emptins and wet with milk, sufficient to bake as above. No. 3 One pound sugar, one pound butter, rubbed into six or eight pounds of flour, twelve eggs, one pint emptins , wet soft with milk, and bake. No. 4. P.C. rusk. Put fifteen eggs to four pounds flour and make into large biscuit; and bake double, or one top of another. No. 5. One pint milk, one pint emptins , to be laid over night in spunge, in morning, melt three quarters of a pound of butter, one pound sugar, in another pint of milk, add luke warm, and beat till it rise well. No. 6. Three quarters of a pound butter, one pound sugar, twelve eggs, one quart milk, put as much flour as they will wet, a fpoon of cinnamon, one gill emptins , let it stand till very puffy or light; roll into small cakes and let it stand on oiled tins while the oven is heating, bake fifteen minute in a quick oven, then wash the top with sugar and whites while hot. A butter drop. Four yolks, two whites, one pound flour, a quarter of a pound bntter , one pound sugar, two spoons rose water, a little mace, bake it in tin pans. PRESERVES To keep Green Peas till Christmas. Take fine young peas, shell them, throw them into a cullender to drain, then lay a cloth four or five times double on a table, and spread them thereon; dry them very well, and have your bottles ready; fill them and cover them with mutton suet fat; when it is a little coll, fill the necks almost to the top, cork them and tie a bladder and a leather over them, and set them in a cool dry place. To preserve Plumbs. Take plumbs before they have stones in them which you may know by putting a pin through; coddle them in many waters till they are as green as grass; peel them and coddle them again : you must take the weight of them in sugar, and make a sirup put to your sugar a pint of water; then put them in, set them on the fire to boil slowly, till they be clear, skimming them often, and they will be verry green. Put them up in glasses, and keep them for use. To preserve currants. Take the weight of the currants in sugar, to a pound of sugar, add half a pint of water; let it melt; then put in your currants and let them do very leisurely; skim them, and take them up; let the sirup boil, then put them on again; and when they are clear, and the syrup thick enough, take them off. When they are cold put them in glasses. For preserving Quinces. Thake a peck of Quinces, pare them take out the core with a sharp knife, if you wish to have them whole; boil parings and cores with two pound frost grapes, in three quarts water, boil the liquor an hour and an half, or till it is thick, strain it through a coarse hair sieve, add one and a quarter pound sugar, to every pound of quince; put the sugar into the sirup, scald and scim it till it is clear, put the quinces into the sirup, cut up two oranges and mix with the quince, hang them over a gentle fire for five hours, then put them in a stone pot for use, set them in a dry cool place. For preserving Quinces in Loaf Sugar. Take a peck of Quinces, put them into a kettle of cold water, hang them over the fire, boil them till they are soft, then take them out with a fork, when cold, pare them, quarter or halve them, if you like; take their weight loaf sugar, put into a bell metal kettle or sauce pan, with one quart of water, scald and scim it till it is very clear, then put in your Quinces, let them boil in the sirup for half an hour, add oranges as before if you like, then put them in stone pots for use. For preserving Strawburies . Take two quarts of Strawburies, squeeze them through a cloth, add half a pint of water and two pound of sugar, put it into the sause pan, scald and skim it, take two pound of Strawberries with stems on, set your sauce pan on a chafing dish, put as many Strawberries into the dish as you can with the stems up without bruising them, let them boil for about ten minutes, then take them out gently with a fork and put them into a stone pot for use; when you have done the whole turn the sirup into the pot, wher hot; set them in a cool place for use. Currants and Cherries may be done in the same way, by adding a little more sugar. To keep White Bullace, Pears, Plumbs, or Damsons, &c. for tarts or pies. Gather them when full grawn, and just as they begin to turn, pick all the largest out, save about two thirds of the fruit, to the other third put as much water as you think will cover them, boil and skim them; when the fruit is boiled very soft, strain it through a coarse hair sieve; and to every quart of this liquor put a pound and a half of sugar, boil it and skim it very will; then throw in your fruit, just give them a scald; take them off the fire, and when cold, put them into bottles with wide mouths, pour your sirup over them, lay a piece of white paper over them, and cover them with oil. To make Marmalade. To two pounds of quinces, put three quarters of a pound of sugar and a pint of spring water; then put them over the fire, and boil them till they are tender; then take them up and bruise them; then put them into the liquor, let it boil three quarters of an hour, and put them into your pots or saucers. To preserve Mulberries whole. Set some Mulberries over the fire in a skillet or preserving pan; draw from them a pint of juice when it is strained; then take three pounds of sugar beaten very fine, wet the sugar with the pint juice, boil np your sugar and skim it, put in two pounds of ripe mulberries, and let them stand in the sirup till they are thoroughly warm, then set them on the fire, and let them boil very gently; do them but half enough, so put them by in the sirup till next day, then boil them gently again; when the sirup is pretty thick, and will stand in round drops when it is cold, they are done enough, so put all into a gallipot for use. To preserve Goosberries, Damsons, or plumbs. Gather them when dry, full grown, and not ripe; pick them one by one, put them into glass bottles that are very clean and dry, and cork them close with new corks; then put a kettle of water on the fire, and put in the bottles with care; wet not the corks, but let the water come up to the necks; make a gantle fire till they are a little codled and turn white; do not take them up till cold, then pitch the corks all over, or wax them close and thick; then set them in a cool dry cellar. To preserve Peaches. Put your peaches in boiling water, just give them a scald, but don't let them boil, take them out, and put them in cold water, then dry them in a sieve, and put them in long wide mouthed bottles: to half a dozen peaches take a quarter of a pound of sugar, clarity it, pour it over your peaches, and fill the bottles with brandy, stop them close and keep them in a close place. To preserve Cherries. Take two pounds of cherries, one pound and a half of sugar, half a pint of fair water, melt some sugar in it; when it is melted, put in your other sugar and your cherries; then boil them softly, till all the sugar be melted; then boil them fast, and skim them; take them off two or three times and shake them, and put them on again, and let them boil fast; and when they are of a good colour and the sirup will stand they are boiled enough. To preserve Raspberries. Choose raspberries that are not too ripe, and take the weight of them in sugar, wet your sugar with a little water, and put in your berries, and let them boil softly; take heed of breaking them; when they are clear, take them up, and boil the sirup till it be thick enough, then put them in again; and when they are cold put them up in glasses. To Keep Damsons. Take damsons when they are first ripe, pick them off carefully, wipe them clean, put them into snuff bottles, stop them up tight so that no air can get to them, nor water; put nothing into the bottles but plumbs, put the bottles into cold water, hang them over the fire, let them heat slowly, let the water boil slowly for half an hour, when the water is cold take out the bottles, set the bottles into a cold place, they will keep twelve months if the bottles are stopped tight, so as no air nor water can get to them. They will not keep long after the bottles are opened; the plumbs must be hard. American Citron. Take the rinds of large watermelons not too ripe, pare off the outside rind, cut them in thin pieces soak them in weak brine four days, the fourth day scald the brine and pour it hot to the mellons, then soak the mellons four or five days in clear water, change the water each day and pour it hot to the melons, to four pounds of melons take five pounds of clear sugar, dissolve the sugar in water, boil it up, rise the scum with an egg beaten up and put into it or lime water; then put your melons in and boil them half an hour, boil lemon peel and grape juice with your melons : to preserve them you will repeat scalding them once in a few weeks. OF PICKLING. To pickle Asparagus. Gather your asparagus, and lay them in an earthen pot; make a brine of water and salt strong enough to bear an egg, pour it hot on them and keep it close covered. When you use them, lay them in cold water two hours, then boil and butter them for table. If you use them as a pickle, boil them as they come out of the brine, and lay them in vinegar. To pickle Mushrooms. Cut the stems of small buttons at the bottom; wash them in two or three waters with a piece of flannel. Have in readiness a stewpan on the fire, with some spring water that has had a handful of common salt thrown into it; and as soon as it boils, put in your buttons. When they have boiled about three or four minutes, take them off the fire, and throw them into a cullender; from thence spread them as quick as you can upon a linnen cloth, and cover them with another. Have ready several wide mouthed bottles; and as you put in the mushrooms, now and then mix a blade of mace, and some nutmeg sliced amongst them; then fill your bottles with distilled vinegar. If you pour over them some melted mutton fat, that has been well strained, it will keep them better than oil itself would. To pickle Walnuts. Put them into strong salt and water for nine days, and stir them twice a day, observing to change the salt and water every three days. Then let them stand in a hair sieve till they turn black. Put them into strong stone jars, and pour boiling vinegar over them. Cover them up, and let them stand till they be cold. Then give the vinegar three more boilings, pour it each time on the walnuts, and let it stand till it be cold between every boiling. Then tie them down with paper and a bladder over them, and let them stand two or three months. Then make the following pickle. -- To every two quarts of vinegar, put half an ounce of mace, and the same of olives ; of black pepper, Jamaica pepper, ginger, and long pepper, an ounce each, and two ounces of common salt. Boil it ten minutes, pour it hot on your walnuts, and tie them down covered with paper and a bladder. To pickle or make Mangoes of Melons. Take green melons, as many as you please, and make a brine strong enough to bear an egg; then pour it boiling hot on the melons, keeping them down under the brine; let them stand five or six days; then take them out, slit them down on one side, take out all the seeds, scrape them well in the inside, and wash them clean in cold water; then take a clove of a garlick , a little ginger and nutmeg sliced, and a little whole pepper; put all these proportionably into the melons, filling them up with mustard seeds; then lay them in an earthen pot with the slit upwards, and take one part of mustard and two parts of vinegar, enough to cover them, pouring it upon them scalding hot and keep them close stopped. To pickle Barberries. Take of white wine vinegar and water, of each an equal quantity; to every quart of this liquor, put in half a pound of cheap sugar, then pick the worst of your barberries and put into this liquor and the best into glasses; then boil your pickle with the worst of your barberries, and skim it very clean, boil it till it looks of a fine color, then let it stand to be cold, before you strain it; then strain it through a cloth, wringing it to get all the color you can from the barberries; let it stand to cool and settle, then pour it clear into the glasses; in a little of the pickle, boil a little fennel; when cold, put a little bit at the top of the pot or glass, and cover it close with a bladder or leather. To every half pound of sugar put a quarter of a pound of white salt. To pickle Cucumbers. Let your cucumbers be small, fresh gathered and free from spots; then make pickle of salt and water, strong enough to bear an egg; boil the pickle and skim it well, and then pour it upon your cucumbers, and stive them down for twenty four hours; then strain them out into a cullender, and dry them well with a cloth, and take best white wine vinegar, with cloves, sliced mace, nutmeg, white pepper corns , log pepper, and races of ginger, (as much as you please) boil them up together, and then clap the cucumbers in, with a few vine leaves, and a little salt, and as soon as they begin to turn their color, put them into jars, stive them down close, and when cold, tie on a bladder and leather. To pickle Artichoke Bottoms. Boil Artichokes till you can pull the leaves off; then take off the chokes, and cut them from the stalk; (take great care you do not let the knife touch the top) throw them into salt and water for an hour them take them out, and lay them into a cloth to drain; then put them into large wide mouthed glasses, put a little mace and sliced nutmeg between then; fill them either with distilled vinegar, or sugar vinegar and spring water, cover them with mutton fat fried, and tie them down with a bladder and leather. To pickle Salmon. Take your salmon, seale and gut it, and wash it very clean; have a kettle of spring water boiling, with a handful of salt, a little all-spice, cloves, and mace, put in the fish, and boil it three quarters of an hour, if small; if large one hour; then take the salmon out, and let it stand till it is cold; strain the liquor through a sieve; when it is cold, put your salmon very close in a tub or pan, and pour the liquor over it; when you want to use it, put it into a dish, with a little of the pickle, and garnish it with green fennel. To pickle Peppers. Take your peppers and cut a slit in the side of them, put them in cold salt and water for twelve hours, then take them out and put them in fresh salt and water, and hang them over the fire in a brass kettle, letting the water be as hot as you can bear your hand in, let them remain over the fire till they turn yellow, when they turn yellow, shift the water, and put them in more salt and water of the same warmth; then cover them with cabbage leaves till they turn green, when they are done, drain the salt and water off, then boil your vinegar, and pour it over them; they will be fit for use in three days. To pickle Beets. Put into a gallon of cold vinegar as many beets as the vinegar will hold, and put thereto half an ounce of whole pepper, half an ounce of allspice, a little ginger, if you like it, and one head of garlic. Note. Boil the beets in clear water, with their dirt on as they are taken ot of the earth, then take them out and peel them, and when the vinegar is cold put them in, and in two days they will be fit for use. The spice must be boiled in vinegar. OF SOUSING. To souse Pigs feet and ears. After you have cleaned your pigs feet and ears, boil them till they are tender; then boil as much spring water, with salt and vinegar in it, as will cover them; when both are cold, put the feet and ears into a pan, and pour the pickle over them; and when you use them, take them out, split them in two, and lay them in a dish; chop some green parsley and shalott fine, mix it with oil and vinegar, and a spoonful of mustard, and pour over them; or put them into a batter and fry them, serve with butter and mustard in a boat. To souse Mackerel. Put some spring water into a fish-kettle with a handful of salt, half a pint of vinegar, and a few bay leaves, and make it boil; then put in your mackerel, (observe they are covered with the liquor) and boil them twenty minutes very gently; then take them out, put them in a long pan, and pour the liquor over them; and when they are cold, put them in a dish with some of the liquor, and garnish with green fennel. OF SAUSAGES. Fine Sausages. You must take six pounds of good pork, free from skin, gristles, and fat, cut it small, and beat it in a morter till it is very fine; then shred six pounds of beef-suet very fine and free from skin, shred it as fine as possible; take a good deal of sage, wash it very clean, pick off the leaves, and shred it very fine; spread your meat on a clean dresser or table, then shake the sage all over, about three large spoonfuls, shred the thin rind of a middling lemon very fine and throw over, with as many sweet herbs, when shred fine, as will fill a large spoon; grate two nutmegs over, throw over two teaspoonfuls of pepper, a large spoonful of salt, then throw over the suet, and mix it all well together; put it down close in a pot; when you use them, roll them up with as much egg as will make them roll smooth; make them the size of a sausage, and fry them in butter or good dripping; be sure it be hot before you put them in, and keep rolling them about when they are thorough hot, and of a fine light brown, they are enough. You may chop this meat very fine if you do not like it beat. Veal eats well done thus, or veal and pork together. You may clean some guts and fill them. Oxford Sausages. Take a pound of lean veal, a pound of young pork, fat and lean, free from skin and gristle, a pound of beef-suet, chopped all fine together; put in half a pound of grated bread, half the peel of a lemon shred fine, a nutmeg grated, six sage leaves washed and chopped very fine, a tea spoonful of pepper, and two of salt, some thyme, savory, and marjoram shred fine; mix it all well together and put it close down in a pan; when you use it, roll it out the size of a common sausage, and fry them in fresh butter of a fine brown, or broil them over a clear fire, and send them to table as hot as possible. TO BOTTLE GREEN CURRANTS. Gather your currants while they are green and almost full grown when the sun is hot upon them, pick them from the stalks, and put them into narrow mouthed bottles; cork them close, and set them in dry sand, and they will keep all the winter. To bottle Cramberries. Gather your cramberries on a fine dry dry, and put them into dry bottles; cork them tight, and put them upright in a cool dry place, aud they will keep for two years. OF WINES. To make Currant Wine. Gather your currants when the weather is dry, and are full ripe: strip them carefully from the stalk, put them into a pan, and bruise them with a wooden pestle; let it stand about twenty hours, after which strain it through a sieve. Add three pounds fine powdered sugar to every four quarts of the liquor; and then shaking or stiring it well, fill your vessel, and put about a quart of brandy to every seven gallons; as soon as it fine, bottle it off. To make Currant Wine another way. Gather your currants when full ripe, which will commonly be about the middle of July; break them well in a tub or vat, (some have a mill constructed for the purpose, consisting of a hopper, fixed upon two lignum vitae rollers) press and measure your juice, add two thirds, water, and to each gallon of that mixture (i.e. juice and water ) put three pounds of muscovado sugar (the cleaner and dryer the better; very coarse sugar clarified, will do equally as well) stir it well, till the sugar is quite dissolved, and then turn it up. If you can possibly prevent it, let not your juice stand over night, as it should not ferment before mixture. Observe that your casks be sweet and clean, and such as never have had either beer or cyder in them, and, if new, let them be first well seasoned. To make Damson wine. Gather your damsons dry, weigh them and bruise them with your hand; put them into an earthern stein that has a faucet, and a wreath of straw before the faucet; add to every eight pounds of fruit a gallon of water; boil the water, skim it, and put it to your fruit scalding hot; let it stand two whole days; then draw it off, and put it into a vessel fit for it; and to every gallon of liquor put two pounds and an half of fine sugar; let the vessel be full and stop it close; the longer it stands the better; it will keep a year in the vessel; bottle it out. The small damsons is the best. You may put a very small lump of double refined sugar in every bottle. To make English Champaign, or the fine Currant Wine. Take to three gallons of water nine pounds of Lisbon sugar; boil the water and sugar half an hour, skim it clean, then have one gallon of currants picked, but not bruised; pour the liquor boiling hot over them; and when cold work it with half a pint of yeast two days, pour it through a flannel or sieve; then put it into a barrel fit for it, with half an ounce of isinglass well bruised; when it has done working, stop it close for a month; then bottle it, and in every bottle put a small lump of double refined sugar : This is excellent wine, and has a beautiful colour. To make Sarogosa Wine, or English Sack. To every quart of water put a sprig of rue, and to every gallon a handful of fennel roots; boil these half an hour, and strain it off, and to every gallon of this liquor put three pounds of honey; boil it two hours and skim it well; when it is cold pour it off, and turn it into the vessel, or such casks as are fit for it; keep it a year in the vessel, and then bottle it. It is a very good sack. To make Shrub. Take two quarts of brandy, and put it in a large bottle, adding to it the juice of five lemons, the peels of two and half a nutmeg; stop it up, let it stand three days, and add to it three pints of white wine, and a pound and a half of sugar; mix it, strain it twice through a flannel, and bottle it up. It is a pretty wine and a cordial. To recover Wine that has turued sharp. Rack off your wine into another vessel, and to ten gallons put the following powder--Take oyster-shells, scrape and wash off the brown, dirty outside of the shell, and dry them in an oven till they will powder; put a pound of this powder to every nine or ten gallons of your wine; stir it well together, and stop it up, then let it stand to settle two or three days or till it is fine. As soon as it is fine, bottle it off and cork it well. To fine wine the Lisbon way. To every twenty gallons of wine take the white of ten eggs, and a small handful of salt, beat them together to a froth, and mix them well with a quart more of wine; then pour the wine and the whites into the vessel and in a few days it will be fine. To clear Wine, Cyder, &c. Take half a pound of hartshorn, and dissolve it in cyder, if it be for cyder, or Rhenish wine for any other liquor. This is quite sufficient for a hogshead. OF BEER. To make Spruce beer out of the Essence. For a cask of eighteen gallons take seven ounces of the essence of spruce, and fourteen pounds of molasses; mix them with a few gallons of hot water; put it into the cask; then fill the cask with cold water, stir it well, make it about luke warm; then add about two thirds of a pint of good yeast or the grounds of porter; let it stand four or five days to work then bung it up tight, and let it stand two or three days, and it will be fit for immediate use after it has been bottled. To make Spruce beer out of Shed Spruce. To one quart of Shed Spruce, two gallons of cold water, and so in proportion to the quantity you wish to make, then add one pint of molasses to every two gallons, let it boil four or five hours and stand till it is luke warm, then put one pint of yeast to ten gallons, let it work, then put into your cask and bung it up tight, and in two days it will be fit for use. To make Spruice beer another way. Take four ounces of hops, let them boil half an hour in one gallon of water, strain the hop water then add sixteen gallons of warm water, two gallons of molasses, eight ounces of essence of spruce, dissolved in one quart of water, put it in a clean cask, then shake it well together, and add half a pint of emptins, then let it stand and work one week, if very warm weather less time will do, when it is drawn off to bottle, add one spoonful of molasses to every bottle. To make Hop Beer. To make a barrel of beer, take five ounces of good hops, add two or three pails of water, simmer six hours, strain this into your barrel when hot, add one gallon of molasses, stir this well together, and then fill your barrel with water, stir the whole together. It will be fit for use in about forty eight hours. A less quantity may be made by the same rule, but always observe to have the vessel full, so that the beer when it works may discharge the filth that rises on the surface. OF CURING BUTTER. Take two parts of the best common salt, one part of refined sugar, and one part of salt petre; beat them up together, and blend the whole completely. Take one ounce of this composition for every fifteen ounces of butter, work it well into the butter and put it down for use. It must be noted, that butter thus cured requires to stand three weeks before used. -- If sooner opened the salts are not sufficiently blended with it, and sometimes the coolness of the nitre will then be preceived, which totally disappears afterwards.
