This is the Second Part of the Book. Recipes 1 - 1820 are contained in the First Part of the Book. Recipes and Pages that belong to the First Part of the Book, are not linked here. POULTRY. (Volaille). (1821). CAPON à L'AMPHYTRION (Chapon à l'Amphytrion). A capon is a castrated cock fattened for the table; truss a good capon as for an entrée (No. 178) selecting it white and very fat, fill the inside with a delicate quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) with truffles into which mix some chestnuts roasted in the oven and broiled Chipolata sausages after removing their skins, and stoned verdal olives; rub the breast over with half a lemon, then cover with bards of fat pork. Cook the capon as for poêler (No. 12) and when done, dress on a rice foundation and garnish around with clusters of channeled mushrooms (No. 118) with half-glaze stuffed tomatoes, and whole truffles with glaze (No. 402), a little Madeira and butter, strain the stock, free it of its fat and reduce with the same quantity of velouté (No. 415). Insert three skewers garnished with glazed truffles and crawfish on top and serve the sauce separately. (1822). CAPON à LA BRESSOISE (Chapon à la Bressoise). Singe, draw and clean well a fine capon; make a forcemeat by soaking a pound of bread-crumbs in milk, then pressing out all the liquid and adding seasoning and eight ounces of very finely chopped beef marrow and three whole eggs. Stuff, truss and tie up the capon as for an entrée (No. 178). Place in a saucepan a quarter of a pound of lard and half a pound of fresh fat pork cut up in quarter inch squares, lay the capon on top and brown it slowly, then wet with some stock (No. 194a) and simmer, adding more liquid when needed until thoroughly cooked. Strain the gravy, free it of fat and untie the capon, dressing it in the middle of an oval dish, pour the well-reduced gravy over, serving a poulette sauce (No. 527) separately. (1823). CAPON à LA FINANCIèRE (Chapon à la Financière). This relevé is dressed on an oval wooden bottom having in the center a four-sided tin support made hollow so that it be lighter. This wooden bottom and support must both be covered with a cooked paste or else of noodle paste (No. 142) dried in the air. Fasten a string of noodle paste of about three-eighths of an inch in diameter on the edge of the socle; this is intended for upholding the capons and garnishing. On the edge of the bowl of the plate, place a noodle paste border (No. 10). Prepare the capons as for an entrée (No. 178) having them stuffed with a stuffing made of cooked chicken livers, grated fresh lard, truffle parings, bread-crumbs, salt and cayenne pepper. Cover over with bards of fat pork placed in a narrow braziere ( Fig. 134) moisten with sufficient stock (No. 194a) to cover the capons, add aromatic herbs and lemon pulp free of seeds and peel, then cook on a good fire, having the liquid reduce to one-third, at the last moment drain off the capons, untie and dress one on each side of the support inserting a garnished skewer on top; fill in the sides between the capons with a varied garnishing composed of mushrooms, cocks'-combs and quenelles; cover over either with a velouté sauce (No. 415) if needed for white or a financiére sauce (No. 464) if for brown; surround the base with a row of peeled truffles cooked in wine and glazed over with a brush, and serve apart a velouté sauce reduced with mushroom broth if for the white or else a brown financière sauce with Madeira. (1824). CAPON à LA PONDICHéRY (Chapon à la Pondichéry). Draw, singe and truss a capon for an entrée (No. 178), chop up finely a few onions, fry them colorless in butter, add to it some rice and moisten to three times its height with beef stock (No. 194a) seasoning with cayenne pepper, salt and butter; let boil then cook in the oven for twenty minutes. Line a buttered saucepan with carrots, onions and slices of fat pork, lay the capon on top and moisten with a little stock (No. 194a); let this reduce entirely then add more moistening and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf. When the capon is done strain the stock, remove the fat and add it to the capon to keep it warm. Reduce the skimmed stock with velouté sauce (No. 415), curry, saffron and powdered sweet Spanish peppers; dress the rice on the bottom of a dish, lay the capon on top and cover it with a third of the sauce, serving the other two-thirds in a separate sauce -boat. (1825). CAPON à LA RéGENCE (Chapon à la Régence). Singe, draw, and remove the breast bones from two capons; fill the breasts with seasoned butter, then truss as for an entrée (No. 178); lard the breasts with fine lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52), and cover the unlarded parts with slices of fat pork. Put the capons in a covered braziere ( Fig. 134), and moisten them with mirepoix (No. 419), to a little above their wings; cover over with buttered paper, and leave to simmer slowly for one hour. Uncover the braziere, take off the paper, and glaze all the larded parts. Have four larded sweetbreads, ten large truffles, twelve fine cocks'-combs, and eight big crawfish. Make a garnishing with chicken quenelles and mushrooms, combining these with some régence sauce (No. 532). Cut a piece of bread-crumb ten and half inches long by four and a quarter wide, and three and a half inches high, it to be conical-formed; fry this, then attach it to the center of a dish with repère paste (No. 142), so that it can support the two capons; have these well drained and arrange them to rest against the bread, the rump parts uppermost. Pour the prepared garnishing into the bottom of the dish; place two large sweetbreads below the two breasts, and two more in the middle intersections, then two crawfish on each side of the sweetbreads; glaze the sweetbreads and the larded parts of the capon and serve with a régence sauce apart. Make six hatelets with the cocks'-combs and the truffles ( Fig. 11), and fasten them in tastefully. (1826). CAPON LEGS WITH TRUFFLES. ROAST CAPON (Cuisses de Chapon aux Truffes. Chapon Rôti). Bone entirely six legs taken from medium-sized and very tender capons; remove carefully the sinews, then season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg; stuff them with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which mix half as much small squares of foies-gras; sew them up and braise in a mirepoix and white wine stock (No. 419); moisten slowly, being most careful to baste frequently, and when done, withdraw the threads, glaze and dress the legs on the strained and skimmed stock. Serve separately a supreme sauce (No. 547), with sliced truffles added. Roast Capon. --Stand the capon on the grater fitting in the roasting pan; for this see the plate in roasted sirloin of beef (No. 306); have the bird trussed for roasting (No. 179). The grater is used so that the meat does not lie in the dripping, this being the best way to attain perfect results in roasting, but attention must be paid to keep turning it over and basting frequently with the dripping fat; care must also be observed not to allow this fat to burn, and in order to avoid this pour a little hot water from time to time into the pan. After the capon is nicely done, withdraw untruss, and serve it on a very hot dish; drain off all the fat so that only the glaze remains in the pan, detach this with a clear gravy (No. 404), strain the gravy, remove the fat and pour a part of it over the capon, serving the remainder in a sauce -boat. CHICKEN (Poulet). (1827). CHICKEN BREASTS à LA CHEVREUSE (Estomacs de Poulet à la Chevreuse). Dip the breasts of two or three chickens in boiling water, lard them with some fillets of ham, and truffles cut the size shown (No. 4, Fig. 52), braise and as soon as cooked drain and arrange them against a triangle-shaped bread support; between each chicken lay a group of truffles, one of olives and another of quenelles; pour some suprême sauce (No. 547) around them and serve more in a sauce -boat. (1828). CHICKEN à LA DELISLE--BROILED (Poulet Grillé à la Delisle). Split a chicken in two through the back after having drawn, singed and cleansed it well; trim it nicely, remove the lights and season with salt and prepared red pepper (No. 168), dip in melted butter, then roll in bread-crumbs and broil over a slow fire; serve on a garnishing prepared as follows: Peel four medium tomatoes, cut them in four, press out the seeds and fry in butter with finely shredded green peppers, adding a little kneaded butter (No. 579), let simmer until thoroughly done. Prepare a low oval border of Piedmontese risot (No. 739) with parmesan; unmold on a dish and lay the tomatoes in the center with the broiled chicken on top; trim the drum sticks with frills (No. 10), and serve very hot. FIG. 353. An illustration of a whole chicken. (1829). CHICKEN à LA IRVING--BROILED AND STUFFED (Poulet Farci et Grillé à la Irving). Procure very young chickens each one to weigh a pound and a quarter; draw, singe and clean them well picking out all the pin feathers; split them in two through the back, and take off the meat from the legs without injuring the skin; chop up this meat with the same quantity of fresh fat pork, a few spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385), and half as much bread-crumbs; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, adding one whole egg; lay this dressing in the inside part of the chickens, cover with melted butter and besprinkle with bread-crumbs; lay them on a double hinged broiler to broil very slowly but to a fine color. Fry colorless one tablespoonful of onions with as much small squares of raw ham; moisten with a gill of veal blond (No. 423), a gill of espagnole sauce (No. 414), and a gill of tomato purée (No. 730); let the whole simmer for ten minutes, then strain the sauce through a fine sieve and pour it into the bottom of the dish; sprinkle over with chopped parsley and lay the stuffed chickens on top. (1830). CHICKEN WITH BACON, MAîTRE-D'HôTEL-BROILED (Poulet Grillé au Petit Salé à la Maître-d'Hôtel). Singe a good small chicken, draw and clean it well plucking out all the feathers; leave the pinions on; cut off the legs one inch below the joint and split the chicken down through the back to open it entirely; take out the breast bone and lights, clean the insides properly decreasing the bones of the carcass; beat the chicken in order to flatten it, and pare ( Fig. 353), then lay it in a dish and baste with melted butter or oil; season with salt and place it in a double broiler to broil over a slow fire for fifteen to twenty minutes; after the chicken has acquired a fine color and is properly done, dress it on an oval hot dish and cover with some maître-d'hôtel butter (No. 581), surround with slices of bacon and serve. (1831). CHICKEN WITH TARRAGON GRAVY OR SAUCE --BROILED (Poulet Grillé au Jus àl'Estragon ou à la Sauce à l'Estragon). Draw a young pound and a half chicken, cut off the legs at the first joint, cut a slit in the chicken near the pope's nose and pass the stump bone through the slit; split the chicken in two lengthwise, pare each part, beat down to flatten, season and roll in melted butter, then in white bread-crumbs and broil on both sides turning over when the meats are found to be done. Dress the two half chickens on a hot dish garnish the leg bones with frills (No. 10), and serve with some good tarragon gravy or else with tarragon sauce (No. 548). (1832). CHICKEN COCOTTE (Poulet en Cocotte). Cut up one small pound and a quarter to pound and a half chicken; season with pepper, only divide it into four parts, the two legs and the breast part cut in two; put the pieces in the bottom of a cocotte (small earthen saucepan, Fig. 354) with a little piece of butter the size of a nut, placing the legs underneath and the breasts on top, add a small bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf and over lay two ounces of un smoked bacon cut in five-eighths inch squares blanched, then fried in butter, also a dozen and half pieces of potato-shaped like cloves of garlic and as many small raw onions fried to a light color in butter; lay here and there half an ounce more butter, put on the lid and push into a moderate oven for half an hour. The cocotte should stand directly on the bottom of the oven; turn the ingredients over carefully ranging the meat on top of the vegetables; let cook for another ten to fifteen minutes, then add a little clear gravy (No. 404) and chopped parsley; toss and serve in the cocotte itself. FIG. 354. An illustration of a pot with a mouth on the left. (1833). éPIGRAMMES OF CHICKEN à LA VOLNAY (épigrammes de Poulet à la Volnay). Raise the fillets from four chickens, remove the minion fillets and skin, bone thoroughly and stuff the thighs, then put them into half heart -shaped bottomless molds three-eighths of an inch high, braise and leave to cool under the pressure of a weight; pare, dip in eggs and bread-crumbs and fry nicely. Sauté the breasts on a moderate fire, drain and dress them in a circle alternated with the thighs, decorate with fancy favor frills (No. 10); and fill the center with a garnishing of whole chestnuts, truffles, mushrooms and cover with velouté sauce (No. 415) that has been thickened at the last moment with egg-yolks and raw cream. (1834). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA BéRANGER (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Béranger). Raise the fillets or wings with the pinions attached from six roasted chickens of two pounds each, having them well larded and not too much cooked; pare nicely, suppressing the skin and lay them in a sautoir with well buttered cream béchamel (No. 411). Dress them in a circle with a croûton of unsmoked red beef tongue between each piece. Add some mushroom heads to the béchamel and use them to fill in the center of the circle; lay on top half-spherical decorated chicken quenelles and garnish around with small half heart bread croûtons fried in butter and having their pointed ends dipped first in meat glaze (No. 402), then in chopped parsley. The word "ailes" should be used in preference to the word "filets" in making French menus, to avoid the repetition of this word which appears so often in French. (1835). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA BODISKO (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Bodisko). Raise the large fillets from six two pound chickens; suppress the skin and split them in two through their thickness without detaching the parts; season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and fill up the opened space with cooked fine herbs (No. 385) mixed with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89). Break six egg-yolks in a dish, add two gills of melted butter and beat them together; dip the fillets into this and then roll them in bread-crumbs; lay them on a buttered baking pan, pour butter over and cook in a hot oven, then drain. Trim the pointed ends with favor frills (No. 10), and dress the fillets in a circle filling the center with cèpes fried in butter, moistened with sour cream and reduced. Serve separately a well buttered white bordelaise sauce (No. 436), thickening it with egg-yolks and butter, straining it through a tammy. (1836). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA CéRTOSA (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Cértosa). Clean well six good fleshy chickens; raise the fillets covered with their skin and sauté them in butter. Prepare a fine Julienne (No. 318) with the red part of carrots blanched in an abundance of water, drained and fried in butter with mushrooms, cut the same shape and size, and also some truffles cut likewise. Add the Julienne to the chickens, moisten with very little broth (No. 194a), and Marsala wine, cover the saucepan and let cook in a slack oven; baste and moisten the chicken slowly, and as soon as the sauce is found to be sufficiently reduced, thicken it with velouté sauce (No. 415), egg-yolks, and cream, then dress the fillets in a pyramid, and pour the sauce over; garnish around with bread-crumb croûtons cut heart -shaped, and fried in butter. (1837). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA CHISELHURST (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Chiselhurst). Raise the fillets from six two pound chickens; pare, suppress the skin, and lard six of them with small shreds of larding pork (No. 3, Fig 52) and the other six with slices of truffles the same size as the pork; pare the minion fillets and lard six with smaller pork lardons than those used for the fillets, and the other six with small pieces of truffles cut the same size. Lay them in two separate buttered sautoirs, the truffles in one and the larding pork in the other, having previously given the minion fillets the shape of a crescent. Cover over the truffled fillets with thin lardon of fat pork, and cook those larded with pork on a brisk fire while those with truffles are to be cooked more slowly. Dress in a circle alternating the two kinds, and fill the center with balls of truffle mingled with supreme sauce (No. 547). Place the truffled minions on top of the larded fillets and the larded minions on top of the truffled fillets; cover with a light supréme sauce, serving some of the sauce in a sauce -boat. FIG. 355. An illustration of a minion fillet. FIG. 356. An illustration of a minion fillet in the shape of a crescent. (1838). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA CUSSY (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Cussy). Pare twelve chicken fillets being careful to keep the minion fillets aside, beat these large fillets to flatten them, then pare into half hearts, rounded on one side and pointed on the other, season with salt and white pepper. Take the minion fillets, the parings and as much raw chicken meat and with it prepare a cream forcemeat (No. 75), adding to it a quarter as much very fine mushroom purée (No. 722). Pour clarified butter into a sautoir, heat it well and range the chicken fillets on top simply to stiffen on one side only; drain them off leaving the butter in the pan and place the fillets on a baking sheet, one beside the other, cover with buttered paper and let get cold without any pressure, then pare. Cover these fillets with the cream forcemeat, smooth them well rounded on the top and range them once more in the sautoir containing the butter, place them in the oven to finish cooking and to poach the forcemeat; brush them over with butter as soon as the forcemeat becomes sufficiently solid not to have them spoiled, then dress them rosette-shaped on a dish, garnishing each pointed end with a favor frill (No. 10). Serve with a well buttered supreme sauce (No. 547), part of it poured under the fillets and the other part served separately. FIG. 357. An oval shape of chicken fillet. (1839). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à L'éCARLATE (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à l'écarlate). Take the fillets from six medium chickens, remove all the skin and epidermis, detach the minion fillets and free them of the sinew and skin which covers them, streak them with pieces of beef tongue and form into rings and place in a buttered sautoir. Sauté the large fillets over a brisk fire with butter. Cut twelve slices of very red beef tongue into half hearts the size of the fillets and three-sixteenths of an inch thick; warm them in stock (No. 194a) and just when ready to serve, drain and decorate each fillet with a favor frill (No. 10), dress in a circle having them intercalated with the half- hearts of tongue. Poach the minion fillet rings, fill the inside of the circle with a garnishing composed of small mushroom heads, truffle balls and quenelles all mixed with velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with cream, and range the minion fillets around the whole; serve a well buttered velouté sauce separately. (1840). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS, CHEVALET à L'éCUYèRE (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet Chevalet à l'écuyère). Prepare the large fillets and minion fillets the same as for Harrison ( No. 1844 ), lay them on sheets of tin bent into semicircles three inches by one and a half high, well buttered and maintain both fillets on this mold with wooden skewers run through holes bored in the tin, laying the streaked minion fillets on top of the larger fillets underneath ( Fig. 358) baste over with butter and cook in a slow oven. Truss some fine crawfish cooked à la bordelaise, dress them crown-shaped on a dish garnished with a tomato purée (No. 730) and lay the fillets of chickens on top of the crawfish; serve separately a bordelaise sauce (No. 436) made with white wine and having three-sixteenths inch squares of mushrooms added. FIG. 358. A semicircles tin with wooden skewer run through holes bored in the tin. (1841). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS A L'IMPéRATRICE (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet Impératrice). Procure six young chickens each one weighing about a pound and a half; lift off the breasts with the pinions and large fillets attached and suppress all sinews and skin. Chop the fillets on both sides without penetrating through the flesh and season with salt, pepper and nutmeg; dampen the surfaces with egg-white, besprinkle with very finely chopped truffles and over these spread a very thin layer of cream forcemeat (No. 75); dip in fresh bread-crumbs and lay them on a buttered sheet, pour butter over and cook in a hot oven. Make some croustades in half heart -shaped buttered bottomless molds lined with puff paste fragments (No. 149) rolled out thin; line them with buttered paper and fill them with rice and then cook in a moderate oven; when done empty out and fill up with bits of celery cut in quarter-inch dice blanched, cooked in broth and fallen to a glaze, then mingled with velouté sauce (No. 415) and thickened; when ready to use with egg-yolks diluted in cream and a few small pats of butter. Lay the breasts on top of these croustades, trim the pinions with paper frills (No. 10) and serve very hot. (1842). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS, EPICUREAN (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à l'Epicurienne). Prepare the fillets of six young two-pound chickens, observing that they be white and tender; remove the skin and epidermis and lard them with fine larding pork (No. 4, Fig. 52), place them in a buttered sautoir and let cook to attain color in a very hot oven, then drain and decorate with frills (No. 10). Streak each minion fillet with six round thin slices of truffles, roll them into rings and place them in a buttered sautoir to poach in the oven without coloring. Dress the large fillets on a forcemeat ring and decorate the outside with the minion fillets. Detach the glaze from the bottom of the sautoir with a little sherry wine, free it of all fat and add a little velouté sauce (No. 415); thicken just when ready to serve with raw egg-yolks diluted with cream and fresh butter; run the sauce through a tammy and pour a part over the breasts and minions and the balance in a sauce -boat. Make twelve five-eighths of an inch diameter balls with foies-gras taken direct from a terrine, rubbed through a sieve; dip them in eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and fry in very hot frying fat; place one of these balls in the center of each minion fillet ring and serve at once. FIG. 359. A large piece of chicken fillet rounded by minion fillets that streaked with thin slices of truffles. (1843). CHICKEN FILLETS OR WINGS à LA GéNIN (Filets ou Ailes de Poulets à la Génin). Take the skin covered fillets from six chickens with the wings, and after paring them neatly, sauté them in butter over a good fire, seasoning with salt and pepper; when done and a fine color, add a little finely chopped shallots and let these fry with the chicken fillets, then add some finely minced fresh mushrooms; when these have evaporated their humidity, moisten with white wine and finish with a little chicken glaze (No. 398). Dress the wings on half heart -shaped bread croûtons fried in butter; add a little velouté sauce (No. 415) to the sauce, reduce and season properly, finishing it with a little foies-gras; pass through a fine sieve, pour over the fillets, sprinkle chopped parsley over and serve very hot. (1844). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA HARRISON (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Harrison) Pare twelve raw chicken fillets to the shape of half hearts; lift off the minion fillets and remove the sinews and fine skin which covers, then cut six bias incisions through half of the thickness of these minions and in each of them lay a thin round slice of truffle. Place the fillets in a buttered sautoir and the scored minions on top lengthwise, pour butter over and cover with a strong buttered paper; cook for ten to twelve minutes on a slow fire. Prepare some boned terrapin à la Maryland (No. 1085); spread a quarter inch thick layer of this on a baking sheet and when cold cut it up into oblong pieces, one and three-quarters wide by three and a half long; dip these pieces in eggs and bread-crumbs, and fry to a fine color; drain, wipe and dress the fillets flat on these terrapin crusts. Pour a little half-glaze (No. 400) with Madeira in the bottom of the dish and serve with a separate sauce -boat of espagnole sauce (No. 414) into which squeeze the juice of an orange, adding a dash of cayenne pepper, meat glaze (No. 402) and plenty of butter. FIG. 360. A chicken fillet cut in the shape of half heart. (1845). CHICKEN FILLETS AND BREASTS à LA LORENZO (Filets et Ailes de Poulets à la Lorenzo). Raise the breasts with the fillets from six young, one pound and three-quarters to two pound chickens; lift off the skin and epidermis, also the minion fillets; place the breasts on a buttered baking sheet with the minions scored with truffles on top, laying them along the thick edge of the breasts; pour over butter and cover with buttered paper, then cook in a moderate oven; garnish the minions with paper frills (No. 10). Dress crown-shaped and fill the inside with a Lorenzo garnishing made as follows: Lorenzo Garnishing. --Have espagnole sauce (No. 414) with a few tarragon leaves added, celery cut in one inch pieces, blanched and cooked in broth (194a); blanched olives stoned and filled with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) containing anchovies, whole chestnuts cooked in broth; artichoke bottoms pared into half hearts, three six-sixteenths inch squares of truffles and some large capers. The border for chicken breasts à la Lorenzo, are made oval and in the following manner: Butter a mold ( Fig. 139) with butter softened without being melted; decorate the sides either with fanciful cuts of truffles, or tongue, or even both; fill it up with cream forcemeat (No. 75) or quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and lay this border in a sautoir; pour boiling water around, set it in a slow oven and when poached, meaning when firm to the touch, unmold and dress the breasts on top and the garnishing in the center. FIG. 361. An oval shaped of chicken fillet. (1846) CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA LUCULLUS (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Lucullus). The large and the minion fillets are to be prepared as described in the Harrison fillets (No. 1814), lay them in a buttered sautoir, twisting slightly so as to have them assume the shape of a chop; lay the minion fillets on the outside edge of the large fillet, mask with melted butter, cover with a strong buttered paper and cook in a slack oven for twelve to fifteen minutes; trim the pointed ends with favor frills (No. 10); dress the fillets in a circle filling up the inside with a garnishing of truffles and tongue balls half an inch in diameter, also capon kidneys, all to be mixed with béarnaise sauce (No. 433) into which has been stirred a few spoonfuls of meat -glaze (No. 402). FIG. 362. A half heart liked chicken fillet. (1847). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS, à LA MARCEAU (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Marceau). Remove the breasts from six chickens each one of them to weigh from a pound and a half to two pounds; suppress the skin and sinews and lift off the minion fillets to streak with truffles; pare the large fillets into half heart -shapes, and lay them in a buttered sautoir; place the minion fillets on the outer edges, pour over butter, cover with buttered paper and cook in a moderate oven. Fill with cream chicken forcemeat (No. 75) some flat quarter inch thick half heart -shaped molds, placed on a sheet of buttered paper and poach very lightly, then sauté on both sides in butter and dress unmolded in a circle with the chicken fillets on top. Prepare a Marceau sauce (No. 495); when ready to serve add a little fresh butter; fill the middle of the circle with small mushroom heads fried in butter, cover over with a part of the sauce and send the remainder to accompany the dish poured into a separate sauce -boat. FIG. 363. A large thick chicken fillet that pared into half heart-shape. (1848). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA MARéCHALE (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Maréchale). Pare twelve raw chicken fillets; remove the minion fillets, and suppress the senews and skin which covers them, then marinate in salt, pepper, parsley leaves, and lemon juice. Make an incision on one side of these large fillets, and fill it in with a Duxelle (No. 385), or else fine herbs cooked with truffles; dip in beaten eggs, then roll in bread-crumbs, and baste with clarified butter; immerse them once more in the bread-crumbs, and put on them a buttered baking sheet; pour melted butter over, and brown in a brisk oven, or else broil over a slow fire, or even sauté them in clarified butter; trim with favors (No. 10) and dress in a circle filling in the inside with a Toulouse garnishing (No. 766). Dip the minion fillets in a fine light frying batter (No. 137), roll them up into rings, and when fried and have attained a fine color, drain and dress pyramidically over the Toulouse garnishing. A suprême sauce (No. 547) to be served separately. (1849). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA MIRABEAU (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Mirabeau). Keep the minion fillets when removing the fillets or wings from the chickens; suppress all the skin and sinews from the large fillets, take off the minion fillets and marinate the larger ones for two hours in a vessel containing salt, pepper, nutmeg, lemon juice, thyme, bay leaf, and parsley leaves, turning them over frequently; remove, drain, and roll in flour, then in beaten eggs, and lastly in bread-crumbs; fry in clarified butter. Pare the minion fillets into oblongs, spread over a layer of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), with cooked fine herbs (No. 385), and roll them into cylinder shapes, now range them inside a buttered timbale mold and let cook in a slow oven. Dress the chicken breasts in the center of a dish on top of a little Mirabeau sauce (No. 500), surround them with the prepared paupiettes, and on every one of these lay a channeled mushroom (No. 118) cooked and glazed in chicken glaze (No. 398). Serve with a sauce -boatful of the same sauce. (1850). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA PATTI (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Patti). Raise the large fillets from six young, two pound chickens that are quite fleshy, suppress the skin and epidermis; remove the minion fillets and from them the nerves and skin; streak these with red beef tongue. Cut an incision through one side of the large fillets without detaching the parts; turn over so that the cut part is now outside; fill in the inside with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which incorporate some foies-gras pressed through a sieve; make the fillet oval-shape like an egg, and lay the streaked minion fillet along the top of it. Place in a buttered sautoir, cover each fillet with a thin slice of fat pork, and cook in a moderate oven. Prepare a cream forcemeat (No. 75) border decorated with pistachios; poach, unmold, and dress with the fillets or breasts over, garnishing with favor frills (No. 10); fill the inside of this border with very thick, well buttered chicken purée (No. 713), into which add half the same quantity of rice boiled in almond milk (No. 4). Garnish around with sliced truffles heated in a little meat glaze (No. 402), butter and Madeira, and serve with a sauce -boatful of supreme sauce (No. 547). FIG. 364. An oval-shape liked fillet laid with streaked minion fillet along the top of it. (1851). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA PRIMATICE (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Primatice). Clean and singe six two pound chickens; lift off the large fillets and detach the minions, remove the skin and epidermis from the large fillets and lay them in a buttered sautoir. Suppress the sinews from the minion fillets, also the fine skin which covers and cut six incisions at equal distances on their length; insert an oblong piece of truffle into the first incision beginning at the smallest end; an oblong of tongue into the second incision, and so on, alternating them until the entire six are filled, then twist the minions into a round-shape and place them in a buttered sautoir; use a cornet to push into the centers some forcemeat having half quenelle (No. 89) and half cream (No. 75), both well mixed together and set a round piece of truffle on top, having it an eighth of an inch thick by three-quarters of an inch in diameter, pour over melted butter, cover over with strong buttered paper and cook in a slack oven for six to eight minutes. Sauté the large fillets on a quick fire, then dress them in a flat circle over croûtons of bread cut the same shape, but slightly narrower. On each fillet lay one minion fillet and fill the inside of the circle with a garnishing of fillets of mushrooms an eighth of an inch wide by five-eighths of an inch long; green peas, lozenge-shaped string beans , the red part of a carrot cut in triangles, quarter of an inch squares of turnips, truffles cut olive -shaped, and semi-circular pieces of tongue, all of those being added to a little velouté (No. 415) and fresh butter. Have a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with truffle essence (No. 395) served at the same time, but separately. (1852). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA PRINCIèRE (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Princière). Choose six well-cleansed chickens, each one to weigh a pound and three-quarters to two pounds; remove the large fillets leaving the pinion on, with the bone kept rather long; lift off the minion fillets, also suppress the large fillets' skin and the thin skin covering the minions; dip the latter in egg-whites, then roll in very finely chopped pistachios, previously run through a sieve; twist them around the finger to form a circle and place them in a buttered sautoir; cover with a sheet of buttered paper and poach just when ready to serve only; this will take but five minutes on a moderate fire. Chop the surface of the large fillet without misshaping it whatever, season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, then cover over with chicken forcemeat and dredge or throw over finely chopped truffles, lay these in a buttered sautoir, shaping them all alike, six with the pinions on the right and six with the pinions on the left, then cook in a slack oven. When done remove and run a ring cut from beef tongue a quarter of an inch thick on the pinion bone and decorate this also with a frill (No. 10). Dress crown-shaped filling in the interior with a garnishing composed of cocks'-combs and kidneys, also slices of foies-gras, the whole combined with supreme sauce (No. 547). Poach the minion fillets and dress them around, serving with a sauce -boatful of the supreme sauce. FIG. 365. A half heart-shaped chicken fillet. (1853). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA SADI-CARNOT (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Sadi-Carnot). To be made with twelve breasts. Fry a chopped shallot in butter keeping it quite colorless and add to it two tablespoonfuls of finely minced truffles, three tablespoonfuls of minced fresh mushrooms and a teaspoonful of chopped parsley; fry the whole for a few moments on the fire, then add a little chicken glaze (No. 398), season and let get partially cold before stirring in three raw egg-yolks. Remove the skin and epidermis from the breasts and cut five gashes on the top of the minion fillets; introduce in each gash a thin round of truffle half an inch in diameter form the fillets into rings and lay them in a buttered sautoir, filling their interiors with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and on top of this set a five-eighths of an inch round of truffle. Split the large fillets through their sides and fill them with the above preparation, then range them in a sautoir with clarified butter and lemon juice; sauté, drain, garnish with favor frills (No. 10) and dress in a circle on half heart -shaped croûtons of bread-crumbs fried in butter, cover with a tomato sauce (No. 549) and Béarnaise sauce (No. 433), mixed and garnish around the large fillets with the minion fillets, glazing the slices of truffles with meat glaze. (1854). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA TOULOUSE (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Toulouse). Pare twelve raw chicken fillets; take off the minion fillets, cut in the large fillet a deep gash lengthwise without separating the pieces, turn the meat over so that the gashed part is now outside and fill in the inside with a well mixed quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and foies-gras that has been passed through a sieve half of each, having as much as would make an inch and a half diameter ball; envelop well this dressing in the flesh of the fillet, shaping them into pretty ovals and well rounded on the top ( Fig. 364); put in more or less forcemeat, according to the size of the fillet so that when they are finished they look all alike; lay on top of each of these a small minion fillet streaked by cutting six incisions and placing in each one a thin slice of truffle proportioned to the size of the minion fillet. Cover the bottom of a sautoir with clarified butter, lay over the chicken fillets at equal distances apart, pour over more melted butter and cover with a strong buttered paper; cook them in a slow oven for twelve to fifteen minutes, drain, trim with favor frills (No. 10) and dress in a circle; pour into the center a Toulouse garnishing (No. 766). (1855). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA VALENçAY (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet a la Valençay). Pare twelve raw chicken fillets without detaching the minion fillet; cut a gash down the whole length and in the middle of each fillet without separating the parts; turn the meat inside out fill the inside space with a preparation of chopped truffles fried in butter and thickened with meat glaze then allowed to cool off and mix with one egg-yolk. Dip each one of the fillets in velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with cream and when they are quite cold, immerse them in beaten eggs and roll in fresh white bread-crumbs; smooth them shapely with the blade of a knife. At the last moment range the fillets in a sautoir with clarified butter and brown them on both sides over a moderate fire; drain and trim with favor frills (No. 10). Dress in a circle filling the inside space with tomatoes prepared as follows: Cut medium-sized sound and peeled tomatoes into quarters, press out the juice and seeds, then fry them in butter seasoning with a little salt and sugar. Serve a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Madeira separately. FIG. 366. A chicken fillet with minion fillet. (1856). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS à LA VALERRI (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Valerri). Prepare twelve fillets by removing the thin skin covering them; remove the minion fillets to streak with red beef tongue; turn each one of these around a large Spanish olive, replacing its stone by quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), pushed through a cornet; on top of this forcemeat set a small truffle ball. Lay these in a buttered sautoir, cover with a sheet of buttered paper, and poach them in a slow oven, just when ready to use. Sauté the large fillets lightly with butter and lemon juice, and lay them under a weight, then divide them in two through their entire thickness. Range half of them very closely together, and pour over a layer of soubise (No. 723), having it a quarter of an inch thick, set the other twelve halves on top of these halves, and leave till cold, then pare them all evenly into half heart -shapes; dip each separate double piece in well reduced but partially cold FIG. 367. Chicken fillet without thin skin and minion fillets. FIG. 368. A sauted mushroom. allemande sauce (No. 407), and let cool off again, then dip in eggs, roll in bread-crumbs, and fry in clarified butter; drain, trim with favor frills (No. 10), and dress in a circle; fill up the center with mushrooms sautéd in butter and fine herbs, pour over some half-glaze (No. 400) and Madeira, and set the minion fillets on top of these mushrooms. Serve separately a sauce -boat of half glaze sauce (No. 413). (1857). CHICKEN à LA VILLEROI (Poulet à la Villeroi). An entrée of chicken à la Villeroi arranged and dressed as in Fig. 369 can be served at the most elegant dinners. This entrée is dressed on a wooden foundation with a round and slightly conical support in the center, both being covered with cooked or noodle paste (No. 142). Cook about fifteen fine, turned, very white, even sized mushroom heads. Select three good, tender chickens, not too large, but quite fleshy; when well cleaned, truss and cover over with thin slices of fat pork and "poêlé" them in some good stock (No. 12), keeping them quite rare; drain, untruss and cut each chicken into five pieces; first take the legs while still very hot, and quickly remove the large second joint bone; cut off the stump at two-thirds of its length and range them on a small baking tin, one beside the other, letting them cool off under a weight. Detach the upper part of the breasts from the bodies, suppress the breast bones, pare them into oblongs and also leave to cool. Remove the skin from the fillets, pare them prettily, detaching the pinion bone and cutting away the flesh from around. Trim the legs the same shape as the fillets and imitate the minion bone by the shortened stump. Dip each one of these pieces separately into a well seasoned, succulent and thick tomato sauce (No. 549) and Villeroi sauce (No. 560) mixed; return them at once to the same tin they were taken from, and leave to cool for a couple of hours; now take up the pieces one by one, detach any surplus of sauce and roll them immediately in fresh white bread-crumbs, then dip them in beaten eggs and bread-crumb once more; shake them nicely without handling them too much, and place them in a frying basket ( Fig. 121); fry in very hot fat till a good color is acquired, then drain and dress the legs and fillets against the support almost upright one piece slightly overlapping the other; on the summit of the support lay a bed of fried parsley and over this the breasts pyramidically arranged; set the mushroom heads in a row around the bottom of the dish, cover over with a little of the velouté and serve the entrée at once. FIG. 369. A plate of chicken fillets arranged in a pyramid form with mushrooms garnished around them. (1858). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS AU SUPRêME (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet au Suprême). Select six medium chickens of two pounds each, remove the large fillets, also their skin and epidermis; pare these into half hearts and range in a buttered sautoir; on top of the thickest part of these lay the minion fillet in a half circle after it has been scored; pour over butter and the juice of a lemon, cover with a buttered paper and cook in a hot oven. Set some supêrme sauce (No. 547) and chicken glaze (No. 389) in a sautoir and just when ready to serve stir in fresh butter, cream and six ounces of peeled and sliced truffles. Trim all the fillets with favor frills (No. 10) and dress them in a circle filling in the inside with the sliced truffles and sauce. Serve a sauce -boat of supreme sauce (No. 547) at the same time. FIG. 370. A half heart-shaped chicken breast laid with minion fillets on its thickest part of half circle. (1859). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS, MEXICAN STYLE, IN PAPERS (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet à la Mexicaine en Papillotes). Remove the fillets from six fine medium-sized chickens; pare them leaving on the pinions and skin, then sauté them, and when done wrap them up in a matignon with white wine (No. 406), adding peeled tomatoes cut in eight pieces, fried in butter and seasoned with salt, pepper, and chopped parsley. Prepare some sheets of paper heart -shaped and well oiled; place on one half a little of the cooked matignon, the tomatoes, some risot (No. 739) and fried sweet peppers; lay one of the breasts or fillets on top and cover with more of the ingredients, then close by pinching the two edges together all around and lay them on a buttered dish; place in a hot oven to beat the contents and color the paper; serve immediately. (1860). CHICKEN FILLETS OR BREASTS WITH CUCUMBERS (Filets ou Ailes de Poulet aux Concombres). Obtain some very small c lean chickens, raise the fillets and remove the minion fillets; pare the large fillets, suppress the skin and lard the tops with fine lardons (No. 4, Fig. 52) of larding pork, season and range them in a sautoir with butter, place this on a hot fire and two minutes later, remove and put them into a hot oven to let cook rare, but of a fine color, then glaze over with a brush, remove, drain and garnish the ends with favor frills (No. 10). Dress into the middle of a hot dish a garnishing of purée of cucumbers (No. 714), smooth the surface with the blade of a knife and dress the chicken fillets on the outside, pouring some supreme sauce (No. 547) around and serving more in a sauce boat. FIG. 371. A small piece of chicken breast. (1861). CHICKEN FRICASSEE (Fricassée de Poulet). Take a well cleansed chicken of two and a half to three pounds; cut the two fillets, the legs, the breast in one, back in two and two wings retaining all the skin. Fill a saucepan with cold water, and soak the pieces of chicken in it for one hour, then throw this off and replace it by one quart of cold water adding to it two medium onions, one containing a clove, a bunch of parsley garnished with a bay leaf and thyme, salt and pepper. Cook the chickens, skim and let simmer gently, be sure that the chicken is cooked before taking them out, and when done, drain on a colander, then lay the pieces in cold water; make a roux with three ounces of butter and three ounces of flour, cook for a few moments without browning, then put in the chicken stock and the liquid from a pound of mushroom heads, as soon as the sauce comes to a boil, remove it to the corner of the range for half an hour. Pare and clean the pieces of chicken carefully, lay them in a low saucepan, remove all the fat from the sauce and pour it through a wire sieve on the chicken, cover and heat it over a slow fire, thicken with four egg-yolks and one ounce of butter by first diluting the yolks with a little of the sauce and increasing gradually until half the sauce is combined with the eggs, then stir it all together, set it on the fire and roll the pieces in; after the sauce thickens, strain it again through a tammy, add the mushrooms to the sauce. Dress the chicken by forming a high square with the two back pieces and the two wings, in the center of the dish; place the two fillets and two legs against the square and the piece of breast on top, cover with the sauce, putting the mushrooms on the four corners, pour the sauce over and garnish around with small round rice croquettes made with almond milk. (1862). CHICKEN FRICASSEE à LA BOUCHARD (Fricassée de Poulet à la Bouchard). Singe and cut up the chickens as for a plain fricassee ( No. 1861 ), fry them without letting attain a color in some butter, and add a heaping tablespoonful of flour, mix well and pour in a pint of chablis wine, some broth (No. 194a), and a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123); cook very slowly and when done, take out the pieces of chicken; thicken the sauce with four egg-yolks and a little butter, pass the sauce through a tammy and just when ready to serve add two chopped blanched shallots; some tarragon leaves and chopped parsley. Pour this over the chicken, garnishing around with Villeroi oysters (No. 698), and mushroom heads fried in butter, then tossed in meat -glaze (No. 402), butter and lemon juice; serve immediately. (1863). CHICKEN FRICASSEE à LA CHEVALIèRE (Fricassée de Poulet à la Chevalière). After the chickens are singed, remove the pouch and raise the fillets whole, with the pinions; slide the blade of a keen, thin knife between the meat and skin covering the fillets, lard them over with fine shreds of pork and lay them in a lightly buttered sautéing pan. Pare the minion fillets and lard them with either truffles or tongue, then shape them into rounds, two and a quarter inches in diameter; place them in a buttered sautoir on thin slices of fat pork. Cut up the remainder of the chickens and cook them the same as for the plain chicken fricassee ( No. 1861 ). Trim the legs and bread-crumb them. Prepare and cook a croustade the same width as the serving dish, having it three inches high, glaze the larded fillets; cook the minion fillets, and fry the legs to a nice golden color. Dress the backs and wings in the center of the croustade; cover lightly with allemande sauce (No. 407), then range the legs leaving them against the backs; place the larded fillets between these legs, and the minion fillets around; in each of the latter set a fine glazed truffle, then glaze the fillets. Serve with a velouté sauce (No. 415), thickened when ready, with egg-yolks, butter, and cream; heat well without boiling, and throw in some chopped mushrooms. (1864). CHICKEN FRICASSEE à LA FAVORITE (Fricassée de Poulet à la Favorite). Prepare and cut up the chickens the same as for the plain fricassee ( No. 1861 ); soak the pieces for half an hour, then drain and return them to the saucepan to moisten with white broth (No. 194a); cook the chicken, drain it in a colander, and run the liquid through a napkin; put it back on the fire to reduce to half adding eight gills of velouté sauce (No. 415), then reduce once more until the sauce adheres to the spoon, afterward finish with egg-yolks and butter. Strain through a tammy, and keep hot in a bain-marie. Wash thoroughly the pieces of cooked chicken in cold water; pare nicely, and place them in the sauce; after they are well heated, dress and garnish around with a cluster of carrot balls half an inch in diameter, blanched and cooked in white stock (No. 194a) and a little sugar, also small white onions cooked in white broth. Decorate the outside with small flat egg -plant croquettes containing mushrooms and truffles, and use also trussed crawfish for the ornamentation. (1865). CHICKEN FRICASSEE à LA LUCIUS (Fricassée de Poulet à la Lucius). Draw and singe a clean, white meat three pound chicken, cut it up into eight pieces and split the carcass in two, also the neck and legs, wash these pieces in tepid water, place them in a sauce -pan containing water to heat, simply to stiffen the meat, then drain, refresh and wipe well on a cloth. Boil half a pound of blanched rice in broth for twenty minutes, keeping it white and consistent; when ready pour it into a plain buttered border mold ( Fig. 139), pressing it down well and keep it in a warm heater for eight minutes. Melt some butter in a saucepan, add to it the pieces of chicken with a garnished bouquet (No. 123), two quartered onions, salt and pepper corns , fry the chicken over a good fire without browning, dredge over a heaping spoonful of flour and continue cooking two minutes while stirring, take the saucepan from the fire, and pour in gradually some hot stock (No. 194a), stirring until it reaches boiling point; let cook for eight minutes on a moderate fire, then remove it to a slower fire to finish cooking the chicken; as fast as each of the pieces are done; the tenderest ones first, take them out, suppressing the legs and carcasses, then pare the remainder and lay them in another saucepan, strain the sauce, reduce it for a few moments to thicken, pour it over the chicken and finally finish the fricassee with a thickening of two raw egg-yolks, half a gill of cream and an ounce of butter divided in small pats; cook this thickening without letting it boil, and squeeze in the juice of a lemon. Dress the fricassee inside the rice border, unmold it on a hot dish, cover it moderately with the sauce and send the remainder to the table in a sauce -boat. (1866). CHICKEN FRICASSEE à LA WALESKI (Fricassée de Poulet à la Waleski). Take three medium chickens each one to weigh two pound and a half; cut both up into seven pieces each, the two legs, two fillets, two from the back and one breast bone; steep them in cold water for an hour, then drain and range in a saucepan; moisten to cover with broth (No. 194a) adding a medium carrot cut in four, a middle-sized onion, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, one clove, and peppercorns; allow the chickens to cook for fifteen minutes, then drain and reserve the broth; refresh and sponge the pieces on a cloth, paring them neatly. Melt three ounces of butter in a saucepan, lay in the pieces of chicken and fry rapidly without browning; a few moments later cover with some clear velouté sauce (No. 415), prepared with the chicken broth and a glassful of white wine; boil up this liquid once, then set the saucepan on one side of the fire to finish cooking the contents; when done, free the sauce of all its fat before straining it through a sieve into a sautoir, adding to it a few spoonfuls of mushroom broth. Reduce while stirring from the bottom of the sautoir until a thick, succulent sauce is obtained, then put in a thickening of six egg-yolks, and an ounce and a half of lobster butter (No. 580). Strain this through a tammy over the pieces of chicken, remaining in the saucepan. Just when serving squeeze in the juice of a lemon. Dress in a thin border of cream forcemeat (No. 75), decorated with truffles; surround this border with a circle of sautéd sweet peppers ( No. 2769 ), with mushroom heads on top, and a trussed crawfish between every one. Serve the surplus of sauce in a sauce -boat. (1867). CHICKEN FRICASSEE WITH CRUSTACEAN SAUCE (Fricassée de Poulet au Coulis de Crustacés). Wash in plenty of water, then cook four dozen crawfish with white wine, an onion, parsley roots, thyme, bay leaf, a grain of pepper and salt; let cook over a brisk fire for five minutes, and after the first boil strain the broth through a fine sieve, then through a napkin; let it settle and pour the top off gently. Detach the tails from the crawfish bodies, pick out the meats, trim and keep them hot while covered. Chop up the tail parings and the claw meats, mix with an equal quantity of cooked chopped mushrooms, season and add a very thick béchamel (No. 409) reduced with a little chicken glaze (No. 398) so as to have a consistent preparation, then season with a coffeespoon of prepared red paper (No. 168); keep this in a bain-marie. Fasten a fried bread support on a dish. Put into a sautoir containing butter, two two-pound chickens each one divided into five pieces and parboiled in water, removing them at the first broil to drain, and fry in butter, keeping them white; season, dredge over a tablespoonful of flour for each chicken, moisten gradually with hot broth (No. 194a) and boil the liquid without ceasing to stir, letting it be in this state for eight to ten minutes; finish cooking the chickens over a slow fire. Use the crawfish hash to fill some hollow semicircular crusts; cover this with a layer of the reduced thick béchamel (No. 409) bestrew with grated parmesan and glaze under a salamander ( Fig. 123); when the chickens are ready dress them on the dish leaning against the prepared support intercalating them with the crawfish tails; reduce the sauce by incorporating into it a few spoonfuls of the crawfish liquor and thicken with four egg-yolks and half a gill of cream, finishing with red butter (No. 580). Strain some of this over the chickens and serve the remainder in a sauce -boat; surround the chickens with the filled crusts after they are baked and browned. (1868). CHICKEN FRICASSEE WITH CURRY (Fricassée de Poulet au Kari). Divide two small chickens of a pound and a half each after cleaning well into four distinct parts; pare them well. Put two or three spoonfuls of chopped onions in a saucepan and fry with butter till of a fine color; add the pieces of chicken, toss them for two minutes and season, sprinkling two dessertspoonfuls of powdered curry over. Moisten to their height with stock (No. 194a), put in a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf. Peel and chop up a small sour apple, add it to the chicken and let cook over a slow fire, taking out the fillets as soon as they are done; then remove the legs and place them in another saucepan with the fillets. Strain the sauce and reduce it with a few spoonfuls of good raw cream and as much mushroom broth; take it off the fire, thicken with three egg-yolks diluted with cream and a piece of butter divided into small pats. Dress the chickens, cover over with the sauce and serve a vegetable dishful of Indian rice. (1869). CHICKEN, MARINADE SAUCE -FRIED (Poulet Fritot à la Sauce Marinade). Cut off the stumps and pinions from two chickens each one a pound and a half in weight, singe, draw and free them well of their pin feathers, cut them both into five pieces, two legs, two wings and the breast, suppress the second joint bones from the legs and the wish bone from the breast. Lay the pieces in a vessel to season and marinate in oil and lemon juice with sliced onions and parsley leaves; a quarter of an hour before serving, drain off the chickens, wipe them nicely on a cloth, dip in cold milk, roll in flour and plunge one piece at the time in hot frying fat, observing that those taking the longest to cook must be the first ones to be put in; fry them to a nice color, but not too rapidly, as fast as one piece is done, take it out and drain it on a cloth, salt over and dress in a pyramid on a folded napkin. Send to the table accompanied by a sauce -boatful of marinade sauce (No. 496), or else a poivrade sauce (No. 522), or a green sauce (No. 473). (1870). CHICKEN, MéDICIS-FRIED (Poulet Fritot Médicis). Lard two two and a half pound very white chickens with truffles after they have been singed, drawn and well cleaned. Braise them in a saucepan lined with bardes of fat pork and moistened with mirepoix stock (No. 419) and two gills of white wine, when done, lay them in an earthenware vessel and cover with their own strained broth, leaving them thus until thoroughly cold, then cut them up into ten medium-sized pieces each, making two of each fillet, two of each leg and two of the breastbone. Place these in a vessel with two tablespoonfuls of vinegar, pepper and salt, leave them in this pickle for two hours. Heat about three pounds of good fresh lard, when very hot, dip each separate piece of chicken in frying batter (No. 137), and then in the fat to fry to a fine color, having them thoroughly warmed throughout. Drain, salt over and dress in a pyramidical form on a dish covered with a folded napkin, garnishing the top with a bunch of fried parsley. Serve a cream béchamel sauce with chopped truffles (No. 411), separately. (1871). GRENADES OF CHICKEN à LA RITTI (Grenades de Poulet à la Ritti). Pare some chicken fillets, remove the skin and lard with the smallest sized lardons (No. 4, Fig. 52), place them in a sautoir, the bottom covered with thin bardes of fat pork, keeping the pointed ends lying toward the center of the pan; moisten with mirepoix stock (No. 419) and mushroom liquor, then cook on a hot fire and glaze, drain and dress them on croûtons the same size and shape. Put the minion fillets in a buttered sautoir after twisting them into rings, fill the centers through a cornet with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and on this lay a ball of truffle; cover with a sheet of buttered paper, poach in a slack oven. Dress the grenades in a circle and the minions around, fill the middle with some foies-gras, mixed with allemande sauce (No. 407), glaze the grenades with meat glaze (No. 402). (1872). JAMBALAIA OF CHICKEN (Jambalaia de Poulet). Cook a quarter of a pound of rice the same as explained below, having the grains swollen but not broken and keep it dry at the oven door. Cut three ounces of cooked lean ham in three-eighths inch dice, also six ounces of cooked chicken meat, suppressing all bones and skin and having them one size. Warm the ham in a sauté-pan with butter, add to it the pieces of chicken to heat while tossing, season and sprinkle over lightly with prepared red pepper (No. 168), then put in the well drained rice, toss it with the meats and pour the whole into a vegetable dish. Indian Rice, which is generally served as a garnishing for chicken or veal is prepared with Indian rice, it having long, white and very perfect grains; plunge a sufficiency of this into a liberal supply of boiling water, after it has been washed and picked, and as soon as it ceases to crack between the teeth, drain it on a colander; wash it in tepid salted water, spread it on a large sieve covered with a white cloth and dry for a few moments at the oven door or else in a hot steamer. Dress on a vegetable dish, cover over and serve. This is the most simple and effectual method. (1873). CHICKENS LEGS à LA SAULNIèRE-BIGARRURES (Bigarrures de Cuisses de Poulet à la Saulnière). Bone the legs of some young chickens leaving on only half of the drumstick, season with salt and pepper, and fill the insides with chicken forcemeat (No. 89), mixing in with it one-third of cooked forcemeat (No. 73), and some chopped parsley; lard those taken from the right with medium lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52), and stud those taken from the left with truffles, covering these with thin slices of fat pork. Cook them in two low saucepans lined with fat pork and moistened with a mirepoix and white wine stock (No. 419); cover over with sheets of buttered paper, and cook in the oven. Glaze those that are larded, and when done drain and decorate with paper frills (No. 10). Dress in a circle filling up the interior space with a financière garnishing (No. 667). (1874). CHICKENS ' LEGS, AMERICAN STYLE--DEVILED (Cuisses de Poulet à l'Américaine à la Diable). Broil slowly some chicken legs and when well done, dip them in English mustard diluted with mushroom catsup, salt, and cayenne, then roll them in bread-crumbs, and broil again over a slow fire until they acquire a fine color. Dress, pour lightly melted maitre d'hôtel butter (No. 581) over, or else a deviled sauce (No. 459) into the bottom of the dish. (1875). CHICKENS ' LEGS AS CUTLETS WITH OLIVES (Cuisses de Poulet en Côtelettes aux Olives ). Take the legs of six young chickens; bone them keeping on part of the drumsticks, but do not open; suppress well the sinews, season and stuff with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and fine herbs (No. 385); sew them up with coarse thread, leaving them in their original shape, range them in a flat saucepan one beside the other, salt over lightly, moisten just to cover with stock (No. 194a) and lay a piece of buttered paper on top, then cook the whole very slowly. Drain off the legs, and let cool between two boards or in the press ( Fig. 71), pressing them down lightly; unsew and pare all around and on the ends, season and then dip in beaten eggs and bread-crumbs Range them one beside the other in a flat sauce -pan with melted butter, return them to a hot fire and brown slightly on one side, then reverse them and brown them on the other. Drain and trim each drumstick with a small paper frill (No. 10); dress in a circle on a hot dish and fill the inside with an olive garnishing (No. 695), made with either verdal or Lucques olives, and serve with a sauce -boat of Colbert sauce (No. 451). (1876). CHICKENS ' LEGS IN PAPERS (Cuisses de Poulets en Papillotes). Take out the bones from some chicken legs, leaving on half the drumstick, season, lay them in a sautoir containing bardes of fat pork and moistened with a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); when they are well cooked set them under the pressure of a light weight; pare all around, also the ends. Cut some sheets of strong paper into heart -shapes, oil them over and lay a very thin slice of fat fresh pork on top of one of the halves, cover this with a layer of reduced duxelle (No. 385) and a chicken leg above; cover with more of the duxelle and a very thin slice of cooked ham; enclose them in the papers, plaiting it all around, lay these on a silver dish, place them in a slack oven and when the papers have acquired a fine color and are considerably swollen, serve them immediately. (1877). CHICKENS ' LEGS, PURéE OF JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES -FRIED (Cuisses de Poulets Frites à la Purée de Topinambours). Remove the first joint bones, season and fry the legs in butter with finely shredded carrots, onions and leeks, adding parsley, thyme and bay leaf. Moisten with stock (No. 194a) and white wine and let simmer slowly until thoroughly done, then turn them on a deep dish, covering them entirely with their stock and leave them to cool off in this; dip each piece in beaten eggs, then roll in bread-crumbs and fry to a fine color. Dress them in a circle over a purée of Jerusalem artichokes (No. 704) serving with a separate half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (1878). PILAU OF CHICKENS (Pilau de Poulets). Cut up in four pieces each, two small chickens weighing no more than a pound and three-quarters apiece, obtaining two legs, two breasts, fry them for a few moments in butter, then moisten to their height with stock (No. 194a), adding a bunch of parsley garnished with aromatics, and seasoning with salt, pepper, and spices; cook the whole slowly, being most particular to remove the tenderest pieces as rapidly as they are done and transfer them into another saucepan; strain the stock, remove its fat, and pour the liquid over the meats with four gills of boiling stock added, and then throw in half a pint of Carolina rice for every quart of broth, and a little powdered saffron; cook the rice for ten minutes on a good fire then withdraw it to the corner of the stove to continue cooking for ten minutes longer; the rice should now be dry and tender; finish by taking it off the fire, and incorporating into it two ounces of fresh butter divided in small pats. Dress the stew in a deep dish or else a vegetable dish. (1879). CHICKENS à LA CHAMPIONNE-ROASTED (Poulets Rôtis à la Championne). Select two very fleshy chickens of two pounds each; singe, draw and clean them, picking out all the pin feathers; truss them as for an entrée, explained in the Elementary Methods (No. 178); cover the breasts with dry mirepoix (No. 419) and wrap up in a thin slice of fat pork; roast them on a spit before a slow but well-regulated fire, basting over frequently. Cut up quite fine one pound of cooked and peeled mushrooms; combine them with reduced béchamel sauce (No. 409) and finish with a little paprika and melted meat glaze (No. 402); with this preparation fill some hollow, round or semi-circular crusts (No. 52), smooth the surfaces and bestrew the tops with parmesan, then glaze them in a brisk oven or under a salamander ( Fig. 123). As soon as the chickens are taken from the spit, unwrap and cut them up into five pieces each, suppressing the drumsticks; range them inside a cooked paste border (No. 10) fastened on at some distance from the edge of the dish as shown in Fig. 3; around this border lay the garnished crusts and cover the chickens lightly with a little tomato sauce (No. 549) sending a sauce -boat of the same to the table to be handed round the same time as the chicken. (1880). CHICKENS à L'HôTELIèRE-ROASTED (Poulets Rôtis l'Hôtelière). Peel twenty medium fresh mushroom heads, empty out the insides and stuff them as explained in No. 650. Roast two tender chickens on the spit before a good fire, basting them over with butter. Chop up the mushroom ends and put them in a saucepan with thyme and bay leaf, minced shallots, two gills of white wine and two gills of gravy (No. 404); cover the pan and cook over a slow fire for ten minutes, then strain the liquid through a sieve and reduce it to the consistency of a half-glaze, adding four tablespoonfuls of melted glaze (No. 402) and two of Madeira wine; boil up the sauce for two minutes and remove it on one side to finish with butter. Salt and untruss the chickens, cut each one into five pieces and dress them pyramidically on a dish; surround with the stuffed mushrooms and pour the sauce over the chickens. (1881). CHICKEN IN THE SAUCEPAN-ROASTED (Poulet Rôti à la Casserole). Brown a fine, small, whole chicken trussed for roasting (No. 179) in any kind of earthen saucepan with a little butter. After the chicken has attained a light golden color, moisten it with a spoonful of clear gravy (No. 404) and half a glassful of white wine; cover over and let the liquid fall to a half-glaze. When ready to serve dish up the chicken after untrussing it. A few small whole onions may be added as a garnishing after blanching them in boiling water and then frying them. Cover the whole with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (1882). CHICKENS WITH OYSTER SAUCE (Poulets à la Sauce aux Huîtres). Blanch four dozen medium-sized oysters in their own liquor. Bard two small chickens weighing a pound and a half each, after having them singed and trussed; run them one at the time on a slender spit, fasten well by tying the legs with twine and roast in front of a good fire basting over with melted butter; untruss, untie and cut each one either in four or five parts, pare the pieces, dress them pyramid form on a dish and cover with velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with the oyster liquor and then with fresh cream, buttering the sauce well when off of the fire, add to it the oysters, warm them, and pour the whole over the chickens besprinkling the top with chopped parsley. (1883). CHICKENS, TOMATO CONDé SAUCE -STUFFED (Poulets Farcis à la Sauce Tomate Condé). Roast some chickens, when cooked and cold, remove the breast meat, carefully leaving the other part of the chicken intact, cut these breasts into dice, also half as much mushrooms as there is chicken and half as many truffles as mushrooms, all cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares. Put this salpicon into a béchamel sauce (No.409), well reduced with the mushroom broth, then use it to replace the breasts in the chickens, rounding it well on the top; cover the whole with béchamel sauce (No. 406), besprinkle with bread-crumbs and a little grated parmesan cheese, pour on some clarified butter and set the chickens in a slack oven to brown slightly. Dress them on a garnishing of noodles sautéd in butter ( No. 2972 ), and well browned, and serve at the same time a sauce -boat of clear tomato condé sauce (No. 550). (1884). CHICKENS à LA BOURGUIGNONNE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Bourguignonne). Clean and singe two small chickens, then cut them up into five parts; range these in a sautoir with melted butter and oil, some shallots and mushroom peelings; season and fry to a good color on both sides; finish to cook in a slow oven being careful to withdraw the fillets and breasts as quickly as they are done, take out all the pieces from the sautoir, unglaze its bottom with a gill of Madeira and a pint of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), strain and reduce by incorporating into it slowly two gills of Burgundy wine, previously boiled in a red copper untinned pan with aromatics and mushroom peelings. When the sauce becomes succulent, pour it over the dressed chickens and surround them with a circle of round, flat croûtons of bread fried in butter and having one side covered with a layer of baking forcemeat (No. 81), glazed over with a brush and kept warm at the oven door. (1885). CHICKENS à LA D'ANTIN-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la d'Antin). Prepare two small chickens of two pounds each, by cutting each one into five parts and tossing them in a sautoir with clarified butter over a moderate fire; cook when needed four artichoke bottoms, drain and mince, then put them in with the chicken, also two chopped, blanched shallots, two ounces of finely shredded cooked ham and some minced truffles and mushrooms. Pour off the fat and replace it by velouté sauce (No. 415) and meat glaze (No. 402), adding chervil, chives and a little finely cut up tarragon leaves, white wine and Madeira, reduce to a proper degree, then dress the chickens and cover with a part of the sauce, trim the drumsticks with paper frills (No. 10) and serve the remainder of the sauce separately. (1886). CHICKENS à LA DIVA-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Diva). Choose good, medium-sized chickens of about two pounds each; draw, singe, and suppress well all the adhering feathers; detach the legs and wings leaving on the pinions and sufficient meat on the breast bones so that they are of the same size as the other four pieces. Put some butter to melt in a sautoir, and when a light brown, lay in the pieces of chicken, seasoning with salt, pepper, and powdered sweet peppers; toss without browning, and moisten with about a gill of veal blond (No. 423) to detach the glaze, and then finish cooking the chickens, moistening as quickly as the stock reduces, and when sufficiently done, dress. Add to the sauce some béchamel (No. 409) and tomato sauce (No. 549), a little tarragon vinegar, and some chopped, blanched shallot; just when ready to serve, thicken with egg-yolks, and butter; strain through a tammy, and pour it over the chickens, bestrewing the top with very green chopped parsley; garnish around with small flat chicken croquettes (No. 877), an inch and a quarter in diameter by half an inch in thickness, and between each of these lay a bordelaise crawfish (No. 1008), placing a channeled mushroom (No. 118) on top of every croquette. (1887). CHICKEN à LA DODDS-SAUTéD (Poulet Sauté à la Dodds). Cut up the chicken as explained for sautéing chicken ( No. 1906 ), and put the pieces in a sautoir with four ounces of butter, cook without browning, and add four ounces of small squares of onions; place it on the fire for a few seconds to cook the onions without letting attain color; then add two teaspoonfuls of curry, and two tablespoonfuls of flour; season with salt and pepper, moisten with a pint and a half of stock (No. 194a), and let boil and simmer quite slowly; when done, drain, pare well the pieces, and place them in a saucepan. Strain the sauce and reduce it with some good cream; pour this over the chicken. At the first boil dress in the shape of a pyramid and cover with a part of the sauce, reserving the remainder for the sauce -boat. Boil some rice in water for ten minutes, drain and press it into a buttered mold furnished with a cover; place it in a slack oven for fifteen minutes, and just when ready to serve, unmold it on a dish, and send it to the table with the chicken. (1888). CHICKENS à LA DUMAS-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Dumas). Cut three chickens into five pieces each, having two legs, two wings and one breastbone piece; season with salt and pepper and toss them in butter with three small chopped shallots; remove the wings and breasts as rapidly as they are cooked and finish the legs, which take longer. Pare all the pieces and return them to a sautoir on the fire with a clear top part of the butter and three-quarters of a pound of minced mushrooms, pour over a few spoonfuls of thin béchamel (No. 409), roll them in the sauce without allowing it to boil. Detach the glaze from the other sautoir with a little Madeira, and add it to the sauce. Blanch three-quarters of a pound of rice, drain and place it in a saucepan and moisten it to three times its height, meaning if there be two inches high of rice, put in six inches high of unskimmed broth (No. 194a); boil, cover the saucepan and finish in the oven; it will take about twenty minutes. When the rice is sufficiently done, add to it three-quarters of a pound of very red beef tongue cut in small three-sixteenths of an inch squares, also three ounces of butter and the same quantity of grated parmesan cheese, a teaspoonful of powdered sweet peppers and a bit of cayenne pepper. Fill a plain buttered border mold ( Fig. 139) with this prepared rice, keep it warm and when ready to serve invert it on a dish; dress the chickens pyramid-form in the center and cover the whole with the sauce thickened with egg-yolks, cream and butter, finishing with a pinch of prepared red pepper (No. 168). Garnish around with breaded and fried spinal marrow of veal, and send a sauce -boat of the same sauce to the table with the chicken. (1889). CHICKENS à LA FINNOISE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Finnoise). Prepare and cook three chickens the same as for the chicken hunter's style ( No. 1903 ); when three-quarters done, put in three ounces of chopped and blanched onion, and three ounces of small squares of ham, moisten with half a pint of stock (No. 194a) in order to detach the glaze and finish cooking the chickens; in case this moisture should be found insufficient, add a little more stock to it; season with sweet Spanish peppers, salt and paprika. Just when ready to serve pour in a pint and a half of velouté (No. 415) and half a pint of cream; reduce slowly until the chicken is thoroughly cooked, thicken with egg-yolks, cream, fresh butter and lemon juice. Dress the chickens inside a border of rice boiled in stock (No. 194a) and finished with a little fine butter; strain the sauce through a tammy, pour it over the chickens and trim the wings and legs with paper frills (No. 10), or serve the chickens simply with a Finnoise sauce (No. 465). (1890). CHICKENS à LA FLORENTINE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Florentine). Cut up three one and a half pound chickens in four pieces each, season with salt, pepper, ground cloves and a teaspoonful of powdered sweet Spanish peppers; sauté them in half oil and half butter, and add six ounces of raw, un smoked ham cut in quarter inch dice; turn over to color evenly and keep sautéing on the fire, or else set the pan in a slow oven and when done drain off the pieces; add to these two gills of Malaga wine, a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414), three tablespoonfuls of meat -glaze (No. 402), and six tablespoonfuls of tomato sauce (No. 549), also three dozen small onions that have been blanched and cooked in white broth (No. 194a), six dozen carrot balls each five-eighths of an inch in diameter, blanched for ten minutes then finished with white broth and a little sugar; three dozen turned and channeled mushroom heads (No. 118) cooked in a little water, butter, salt, lemon juice and six ounces of minced truffles. Boil up the whole, dress the chicken with the garnishing around; reduce the sauce to perfection, pouring half of it over the chicken, and trim the legs and wings with frills (No. 10); strain the remainder of the sauce and serve it separately. (1891). CHICKENS à LA MADELEINE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Madeleine). Cut in quarters two small one and three-quarter pound chickens after cleaning them well; season with salt, pepper, paprika, and sweet Spanish peppers; put them into a liberally buttered sautoir, and when they commence to brown add half a pound of bacon cut up in quarter inch squares, having it previously blanched, four ounces of carrots and the same quantity of turnips cut in three-sixteenth inch squares and blanched separately, four ounces of onions in one-eighth inch squares also blanched, and a small garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123). Moisten with a little stock (No. 194a) and velouté (No. 415), cover the sautoir and finish cooking in a slack oven until cooked; when ready to serve thicken the sauce with egg-yolks, cream, butter and lemon juice; pour this over the chickens trim the handle bones and serve. (1892). CHICKENS à LA MARCEL-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Marcel). Prepare a sufficient number of chickens the same as for sautéing (No. 1906); season with salt and pepper; pour some oil into a sautoir and when very hot add the pieces of chicken and sauté them colorless; when nearly done put in one small chopped up shallot for every chicken, also a clove of garlic. Scoop out some potatoes olive-shaped, with a large oval vegetable spoon; cook them slowly in butter as well as some small artichoke bottoms after having them blanched, then finish cooking in butter; dress the chickens, garnish the artichoke bottoms with a consistent, mellow chestnut purée (No. 712) pushed through a pocket, and lay on top of this medium-sized channeled and glazed mushroom heads (No. 118); range these around the chicken and the potato olives between every one; trim the handles with frills (No. 10) and serve with a separate Colbert sauce (No. 451). (1893). CHICKENS à LA MARENGO-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Marengo). Take two chickens and prepare them exactly as for the sautéd chickens ( No. 1906 ); heat some oil in a sautoir, range in the pieces one beside the other, and set it on a brisk fire tossing them until they are of a fine color, then add a clove of crushed and chopped garlic and some mignonette. Just when prepared to serve drain off three quarters of the fat and replace it by half a pint of white wine, detaching the glaze from the pan, then add a pound of mushroom buttons, and four ounces of thickly sliced truffles espagnole sauce (No. 414), a little meat glaze (No. 402), a little fine tomato purée (No. 730) and lemon-juice. Dress the chickens in a pyramid form, cover over with the garnishing and trim the drumsticks and pinions with paper frills (No. 10); decorate the edges of the dish with egg-yolks fried in a small frying pan with a little oil, some half- heart small bread croûtons and middling-sized trussed crawfish. (1894). CHICKENS à LA MARYLAND-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Maryland). For this dish choose small one pound chickens, split them open through the back, pare nicely ( Fig. 353) and season, rub over with flour, then immerse in beaten eggs and bread-crumbs. Heat some clarified butter in a sautoir, fry the chickens in it very slowly to cook and attain a fine color, then finish cooking them in a slack oven for ten minutes. Dress the chickens on a béchamel sauce (No. 409), reduced with cream, and garnish the top with small corn fritters (No. 1349) and slices of broiled bacon, decorate the legs with paper frills (No. 10). (1895). CHICKENS à LA MONTESQUIEU-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Montesquieu). By observing the drawing for this entrée the elegance of this new style of dressing can easily be perceived. On an entrée dish one inch from the edge fasten a standing open work border made of cooked paste ( Fig. 3), spreading it out slightly; brush this over with egg-yolks and dry it in the air. In the center of this border, fasten a wooden bottom to be covered with the same paste rolled out very thin. Singe three c lean chickens, detach the legs, leaving on as much skin as possible, then lift off the large fillets with the pinions leaving the minion fillets adhere to the breasts, remove the skin from four of the large fillets, pare and lard with fine larding pork (No. 4, Fig. 52), range them in a sautoir lined with fat pork, salt and pour butter over. Detach the minion fillets from the breasts, trim four of them, cut five gashes on their top, into these place rounds of truffles, laying them in a buttered sautoir. Bone the legs, pare the meats evenly, salt and stuff them with a rather firm quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) into which mix some truffled Duxelle (No. 385); sew them up and range them in a sautoir, covering over with fat pork and basting with some stock (No. 194a); cook very slowly, then drain and let to get cold under the pressure of a light weight. With the remaining large fillets and the minion fillets prepare a little cream forcemeat (No. 75) and with it fill a small, plain pyramidical mold flat on top; poach this in a bain-marie for ten minutes; cut the stuffed legs in two and return them to the sautoir with their stock reduced to a half-glaze, heat up slowly while basting at the oven door; glaze the larded fillets in a hot oven and poach the streaked minion fillets. At the last moment unmold the croûton of forcemeat on the paste -covered dish; dress the legs around, one overlapping the other, pour over a little good reduced velouté sauce (No. 415), and then range the four large fillets intercalating them with the streaked fillets; on top of the pyramid insert a small skewer garnished with truffles ( Fig. 11). Surround the border with a chain of round, peeled truffles cooked just when needed with glaze (No. 402) and Madeira and send with the entrée a sauce -boatful of velouté sauce reduced with the truffle broth. FIG. 372. A decorative plate of chickens arranged in a pyramid form and surrounded by truffles. (1896). CHICKENS à LA NANTAISE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Nantaise). Prepare three chickens the same as for hunter's style ( No. 1903 ,) sauté them in butter without browning and remove each piece as fast as cooked; drain off the grease, detach the glaze with a little mushroom broth and Madeira wine, add some béchamel and cream (No. 411) and let simmer slowly, pouring in a little more cream if necessary; strain the sauce and keep it boiling hot. Make a croquette preparation with artichoke bottoms and cooked lean ham, the former cut in three-sixteenth inch squares and the latter in one-eighth pieces; mingle with some thick cold béchamel (No. 409) and form it into pear -shaped croquettes, dip in eggs and bread-crumbs and fry to a fine color in clean, white, and very hot frying fat. Fry some shrimps in butter, season with salt, pepper, fine herbs and lemon juice. Dress the chickens, pass the sauce through a tammy and pour part of it over the chickens; dress the shrimps in clusters and artichoke bottom croquettes between each; serve the rest of the sauce separately. (1897). CHICKENS à LA PARMENTIER-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Parmentier). Draw and singe three two pounds chickens, clean them well, suppressing all the pin feathers, cut them up in to five pieces, namely: two legs, two wings and a breastbone piece; sauté in butter and when three-quarters done add potatoes cut cylindrical shape an inch in diameter then sliced three-eights of an inch thick, or else cut in five-eighths squares; cook them partially in a frying pan with clarified butter. Finish cooking the chicken and potatoes together in the oven, being careful to remove the breasts as soon as they are done. Dress the chickens on a dish with the potatoes around, detach the glaze from the sautoir with a little clear gravy (No. 404), Madeira and half-glaze sauce (No. 413), reduce the liquid for two minutes, pass through a tammy and pour it over the chickens. (1898). CHICKENS à LA PORTUGAISE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Portugaise). Have three chickens prepared the same as for hunter's style ( No. 1903 ), sauté them in half oil and half butter, season with salt and pepper, and when they are three-quarters done add three pounds of peeled tomatoes, halved through the center and the seeds and juice pressed out, a little finely cut up chives and three tablespoonfuls of melted glaze (No. 402); boil and simmer until thoroughly cooked. Prepare eighteen small very sound halved tomatoes; press lightly to extract the juice and fill them with a dressing prepared as follows: Put four ounces of bread-crumbs into a bowl with a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a crushed and chopped clove of garlic, the chopped livers of three chickens, salt, pepper and nutmeg; mix the whole well together and fill each half tomato with some of this; besprinkle with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan, and lay a small piece of butter on top of every one, set them in a hot oven and when nicely browned take out and dress in a circle on a dish with the chickens in the center, dredge over with chopped parsley and decorate the leg and wing bones with paper frills (No. 10). (1899). CHICKENS à LA SANFORD-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Sanford). Draw and singe small one pound and a quarter to one pound and a half chickens, divide them into four pieces, suppressing the legs above the joint, also the pinion of the wings; season with salt and pepper, and rub over with flour; they may now be if so desired dipped in eggs and in bread-crumbs; sauté them slowly in clarified butter, and when well done drain and dress; pour a little good gravy (No. 404) in the dish and garnish around with hollow tartlets filled up with Chantilly sauce à la Sanford (No. 588). (1900). CHICKENS à LA STANLEY (Poulets à la Stanley.) Select three chickens each one weighing two pounds and a half; draw, singe, and detach the legs from the bodies, cut the carcasses on a level with the breasts and plunge these for a few moments in hot water to stiffen them, then dip them at once in cold water to refresh, lard them with lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52). With the meat taken from the legs and all the parings prepare a quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), finishing it with a dash of cayenne pepper, and two tablespoonfuls of béchamel (No. 409). Butter eighteen hollow tartlet molds with rounded bottoms, besprinkle the insides with finely chopped raw truffles, and fill them up with the prepared forcemeat; range these in a sautoir having boiling water around and reaching up to half their height, then poach the forcemeat slowly. Besides this, poach a layer of the same forcemeat on an entrée dish and keep it warm. Cut the breasts of the chickens into three pieces, two fillets and the upper part of the breast; suppress the pinions. Mince ten ounces of white onions, and fry them slowly with butter in a sautoir, and when a good color, add the chickens; season with salt and pepper, and moisten with three gills of chicken broth prepared with the carcasses and bones of these chickens; cover the sautoir and allow the liquid to fall to a glaze, then begin the operation again until the fillets and breasts are thoroughly done; remove and transfer to a flat saucepan; increase the chicken stock with a few spoonfuls of good velouté (No. 415), reduce this sauce without ceasing to stir, incorporating more of the broth into it, and lastly a gill of good raw cream; the sauce should now be succulent and of a medium consistency; thicken it with a liason of two egg-yolks, and cook this without boiling, then strain it through a tammy into another saucepan to work it vigorously while adding butter; finish with a dash of cayenne pepper, and the juice of a lemon. At the last moment dress the fillets in a circle on the bed of forcemeat laying on the dish; fill the center of this with cut up cooked mushrooms, and place the breast pieces on top; cover over with a part of the sauce, pouring the remainder into a sauce -boat to be served separately. Unmold the small forcemeat molds, dress them around the fillets and glaze over with a brush, then serve. (1901). CHICKENS à LA TUNISIAN-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Tunisienne). Divide two two-pound chickens into five pieces each, range the pieces in a sautoir with half melted butter and half oil, sauté on a moderate fire and then in the oven. When they are three-quarters cooked, season and finish, being careful to remove the fillets and other tender pieces as quickly as they get done; drain them all off, leaving only the fat in the sautoir, then pare the chickens piece by piece and range them at once in a low saucepan with a little clear gravy (No. 404) and meat glaze (No. 402); keep this in a warm place; fry two ounces of finely chopped onions in butter left from the chickens with the gizzards cooked and cut in small squares, the chopped up livers and four ounces of cold tenderloin of beef or lamb cut also into one-eighth inch squares, add salt, pepper and bread-crumbs and cool this off before breaking in a few raw egg-yolks. Form this preparation into five-eighths inch diameter balls and put them in with the chicken, also a quart of velouté (No. 415) and two gills of Madeira wine, let simmer and reduce the sauce, skimming off the fat. Dress the chickens in a pyramid form with the quenelles around, and cover over with a part of the sauce passed through a tammy, serving the remainder separately. Trim the pinion bones and drumsticks with paper frills (No. 10) and lay trussed crawfish all around. (1902). CHICKENS POINT DU JOUR--SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés au Point du Jour). Take two chickens and prepare them exactly as for bourguignonne ( No. 1884 ), range them in a sautoir with melted butter. Fry colorless in butter, four ounces of chopped onions, dredge over with a tablespoonful of flour and make a small light roux; moisten this with red wine and stock (No. 194a) add a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf and a few mushroom parings, despumate and reduce well the sauce. Sauté the chickens in the butter and when well browned add two dozen small glazed onions, as many cooked mushroom heads and as many olives as mushrooms; strain the above sauce, pour it over the chickens and at the first boil, take out the chickens and dress. Reduce the sauce, add to it a handful of small nonpareil capers and pour it over the chickens, garnish around with tiny round crusts an inch and a half in diameter, toasted and covered on one side with anchovy butter (No. 569). (1903). CHICKENS, HUNTER'S STYLE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés au Chasseur). Pick out three good chickens of about two and a half pounds each, draw, singe, then clean well and extract all the small pin feathers, cut them each up into seven pieces, the two wings, two legs, two pieces of the back and one of the breast bone; season with salt and pepper; melt six ounces of butter in a sautoir until it becomes a fine golden color, then lay in the pieces of chicken and toss them well; when they acquire a fine light brown on one side, turn them over to brown likewise on the other, cover the sautoir and finish cooking on a very slow fire or in the oven. When the meats are well done, drain off the butter and detach the glaze with a little stock (No. 194a). Fry colorless in butter a large pinch of chopped shallot, moisten with half a bottleful of red or white Burgundy wine, reduce to half, then add a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414) and simmer the whole for a few moments, season well, and when the sauce is properly reduced, return the chickens to it, put it back on the fire to remove at the first boil and add three ounces of cooked, lean ham cut up in one-eighth of an inch squares, slice three onions across, having them two inches in diameter by three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness, remove the largest rings and roll them in flour, then fry a few at the time in plenty of fat; dress the chickens and use these rings to garnish the top, decorate the stumps of the legs and the pinions with paper frills (No. 10) and serve immediately. (1904). CHICKENS, PARISIAN STYLE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Parisienne). Peel a few medium-sized truffles, lay them in a saucepan with a little salt and Madeira wine; cook them slightly; cook also as many mushrooms with a piece of butter and the juice of a lemon. Take two singed, drawn chickens, cut off the pinions and drumsticks, detach the thighs, and divide the breasts into three pieces, the two fillets and the upper breast part; cut the carcasses in two; crack the thigh bones in order to remove them, then place the thighs in a buttered flat saucepan; add the pinions, necks, and carcasses, season and cook on a moderate fire stirring them about at times; when partly done, add the fillets and upper breast parts, a bunch of parsley garnished with aromatic herbs, and a clove of garlic. After all the meats are well sized lift them out with a skimmer, and transfer to another saucepan, adding the truffles. Drain off the fat from the contents of the first saucepan, put in the truffle parings, and moisten with half a glassful of Madeira; boil up once or twice, then mix in double as much brown sauce (No. 414) and the truffle stock; let cook on a brisk fire for ten minutes; skim off the fat, and strain this sauce over the chickens; heat without allowing the liquid to boil. Fasten a small fried bread pyramid in the center of a dish, around it dress first the carcasses and pinions, then the thighs and breasts, placing the upper breast pieces on top; surround the chickens with the truffles and mushrooms, place a few cocks'-combs here and there, and free the sauce once more of its fat; pour it over the chicken and serve. (1905). CHICKENS, VIENNA STYLE-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés à la Viennoise). Select chickens that weigh from a pound to a pound and a quarter; bleed them just when ready to use, and pluck them quickly, then cut them up into four pieces, performing all this operation most speedily so that the chickens have no time to become cold; season over with a mixture of salt, pepper, thyme, powdered bay leaf, and lemon juice, then dip in flour, afterward in beaten eggs, and bread-crumb them only once. Cook in a sautéing pan with clarified butter over a very hot fire, drain, sponge, and season; dress them dry with a bunch of fried parsley on the top. (1906). SAUTéD CHICKENS WITH HALF-GLAZE (Poulets Sautés Demi-Glace). Sautéd chickens are cooked various ways, either with a plain sauce or garnishing. How to Sauté. --Cut up two chickens each of two pound weight, having them well cleaned and singed, into seven pieces, viz: two legs, the breastbone, whole breasts, and the backbone, split in two, suppressing the pinions and giblets. Break the second joint bone of the legs and remove it. Heat some butter and oil in a sautoir, range the pieces of chicken in this, and cook over a good but not too fierce fire, turning them over when of a nice color and well browned; remove the saucepan from off the fire and place it in the oven to finish cooking the chickens, taking out the pieces as fast as they are done, and when the legs are sufficiently cooked, drain the fat from the sautoir and return to it the pieces previously removed, then pour over a pint of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), boil up for a minute, turning the pieces over so that they are thoroughly covered with the sauce on all sides. Dress these pieces of chicken on a dish, cover and keep hot. Pour a gill of Madeira or white wine, or else half of each, into the sautoir, reduce to half, add another half pint of half-glaze sauce and some mushroom and truffle parings; boil up for a minute while stirring incessantly with a spoon, strain the sauce through a fine strainer pour it over the chickens and serve. FIG. 373. A piece of chicken backbone. FIG. 374. An illustration of a chicken breast. FIG. 375. A piece of chicken split in two. (1907). CHICKENS WITH FINE HERBS, TOMATO GARNISHING-SAUTéD (Poulets Sautés aux Fines Herbes, Garnis de Tomates). Fry chopped parsley and mushrooms and four blanched chopped shallots in butter; add two young two-pound chickens, both cut up into five pieces and a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123); season with salt and pepper; let all cook without adhering to the pan, skim off the fat and add a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414), some clear gravy (No. 404) and the juice of a lemon. Put some butter and oil in a pan and when hot range one beside the other, some halved tomatoes having the seeds pressed out; season with salt and pepper, add a whole clove of garlic; fry these over a hot fire keeping them whole, and when their moisture has evaporated suppress the garlic and besprinkle with a little prepared red pepper (No. 168). Dress the chickens in a pyramid form, surround with the tomatoes and pour over the chicken gravy just as it is; dredge the surface with chopped parsley and serve with a separate half-glaze sauce (No. 413) mixed with tomato sauce (No. 549). (1908). SPRING CHICKENS AS AN ENTRéE, ROASTED-SMALL (Poulets Reine Rôtis en Entrée de Broche). Singe three small chickens weighing three-quarters of a pound each; draw, and clean well; truss as for an entrée (No. 178), cover the breasts with a dry matignon with Madeira (No. 406) and tie on this thin slices of fat pork to keep it in place, tying the pork with three rows of string; run iron skewers lengthwise of the chickens and fasten them on the spit; three-quarters of an hour before serving roast them in front of a bright fire basting over with butter and the fat from the dripping pan. When done, remove, unwrap and untruss. Invert on a dish a decorated and poached quenelle forcemeat (No. 80) border; lay in the center of the dish and on this a triangular center of fried bread covered with the same forcemeat, poach in the oven and range the chickens in a triangle on this border, leaning them up against the fried bread center. Dress between each one small clusters of round and peeled truffles rolled in meat glaze (No. 402), insert a garnished skewer in the bread center and the chickens. Pour some Madeira sauce (No. 492) reduced with truffle parings into the bottom of the dish after straining it through a tammy and serve more of it in a sauce -boat. (1909). CHICKEN à L'AQUITAINE-BRAISED (Poulet Braisé à l'Aquitaine). Draw and singe a fine corn -fed chicken weighing two and a half to three pounds; break the breastbone and fill the inside with a good dressing composed of beef marrow and raw ham combined with a handful of bread-crumbs, one egg-yolk, salt and nutmeg; sew up the stomach skin at the vent and truss with the legs inside; cover with slices of fat pork and then lay it in a narrow saucepan garnished with a bunch of parsley containing two cloves, some ham trimmings and an onion; moisten to half the height of the chicken with broth and allow the liquid to boil for a few moments, then set the saucepan on a slower fire to have it cook from half to three-quarters of an hour, basting it over frequently and letting it acquire a fine color. Strain off the stock, remove its fat and reduce it with espagnole sauce (No. 414) to the consistency of a half-glaze sauce. Infuse a piece of cinnamon in a gill of Madeira wine for fifteen minutes, strain it through a napkin and add it to the sauce. Place in a saucepan some round and well-pared slices of duck's liver, some cocks'-combs and kidneys, truffles and mushrooms; pour two-thirds of the above sauce over these, then untruss the chicken and dress it with the garnishing distributed around and the remainder of the sauce served in a separate sauce -boat. (1910). CHICKENS à LA LéONIA-BOILED (Poulets Bouillis à la Léonia). Have very tender two-pound chickens, prepare and truss them as for an entrée and range them in a saucepan with stock (No. 194a) to cook slowly; when done cut each chicken into five pieces; two legs, two wings, and one of the breast bones. Fry lightly in butter one shallot or half a medium onion, add four ounces of dried mushrooms, softened in water and chopped up finely, also a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, moisten with two gills of white wine and a pint of velouté sauce (No. 415); skim the top properly for fifteen to twenty minutes, then take out the parsley and pour in a pint of tomato sauce (No. 549) and a quarter of a pound of lean ham cut in three-sixteenths inch squares, let the sauce reduce until quite thick, add the pieces of chicken and when thoroughly warm, dress with the sauce, bestrewing the surface with chopped parsley. (1911). CHICKENS à LA STUYVESANT--POêLé (Poulets Poêlés à la Stuyvesant). Have two good chickens weighing three pounds each; truss them for entrée (No. 178) and cook them as explained under the heading to poêler (No. 12); when done properly, drain, untruss and cut them up into five or six pieces, dress them in a pyramid form on a layer of forcemeat three-quarters of an inch thick, poached on the same dish intended for the table, and surround with a circle of channeled mushrooms (No. 118), new carrots cut pear -shaped and blanched, then cooked in stock (No. 194a) with a little sugar; throw some very small cooked green peas over the whole, also a printanière sauce (No. 546) and send to the table with some of the same sauce served separately. (1912). CHICKENS, ENGLISH STYLE-BOILED (Poulets Bouillis à l'Anglaise). Prepare and truss some young two-pound chickens as for an entrée (No. 178), boil them in stock (No. 194a) and drain when done; dress and cover with a well buttered velouté sauce (No. 415), adding to it chopped parsley and lemon juice. (1913). CHICKEN WITH NOODLES, MACARONI, RAVIOLES, OR MIRMIDONS-BRAISED (Poulet Braisé Soit aux Nouilles, Macaroni, Ravioles, ou Mirmidons). Cook a chicken the same as with rice ( No. 1914 ), roll out thin, some noodle paste bands (No. 142) two inches wide, cut it into fine shreds, plunge them into boiling, salted water and let cook for eight to ten minutes while covered; remove from the fire to drain on a sieve. Return these noodles when dry to the saucepan and add two or three spoonfuls of good béchamel (No. 409), fresh butter, grated parmesan, a bit of nutmeg and salt and pepper, then dress on a hot dish; lay the chicken on top either whole or neatly cut up, pour over its liquid reduced to a half-glaze and thickened with a little tomato sauce (No. 549). This chicken can be served exactly the same only substituting macaroni ( No. 2960 ), ravioles ( No. 2976 ), or mirmidons (No. 689). (1914). CHICKEN WITH RICE -BRAISED (Poulet Braisé au riz). Draw a chicken weighing three pounds, break the breastbone and fill the inside with a good dressing composed of beef marrow and raw ham, a handful of bread-crumbs, one egg-yolk, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Sew up the opening on top and truss with the legs inside; bard nicely, and lay it in a saucepan proportionate to its size, with the giblets, a garnished bunch of parsley, (No. 123) two cloves, and some ham parings. Moisten to about its height with stock (No. 194a) from the stock pot retaining all the fat and let boil up briskly for five to six minutes; remove the saucepan on one side of the range to finish boiling the liquid slowly for half to three-quarters of an hour. Place half a pound of well-washed and lightly blanched rice into another saucepan, wet it with two-thirds of the chicken broth after straining it through a fine sieve; in case there be not sufficient add a little broth; cook eighteen to twenty minutes on a hot fire; it should be softened and sufficiently dried; remove and finish by stirring in with a fork, a piece of butter, also a dash of nutmeg. Dress the rice on a dish, lay the chicken on top after draining and untrussing it, then serve. A small handful of grated parmesan cheese may be added to the rice if desired. Serve separately the remaining third of the stock reduced to a half-glaze. (1915). CHICKEN WITH TARRAGON --BRAISED (Poulet Braisé à l'Estragon). Choose a good three-pound, very white chicken; singe and draw it well; clean and free it from pin feathers; slip between the skin and breast meat a six ounce piece of butter mingling it with a heavy pinch of tarragon leaves; truss for an entrée (No. 178), and cover with bards of fat pork; place it in a saucepan, also the neck, gizzard, and a few veal parings; moisten just sufficiently to cover the chicken having three-quarters of unskimmed broth (No. 194a), and one-quarter of white wine. Boil up this liquid, then remove the saucepan to a more moderate fire to allow the chicken to cook for forty-five to sixty minutes; when properly done, strain the liquid, free it of fat, and put this latter in with the chicken to keep it warm. Throw a few tarragon leaves into a little boiling water; take the saucepan from the fire at the first boil, and drain these leaves on a sieve. Clarify the chicken stock, reduce, and afterward add to it a piece of chicken glaze (No. 398), and the juice of one lemon; untruss the chicken, dress and decorate the breast with the blanched tarragon leaves; pour a part of the gravy around, serving the remainder in a sauce -boat. (1916). CHICKENS WITH NEW VEGETABLES--SMALL--BRAISED (Petits Poulets Braisés aux Légumes Nouveaux). Procure two small tender chickens each one to weigh a pound and a half; singe and draw, truss for an entrée (No. 178), then lay them in a saucepan with melted butter and fry over a slow fire for ten to twelve minutes, turning them around and not letting them brown; moisten with a pint of stock (No. 194a); season and add a garnishing composed of small new blanched carrots and uncooked fresh green peas. Cover the saucepan and finish cooking the vegetables together with the chickens in a slack oven, occasionally adding a little hot stock (No. 194a). As soon as they are nicely done, drain, untruss and cut each one into four pieces; dress them in a pyramid form in the center of a long dish. Strain the vegetables, thicken them with butter and add a pinch of sugar; range them around the pyramid of chickens, and on both ends of the dish lay a cluster of mushrooms and one of small glazed onions. (1917). DUCK à LA BRITANNIA--STUFFED (Canard Farci à la Britannia). Chop up a little green sage also one shallot, put them into a vessel and season with salt and pepper, add three hard-boiled egg-yolks, two dozen chestnuts and two tablespoonfuls of bread-crumbs; work the whole well together and with it fill the duck; truss and roast for three-quarters of an hour to one hour, then dress on a croûton of fried bread, pour over a poulette sauce (No. 527), and serve more in another sauce -boat. rend="bold">(1918). DUCK à LA MATIGNON (Canard à la Matignon). Select a fine young duck and truss it after singeing and drawing. Cut up some carrots, bacon and onions into three-sixteenth inch squares; have also sprigs of parsley, thyme and bay leaf. Put the bacon into a sautoir with two ounces of butter, fry, put in the onions without coloring them, then add the carrots, herbs and seasoning; moisten with Madeira wine and let fall to a glaze. When cold wrap the duck with this matignon in strong sheets of buttered paper, and roast either on the spit or in the oven from three-quarters of an hour to one hour. Unwrap and add the vegetables to half a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414) and as much broth (No. 194a); boil and despumate for half an hour reducing to the consistency of a light sauce; strain this through a tammy (No. 159) and pour a part of it over the dressed duck, serving the remainder in a sauce -boat. (1919). DUCK à LA SIEBRECHT (Canard à la Siebrecht). Have a duck prepared and cooked the same as for roasting ( No. 1921 ), dress and serve at the same time a sauce prepared as follows: Peel and cook some sour apples, and when done strain off the liquid part collecting the pulp in a vessel; mix into this a quarter as much grated fresh horse- radish and as much unsweetened well drained whipped cream; pour this sauce into a sauce -boat and serve it to accompany the duck. (1920). DUCK, AMERICAN STYLE-STUFFED (Canard Farci à l'Américaine). Singe, draw, and clean well a young duck, fill the insides with an American bread stuffing (No. 61); truss for roasting (No. 179) and roast it either on the spit or in the oven, three-quarters of an hour should be allowed. Dress it on a hot dish and pour a little gravy (No. 404) around, serving more in a separate sauce -boat. (1921). ROAST DUCK (Canard Rôti). Singe and draw a nice fat duck, chop up the liver with the same quantity of fresh fat pork, season and mix in a small finely chopped onion, some chopped parsley, a handful of bread-crumbs passed through a sieve and one egg-yolk; with this dressing stuff the duck's stomach; truss for roasting and cook either on the spit or in the oven for thirty to forty-five minutes, according to its size; baste over several times with butter, salt, and then take it from the spit; untruss and dress it on a dish garnishing around with slices of lemon. Send at the same time a sauce -boat of good gravy taken from the dripping pan, adding a little good stock (No. 194a) to it. This duck may be served plain without dressing if desired. (1922). DUCK WITH CèPES (Canard aux Cèpes). Put a good clean, trussed duck into a saucepan with melted fat pork and two minced onions, fry, season and moisten with two to three gills of gravy (No. 404), then cook smothered, turning it over. When three-quarters cooked, add two to three dozen small fresh and peeled cèpes free of stalks; finish cooking together with the duck, and when done, drain off the latter to untruss and dress on a dish with the cèpes grouped around. Strain the gravy stock, thicken it with a little tomato sauce (No. 549) and pour it over the duck and garnishing, then serve. (1923). DUCK WITH CHERRIES (Canard aux Cerises). Prepare a duck for an entrée (No. 178) after cleaning and singeing it; lay it in a saucepan lined with slices of fat pork and moisten to half its height with a mirepoix white wine stock (No. 419) bring the liquid to a boil and finish cooking in a slow oven. Suppress the stones and stalks from one pound of sour cherries, set them into an untinned copper pan with a little water, lemon peel, cinnamon and sugar, and let boil for a few moments, in case there should be no fresh cherries at hand take candied cherries or dried black ones; these should be soaked for an hour in tepid water, drained and put into a pan with a little fresh water, lemon juice and its peel, also cinnamon. Boil the cherries, then keep it at the same degree of heat, but discontinue the boiling for half an hour; the liquid should now be entirely absorbed. After the duck is ready, remove it from the saucepan and untruss, strain its stock, free it of fat and let reduce with some good brown sauce (No. 414), and after it attains a sufficient sucenience and is well-reduced, run it through a tammy over the cherries. Dress the duck in the center of a dish, pour half the gravy over, lay the cherries around and serve the remainder of the sauce in a sauce -boat. (1924). DUCKS WITH OLIVES -BRAISED (Canards Braisés aux Olives ). Dress two ducks for entrées (No. 178) and lay them in a saucepan lined with bardes of fat pork; moisten to half their height with a mirepoix white wine stock (No. 419) and let boil, skim and simmer slowly for three-quarters to one hour. Stone about one pound of verdal olives, blanch, drain and add them to a brown sauce (No. 414) stirred in the mirepoix stock from the ducks after it has been strained and skimmed. Dress the ducks, cover lightly with sauce and garnish around with the olives. (1925). DUCKS WITH SAUERKRAUT (Canards à la Choucroute). Dress two nice ducks; place them in a saucepan lined with bards of fat pork, some carrots and onions and a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123); moisten with stock (No. 194a), boil; skim and cook in a moderate oven for an hour to an hour a half. Put two pounds of well washed sauerkraut in a saucepan, add two onions, one containing two cloves, half a pound of sliced carrots, half a pound of blanched breast of bacon and half a pound of raw sausage (with or without garlic according to taste). Moisten with half broth and half fat taken from the stock -pot, boil and cook slowly for two hours, then drain and dish it around the duck with the sausage and bacon cut in slices dressed intercalated. Stir a poivrade sauce (No. 522) into the duck stock, pour a third of it over the ducks, serving the other two-thirds separately. (1926). DUCKS WITH TURNIPS (Canards aux Navets). Truss a good, clean singed duck, lay it in a saucepan with melted fat pork or else lard, and fry very slowly until it acquires a fine color, then season and fry for a few moments longer, draining it off afterward. Pour into the same fat a tablespoonful of flour, cook slowly together for a few moments, moistening gradually with a pint of stock (No. 194a); stir the sauce while it keeps boiling for fifteen minutes on the side of the range. Skim off the fat, strain, and add this strained sauce to the duck with a garnishing of good, sound turnips cut in clove of garlic -shapes or else in balls, and browned in a pan with butter, salt, and a little sugar; finish cooking the duck and turnips on a very slow fire, and when both are ready, lift out the bird, untruss, and dress it in the center of a dish, surrounding it with the turnips; strain the stock, skim and reduce, if there should be too much, and when correct, pour it over the duck, and serve. (1927). DUCKS ' GIBLETS HOUSEKEEPERS' STYLE (Abatis de Canards à la Ménagère). After a duck has been drawn and singed, chop off the neck as far down as the back, and divide this neck into two or three pieces. Remove the gall from the liver, being careful not to break it, and cut the liver in two or three pieces according to its size. Clean the wings well. Put four ounces of butter into a saucepan with the wings, the neck, and four ounces of lean salt pork blanched and cut in quarter inch squares; when these are nicely fried, add the liver, dredge in for every set of giblets a heaping tablesponful of flour; stir well and let the flour cook for one second, then moisten with stock (No. 194a) and white wine; season with salt and pepper, and add one dozen small onions, and as many carrots cut pear -shape; let simmer for one hour and a half, remove the fat from the surface and put in a pint of uncooked green peas, then boil together for half an hour longer. When well done and properly seasoned, dress the meats in the middle of a dish with the vegetables arranged around, pour the sauce over and serve. (1928). DUCKS ' PAUPIETTES WITH RISOT (Paupiettes de Canards au Risot). Singe some young ducks; bone them entirely, removing all the meat and use this to make a well seasoned quenelle forcemeat into which mix finely cut up chives, truffles, and mushrooms, both chopped and three-sixteenth of an inch squares of cooked ham. With this forcemeat cover pieces of the duck's skin cut in four or six parts, and roll them up into paupiettes, covering each one with a slice of fat pork; lay these in buttered paupiette rings, and place them in a sautoir covered with bardes of fat pork, and moisten with some good stock (No. 194a); cover over with a buttered paper, and then a round baking dish which will fit into the saucepan. Cook in a moderate oven, and when done and glazed to a fine color, take from the rings and dress them in a circle; garnish the center with risot (No. 739), and place a channeled mushroom head (No. 118) on top of each paupiette; serve with a sauce prepared as follows: Fry some minced onions in oil, drain, place it in a saucepan with lemon juice, mignonette, and Spanish sauce (No. 414), also the skimmed duck stock reduced to a half-glaze, and then strained through a tammy; serve it in a sauce -boat at the same time as the paupiettes. (1929). MONGREL DUCK -ROASTED AND STUFFED (Carnard Métis Farci et Rôti). A mongrel duck is the mixed breed of the wild and the domestic duck; it is generally larger than the domestic, and is usually served stuffed with a dressing made of soaked and pressed bread-crumbs, into which mingle chopped and blanched onions, chopped parsley, butter or chopped up marrow, salt pepper and nutmeg. Put the duck in a baking pan, cover with fat and roast in the oven, basting over at frequent intervals while cooking. A mongrel duck will take from an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half, and a goose from two and a half to three hours. Dress on a long dish; pour some clear gravy (No. 404) into the roasting pan, strain off the fat and reduce, pour a little of this over the bird and serve the remainder apart. (1930). DUCKLING à L'ANDALOUSE (Caneton à l'Andalouse). Procure a young duck; singe, draw and clean it well, then truss it as for an entrée (No. 178); fry it very slowly with chopped up leaf lard and when it assumes a fine color, remove it from the saucepan, drain off the fat and cover the bottom with slices of ham, cut up carrots and onions, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf and the duck; moisten with a little white wine and let this fall quickly to a glaze, then remoisten with a little stock (No. 194a), and let fall to a glaze twice more. After the duck is half cooked pour in two gills of Malaga wine and finish cooking slowly for about three-quarters of an hour; transfer the duck to another saucepan and keep it hot. Strain the stock and reduce it with the same amount of espagnole sauce (No. 414), to the consistency of a succulent sauce, and add to it a garnishing of small mushroom buttons, stoned Spanish olives, and small ball-shaped chicken quenelles; dress the duck, garnishing with part of the sauce, and serve the remainder separately. (1931). DUCKLINGS à LA BORDELAISE-SAUTéD (Canetons Sautés à la Bordelaise). Cut up two ducklings into five pieces each, obtaining the two legs, the two wings and one piece from the breastbone; pare them nicely, leaving on the pinions, but suppressing the bone from the legs, sauté in half clarified butter and half oil with the addition of four ounces of bacon cut in three-sixteenth of an inch squares, the well-chopped livers, two teaspoonfuls of chopped shallot, the same of parsley and a soupçon of garlic; moisten with white wine, add half a pound of finely chopped cèpes, four ounces of cooked ham cut in eighth of inch squares, espagnole sauce (No. 414), and some tomato purée (No. 730). Remove at the first boil, dress the duck, pour the sauce over, garnish the extremities with paper frills (No. 10), and serve immediately. (1932). DUCKLING à LA BOURGUIGNONNE-FRIED (Caneton Frit à la Bourguignonne). Divide a young tender duck into five pieces; two legs, two wings and a breast piece; pare nicely leaving the pinion bones on the wings and suppressing the leg bones; lay these pieces in a vessel to season with salt, pepper, lemon juice, chopped parsley, very little pulverized thyme and bay leaf and olive oil. Break up the carcass, fry it in butter, until well colored, adding mushroom parings, shallots, cloves, mignonette and nutmeg, then moisten with red wine and cook the whole slowly for half an hour, strain through a sieve and add this stock gradually to an espagnole sauce (No. 414), that is being reduced, and boil both together to the consistency of a light gravy. Roll the pieces of drained duck in flour, immerse them in eggs and fry in a very white frying fat over a moderate fire, allowing them to attain a fine golden brown while cooking, serve on a folded napkin with the sauce in a sauce -boat. (1933). DUCKLINGS à LA GRAINVILLE-LARDED (Canetons Piqués à la Grainville). Have two ducklings, draw, singe and lard them with medium lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52), having previously plunged them in boiling water to render the meat firm. Line a saucepan with some slices of ham, place the ducklings on top and set around carrots, onions and a bunch of parsley garnished with bay leaf and thyme. Moisten to half their height with stock (No. 194a) and finish cooking, basting over frequently and glazing them in such a way that they attain a nice color; strain the stock free of its fat and reduce it to the consistency of a light syrup, mix in some blanched chopped up shallots, then remove from the fire and squeeze in the juice of two oranges. Dress and garnish around with slices of apple besprinkled with sugar and cooked in the oven; serve the sauce in a sauce boat separately. (1934). DUCKLING à LA LYONNAISE (Caneton à la Lyonnaise). Bone the breast of a large duckling, singed and well cleaned. Fill up the empty space with a liver baking forcemeat (No. 64), mixed with a few spoonfuls of lean cooked ham cut in dice-shapes, and bread-crumbs, sew the breast skin, truss the duck, wrap it up in larding pork and let braise in a narrow saucepan slightly moistened with some stock (No. 194a), and a little white wine. Drain the duck, untie and untruss, then dress it on a dish and surround with clusters of small glazed onions alternated with clusters of whole chestnuts, first cooked, then fallen to a glaze with a little gravy (No. 404). Strain the stock, remove its fat and reduce it to a half-glaze, thicken it with a little brown sauce (No. 414), and serve it separately. (1935). DUCKLINGS' FILLETS à LA MACéDOINE OR GREEN PEAS (Filets de Canetons à la Macédoine ou aux petits pois). Singe, drain, and clean two young ducklings trussed for entrée (No. 178); lay them in a saucepan lined with bardes of fat pork, moisten to half their height with good mirepoix wine stock (No. 419), let boil, then skim or simmer over a slow fire or in the oven until done, basting over at frequent intervals, and glazing to a fine color; it will take from three-quarters of an hour to one hour to cook them. When the ducks are thoroughly done, remove the fillets, strain, skim, and reduce the stock with espagnole sauce (No. 414), and when it becomes succulent and properly reduced, add it to the fillets with a piece of fine butter, rolling all the while to mix well. Dress the fillets in a circle, filling the inside with a macédoine of vegetables (No. 680), or small fresh peas with bacon prepared as follows: Have half a pound of bacon cut in half inch dice, unsalt by parboiling, drain and fry in butter with some small onions; moisten with brown sauce (No. 414), and some of the duck stock, let simmer until the onions and bacon are cooked, then throw in three pints of peas cooked French style ( No. 2743 ). Mix all together and pour it into the center of the fillets, or else serve with a garnishing of cucumbers and Villeroi ( No. 2732 ). (1936). DUCKLINGS' FILLETS à LA PéRIGUEUX (Filets de Canetons à la Périgueux). This entrée is to be dressed on a wooden foundation covered with cooked or noodle paste (No. 142). Have a small pyramidal mold, smooth and well rounded, and poach in it a loaf of chicken or veal forcemeat mingled with an equal quantity of liver baking forcemeat (No. 64); keep this mold in water until needed. Cook six ducklings in a good mirepoix stock (No. 419), having only very little liquid, and when done drain them out to untruss; detach the two fillets from each breast retaining both skin and wing bones, then pare. Quickly unmold the small forcemeat loaf on the center of the paste -covered foundation; mask it over with velouté (No. 415), reduced with the duck stock, and dress the fillets in a detruncated circle around, that is the six fillets on the right side are to incline one way, while the six on the left the other. On the summit of the support, in the hollow formed by the points of the fillets, dress a tasteful cluster of small, round truffles peeled and cooked when required with Madeira sauce, and glazed over with a brush. Lightly cover over the fillets and the bottom of the dish with more of the same sauce, and send a sauce -boatful of it at the same time as the fillets. FIG. 376. A decorative plate of duck fillets arranged in a pyramid form. (1937). DUCKLING à LA ROUENNAISE (Caneton à la Rouennaise). Chop up half a pound of onions, blanch, then fry in butter; chop up also half a pound of chicken livers, and half a pound of leaf lard, each one separately; mingle all together, and when very hot thicken with six egg-yolks; add four ounces of bread-crumbs to this preparation, some chopped parsley, and finely cut up chives. Remove the breastbone from a duck and fill the empty space with the above; truss for roasting and wrap it up in buttered paper, and roast for about half an hour. Serve it on a little clear gravy (No. 404), and have a sauce -boatful of the following sauce : Cut up two ounces of onions in one-eighth of an inch squares; cook them in salted water, drain and return them to a saucepan to moisten with red wine; when this has fallen to a glaze dilute it with espagnole sauce (No. 414). (1938). DUCKLING WITH GREEN MAYONNAISE AND FINE HERBS --BROILED AND ROASTED--(Caneton Grillê et Rôti à la Mayonnaise Verte aux Fines Herbes). Broiled. --Split a singed, clean young duckling through the back, open it entirely and flatten well, trim neatly cutting off the legs at the first joint, salt and cover with oil; put it in a hinged double broiler, close and broil over a moderate even fire for about eighteen minutes; when done and of a fine color, dress on a hot dish, serve separately a sauce -boat of green mayonnaise fine herb sauce (No. 612). Roasted. --After singing and drawing the duckling, truss it for roasting (No. 179) and cook either on the spit or in the oven for twenty-five to thirty-five minutes; baste frequently, salt only when cooked, then untruss and dress on a very hot dish, pour some clear gravy (No. 404), over and garnish around with water -cress seasoned with salt and vinegar. (1939). DUCKLING, PEASANT STYLE (Caneton à la Paysanne). Blanch and braise a small curled cabbage after cutting it in quarters and taking out the core, blanch separately some trimmed carrots and turnips, and celery root cut like cloves of garlic. Fry six ounces of half inch pieces of bacon in a saucepan, remove it with the skimmer leaving the fat in the sauce -pan, and in this fry very slowly a clean duckling trussed-as for an entrée (No. 178); when of a fine color moisten it with a little white wine and let this fall quickly to a glaze, then remoisten with a very little stock (No. 194a), and bring it twice to a glaze. After the duckling is partly cooked, put in the bacon and vegetables, moisten with broth to half the height finish cooking the whole very slowly on the fire or else in the oven. At the last moment untruss the duck and dress it on a dish, surrounding it with the garnishings and the quartered cabbage; lengthen the stock with a little more gravy, strain and thicken it with either some sauce or kneaded butter (No. 579); boil for two minutes, strain and pour it over the duck. (1940). SALMIS OF DUCKLING (Salmis de Caneton). To Roast. --Select a young and very tender duck, prepare and truss it for roasting the same as explained in No. 179; it should be roasted on the spit or in the oven for fifteen to twenty-five minutes according to its size and the heat of the fire. A domestic duck ought to be served quite rare, and should be killed without bleeding. Dish it after untrussing and pour over a little of its gravy, garnish around with water -cress and serve the remainder of the gravy in a sauce -boat. For the Salmis. --Cut the roasted duck up in two or three slices from each breast. Chop up the legs and carcasses and fry them in butter with an ounce of onions and as much shallot, both minced very finely; add the parings, pepper and mignonette, then moisten with red wine and some brown sauce (No. 414); reduce this to half, strain it through a tammy and pour it over the pieces of dressed duck; surround with heart -shaped bread croûtons and serve very hot. (1941). DUCKLING, WITH BIGARADE SAUCE (Caneton à la Sauce Bigarade). Make a small hash with some fresh pork, the duck's liver and two cooked chicken livers; mix into it a handful of white bread-crumbs, one egg-yolk and two or three spoonfuls of mushrooms, onions and parsley all minced very fine. With this preparation fill a duck's stomach; sew up the apertures, truss and roast it on the spit or in the oven, basting liberally with butter. Drain and dress it on a dish with some clear gravy (No. 404), and serve a bigarade sauce (No. 435) separately. (1942). DUCKLING, WITH JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES (Caneton aux Topinambours). Cook the duckling the same as for Andalouse ( No. 1930 ), and when done dress and surround it with a garnishing of glazed and peeled Jerusalem artichokes; serve with a separate sauce -boat of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) worked with butter and finished with parsley and lemon juice. (1943). DUCKLINGS, WITH ORANGES (Canetons aux Oranges ). Prepare two ducklings as for an entrée (No. 178). Line a saucepan or a braziere ( Fig. 134) with carrots, onions, fragments of fat pork, slices of ham and raw veal, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, mushroom peelings and melted fat pork. Lay the ducklings over, the breasts upper-most and pour on a pint of stock (No. 194a); cover and reduce the liquid slowly and completely, then remoisten with half stock and half champagne or white wine, and let simmer until thoroughly cooked. Strain the stock, remove its fat, despumate and reduce it to a half-glaze; take out a fourth part of it and to the remainder, add the blanched and shredded peels of two oranges; let cook again for fifteen minutes. Peel two oranges, free of all pith, remove the pulp between each section and take out the seeds, then add this to the sauce; dish the ducklings, cover with a quarter of the sauce kept aside and surround with two medium oranges cut in four. Serve the sauce separately at the same time as the ducks, or else substitute an orange sauce (No. 511). (1944). BUSTARD EN DAUBE-- WILD GOOSE (Outarde en Daube--Oie Sauvage). As a bustard is nearly always tough, it is necessary to hang it up for several days. Pick, singe, draw and clean it well; cut off the pinions, neck and drumsticks; detach the legs from the body as well as the breasts, and lard all these meats with large shreds of raw ham, then season; lay them in a vessel with a pint of vinegar and as much water, let macerate for twenty-four hours. Cover the bottom and sides of a large stone stock pot with thin slices of fat pork, range in the bottom a few small carrots and turnips in the shape of three-fourth inch balls, a few onions, a bunch of aromatic herbs and two boned and blanched calf 's feet, dredge over whole peppers and cloves then put in the carcass, legs and breast pieces after draining them from their marinade. Moisten to half the height of the meats with white wine, cover over with bards of fat pork, and reduce the liquid for a few moments. Close the vessel hermetically with a piece of paper and a common plate half filled with water and let it cook very slowly in the oven for six to seven hours, according to its tenderness; remove carefully and dress on a large dish with the calf 's feet and vegetables; skim the fat from the strained liquid and strain it again over the meat. (1945). GOOSE à LA CHIPOLATA (Oie à la Chipolata). A whole goose can either be served as a relevé or as a roast; the slices, legs and giblets as an entrée. A goose is usually served at unceremonious dinners. Draw and singe a goose, clean it well and truss it as for an entrée (No. 178); fill the inside with a sausage forcemeat (No. 68) into which mix a handful of bread-crumbs, several eggs and cooked fine herbs (No. 385); season highly. Line a braziere with bards of fat pork, cut up carrots and onions and a bunch of parsley garnished with chervil; lay the goose on top of these, surround it with bits of veal and moisten with Madeira wine, broth and white wine to half its height; boil, skim and simmer for three to four hours until properly cooked. Strain the stock, remove all its fat and reduce to half, then pour it into some brown sauce (No. 414) in the act of being reduced, adding more of the Madeira. Dress the goose and garnish around with clusters of small braised and glazed onions, blanched carrots cooked in stock (No. 194a), braised chestnuts fallen to a glaze, and mushroom heads cooked, turned and channeled (No. 118); cover over with a part of the sauce and serve the remainder in a sauce -boat. (1946). GOOSE à LA ROYER (Oie à la Royer). Prepare the same as for the chipolata ( No. 1945 ) and after the stock has been strained, skimmed and reduced to a half-glaze, add to it the juice of one orange, some currant jelly and finely shredded cooked orange peel, pour a part of this sauce over the goose, and garnish around with sour apple tartlets ( No. 2189 ); serve the rest of the sauce separately. (1947). GOOSE à LA THIéBLIN-ROASTED (Oie Rôtie à la Thiéblin). Pick out a fine goose, draw, singe and clean it thoroughly, then truss it for roasting. Boil fifty peeled chestnuts in some stock (No. 194a) with a few shredded celery stalks, adding only sufficient of the moisture just to allow them to cook, and when done, drain. Put two pounds of pork forcemeat in a sautoir over a brisk fire, cook, stir occasionally and season with salt, mignonette, nutmeg, chopped parsley, a handful of bread-crumbs and two whole eggs, add the chestnuts and use this dressing to fill the insides of the goose, wrap it up in several sheets of buttered paper and roast it for two and a half hours, basting it over frequently. Twenty-five minutes before serving, unwrap the goose and return it to the spit in order to have it acquire a fine color, dress and serve with Zuchette sauce (No. 564). Garnish around the goose with croustades filled with gooseberries preparing them in the following way: Have two pounds of gooseberries, cut off the tops and stalks, blanch for two minutes, then drain. Cook in a saucepan a quarter of a pound of sugar to small crack, add the gooseberries, toss them gently, then cool off, stir in as much whipped cream as there are gooseberries, having it unsweetened and well drained; serve a sauce -boat of gravy (No. 404) at the same time. (1948). GOOSE, GERMAN STYLE-ROASTED (Oie Rôtie à l'Allemande). Prepare and cook the goose the same as for stuffed with chestnuts ( No. 1950 ), but instead of filling with chestnut forcemeat, substitute ten apples, peeled, quartered, cored and cooked in a vessel with six ounces of dried currants and four ounces of seeded raisins, half a pound of bread-crumbs, cinnamon and two whole eggs. Mince well a red cabbage after carefully removing all the hard parts and lay it in a saucepan with stock (No. 194a), from which the fat has not been removed, and salt, cook slowly until ready to serve, then put in a tablespoonful of vinegar, garnish around the goose with this cabbage and outside of it set a string of small broiled sausages (No. 754). (1949). GEESE GIBLETS WITH TURNIPS (Abatis d'Oie aux Navets). Put half a pound of un salted bacon into a saucepan with a little butter and let fry for a few moments, then add the giblets prepared as for No. 1927 and the seasoning, also two dozen small onions and four dozen turnips cut the size and shape of large Spanish olives, having previously fried them in butter with a pinch of sugar. Drain them and add them to the stew with a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, and pour in some espagnole sauce (No. 414) and stock (No. 194a), boil, skim and simmer for half an hour; season to taste with salt and pepper. When the giblets are cooked, remove the parsley and serve the meat in the center of a dish with the vegetables around and the sauce poured over the whole. (1950). GOOSE STUFFED WITH CHESTNUTS AND WITH SAUSAGES AND CHESTNUTS -ROASTED (0ie Rôtie Farcie aux Marrons et aux Saucisses et Marrons). Select a fine goose; singe and reserve the fat and giblets, then wipe out the insides and fill it, also the breast with a dressing prepared as follows: Take one pound of chopped veal, and two pounds of chopped fat pork, only mixing them together afterward, and season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and allspice; add two gills of stock ( No. 149a ) or water, and pound the whole together; then mix in sixty chestnuts that have been roasted in the oven and freed of skins. Truss the goose and lay it in a roasting-pan with its own fat and half a pint of hot water, sprinkle fine salt over it, and cover with a buttered paper; then place it in the oven to cook for three hours, being careful to baste it occasionally; it should be well done; salt over, untruss, and dress on a dish; skim the fat from the surface of its liquid, pour in a little gravy (No. 404), boil, and then strain through a sieve. Throw a little of this over the goose and serve the remainder separately. FIG. 377. A roasting-pan with goose lay in it. With Sausages and Chestnuts. --Prepare and cook the goose exactly the same only omit putting the chestnuts in the dressing; but braise them and use them for garnishing both sides of the goose and arrange small broiled Chipolata sausages (No. 754) on the ends. (1951). GOSLING à LA SOYER (Oison à la Soyer). Draw, singe, and clean well a young goose; truss, filling the inside with a dressing made of a pound of finely chopped beef suet, a pound of soaked bread-crumbs, having all the water extracted, half a pound of butter, some onions fried in butter with the goose liver cut in small squares, sage, thyme, basil, marjoram, parsley, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Roast the goose either on the spit or in the oven for an hour and a half to two hours, basting it frequently. When done, dish it up on top of a purée of apples seasoned with sugar and nutmeg. Peel some apples cut in four; range on a generously buttered dish, sprinkled over with sugar, and cook for ten minutes in the hot oven, and lay around the goose. Serve separate a sauce prepared with the glaze from the dripping pan detaching it with a little gravy (No. 404), strain and skim; mix in gradually some espagnole sauce (No. 414) in which currant jelly has been dissolved; strain the whole through a sieve, and serve it in a sauce -boat to accompany the goose. (1952). ROAST GOSLING OR MONGREL GOOSE (Oison ou Oie Métisse Rôtis). A gosling roasted on the spit makes an excellent dish. It can also be cooked in a slow oven laid in a narrow earthenware ( Fig. 377) or iron pan with plenty of fat; generally both these birds are stuffed before being roasted. A mongrel goose may be filled with partly broiled chestnuts lightly fried in butter or fat pork; it can also be stuffed with small apples after removing the core with a tube five-eighths of an inch in diameter, or both chestnuts and apples can be replaced by a fresh pork hash into which fine herbs and bread crumbs have been mixed, or even by small sausages roasted partially in fat pork or grease. If the goose be large it will take two to three hours to have it tender; when a gosling is cooked on the spit it must first be trussed, then wrapped in buttered paper and roasted for one hour, being careful to baste frequently and to remove the paper after it has been in three-quarters of an hour to let it acquire a fine brown color, and it is then served simply with good reduced gravy (No. 404). A kind of thick pancake can be served at the same time made with bread-crumbs soaked, pressed, then pounded in a bowl and diluted with whole eggs and milk, seasoning with salt, pepper, pulverized thyme and marjoram and chopped blanched onions. Lay this preparation on a well-greased tin sheet and cook in the oven basting it bountifully with goose grease, after cutting it into inch and a half squares. (1953). GOSLING SAUTéD WITH TOMATOES, ROBERT SAUCE (Oison Sauté aux Tomates à la Sauce Robert). Have a good gosling, singe, draw and cut it up into seven pieces-the two legs and five pieces taken from the breast; season with salt and pepper and fry slowly in lard. Drain off the fat and detach the glaze from the pan with a little clear gravy (No. 404). Cut twelve peeled tomatoes across in two, press out the juice and seeds and fry them in a frying pan with very hot oil; season with salt, pepper and a crushed and chopped clove of garlic. When the pieces are cooked, dish up and dress the fried tomatoes over; sprinkle very green chopped parsley on top, pour the gravy around and serve separately some Robert sauce (No. 533). (1954). GOSLING STEWED WITH TURNIPS (Ragoût d'Oison aux Navets). Cut up a small tender and well cleaned gosling into medium-sized pieces, suppressing the pinions, drumsticks and neck; cut also half a pound of lean bacon into half inch squares; fry them for a few moments in butter, and remove with the skimmer, leaving the fat in the saucepan; lay the pieces of goose into this fat, fry over a hot fire while stirring, season and add one onion and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf. When the meats are browned, drain off the fat and dredge the goose with flour, moisten to its height with hot stock (No. 194a), and boil up this liquid while stirring, letting it remain in this state for ten minutes; the sauce should now be slightly thickened. Cover well the saucepan with its lid and continue to cook moderately. Take raw turnips and cut them into balls three-quarters of an inch in diameter, place them in a pan with the strained fat from the goose, season with salt and a pinch of sugar, and color them briskly; when half cooked lift out the pieces of goose to trim neatly, strain its stock and return it to a clean saucepan with a gill of Marsala wine, the pieces of goose, the bacon and the turnips; boil together for ten minutes and finish cooking in a slack oven. The gosling and turnips should both be found done at the same time; dress all in a deep dish with very little sauce. (1955). GUINEA FOWL (Pintade). The guinea fowl is a pretty bird the same size as an ordinary fowl, having slate-colored feathers covered with small round white spots; it is raised in the poultry yard; when young its meat is most agreeable to eat. The fecundity of a guinea fowl is most remarkable. FIG. 378. An illustration of a guinea fowl. (1956). GUINEA FOWLS LARDED AND DECORATED WITH THEIR OWN FEATHERS-ROASTED (Pintades Piquées Rôties Garnies de Leur Plumage). Guinea fowls are frequently disguised with their own or with pheasants ' feathers, for their resemblance is almost similar. Select young guinea fowls, dress and truss them as if intended for roasting (No. 179); plunge the breasts in boiling water to stiffen the skin and lard them with very fine shreds of larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52); wrap them up in several sheets of buttered paper, then roast them either on the spit or in the oven; when they are three-quarters done, unwrap and brown a fine color; salt and dress on croûtons of bread fried in butter, and decorate with either their own feathers; serve a separate sauce -boat of clear gravy (No. 404). (1957). GUINEA FOWLS FILLETS à LA GAILLARDET (Filets de Pintades à la Gaillardet). Raise the fillets from half a dozen young guinea fowls, remove the skin and epidermis, and sauté them over a brisk fire, but without coloring. Set them under a weight and when partly cold pare them into half hearts, cover with some well-reduced Villeroi sauce (No. 560) and range them as quickly as they are ready on a tin sheet to cool thoroughly. Detach them from this sheet, roll them in bread-crumbs, dip in eggs and again in bread-crumbs, smoothing the breading with the blade of a knife. Fry them in clarified butter to a fine golden brown, drain on a napkin and trim the pointed ends with favor frills (No. 10), then dress in a circle and garnish the center of the dish with tomatoes fried in oil with finely chopped shallots and mushrooms, also some chopped parsley; serve with a separate Colbert sauce (No. 451). (1958). GUINEA FOWLS WITH SAUERKRAUT (Pintades à la Choucroute). Cook two pounds of good sauerkraut perfectly plain with a piece of smoked bacon and half a pound of sausages. Bard two young guinea fowls and cook them smothered in a saucepan; when nearly done, add them to the sauerkraut, which is not thoroughly cooked yet, and finish both together. Drain off the fowls and meat and reduce the liquid remaining in the sauerkraut, thickening it with a piece of kneaded butter (No. 579); finish off the fire with a piece of plain butter. Dress on a dish, form a hollow in the center and lay in it the cut up fowls glazing them over simply with a brush; serve a clear gravy (No. 404) separately. (1959). PIGEONS à LA CHARTREUSE ( Pigeons à la Chartreuse). Blanch half a cabbage and cut it up into two parts, remove the core, then braise these with half a pound of bacon. Place some melted fat pork in a saucepan and fry in it three pigeons; when colored range them over the cabbage and garnish the spaces between the pigeons with turnips and carrots each blanched separately, and small onions browned in a pan; season and then withdraw the saucepan, pushing it into a moderate oven. A quarter of an hour later moisten with a gill of hot stock (No. 194a). Finish cooking the pigeons and vegetables very slowly; untruss the birds and dress them over the braised cabbage laid in the center of the dish; between each pigeon place a cluster of of onions, turnips and carrots, separating each one of these by a thick slice of the bacon standing upright. Increase the quantity of pigeon stock with a little clear gravy (No. 404), suppress all the fat and thicken lightly with a little brown sauce (No. 414); strain this, pour part over the pigeons, cut the sausages in slices and dress them around the pigeons one overlapping the other. Serve the rest of the sauce separately. (1960). PIGEONS à LA LOMBARDY-POêLED (Pigeonneaux à la Lombarde-Poêlés). Prepare eight pigeons; singe, draw and truss for an entrée (No. 178); wrap them up in a dry matignon (No. 406), with slices of fat pork and then in strong buttered paper. Butter and garnish the bottom of a saucepan with sliced carrots and onions, thyme, bay leaf and sprigs of parsley, add the pigeons, half a pint of white wine and as much stock (No. 194a), boil until there is no more moisture, then remoisten to half the height of the birds and let simmer gently until they are cooked, which will take from thirty to forty-five minutes, drain and strain the stock, skim off all its fat and reduce. Dish the pigeons in a circle over artichoke bottoms fried in butter and fill up the middle with a garnishing of escaloped sweetbreads also fried in butter, and on top lay small squares of cooked lean ham half an inch in diameter and fried in butter, and over these cooked channeled mushroom (No. 118) heads. Cover these garnishings with velouté sauce (No. 415) stirred into the pigeon stock and serve also a sauce -boatful of the same sauce. (1961). PIGEONS à LA VALENCIENNE ( Pigeons à la Valencienne Cut six ounces of bacon into small dice; fry them for a few moments in butter, then lift out, leaving the fat in the saucepan, and into this put three fine, clean and trussed pigeons, also a few small onions and a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123). Fry and moisten to half their height with broth, let fall to a glaze and remoisten once more to half the height of the pigeons and finish cooking over a moderate fire. When they are almost done strain the stock and return it to the sauce -pan without the onions and parsley and let boil up; now add four gills of good rice for each quart of liquid; put back the bacon and a coffeespoonful of prepared red pepper (No. 168) and finish all together. Dish up the rice, untruss the pigeons and dress them on top, surround the whole with small chipolata sausages and the small onions. FIG. 379. Three pigeons arranged in a pyramid form in a decorative plate and surrounded with small chipolata sausages and small onions. (1962). PIGEONS GARNISHED WITH MONTGLAS CASES-STUFFED ( Pigeons Farcis Garnis de Caisses Montglas). Fasten a wooden foundation on a dish, it to be one inch high and not too wide; cover with cooked paste (No. 131) or noodle paste (No. 142) decorated on the top with a piping in relief and having a wooden or tin triangle or conical-shaped support in the center, also covered with paste and bored on top so that a skewer can be inserted. Bone the breasts of three young, c lean pigeons by splitting them lightly through the back, but leaving the legs and thighs attached to the bodies; season the inside meats and fill the breasts with baking liver forcemeat (No. 81) combined with a third as much raw forcemeat (No. 89), a few spoonfuls of cooked lean ham and as much cooked truffles, all to be well chopped; sew up the back, truss as for an entrée (No. 178) with the legs thrust inside the body, bard over and wrap each one in a small buttered cloth, then cook in a good poêler stock. As soon as the pigeons are done, drain, unwrap and retighten the cloth more firmly; put them back into their stock to leave cool, then drain again and when unwrapped, wipe them carefully with a cloth. Now detach the breasts from the rump of each pigeon to cut into lengthwise slices, return them to their original position and then place the birds in a sautoir with a part of their stock reduced to a half-glaze warm them in the open oven basting frequently. Remove the pigeons to a small baking sheet, smooth the cut parts nicely and cover the breasts with a not too thick Mornay sauce (No. 504), so the form of the pigeons remain intact; place them for a moment in the hot oven to have the sauce adhere, then dress them at once in a triangle almost standing upright against the support; on top of this insert a small skewer garnished with truffles; surround the bottom of the dish with a chain of small china cases filled with montglas (No. 747), then covered with a layer of forcemeat and poached in a bain-marie; when serving this entrée send also a sauce -boatful of the reduced pigeon stock thickened with a little sauce. (1963). PIGEONS, HUNTRESS STYLE- BREASTS (Filets de Pigeons, Chasseresse). Raise the fillets from six pigeons leaving the minion fillet adhere, pare and suppress the skin, then salt and lay them in a sautoir with butter and lemon juice; place this on a hot fire and as soon as they are firm to the touch, remove to place under a weight; then pare again and cover one side only with a salpicon of sweetbreads, truffles and mushrooms mingled with well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407). Cover this salpicon with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) diluted with a little cream. Dust the tops with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan cheese, mask with butter and lay the breasts in a sautoir, having the bottom covered with thin slices of fat pork, set it in the hot oven and when the breasts are of a fine color and very warm, dress them in a circle, pouring a Diana sauce (No. 400) in the middle. (1964). PIGEONS, MONARCH STYLE-SMOTHERED ( Pigeons au Monarque-à l'étuvée). Choose six good squabs; draw, singe, and clean them well; dip the breasts into boiling water to harden the skin and facilitate the larding process, then lard them with small lardons of fat pork (No. 4, Fig. 54), and braise them in a mirepoix stock (No. 419); glaze and let them get a fine color; when done, drain and dress. Garnish around with stuffed olives, truffles, mushrooms, quenelles, cocks'-combs, and kidneys, or the combs may be imitated by pieces of veal palate removed with a cutter into comb-shapes. Cover with a velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with mushroom essence (No. 398), and thickened with raw egg-yolks and fresh butter, sending some of the sauce to the table separately. Surround these garnishings with trussed crawfish, and between these lay slices of foies-gras an inch and a quarter in diameter by three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness, breaded à la Villeroi and fried. (1965). POTTED PIGEONS (Ragoût de Pigeons au Four). After cleaning and singeing six pigeons, cut them up into four pieces; lay three ounces of butter in a saucepan with six ounces of bacon cut in quarter inch squares; when this begins to brown put in four ounces of onions cut in slices. Range the pigeons in an earthen pot or deep dish with a bed of the bacon on the bottom, the pigeons on top, and more bacon over; add salt, pepper, and sprigs of thyme; moisten with thin brown sauce (No. 414), placing here and there a few pieces of pilot cracker dipped in water. Boil and then let simmer or push in the oven until thoroughly done, and serve in the same crock they have been cooked in. (1966). PIGEONS, PRINTANIèRE STYLE ( Pigeons à la Printanière). Prepare a garnishing composed of carrots and turnip balls formed with a half inch vegetable-spoon, and some large green peas; have the carrots and turnips blanched separately, and the peas simply cooked in an untinned copper pan. Break the breastbones of three tender pigeons, remove these bones and fill the breasts with a dressing made of fresh fat pork, chicken livers cooked, chopped, and pounded with a little panada and two egg-yolks. Truss the pigeons with the legs thrust inside for entrée (No. 178), and lay them in a saucepan lined with fat pork, roots, and minced onions; cook them almost dry, only having a very little stock (No. 194a), reduce it to a glaze, and repeat this several times, when finished; drain them off, untruss and cut each one in two lengthwise, then reconstruct them into their former shape. Dress them on a dish leaning them against a triangle-shaped fried bread support fastened on the center of the dish, and between each pigeon set a different garnishing namely; the carrots, turnips, and peas. Increase the quantity of stock with a little stock (No. 194a), strain, skim, and reduce it, thicken it with brown sauce (No. 414), and serve it in a sauce -boat. (1967). STEWED PIGEONS ( Pigeons en Compote). Bleed six young pigeons in order to kill them, reserving the blood in a bowl; mix with it a spoonful of vinegar to prevent its coagulating. After the pigeons are drawn, singed and well cleansed, truss them with the legs thrust inside. Glaze four dozen small, raw onions, cut eight ounces of bacon into half inch pieces and fry them for a few moments in a saucepan with butter; remove them with a skimmer leaving in the fat, and to this add the pigeons, fry them on all their sides, and season when they have acquired a fine color, then dredge over a spoonful of flour and cook together for two minutes while tossing them about, now moisten the pigeons gradually to their height with white wine and hot stock (No. 194a), stir the liquid till it boils rapidly, then leave it in this state for five minutes, afterward removing the saucepan to a more moderate fire; now add a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123) and some mushroom peelings. When the pigeons are three-quarters done, put in both the glazed onions and the bacon and finish cooking together. At the last moment, drain out the pigeons, untruss and range them on a dish surrounded by the garnishings. Strain the sauce, free it of fat and thicken it with the blood mixed with two raw egg-yolks, cook this thickening without boiling it and finish the sauce with a piece of butter, then strain it over the pigeons. (1968). PIGEONS WITH CRAWFISH ( Pigeons aux écrevisses). Cook some small crawfish with salt, white wine and parsley; break off the tails and suppress their shells in order to be able to pare them, chop up the fragments and add them to a little bread forcemeat finished with fine herbs and egg-yolks. Break the breastbones of two or three pigeons so as to remove the bone, fill up the empty space with the prepared forcemeat, truss and braise them with very little moisture, then strain off the stock, free it of fat and add to it a few spoonfuls of the crawfish stock, thickening with raw egg-yolks diluted with cream, then put in the crawfish tails, untruss the pigeons, dish them and pour the sauce over. (1969). PIGEONS WITH GREEN PEAS ( Pigeons aux Petits Pois). Truss six pigeons as for an entrée (No. 178), returning the livers to their original place. Melt some chopped fat pork in a saucepan, add to it a quarter of a pound of small five-eighths inch squares of bacon and fry for a few moments, then remove them with a skimmer. Put the pigeons into this saucepan with five or six small onions for each bird, brown slightly and slowly, then add one and a half quarts of green peas, a bunch of parsley and the bacon. Two minutes later moisten with two gills of stock (No. 194a), boil for five minutes and withdraw the saucepan to a slower fire, push into the oven, and finish cooking the peas and pigeons, then drain out the birds, untruss and dress them on a dish; thicken the peas with kneaded butter (No. 579), and place them around the pigeons. FIG. 380. A plate of pigeons garnished with forcemeat. (1970). PIGEONS WITH OLIVES-BREASTS (Filets de Pigeons aux Olives ). This entrée is dressed in the hollow of a cooked paste border (No. 10) cut into points and open-worked with a pastry cutter. The band intended for making the border should be cut out on a flour ed table as soon as it has been rolled; fasten it on a dish a quarter of an inch from the inside edge, spreading it slightly; egg it over with a brush and dry for a few hours. After this paste is dried, lay inside of it a wooden foundation covered with more of the same paste rolled out thin. Besides this, prepare a little raw chicken forcemeat (No. 89) mixed with an equal quantity of baked liver forcemeat (No. 80) pounded and passed through a tammy. Poach this forcemeat in a pyramidical mold rounded and smooth an inch and a half high, placed in a bain-marie; unmold this pyramid in the center of the dish, for it is intended to uphold the entrée. Select a few dozen of the finest and largest Spanish olives procurable; stone and blanch them to stuff with foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78). Singe six young but large pigeons quite fleshy, fill the breasts with a spoonful of grated fat pork and fresh chopped truffle peelings; truss and cover with fat pork, then cook in some good stock; as soon as done remove to untruss; detach the breasts from the back, remove the two fillets from both breasts, suppress the skin, pare and take off the minions. Lay the six fillets from the left side in a small sautoir, mask them with a little espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with the pigeon stock and Madeira; cover and keep them hot. Pare the other six fillets, mask them also on the inside with a layer of baking forcemeat thickened with a little raw forcemeat, smooth well, and range these fillets in another small sautoir having a little half-glaze on the bottom to heat the forcemeat; warm it while glazing over with a brush. At the last moment unmold the pyramid, lay the fillets around alternating them, and all turned in the same direction standing almost upright. Dress a part of the olives in the center space formed by the circle on top of the pyramid, and range the others around the open-worked border. Cover the fillets lightly with the sauce, also the garnishings and serve more separately. (1971). PULLET à LA ARCO VALLEY (Poularde à la Arco Valley). Prepare, cook, and dress the pullet the same as for à la Seymour( No. 1981 ); serve at the same time but separately a velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with mushroom broth and thickened when ready to serve with egg-yolks, cream and fresh butter, adding chopped parsley, small mushroom buttons and small chicken quenelles. Garnish around with cassolettes (No. 860) of oysters poached, drained and mingled with allemande sauce (No. 407). (1972). PULLET à LA DAME BLANCHE (Poularde à la Dame Blanche). Truss a pullet to be served as an entrée (No. 178), rub over the breast with half a lemon, and cover with slices of fat pork. Poêler the pullet in some good stock, as explained in No. 12, adding to it a piece of bacon previously blanched. When the pullet is cooked, strain the stock, free it of fat, and keep the chicken hot in this. Place on the fire to reduce four gills of velouté sauce (No. 415), incorporating a part of the reduced stock slowly into it with a coffeespoonful of prepared red pepper (No. 168); when succulent, strain. Dress the pullet on a thin layer of forcemeat (No. 79) poached on a dish, surround it with small clusters of potatoes cut in balls with a large vegetable scoop, and simply cooked first in salted water, then steamed. Cover the pullet with a part of the sauce, serving the remainder separately. Pullets or capons may be handed round to the guests after being cut up, and they can also be carved on the dining-room sideboard, and served on hot plates with some of the garnishing, and a little of the sauce. (1973). PULLET à LA DEMIDOFF (Poularde à la Demidoff). Draw a pullet through the side; crack the breastbone so as to be able to draw it out and fill the empty space with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), containing cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and chopped truffles, sew up the skin underneath, also the side opening, and truss the pullet to be served as an entrée (No. 178). Cover over with fat pork, and cook it for an hour and a half in some good mirepoix stock (No. 419). When done to perfection, drain, untruss, and dress it on a dish having a bottom of croustade rice fastened to it and surround with a garnishing dressed in groups composed of small truffle balls cut out with a three-eighths vegetablespoon, small balls from the red part of carrots, and small balls of white turnips, also clusters of fresh green peas cooked English style in an untinned pan. Cover the pullet with a little velouté sauce (No. 415) strained and reduced with the pullet stock, and finished with two spoonfuls of good raw cream, serving a sauce -boat of velouté sauce (No. 415) separately. (1974). PULLET à LA LéONDISE (Poularde à la Léondise). Roast the pullet the same as No. 1996 and range it on a layer of macaroni into which has been mixed crawfish or shrimp tails, mushrooms, and quenelles. Serve with a sauce -boat of financiere sauce (No. 464). (1975). PULLET à LA LESTER WALLACK (Poularde à la Lester Wallack). Break and remove the breastbone of a clean pullet, fill in the empty breast space with a dressing made of grated fat pork, chopped mushrooms, and bread steeped in milk and this liquid squeezed out; truss as for an entrée (No. 178), cover with bards of fat pork, and poêler it quite white (No. 12), then untie and dress on a rice croustade foundation fastened on a dish; surround it simply with turned and channeled mushroom heads (No. 118), cooked artichoke bottoms about two and a half inches in diameter, removing the center with a five-eighths of an inch cutter, then divide into eight pieces, and small chicken quenelles poached in salted water; all these garnishings to be arranged in separate groups. Cover the pullet with some good velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced and thickened with egg-yolks and cream, and finished at the last moment with a purée of foies-gras (No. 743), passed through a fine sieve; serve more of the sauce in a sauce -boat. (1976). PULLET à LA MARTINIèRE (Poularde à la Martinière). Poêler a pullet very white (No. 12); drain and cut it up into eight pieces; dress them simply on a force-meat ring poached on the dish; surround with a circle of medium-sized poached spoon quenelles (No. 155), and cover the chicken and quenelles with good velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with mushroom peelings, and finished with a little good cream. Serve the remainder of the sauce separately with very small and very white mushrooms added. (1977). PULLET à LA MORNAY (Poularde à la Mornay). Select a good clean pullet and truss it for entrée (No. 178); poêler it in a stock (No. 194a), keeping it very white, then drain, and when half cold detach the bread so as to be able to dress a garnishing in the empty spaces of the remaining carcass. Escalop these breast fillets and lay them in a sautoir with a garnishing composed of cocks'-combs and kidneys, mushrooms and foies-gras, and moisten this stew rather sparingly with reduced thick allemande sauce (No. 407). Range this in the cleaned out empty space, having them reassume their former shape, smooth them nicely and cover with a layer of Mornay sauce (No. 504), smooth this also and besprinkle over with a grated parmesan cheese, then glaze the surface under a salamander ( Fig. 123) or in a hot oven. After finishing the pullet dress it on a long dish containing a layer of poached forcemeat, cover the breasts with a row of slices of truffles and surround the base with clusters of chicken croquettes. (1978). PULLET à LA NANTUA (Poularde à la Nantua). Split down the back of a singed and very clean pullet; bone the breast and legs, leaving on the wing bones; season the inside meats and fill the empty space with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) combined with crawfish butter (No. 573) and prepared red pepper (No. 168) also the crawfish tails cut lengthwise in two. Sew up the pullet, truss and have the breast well rounded, then cover over with slices of fat pork and lay it in a narrow saucepan, cover three-quarters of its height with skimmed stock (No. 194a), adding aromatic herbs and mushroom peelings; cook it in this alone for one hour; it should really only be poached; then drain off the pullet, untie and dress it on a thin layer of forcemeat poached on a dish; cover lightly with velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with a part of the stock and finished with red butter (No. 580). Surround with small timbales of fat rice made in timbale molds (No. 6) letting it be quite white; serve the remainder of the sauce in a sauce -boat. (1979). PULLET à LA PéRIGORD (Poularde à la Périgord). After the pullet has been singed stuff the breast with pounded veal suet seasoned with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and a clove of garlic, adding to it some chopped up truffles. Insert thick slices of truffles between the fat and skin, then wrap the fowl in a matignon (No. 406) and roast it on the spit or oven; unwrap and reduce the matignon with espagnole sauce (No. 414) and Madeira; dress the pullet with some clear gravy (No. 404) and serve the sauce separately. (1980). PULLET à LA PRINTANIèRE-GLAZED (Poularde Glacée à la Printanière). Have a clean, singed pullet; break the breast bone and stuff the breast with grated fat pork mingled with truffle peelings, truss for entrée (No. 178). Scald the breast in boiling water to harden the meat, then dip these scalded parts at once into cold water, wipe dry and lard with fine lardons of larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52). Lay the pullet in a saucepan containing fragments of fat pork, roots and minced onions, salt over and steam for fifteen to twenty minutes, then moisten with two or three gills of stock (No. 194a) and allow it to fall to a glaze. Remoisten to half its height with stock and reduce the liquid slowly to half, finish cooking the pullet in this manner, basting it over frequently; when done it should be glazed to a fine color; drain it off to untruss and dress on a dish, surrounding it on both sides with clusters of new cooked carrots and small glazed onions. Strain and skim the pullet stock, reduce it until it becomes succulent, then thicken with a little good brown sauce (No. 414), serving it in a sauce -boat. (1981). PULLET à LA SEYMOUR (Poularde à la Seymour). Soak a pound and a half of bread in milk, then press out all the liquid and add it to half a pound of very finely chopped beef suet taken from around the kidneys and a seasoning of shallots, chopped parsley, salt, pepper, cream and egg-yolks; use this to stuff the inside and the breast of a pullet, prepared for roasting (No. 179), tie it up and cover with fat pork then roast it before a good fire basting it over frequently, remove, dress and pour on some clear gravy (No. 404), then serve. (1982). PULLET à LA VILLARS (Poularde à la Villars). Truss a pullet as for an entrée (No. 178) with the legs inside; rub over the breasts with half a lemon, cover with bards of fat pork, tie well and poêler it in some good stock (No. 12) keeping it very white. Just when prepared to serve, drain out the pullet, untie and dress it on a trimmed rice croustade foundation fastened on a dish, and surround it with a white garnishing compsed of lamb's sweetbreads, cocks'- kidneys and mushroom heads, dressed in clusters and these alternated with fine slices of red beef tongue cut in points to resemble cocks'-combs. Cover the pullet and garnishings with a little Villars sauce (No. 559) and serve more of it separately. (1983). PULLET à LA ZINGARA (Poularde à la Zingara). Draw two pullets, singe and truss with the legs inside, then tie, stiffen the breast meats and lard them with lardons of tongue and fat pork (No. 3, Fig. 52). Line the bottom of a saucepan with bards of the same pork and slices of veal, round slices of carrots and onions, one whole onion containing a clove and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf; lay the pullets on top, cover over with strong buttered paper and moisten with one quart of stock (No. 194a); boil, skim and cook slowly for an hour to an hour and a half, and thirty minutes before serving allow it to brown to a nice color. Pound four ounces of unsmoked red beef tongue with the same amount of butter, season with pepper and grated nutmeg and dissolve this in a quarter of a pint of meat glaze (No. 402), heat it up and add a little espagnole (No. 414); rub the whole through a tammy and lay this purée on the bottom of a dish with the pullets on top. (1984). PULLET, ANCIENT STYLE (Poularde à l'Ancienne). Draw and singe a pullet, trim and insert slices of truffle between the skin and flesh, truss as for an entrée (No. 178), and lard the legs with rosettes of truffles, bard it nicely and cook in stock (No. 194a) then drain and dress garnishing around with cauliflower and serving a separate well-buttered velouté sauce (No. 415) into which mingle some chopped up truffles. (1985). PULLET, ENGLISH STYLE (Poularde à l'Anglaise). After the pullet is cooked as for ancient style ( No. 1984 ), dress it the same, only changing the garnishing to one of potatoes, carrots, turnips, Brussels sprouts and green peas, the whole cooked in salted water; serve a cream béchamel (No. 411) separately. (1986). PULLET, EGYPTIAN STYLE-BROILED (Poularde Grillés à l'égyptienne). First braise the pullet and when cold cut it up and place it in a vessel with salt, pepper, oil and lemon juice, drain, then immerse in bread-crumbs, saturate with oil and broil over a slow fire. When very hot and of a fine color dress on a layer of rice oriental style ( No. 2978 ). Serve with a separate espagnole sauce (No. 414) into which has been added prepared red pepper (No. 168). (1987). PULLET IN SURPRISE (Poularde en Surprise). Dress a pullet leaving the neck skin very long; break the breast bone in order to remove it and fill the empty breast space with rather firm quenelle forcemeat (No. 89). Truss the pullet with the legs thrust under the skin and wrap the breast around with thin slices of fat pork, braise (No. 12) it the same time as a chicken and then let both get cold. Untruss the pullet, divide the breasts from the carcass, leaving on the legs and a part of the breast, so that it forms a long hollow case; lay it erect on a small baking sheet and fill the bottom of the hollow case with a layer of chicken cream forcemeat (No. 75); poach this for two minutes in a slack oven. Cut the two pullet fillets into large Julienne, also those taken from the cooked chicken; put them in a saucepan with the same quantity of cooked foies-gras and as many cooked truffles both cut up the same size as the chicken meat, mingling some good reduced velouté sauce (No. 415) with the whole; it should remain quite consistent. Dress this on the top of the cream forcemeat in the hollow case, smooth it well rounded on top, and cover with a thick layer of the same forcemeat; smooth this carefully to the shape of the the original breast in order to have the pullet served whole. Decorate both sides of the breast with graduated truffle crescents; butter the forcemeat lightly with a brush and poach in a very slack oven. After removing the pullet, dress it on a dish having its bottom covered with a layer of foundation rice (No. 160) to maintain it in position, and lay on the outer edge a fancy silver border ( Fig. 6); keep the whole hot for ten minutes, then remove and dress on each side a cluster of very white mushrooms; cover them as well as the breast with a little suprême sauce (No. 547) prepared with the stock and serve with a sauce -boatful of the same. FIG. 381. A pullet placed on a decorative dish with white mushrooms around it. (1988). PULLET IVORY WITH DECORATED QUENELLES (Poularde à l'Ivoire aux Quenelles Décorées). Break the breast bone of a cleaned and singed pullet, tie it up as for an entrée (No. 178) and insert a piece of butter into the breast; cover over with bards of fat pork and set it in a saucepan of its own dimensions; moisten to its height with stock (No. 194a), boil the liquid over a hot fire then remove the saucepan on a slower one, cover and finish cooking the pullet for forty-five to sixty minutes. As soon as done to perfection, strain the stock through a napkin into another vessel leaving the pullet to keep warm. Skim the fat from the stock and pour the top gently into another saucepan, then reduce it with some velouté sauce (No. 415) and cream; strain this through a tammy. Dress the pullet, pour the sauce over, and garnish around with chicken quenelles decorated with truffles (No. 154). (1989). PULLET, MODERN STYLE (Poularde à la Moderne). Peel two pounds of fresh truffles and chop up the peelings; pound them with one pound of panada, adding half as much raw foies-gras; continue to pound, putting in eight ounces of grated fat pork, a few eggs and seasoning, then rub the whole through a sieve. Fill the breasts of a pullet with a part of this dressing, using the remainder for the insides; braise (No. 12) with a very little moistening; dress when cooked, and garnish around with cocks'-combs, and the peeled truffles sautéd in butter, and cooked in Madeira. Reduce the braise stock with velouté sauce (No. 415), and just when ready to serve incorporate a few pats of fine butter; pour it over the pullet and garnishings, and serve some well-buttered chicken purée (No. 713) separately. (1990). PULLET, PARISIAN STYLE-STUFFED (Poularde Farcie à la Parisienne). This entrée is dressed on a dish decorated with an open-work border made of cooked paste (No. 10), having the empty space in the center covered with a wooden foundation masked over with noodle paste (No. 142), dried in the air. Draw a pullet through the side, break the breastbone to be able to draw it out, and stuff the breast with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), finished with a few spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385), and a foies-gras salpicon cut in three-eighths of an inch dice, and truffles of the same size; sew the breast skin underneath, and truss the pullet as for entrée (No.178); cover with slices of fat pork and cook in a good stock (No. 194a), keeping it white, and when done properly, drain, untie, and untruss. Lay it on the foundation already placed on the dish; surround it with a garnishing of round truffles cooked at the last moment with Madeira and melted glaze (No. 402). Cover the pullet with some good velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with its own stock and the Madeira and glaze in which the truffles have been cooked, and serve a sauce -boat of the sauce at the same time. FIG. 382. A pullet dressed on a decorative dish with an open-work border. (1991). PULLET TARTAR SAUCE -BROILED (Poularde Grillée à la Sauce Tartare). Draw and truss a pullet as for an entrée (No. 178), then split it down the center of the back, flatten and bread-crumb it English style with egg-yolks and butter beaten together; broil on a slow fire, and serve on a very hot dish; pour a little good gravy (No. 404) under, and send to the table with a separate tartar sauce (No. 631). (1992). TRUFFLED ROASTED PULLET (Poularde Rôtie Truffée). A few days before this is needed draw the pullet through the side and wipe the inside well. Peel twelve to sixteen ounces of fine, fresh truffles, leaving them either whole or cut in two or four according to their size. Melt two ounces of grated fat pork in a saucepan, add to it the truffles and season with fine allspice; fry for two minutes, remove and use this to stuff the breast of the pullet. Sew up the openings and truss, then lay it aside in a cool place. When needed wrap it in buttered paper, run it on a spit (No. 118) or else lay it in a small cradle spit (No. 116) without boring any hole through it whatever, and roast it for one hour, basting frequently. Unwrap it ten minutes before serving to salt over and allow to attain a fine color; take it out, untie and send it to the table with a sauce -boat of good reduced gravy (No. 404) into which has been added the chopped up truffle peelings. (1993). PULLET WITH CROUSTADES FINANCIèRE (Poularde aux Croustades Financière). Draw a pullet, singe and free it well of all the pin feathers adhering to the flesh; truss as for an entrée (No. 178) and rub over with lemon juice; wrap it up in thin slices of fat pork, tying it on firmly. Cover the bottom of a saucepan with bards of fat pork, slices of veal, two slices of raw, smoked ham, a few cut up carrots, two onions, two cloves, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, and season with salt and whole peppers; place it on the fire and let simmer for an hour or more and when done, strain the stock through a napkin, remove its fat and reduce it with two gills of espagnole (No. 414). Drain the pullet, untruss and lay it on a dish, garnishing around with some small timbales (No. 972) made in molds (No. 3, Fig. 137) and filled with financière salpicon (No. 667). (1994). PULLET WITH MUSSELS OR OYSTERS (Poularde aux Moules ou aux Huîtres). Truss and cook a pullet exactly as with the ravioles ( No. 1995 ), wash some mussels in several waters and place them in a covered saucepan over a brisk fire to open; when this occurs remove from their shells, transfer them to another vessel. Fry colorless in butter a little parsley and chives, add two gills of either béchamel (No. 409) or velouté (No. 415), a little stock (No. 194a) and grated nutmeg; boil this sauce up once or twice, then put in either the mussels or else some prepared oysters; just when ready to serve, drain the pullet, untruss and dress. Thicken the sauce with a few raw egg-yolks and fine butter, heat it up without boiling and range the garnishings around the pullet, cover over with a part of the sauce and serve what remains separately. (1995). PULLET WITH RAVIOLES (Poularde aux Ravioles). Draw a fine pullet, singe and clean it well, truss it for an entrée, (No. 178), and cover over with slices of fat pork. Butter the bottom of a braziere ( Fig. 134), lay over some sliced onions and carrots, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, a clove of garlic and two cloves. Moisten with stock (No. 194a) to three-quarters its height, then boil, skim and cook slowly for one hour and a half to two hours; drain off the stock, free it of fat and return this to the braziere to keep the pullet warm. Reduce the stock with velouté (No. 415) if for white, or espagnole (No. 414) if for brown. Dress the pullet on a layer of ravioles ( No. 2976 ) mingled with some velouté or espagnole and parmesan cheese, and serve a separate sauce -boat of the sauce with cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and chopped parsley added. (1996). PULLET GARNISHED WITH WATER -CRESS-ROASTED (Poularde Rôtie au Cresson). Six to nine months old pullets are the most desirable ones especially when quite fat. Roasted poultry should be treated with extreme care, for the roast is the most essential part of a dinner and is partaken of by almost every one. Should the fowl not be barded, then it must be enveloped in a buttered paper and basted frequently while cooking, either with butter or else good poultry fat. Draw and singe a good pullet, truss it for roasting (No. 179) and place it on the spit or in the oven, although roasting on the spit is far the most preferable. When the pullet is nicely done dress and surround with water -cress, serving its own gravy strained and free of fat separately. (1997). BLANQUETTE OF PULLET WITH MUSHROOMS (Blanquette de Poularde aux Champignons). Begin by detaching the legs from a trussed and singed pullet, cut each of these in two, then lay them in a vessel containing water; divide the breast in two and cut each piece into three parts; plunge them also into the cold water with the cut up carcass; let soak for fifteen to twenty minutes then drain and lay them in a saucepan with an onion and a bunch of parsley, and cover plentifully with white chicken broth (No. 188); boil and skim this liquid for twelve minutes then take it off the fire. Prepare a white roux (No. 163) with flour and butter, dilute it with the strained and skimmed pullet broth when partially cold and stir this sauce well until it boils; let it despumate for a quarter of an hour on the side of the fire while removing the fat from the surface. Pare and wipe the pieces of pullet, return them to the saucepan with two dozen turned mushrooms (No. 118); strain the sauce over and finish cooking, finally dressing the pieces of pullet in a deep dish with the mushrooms. Reduce the sauce for a few minutes, thicken with two egg-yolks finishing it off the fire with a piece of butter worked in, also some lemon juice; strain and pour it over the pullet. (1998). PULLETS à LA MONTMORENCY-- BREASTS (Filets de Poularde à la Montmorency). Fasten to a dish a plain or ring-shaped bottom covered with cooked paste (No. 131) or noodle paste (No. 142), having in its center a tin cup equally covered with ornamental pieces of paste, egg it all over and dry in the air. Pare the fillets of five small pullets, suppressing the superficial skin, remove the minion fillets and streak them with truffles, also suppress the pinion bones, trimming them into half hearts rounded on one end and pointed on the other. Place the minion fillets on the larger ones, both slightly bent; Range the fillets on the bottom of a sautoir with a layer of cold clarified butter, being careful to have them all lie in one direction, so that the pointed FIG. 383. A plate of fillets arranged in a ring form with a cup of truffles at the center of the dish. ends extend toward the center. With the cut up pullet carcasses, prepare a little chicken essence (No. 387) and when done and nicely seasoned, strain and skim off the fat and incorporate into it a few gills of good velouté (No. 415) in the act of being reduced. When this sauce is perfect and succulent, finish it with a few spoonfuls of good, raw cream and afterward a piece of fresh butter; keep it in a bain-marie till needed. Just when ready to serve, sprinkle the fillets over with salt and poach them lightly, drain and dress in a circle on the foundation prepared on the dish. Fill the center cup with a garnishing of peeled truffles cooked in Madeira; cover the fillets lightly with the sauce, serving the rest in a sauce -boat. (1999). PULLET à LA MONTPENSIER-MINION FILLETS (Filets Mignons de Poularde à la Montpensier). Streak twelve minion fillets with truffles, shape them into rings two inches in diameter and poach them with butter in a small sautoir. Cut twelve quarter inch thick slices from the middle part of freshly cooked red beef tongue and from each of these slices cut out a round piece the same size as the minion fillet rings; lay these tongue rounds on thin crusts of bread fried in butter and covered with a layer of consistent soubise (No. 723), then mask the tongue rounds with a layer of reduced thick Madeira sauce (No. 492), and on top set the minion fillet rings, one on each, filling in their hollow spaces with a large stuffed Spanish olive standing upright and covered with more of the same Madeira sauce. Dress the hot fillets in a circle and in the center place a garnishing of green asparagus tops ( No. 2693 ). (2000). PULLET BREASTS à LA VARSOVIAN (Filets de Poularde à la Varsovienne). Prepare and cook the pullet fillets as for Montmorency ( No. 1998 ), poach them in butter and dish in a circle intercalating with a croûton of bread fried in butter; fill the center with cèpes sauted with fine herbs and garnish around with small chicken croquettes (No. 877) made crescent-shaped and fried in hot and very white frying fat. Cover the fillets with béchamel (No. 409) into which has been mixed a little meat glaze (No. 402) and lemon juice; have a sauce -boat of the same sauce served at the same time as the fillets. (2001). PULLETS' BREASTS à LA VISCONTI (Filets de Poularde à la Visconti). Pare the fillets of three pullets each one weighing from three to four pounds; suppress the superficial skin covering the minions, also the pinion bones; beat them lightly, giving them the shape of a half heart on one end and pointed on the other; range these fillets on the bottom of a sautoir covered with a layer of clarified, and cold butter being careful to place them all in such a way that the sharp ends point toward the center. Just when ready to serve, salt them over and cook slowly on both sides while turning, then drain and dress in a circle on a ring of poached forcemeat laid on a dish. Serve them with a garnishing in the center composed of cocks'-combs and kidneys, mushrooms and truffles, mingled with suprême sauce (No. 547), into which has been added half its quantity of mushroom purée (No. 722). (2002). PULLETS' MINION FILLETS WITH MACéDOINE (Filets Mignons de Poularde à la Macédoine). Pare twelve pullets' minion fillets, remove the outer skin and inside sinew; pare and streak with three-quarter circles of red beef tongue cut into graduated sizes; range them on the bottom of a sautoir and cover with clarified butter, forming each one into the shape of a crescent, salt, sprinkle with butter, and cook in a slow oven, then drain off. Cover a dish with a garnishing of macédoine vegetables mixed with béchamel (No. 680), and finished with a few spoonfuls of melted glaze (No. 402) and several small pats of fresh butter; surround this with the minion fillets. Fill some crescent-shaped bottomless molds placed on a sheet of buttered paper with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) leveled to the height of the mold with the blade of a knife. Place a sautoir on the fire containing clarified butter, set in the molds having the paper on top, push in the oven to detach the paper; remove this and lay the sautoir on the fire to color the cresent to a fine color on both sides; unmold, drain, and dress the minion fillets on these, and around arrange the macédoine garnishing (No. 680). (2003). PULLETS' LEGS à LA BAYONNAISE (Cuisses de Poularde à la Bayonnaise). Remove the legs from three singed pullets retaining the skin covering the back as far down as the rump; bone them entirely with the exception of the drumstick; put them in a vessel with salt, mignonette, lemon juice and a broken bay leaf; let marinate for three hours, being careful to turn them over several times. Twenty-five minutes before serving, drain and roll each one in flour, fry them in grated fat pork and when they attain a fine color and are well cooked, remove. Slice four medium onions three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; detach the pieces so they form rings, flour over and fry these to a golden brown. Dress the legs in the middle of a dish, cover over with brown poivrade sauce (No. 522) with some grated Bayonne ham added to it, and garnish the whole with the fried onions; trim the stump bones with paper frills (No. 10) and serve immediately. (2004). PULLETS' LEGS DEVILED (Cuisses de Poulardes à la Diable). Generally this dish is prepared with pullets' legs already cooked and then broiled, but raw ones can also be used. Score and season well- pepper should predominate-then roll them in mustard diluted with oil; besprinkle with bread-crumbs and broil on a slow fire, turning them over. Serve with a deviled sauce (No. 459). (2005). PULLETS' LEGS WITH NEW CARROTS (Cuisses de Poulardes aux Carottes Nouvelles). Have three singed pullets and from them remove the legs and the skin covering the back, bone them entirely, retaining the drum sticks; stuff them with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and cooked fine herbs (No. 385), shaping them like a cutlet; cover with slices of fat pork and braise them in a little mirepoix stock with white wine (No. 419) into which add six dozen small new blanched carrots, but in case there be no new ones procurable use others, cutting them up to represent the new ones. When these are cooked, lift them out and place them in a saucepan with a little butter, chicken glaze (No. 398) and fine herbs. Strain the stock, free it of fat and reduce it with espagnole sauce (No. 414) to the consistency of half-glaze; skim well the surface of the sauce; dress the legs in the center of a dish with the new or other carrots around, pour over some of the sauce and serve the remainder of it separately. (2006). SQUABS à LA BRIAND (Pigeonneaux à la Briand). Soak bread-crumbs in a little broth; press it to extract well the moisture, then lay it in a bowl with a quarter as much good butter, a few egg-yolks and one whole egg; work this preparation well, seasoning with salt, pepper, parsley and onions chopped and blanched; use this for filling the squabs, then truss them for an entrée (No. 178) and run them on the spit to roast, being careful to baste over occasionally with butter; untie them, remove the larding pork covering the breasts and lay them on a bed of sautéd tomatoes ( No. 2841 ). Serve a brown sauce (No. 414) separately into which mix Worcestershire sauce, meat glaze (No. 402), chopped parsley and tarragon vinegar. (2007). SQUABS CRAPAUDINE-BROILED (Pigeonneaux Grillés Crapaudine). After a squab has been well drawn, singed and thoroughly cleaned, cut each side from the pinion of the wing to the tip of the breast; open without detaching the parts, having the legs and back on one end, and the breast on the other; beat well to flatten, season and dip in melted butter; roll them in bread-crumbs and broil slowly. While this is progressing chop up one shallot exceedingly fine, blanch, drain and fry it colorless in butter, add to it some clear gravy (No. 404) and a little espagnole sauce (No. 414) and white wine; season and then pour this sauce into a dish, dress the squabs on it and surround with slices of lemon cut in halves. FIG. 384. A plate of squabs surrounded with slices of lemon cut in halves. (2008). SQUABS à LA CRISPI (Pigeonneaux à la Crispi). Bone the backs of some small squabs, fill the insides with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), containing mushrooms, ham and truffles cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, enclosing it well in the birds. Lay some rings in a sautoir already garnished with slices of fat pork, and place the squabs inside these rings, cover with more slices of the pork and moisten with a very little mirepoix stock (No. 419) with Madeira wine, and when cooked place a round tin plate on the squabs with a weight on top to flatten the birds slightly. Dress them crown-shaped and cover over with green ravigote sauce (No. 531); lay a cooked trussed crawfish and serve more of the sauce separately. (2009). SQUABS à LA FLOUR ENS (Pigeonneaux à la Flour ens). Procure eight squabs, draw, singe and truss as for an entrée (No. 178), or one squash for each guest Chop up very fine eight ounces of beef marrow, mix with it eight ounces of butter, some chopped parsley, finely cut up chives, eight chopped tarragon leaves, a little crushed and chopped garlic, salt, pepper, four ounces of lean ham cut into one-eighth inch squares, four ounces of bread-crumbs and two whole eggs. Fill the squabs with this dressing and roast them either on the spit or in the oven for thirty minutes, basting them frequently. When done, untruss, dress in a circle and pour in a garnishing of sweetbreads and artichoke bottoms cut in three-sixteenth inch squares to which has been added some espagnole sauce (No. 414). Serve some of this sauce separately. (2010). SQUABS à L'IMPROMPTU-SAUTéD (Pigeonneaux Sautés à l'Impromptu). After the squabs are prepared the same as for broiling, fry them in clarified butter, and when done, dress. Fry and cook colorless a teaspoonful of chopped shallots for each pigeon, add to it a little flour, moisten lightly with stock (No. 194a) and white wine, boil and skim; reduce this rapidly over a hot fire and just when ready to serve, incorporate a little fine butter, lemon juice and chopped parsley; pour this over the squabs and serve at once. (2011). SQUABS à LA STANISLAS-STUFFED (Pigeonneaux Farcis à la Stanislas). Fry eight ounces of bacon cut in three-sixteenth of an inch squares in butter, also as much fresh mushrooms sliced the same size, with a little chopped shallot and parsley. Fill the pigeons with this preparation and roast them. Have as many round truffles as there are pigeons, each one inch in circumference, peel and use the parings to pound with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), and with this make some quenelles the shape and size of large verdal olives; poach and put them into an allemande sauce (No. 407) with a little meat glaze (No. 402), also the peeled truffles and some channeled mushrooms (No. 118). When the squabs are roasted untruss and dish up with the garnishings ranged around. (2012). SQUABS, AMERICAN STYLE-STUFFED (Pigeonneaux Farcis à l'Américaine). Have six squabs, draw, singe lightly and truss as for roasting (No. 179); fill the insides with an American bread dressing (No. 61), and cover the breasts with thin slices of fat pork; roast them either in the oven or on the spit; they take about twenty minutes when stuffed and fifteen when not. Dress and surround with slices of broiled bacon, pouring a little clear gravy (No. 404) around. (2013). SQUABS, COLBERT SAUCE -BROILED (Pigeonneaux, Grillés Sauce Colbert). Select small squabs and after they have been plucked, drawn and singed, clean them nicely and cut the necks from the bodies; truss with the legs thrust inside and split them down through the back the whole length as far as the rump; beat the breasts to have them quite flat, pare, then season with salt and mignonette; immerse them in melted butter and roll in bread-crumbs; then broil over a slow fire for about ten minutes, laying them with the breast side downward and turning them over as fast as they attain a good color, finish cooking and dress with some gravy (No. 404) poured over or else serve them on a Colbert sauce (No. 451); garnish around with slices of lemon cut in halves. (2014). SQUABS, ENGLISH STYLE (Pigeonneaux à l'Anglaise). Truss eight squabs as for an entrée (No. 178), wrap them up in bards of fat pork. Lay them in a saucepan lined with thin slices of ham and moisten to their height with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); cover with a round sheet of buttered paper and place the lid on tight. Boil and simmer until the squabs are thoroughly done; which will take about twenty-five minutes. Prepare eight oval-shaped bread croûtons, three inches long by two wide, make an incision all around a quarter of an inch from the edge and to half their depth, then fry in clarified butter, and empty out the center. Dress the squabs on these croûtons, range on a dish and place between each a vegetable garnishing composed of carrots trimmed to imitate new ones, then blanched and cooked in broth; turnips shaped like corks with the edges rounded, then blanched and cooked in white stock (No. 194a), small green peas boiled in salted water with fresh mint, tossing with butter after draining, and string beans boiled in salted water and finished with butter, fill in the center with a fine cauliflower boiled in salted water and having butter poured over. Serve a York sauce (No. 563) separately. (2015). SQUABS, NEW YORK STYLE (Pigeonneaux à la New Yorkaise). Have some squabs drawn, singed, cleaned, and trussed for an entrée (No. 178); fry them white in butter and dredge over a little flour; fry for a few moments longer without browning, then moisten with beef stock (No. 194a); add a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, small onions, portato balls made five-eighths of an inch in circumference, and small half inch dice of bacon fried in butter. A few moments before serving, add some quenelles shaped to represent large verdal olives either of godiveau or else of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which mingle chopped sweetbreads and parsley; poach these in boiling water. Just when ready to serve, remove the parsley, thicken the stew with raw egg-yolks diluted with cream, and incorporate a piece of fresh butter, and dress the squabs in the middle of a dish with the garnishing around. (2016). SQUABS WITH TARRAGON (Pigeonneaux à l'Estragon). After the squabs have been drawn and singed, split them lengthwise in two down the back, but do not separate the parts; beat lightly, and season with pepper and salt. Put two ounces of butter into a sauté pan, and after it begins to heat, lay in the squabs, the breast side downward, and set it on a brisk fire; when browned on one side, turn them to do likewise on the other; they take about twelve minutes to cook. Dress and pour off half the butter in the pan, and to the remainder add a pinch of flour, stir well, pour in some clear gravy (No. 404), two tablespoonfuls of good tarragon vinegar, and salt; let the sauce give one or two boils, season it nicely, and pour it over the squabs. (2017). SQUABS WITH FIGARO SAUCE -FRIED (Pigeonneaux Frits à la Sauce Figaro). Singe and draw some young, tender pigeons; truss as for an entrée (No. 178), then wrap them in slices of fat pork. Butter a saucepan, line it with sliced carrots and onions, and a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123); lay the squabs on top. Moisten to half their height and let the liquid fall to a glaze, then remoisten and boil very slowly until cooked to perfection, adding half a bottleful of white wine, pouring it in at two or three different intervals. Let the squabs become cold, then split them in two, pare nicely and dip them in frying batter (No. 137), and fry to a fine color, having the birds well heated throughout. Drain, wipe off, and salt; dress them on a folded napkin with a bunch of parsley on top. Serve at the same time but separately a figaro mayonnaise sauce (No. 609). (2018). SQUABS IN EARTHENWARE SAUCEPAN OR STUFFED--ROASTED (Pigeonneaux Rôtis à la Casserole ou Pigeonneaux Farcis Rôtis au Four). In Earthenware Saucepan. --Procure six squabs, draw, singe and truss well with the legs thrust inside, keeping them a pretty shape. Put two ounces of butter into a small earthenware saucepan and when hot, add the squabs and roast them in this over a good fire or in the oven; when done, drain and pour off the fat, detach the glaze with a little gravy (No. 404), untruss the squabs, put them back in the pan, dress, strain the sauce over them and serve in the earthen ware pan. Stuffed. --Steep a piece of bread in broth and at once squeeze out all the moisture; lay it in a saucepan and add to it as much chopped beef suet, a few egg-yolks and one whole egg; stir this preparation with a spoon and season with salt, pepper, chopped parsley and onions. Break the breastbones of three young, drawn and c lean squabs, fill the empty space with the prepared dressing and roast them quickly on the spit, basting over with melted butter. Salt over when ready to take out, untruss and dress on a dish, garnishing them if so desired with a little very green water -cress seasoned with salt and vinegar, and serve some gravy (No. 404) separately. (2019). SQUABS, BREASTS à LA DUXELLE-STUFFED (Filets de Pigeonneaux Farcis à la Duxelle). Pare eight to ten breasts of squabs; split them in two through their thickness without detaching the parts, but simply to form a pocket, fill this in with a little duxelle with raw truffles (No. 461), close the opening, season the breasts, dip them in beaten eggs mixed with cooked fine herbs, (No. 385) roll in fresh bread-crumbs and then in melted butter and broil over a slow fire. Dress the breasts crown-shaped on a dish with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) to which has been added butter, lemon juice and chopped parsley. (2020). SQUAB FRITTERS, OPORTO SAUCE (Beignets de Pigeonneaux, Sauce Oporto). Pluck, draw and singe some nice squabs, free them of all their feathers, cut off the stumps and pinions, then divide them in two lengthwise and afterward split them across on the bias to obtain two pieces from each, one from the legs and from the wings; lay them in a vessel and season with salt, whole peppers, nutmeg, thyme, bay leaf, sliced onions, lemon juice and a little oil, leave to marinate for two hours, turning them over occasionally, take each piece out and dip it in frying batter (No. 137), then plunge into very hot frying fat, drain, salt and dress them in a pyramid form on a folded napkin; serve separately a currant sauce (No. 455) with Port wine. (2021). SQUABS à LA CAROLINA (Pigeonneaux à la Caroline). Cut up some squabs after being dressed in six pieces each; have the same quantity of blanched terrapin of the same size; place them in a saucepan and moisten with half Madeira and half stock (No. 194a); season with salt and pepper and boil up once, then finish cooking in a slack oven for about thirty minutes; when done thicken the sauce with hard boiled egg-yolks pounded with as much butter and then passed through a sieve, add a little white wine and season highly. Roll well the meat in the sauce to have it thick, and serve the whole inside a border made of rice boiled in salted water, and fresh butter added, for ten minutes or until it ceases to crackle between the teeth, then drain and mingle it with a little béchamel (No. 409). Mold this rice in a liberally buttered plain border mold ( Fig. 139), push it into the oven for a few moments, invert it on a dish, remove the mold and fill in the center with the stew. (2022). SQUABS à LA VESTAL (Pigeonneaux à la Vestale). Mix in with some veal godiveau (No 85) truffles, chives and parsley all well chopped; range this forcemeat in a plain well-buttered border mold (No. 189) and poach in a slack oven. Cut some squabs in four, fry them in butter to a nice color, drain off the grease, add allemande sauce (No. 407) and small mushroom heads; fill the inside of the unmolded border with this stew; bestrew over with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan; pour melted butter on it and brown the whole in a hot oven serving when of a fine color. (2023). TURKEY HEN (Dinde). The hen turkey is the female of the gobbler; it hatches on the ground and is very prolific. The meat of the hen turkey is far more delicate than that of the male, therefore it is more frequently selected for stuffing with truffles or chestnuts. In order to have it good it must be young and raised on the barn-yard. Its meat is better in winter time after leaving it hang for a certain period; it can be roasted or else cooked in its own gravy, both ways are excellent, but if old then it should be boiled. Wild turkeys abound principally in North America and feed on fruits and green acorns; their meat is far more delicate and succulent than that of the domestic turkey. The eggs are much liked either boiled or cooked in an omelet. (2024). TURKEY à LA CHIPOLATA-STUFFED (Dinde Farcie à la Chipolata). Select a small turkey not too fat but quite fleshy; bone the entire front part leaving the breast-skin as long as possible, also the thighs; diminish the thickness of the fillets and place these pieces where there is no meat so as to equalize the thickness of the meat. Season the inside of the breasts. Cut lengthwise two veal minion fillets and fry them in butter, season and throw over some cooked fine herbs (No. 385), then let get cold; mix in with these a few fillets of veal udder, and of cooked ham and truffles, also an equal quantity of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89). Fill the empty space with the garnishing and forcemeat mixed; press the forcemeat into the skin of the turkey and let it assume its original shape; braise it for an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half on a very slow fire, and at the last moment glaze, drain off and untruss the turkey. Dress it on a rice croustade foundation ( Fig. 9a) and surround with a chipolata garnishing (No. 657) into which a good espagnole sauce (No. 414) with Madeira wine has been added reduced with the braise stock; pour a part of this sauce over the turkey, and serve the remainder separately. (2025). WILD TURKEY à LA DELAGRANGE-STUFFED (Dinde Sauvage Farcie à la Delagrange). Singe and draw a young wild turkey, then truss for an entrée (No. 178). Prepare a dressing composed of bread-crumbs soaked in warm water and the liquid entirely extracted, season with salt, fine spices, sage, chopped onions fried in butter, and finely chopped beef marrow; add some roasted chestnuts, and broiled sausages free of skin, and cut into slices. When all the ingredients are thoroughly mixed, fill the turkey with it and braise in a saucepan garnished with bards of pork, and moistened with a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); when nearly done, glaze, drain, untruss, and dress on a layer of Piedmontese risot (No. 739); serve with béchamel sauce (No. 409) reduced with the mirepoix stock, thickening with raw egg-yolks and cream; when ready to serve incorporate a little chicken glaze (No. 398), and a piece of fine butter. Pour part of this sauce over the turkey serving the rest in a sauce -boat. (2026). SMALL TURKEY à LA FINANCIèRE-LARDED (Petite Dinde Piquée à la Financière). The turkey represented in Fig. 385, the recipe of which is given below, is simply dressed on a rice croustade foundation ( Fig. 9a), cut an inch and a quarter thick. Prepare a financière garnishing composed of whole truffles, mushroom heads, large cocks'-combs and four large chicken quenelles molded on buttered paper and decorated with truffles; keep them warm. Select a good, small fleshy turkey not too fat, break the breastbone in order to draw it out, and fill up the empty space with grated fat pork pounded with fresh truffle peelings; sew up the skin, truss it with the legs inside and lard the fillets and thighs with fine shreds of larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52). Put the turkey in a small braziere lined with fragments of fat pork, roots and minced onions; moisten to half its height with good broth (No. 194a) and reduce the liquid quickly to half, finish cooking the turkey quite slowly while basting frequently; at the last moment allow it to brown nicely in the oven. Strain and skim the stock, reduce it to a half-glaze, incorporating into it slowly some good espagnole (No. 414) that is in the act of being reduced, adding at the same time a few spoonfuls of good dry white wine. Untruss the turkey, dress it on the foundation and surround it with the prepared garnishings dressed according to the illustration; glaze the truffles and pour a little of the sauce over the cocks'-combs and mushrooms. Serve the prepared sauce at the same time as the relevé which is intended to be placed on the table. FIG. 385. A decorative plate of turkey garnished with truffles, mushroom heads, cocks'-combs and chicken quenelles. (2027). TURKEY à LA SARTIGES-STUDDED (Dinde Cloutés à la Sartiges). Singe, draw and truss a ten pound turkey as for an entrée (No. 178), stuff the insides with a quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) mixed with cooked fine herbs (No. 385); dip the breasts in boiling water to stretch the skin, drive twelve truffle nails into each fillet at equal distances apart and arranged symmetrically in rows of six each, then wrap the turkey in slices of fat pork fastening them on with a string. Cover the bottom of a saucepan with fat pork, lay in the turkey and moisten to a little above its height with a mirepoix stock (No. 419), boil, skim and cook in a moderate oven. When the bird is done drain it off and dress it on a rice foundation. Have a garnishing of cocks'-combs truffles, quenelles, and cèpes dressed in clusters around the turkey; strain and skim off all the fat from the stock, reduce it to a succulent sauce with some espagnole (No. 414) added; pour a part of this over the garnishings and the remainder to be served separately with Spanish olives stuffed and minced mushrooms. FIG. 386. A turkey served with cocks'-combs truffles, quenelles, and cèpes on a decorative dish. (2028). TURKEY, AMERICAN STYLE-ROASTED (Dinde Rôtie à l'Américaine). Draw, singe and truss a turkey weighing from eight to twelve pounds, selecting a very fresh one. Clean the insides thoroughly, having it well washed and dried, then fill with a bread stuffing (No. 61); wrap it well in strong buttered paper and lay it on the spit, running the iron rod of the spit between the loins and the string that is used for trussing the turkey; fasten the legs firmly to this rod and roast before a good fire for about an hour to an hour and a half. Fifteen minutes before serving, unwrap the turkey, that is to remove the paper and let it assume a fine color while continuing to baste; it should be a golden brown and cooked to perfection. Dress and pour around a little gravy (No. 404) and then garnish with very green water cress; serve with a sauce -boat of cranberry sauce (No. 598). (2029). TURKEY, FRENCH STYLE (Dinde à la Française). Choose a small fat turkey; draw, singe and clean it well, extracting all the pin feathers; break the breastbone, remove it and fill the breast with an Engish bread dressing (No. 61); sew up the skin underneath and truss it for an entrée (No. 178); lay it in a braziere of the same dimensions as the turkey, having it lined with slices of fat pork, moisten to half its height with mirepoix stock (No. 419) and let the liquid come to a boil; then cover the turkey with a thick buttered paper and cook for an hour and a half to two hours with the braziere well closed; simmer slowly while basting frequently. At the last moment drain off the turkey, untruss and dress on a rice foundation ( Fig. 9a) surrounding it with clusters of cauliflower, mushroom heads, braised celery, glazed carrots and stuffed cucumbers, or else both, all being arranged in separate groups. Cover the breasts with some velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with the stock already strained and skimmed, serving at the same time a sauce -boat of the same sauce. FIG. 387. A plate of turkey surrounded with cauliflower, mushroom heads, celery, carrots and cucumbers in separate groups. (2030). TURKEY WITH CèPES (Dinde aux Cèpes). Pick out four dozen good unopened cèpes weighing about four pounds, having them fresh, sound, and of equal size; cut off and peel the stalks, chop them up and cook in butter with a little chopped onion. Prepare a fine hash with one pound of veal, and one pound of fresh fat pork, seasoning it highly, add the chopped cèpes and a handful of soaked and pressed out bread-crumbs. Crack the breastbone of a fat turkey, remove the bone and fill in the empty space with the prepared dressing, sew the skin underneath and truss for entrée (No. 178). Lay the bird in a buttered stew-pan covering the bottom with small squares of bacon; surround it with the peeled and seasoned cèpes heads, and a bunch of parsley; season and moisten with a quart of stock (No. 194a); baste the turkey with butter, salt well, and place it in the oven to leave until the moistening is entirely reduced, then moisten again to half its height with more stock; boil, close the pan, and keep it cooking in the oven for three hours, pouring in a little broth at times while basting it occasionally. At the last moment drain off the turkey to untruss and dress on a dish surrounding it with the cèpes and bacon. Strain the stock, skim it free of fat, then thicken and reduce with some good béchamel, (No. 409) and a few spoonfuls of half-glaze (No. 400). Pour a part of this over the turkey and the surplus in a sauce -boat. (2031). TURKEY TRUFFLED AND GARNISHED WITH BLACK OLIVES (Dinde Truffée et Garnie d' Olives Noires). Have a fine fat tender turkey weighing about eight or ten pounds; truffle it three days before-hand with two pounds of leaf lard, three bay leaves, thyme, salt, pepper, a very little crushed and chopped garlic, and two chopped up shallots. Peel three pounds of truffles, chop up the parings, and place all together in a vessel, cutting the large truffles into pieces. Strain the melted lard over these and let get cold, stirring the whole well together with a gill of brandy, and season. Fill up the turkey with this and insert a slice of thin fat pork between the breast skin and the meat; place on this fat pork slices of truffle. Truss for roasting (No. 179) and wrap in buttered paper; lay it on a cradle spit ( Fig. 116), and cook for an hour and a half to two hours, basting frequently; unwrap it fifteen minutes before serving; salt and let acquire a good color. Dress on a long dish, garnish around with black olives, and serve separately some clear gravy (No. 404) taken from the drippings well skimmed and strained. (2032). TURKEY WITH WHITE OYSTER SAUCE (Dinde à la Sauce Blanche aux Huîtres). Truss an eight pound turkey to serve for an entrée (No. 178), put it into a saucepan, moisten to cover and two inches higher with stock (No. 194a) and let boil; skim, season with salt, whole peppers, and a bunch of parsley garnished with bay leaf; boil this slowly for one hour or more until thoroughly cooked; when done, drain, untruss, and dress it either whole on an oval rice border, or cut up and placed inside a rice border. Serve the turkey with a white sauce (No. 562), or the same sauce containing small lightly blanched and well drained oysters and raw fine herbs. A part of the sauce should be poured over the turkey, and the remainder served in a sauce -boat. (2033). TURKEY GIBLETS à LA SALAMANDER (Abatis de Dinde à la Salamandre). Bone the cleaned pinions and cut them into half inch squares; divide the neck at every joint and put all the pieces into a saucepan with clarified butter (No. 16); fry and besprinkle with flour, and cook again for a few moments; moisten with stock (No. 194a) and season with salt, pepper, a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123), and some small onions. When the meats are done add the liver after frying it in butter, also some minced mushrooms; suppress the parsley and onions, thicken the sauce with a few egg-yolks, cream and butter, then put back the onions. Butter a baking dish, bestrew over with bread-crumbs and fill it with the stewed giblets; dredge bread -raspings and grated parmesan on top, pour over butter and brown under a salamander ( Fig. 123), then serve. (2034). TURKEY GIBLETS, PEASANT STYLE (Abatis de Dinde à la Paysanne). These are composed of the pinions, liver, neck, legs, heart, gizzard and head. Prepare a garnishing of turnips, carrots and onions; cut the turnips into clove of garlic shapes; the carrots are to be cut with a root spoon into three-quarter inch balls, and the small onions pared to the same size as the carrots, the three to be blanched separately for a few moments in salted water; drain the turnips and brown them in the pan over a good fire with butter, salt and a pinch of sugar; drain the carrots, cook them again in stock (No. 194a) and let fall to a glaze as well as the onions. Take the giblets from two fresh turkeys, put the livers aside and clean the remaining parts; scald them simply to stiffen, pare and wipe on a cloth. Cut in three eighths of an inch squares six ounces of bacon without the rind, fry colorless in butter and when melted remove the bacon, leaving the fat in the saucepan, then put in the giblets and fry over a good fire while stirring with a spoon; season, and after the meats are nicely browned, besprinkle with a heaping spoonful of flour and let cook for a few moments, continuing to stir. Remove the saucepan from the fire and moisten the meats with a little stock (No. 194a) and a little white wine; stir the sauce until it comes to a boil and cover the saucepan; cook the stew over a good fire for six minutes adding a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123) and an onion. Pare the pieces, strain the sauce and return them to the saucepan with the sauce poured over; let cook for one hour then put in the carrots, turnips, onions and bacon. Finish cooking the whole together, and a quarter of an hour before taking from the fire put in the turkey livers without the gall, and finally skim the fat from the sauce; strain it into a saucepan, let reduce, season to taste and dress the pieces of giblet in a deep dish; surround with the turnips, carrots, onions and bacon, pour the sauce over and serve. (2035). TURKEY -GRENADES-à LA JULES VERNE (Grenades de Dinde à la Jules Verne). Raise and pare the fillets from one or two turkeys weighing eight pounds each; shape them into half hearts rounded on one side and pointed on the other; remove the skin and lard the tops with small lardons of larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52), and then braise in mirepoix stock (No. 419) being careful to baste occasionally and to glaze toward the end so that they assume a fine color. Dress them on a rice socle placed in the center of a dish, pour over the strained and reduced stock, lay on top croustades made of thin foundation paste (No. 152), having them one inch and three quarters in diameter and filled with a fresh mushroom salpicon cut in quarter inch squares and fried in butter; then moisten with a little Madeira and let fall to a glaze; garnish around with half-spherical quenelles the same circumference as the croustade, having it decorated with truffles. Serve in a sauce -boat a velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with cream and butter just at the last moment. (2036). TURKEY LEGS WITH NOODLES, MILANESE (Cuisses de Dinde aux Nouilles à la Milanaise). Bone the legs of a young turkey, leaving half of the drumstick bone to use for a handle; fill up the boned parts with chicken forcemeat (No. 62) into which mingle finely chopped truffles and mushrooms; sew up to inclose well the dressing. Line a sautoir with bards of fat pork and lay the stuffed legs on top; moisten with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419), and braise slowly, basting and glazing until a fine color is obtained. Dress the legs on a garnishing prepared with noodles (No. 142) velouté sauce (No. 415), tomatoes, parmesan cheese and strips of red beef tongue and mushrooms added. A half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with tomato essence accompanies this dish, but it is served separately. (2037). TURKEY-BREASTS OR FILLETS-à LA DONOVAN (Ailes ou Filets de Dinde à la Donovan). Raise the fillets or breasts from two turkeys, retaining the upper skin; fry them in butter and moisten with a little mirepoix stock (No. 419), then allow it to fall to a glaze; moisten once more and cook very slowly, barely moistened, so that when done the liquid is reduced to a mere glaze. Range the fillets in the center of a dish on a rice socle and garnish around with clusters of quenelles molded with a coffeespoon (No. 155), mushroom heads and small croustades filled with Montglas (No. 747). A half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Madeira sauce to be served separately. (2038). TURKEY WINGS FRICASSED AND BAKED (Fricassée d'Ailerons de Dinde au Gratin). Select a dozen and a half large young turkey wings; singe, bone as far as the first joint and remove the second joint; stuff them with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) with fine cooked herbs (No. 385) and sew them up. Line a flat buttered saucepan with onions and carrots, slices of fat pork and a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123), range the wings on top larded across with two rows of larding pork (No. 4, Fig. 52) or else leave them unlarded, and then moisten with stock (No. 194a), seasoning with salt and whole peppers, cover over with buttered paper and let boil. Push the saucepan into a slack oven and three-quarters of an hour after add six small onions for each wing, previously blanched in boiling water. When the whole is cooked take out both the onions and wings, strain the stock through a sieve, add to it some velouté sauce (No. 415), and reduce together; thicken the sauce with raw egg-yolks and fresh butter, pass it through a tammy, season to taste. Put a part of this sauce into a deep china dish capable of being placed in the oven, lay the wings and onions on top, and pour over the remainder of the sauce; bestrew with bread-crumbs and parmesan and let acquire a good color while in the oven; drain and serve the dish on another covered with a folded napkin. (2039). TURKEY WINGS WITH CELERY AND CHESTNUTS (Ailerons de Dinde au Céleri et aux Marrons). Take twelve scalded and very white wings without any pin feathers whatever, singe and bone all the fleshy first part, then soak them. Line a saucepan with slices of fat pork, lay on the wings and moisten with mirepoix stock (No. 419) placing more fat pork on top. For young turkey wings it will take three-quarters of an hour, but when the birds begin to get harder the wings require one hour or more cooking. Just when ready to serve, drain well and range them in a dish, strain, skim and reduce the stock, clarify, strain once more through a napkin. Have some chestnuts braised with celery prepared as follows: Put some skinned chestnuts into a saucepan with as much celery stalks cut in inch and a quarter squares, having it already well blanched; moisten with stock (No. 194a) and cook on a slow fire until both chestnuts and celery can crush easily under a pressure. Reduce in a sautoir a little espagnole sauce (No. 414) with the stock and pour it over the chestnuts, then finish cooking slowly, season to taste, and pour over the wings when ready. (2040). TURKEY WINGS WITH RISOT-STUFFED (Ailerons de Dinde Farcis au Risot). Choose two dozen large turkey wings; singe and bone as far as the second joint, leaving on the tip; fill up the empty space with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) with fine herbs and sew up the opening with thread; scald them in boiling water to stiffen the skin and refresh to pare; range them in a sautoir lined with fragments of salt pork, onions and roots, salt over and moisten to half their height with stock (No. 194a); let fall to a glaze and remoisten to their height with more broth and a little white wine, cover with fat pork and finish to cook very slowly. Apart from this prepare a good risot with half a pound of rice and some stock (No. 194a); when done remove and finish with butter, parmesan cheese and two spoonfuls of tomato sauce (No. 549). Drain the wings, untruss and cut off the tips; dress the risot in a vegetable dish and the wings on top, pour some of their own stock over after skimming and reducing it well and serve remainder in a sauce -boat. (2041). TURKEY GOBBLER STUFFED WITH CHESTNUTS (Dindon Farci aux Marrons). The gobbler turkey is a large-sized bird having a medium convex shaped beak and is specially known by the erectile mammilated carnucle or fleshy membrane covering its head and extending over a part of the beak and neck. The turkey's tail is provided with fourteen distinct feathers that can be raised in such a manner as to form a semi-wheel. Its plumage is of a fine black or greenish color mingled with gravy and white; they usually weigh from six to eighteen pounds. Draw, singe, pare, truss and remove the breastbone from a young gobbler turkey, the same as for roasting. Chop up ten ounces of kernel of veal and sixteen ounces of pig's leaf lard, both to be chopped separately then mixed together; season with salt and spice, adding a little shallot and the liver both well chopped. Put this into a mortar with a gill of stock (No. 194a), pound well, remove and place in a sautoir to cook for fifteen minutes, let cool and stir in sixty cooked chestnuts; stuff the turkey with this roast, dress and pour over a little good gravy (No. 404). (2042). SPRING OR YOUNG TURKEY, PURéE OF ARTICHOKES -LARDED AND ROASTED (Dindonneau Piqué et Rôti à la Purée d'Artichauts). A spring turkey by its delicate flesh is considered one of the most desirable meats, especially if stuffed with peeled Perigord truffles. The spit ( Fig. 118) is the only manner worthy of cooking this bird; it is at its best when two or three months old. Dress two young turkeys, each one to weigh about six pounds; truss for roasting (No. 179) and singe them and lard the breasts with two rows of larding pork on each fillet and two rows on each leg (No. 3, Fig. 52). Three-quarters of an hour to one hour before serving roast them either on the spit or in the oven, basting frequently with butter; when done and of a fine color, salt them over and remove on a dish to untruss and carve, first detaching the two legs and fillet pieces; cut each of these in pieces, then glaze and dress. Serve with a separate sauce -boat of good gravy and a vegetable dish of purée sauce -boat of good gravy and a vegetable dish of purée of artichokes (No. 704). (2043). SPRING TURKEY WITH TURNIPS-WINGS (Filets ou Ailes de Dindonneau aux Navets). Procure a spring turkey of about eight pounds; draw, singe and clean it well, suppressing all its pin feathers, remove the breasts with the skin and pinion bone attached; fry in butter some carrots, onions, lean salt pork, thyme and bay leaf, then moisten with stock (No. 194a). Line a flat saucepan or sautoir with bards of fat pork, strain the above stock and pour in a third part of it, add the fillets, and let the liquid reduce to a glaze, then add another third part and set the pan in the oven to cook while basting plentifully and adding more stock as fast as it reduces, finally glazing to a beautiful color. Aside from this blanch and cook some turnips in stock and sugar having just sufficient moisture that when done they have fallen to a glaze; they should first be cut into cork-shaped pieces with square angles. After they are finished cooking, put in a little meat glaze (No. 402) and fresh butter; strain the stock, remove its fat and reduce it with as much velouté sauce (No. 415), thickening just when ready with raw egg-yolks diluted in stock, and finishing by stirring in a piece of fresh butter. Lay the breasts in the center of a dish, with the turnips around and cover the whole with the sauce. (2044). SPRING TURKEY WITH WATER -CRESS-ROASTED OR BROILED (Dindonneau Rôti ou Grillé au Cresson). Draw a young spring turkey, singe and truss, bard it with thin slices of fat pork and let roast for half to three-quarters of an hour at a moderate, but well regulated fire, basting it over frequently with butter, at the last moment salt it over, remove, untruss and lay it on an oval dish pouring over a little of the dripping-pan fat well skimmed and strained through a sieve. Surround it with water -cress seasoned with salt and vinegar. Broiled Spring Turkey. --Should it be a small young one, then prepare it the same as a chicken, the time of cooking depending upon its size; when done and of a fine color, dress on a hot dish and pour over some lightly melted maître d'hôtel butter (No. 581). (2045). PAUPIETTES OF YOUNG TURKEY, SOUVENIR (Paupiettes de Dindonneau au Souvenir). Remove the nerves from the minion fillets, beat them lightly and cut into oblongs, season and spread over the surface a layer of well seasoned quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) into which has been mixed some chopped truffles, roll them cork-shaped and place in buttered tin paupiette rings ranged on a buttered baking sheet having the bottoms of the rings covered with croûtons of bread fried on one side only and of the same dimensions as the rings, the unfried side resting on the buttered sheet; on top of each place a channeled mushroom head (No. 118) and cover this with a bard of fat pork, then cook in a slack oven. Have braised as many turkey legs as there are paupiettes and when done to perfection, drain and cut them into small pieces; enclose each one of these in some quenelle forcemeat with cooked fine herbs (No. 385); bread-crumb, dip in eggs and fry to a fine color, then glaze. Dress the paupiettes in a circle, fill the center with the fried legs and serve with a separate cream soubise sauce (No. 543). FIG. 388. An illustration of minion fillets cut into oblongs with paupiettes arranged in a circle on top of it. GAME (Gibier). (2046). BEAR STEAKS BROILED (Tranches d'Ours Grillées). Bear's meat when young can be broiled and after it is cooked, has much the same flavor as beef. Cut some slices from off the thigh, season with salt and coat over with oil, then broil; when done dress on a sharp sauce (No. 538) with grated horseradish added. (2047). BLACKBIRDS à LA DEGRANGE (Merles à la Degrange). Procure eight blackbirds, draw and singe, suppress the feet and necks. Fry in butter some carrots, onions, ham and fat pork cut in three-sixteenth inch squares, also parsley, thyme, bay leaf and six chicken livers; when well cooked, lay aside to cool, then pound into a pulp with a little bread-crumb and seasoning; press this through a sieve and use this forcemeat for filling the blackbirds; fry them in butter, drain it off and replace it by a little glaze (No. 402), lemon juice, chopped truffles, parsley and a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413). Dress the birds inside a rice border finished with butter and parmesan cheese, and pour the sauce over the birds. (2048). BOAR ( WILD PIG ) TENDERLOINS ROASTED, HAUNCH, ROBERT SAUCE, CUTLETS SAUTéD (Sanglier (Cochon Sauvage) Cuissot, Sauce Robert, Filets Rôtis Côtelettes Sautées). Only young ones can be used. They can be roasted without marinating, and as the meats are covered with fat it is useless to lard them. Roasted pieces are served from the haunch, saddle, tenderloin or loin, basted with its own gravy or else a very highly seasoned sauce. For the Haunch. --After the boar is singed and well trimmed, scald it in boiling water, then saw off the end or handle bone an inch and a half from the knuckle bone and marinate in a cooked cold marinade (No. 114) or eight days; drain, wipe and wrap it in strong sheets of buttered paper, including the vegetables and marinade; lay it on a cradle spit (No. 116) or in the oven to roast for one hour and a half, more or less according to the size of the haunch or leg, being careful to baste every twenty minutes with the grease from the dripping pan. Ten minutes before serving unwrap and remove the buttered paper, also the cracknel; glaze the haunch in the oven and place it on a dish to trim with a fancy frill (No. 10), pour gravy (No. 404) around and serve a Robert sauce (No. 533) in a sauce -boat. Boar's Tenderloins are prepared by paring, larding, marinating and roasting, then dressing on croûtons and serving with shallot and fine herb sauce (No. 537). The Cutlets are pared and sautéd drained and trimmed with frills (No. 10), afterward dressed in a circle; drain the fat from the pan, detach the glaze with white wine and espagnole sauce (No. 414), reduce; then strain it through a tammy and pour it in the middle of the cutlets. (2049). YOUNG WILD BOAR --QUARTER--GARNISHED WITH CUTLETS AND BREASTS MARINADE SAUCE (Quartier de Marcassin Garni de Côtelettes et de Poitrines, Sauce Marinade). Have a quarter of young wild boar very tender; suppress the rind and marinate in a cooked cold marinade (No. 114) for twenty-four hours; drain and wrap in several sheets of strong buttered paper. Put it in a roasting pan and cook it in the oven. Have the breasts braised, and when done bone and lay them under a light weight to get cold, then cut them into eight pieces paring each one to the shape of a half heart, then dip in eggs and bread-crumbs, and fry till hot and of a fine golden color. Trim eight cutlets, marinate them for twenty-four hours, drain, wipe and sauté with clarified butter. Dress the breasts on one side of the quarter and the cutlets on the other, glaze them with meat glaze (No. 402) and cover the quarter with a little marinade sauce (No. 496), serve more of it separately with the boar, trimming the handle of the leg with a paper frill (No. 10). (2050). BOAR SADDLE AND QUARTER--ROASTED (Selles et Quartiers de Sanglier Rôtis). Before roasting a saddle or quarter of boar is better to be sure that the animal is a very young one. The saddle tenderloin must not be pared as for venison, neither are the quarters pared; simply steep the pieces of meat for twenty-four hours in a cooked and cold marinade (No. 114). They are to be roasted in a very deep pan lined with fragments of salt pork and cut up roots, then basted over with butter. For a young boar it will take from an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half in a moderate oven. After removing it from the fire, dress it on a dish and unglaze the bottom of the pan with a few spoonfuls of the marinade; reduce the liquid for a few moments, then strain, skim off the fat and thicken the sauce either with some sauce or kneaded butter (No. 579); serve it in a sauce -boat. With roast boar a light acidulated sauce is usually served, prepared with a little of its marinade; a saucerful of currant jelly is also its usual accompaniment. (2051). DOE BIRDS ROASTED AND BROILED (Courlis Rôtis et Grillés). Small doe birds are the size of a large plover, having a long bent beak. It is a delicate game being slightly analagous to the plover; let set till tender then pick, singe and suppress the gizzard and crop without emptying out the insides. Truss them bent under like the plovers ( No. 2119 ) bard over with very thin slices of fat pork and cook either on the spit or in the oven, or else broil; serve on canapés with clear gravy (No. 404) separate. Doe birds can be prepared in several ways, proceeding exactly the same as for the plovers. (2052). BLACKHEAD DUCKS ROASTED OR BROILED (Canards Sauvages à Tête Noire Rôtis ou Grillés). Pick the feathers from two blackhead ducks, and truss as described (No. 179); fasten them on the spit then cook the ducks, if fine and large for fourteen or eighteen minutes before a bright fire. Untruss and serve them to the guests after cutting them up on very hot plates; serve currant jelly at the same time. For broiled blackheads see broiled canvasback ducks ( No. 2054 ). (2053). BRANT DUCKS WITH CAULIFLOWER VILLEROI--ROASTED (Canards Sauvages Brant Rôtis aux Chouxfleurs Villeroi). Brant ducks are prepared the same as blackhead ducks and when roasted, dress them on a long dish; garnish around with cauliflowers à la Villeroi ( No. 2715 ), serving a separate poivrade sauce (No. 522) into which incorporate half as much fresh butter. (2054). CANVASBACK DUCKS BROILED (Canards Sauvages Canvasback Grillés). Clean nicely and split through the whole length of the back, open entirely to have them perfectly flat, wipe, trim and season with salt and pepper; coat over with oil and put them inside a double boiler sufficiently thick not to have them squeezed too tight; broil over a brisk fire for eight or ten minutes and as soon as done, dress on a buttered half-glaze sauce (No. 413) into which has been added butter, lemon juice and chopped parsley. (2055). CANVASBACK DUCK ROASTED GARNISHED WITH HOMINY OR SAMP (Canards Sauvages Canvas Back Rôtis Garnis Avec Hominy ou Samp). Pick the feathers from some nice Havre-de-Grace canvasback ducks, each one to weigh three pounds, prepare them for roasting as described (No. 179), lay them on a spit to roast before a brisk fire for sixteen to twenty minutes, more or less according to their size; untruss and dress on to a very hot dish, surround with squares of hominy dipped in eggs and bread-crumbs, then fried, present them whole to the guests, remove to carve and place on very hot plates with a piece of hominy for each person. FIG. 389. Four canvasback ducks are laid on a spit. FIG. 390. Woodcock--(Bécasse). An illustration of a woodcock. FIG. 391. Quail--(Caille). An illustration of a quail walking on the ground. FIG. 392. Plover--(Pluvier). An illustration of a plover. FIG. 393. English Snipe--(Bécassine Anglaise). An illustration of a english spine standing at the river bank. FIG. 394. Prairie Hen (Grouse)--(Tétras). A prairie hen standing on top of a rock. FIG. 395. Ptarmigan--(Poule de Neige). An illustration of a ptarmigan standing on top of a large rock. Hominy and Samp (Crushed Corn ). --Cook some hominy in boiling salted water, spread it on a baking sheet in a five-eighths of an inch thick layer and when cold cut it into oblongs one inch wide by two and a half inches long, dip them in eggs and bread-crumbs and fry to a fine color, then drain, salt and dress on folded napkins. Samp is a species of Indian corn crushed to the size of small peas; it should be soaked in cold water for several hours, then cooked in a covered saucepan with water, salt and butter for three hours, placed in a slack oven after it has boiled up once. Put it to cool on a dish, divide it into inch and three-quarters balls, flatten, keeping them thin on the edges and thick in the center, dip in eggs and bread-crumbs and fry nicely to a fine color (2056). SALMIS OF CANVASBACK DUCKS (Salmis de Canards Sauvages, Canvasback). Cook either on the spit or in the oven two ducks prepared for roasting (No. 179); when nearly done, untruss and divide each one into six pieces, cutting the breast in four and legs in two. (The legs are generally fibrous and tough.) Put all the pieces in a saucepan with their own blood and keep them warm in a bain-marie, having a lid on top. Put the fragments of the ducks, broken in pieces into another saucepan with a pint of red Bordeaux wine, half a shallot and a pinch of mignonette, let boil slowly until the liquid is reduced to half, then pass it through a colander into a sautéing dish, adding the same quantity of thick espagnole sauce (No. 414); reduce the whole until consistent, pass it once more through a tammy and finish by incorporating therein a tablespoonful of sweet oil and the strained juice of half a lemon. Pour this sauce over the cut up ducks and dress on the center of a dish, garnish around with half heart croûtons hollowed out in the center and filled with minced celery parboiled and cooked in consommé (No. 189), cover with half-glaze and Madeira sauce (No. 413). (2057). CANVASBACK DUCKS, BIGARADE SAUCE -- BREASTS (Filets de Canard Sauvages, Canvasback, Sauce Bigarade). Prepare and cook the canvasback ducks the same as roasted ( No. 2055 ); when still very rare, remove and raise the two fillets and divide each one into three pieces. Put them in a chafing dish with a little melted game glaze (No. 398), as much butter and the juice of half a lemon, roll them well in this to glaze and dress on a bigarade sauce (No. 435). (2058). CANVASBACK DUCKS WITH ORANGE JUICE, PORT WINE AND CURRANT SAUCE -- BREASTS (Filets de Canards Sauvages, Canvasback, au Jus d' Orange à la Sauce Porto et à la Gelée de Groseilles). Roast the ducks the same as for roasting ( No. 2055 ) keeping them very rare; raise the two fillets, one from each side of the breast and cut each one into two lengthwise pieces; put them in a chafing dish, pour over some bitter orange juice, also a little game glaze (No. 398) and brown poivrade sauce (No. 522); serve separately a sauce made with currant jelly dissolved in port wine, heating it in a bain-marie, then strained through a fine wire sieve, surround with half- heart -shaped croûtons of bread fried in butter. (2059). MALLARD DUCKS ROASTED AND BROILED--(Canards Sauvages, Mallard Rôtis et Grillés). Draw two singed and clean Mallard ducks, wipe out the insides with a cloth and fill the empty space with some bread dressing combined with butter or chopped suet, thyme, bay leaf, parsley, and a few finely sliced green celery leaves, adding egg-yolks; truss (No. 179), and run a skewer through to fasten them on the spit, then roast basting over with melted butter or oil. The fire should be quite brisk, and if so, twenty minutes will be sufficient to cook them. Dish them up with sliced lemons around, and serve the gravy separately. Broiled. --Mallard ducks are broiled and dressed the same as canvasback, the only difference to be observed is perhaps a modification in the time of cooking. (2060). MALLARD DUCKS WITH CELERY HALF-GLAZE--ROASTED (Canards Sauvages, Mallard Rôtis au Céleri Demi-Glace). Truss some mallard ducks for roasting (No. 179), and when cooked dish up as the others. They may be served either whole or else cut up into six pieces or the fillets only if they be whole; place the garnishing around; should they be dressed in a circle then fill in the center with a garnishing composed of cardoons or celery cut in half inch squares, blanched and cooked with chopped beef marrow also blanched, and afterward drained; put them into a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413), and let simmer for a few moments. (2061). SALMIS OF MALLARD DUCKS WITH MADEIRA (Salmis de Canards Sauvages, Mallard au Madère). Cut two roasted wild ducks into six pieces; remove the skin and part of the bones, then divide the breasts and legs, suppressing the feet, and range them in a sautoir keeping it covered. Chop up the carcass, bones, and parings; fry a mirepoix (No. 419), and minced shallots with aromatic herbs, add to this the chopped carcasses and moisten with two or three gills of red wine previously boiled in a copper pan, and reduce it to three-quarters; again moisten to their height with stock (No. 194a) and continue to cook for twenty minutes; strain this through a tammy, remove the fat and return it to the fire and reduce, thickening with half-glaze sauce (No. 413), and finishing with two spoonfuls of Madeira wine. As soon as it is completed, strain it over the pieces of duck, and heat in a bain-marie for a quarter of an hour. Dress the pieces on a dish, cover over with a part of the sauce and serve the remainder separately; surround with thin round crusts masked on one side with baked liver forcemeat (No. 81), and serve. (2062). REDHEAD DUCKS à LA BARéDA (Canards Sauvages à Tête Rouge à la Baréda). These ducks are first to be prepared the same as for roasting; put them in a pan, cover with good fat and roast them in the oven; add one gill of vinegar, a spoonful of powdered sugar, and mignonette pepper; baste the birds several times while cooking and salt over a few moments before removing from the oven. Untruss and strain the stock, suppress all the fat, and place it in a sauce -pan with some espagnole sauce (No. 414) currant jelly, mixing the whole well together, pass through a sieve. Make a sour apple marmalade, drain properly and press it through a very fine sieve, stir in some unsweetened whipped cream; serve these two sauces separately at the same time as the birds. FIG. 396. A dead redhead duck placed on top of a table. (2063). REDHEAD DUCKS, ROASTED AND BROILED (Canards Sauvages à Tête Rouge Rôtis ou Grillés). Prepare the ducks as for No. 2059 , lay them on the spit to roast for fourteen to eighteen minutes, more or less according to their weight; salt over, remove from the spit and untruss and serve on a very hot dish, or they can be roasted in the oven, putting them into a baking pan; pour a little fat over and set them in a hot oven; they will take a few minutes longer to cook this way, then serve on a very hot dish. Hand round separately on a folded napkin some hominy or samp the same as for canvasback ducks ( No. 2055 ). Cut up the ducks and serve on very hot plates. Four slices can be taken from each duck, two on each fillet and one or two of these served to one guest. Broiled. --Have them prepared the same as the canvasback duck ( No. 2054 ), then cook and dress exactly the same. (2064). REDHEAD DUCKS WITH FRIED CELERY (Canards Sauvages à Tête Rouge au Céleri Frit). Prepare and cook two redhead ducks the same as for roasting ( No. 2063 ); dress and garnish around with celery prepared in two different ways. From four celery stalks, remove the outer branches, using only the white and tender ones; cut into four inch lengths half of the largest branches and blanch them as well as the four roots, peeled and cut in eight pieces then nicely pared; drain and put into a saucepan and cover to their height with a light ten degree syrup; cook on a slow fire, drain through a strainer and dip each separate piece into frying batter (No. 137) and fry to a fine golden color, ranging them afterward on each side of the ducks. Cut the remainder or tender stalks lengthwise into fillets the size of a straw, dip them in frying batter, then fry slowly to a fine color; drain, salt over and use them for decorating the ends of the dish. Serve separately a brown sauce (No. 414) reduced with white wine pressing into it the strained juice of an orange. (2065). RUDDY DUCKS à LA HAMILTON (Canards Sauvages, Ruddy à la Hamilton). Prepare and cook the ducks the same as for roasted ( No. 2066 ); detach the fillets without taking off the skin and range them at once in a sautoir, pour over some reduced espagnole sauce (No. 414) and a little good sherry; roll them in this off the fire and strain the juice of a lemon over. Dress the fillets in a circle on a poached and unmolded forcemeat border placed on a dish, and fill the insides with a garnishing of truffles, mushrooms, olives and cut up foies-gras; cover both fillets and garnishing lightly with the sauce and serve more of it separately after straining it. (2066). RUDDY DUCKS, ROASTED (Canards Sauvages, Ruddy Rôtis). This duck is roasted either on the spit or in the oven. Pick and take off all the down; singe, wipe and draw, then cut off the wings near the body, suppress the necks, turn in the feet and truss, the same as canvasback (No. 179). Put them to roast on the spit or in the oven for twelve to fifteen minutes according to the heat of the fire and the size of the duck, keeping them rare; take them off and serve with a little clear gravy (No. 404) poured over and garnish with quartered lemons; serve. (2067). TEAL DUCKS, BROILED (Canards Sauvages, Sarcelles Grillées). Split the teal duck, lengthwise in two through the back after cleaning well; pare and season with salt and mignonette; coat over with oil and place in a double broiler without pressing too tight. Broil over a brisk fire and serve on a good, rich gravy (No. 404) surrounded by slices of lemon. (2068). TEAL DUCKS, ROASTED (Canards Sauvages, Sarcelles Rôtis). This is a small kind of wild duck, the meat being quite nutritious and of an excellent flavor the blue wings are preferred to the green. Prepare the teal (No. 179), roast before a brisk fire for ten to fifteen, minutes either on the spit or allow the same time in the oven. When done to perfection salt over, untruss and serve on a hot dish either whole or carved, each one to be divided in four pieces. Dress the legs on the bottom of the dish with the breasts over, glaze, then pour into the bottom a little good gravy (No. 404); surround the birds with slices of lemon cut in two through the center. FIG. 397. An illustration of a dead teal duck. (2069). TEAL DUCKS à LA PONTCHARTRAIN (Filets de Canards Sauvages, Sarcelles à la Pontchartrain). Lift the breasts from four very plump raw teal ducks; keep on the skin and score this lightly; marinate these in oil with cut up chives, parsley leaves, salt, mignonette and lemon juice; let them remain in this for two hours and just when ready to serve, pour two tablespoonfuls of oil in a sautoir, heat it up and put in the breasts; place it on a good fire, turning the pieces over when done on one side; drain and dress in a circle with half heart -shaped croutons between each piece, having them the same size as the breasts; cover the whole with a well-reduced buttered espagnole sauce, (No. 414) straining into it the juice of an orange. They can also be broiled, after scoring, seasoning and coating over with oil, then put into a double broiler without pressing and when cooked dress in a circle with croûtons between each fillet and the same sauce as above poured over the whole. (2070). SALMIS OF TEAL DUCKS à LA HARRISON (Salmis de Canards Sauvages, Sarcelles à la Harrison). Roast some teal ducks as for No. 2068 . Fry a shallot lightly in butter without acquiring color; add some raw chopped mushrooms, salt, pepper and nutmeg, then moisten with champagne and reduce with the following fumet and espagnole sauce (No. 414) to a proper consistency. Break up the carcasses of the birds, moisten these with broth (No. 194a) and cook for fifteen minutes, then strain forcibly; add to it some cooked ham cut in one-eighth of an inch squares and chopped parsley. The ducks must be cut in four pieces each, namely: two legs, two wings, each of these to be cut lengthwise; dress, mix the gravy and sauce together, pour it over and surround with heart -shaped croûtons, then serve. (2071). GROUSE OR PRAIRIE HENS, BROILED (Tétras ou Poules de Prairie Grillés). There are two ways of preparing these birds for broiling; the first, or the one most generally employed is to cut off the feet at the first joint, also the neck, leaving the throat skin on as long as possible; split the grouse lengthwise through the back to open it entirely; remove the breastbones, flatten lightly and season with salt; dip them in oil and broil over a moderate fire, then dress on toast with clear gravy (No. 404). Another Way is after the grouse is picked, drawn and singed, truss with the legs thrust inside, and cut them lengthwise in two, beat lightly, pare neatly, season and dip in melted butter, then in bread-crumbs and broil in a double broiler on a moderate fire, turning them when well done on one side; dressed grouse can be cooked in either of these ways, being careful not to have the broiler too tight, and when dressed they may be covered with maître d'hôtel butter (No. 581) or else have a cold tartar sauce (No. 631) served separately. (2072). GROUSE OR PRAIRIE HENS ROASTED WITH GRAVY, FRIED BREAD-CRUMBS OR APPLE SAUCE (Tétras ou Poules de Prairie Rôtis au Jus, Mie de Pain Frite ou Sauce aux Pommes). Select some grouse and after picking, singeing and drawing, truss them without barding for roasting (No. 179), run a skewer through and fasten this firmly to the spit, then roast before a good fire or they may be put in a baking pan, smeared over with fat and roasted in the oven, but in either case they need basting frequently with melted butter. When almost done, salt them over and as soon as they are finished (which will take from twenty to twenty-five minutes), like all black meats these should be cooked rare, untruss and dress on a croûton of bread cut so that they stand plumb on it, and serve some clear gravy (No. 404) separately or replace it by apple sauce (No. 428), served the same, or a bread sauce (No. 438), may be substituted or surround with fried bread-crumbs prepared as follows: Brown some slices of bread in the oven and when of a good color and very dry, pound and pass through a fine wire sieve, mix these crumbs with a little butter, put it into a sautoir and set in the oven to fry until of a nice color. (2073). GROUSE OR PRAIRIE HENS à LA TZARINA-- BREASTS (Filets de Tétras ou de Gelinottes à la Tzarine). Remove the breasts from six fresh grouse or prairie hens, suppress the minion fillets and pare the larger ones prettily the same as chicken fillets, taking off all the skin; beat down to flatten and season with salt, lay them in a sautoir with cold clarified butter and cover with a buttered paper. With the minion fillets, and the breast parings, prepare game cream forcemeat (No. 75), have it nice and smooth and keep it cold. Butter a plain border mold ( Fig. 139), decorate the sides with fanciful bits of truffle and lay it aside on ice. Prepare a garnishing composed only of fine and very white cocks'-combs, not having them too much cooked and place them in a bain-marie. With the carcasses of the breasts without the legs prepare a good fumet, and strain it. Put on to reduce a few gills of good béchamel (No. 409) with a small bunch of green fennel, mushroom peelings and a spoonful of prepared red pepper (No. 168) and incorporate the fumet slowly into this; when this sauce becomes rich, but not too thick, strain and keep it in a bain-marie stirring it up occasionally. Fill the decorated mold with the cream forcemeat pressing it in carefully, cover it over with a buttered paper and poach it for fifteen to twenty minutes in a bain-marie. At the last moment poach the fillets over a brisk fire, turning them around and keeping them rare; two minutes will suffice for their cooking drain them off at once to pare and pour into this same sautoir one gill and a half of good game stock (No. 195), reduce the liquid to half with the butter and incorporate this slowly into the sauce. On the rounded end of each of the fillets lay an oval piece of cooked truffle covered with a thin layer of raw forcemeat to help fasten it on. Unmold the border on a dish, fill the interior with the well-drained combs and dress the fillets in a circle on the border. Cover them as well as the combs with a part of the sauce and serve the rest apart. FIG. 398. Grouse or prairie fillets arranged in a ring form and garnished with combs at the middle of the ring. (2074). HARE à LA CHâTELAINE--STUFFED (Lièvre Farci à la Châtelaine). Skin and draw a good hare, not having it too young, lard it with shreds of larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52), make a hash with its minion fillets, the heart, liver and a few good cooked chicken livers, put this into a vessel and mix in an equal quantity of chopped fat pork, bread-crumb raspings, chopped onions, one egg, salt and thyme. With this dressing fill the hare's stomach, sew up the opening, truss the shoulders, head and legs, then put it into a long braziere, having the bottom covered with fragments of fat pork, minced onions and roots, aromatic herbs and mushroom peelings, add two or three gills of white wine and cover with buttered paper; cover the pan and allow the hare to cook very slowly for two or three hours with fire over, and under or in the oven, adding a little broth or gravy from time to time. When the hare is three-quarters done, lift it out, strain the stock, skim it free of fat and thicken with a little brown sauce (No. 414), then boil again for five minutes. Pour this into the braziere, replace the hare and add two or three dozen fresh peeled mushrooms, then finish cooking all together. Dish up the hare, untruss and surround it with the garnishing and a part of the sauce, serving the remainder separately. (2075). JUGGED HARE (Clivet de Lièvre). To prepare this dish the hare should not be too tender; those are only desirable when eaten roasted. Skin the hare, draw it well reserving the blood in a small bowl with a dash of vinegar added. Separate the four limbs from the back, cut them up into medium-sized pieces and split the head in two, then cut the back across. Lay these parts in a vessel to season and marinate with a few spoonfuls of brandy, aromatic herbs and sprigs of parsley; leave them in this for five to six hours. Melt in a saucepan half a pound of chopped fat pork, add to it half a pound of bacon cut in flat squares, and as soon as these are browned, remove them with a skimmer, leaving the fat in the saucepan, and to it add the well drained pieces of hare. Fry over a very brisk fire stirring at times, and when the meats are well browned, besprinkle with two spoonfuls of flour; cook this while turning for a few minutes, then moisten the stew to its height, with a third part of good red wine previously boiled in an untinned copper vessel, and two-thirds of broth (No. 194a), adding both very slowly. Stir the liquid until it boils and let it continue thus for ten minutes; withdraw the saucepan to a slower fire, put in a bunch of aromatic herbs, two or three small onions and mushroom parings. Continue the cooking until the meats are partly done, then set a large colander on top of a vessel and pour into it the stew; return the sauce to a sautoir, adding to it a few spoonfuls of red wine, boil the same as before, add a few spoonfuls of gravy (No. 404) to enrich it, reduce for a few moments, skimming off the fat and put it back into the first saucepan. Take up the pieces of hare one by one, pare them free of all superfluous bone and return them to the sauce, all except the head, and add the bacon and the marinade the hare was in. Place the saucepan on the fire to finish cooking the meats very slowly; twenty minutes before taking off the stew, mix in with it two dozen mushrooms and finish cooking all together. At the last moment thicken the gravy with the blood laid aside, being careful that once this is added not to let it boil again. Dress the meats and bacon on a dish, strain the sauce over and surround with clusters of mushrooms and the same of small onions glazed separately. (2076). HARE'S BACK ROASTED WITH CREAM (Râble de Lièvre Rôti à la Crème). The hares used for roasting should be chosen particularly tender. Suppress the shoulders, legs, and neck, leaving the back whole; remove the fillet skin delicately so as to be able to lard the meats with larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52); season and lay the back in a small baking pan to mask over with butter and roast in the oven for twenty-five to thirty minutes while basting at times. Drain off the back and dress it on a dish, pour off half the fat and put into the pan a few spoonfuls of half-glaze (No. 400); boil up for five minutes to detach the glaze from the bottom of the pan, then strain and let reduce for a few moments, adding a gill of raw cream; finish the sauce with a dash of vinegar. FIG. 399 An illustration of a hare. (2077). YOUNG HARE à LA CASTIGLIONE--SAUTéD (Levraut Sauté à la Castiglione). Cut a young hare into twelve parts; two shoulder pieces, four from the legs and six from the back and ribs, put these in a sautéing pan and fry on a good fire with plenty of fresh butter; throw over some chopped parsley and mushrooms, two blanched and very finely chopped shallots, a little cooked ham either cut very small or in eighth of an inch squares, salt, pepper, and nutmeg; moisten with a pint of broth (No. 194a) adding a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme, bay leaf, a little garlic, and a clove; cook on a slow fire, then finish in a slack oven in a hermetically closed saucepan, allowing it to be in for twenty to thirty minutes; remoisten as fast as the liquid becomes reduced, adding only a very little at the time so that when done there remains very little of the stock, and that has fallen to a glaze without adhering to the pan. After the hare is done, pour in two gills of espagnole sauce (No. 414), and half a gill of Madeira at the same time, suppressing the parsley, and finish with the juice of a lemon. Garnish around with heart -shaped croûtons fried in butter. (2078). éPIGRAMMES OF YOUNG HARES à LA POLIGNAC (épigrammes de Levrauts à la Polignac). Raise the fillets and minion fillets from two young hares; suppress the skin and nerves and cut the fillets slanting into two pieces each; beat lightly and pare them all into cutlet form; season with salt, pepper, fine spices and truffles cut in thin shreds. Mince the fragments of the meat, add a third as much pork tenderloin and chop the two well together with as much chopped fat pork as fresh pork; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, adding some reduced espagnole sauce (No. 414). Divide this preparation into twelve parts, have as many squares of "crépine" or caul fat four inches by five spread out on a cloth, on each one lay half of its intended forcemeat, on top the pared cutlet -form fillet and then the remainder of the forcemeat; fold the "crépine" or caul fat into an oval shape, lay them on a baking sheet, baste over with butter, bestrew with bread-crumbs and cook in the oven. Dish them up in a circle intercalated with cutlets made of very delicate hare quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) made with the parings, dip in eggs, bread-crumb over and then fry in olive oil. Pour into the center of the circle a little marinade sauce (No. 496) with chopped truffles added. The quenelle forcemeat cutlets can be replaced by others made of hare croquette preparation (No. 885). (2079). YOUNG HARES ' FILLETS WITH CURRANT JELLY AND RAISIN SAUCE (Filets de Levrauts à la Sauce de Gelée de Groseilles et aux Raisins ). Pare and suppress the nerves from the fillets and minion fillets of two young hares; cut the larger ones on the bias to obtain two or three slices, flatten, pare into half hearts, season and put them in a buttered sautoir sprinkle over with butter. With the bones and fragments make a fumet (No. 397) and moisten it with skimmed broth (No. 194a), and when ready pass this through a sieve and pour it into a saucepan with a gill of vinegar, then reduce the liquid to a half-glaze, stir in some currant jelly, a piece of lemon peel and a handful of well-washed dry raisins softened in hot water. Push the fillets into a brisk oven and as soon as cooked add them to the sauce; dress, pass the sauce through a tammy and pour part of it over the meats, serving the rest in a sauce -boat. (2080). YOUNG HARES ' PAUPIETTES WITH STUFFED OLIVES (Paupiettes de Levrauts aux Olives Farcies). Take the fillets and minion fillets from two young hares, suppress the nerves and separate them lengthwise in two; flatten all the pieces and then cut them up into twelve bands or strips an inch and a half wide by two and a half long; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Pass twice through the chopping machine ( Fig. 47) a pound of the lean meats, cut from the legs and shoulders of the hare with as much fresh fat pork; when the whole is very fine add to it some cooked fine herbs (No. 385), two ounces of bread crumbs, one egg, salt and pepper. Spread a layer of this hash on each strip, roll them over on themselves and place in buttered paupiette rings. Make a fumet (No. 397) with the carcasses and fragments moistening it with white wine; reduce some espagnole sauce (No. 414) with this fumet, despumate it free of all fat and scum that arises to the surface. Cook the paupiettes in a sautoir lined with bards of fat pork, and moisten with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); when done, drain off and strain the stock, reduce it with the espagnole and fumet. Stuff some Spanish olives with anchovies, heat them in a little gravy (No. 404); dress the paupiettes in a circle, fill the center with the stuffed olives and place a channeled mushroom (No. 118) on each paupiette; cover with a part of the sauce, serving the rest in a sauce -boat. (2081). LARKS à LA MARéCHALE (Mauviettes à la Maréchale). Bone and stuff about fifteen larks with a baking forcemeat (No. 81) mixed with a little raw forcemeat (No. 91) and chopped truffles. Form these into ball-shapes and wrap each one in a small piece of cloth; tie them up tight and cook in a very little clear stock (No. 194a); drain off to tighten the cloth. When cold, unwrap the birds and pare; lay each one inside of a large head of cèpes or fresh mushrooms previously scooped out with a vegetable spoon. Lay these in a sautoir, pour over some hot butter and cook for ten minutes on a bright fire while covered, then baste with a few spoonfuls of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), cook again for seven or eight minutes on a slow fire, remove them with a pallet and dress on a dish; add two spoonfuls of Madeira wine to their broth and thicken it with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413), reduce for two minutes and then pour into the dish. (2082). LARKS BROILED (Alouettes Grillées). Take the larks well cleaned and picked, split them lengthways through the back, season and broil; three to five minutes suffice to cook them. Dress on canapés made of toasted oblongs of bread-crumbs, cover with game fumet (No. 397) made with quail and espagnole sauce (No. 414) that has been liberally buttered, then serve. (2083). LARKS, PéRIGUEUX SAUCE --ROASTED (Alouettes Rôties Sauce Périgueux). Roast without drawing, only removing the gizzard, singe and cover with very thin bards of fat pork and run a metal skewer through four of them, keeping them slightly apart so that the heat can penetrate between each one. They only require to be cooked from five to six minutes, then dress them on croûtons of bread covered with liver forcemeat; remove the larding and pour over a Périgueux sauce with Madeira (No. 517). (2084). LARKS WITH RICE (Mauviettes au Riz). Singe, draw and bone about fifteen fine larks; spread them out on the table to season and lay in each one a ball of game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) mixed with baking forcemeat (No. 81) and a part of their own intestines, cooked, pounded and rubbed through a sieve; form the birds into ball-shapes and sew them up, then lay them in a saucepan with butter or melted fat pork; season and fry quickly for seven or eight minutes while turning them over; now remove them from the pan, leaving in the fat, and into this add two spoonfuls of chopped onions; fry and mix with it three or four spoonfuls of chopped raw ham; fry together for two minutes longer, then put in three gills of good picked rice without previously washing it; heat well while stirring and moisten with a quart of good unskimmed broth (No.194a). After this has boiled for fifteen minutes, or when the rice begins to soften add the untrussed larks, a pinch of prepared red pepper (No. 168), a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123) and two spoonfuls of tomato purée (No. 730); cook both rice and larks moderately and finish by incorporating into it a generous piece of butter divided into small pats. Dress in a deep dish and pour over two spoonfuls of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and tomato sauce (No. 549). (2085). PARTRIDGES, BROILED ENGLISH STYLE (Perdreaux Grillés à l'Anglaise). Cut two tender partridges in two after they have been drawn and singed; cut off the legs to the height of the knee to slip them under the skin; beat lightly, suppress the surplus of bone, season and bread-crumb them English style, rolling them in oil or melted butter, then in fresh bread-crumbs. Range these half partridges on a broiler, and broil for eighteen minutes over a moderate fire, turning them from one side to the other; serve with a sauce -boat of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and sliced lemon around. (2086). PARTRIDGES, GIRALDA-- BREASTS OR FILLETS (Ailes ou Filets de Perdreaux à la Giralda). Raise the breasts from four partridges; remove the skin and sinews and lift off the minion fillets; streak these with five slices of truffle cut the shape of a cock's-comb. Lay the large fillets in a buttered sautoir and the minion fillets formed into rings in another, filling the centers with quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) pushed through a cornet and on each one lay a small channeled mushroom (No. 118). Butter and decorate with cooked beef tongue, a plain border mold hollowed out on top ( Fig. 139), fill it with partridge quenelle forcemeat (No. 91); poach in a bain-marie for half an hour first on top of the range and then in the oven. Prepare a fumet with the carcasses as in No. 397, strain and reduce with the same quantity of espagnole sauce (No. 414) and a little Madeira; skim to free it well from fat, removing all the impurities arising on the surface. Sauté the fillets, poach the minion fillets, drain off the butter from the former and replace it by a few spoonfuls of Madeira to detach the glaze. Make a partridge purée with the meats picked from the birds, some rice and béchamel; rub it through a sieve and place it in a saucepan to season with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and nutmeg, adding plenty of butter. Invert the mold on the center of a dish, lift it up and place the fillets on the border with a fried croûton of bread to separate each one and pour the purée in the center; serve more of the sauce separately. (2087). PARTRIDGES à LA JULES VERNE-- BREASTS OR FILLETS (Ailes ou Filets de Perdreaux à la Jules Verne). Fasten a wooden foundation on a dish having it slightly sloped and channeled all around, then cover it entirely with cooked paste (No. 131). On the center of this foundation attach a tin basket covered over with more of the same paste, embossed and decorated with a pretty hanging border; the empty space in the basket is filled with a croûton of fried bread covered with a layer of the same paste. The three partridge heads must retain their own feathers and should be selected as fresh as possible; to keep them in a proper position, penetrate the necks with a wire sufficiently thick to uphold them thrusting the other end of the wire into the piece of bread prepared for this purpose in the basket; between each head is also fastened a small paper case filled with a truffle. Raise the breasts from five or six partridges without the minion fillets; suppress the skin, beat them to flatten and pare with the same care as is bestowed on a chicken fillet, then season and place them at once in a sautoir with clarified butter, at the last moment poach the breasts over a good fire turning them around, they should be kept rare, then drained, wiped free of butter and on each wide end place a round piece of truffle cut out with a round cutter and covered on one side with a very thin layer of raw forcemeat to make it adhere. Dress these breasts in a circle the pointed ends downward on the paste -covered foundation cover them lightly with a little good velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with partridge fumet (No. 397) and serve with a sauce -boatful of the same. FIG. 400. A two layer decorative plate dressed with partridge fillets at the bottom and fried bread on top. (2088). PARTRIDGES à LA LUCULLUS-- BREASTS OR FILLETS (Ailes ou Filets de Perdreaux à la Lucullus). Roast some partridges that have been wrapped up exactly as explained for à la Matignon ( No. 2096 ); when done remove the breasts, pare and lay them in a sautoir with a little half-glaze (No. 400). Prepare a fumet (No. 397) with the parings and carcasses. Butter a plain border mold deep on the top ( Fig. 139), decorate the sides with fanciful cuts of truffles and fill it entirely with partridge cream forcemeat (No. 75). Cut some raw artichoke bottoms into small squares, then blanch, cut some carrots into half inch diameter balls, and blanch them likewise, some turnips the same, blanching them as well, some small cooked mushroom heads and truffles shaped like a clove of garlic. First put the artichokes with some butter, add the carrots and turnips, and moisten with a little Madeira and the fumet; let cook slowly and when these three vegetables are done, then add the mushrooms and truffles; as soon as the liquid reduces entirely pour in some velouté sauce (No. 415) and toss the garnishings in it, adding small pieces of fresh butter; with this fill the hollow in the center of the unmolded border; glaze the breasts or fillets, trim them with favor frills (No. 10) and lay them on top of the garnishings; surround the border with small three-quarters of an inch balls made of foies-gras from a terrine pressed through a sieve, bread -crumbed, egged, then fried. (2089). PARTRIDGES à LA VéRON-- BREASTS OR FILLETS (Ailes on Filets de Perdreaux à la Véron). Trim the breasts of four partridges, then range them in a sautoir with clarified butter, and salt over. Cook the legs in a small saucepan with some stock (No. 194a), let them get quite cold and then cut off the tenderest parts of the meats; pound these with the cooked partridge livers, two or three spoonfuls of cooked truffles and two spoonfuls of velouté sauce (No. 415); then press the whole through a sieve. Put this pulp into a saucepan with an equal amount of chestnut purée (No. 712), and two spoonfuls of good melted glaze (No. 398); season and heat without ceasing to stir and without letting it boil; finish with a piece of butter. Poach the partridge breasts, drain off the butter and pour a little sauce over; dress them in a circle on a dish alternating each one with a croûton of bread cut cock's-comb-shaped and browned in clarified butter; lay the purée in the center of the circle, and cover over the fillets with a melted glaze applied with a brush. (2090). PARTRIDGES --MINCED (émincé de Perdreaux). Remove the best parts from two breasts of roasted partridges, pare and suppress the skin and bones; cut the meat up into small, thin slices and range them in a small sautoir. Reduce a few spoonfuls of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with a little tomato sauce (No. 549) and a little Madeira, adding a bunch of parsley garnished with aromatic herbs; when of a good succulence, strain it over the meats and heat them up without boiling. At the last moment dress the slices on a small, long dish and cover with the sauce; surround with a row of large, stuffed Spanish olives heated in a little of the sauce, but they should not boil. Minced Pheasant Woodcock or Duckling may be prepared exactly the same. The olive garnishing can be replaced by a row of small slices of red beef tongue, or else stuffed and baked artichoke bottoms, each one cut in two. (2091). PARTRIDGE MINCED WITH RICE (émincé de Perdreaux au Riz). Cut in slices the breasts of two roast partridges; if very tender take also the thick thigh part and pare the slices neatly; range them in a sautoir with two or three minced truffles and cover with half-glaze sauce (No. 413); keep the meats warm in a bain-marie. At the last moment dress the mince and truffles in the center of a risot border inverted on a dish, or else the stew can be served alone and surrounded with a row of oval game quenelles, poached, cut in half across, breaded and fried, and set on the flat end. Even these quenelles can be replaced by small hollow bread crusts cut either into triangles or half circles and covered with a salpicon of truffles. (2092). SALMIS OF PARTRIDGES (Salmis de Perdreaux). Pick, singe, draw and truss four partridges as for an entrée (No. 178); roast them either on the spit or in the oven; they will require half an hour to cook, remove, untruss and let get partly cold, then cut them up into five pieces each; the two legs, two fillets and one breast piece; suppress all the skin covering each member and put them into a saucepan with buttered paper over and cover with the lid; keep either in a bain-marie or else at a moderate heat. Break up the bones, put them into another saucepan and moisten with a pint of broth (No. 194a) and a pint of Chablis, leave it on the range until it boils, then add a pint more broth and let cook very slowly for half an hour, being careful to skim off all the fat as it arises to the top, then strain through a napkin. Fry in butter a little chopped shallot, thyme, bay leaf and whole peppers, moisten with the stock and reduce with as much espagnole sauce (No. 414) stirring well from the bottom with a spatula to prevent it adhering thereto. After this sauce is well reduced, pour it through a tammy and put one-third of it with the pieces of partridge. Fry sixteen half heart -shaped croûtons in butter; dish up the salmis putting the legs at the bottom on top of bread croûtons, cover these lightly with the sauce and lay the wings and breasts between intermingling in the other croûtons and in the intersections formed by them, dress some turned and channeled mushroom heads (No. 118) and cut up truffles. Incorporate a few spoonfuls of good oil into the remainder of the sauce and pour it over the salmis. (2093). PARTRIDGES à LA BAUDRIMONT (Perdreaux à la Baudrimont). Roast two partridges; untruss and set aside to cool, remove breast meats in a way to form a hollow in the shape of a case, cut the meats into three-eighths of inch squares; prepare an equal quantity of mushrooms cut the same, as much ducks ' livers and some small partridge quenelles made with a coffeespoon (No. 155). Put a gill of Madeira into a saucepan, heat it well without boiling and let a piece of Ceylon cinnamon infuse therein for half an hour, take this out, then add some espagnole sauce (No. 414) and reduce the whole; throw in the salpicon and when all is cold, use it to fill the partridges, having the breasts nicely rounded; cover over with quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), smooth neatly and cover the whole with melted butter; bestrew bread-crumbs and parmesan over and brown in a moderate oven, being careful to baste occasionally while cooking. Arrange the partridges on a dish, glaze with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and serve a financière sauce (No. 464) apart. (2094). PARTRIDGES à LA CHARTREUSE (Perdreaux à la Chartreuse). Blanch two cabbages each cut in four and the core removed; drain and divide them into small clusters, press out all the water and braise them with a piece of bacon of about ten ounces that has been previously parboiled. Prepare a garnishing of carrots and turnips, blanch and then cook them in broth to allow finally to fall to a glaze; have also some quenelles made with a coffeespoon (No. 155). Fry in butter or melted fat pork, two trussed partridges, season and when of a fine color, drain them off, make a hollow in the middle of the cabbage in the saucepan and lay the partridges in, and finish cooking all together. As soon as the birds are done, drain them off and keep them warm in a saucepan with a little half-glaze (No. 400), drain off also the bacon and cabbage, extract all the fat from the latter and dress half of it in the center of a dish, lay the partridges on top and surround with the rest of the cabbage, the carrots, the turnips and the quenelles all in separate clusters. Glaze the partridges over with a brush and serve with a sauce -boatful of the half-glaze from the saucepan. Another Way. --Decorate a timbale mold with carrots and turnips, upholding the decorations with a layer of thick game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91). Cut up the partridges and fill the mold with the cabbage, the bacon and the partridges, place it in a sautoir containing water and put in the oven for half an hour; unmold, pour part of the sauce around the chartreuse and serve. A half-glaze sauce (No. 413) should be served separately at the same time. (2095). PARTRIDGES à LA MARLY (Perdreaux à la Marly). Have two partridges, truss them as for an entrée (No. 178), and fill them with well seasoned partridge quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), into which mix truffles and cooked beef tongue cut in three-sixteenth of an inch squares; tie thin slices of fat pork over and braise in a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); strain this and put the fat back into the saucepan to keep the birds warm therein. Raise the fillets from the breast of a raw partridge, remove the sinews and cut the meats into escallops; sauté them in butter without browning, drain off the butter, remove the meats and keep them warm in this. Put half a pint of the stock used for cooking the partridges into a sautoir with as much allemande sauce (No. 407), reduce and add some cut up truffles and mushrooms; the sautéd partridge escalops, a little fresh butter and lemon juice. Dress the partridges on the bottom of a dish, place the garnishing around, and outside of it lay some crescent-shaped game croquettes (No. 885). (2096). PARTRIDGES à LA MATIGNON, GARNISHED WITH "PAINS" à LA MONTGLAS--(Perdreaux à la Matignon Garnis de Pains à la Montglas). Prepare and truss two partridges as for an entrée as in No. 178. Wrap the two partridges with dry matignon (No. 406) in several sheets of paper; roast and when done, unwrap and place the matignon in a saucepan with some clear gravy (No. 404) and espagnole sauce (No. 414); reduce, despumate and strain through a tammy. Butter twelve mousseline molds (No. 1, Fig. 138), decorate them with fanciful cuts of truffles, and cover the entire inside with a layer of partridge quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), filling the center as far up as the edges with a montglas prepared as follows: Cut off the white meats from half of a roasted partridge; have as many mushrooms heads cut the same size, and half as many truffles as mushrooms, also as much cooked beef tongue as truffles; mingle these with a little supreme sauce (No. 547), when the molds are full finish with more forcemeat. Put some boiling water in a saucepan to reach to a third of the height of the molds and poach these in a slack oven for fifteen to twenty minutes. Dress the partridges, glaze and lay them on top of an oval rice foundation ( Fig. 9a); unmold the montglas pains around, and cover over with some of the sauce having the rest served apart. (2097). PARTRIDGES à LA SOYER (Perdreaux à la Soyer). Make a forcemeat with the partridge livers and a few chopped chicken livers; knead in a piece of butter, pepper, salt, a little shallot previously fried lightly in butter and chopped parsley. Have two trussed partridges (No. 179); put about two ounces of this prepared forcemeat into each one, and cook them on the spit for half an hour; dress on canapés, and pour some clear gravy (No. 404) under. Serve separately the same time as the partridges an English bread sauce (No. 438). (2098). PARTRIDGES BRAISED à LA MOLIèRE (Perdreaux Braisés à la Molière). Truss three partridges as for an entrée (No. 178); cover the breasts with slices of lemon and these with bards of fat pork. Line a flat saucepan with the fragments of pork, some ham, cut up vegetables and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf; lay the partridges on top and moisten with half a pint of dry white wine and half a pint of stock (No. 194a); boil this liquid, skim and continue to boil slowly either on the side of the range or in the oven until the partridges are cooked then drain and untruss. Cut each one up into five parts and arrange them in a saucepan to keep warm in a bain-marie with the fat drained from the first saucepan; in the stock place the broken carcasses, moisten with half a pint of clear gravy (No. 404) and half a glassful of Madeira, boil up, then strain through a sieve and reduce again to half, thickening it with some velouté sauce (No. 415); pour this over the cut up partridges and keep the whole warm. Prepare a partridge quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) mold it with a tablespoon the same as explained in No. 733, and range these quenelles in a buttered sautoir, decorate with truffles and poach. Dress the partridges on a forcemeat foundation ( Fig. 8) without the central support and garnish around with the quenelles, cover with a little supreme sauce (No. 547) serving a sauce -boatful of it separately. (2099). PARTRIDGES BROILED--COLBERT SAUCE (Perdreaux Grillés Sauce Colbert). After the partridges have been well cleaned, split them lengthwise through their backs; cut off the feet and slip the legs under the skin; beat, pare carefully, season with salt and pepper and dip them in melted butter and broil over a slow fire; serve when done either on a Colbert sauce (No. 451) or a hunter's sauce (No. 480) or else a tartar sauce (No. 631). (2100). PARTRIDGES TRUFFLED AND ROASTED (Perdreaux Truffés et Rôtis). Draw two young partridges, wipe them well and singe. Peel five or six raw truffles, cut them in four and season; chop up the peelings and pound them with fresh fat pork, adding to it the cooked partridge livers with two or three pullet livers; season the preparation and press it through a sieve. Melt a quarter of a pound of grated fat pork, add to it the cut up truffles, season and warm up for a few seconds while tossing over the fire, then mix them in with the forcemeat. After this preparation has cooled off, use it to fill the partridge breasts and bodies; sew up the openings, truss and cover or else lard them with fine larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52), fasten them on the spit and roast for fifteen to twenty minutes in front of a good fire, basting over with butter. As soon as they are done sprinkle salt over and remove from the spit; untruss and dress each one on a large crust of bread browned in butter and laid on an oval dish; surround the partridges with sliced lemons only, serving water -cress separately, also some clear gravy (No. 404). (2101). PARTRIDGES WITH CABBAGE (Perdreaux aux Choux). Dress four partridges, truss them for an entrée as in No. 178, and plunge the breasts in boiling water to stiffen the skin, then lard with medium lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52). Blanch for fifteen minutes four medium cabbages after removing the heart or core, and part of the green leaves; refresh, drain and press out every particle of water, then divide each quarter into two, remove the thick stalks, season lightly with salt and pepper, roll in thin slices of fat pork, tie with a string; put them into a braziere ( Fig. 134) with the partridges and a pound of bacon cut in two equal-sized pieces and blanched for ten minutes; add also a one pound sausage, four medium carrots cut lengthwise in four, two onions, one having two cloves stuck in it, and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf. Moisten with some stock (No. 194a) adding a little chicken fat; let cook, and after it comes to a boil finish in a slack oven for thirty to forty minutes. If the partridges be old ones they require one hour and a half to cook; remove them from the braziere, also the sausages and bacon which must be put under a light weight to cool off; it will take fully three hours to cook the cabbages. Have four dozen small carrots cut in pear -shapes and as many turnips of cylindrical form, two inches long by half an inch in diameter, round the ends neatly, then blanch, cook and let fall to a glaze separately. Half an hour before serving return the partridges to the cabbages and keep the whole warm. Cut the bacon into large three-fourths of an inch squares, the sausages into slices, and put both these into a sautoir with a few spoonfuls of the cabbage stock so that they keep hot until ready to serve; drian the cabbages through a colander, pressing it lightly to form into a socle on the bottom of the dish, laying the four untrussed partridges on top in a square, placing two clusters of carrots and two of turnips, alternated with the slices of sausages between the partridges, having the bacon in the center on top. Cover the partridges only with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413), and serve some of the same sauce separately. (2102). PARTRIDGES LARDED AND ROASTED WITH GRAVY AND WATER -CRESSES (Perdreaux Piqués Rôtis au Jus Garnis de Cresson). Prepare and truss the partridges for roasting as explained in No. 179; dip the breasts into boiling water to stiffen the skin, and lard with small lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52). Lay them on the spit to roast, salt over and untruss a few moments before serving; glaze and dress on a canapé and surround with water -cress, serving at the same time a sauce -boatful of partridge fumet (No. 397) or clear gravy (No. 404). They can be barded instead of larded by covering their breasts with a thin slice of fat pork, tying it on with three rounds of string; roast and dress the same as the others. An ounce of good butter may be placed inside of each bird before cooking. (2103). PARTRIDGES WITH OLIVES (Perdreaux aux Olives ). Lard two good-sized partridges with fine larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52), and put them into a narrow saucepan lined with fragments of the same pork, minced roots and onions; season and moisten with a little white wine, then reduce to a glaze. Cook the partridges in very little moisture with stock (No. 194a), having it fall several times to a glaze. After the partridges are nicely done, drain them off to untruss. Strain the stock, skim off its fat and reduce, then incorporate it into brown sauce (No. 414) in the act of being reduced with two spoonfuls of Madeira added at the same time. Dress the partridges on a dish, surround with a garnishing of olives stuffed with baked forcemeat (No. 81), then poached and covered over with some of the sauce; serve the rest in a sauce -boat. (2104). PARTRIDGE WITH SAUERKRAUT (Perdreau à la Choucroute). Cut a roast partridge into small pieces and lay them aside. With the game bones and parings some aromatic herbs and white wine, prepare a small quantity of concentrated fumet (No. 397); thicken it with very little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and keep it in a bain-marie. Cook some good sauerkraut with a small piece of bacon, proceeding as for garnished sauerkraut ( No. 2819 ), adding a piece of butter divided into small pats, dish it up and form a hollow in the center; into this dress the pieces of game, pour over the sauce, cover with the sauerkraut and surround this with the bacon cut in slices. FIG. 401. An illustration of a partridge. (2105). BREASTS OR FILLETS OF PHEASANTS WITH TRUFFLES (Ailes ou Filets de Faisans aux Truffes). Raise the breasts from six pheasants; remove the minion fillets, pare the large ones into half hearts after suppressing the skin and lay them in a thickly buttered sauté pan and cover over with melted butter; place the minion fillets in a smaller sauté pan after removing the thin skin that covers them also the sinews; streak them by cutting six bias incisions on the surface and filling these with half circles of channeled truffles and finish by giving them the shape of a ring; cover over with very thin bards of fat pork or else buttered paper. Make a fumet (No. 397) with the parings and legs, suppressing the rump, and add to it carrots, onions and a garished bunch of parsley (No. 123), moisten with a pint of stock (No. 194a) and two gills of Madeira and let this come to a boil and continue the ebullition process very slowly for one hour and a half, strain through a napkin and separate it into two parts, reduce one of these to the the consistency of a light glaze and to the other add as much velouté sauce (No. 415) that is being reduced. Escalop one pound of fine truffles, put them in a bain-marie with a little meat glaze (No. 402), Madeira and as much fine butter, close the receptacle well and keep hot for at least fifteen minutes. Just when prepared to serve, sauté the pheasants ' breasts; finish cooking them in a slack oven and when the larger fillets are done drain off the butter, being careful to retain the glaze, detach this with a little Madeira and add some velouté sauce (No. 415) and fresh butter; dress the large fillets in a circle, cover with half of the above sauce and on the large ones lay the smaller ones, brush over with meat glaze (No. 402), pouring the truffles in the center; serve the other half of the sauce separately. (2106). SALMIS OF PHEASANT à LA LORENZO (Salmis de Faisan à la Lorenzo). After the pheasant has been roasted the same as for No. 2107 , cut it up into six or eight pieces; pare these nicely, removing all the skin, put them into a saucepan with half a pint of red or white wine, two shallots cut in three-eighths inch squares, the peel of a bitter or an ordinary orange and that of a lemon, all cut in small fillets and then blanched; add a pint of espagnole (No. 414) and a few spoonfuls of game glaze (No. 398). Pound the parings, rub through a sieve and add this pulp to the sauce, heat it up without boiling and keep it warm in the same way in a bain-marie. Dish up the pheasants, squeeze the juice of a bitter orange into the sauce and pour it over the dressed birds, garnish around with bread-crumb croûtons cut in heart -shapes and fried in butter and small game croquettes prepared as for No. 885. (2107). PHEASANTS ADORNED WITH THEIR OWN PLUMAGE--ROASTED (Faisans Rôtis Garnis de Leur Plumage). The pheasant's head can be preserved in advance and also keep carefully the wings and tail intact. Pick the pheasants, singe, draw and truss for roasting (No. 179); bard them over and roast either on the spit or in the oven, basting frequently while cooking; when done, take off, untruss and dress on top of trimmed croûtons hollowed out in such a way that the pheasants can stand well on them; glaze over and decorate with their own plumage, keeping it in place with metal skewers and letting them appear natural and lifelike; surround with clusters of water -cress. Strain and skim the fat from the dripping-pan stock and dilute it with some clear gravy (No. 404); pour a third of it over the pheasants and the other two-thirds serve in a sauce -boat. rend="bold">(2108). PHEASANTS à LA MONTEBELLO (Faisans à la Montebello). Cut into quarter inch squares, three-quarters of a pound of cooked duck's livers, and a quarter of a pound of truffles, season with salt and pepper, add half a pound of butter and put this equally inside of two pheasants; truss them for an entrée (No. 178), and cover with bards of fat pork; place them in an oval braziere saucepan ( Fig. 134), and moisten with half a pint of champagne and a pint of mirepoix stock (No. 419). Cook on a slow fire or in the oven for three-quarters of an hour. Prepare a garnishing to be composed of escaloped and braised foies-gras, eighteen large truffles, fourteen double cocks'-combs, and fourteen fine cocks'- kidneys. Just when ready to serve drain off the pheasants and untruss. Have already prepared a conical-shaped piece of bread-crumbs, four and a half inches long by three inches wide, and eight inches high; made for the purpose of upholding the birds; form a hollow on each side near the top to enable the pheasants to be placed therein; fry this piece of bread to a fine color, and paste it on the dish. Place the birds in an incline inside this hollow space with the breasts uppermost, and then garnish all around with the truffles, livers, and kidneys, so that the bread is completely covered; trim five skewers with some of the truffles and the cocks'-combs ( Fig. 11); stick two of them in each pheasant, and one on the summit of the bread; cover the whole with espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with the essence of truffles, and serve more of it in a separate sauce -boat. (2109). PHEASANT à LA PéRIGUEUX (Faisan à la Périgueux). Have a good pheasant not too gamey; break the breastbone and fill the empty breast with liver baking forcemeat (No. 64), mixed with a salpicon of cooked truffles. Truss it with the legs thrust inside and cover the breast with a dry mirepoix (No. 419) wrap it in a half sheet of buttered paper tied on with a string. Fasten the pheasant on the spit and let roast for fifty to sixty minutes before a good fire while basting, then take it off, untie and dish it up, covering it with a Périgueux sauce (No. 517). Serve some of the same sauce separately. (2110). PHEASANT TRUFFLED--ROASTED (Faisan Truffé Rôti). Choose a good, fat, well set, and tender pheasant; after it has been drawn and well cleaned, fill its inside and breast with raw, peeled truffles, slightly fried in melted fat pork, and seasoned, proceeding the same as for truffled pullet ( No. 1992 ). Lard the pheasant or else wrap it up in fat pork; thrust a small skewer through in order to fasten it to the spit and roast for fifty to sixty minutes according to its tenderness, basting it over with butter. As soon as it is done, detach the bird, untruss it on a dish or else on a thick oval slice of bread browned in butter. Serve with a separate sauce -boat of clear gravy (No. 404) and some water -cress. (2111). PHEASANT WITH TRUFFLES --LARDED (Faisan Piqué aux Truffes). Break the breastbone of a c lean pheasant to facilitate the removal of the bone, and fill up the empty space with baking forcemeat (No. 81) mixed with a little raw forcemeat (No. 91), and raw, chopped truffles added; sew the skin underneath the breast and truss with the legs pushed in the thigh; this is done by removing the drumstick and pushing the leg bone back into this space; put the pheasant in a narrow saucepan lined with fat pork, salt over and besprinkle with melted butter. Cook for forty-five minutes while covered, basting over frequently, and lastly glaze it, then drain. Untruss it on a rice foundation ( Fig. 9a) poached on a dish and surround this with round, peeled truffles cooked in wine; pour into the bottom of the dish a few spoonfuls of brown sauce (No. 414) reduced with the truffle liquid and a few spoonfuls of Madeira wine. Accompany this entrée with a sauce -boatful of the same sauce. (2112). WILD PIGEON OR SQUABS POUPETON, ANCIENT STYLE (Poupeton de Pigeons Ramier ou de Ramereaux à l'Ancienne). Chop up half a pound of veal with half a pound of beef marrow and half a pound of fat pork; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg; pound all together, mixing in four ounces of soaked and well pressed bread-crumbs, two whole eggs, some chopped mushrooms fried in butter and chopped parsley. Lay a buttered flawn ring eight inches in diameter on a sheet of buttered paper; fill the bottom and sides with the forcemeat (No. 81) and in the center lay a stew made of six wild pigeons prepared as explained below. Cover the top with more of the forcemeat, having it bomb-shaped, egg over and cook in a moderate oven. For the wild pigeon stew, truss the pigeons as for an entrée (No. 178); brown them in butter with escalops of uncooked sweetbreads, some ham or bacon cut in five-eighths squares and blanched mushrooms, also a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123). Dredge three tablespoonfuls of butter over the whole and let it attain a fine color; then moisten with white wine and stock (No. 194a). When the birds are cooked suppress the parsley, reduce and thicken the sauce, adding the juice of a lemon; put it into a vessel to get cold and then cut the birds lengthwise in two, pare neatly and use for filling the inside of the poupeton. Wild Squabs are roasted or broiled the same as tame squabs. See No. 2018 . (2113). GOLDEN PLOVER OR GRASS PLOVER AND BUSTARD PLOVER (Le Pluvier ou le Vanneau). Plover's meat is of a very delicate taste; it excites the appetite and digests easily. Plover are eaten larded or barded after being drawn and then cooked on a brisk fire. The golden and the bustard plover are very much alike, living in the same localities, eating the same food, and their meats are almost similar. Golden plover's eggs are used the same as bustard plover, but are considered much inferior. (2114). PLOVERS à LA MONTAUBAN (Pluviers à la Montauban). Draw, singe and clean the plovers, thrust the legs inside and split them lengthways through the back; open, beat and season with salt and pepper; sauté them in clarified butter, drain this off and moisten with a little champagne and brown sauce (No. 414), adding some peeled and sliced or whole truffles. Dress the plovers in a straight row, surround them with the truffles and strain the sauce through a tammy, pour part of it over and serve the rest in a sauce -boat. (2115). PLOVERS à LA STOUGHTON (Pluviers à la Stoughton). Draw the plovers, singe, clean and poêler them as for No. 12; after wrapping them in thin bards of fresh fat pork tying each one on with three rows of string. Fry the intestines in butter, carefully suppressing the gizzard and stomach pouch, drain off the butter and replace it by Madeira and brown sauce (No. 414). Then simmer for a few minutes; pass it through a tammy and add to it some foies-gras escalops, truffles and cocks'-combs; dress the plovers in a low croustade made of tart paste (No. 149) and pour over the garnishing. (2116). PLOVERS à LA PARNY-- BREASTS (Filets de Pluviers à la Parny). Raise the breasts from six plovers; pare, beat, salt and sauté them lightly on the side that adheres to the bones; cover this side with a salpicon of fresh mushrooms mixed with a reduced, thick half-glaze sauce (No. 413); spread a layer of quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) on top and bestrew with finely chopped truffles; range them in a sautoir, pour melted butter over and ten minutes before serving, set them in a hot oven and baste at times with melted clarified butter. Drain as soon as they are done and dress in a circle on the edge of a low, carved rice foundation ( Fig. 9a); fill the inside of the circle with small turned mushroom heads (No. 118) mingled with espagnole sauce (No. 414), reduced mushroom essence (No. 392) and Marsala wine. Serve a sauce -boat of this brown sauce at the same time as the fillets. (2117). PLOVERS à LA VICTOR HUGO-- BREASTS (Filets de Pluviers à la Victor Hugo). Remove all the skin from the breasts taken from seven plovers; streak the minion fillets rounds of truffles, pare the larger ones into half hearts rounded on one end and pointed on the other; place a minion fillet twisted into a half-circle on the edge of the round end of the fillet itself, and range these in a sautoir, cover with butter and cook in a hot oven, basting frequently while cooking. Prepare fourteen half heart -shaped croustades the same size as the fillets, made with very thin foundation paste (No. 135) and fill with paper and rice; empty them as soon as done and egg over the outside, return them for an instant to the oven to color, and then fill them with a purée of mushrooms (No. 722); lay one of the fillets in each and glaze over. Serve separately a brown sauce (No. 414) with game fumet (No. 397) and Madeira. (2118). PLOVERS BROILED (Pluviers Grillés). Split them lengthwise in two through the back, open and flatten (see broiled woodcock, No. 2204 ); season with salt and pepper, coat them with oil and broil in a double gridiron; dress on croûtons of basted bread, cover with maître-d'hôtel butter (No. 581) and serve. (2119). PLOVERS ROASTED (Pluviers Rôtis). Singe and draw half a dozen of either golden or grass plovers. With their intestines and some grated fat pork make a dressing seasoned with salt, pepper, parsley and finely chopped shallot fried in butter; fill the insides of the birds, bard them over tying on the pork. Turn the feet and maintain them by passing one through the other; run the under part of the throat on the leg to keep it in this position; thrust a skewer through, fastening it on the spit, and when cooked remove, untruss and dress on top of croûtons (No. 51), pour over some good gravy into which mix game glaze (No. 398); surround with water -cress seasoned with vinegar and salt. (2120). PLOVERS ROASTED à LA MARTEL--LARDED (Pluviers Piqués Rôtis à la Martel). After being drawn, or simply after removing the gizzard, for they are frequently roasted the same as woodcock without drawing, only trussed and larded with fine lardings of pork (No. 4, Fig. 52); fry their intestines with melted fat pork and a few good chicken livers, chopped truffles and cognac to make a preparation the same as described for woodcock canapés ( No. 2205 ), and with it cover some oblong crusts. Glaze and heat them at the oven door and serve with the birds on these. Have a separate colbert sauce (No. 451) finished with cayenne butter (No. 571). (2121). SALMIS OF YELLOW- LEG PLOVERS à LA DUCLAIR (Salmis de Pluviers aux Pattes Jaunes à la Duclair). Roast six yellow- leg plovers very rare either on the spit or in the oven; cut them up for a salmis retaining only the breasts, cut these in two through the center; pound the remainder of the meats with the same quantity of rice to obtain a purée; with the broken up carcass make a white wine fumet (No. 397); dress the fillets in a circle and fill the center with the purée, lay on top of it some slices of truffle warmed up in half-glaze (No. 400) with Madeira and fresh butter. Prepare some forcemeat as follows: Fry the intestines in butter with chopped shallots and chicken livers, season and rub through a sieve. Make some oblong crusts two and a half inches long, two wide and half an inch in thickness, slit them all around and fry to a fine color in clarified butter, remove the upper part and empty out the centers, then fill them with the prepared forcemeat, rounding it slightly on top and poach in a slack oven. Range these crusts around the dressed salmis and serve with a sauce -boat of espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with the fumet and Madeira wine. (2122). BUSTARD PLOVERS à LA DUMANOIR (Vanneaux à la Dumanoir). Chop up the intestines of several bustard plovers with as much grated fat pork, pound and press through a sieve, add fine spices and chopped truffle parings, mixing in a little brandy and a soupçon of garlic. Truss the plovers as for roasting (No. 179), stuff them with the above preparation and roast in a hot oven. Dress them when done on hollow oval bread croûtons. Glaze them over with game glaze (No. 398), pour a little gravy in the bottom of the dish and serve separately a small quantity of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Madeira. (2123). QUAILS à LA CAPRéA (Cailles à la Capréa). Truss eight quails as for entrée (No. 178), after picking, singeing, drawing, and cleaning them well; stuff them with butter into which has been mingled salt, pepper, and lemon juice, then sauté them in some butter; transfer to a saucepan lined with bards of fat pork, and cook with a very little white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); place around a bunch of parsley garnished with a bay leaf, eight ounces of lean bacon cut in quarter inch squares, and eight ounces of lean ham cut the same, also eight ounces of artichoke bottoms, the whole blanched separately, and four ounces of truffles cut as cloves of garlic. When the quails are cooked, untruss and transfer them to another saucepan, skim the stock, and pour the strained fat over the quails to keep them hot; now strain the stock itself, remove all the fat that is left, and add it to some espagnole sauce (No. 414), and a little Madeira; season and boil it down to the consistency of a succulent sauce. Blanch four ounces of rice, cook it with very little unskimmed stock (No. 194a), and when done place it in a flat bottomed border mold ( Fig. 139) having it carefully buttered, or if to unmold at once dip it merely into cold water; fill it very tight, unmold on a dish and on top of the border lay oval pieces of tongue, a quarter of an inch thick by three inches long and two inches wide; remove the centers, making the same shape oval only two inches long and one inch wide; on these lay the quails, glaze over with game glaze (No. 398), and inside the center of the border dress the bacon, ham, artichoke bottoms, and truffles; cover with some of the sauce, serving more apart. (2124). QUAILS à LA MACéDOINE--LARDED (Cailles Piquées à la Macédoine). Truss eight quails after they have been picked, drawn, and singed, proceeding the same as for an entrée (No. 178); dip the breasts in boiling water and lard them with small lardons (No. 4, Fig. 52). Line a low saucepan with bards of fat pork, lay the quails on top, and moisten with a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); braise in a slack oven and when almost done, glaze over. Untruss and dress in a circle with a garnishing of macédoine vegetables (No. 680), in the center; strain the stock, free it of its fat, and reduce to the consistency of half-glaze, serving it separately. The quails may be barded instead of larded, and the macédoine replaced by green peas Parisian style ( No. 2745 ), or else cucumbers cut as cloves of garlic, blanched and cooked in consommé (No. 189), then thickened with bechamel (No. 409), etc. (2125). QUAILS à LA MIREPOIX (Cailles à la Mirepoix). Bone the breasts from the inside of six small and singed quails. Shred finely into small Julienne, some onions, red part of carrots, tender celery stalks, and fresh mushrooms; fry all these very slowly with butter in a small saucepan, stirring occasionally until cooked; season and remove. Leave these ingredients to cool off partially in the saucepan, then put in two or three spoonfuls of glaze (No. 398) barely melted so as to have a thick preparation of a proper consistency to roll into balls. Insert one of these balls into the breast of every quail, sew up the skin, truss and fry them for two minutes in a saucepan; season and moisten with a gill of Madeira wine; glaze over with a brush, and finish cooking them smothered. When the quails are properly done, drain off to untruss; lay each one in an oval china case with a part of their stock; cover with a little good, reduced, thick brown sauce (No. 414) having it almost cold, and let this sauce become glossy for two minutes at the oven door; serve the quails at once. (2126). QUAILS, PIEDMONTESE STYLE (Cailles à la Piémontaise). Bone the breasts of four or five c lean quails, fill in the empty space with a baked forcemeat (No. 81) and truffles, mingled with a little raw forcemeat (No. 91); truss and cook smothered with Madeira wine and gravy. Have one quart of water, half a pound of polenta, and a piece of butter and some salt and with it prepare a mush; as soon as done, finish with a handful of parmesan and another piece of butter. With this preparation fill a buttered border mold ( Fig. 139) and keep it warm. Fry quickly in butter about fifteen small Chipolata sausages (No. 754), drain, cut them apart and glaze over with a brush. At the last moment, lift up the quails and cut each one in two, unmold the polenta border on a hot dish, dress the quails pyramidically in the center and lay the halved sausages in a circle on top of the border, cover the border and sausages with Piedmontese brown sauce (No. 519). (2127). QUAILS à LA TALLEYRAND-- BREASTS (Filets de Cailles à la Talleyrand). Raise the fillets, suppress the skin and nerves and pare them into half hearts, season and sauté with slices of raw truffles add a half-glaze sauce with Madeira (No. 413). Lay them on half heart -shaped bread croûtons the same size as the fillets and hollowed out, then filled with a salpicon of mushrooms mingled with half-glaze sauce made of game essence (No. 389). Dress in a circle on a dish, put truffles in the center and pour the sauce over all. (2128). QUAILS BROILED (Cailles Grillées). Have the birds very clean and truss with the legs thrust inside; split them through the back without separating, open, trim, beat and season, then coat them over with butter or oil and broil. Dress on well pared toasted slices of bread and cover with maître-d'hôtel butter (No. 581). (2129). QUAIL CUTLETS, GIRONDINS (Côtelettes de Cailles Girondins). Prepare the same as the above, split them in two equal parts, the legs to form a handle and trim with a fancy frill (No. 10). Sauté on a brisk fire, keeping them rare, then place under a light weight, cover over with Villeroi sauce (No. 560), let get cold, then dip in eggs and bread-crumbs and fry in clarified butter, dress on croûtons of cooked red beef tongue, filling the center with minced cèpes fried in oil, seasoned with salt, pepper and chopped parsley; drain and mix in with the cèpes a little game glaze (No. 398) and lemon juice. Serve a sauce -boat of Bordelaise sauce (No. 436) at same time. (2130). QUAILS IN PAPERS (Cailles en Papillotes). Prepare eight cleaned quails by removing the bones beginning at the back and leave on one leg only, then stuff with game forcemeat (No. 91) into which has been added cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and a little glaze (No. 402); put them into half heart -shaped bottomless molds, having them laid on a baking sheet covered with thin bards of fat pork, pour butter over and cook in a moderate oven for half an hour; leave them in their molds and set a weight on top. Fry in butter chopped shallot, mushrooms, truffles and parsley, add a quart of velouté sauce (No. 415), reduce and thicken with four egg-yolks, a little cream and the juice of two strained lemons. Cut out six sheets of strong paper into heart -shapes, coat them with oil; on the right side of the heart and near the center having the point toward you, place on a layer of the cooked fine herb sauce (No. 385), over this a quail, and on top another layer of the sauce; fold the paper in two forming a half heart, crimp the two edges together to enclose hermetically and then set each one on a small silver dish; place them in a slack oven for fifteen to twenty minutes and when a fine color serve, placing the hot dish from the oven on a second plate. (2131). QUAILS ROASTED (Cailles Rôties). After they have been plucked and drawn, singe and cut off the end of the claws; truss and cover the breasts, first with a grape leaf buttered over with a brush, and then with a thin slice of fat pork; run them on small skewers and fasten them to the spit; baste over with melted butter and let cook for fourteen to sixteen minutes then salt; take off and untruss, or they may be put in a baking pan sprinkled with butter and cooked in a hot oven. Dress each one on a crust covered with a layer of baking forcemeat with foies-gras (No. 78), and serve at the same time some clear gravy (No. 404). (2132). QUAILS, SALMIS OF, à LA MORISINI (Salmis de Cailles à la Morisini). Prepare six quails the same as for roasting ( No. 2131 ), divide them in two splitting through the center of the breast, suppress the legs and pare the remainder of the birds. Mince two shallots finely, break the legs and put them into a saucepan with the fragments of quail and the shallots; moisten with red or white Bordeaux wine (either will answer), and as much mirepoix stock (No. 419) and espagnole sauce (No. 414). Let boil slowly for fifteen minutes, then strain through a sieve, put in the quails, heat up without boiling and dish up in a circle. Add some finely cut up mushrooms and truffles to the sauce and pour it over the quails; surround the salmis with heart -shaped bread croûtons fried in butter. (2133). QUAILS WITH BAY LEAF (Cailles au Laurier). Pick, draw and singe six quails, truss for roasting (No. 179). Chop up the livers, the same quantity of chicken liver and as much grated fat pork as liver; add chopped parsley, pepper, a tablespoonful of chopped shallot, a handful of bread-crumbs and one small beaten egg. Mix the ingredients well together and fill the quails with it; roast them in a moderate oven, basting over frequently with lard; drain this into a saucepan and add to it some bread-crumbs, raw ham cut in one-eighth squares, fry nicely and put in two bay leaves, moisten with thickened, gravy (No. 405) and game -glaze (No. 398); skim off the fat, add the juice of a lemon and also a little butter; mix well with a wire whisk, dress, and pour the sauce over the quails. (2134). QUAILS WITH MUSHROOMS --STUFFED (Cailles Farcies aux Champignons). This entrée is dressed on a foundation covered with cooked paste (No. 131) having a low support fastened to the center, also covered with the same cooked paste and decorated on the upper edge with a raised border, it being spread out and open-worked ( Fig. 8). Bone the breasts of ten quails, fill up the empty space with a baking forcemeat (No. 81), mixed with a little raw forcemeat (No. 73), and a few spoonfuls of raw truffles cut in small dice; sew up the skin, truss and cover with bards of salt pork. Lay them in a deep sautoir lined with salt pork, roots and minced onions, moisten with a glassful of white wine and let reduce, then remoisten with unskimmed stock (No. 194a). Boil the liquid, withdraw the pan to a slower fire to finish cooking the quails, drain them off, untruss and untie. Cut each one lengthwise in two and dress them to imitate a rosette on the foundation, standing almost upright without injuring their shapes and leaning them against the support. Fill up the empty border with a garnishing of pretty white mushrooms all of the same size; cover them as well as the quails with a little good velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with the quail stock and that of the mushrooms. FIG. 402. A decorative two layers dish, with quails at the bottom and white mushrooms on the top. (2135). QUAILS WITH RISOT (Cailles au Risot). Draw four or five singed quails, bone the breasts from the inside of the birds and fill in the empty space with baked forcemeat (No. 81), mingled with a little raw quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) and having chopped truffles added. Truss the quails, fry in a sautoir with butter, season and moisten with Madeira wine and gravy (No. 404), reduce this liquid to half and finish cooking them smothered. At the last moment drain off, untruss and split each one lengthwise in two, then dress on a risot (No. 739). Strain the stock, remove its fat and pour it over the birds. (2136). CALIFORNIA QUAILS à LA MONTEREY (Cailles de Californie à la Monterey ). Having drawn and singed six California quails leave the breast skin as long as possible without breaking it. Peel half a pound of truffles, chop up the peelings and cut the truffles in half inch square pieces, season with No. 1 spices (No. 168), then add the livers, a few chicken livers, a little brandy, a soupçon of garlic and four ounces of fresh butter; stuff the quails with this and truss them for an entrée (No. 178), cover with thin bards of fat pork tying it on with three rows of string, run a skewer through and range them on the spit; put to the fire for about three-quarters of an hour, then unwrap and dress on hollow crusts forming them into a circle; cover with half-glaze sauce (No. 413) finished with essence of truffles (No. 395) and fill the center with cooked and turned small mushroom heads, turned olives and small game quenelles made with a coffeespoon (No. 155); pour some sauce into this garnishing, serving more separately. (2137). YOUNG RABBIT à LA CELTOISE (Lapereau à la Celtoise). Divide a young rabbit into twelve pieces after skinning and drawing it; put these to steep in a raw marinade for six hours, then drain and wipe, lay the pieces in a sautoir with fat pork cut in half inch squares and blanched; set the sautoir on a good fire and fry the rabbit with the addition of some small onions and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme, bay leaf and a clove of garlic; when the meats are done, baste them over with white wine and some clear gravy (No. 404), adding six peeled tomatoes cut across in two and the seeds well extracted, also half a pound of lean cooked ham cut in three-sixteenths inch squares and a pint of brown sauce (No. 414). Remove the parsley, skim off the fat and season highly with salt, pepper and prepared red pepper (No. 168); dress the rabbits inside a risot à la piemontese border ( No. 2981 ), pour very little of the sauce over and serve. (2138). YOUNG RABBITS à LA THIéBLIN (Lapereaux à la Thiéblin). Skin, empty, and trim two young rabbits; put the livers aside, and divide each rabbit into twelve pieces; heat some oil and butter, half of each, in a sautoir, put in the pieces of rabbit, and season well with salt, pepper, a crushed clove of garlic, and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf; fry them quickly, moisten with espagnole sauce (No. 414), white wine, a little clear gravy (No. 404), and tomatoes; let simmer till thoroughly cooked, and add the sautéd livers, and some mushrooms. Dress the rabbit and mushrooms, covering over with the sauce. Prepare a rabbit forcemeat (No. 84), mix with it a little espagnole sauce reduced and stirred with some half-glaze made of game fumet (No. 397); place it in small oval molds and poach in the oven; cut them in two lengthways, bread-crumb them first without any eggs, then again with eggs, and fry to a fine color in clarified butter; drain, wipe, and dress them around the rabbit. Serve separately an espagnole sauce (No. 414) made with game fumet (No. 397). (2139). YOUNG RABBITS, VALENCIA STYLE (Lapereaux à la Valence). Cut up in twelve pieces each, two skinned and drawn young rabbits; put half a pound of chopped fat pork in a sautoir, adding the rabbits when it is very hot and fry over a brisk fire, season with salt and pepper, and add also half a pound of blanched bacon cut in quarter inch squares, one medium onion cut the same size, four quartered, peeled and pressed tomatoes, and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme, bay leaf, and a clove of garlic. Cover the saucepan and cook on a moderate fire; just when ready to serve, skim off the fat, suppress the parsley, and put in a little game glaze (No. 398); dress and dredge chopped parsley over the top. Stiffen some small oiled cases in the oven, fill them with rabbit forcemeat (No. 84), into which cooked fine herbs (No. 385) have been added; place on top the minion fillet scored with truffles removed from the rabbit, and over these thin slices of fat pork; bake in a slow oven, drain off the fat, and lay a small glazed truffle in the center of each fillet; range these cases around the dish, and serve. (2140). YOUNG RABBITS, HUNTER'S STYLE (Lapereaux au Chasseur). Skin and draw two young rabbits; wash, wipe, and cut each one into twelve pieces; put them into a sautoir on a brisk fire to fry and color the meats lightly, adding half a pound of raw ham cut in one-eighth of an inch squares, four ounces of onions cut exactly the same size, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme, bay leaf, garlic, and a clove. Drain off the fat, and season with salt and pepper, putting in a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414), and as much Burgundy wine; simmer, reduce, and add a pint of cooked minced mushrooms and half as many truffles. Dish it up and garnish with the mushrooms and truffles, pour a third of the sauce over, and range croûtons of bread fried in butter all around; serve the remainder of the sauce in a sauce -boat. (2141). WILD RABBIT JUGGED WITH BLOOD (Civet de Lapin de Garenne au Sang). Procure a good, young, fleshy wild rabbit, preserve all the blood in a bowl, stirring into it a little vinegar to keep it liquid. Skin and prepare it, and cut it up into equal-sized pieces. Put the meats into a vessel to season and let marinate for two hours with a little boiled vinegar, a little white wine and a tied bunch of fresh and wild thyme. Chop up some fat pork, melt it in a frying pan and add to it half a pound of small squares of bacon; after these are well sized, remove them with a skimmer and add to the fat the well-drained pieces of rabbit and cut up onions; fry over a good fire until the meats are nicely browned and have evaporated their moisture, then put them into a fireproof stone vessel with a glassful of red wine; reduce this over a brisk fire and moisten the meats at once to their height with white wine and stock (No. 194a); let this liquid come to a boil, then remove the vessel on one side to boil gently until partly done; strain the liquid through a sieve, pare the surplus bones from the meats and return the latter to the saucepan with the cut up bacon, the marinade, a bunch of parsley and a peeled clove of garlic. Put the stew back on the fire and thicken it with a little cooked roux or diluted flour, finish cooking slowly. A few moments before serving, transfer all the pieces of rabbit and bacon into another saucepan, strain the sauce over and boil up once or twice thickening it off the fire with the reserved blood; let cook again but without boiling. Dress the stew on a dish and surround it with small clusters of onions glazed separately, if intended for a more ceremonious dish, a few clusters of fresh, peeled mushrooms cooked in butter may be added. (2142). YOUNG RABBIT ROASTED AND LARDED (Levraut Piqué et Rôti). Suppress the skin from the back and hind legs of a good, trimmed rabbit; fill the body with a bread forcemeat (No. 61), with cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and chopped truffles mixed with a third as much liver baking forcemeat (No. 64); sew up the opening. Break the bone of the thick thigh part so as to be able to bend the legs under and keep them in position while trussing; truss also the fore legs and the head, keeping the latter upright. Lard the back and thighs with larding pork (No. 3, Fig. 52). Lay the rabbit on a spit, maintaining it in position with skewers, and roast it for thirty to forty minutes, basting over frequently with butter, and when done salt it over. Remove, untruss, and dress on a dish; serve separately some clear gravy (No. 404), also a light sharp sauce (No. 538). FIG. 430. An illustration of a roasted rabbit. (2143). FILLETS OF YOUNG RABBITS à LA BIENVENU, GARNISHED WITH CROQUETTES (Filets de Lapereaux à la Bienvenu, Garnis de Croquettes). Remove and lard both the fillets and minion fillets from four young rabbits, having the lardons exceedingly small (No. 4, Fig. 52); place them in a sauté pan with clarified butter, place on a brisk fire, let cook and drain off the butter, detaching the glaze with a little white wine. Dress them in the center of a dish and serve with a separate marinade sauce (No. 496), garnishing around with prepared croquettes as follows: Hare Croquettes. --Fry colorless in butter, one ounce of finely chopped onions adding four ounces of chopped mushrooms and eight ounces of cold roast rabbit taken from the legs and shoulders, mix with a well reduced brown sauce (No. 414), also a little meat glaze (No. 402) and fresh butter, add salt, pepper and chopped parsley; when this preparation is cold divide it into inch and a half balls, flatten them to three-quarters of an inch thick, dip in eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and fry to a fine golden color; drain, wipe and lay them around the dressed rabbit, resting one against the other; serve with the sauce as explained above. (2144). FILLETS OF YOUNG RABBITS à LA LAVOISIER (Filets de Lapereaux à la Lavoisier). Raise the fillets and minion fillets from four young rabbits, suppress all the nerves and cut them into bias slices; flatten and shape into half hearts, split them through their thickness to form a pocket and season this with salted spices (No. 168), stuff the cavity with reduced duxelle (No. 385) and cover over with very consistent allemande sauce (No. 407); when cold, dip in eggs and bread-crumbs, then sauté in butter, draining this off when done, decorate with fancy favor frills (No. 10) and dress in two rows, trim the sides with cèpes sautéd à la Provenç ale ( No. 2723 ) and the ends with oval shaped rabbit croquettes decorated with truffles; a separate half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Madeira should be served in a tureen. (2145). FILLETS OF YOUNG RABBITS WITH CURRANT SAUCE (Filets de Lapereaux Sauce aux Groseilles). Remove the nerves and pare two young rabbit fillets, also the minion fillets; lard them with small lardons (No. 4, Fig. 52) and marinate for two hours, then strain the marinade and put its vegetables on the fire to fry in butter, braise the fillets in this, glaze and dress in a circle. Break up the bones and cook them in butter, adding a little flour; with this make a small roux (No. 163), season it with pepper and salt, adding an onion and a bunch of garnished parsley, moisten with boiling port wine, reduce and strain through a sieve, boil it up again and despumate well adding some currant jelly, dissolving it slowly in the sauce; strain the whole through a tammy and pour a part of it under the meats, serving the remainder separately. The fillets can be roasted instead of braised if so desired. (2146). FILLETS OF YOUNG RABBITS WITH ARTICHOKE OR MUSHROOM PURéE (Filets de Lapereaux à la Purée d'Artichauts ou de Champignons). Raise the fillets and minion fillets; divide the larger ones in two or three pieces, then pare each one and make a deep incision on one side; season this and stuff it with cooked fine herbs (No. 385) mingled with a well-reduced half-glaze sauce (No. 413); bread them English style (No. 13), and broil over a slack fire. Dress in a circle filling the center with a purée of mushrooms (No. 722) or artichokes bottoms (No. 704) and serve separately an espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with fumet of rabbit (No. 397). Instead of stuffing the whole inside, one side only need be filled, after sautéing the fillet on one side, mask it with raw game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), then dip in eggs and bread-crumbs and fry in clarified butter to a fine color; serve the same as the above. (2147). GIBELOTTE OF RABBITS (Gibelotte de Lapins). Cut clean fine tame rabbits in pieces, put them into a vessel to season and marinate for a couple of hours with onions, parsley, and vinegar. Melt some chopped up fat pork in a pan; add to it a quarter of a pound of cut up bacon, fry and drain this off. Put the rabbit meats into the same pan and fry over a good fire, bestrew with a spoonful of flour, and moisten to their height with one-third of white wine, and two-thirds of stock (No. 194a); boil up the liquid, then transfer the stew into a saucepan to let cook slowly until partly done; strain the sauce, pare the meats and return them to the same saucepan with the bacon, a clove of garlic, a garnished bunch of parsley, and two dozen small onions browned in a pan; continue to boil all together. At the expiration of a quarter of an hour, put in fifteen to twenty fresh mushrooms, and seven or eight minutes later, dress the meats on a dish with the garnishings around, if there be too much sauce, reduce it; strain it over the stew, and surround with plain bread -crusts cut into triangles, and browned in butter. (2148). GIBELOTTE OF YOUNG RABBITS, PARMENTIER (Gibelotte de Lapereaux Parmentier). After disjointing two young rabbits, wash them in plenty of cold water to extract all the blood, wipe on a cloth drying them at the same time, then fry in butter to stiffen; add two tablespoonfuls of flour, salt, pepper, grated nutmeg, and half a clove of crushed garlic; moisten with half a bottleful of white wine, and some stock (No. 194a), keeping the sauce rather thick, now throw in a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123), and some mushroom parings. Let cook for three-quarters of an hour, skim the fat from the top, drain off the pieces of rabbit, and pare each one, then put them aside in a saucepan to keep hot with a few spoonfuls of the sauce. Now reduce the remainder of it to resemble a thick velouté sauce (No. 415), and thicken it with a liaison of four egg-yolks; strain it through a tammy, and place it in a bain-marie. When prepared to serve, dish up the pieces of rabbit, and garnish around with olive -shaped potatoes cooked in stock (No. 194a) and a pound of cooked mushrooms; add to the sauce kept warm, a heavy pinch of chopped parsley, and two shallots blanched and chopped; also two spoonfuls of olive oil and the juice of a lemon; pour it over the rabbit. (2149). WILD RABBIT BACKS, BROILED (Râbles de Lapins de Garenne Grillés). Pare the backs of three field rabbits, skinned and cleaned; suppress the breasts, then season; dip them in beaten eggs, roll in bread-crumbs, and immerse in melted butter; broil for twenty minutes over a moderate fire while turning. Dress on a dish and serve with a separate sharp sauce (No. 538), or else a tartar sauce (No. 631). (2150). RAIL à LA MAREILLE--ROASTED AND BROILED (Râle Rôti et Grillé à la Mareille) A species of bird belonging to the grallic order; they are in great demand on account of the delicacy of their meats, especially in the fall season. There are two kinds, the water rail and the land rail; the latter being the best. à la Mareille. --Pick, draw, singe, and truss six rails, carefully remove all their pin feathers, then stuff them with the following dressing: Chop six ounces of chicken livers with as much fresh fat pork, both to be chopped separately; mix all together, then season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and chopped truffles, mushrooms, and parsley; cook in a brisk oven, and afterward dress on hollow crusts fried in butter garnished with forcemeat and poached in the oven; serve a Bigarade sauce (No. 435) separately. Roasted. --Prepared the same as the above without any dressing; roast in a hot oven, and dress on croûtons of bread fried in butter, and covered with foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78); pour clear gravy (No. 404) over, and serve with currant jelly. Broiled. --Split the rails, cook and dress the same as the English snipe ( No. 2157 ). (2151). REED BIRDS, BROILED (Mésanges Moustaches Grillées). Split them through the back, remove the intestines, pare and season; place them in a hinged broiler, cook lightly on the opened side and finish cooking on the other side; a few moments should suffice. Dress one resting on the other intercalated with toasts; spread over a little maître d'hôtel butter (No. 581). (2152). REED BIRDS, ROASTED (Mésanges Moustaches Rôties). Remove the gizzards and the pouch from the birds; cut off the legs halfway, singe and cover with bards of fat pork pared very thin; thrust small skewers through, and spread the birds with a spare layer of softened butter; roast them for seven to eight minutes at a brisk fire, salt over when unwrapping and dress on buttered and browned crusts. Serve with sliced lemon. FIG. 404. A sweker with six reed birds. (2153). SNIPE--ENGLISH--AFRICAN STYLE (Bécassines Anglaises à l'Africaine). Divide six snipe in two parts, beat, pare and place them in a sautoir with melted butter; cook the intestines and some chicken livers in butter with half as much grated fat pork, two ounces of bread-crumbs and half a pint of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), pass it through a sieve and incorporate into it a few spoonfuls of chopped truffles; fill some hollowed out half heart -shaped croûtons with this preparation, cover with slices of fat pork and poach in the oven. Sauté the snipe and when done lay on top of the croûtons and cover with espagnole sauce (No. 414), reduced with game fumet (No. 397); serve an African sauce (No. 424) separately. Dowich snipe are prepared the same as English snipe. (2154). SNIPE--ENGLISH--à LA MONTALAND (Bécassines Anglaises à la Montaland). Truss twelve very clean snipe, roast them on the spit or in the oven, leaving them quite rare; lift off the breasts. Fry the intestines and livers in butter, season with salt and pepper; cut off all the leg meats and pound them with the fried intestines, then press through a sieve. Reduce half a pint of champagne with two finely minced shallots, also some truffles, mushrooms, chopped parsley, mignonette and a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414), add to it the pounded meats, a spoonful of olive oil and the juice of a lemon. Dress the snipe on half heart croûtons covered with foies-gras, and pour the sauce over. (2156). BAKED SNIPE (Bécassines au Gratin). Singe and bone twelve snipe leaving on the feet only as far as the phalanges, add a few chicken livers to the livers and intestines. Fry in butter, also one shallot, mushrooms, truffles and parsley all finely chopped, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, set this aside to cool, then pound thoroughly. Pound a third as much panada (No. 121), add little by little six raw egg-yolks and the preparation; when thoroughly pounded, press the whole through a sieve and use half of it to fill the snipes, sew them up, truss and cover with fat pork; wrap them in paper and cook in the oven from ten to twelve minutes; when done, untie, untruss and lay them in a circle on a dish covered with the remainder of the forcemeat; fill the center with truffles, olives and mushrooms, cover with thick allemande sauce (No. 407), bestrew bread-crumbs and grated cheese on top and brown in a moderate oven. (2157). BROILED SNIPE (Bécassines Grillées). Split the snipe lengthwise through the back, cut off the legs, pare nicely and thrust the beak through one of the breasts (see broiled woodcock No. 2204 ), season, coat with oil and broil over a good fire, dress on slices of toast and pour some maitre-d'hôtel butter (No. 581) over; serve very hot. (2158). ENGLISH SNIPE IN PAPERS (Bécassiens Anglaises en Papillotes). Cut six snipe in two lengthways, pare, beat lightly, season and toss them to stiffen both sides. Fry in butter some shallots, raw mushrooms, truffles and parsley all finely chopped, add a few spoonfuls of espagnole sauce (No. 414), besides this fry the intestines with a few chicken livers, season, pound and press through a sieve; put this pulp in with the cooled off fine herbs and divide the preparation in twenty-four parts using one of them to cover the inside of each half snipe. Cut some sheets of paper into hearts, oil, and on one side lay a half snipe, over a layer of grated fat pork and cover with the remainder of the preparation, fold the paper, crimp it all around to enclose properly the birds and dress each one on a small oval dish intended for the table, heating and browning them on this. When of a fine color and swollen considerably, remove from the oven; serve separately an espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with game fumet (No. 397). (2159). SNIPE, ENGLISH, ROASTED (Bécassines Anglaises Rôties). Pick, singe, remove the gizzard and pouch and truss the snipe thrusting the feet inside; cover the breast with a very thin slice of fat pork and cross over this as well as the joint of the thick part of the leg with the beak. Roast them from six to eight minutes, dress on slices of toast, pour the gravy over and garnish with water -cress. (2160). SNIPE STUFFED, BORDELAISE (Bécassines Farcies, Bordelaise). Clean the birds well, draw, remove the gizzard and pouch and chop up the intestines, mix in with them as much grated fat pork, some parsley, chives, salt and pepper; fill the snipe with this dressing and roast them in the oven; dress them on hollowed out bread crusts fried in butter and filled with marrow Bordelaise (No. 436). (2161). SAND SNIPE ROASTED WITH WATER -CRESS (Petites Bécassines de Sable Rôties au Cresson). Pick and singe a dozen sand snipe without drawing them; cover with very thin small slices of fat pork, and run a thin hatelet or skewer into them one after the other. Lay them on a baking sheet, pour good fat over and roast in a quick oven; when done salt and dress in pairs on bread croûtons, three inches long by one and a half wide covered over with butter; pour over some clear gravy (No. 404) and decorate with water -cress. Serve. (2162). THRUSHES ANDRIEUX (Grives Andrieux). A bird similar to the blackbird with speckled plumage; its meat is very succulent. Bone the the backs of eight well-cleaned thrushes, leaving on the breastbone and legs; season the meats and fill the insides with game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), and cooked fine herbs (No. 385). Enclose the dressing, sew and truss the birds for an entrée (No. 178). Line a low saucepan with bards of fat pork, put over bottomless oval molds three inches long, two wide and half an inch high, place a thrush in each of these rings. Cut up some ham, veal, carrots and onions in three-eighths of an inch squares, place them around the birds, also a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, cover with a round piece of strong buttered paper, moisten with a little stock (No. 194a) and Madeira and reduce the liquid till dry, then remoisten with broth and let boil. Close well the saucepan and push it into a moderate oven, leaving it there until the birds are nearly done, then untruss and glaze to a fine color; return them to another saucepan with a little braise stock to keep hot until ready to serve. Prepare some croustades with foundation paste (No. 135); in oval molds three and a quarter inches long, two and an eighth wide and three-quarters of an inch high. Strain the stock, skim off the fat and reduce with the same quantity of espagnole sauce (No. 414), and a gill of good Madeira into which has been infused a piece of Ceylon cinnamon; take a third part of this sauce to serve separately at the same time as the thrush and to the other two-thirds add some truffles and escalops of cooked duck's liver; fill the croustades with this, drain the birds, glaze over and lay them on top, then serve. (2163). THRUSHES à LA BIANCA (Grives à la Bianca). Have as many birds as guests; pick, singe and remove the gizzard, pouch and intestines and fill the inside of each one with Spanish olives stuffed with anchovies, finishing to fill up the empty space with lightly melted fresh butter. Cut as many oval croûtons as there are birds, having them three inches long by one and three-quarters wide and half an inch thick; slit them all around a quarter of an inch high and three-sixteenths of an inch from the edge; take out the inside and place a bird in this hollow; lay them in a sautéing pan the bottom covered with a bed of clarified butter and put it on the hot fire; as soon as the butter is well heated push it into the oven and after the croûtons are colored and the thrushes well cooked, take them out and drain them from the butter on a cloth, then range in a circle on a dish and fill the inside with a garnishing made of minced mushrooms and truffles mingled with half-glaze (No. 400), a tablespoonful of good olive oil and the juice of half a lemon; pour this sauce over all and serve. (2164). BAKED THRUSHES (Grives au Gratin). Have some well-cleaned thrushes, bone keeping on the legs; season the meats, and in each bird set a ball of forcemeat made with quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), and foies-gras from a terrine, half of each. Truss and fry in butter with a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf; drain off the butter, moisten with a little Madeira and stock (No. 194a), and reduce the moisture entirely while cooking slowly. Range a layer of game quenelle forcemeat mixed with cooked fine herbs (No. 385) on a dish; this layer should be seven inches in diameter by three-quarters of an inch high; place the dish on a baking-pan containing a little boiling water and poach the forcemeat in a slack oven. Dress the thrushes on this forcemeat, the breasts lying toward the outer edge and the legs in the center; cover the birds with well reduced velouté sauce (No. 415) into which mix a little game glaze (No. 398), and cooked fine herbs (No. 385); bestrew with parmesan, pour over melted butter, and brown in a hot oven or salamander ( Fig. 123). Serve separately a velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with white wine and mushroom essence (No. 392). (2165). THRUSHES IN THE SAUCEPAN (Grives à la Casserole). Pick and singe one dozen thrushes; remove the gizzard and pouch without drawing them, truss for roasting and fry in butter in an earthenware saucepan over a brisk fire. When done remove them from the saucepan, untruss and dress in a circle on a hot dish, the legs lying inwards; add to their stock a little game glaze (No. 398), some clear gravy (No. 404), the juice of a lemon, and a small pinch of chopped parsley. Pour the sauce over the birds, and serve. (2166). THRUSHES AND ROBINS, ROASTED AND BROILED (Grives ou Rouges Gorges Rôtis ou Grillés). Pick, draw, and singe six thrushes or robins; stuff them with forcemeat made of four ounces of lean cooked ham cut in dice, and as much finely chopped sausage meat; put this into a sautoir on a bright fire to cook, when cool add four ounces of truffles, and the same of foies-gras, cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares; mix in six ounces of thick and well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407). Truss the bird as for an entrée (No. 178), cover the breast with a grape leaf, and on this place a thin layer of fat pork; cook on the spit or in a quick oven, untruss and dress on canapés with the following gravy poured around: Fry two bay leaves in butter with one chopped shallot, salt, pepper, and fine herbs, add half a pint of white wine, and a little stock (No. 194a); let boil and simmer, then put in some game glaze (No. 398), and minced mushrooms; when ready the bay leaves should be removed. For Broiling. --Prepare and broil the thrushes the same as quails ( No. 2128 ), only not allowing them to cook quite as long; dress and serve the same. (2167). VENISON. ANTELOPE. DEER (Chevreuil. Antilope. Daim). The animal should be chosen at the age of eighteen months to two years and a half, in order to have it savory and tender. The flesh is then excellent, however its quality depends principally upon its place of abode. Those with brown hair are better than those with red. Males over three years of age are unfit to eat in certain months of the year. The meats of the kid or doe are also excellent after they have attained the age of nine or ten months. The parts generally used are those from the saddle, leg, baron (see mutton, Fig. 334, for the cuts), quarter, haunch, hip, cutlets and the racks from the fifth rib by the neck as far down as the tenderloin, the shoulders, tenderloins and breast. The saddle tenderloin and rack are larded. The haunch and quarters are marinated from two to ten days and are also larded, but if very fresh and tender venison is eaten without being marinated. (2168). LOIN of DEER, CHERRY SAUCE (Longe de Daim, Sauce aux Cerises). The loin is the part of the deer beginning at the thick loin end and reaching as far as the first rib; remove the skin from the sirloin and put the meat into an earthen dish with a quart of vinegar and two gills of water, should the vinegar be too strong; adding whole peppers, salt, bay leaf, thyme and parsley leaves. Leave it to marinate for several days, then lard with medium lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52); lay it it in a baking pan, and pour over some fat; cook in a hot oven and when three-quarters done season with pepper, salt, pour over vinegar, a little broth and gravy; when done dress and cover with the skimmed stock serving a cherry sauce (No. 447) apart. (2169). RACK OF VENISON, ROASTED COLBERT SAUCE (Carré de Chevreuil Rôti, Sauce Colbert). Have two racks of venison of seven ribs each, bone, suppress the shine bone (see drawing for rack of mutton Fig. 343); remove the skin covering the meat and lard with lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52); put them into a cold cooked marinade (No. 114) for six hours. Roast, dress on a hot dish, pour over the well-skimmed gravy from the dripping pan, to which clear gravy (No. 404) has been added, and surround with Marchioness potatoes ( No. 2797 ) serving a Colbert sauce (No. 451) separately. (2170). VENISON CUTLETS à LA BURIDAN (Côtelettes de Chevreuil à la Buridan). Have some well-pared cutlets (see mutton cutlets, No. 1590), lard them on one side only with fine larding pork (No. 4, Fig. 52), all on the same side so that the handle is on the right; put them in cold marinade for three hours. Make some coffeespoon quenelles (No. 155) with young rabbit and game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), poach in boiling water and drain. Sauté the cutlets in butter, drain it off and replace it by a little game glaze (No. 398) and a gill of vinegar to detach the glaze from the pan, adding a little brown sauce (No. 414); allow it to boil up once or twice and then strain through a sieve and add the quenelles; glaze the cutlets and garnish with paper frills (No. 10). Dish up the cutlets in a circle, fill the center with the quenelles, and serve the sauce separately. Garnish around with small round croquettes made like croquettes à la trimalcion ( No. 3016 ). (2171). VENISON CUTLETS à LA CAUCHOISE (Côtelettes de Chevreuil à la Cauchoise). Cut and pare some venison cutlets and lay them in a sautéing pan with clarified butter; sauté on a brisk fire, then remove from the pan, keeping them warm; detach the glaze with a little white wine and poivrade sauce (No. 523), roll the cutlets in this to have them well covered, take out and trim the handles; range them in a circle and fill the center with some cream of game ( No. 2240 ), and all around with a garnishing made of cabbage purée, mingled with egg-yolks and velouté sauce, then poached in mousseline mold (No. 4, Fig. 138). (2172). VENISON CUTLETS à LA FINANCIèRE (Côtelettes de Chevreuil à la Financière). Prepare some venison cutlets the same size as those of mutton (No. 1590); lard them on one side only, but all on the same side, with the handles on the right; put them into a buttered sautoir with the larded side uppermost and cook them in a hot oven; finally drain off the butter from the sautoir, glaze the cutlets with a brush, trim them with paper frills (No. 10) and dress in a circle on a low venison quenelle forcemeat border; fill the center with a financiere garnishing (No. 667). (2173). VENISON CUTLETS, DEVILED (Côtelettes de Chevreuil à la Diable). Coat some cutlets with mustard and immerse them in melted butter; roll in bread-crumbs and broil. Have some shallots fried in butter and moisten them with a light poivrade sauce (No. 522) and game glaze (No. 398), adding mushrooms, lean cooked ham cut in small squares and chopped parsley. Dress the cutlets crown shape, pour the sauce over and decorate the handle- bones with frills (No. 10). (2174). VENISON CUTLETS, TOMATO PARISIAN SAUCE (Côtelettes de Chevreuil, Sauce Tomate Parisienne). Pare some venison cutlets, season with salt and pepper and sauté in clarified butter or oil over a brisk fire; when of a fine color and sufficiently done, drain off the fat and detach the glaze from the pan with a little white wine, adding a little brown sauce (No. 414) and meat glaze (No. 402). Dress the cutlets after trimming them with paper frills (No. 10) intercalating them with half heart -shaped croûtons and pour the sauce in the center; serve a tomato Parisian sauce (No. 550) separately. (2175). VENISON CUTLETS WITH CHESTNUT PURéE (Côtelettes de Chevreuil à la Purée de Marrons). Pare some venison cutlets the same as mutton cutlet No. 1590, season with salt and dip in oil or melted butter, roll in bread-crumbs, equalize the surfaces and broil to a fine color, trim the handles and dress in a circle, filling the center with a consistent and mellow chestnut purée (No. 712); serve with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) reduced with Madeira and game fumet (No. 397). (2176). éPIGRAMMES OF ROEBUCK, MARINADE SAUCE WITH TRUFFLES (épigrammes de Chevreuil, Sauce Marinade aux Truffes). Pare some roebuck cutlets, put them into a deep dish and season with salt, pepper, mignonette, thyme, bay leaf, parsley leaves, olive oil and lemon juice. Prepare a game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) with half venison and half rabbit meat, lay eight half heart -shaped bottomless molds, they being three and a half inches long by two wide and half an inch high, on sheets of buttered paper, fill them with the quenelle forcemeat and poach lightly in a slack oven; as soon as sufficiently done to bread-crumb, remove, unmold and dip in beaten eggs, then in bread-crumbs, smoothing this with the blade of a knife. Just when prepared to serve, drain the cutlets, wipe and sauté them in butter, fry the quenelles to a fine color, then drain off the cutlets, trim them with paper frills (No. 10) and dress in a circle on a hot dish, alternating them with the quenelles (they to be arranged with the pointed ends uppermost), pour a little marinade sauce (No. 496) with Madeira into the bottom of the dish and serve a sauce -boat of the same, mingling into it three tablespoonfuls of truffles cut in one-eighth inch squares. (2177). DEER OR ROEBUCK FILLETS à LA LORENZO (Filets de Daim ou de Chevreuil à la Lorenzo). Pare two minion fillets of a deer or a roebuck; suppress the superficial skin covering them and marinate for five or six hours in a little cooked marinade (No. 114), drain, lard the entire upper surface with lardons (No. 4, Fig. 52), range them on a small buttered baking pan, one beside the other, cover with buttered paper and cook in a moderate oven for half an hour, until well done. Remove and cut them into slightly bias slices, and dress either in a straight row or else in a circle, and fill the sides or inside with braised chestnuts (No. 654), stuffed Spanish olives (No. 695), mushroom heads, round, medium truffles and large capers; cover with a Pignola Italian sauce (No. 520) and game glaze (No. 398) and trim around with portato croquettes ( No. 2782 ). (2178). ROEBUCK--HAUNCH OR QUARTER--à LA BOUCHARD (Hanche ou Quartier de Chevreuil à la Bouchard). Suppress all the nerves from a good haunch of venison; lay it in a cold cooked marinade (No. 114), for two days, then drain, pare it on the kernel end and lard with lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52), range it on the cradle spit (No. 116) and let roast before a good fire from three-quarters of an hour to an hour. Dress and garnish around with stuffed peppers and rissoles of brain, Princetown (No. 947), mixed with a chopped sauce (No. 538), serving pimentade sauce (No. 521) separately. (2179). ROEBUCK--HAUNCH OR QUARTER--à LA LYTTON (Hanche ou Quartier de Chevreuil à la Lytton). Choose a very fat haunch of roebuck; bone the thick loin end, sprinkle salt over, and coat the surfaces with butter; wrap it up in buttered paper, then in a flat of paste made with three pounds of flour into which is added an ounce of salt, three eggs, and just sufficient water to form a very firm dough; place this in a wet cloth, and leave it for several hours, then roll it out to an eighth of an inch in thickness; wrap it all around the meat; fasten the two ends and sides by wetting them both and have one overlap the other to prevent any fissure whatever, then cover it all with buttered paper; lay it on a cradle spit ( Fig. 116), or else in a moderate oven in a baking-pan. The length of time to cook it depends upon its size; for a medium haunch of venison it will take two hours; deer require three hours. Remove the paper, brown the paste nicely, and serve with a poivrade sauce (No. 522), finished with currant jelly and cold sour apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ). (2180). JUGGED VENISON (Civet de Chevreuil) To jug venison use the breasts, neck, shoulder, and thick loin end (the shoulder and loin ends are to be larded through the meat with seasoned lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52). Cut the meats into pieces an inch and a half to two inches square, and for three pounds of it allow six ounces of un smoked bacon cut in quarter-inch dice; fry the whole in butter, and when stiffened dredge with three tablespoonfuls of flour; let brown slightly, then moisten with six gills of red wine, and three gills of stock (No. 194a), adding a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, some dry orange peel, a whole clove of garlic, and a seasoning of pepper and salt; cook slowly for one hour and a half, then put in three dozen small onions fried in butter, and three-quarters of a pound of small mushrooms; skim the fat from the surface, and add two gills of brandy, one gill of Madeira, and the strained juice of two lemons, or else three tablespoonfuls of good vinegar. Pile up the meats on a dish; season and reduce the sauce, suppress the parsley, and pour it over the meats; surround with heart -shaped bread croûtons fried in oil, then serve. (2181). VENISON --SLICES OF KERNEL--à LA HUSSARDE (Tranches de Noix de Chevreuil à la Hussarde). Cut off some slices from the kernel of a haunch, five-eighths of an inch thick; pare into ovals each one to weigh about half a pound, and marinate in cold cooked marinade (No. 114) for two hours; sauté them rare in butter, and dress on a hussarde sauce (No. 482). (2182). VENISON --SLICES OF KERNEL--IN PAPERS (Tranches de Noix de Chevreuil en Papillotes). Pare oval-shaped some slices half an inch thick cut from the kernel of the haunch; they should each weigh five ounces after being trimmed; broil them rare, and then wrap in heart -shaped sheets of oiled paper; on top of each slice lay a thin slice of fat pork, and over this some well seasoned and thick Duxelle (No. 385), then close the paper, crimp it all around, and lay them on a buttered dish that can be placed in the oven; and on which they should be served; push it in the oven for a few moments to serve when a fine color. (2183). ROEBUCK, LEG OF, à LA FRANCATELLI (Cuissot de Chevreuil à la Francatelli). Have a leg of roebuck weighing about ten pounds; pare and lard it with lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52), and marinade for six hours in cold cooked marinade (No. 114); then roast in the oven, basting frequently with melted butter while cooking, this operation taking about an hour and a half to an hour and three-quarters; salt. Dress, garnish around with bouchées (No. 11) filled with chestnut purée (No. 712). Serve a venison sauce (No. 556) in a sauce -boat. Hand around currant jelly the same time as the meat. FIG. 405. An illustration of a leg of roebuck. (2184). MINCED VENISON (Emincé de Chevreuil). Cut a piece of cooked saddle of venison into even-sized slices; pare and range them in a small sautoir. Reduce the value of two gills of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), incorporating into it a few spoonfuls of the venison gravy and a few spoonfuls of raw cream; when this sauce becomes succulent, finish it with a dash of good vinegar and pour it over the slices of venison. Heat these meats well over a slow fire without allowing the sauce to boil and baste frequently with the same. Dress the stew the same as for minced partridge ( No. 2090 ), either inside a border or else on a dish, and surround with fried Villeroi quenelles (No. 733) or crusts of bread hollowed out and filled in with a cooked salpicon of truffles; strain the sauce over. This mince may also be surrounded with stuffed Spanish olives (No. 695). (2185). SADDLE OF ANTELOPE, HUNTRESS STYLE (Selle d'Antilope à la Chasseresse). Procure a fine thick saddle of antelope; raise the sirloin from one part, remove the skin and lard with small lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52); lift up the minion fillets, suppress their sinews and score with large slices of truffles; pare the remainder of the meat and chop it up with as much fat pork, season with mixed spices (No. 168) and add two eggs. Make a stock with the parings and bones of the antelope. Marinate the sirloin and minion fillets and cook them in a brisk oven. Make small balls with the chopped meats; bread-crumb, English style (No. 13), and bake them in a slow oven; reduce some espagnole sauce (No. 414) and Madeira with the prepared stock, and when a consistent sauce is obtained, put in the meat balls, whole chestnuts and stuffed olives (No. 395). Prepare a bread croûton five inches wide, eight long and two and a half high; hollow it out lengthways on both ends and on each side form semicircles two inches in diameter; carve the croûtons nicely, fry in butter, and fasten firmly to a dish. Cut the sirloin up lengthwise on the bias, lay the pieces in the hollow and the minion fillets in the center. Fasten a skewer garnished with cocks'-combs and kidneys and crawfish in the middle, and one on each of the two ends, and around with croustades garnished with the above prepared garnishing. Serve a huntress sauce (No. 481) with the meat. (2186). SADDLE OF VENISON à L'ATHALIN (Selle de Chevreuil à l'Athalin). For cutting up a venison saddle see Fig. 322. Pare a saddle of venison, removing the skin covering the sirloin; lard it with lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52) across the grain of the meat and marinate for twelve hours in cold cooked marinade (No. 114). Put it in a baking pan with bards of fat pork on top and the marinade; pour butter over and when half cooked baste with more butter and besprinkle with flour. Set the parings into a sautoir with a stalk of celery, onions containing cloves and a bunch of parsley garnished with garlic, thyme and bay leaf; moisten with red wine and stock (No. 194a), boil and simmer for one hour, then thicken lightly with a little kneaded butter (No. 579); remove the saddle from the roasting pan and pour in some gravy (No. 404) to detach the glaze, then add it to the sauce and strain the whole through a tammy, skim off the fat and place a third of the sauce on a dish, dressing the saddle on top; serve the remainder separately in a sauce -boat and some currant jelly on a plate. (2187). SADDLE OF VENISON à LA MACMAHON (Selle de Chevreuil à la MacMahon). Pare and marinate a saddle the same as for à l'Athalin ( No. 2186 ). One hour before dinner drain and roast it in the oven, and when done skim off the fat and put in half a pint of the marinade and as much raw cream; reduce the sauce, cut some medium-sized apples in quarters, range them in a liberally buttered sautoir, bestrew with a little powdered sugar and pour butter over, place in the oven, and when cooked dress the saddle, glaze and pour over a little gravy (No. 404); range the apples on each side and serve the sauce separately. (2188). SADDLE OF VENISON à LA MORTON (Selle de Chevreuil à la Morton). Pare, lard and roast a saddle of venison; as soon as it is done cut off the tenderloin and replace it without deforming the meat, then pour over a little gravy (No. 404) and garnish around with macaroni croquettes, glazed turnips, fried Jerusalem artichokes, boiled white beans and boiled portato balls three-quarters of an inch in size; serve currant jelly apart, also a poivrade sauce (No. 522) having a little Worcestershire added and the whole stirred with some maître d'hôtel butter (No. 581), when ready to serve. (2189). SADDLE OF VENISON, TYROLESE STYLE (Selle de Chevreuil à la Tyrolienne). Prepare and roast the saddle the same as the one with currant jelly ( No. 2193 ); detach the glaze from the pan with a little port wine, a small quantity of espagnole sauce (No. 414), and into it put as much currant jelly, then strain through a fine sieve. Lay the meat on a long dish, pour some good gravy (No. 404) over and surround with tartlets of sour apple marmalade covered with puff paste parings (No. 146); serve the sauce apart. (2190). SADDLE OF VENISON --LARDED--AIGRELETTE SAUCE (Selle de Chevreuil à la Sauce Aigrelette). Lard the saddle the same as explained for saddle with currant sauce ( No. 2193 ), put it in a dish, the minion fillet side uppermost and the larded side underneath, season with mignonette, cloves, garlic, vinegar, onions, thyme, bay leaf and lemon juice; after it has been steeping for six hours, remove and roast it in the oven or on a spit and dress on a hot oval dish; serve an aigrelette sauce (No. 544) separately. (2191). SADDLE OF VENISON, GASTRONOME (Selle de Chevreuil, Gastronome). Trim and lard a saddle of venison; lay it in a baking pan covered with slices of fat pork, carrots, onions and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf; moisten with white wine and stock (No. 194a) and cook in the oven, basting at frequent intervals with white melted butter; when done and of a fine color cut it up lengthways of the meat and reconstruct it as before, strain the stock, remove all the fat and reduce, add Marsala wine, serve the sauce separately. Garnish the ends with mushrooms or cèpes and olives stuffed with anchovies, and gastronome potatoes ( No. 2789 ) at the ends. Serve also a Colbert sauce (No. 451) with the meat. (2192). SADDLE OF VENISON --BREADED-- BLACK CHERRY SAUCE (Selle de Chevreuil Panée Sauce aux Cerises Noires). Instead of larding the saddle, it can be breaded when three-quarters cooked by sprinkling over with white bread-crumbs or pumpernickel; pour on some butter and brown in a hot oven. A black cherry sauce (No. 447) seasoned with cinnamon accompanies this. (2193). SADDLE OF VENISON, PORT WINE SAUCE AND CURRANT JELLY (Selle de Chevreuil à la Sauce Oporto et à la Gelée de Groseilles). Cut the saddle from a roebuck the same as a saddle of mutton, leaving one rib adhere to the end of the loin on both sides; remove the haunch, cutting it off rounded or straight, while crossing the thick loin end; pare the surplus fat and remove the skin carefully that covers the sirloin; lard it with two rows of lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52) inserting them into the meat across the saddle, and the entire length of the sirloin. Roast it either on the spit or in the oven, detach the pan, glaze with a little gravy (No. 404), strain this through a sieve, skim off the fat and pour it over the saddle. Serve separately, but at the same time some currant jelly or port wine, and jelly sauce made by dissolving the jelly in port wine and thickening it with brown sauce (No. 414). (2194). SADDLE OF VENISON --ROASTED (Selle de Chevreuil Rôtie). Unless the meat is far advanced it is unnecessary to marinate it; simply pare the pieces and suppress the skin so as to be able to lard the flesh with larding pork, either crosswise or lengthwise, with lardons. Saddles and quarters of venison are roasted either on the spit or in the oven, basting over with butter. A small saddle of venison takes forty minutes to cook. Roasted venison is served either with a clear gravy (No. 404), a brown sauce (No. 414) with lemon juice added, or else a sauce prepared with the stock it was cooked in, mingled with half-glaze (No. 400), then reduced with raw cream and finished with lemon juice or a dash of vinegar. Or it can also be served with currant jelly dissolved in espagnole sauce (No. 414) and port wine. FIG. 406. An illustration of a saddle of venison. (2195). VENISON GRENADINS à LA ROYALE-- TENDERLOIN (Grenadins de Filet de Chevreuil à la Royale). Trim off some grenadins from the minion fillets, each one to weigh five ounces, and pare into half hearts; after removing the sinews lard with fine larding pork (No. 4, Fig. 52), and marinate for twelve hours; dry, wipe and sauté in good hot fat; drain, glaze and dress in a circle, filling the center with portato quenelles breaded and fried in clarified butter; serve a Colbert sauce (No. 451) separately. (2196). VENISON NOISETTES à LA THIERRY-- TENDERLOIN (Noisettes de Filet de Chevreuil à la Thierry). Cut the tenderloin into slices, each to weigh four ounces when pared and rounded; lay them in a sautoir with melted butter, season with salt, mignonette, a whole clove of garlic and a bay leaf. Just before serving place the saucepan on a hot fire and sauté them quickly; lay each noisette on a bread croûton fried in butter of the same diameter and a quarter of an inch thick; dress them in a circle and in the center have a garnishing of game quenelles made with a coffeespoon (No. 155), truffles cut in the shape of crescent olvies mixed with espagnole sauce (No. 414), reduced with game essence (No. 389) and Madeira wine. (2197). VENISON TOURNEDOS ST. HUBERT-- TENDERLOIN (Tournedos de Filet de Chevreuil St. Hubert). Pare some slices to weigh three ounces each, season and sauté them briskly in a sauté pan with butter; drain, wipe, glaze and dress on a bed of soubise purée (No. 723); garnish around with Spanish olives stuffed with anchovies. Serve separately a tomato sauce (No. 549), mixed with grated horseradish. (2198). WOODCOCKS à LA CAVOUR (Bécasses à la Cavour). Cut six woodcocks in four each and withdraw the intestines, discarding the pouch and gizzard. Fry the quartered birds in butter with some truffles, mushrooms and escaloped sweetbreads; moisten with a little white wine and season with salt, pepper and finely cut-up chives. Fry also the intestines in butter, with the parings, some minced ham, carrots and onions, mushroom parings, all well chopped, thyme and bay leaf; wet with a little white wine when cooked, press through a tammy and add this pulp to the woodcocks; moisten once more with white wine and a little brown sauce (No. 414), despumate well and reduce to a proper degree; dress the meat in a border made of risot (No. 739) and pour the sauce over. (2199). WOODCOCKS à LA DUMAS (Bécasses à la Dumas). Pick, singe and truss eight woodcocks, put them into a saucepan with fresh butter and fry over a brisk fire, adding chopped shallots, salt, pepper and nutmeg. When the birds are cooked drain off the fat, add to their stock the juice of one lemon, a quarter of a bottleful of champagne and half a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414); reduce and put in some whole truffles, cocks'-combs and kidneys. Dress the woodcocks on some stuffed crusts (No. 51) and place the garnishing around. (2200). BREASTS of WOODCOCKS à LA DIANE (Ailes ou Filets de Bécasses à la Diane). Raise the breasts from six well-cleaned woodcocks, remove all the sinews and skin and stiffen them while heating in a little butter; place them under a light weight. Make a dressing with the intestines, removing the gizzard and pouch, adding a little chicken liver and grated fat pork, chopped parsley and seasoning; fill some hollow crusts with this, pour butter over and poach in a slack oven; on each crust lay a woodcock breast brushed with game glaze (No. 398), then dress them in a circle, stick either a whole or half head in each croûton and fill the center with olive -shaped game quenelles ( Fig. 83); cover with brown Périgord sauce (No. 516). (2201). BREASTS of WOODCOCKS à LA HOUSTON (Ailes ou Filets de Bécasses à la Houston). Fry quickly in butter six breasts of woodcocks previously cleaned, singed, and seasoned; as soon as cooked, drain them off. Cook the small part of the intestines before pounding and rubbing them through a sieve. Prepare a little game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), mix in with it an equal quantity of liver baking forcemeat (No. 64), and the pounded intestines. With this preparation fill a smooth buttered border mold ( Fig. 139), having the bottom rounded, and poach it in a bain-marie. Take a part of the woodcock carcasses, to make a good fumet (No. 397), and after it has been strained and the fat removed, incorporate it into a good brown sauce (No. 414) while reducing, also a few spoonfuls of Madeira. When the sauce has attained succulence, strain it over the woodcock breasts, and keep them in a bain-marie. Fry quickly in a frying-pan, with oil and melted butter, half a pound of peeled truffles cut in slices or in large shreds, season and drain off the fat, pour over a few spoonfuls of Madeira wine, and reduce; then add it to the prepared breasts, and dress the whole in the inside of the border, unmolded, on a hot dish. (2202). BREASTS of WOODCOCKS à LA MANCELLE (Ailes ou Filets de Bécasses à la Mancelle). First clean and singe six woodcocks, then roast them; remove all the breast part, and cut off the remainder of the meat to pound with the same quantity of rice; obtain a purée, and combine it with a little espagnole (No. 414) reduced with game fumet (No. 397). Cut some thin slices of foies-gras, pare them into ovals, and dip in flour, then fry in butter; dress the fillets alternating them with the slices of foies-gras; pour into the bottom of the dish a little espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with woodcock fumet (No. 397) and Madeira wine, and to the remainder of the sauce add truffles and mushrooms cut in one-eighth inch squares, serving this separately. (2203). BREASTS of WOODCOCKS à LA VATEL (Ailes ou Filets de Bécasses à la Vatel). Raise the breasts from six fine woodcocks, remove the skin and sinews, and fry them in butter over a brisk fire. Fill some heart -shaped bottomless molds with a game quenelle forcemeat made from the woodcocks ' legs and parings and young rabbit meat; poach them slowly in a slack oven, unmold, cool off, and lay on buttered paper, coat the tops with woodcock cream forcemeat, made as game cream forcemeat (No. 75), and dress the breasts two on each croûton; cover entirely with woodcock cream forcemeat, smooth with a knife, shaping them into hearts, run the beak through from side to side between the forcemeat and fillet. Bestrew with finely chopped coral sifted through a sieve and imitate a flame with yellow tinted game quenelle forcemeat pushed through a cornet, on which place thin fillets of tongue. Pour butter over the whole and push into a moderate oven; when removed lay them on top of a sauce made with game fumet (No. 397) and essence of truffles (No. 395), serving a financière garnishing (No. 667), cut in salpicon (No. 741) apart. FIG. 407. A heart-shaped forcemeat with a beak run through it. (2204). BROILED WOODCOCKS (Bécasses Grillées). Split the woodcocks lengthwise through the back; open entirely, beat lightly, pare, salt, and coat over with oil; broil them over a brisk fire (for they must be served quite rare) and when done dress them on oval toasts (No. 51); cover entirely with maître d'hôtel butter (No. 581), and serve very hot, surrounding the toast with sliced lemon (No. 113). FIG. 408. An illustration of a woodcock. (2205). WOODCOCKS ON CANAPéS à LA PéRIGORD (Bécasses sur Canapés à la Périgord). Prepare some bread croûtons three and three-quarter inches long, two and a quarter inches wide and half an inch thick; cut off the four corners and empty an oblong square on each side one and three-quarters inch long by one inch wide; from each side of the middle remove a half circle an inch in diameter; hollow out the center so that when the bird is dressed it can stand upright on it; fry these in butter and empty the slit. Chop up some woodcock intestines with as much grated fat pork and as much chicken liver, season with salt and pepper and add chopped parsley, a little game glaze (No. 398) and a few egg-yolks, fill the hollowed out spaces on each end of the croûton ( Fig. 41) with this, forming it into dome shape on top and push into the oven with butter poured over. Cook some pieces of truffle with grated fat pork, salt, pepper and fine spices (No. 168) and have it get cold. First begin by picking, singeing and cleaning the birds well; withdraw the gizzard, pouch and intestines; stuff the birds with the truffles and truss well for roasting and inserting the beak into the breast aperture; wrap in thin slices of fat pork, tying on with three rounds of string; roast for ten minutes and dress on the center of the croûtons; serve these with a Madeira half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with essence of truffles (No. 395). (2206). WOODCOCKS ROASTED (Bécasses Rôties). Woodcocks can be roasted with their intestines or else drawn; the gizzard and pouch must always be removed, but the necks left on. Singe the birds, truss by inserting the beaks through the legs ( Fig. 409); lard over and lay them on the spit, roast for twelve to sixteen minutes before a bright fire, basting over with butter and laying pieces of bread in the dripping pan, that is if the birds are not drawn; if they are, then cook their intestines separately with melted fat pork and a few good chicken livers, finishing them the same as the woodcocks on canapés à la Périgord ( No. 2205 ). After removing the birds from the spit, salt them over, dress on a dish with the crusts and sliced lemon placed around; serve some gravy separately. The beak may be stuck in the stomach in front so that in case the bird is cut in two the head will be divided equally. FIG. 409. An illustration of two roasted woodcocks where beaks are inserted through their legs. Roasted woodcock on the left is cook together with intestine whereas woodcock on the right is without intestine. (2207). SALMIS OF WOODCOCKS à LA BEAUMONT (Salmis de Bécasses à la Beaumont). Roast five whole woodcocks, remove the intestines and cut each bird into five pieces, suppress all the skin and lay them in a sautoir. Pound the parings and carcasses, place the purée in a saucepan with three finely cut up shallots and a bunch of parsley garnished with a bay leaf. Moisten with a pint and a half of red or white wine or else champagne according to taste; reduce to half, then add a pint of espagnole (No. 414); let simmer on the side of the range for half an hour, being careful to remove all vestige of fat and scum as fast as it arises to the surface; pass the sauce through a tammy and reduce it to the consistency of a light one, adding some peeled and cut up truffles or mushrooms, or even both. Dress the woodcock on a dish and surround with the truffles or mushrooms; garnish around with hollow crusts filled with the intestines, as much chicken liver and half as much grated fat pork seasoned with salt, pepper and chopped parsley; then poach in the oven. (2208). SALMIS OF WOODCOCKS à LA SANDFORD (Salmis de Bécasses à la Sandford). Roast six woodcocks very rare; cut them in four, lift off all the skin and place the birds in an alcohol chafing dish; season with salt, pepper, add a little blanched shallot, three gills of wine, the juice of a lemon, a little fresh bread raspings and an ounce and a half of butter; simmer for a few moments, then serve. (2209). WOODCOCKS STUFFED (Bécasses Farcies). Bone three woodcocks, remove the best part of their breast meat and cut these into large dice; lay them in a vessel and add an equal quantity of truffles and as much foies-gras; season these meats, and pour over two tablespoonfuls of Madeira. Pound the leg meats with those of three wild pigeons or as much of rabbit, adding a third as much panada (No. 121), and four egg-yolks; season and strain this forcemeat. Melt four tablespoonfuls of grated fat pork, add to it the woodcock intestines, also five or six good chicken livers, season highly and leave stand till cold, then strain and mix the forcemeat with this, also the meats and truffles laid away in the vessel. Fill the woodcock with this preparation, shaping each one to resemble a boned turkey, and wrap a piece of fat pork around; attach them firmly in separate pieces of thin muslin, tying it on tight to keep them in proper shape, then cook in some good stock on a moderate fire for one hour; leave them in this partly cold, then drain, unwrap, and tie them up again tight until thoroughly cold, keeping them in shape, but not under the pressure of any weight. Unwrap them half an hour before serving, stand them upright in a saucepan with a little of their own stock, reduced to a half-glaze; heat them in a very slack oven, basting over frequently, then dress them in a triangle on a forcemeat border, poached in the oven and turned out on a dish, having fastened to the center a portion of bread covered with some of the forcemeat. Place in the angles the three birds' heads, slightly cooked and glazed over with a brush; fasten three skewers garnished with truffles in the summit of the pad and cover the woodcock, and border lightly over with a brown sauce (No. 414) prepared with the stock and the truffle parings. MISCELLANEOUS ENTRéES (2210). BORDER OF CHICKEN FORCEMEAT FILLED WITH CHICKEN BLANQUETTE à LA TOULOUSE (Bordure de Farce de Volaille Garnie d'une Blanquette de Poulet à la Toulouse). Raise the fillets from six young, fat chickens; roll them in a buttered sautoir. With the leg meats prepare a chicken and rice quenelle forcemeat (No. 79). Have a fancy border mold, butter it and fill it up with the forcemeat, place this border in a sautoir and poach for half an hour. Pare the fillet pieces, sauté them in butter, drain this off and replace it by fat béchamel (No. 409), and minced truffles added to it; keep it warm in a bain-marie. Trim a dozen truffles into round shapes an inch and a quarter in diameter, cook them in a little Madeira, add some meat glaze (No. 402), and put into a bain-marie. Unmold the border, dress the chicken blanquette in the center. Cover with a Toulouse garnishing (No. 766), and on the top of the garnishing arrange the prepared truffles. FIG. 410. A plate of chicken forcemeat arranged in ring form and filled with truffles at the middle of the plate. (2211). BORDER OF FISH FORCEMEAT à LA DUCHESS WITH CRAWFISH TAILS AND MORILS (Bordure de Farce de Poisson à la Duchesse aux Queues d'écrevisses et Morrilles). Prepare a not too light cream fish forcemeat (No. 76) with some pike meat; also prepare a plentiful garnishing with good morils blanched and cooked, unshelled crawfish tails, slices from the tails of small freshly cooked lobsters, and poached oysters; lay all of these in a flat saucepan, and keep covered. Half an hour before serving fill a fancy border mold with the prepared forcemeat, and poach for twenty-five minutes in a bain-marie. Besides this put on to reduce three gills of velouté sauce (No. 415), incorporating into it slowly a few spoonfuls of good court bouillon (No. 38), and the oyster and crawfish broth; when this sauce becomes succulent, strain it over the garnishing, heat up without boiling, and finish with a piece of red butter (No. 580). At the last moment turn the border over on a hot dish and fill the center with the garnishings, dressing them in a dome without any sauce; on this lay four pretty cooked crawfish, having them whole, only the tails being shelled; place a small round truffle on the summit, and serve the sauce apart. FIG. 411. A decorative plate filled with cubes of fish forcemeat at the bottom layer, and with crawfish tails and morils on the top layer. (2212). BORDER OF RISOT VALENCIENNES (Bordure de Risot Valenciennes). Blanch and cook six beef palates in a good mirepoix stock (No. 419), drain and leave them to cool under a weight, pare and cut up into large Julienne; lay these in a sautoir with three gills of Madeira sauce, simmer on a slow fire for a quarter of an hour, and when very tender add half the quantity of freshly cooked truffles cut like the fillets. Have a good risot prepared with about a half pound of Piedmontese rice (No. 739); as soon as done remove and mix in one spoonful of sweet Spanish pepper reduced to a pulp; cover the saucepan and keep it for five to six minutes on the side of the range and then finish with butter and grated parmesan; season to taste. With this rice fill a buttered border mold, as shown in the cut, place it for a few moments in the heater to harden, then unmold it on a dish and fill the center with beef palate preparation; serve at once. FIG. 412. A decorative pentagonal border is placed at the middle of a plate and is filled with very fine cut beef palate. (2213). BORDER OF RISOT OF LOBSTERS OR SPINY LOBSTERS (Bordure de Risot de Homards ou de Langoustes). Boil two good lobsters or spiny lobsters in a white wine court-bouillon (No. 419), drain, and five to six minutes later detach the tails from the body and keep them warm in a few spoonfuls of their liquor. Cook four or five uniform-sized peeled truffles in Madeira wine, cut them up in broad slices of an inch thickness and keep them warm in a saucepan with their own broth that has been strained and mixed with a little melted meat glaze (No. 402). With half a pound of good Piedmontese rice prepare a risot (No. 739) cooked with plain fish broth (No. 195) and a small spoonful of prepared red pepper (No. 168); as soon as done finish with fine butter and fresh parmesan; mold it in a buttered border mold, as shown in the cut, and keep it slightly warm. Split two lobster bodies, take out all the creamy parts, press through a sieve and lay it aside. Chop half of the shells, fry them in oil for a few moments and sprinkle with a pinch of prepared red pepper (No. 168), then moisten with two or three gills of good court-bouillon and white wine (No. 419); cook slowly for ten to twelve minutes, strain the liquid, free it of fat and reduce to a half-glaze; thicken with a gill and a half of good tomato sauce (No. 549), and reduce it once more for a few moments, then remove from the fire and finish with two spoonfuls of the creamy parts from the bodies, add some butter, stir vigorously and lastly put in two or three spoonfuls of the reduced truffle broth. Suppress the tail shells hastily, pare the meats, trim off the thin ends and cut all the pieces in not too thick slices; lay them in a sautoir and cover with a few spoonfuls of the sauce buttered at the very last moment. Unmold the border on a hot dish and in the center place the slices of lobster and the truffles in a pyramidical form; pour part of the sauce over, serving what remains in a separate sauce -boat. FIG. 413. Slices of lobster and truffles are arranged in a pyramifical form and are placed at the center of a decorative plate. (2214). BOUDINS OF CHICKEN à L'éCARLATE (Boudins de Volaille à l'Eácarlate). This entrée is dressed on a low rice croustade ( Fig. 9a) slightly hollowed on top. First cook two small red beef tongues in boiling water with the pared meats taken from a large raw chicken, prepare a quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), keeping it rather firm; season tastily and smooth by working it with a spoon, then finish by incorporating in slowly some béchamel sauce (No. 409) reduced with chopped fresh mushrooms until it becomes succulent and thick, but do not pass it through a sieve. After the sauce is well mixed with the forcemeat divide it into seven or eight equal parts and roll these into pieces, two and a half inches long and three-quarters of an inch thick, on a flour ed table, press them down a little with the blade of a knife to decrease their thickness. Range these boudins as soon as done one beside the other on a lightly buttered raised-edge baking tin and cover with salted hot water, then heat the liquid until the forcemeat hardens. Drain the boudins on a cloth, pare them evenly and dip them in beaten egg-whites, then in white bread-crumbs. Now drain the tongues, cut them into lengthwise through the center; roll them in a sautoir with half-glaze (No. 400) so as to cover them lightly and dress them in a row, alternating each one with a boudin; cover these with a little good reduced velouté (No. 415) mixed with a montglas composed of chicken with half as many truffles and mushrooms cut in fillets. Surround the base with a chain of small round truffles glazed over with a brush. Send to the table at the same time a sauce -boat of velouté sauce. (2215). BOUDINS OF CHICKEN à LA SOUBISE (Boudins de Volaille à la Soubise). Have half a pound of leaf lard chopped up very finely, add to it one ounce of soaked and pressed bread-crumbs, pound the two together, then press through a sieve. Put this into a bowl with half a pound of raw chicken meat minced very finely, mingle well together and gradually add half a pint of soubise onion purée (No. 723), nine raw egg-yolks, a quarter of a pound of raw truffles (if obtainable), cut in three-sixteenths inch squares, and with this preparation fill some ready prepared sheep's casings three inches long and one inch in diameter, not too full, throw them into boiling water, remove them almost immediately and prick them with a larding needle, then broil them over a very slow fire; serve a soubise sauce (No. 543) in a separate sauce -boat. (2216). BOUDINS OF CHICKEN AU CARDINAL (Boudins de Volaille au Cardinal). Prepare a consistent chicken forcemeat (No. 75), cut half of a medium-sized onion into small one-eighth inch squares, blanch, refresh and drain, then fry them colorless in butter, stirring continuously; drain well and mix this with the forcemeat. Butter sixteen molds the shape of the half of a small boudin (this shape is well shown in the quenelles, Fig. 81), three and five-eighths inches long by one and three-eighths inches wide. Scatter some finely chopped lobster coral over the insides of these molds and fill them up with the forcemeat, leaving an empty space in the center; fill this with a salpicon composed of truffles, red beef tongue and mushrooms cut in three-sixteenths inch squares and mingled with some well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407). After they are ready place eight on top of the other eight, the salpicon to be in the center; twenty minutes before serving lay them in a flat saucepan one beside the other, pour some boiling water over and poach without boiling, then drain and unmold on a napkin. Dress them in a row on a dish, one close to the other, on a lobster sauce (No. 488), buttered with lobster butter (No. 580); serve some of the same sauce in a sauce -boat and throw over some chopped lobster coral. (2217). BOUDINS OF CHICKEN WITH MONTEBELLO SAUCE (Boudins de Volaille à la Sauce Montebello). Put a pound and a quarter of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) into a vessel; smooth and mix in a quarter as much salpicon of truffles and cooked foies-gras. Lift the forcemeat with a tablespoon and push it with the finger to have it fall on a flour ed table; roll these pieces into sausage shapes, flatten a little on both sides with the blade of a knife, then range them at once in small quantities on a smooth and flour ed saucepan lid without once handling them. Place a sauté pan and remove to the side of the range, leaving in the boudins until the forcemeat hardens, then lift them out with a skimmer and lay them on a cloth, one next to the other, to wipe and pare lightly. Dip them into beaten egg, roll in fresh white bread-crumbs and place them on the bottom of a sautoir with clarified butter to brown both sides while turning them over carefully; drain and dish in a circle on a Montebello sauce (No. 502). (2218). BOUDINS OF GAME à LA BERCHOUX (Boudins de Gibier à la Berchoux). Cook on a slow fire half a pound of chopped leaf lard with a quarter of a pound of chopped onions, and let get cold. Have half a pound of cooked and finely chopped game meat and seven ounces of soaked and well-pressed bread-crumbs; pound both of these together and pass through a sieve; put it into a bowl and mix in gradually the onions and lard, also two gills of béchamel sauce (No. 409), seven raw egg-yolks, a quarter of a pound of chopped mushrooms, and truffles, some salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and nutmeg. Fill some ready prepared sheep's casings, three inches long and one inch wide, with this preparation--not too full--and plunge them into boiling water; prick them with a larding needle, and then broil them over a slow fire. Serve a Berchoux sauce (No. 434) separately. (2219). BOUDINS OF GAME OR CHICKEN BLOOD à LA VICTORIN (Boudins de Sang de Gibier ou de Sang de Volaille à la Victorin). Collect a pint of blood either from a hare, rabbit or chicken, stir into it a little vinegar to prevent coagulation; cut half as much breast of fat pork as there is blood into three-sixteenths of an inch squares, fry these in butter with a little chopped onion and mix in the blood, or else fry the onion in butter and stir into the blood some cooked veal udder instead of the fat pork, a little apple marmalade, and mix together; season well with salt, pepper, a little sugar and cream. With this preparation fill some sheep's casings one inch in diameter; when filled, but not too tight, divide them in three-inch lengths, tying the ends; poach, drain and when cold rub them over with lard; prick and broil them on a slow fire and serve plain without any sauce. (2220). BOUDINS OF KINGFISH à LA PONIATOWSKI (Boudins de Kingfish à la Poniatowski). Prepare a quenelle forcemeat of kingfish (No. 90), into which add an eighth of its quantity of chopped truffles; roll them into round pieces three-quarters of an inch in diameter and two and a half inches long; wrap each one separately in buttered paper, then poach in boiling salted water; drain, dip in beaten egg, and fry in clarified butter. Drain and dress on a folded napkin; serve a separate sauce -boat of Polish sauce (No. 524). (2221). BOUDINS OF SALMON WITH SHRIMPS (Boudins de Saumon aux Crevettes). Prepare one pound of fish quenelle forcemeat made with salmon (No. 90). Butter some boudin molds the same as for boudins of chicken au cardinal ( No. 2216 ) and garnish the sides with the delicately prepared salmon forcemeat, adding to it four ounces of fresh mushrooms, and two ounces of truffles, both cut into eighth of an inch square bits; lay one mold on top of the other, and set them in a sautoir close together; pour over boiling water, and put them to poach in a slack oven; unmold and dress them on a well-buttered Normande sauce (No. 509). (2222). SKEWERS OF CHICKEN LIVERS, COLBERT SAUCE (Brochettes de Foies de Poulet, Sauce Colbert). Cut up into one-inch squares some chicken livers; season with salt and pepper and run them on to metal skewers ( Fig. 176), intercalating each piece with a thin one-inch square of bacon; coat over with oil or melted butter, roll in bread-crumbs and broil over a slow fire; dress them on a Colbert sauce (No. 451). (2223). SKEWERS OF LAMPREYS, MARINADE SAUCE (Brochettes de Lamproies, Sauce Marinade). Skin a fine lamprey, clean well and cut off the head, also the thin tail end, then divide it into quarter-inch pieces; lay these in a tureen with sliced onions, parsley, a clove of garlic, truffle peelings, aromatic herbs, allspice, salt and a little brandy, and let macerate for a few hours in a cool place, tossing them about at short intervals; when sufficiently steeped drain them off and wipe dry; run an iron skewer ( Fig. 176) through, alternating each slice with one of fresh, fat salt pork. Set these brochettes on a baking sheet, pour a little butter over and cook them in the oven, basting frequently with more melted butter. Add to the marinade two gills of brown sauce (No. 414), as well as half a pint of stock (No. 194a); remove all scum rising for a quarter of an hour while standing it on the side of the range; remove all its fat and afterward strain the sauce, pour into it half a glassful of Marsala wine, reduce again for ten minutes, keeping it in a bain-marie ( Fig. 122). When the pieces of fish are cooked, take them from the oven, sprinkle them liberally with salt and dress on a dish, surrounding them with cut-up lemons, and serve the sauce separately. (2224). BROCHETTES OF LOBSTERS (Brochettes de Homard). Plunge some live lobsters in boiling water just sufficiently long to easily detach the meat from the shells; drain them, and break the tail shells so as to obtain all the meat contained therein; cut this up into transversal slices three-sixteenths of an inch thick, season them highly with salt and prepared red pepper (No. 168), immerse them in melted butter, and run skewers ( Fig. 176) through the pieces, alternating each one with slices of cooked mushrooms; lay them again in butter, and broil them over a steady fire for twelve to fourteen minutes. Dress them on a dish, pour over some Colbert sauce (No. 451); serve very hot. (2225). OYSTER BROCHETTES (Brochettes aux Huîtres). Poach lightly some large oysters in their own liquor, dry them on a cloth, pare, and lay them in a deep plate, season and mix them with some fine herbs cooked with truffles (No. 385) and a pinch of sweet peppers; cover the oysters with oil, and roll them in this seasoning. Run them one by one on small skewers ( Fig. 176), alternating each with slices of cooked mushrooms; brush them over with melted butter, roll them in bread-crumbs and broil them for six or seven minutes, turning them frequently, then dress them at once. (2226). BROCHETTES OF SWEETBREADS (Brochettes de Ris de Veau). Blanch the sweetbreads, suppress the windpipes and fat and place them under a weight to reduce to the thickness of an inch; when cold cut them lengthwise into slices an inch square; cut these into pieces three-eighths of an inch thick; season with salt, pepper, oil and chopped parsley; run each square on small silver skewers ( Fig. 176), alternating them with a thin piece of bacon cut an inch square; besprinkle with white bread-crumbs and broil over a slow fire for fifteen to eighteen minutes, having all four sides equally cooked. Dress on a hot dish, pour maître d'hôtel butter over (No. 581) and garnish with slices of lemon. FIG. 414. An illustration of a brochettes of sweetbreads. (2227). CASES à LA MONTGLAS--SMALL (Petites Caisses à la Montglas). Cut some chicken fillets into fine Julienne, also truffles and red beef tongue; put on the fire to reduce two gills of good espagnole (No. 414), incorporating into it slowly the truffle broth, and a few spoonfuls of Madeira and meat glaze (No. 402); it should be succulent and thick, then throw in the Julienne, and remove the saucepan at once from the fire, to allow the contents to cool off. With some liver baking forcemeat (No. 73), mingled with a little raw quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), line the bottom and sides of about fifteen china cases, making a hole in the center of each; into this place a little of the prepared montglas, and cover with more of the forcemeat, smoothing it down with the blade of a small knife. Range the cases on a baking sheet containing a little hot water and keep them in a slack oven for fifteen to eighteen minutes in order to poach the forcemeat and montglas. After removing the cases cover the tops with a layer of Madeira sauce (No. 492), and return them to the oven for two minutes to have them attain a glossy appearance. Dress in a circle on a folded napkin, garnishing the center with a layer of very green parsley leaves. (2228). CASES OF ENGLISH SNIPE à LA CARêME (Caisses de Bécassines Anglaises à la Caréme). Bone nine snipe thoroughly after they have been well-singed and cleaned; fill them with game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) into which mix a little Madeira and cooked fine herbs (No. 385); lay them in oval molds the size of the inside of the paper cases in which they are to be served, and cover with slices of fat pork; cook them in the oven for twenty minutes. Oil a sufficient number of paper cases, turn them over on to a grater and stiffen in the oven; cover the bottom and sides with delicate game forcemeat (No. 75), into which mix some chopped truffles. Lay the unmolded snipe in the center, reconstruct the heads naturally, imitating the eyes with a little white forcemeat, and a small round of truffle; push the beak on the neck end leaving only the head protrude, then place the cases in a buttered sautoir, cover with a round of buttered paper, and push into the oven to poach the forcemeat; drain off all the fat, and cover with a brown sauce (No. 414) made with a game essence (No. 389) extracted from the carcasses, and some Madeira wine. (2229). CASES WITH FAT LIVERS --SMALL (Petites Caisses de Foies-Gras). Cut into small escalops half of a large cooked fat liver; put it into a small sautoir with an equal bulk of escalops of cooked truffles cut the same size as the livers; moisten these with a little good thick sauce reduced with Madeira; let simmer without boiling for seven or eight minutes, then take it off and leave to cool partly. With this stew fill eight or ten china cases, cover the tops quickly with a thick layer of chicken forcemeat (No. 89), smooth nicely, and then range the cases on a small baking sheet. Poach the forcemeat in a slack oven, warming the stew at the same time, and finally cover the surface of the forcemeat with a little cold Madeira sauce (No. 492) applied with a brush; return to the oven for two minutes to gloss the sauce, and then dress the cases pyramidically on a folded napkin. FIG. 415. A plate of cases with fat livers are arranged pyramidically on top of a folded napkin. (2230). CASES OF LARKS OR SNOW BIRDS (Caisses d'Alouettes). Bone thoroughly one dozen snow birds or larks; put the intestines into a pan with grated fat pork, a few chicken livers and a few foies-gras parings, fry over a quick fire, season and mix in some mushroom peelings. When this preparation is cold, pound and press it through a sieve, then mix in with it twelve ounces of chopped and pounded fat pork, four ounces of chopped and pounded lean pork, pound all together and pass through a sieve. Take out a third part and divide the other two-thirds into twelve parts and fill the birds with them; roll them up into balls, range them on the bottom of a saucepan and brush over with a little melted game glaze (No. 398) and Madeira wine, cook them quickly for a few minutes to stiffen, then remove. Oil twelve small oval paper cases, having them an inch and a quarter wide by two inches long; drain and set them on the grater to stiffen in the oven; cover the bottoms and sides with a layer of the forcemeat (No. 73), set a bird on top of each case, range them on a small baking sheet, push into a slack oven and a few moments later baste the birds with a little melted game glaze (No. 398); remove them five minutes after, dress on a dish and brush over with some good reduced sauce. (2231). CASES OF OYSTERS à LA HILTON (Caisses d'Huîtres à la Hilton.) Prepare and line the cases exactly as for Lorenzo ( No. 2232 ); fill them with small oysters after removing the muscle or ligament, cover over fine herbs cooked dry (No. 385), and finish with a béchamel sauce (No. 409), reduced with the oyster liquor, well seasoned; besprinkle with fried bread-crumbs, brown in a hot oven and serve on folded napkins. (2232). CASES OF OYSTERS à LA LORENZO (Caisses d'Huîtres à la Lorenzo). Either buttered metal or china cases may be used for these, or else buttered paper ones stiffened in the oven; cover their bottoms and sides with a thin layer of fish quenelle forcemeat (No. 90), mixed with some soubise purée (No. 723). Poach medium-sized oysters in their own liquor and white wine; drain and pare them, cut them up into pieces half an inch in size, and use these to fill in the cases; set on top some mushrooms that have been chopped up raw, fried in butter, then covered with velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with the oyster liquor and finished with a piece of lobster butter (No. 580) and a dash of cayenne; cover over with a layer of the same forcemeat, smooth and moisten the tops with a brush dipped in melted butter; range the cases on a baking sheet, and set them in a slack oven from twelve to fifteen minutes, then serve. FIG. 416. Cases of oysters are arranged pyramidically on top of a plate with folded napkin. (2233). CASES OF QUAILS à LA DéJAZET (Caisses de Cailles à la Déjazet). Bone thoroughly some well-cleaned quails, open them on a cloth, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, cover the inside meats with a layer of game forcemeat (No. 91) with chopped truffles added and envelop the forcemeat, forming them in the shape of an egg, and lay them inside of bottomless oval molds of the same size as the paper cases in which they are to be served; set the molds on a baking sheet, cover with thin slices of fat pork, moisten with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419) and cook in a hot oven. Mask the bottom and sides of the paper cases previously oiled and stiffened with a thin layer of quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) and the same quantity of cooked forcemeat (No. 73), both well mixed together; put the quails in the center and push into the oven for about twenty minutes, then cover with a salmis sauce (No. 536), mixed with the strained and skimmed braise stock. (2234). CASES OF SQUABS à LA FOLSOM AND CASES OF SQUABS à LA UMBERTO (Caisses de Pigeonneaux à la Folsom et Caisses de Pigeonneaux à la Umberto). Pluck well all the pin feathers from some drawn, singed and cleaned squabs; bone them entirely, beginning by making an incision in the meat on the back and following the line down on each side with the help of a small knife; remove the breast and wing bones, then fill the inside with chicken forcemeat (No. 89) into which has been mingled mushrooms and truffles chopped up fine, fried in butter and wetted with a little Madeira. Oil the insides of some paper cases, turn them upside down on a baking pan, push them into the oven to stiffen and then cover the bottoms and sides with a layer of the same forcemeat; set the squabs on top, one on each, and cover with a slice of fat pork; cook them in a slack oven for half an hour. Drain off the fat and dress the cases in a circle, having on top of each one a channeled mushroom head (No. 118); pour a Madeira sauce (No. 492) over that has been reduced with some mushroom essence (No. 392). Cases of Squabs à la Umberto. -- Butter or oil as many oval paper cases as there are squabs to be prepared; place them in the oven to stiffen and brown, then drain. Bone the birds, stuff them with a delicate quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which mix chopped truffles and mushrooms; lay them in a sautoir in oval rings of the same diameter as the cases, moisten with a little mirepoix stock (No. 419), reduce it to a glaze, then remoisten to half the height of the squabs, and when done the stock ought to be well reduced; lay them in the cases and cover over with African sauce (No. 424), dress and serve. (2235). CASES OF SWEETBREADS à LA GRAMMONT (Caisses de Ris de Veau à la Grammont). Blanch and braise the sweetbreads as indicated in la Montebello (No. 1560), then put them in round rings under the pressure of a weight. Melt some butter; fry in it a little shallot, parsley, mushrooms and truffles, all finely chopped, season and moisten with Madeira wine; let fall to a half-glaze, then thicken with egg-yolks. Fill some cases half full of these herbs, lay the sweetbreads on top and cover each one with a slice of fat pork; place them in the oven, and when cooked remove the pork and drain; pour the stock over the sweetbreads; when cooked reduce to a half-glaze. FIG. 417. Cases of sweetbreads arranged pyramidically on top of a plate with folded napkin. (2236). CASES OF THRUSHES (Caisses de Grives). Select six good, fat thrushes, not taking those that are too large; singe and split them down the back to bone the breasts and draw the insides; season the interior meats and lay in each one a ball of game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), mixed with a third as much of the intestines from the birds, cooked, pounded and rubbed through a sieve. Sew up the opening on the top, truss the legs and shorten the stumps. Melt some grated fat pork in a saucepan, range the birds in this, season and fry while turning them over until partly cooked, then drain and draw out the sewing thread without disturbing the legs. Add to the fat in the saucepan two or three spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385), a pinch of bread-crumbs and some grated fat pork, obtaining a light paste. Oil over with a brush six oval paper cases, and on the bottom of each spread a layer of this paste and over place a thrush; set the cases on a buttered sheet, cover with buttered paper and push into a slack oven to finish cooking the birds. At the last moment remove, untruss the legs, glaze over with a brush and set each case inside another white one in order to serve them neatly. (2237). CASES OF THRUSHES à LA DIANA (Caisses de Grives à la Diane). Split eight thrushes through the back, leaving on the breastbone and legs; stuff them with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), add to this forcemeat a third of its volume of foies-gras from a terrine, mix well together and inclose a ball of the forcemeat an inch and a half in size in a bird, and place them in buttered oval tin rings, covering over with thin layers of fat pork, and cook them in a slack oven. Oil some oval paper cases, turn them on to a grater and lay this on a baking sheet, stiffen them in the oven, remove and line them with a light layer of the same forcemeat; place a thrush inside of each and push them into a slow oven for twelve minutes; as soon as done remove the pork, drain off the fat and cover with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and game fumet (No. 397); set the case inside of another cleaner and larger one, then serve. (2238). CASSEROLES OF LAMB SWEETBREADS à LA DE LUYNES (Casseroles de Ris d'Agneau à la de Luynes). Braise twelve unlarded lamb sweetbreads as for la Montebello (No. 1560); when cooked place under a weight to reduce to half an inch thick, and when cold cut them up into squares, as well as a quarter as many cooked truffles into one-quarter of an inch squares. Put on to reduce some béchamel sauce (No. 409), stirring into it some truffle essence and a little good melted game glaze (No. 398); when the sauce is properly reduced, add to it the salpicon of sweetbreads and truffles. Fill some small porcelain or silver casseroles (flat saucepans) with this preparation, having them quite full and rounded on the top; smooth the surfaces dome-shaped with a knife, let get cold and then cover over with a thin layer of forcemeat, besprinkle with parmesan and bread-crumbs, pour a little melted butter over, then bake lightly in a slack oven. (2239). CASSEROLES OF RICE WITH CHICKEN, PALESTINE (Casseroles de Riz au Poulet, Palestine). Pick and wash in several waters, one pound of rice, more or less according to the size of the casserole that is to be made. Place it in a saucepan, moisten with double its quantity of water and cover entirely with slices of fat pork, salt over and allow to cook, then drain and pound, moistening with a little water. Put this into a saucepan on the fire and let get dry, then turn it over on to a baking sheet or a marble slab and taking in the hands a little less than half, mold it to the shape of a mushroom head, proceeding exactly the same with the other half, keeping back a piece to roll into a round form, then flatten it down to half its thickness. Dress the croustade, laying the flat side of one of the small mushroom pieces on a sheet of paper, then fasten the flattened ball in the center and place the other large mushroom on top of this, only having it reversed, the widest part uppermost. Carve the croustade all around and cover it with clarified butter, then brown in a brisk oven and empty out the inside; fill it with fillets or breasts of chicken sautéd in clarified butter and small artichoke bottoms cut in four, also some truffles; when these ingredients are well done dress them inside the croustade; drain the fat from the sautoir, moisten with a little Madeira to detach the glaze, then add some half-glaze sauce (No. 413), reduce, and pour it over the chickens; garnish around the top with hatelets of chicken Villeroi. A Potato Casserole can be prepared the same as the one of rice, having a very dry mashed portato preparation moistened with raw egg-yolks, then molded; baste butter over and brown in the oven; empty it out and fill up with chicken livers sautéd in butter with cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and Madeira sauce (No. 492). (2240). CREAM of PARTRIDGE OR CHICKEN (Crème de Perdreau ou de Poulet). Pound the meats taken from two roast partridges or chickens, with a piece of butter, a few parings of cooked foies-gras and two or three spoonfuls of reduced velouté sauce (No. 415); pass the whole through a sieve. Dilute this pulp with ten egg-yolks and one whole one, two gills of good raw cream and two gills of very concentrated game fumet (No. 397) prepared with the partridge bones or those of the chickens. Pour this preparation into a small vegetable dish or small buttered timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137), and poach in a bain-marie, done by placing the dish in a saucepan containing hot water, having this water quiver only and not boil. As soon as the cream is set, remove to serve. (2241). CREAM of PHEASANT, CHANTILLY (Crème de Faisan, Chantilly). Pound the meats of a raw pheasant; season and pass them through a sieve; return to the mortar and pound again with four egg-yolks, and three-quarters as much butter; put this into a thin metal bowl, and beat on ice to render it smooth and acquire a body, mixing in about a gill of raw cream; try a little piece in the oven in a very small mold to discover its consistency, and rectify when necessary. Prepare a montglas composed of uncooked foies-gras, truffles, and recently cooked tender red beef tongue; place it in a small sautoir to mingle with two or three spoonfuls of velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with pheasant fumet (No. 397); keep it in a bain-marie. Butter a mold ( Fig. 139) with clarified butter; fill with the forcemeat, smooth the top, then poach in a bain-marie for twenty minutes, with a white paper laid on top; wipe the mold neatly after it has been removed, and turn the contents over on to a rice croustade foundation ( Fig. 9a) fastened on to a dish; this to be an inch thick, and slightly wider than the mold; fill the hollow at once with the montglas; brush the forcemeat lightly with a little of the velouté sauce, serving more separately. (2242). CRéPINE OF LAMBS ' TROTTERS, PéRIGUEUX SAUCE (Crépine de Pieds d'Agneau, Sauce Périgueux). Prepare and cook the lambs ' trotters the same as for the poulette (No. 1788), drain and wipe; open them lengthways, and bone them entirely, using the utmost precaution not to tear the flesh; divide each one into two parts, season and fill the hollow place in each half foot with a salpicon composed of truffles, veal udder and cooked foies-gras, combined with raw quenelle forcemeat (No. 92), and a little baking forcemeat (No. 81); place on each four slices of truffle; wrap each half foot in a band of "crépine" or caul fat, previously well dried and beaten between two cloths to reduce its thickness; roll these crépines in melted butter, then in bread-crumbs, smooth and equalize the surfaces with the blade of a knife, and boil them for twenty to thirty minutes over a very slow fire, turning them during the operation. Dress them on a very hot dish, and serve with a sauce -boat of Périgueux sauce (No. 517). (2243). CRéPINE OF PULLET (Crépine de Poularde). Put half a pound of grated fat pork in a saucepan with as much butter and oil, set it on the fire with the pullet, and brown this to a fine color, then take out and untruss. Brown in butter some finely chopped shallot and mushrooms, season with salt, pepper and chopped parsley, let cool off, and use it to mask the surface of the pullet, then lay over a layer of not too hard quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), and wrap the whole up in a piece of "crépine" or caul fat; baste with butter, bestrew with bread-crumbs, and place it in a hot oven to finish cooking the pullet; dress and pour around a buttered half-glaze sauce (No. 413), with lemon juice added. (2244). CRéPINE OF BRAINS (Crépine de Cervelles). Prepare and cook some brains as for the poulette (No. 1481); when well drained, split them in four through the thickest part. Blanch one pound of onions, cut in eighth of an inch dice pieces, in salted water for ten minutes; drain them off, then fry these in butter to cook without coloring; season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, thyme and bay leaf; add a quart of velouté sauce (No. 415), reduce well, suppress the thyme and bay leaf, and thicken with six egg-yolks and a little butter; let this preparation cool off partially, then envelop the slices of brains in plenty of it, and then wrap them in "crépine" or caul fat, giving each one a flat oval-shape; dip in butter and roll in bread-crumbs, broil over a slow fire, and serve on a slightly thickened aspic gravy (No. 391). (2245). CRéPINE OF CHICKEN à LA TURENNE-- BREASTS (Crépine de Filets de Poulet à la Turenne). Pare and chop up finely half a pound of raw chicken fillets, and one pound of chopped fresh fat pork; season with an ounce of spiced salt (No. 168), and two tablespoonfuls of chopped truffles. Pound the chopped chicken, add to it the pork. Spread some pieces of "crépine" or caul fat on a napkin; divide half of the prepared forcemeat into inch and a half diameter balls, and lay on top of the crépine a fine slice of truffle, over this a forcemeat ball; flatten down to half, and place on top some minced mushrooms previously fried in butter with fine herbs, and on this lay another slice of truffle. Wrap the crépines into oval-shapes, and dip each in butter, then roll in bread-crumbs to broil over a slow fire; serve on a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) finished with mushroom essence (No. 392). FIG. 418. An illustration of a forcemeat ball. (2246). CRéPINE OF PIGEONS, POIVRADE SAUCE WITH TRUFFLE ESSENCE (Crépine de Pigeons, Sauce Poivrade à l'Essence de Truffes). Truss six pigeons as for an entrée (No. 178); braise them in a mirepoix stock (No. 419) and when done transfer them to a vessel, straining the mirepoix stock over and then let get thoroughly cold. Spread some pieces of "crépine" or caul fat on the table; split the pigeons in two, pare nicely and cover with a forcemeat made of half a pound of veal and half a pound of veal suet, both being finely chopped and pounded to a pulp, then mix in two ounces of bread crumbs, salt, pepper, nutmeg, finely shredded chives, chopped up mushrooms and a few egg-yolks; when this forcemeat is of a sufficient smoothness, and has acquired a firmness, use it to cover over both sides of the pigeons, laying it on rather thick; place a few slices of truffles on top and wrap the whole in pieces of crépine; baste over with melted butter and roll in bread-crumbs, then put them in a slow oven to get very warm, and serve on a poivrade sauce (No. 522) with essence of truffle (No. 395) added. (2247). CRéPINE OF REEDBIRDS (Crépine de Mauviettes). Take one dozen well cleaned and boned reedbirds, remove the breasts and put the leg meats and intestines into a sautoir, fry them in butter with some truffle parings and let get cold; season with salt and pepper, pound to a pulp and press through a sieve; mix in with this as much game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), and later add an equal quantity of fine herbs. Pare the breasts, remove the skin without extracting the minion fillets, season and cover both sides with a part of the forcemeat. Have some fresh and well soaked "crépine" or caul fat; remove the fattest parts with a knife and wrap the breasts in, dip them once in butter, then in bread-crumbs, smoothing this nicely with the blade of a knife, fry in clarified butter, drain and dress in a circle with a bread croûton between each of the breasts. Fry some chopped mushroom, shallot and parsley, moisten with a little white wine and good stock; reduce the stock, add to it a little meat glaze (No. 402) and parsley and finish with a piece of fresh butter; cover the crépines with this and serve at once. (2248). CRéPINE AND SAUSAGES of VENISON (Crépine et Saucisses de Chevreuil). Crépine. --Take a pound of venison minion fillets, suppress all the sinews and cut it up into medium quarter-inch squares, place these in a vessel with half as many raw truffles cut in three-sixteenths inch squares, and season with salt and spices, pour a little Madeira over and marinate for one hour. Mix in with some prepared pork farce (No. 68), three ounces of foies-gras braised and cut in three-sixteenths inch squares; after it is cold, pound the parings with a few truffle parings and put the whole together, season highly and divide the preparation into even parts each the size of an egg and shape them into flat ovals, wrap up in fresh pork "crépine" or caul fat, brush over with butter, dip in bread-crumbs and broil on a moderate fire for fifteen minutes while turning over; range them on a dish, pouring a little reduced gravy (No. 404) in the bottom, or add some Westphalian sauce (No. 561) to this. Sausages. --Chop up three pounds of lean and sinewless venison with the same weight of fresh pork, a coffeespoonful of fine spices or else powdered sage, two coffeespoonfuls of pepper, three of salt, and three gills of water; when the whole is well chopped fill some mutton casings so as to form sausages five to six inches long; prick them and broil. (2249). CRéPINE OF YOUNG RABBITS (Crépine de Lapereaux). Remove all the meats from two raw young rabbits after they have been properly cleaned; suppress all the skin and sinews and chop up finely, then mix in an equal quantity of chopped fresh pork and season highly. Chop all this once more together, adding one-sixth of the same quantity of cooked fine herbs (No. 385) such as onions, shallots, mushrooms, truffles and parsley. Lay this hash on a large piece of "crépine" or caul fat and roll it up oval shape, flatten to half an inch in thickness, butter over with a brush and place it in a deep, narrow, but long baking pan; cook for thirty or forty minutes in a slack oven while basting occasionally. Drain and dress on a dish, serving at the same time a sauce -boatful of good gravy reduced with game glaze (No. 398). (2250). CROUSTADES OF CHICKEN LIVERS WITH MADEIRA (Croustades de Foies de Volaille au Madère). Prepare some croustades in channeled molds, buttered while cold and lined with fine foundation paste (No. 135), fill them up with buttered paper and rice, over this a round of buttered paper, cover and fasten on a flat of the same paste; pinch the edges and lay on the center a puff paste cover made in three layers an eighth of an inch thick and two inches in diameter for the lower one, an inch and a half for the second and an inch for the upper one; egg over and bake in a hot oven, take off the lid and empty out the insides. Fry some chicken livers in a sautoir over a brisk fire, drain off the fat and moisten with a little Madeira or Marsala wine, adding some small cooked mushroom heads and half-glaze sauce (No. 413). Fill the croustades with these livers and mushrooms, sauce over, replace the covers and serve. (2251). CROUSTADES OF LAMB SWEETBREADS --SMALL (Petites Croustades de Ris d'Agneau). Keep warm eight to ten small channeled croustades made of astruc, each to be provided with a channeled and pointed cover. Cut into dice some recently glazed lamb's sweetbreads; put this salpicon into a small saucepan with half the quantity of cooked truffles cut the same as the sweetbreads. FIG. 419. An illustration of a plate of lamb sweetbreads croustades. Put a few spoonfuls of good béchamel (No. 409) on to reduce, incorporating in the truffle broth and a little melted meat glaze (No. 402); when succulent and thick mix it with the salpicon, then remove it at once from the fire and fill up the small croustades, smoothing the preparation to a dome; leave to cool, cover with a thin layer of raw forcemeat (No. 89), bestrew with parmesan and bread-crumbs, pour melted butter over and warm slightly in a slow oven. (2252). CROUSTADES OF REEDBIRDS (Croustades de Mauviettes). Cut ten to twelve crusts of bread; slit them all around and simply brown the surfaces in a sautoir with clarified butter to open and empty them out. Bone ten to twelve fine reedbirds, season and fill them with a little baking forcemeat (No. 81), besprinkled with chopped truffles : lay a piece of foies-gras in the center, and return them to their original shape; run a thin skewer through the legs. After the crusts have been emptied and are nearly cold, cover them over quickly with a thin layer of the same forcemeat, and in the hollow space in each lay one of the birds, sinking it down in such a way that it will not be deformed while cooking. Butter them over with a brush, season and cover with a thin slice of fat pork. Place the crusts on a buttered baking sheet, and this on a thick baking-pan so that the heat reaches the top more than the bottom. Cook the birds for twelve to fifteen minutes in a slack oven, and after removing them cover over with a good, reduced, thick and cold brown sauce (No. 414); let them attain a gloss at the oven door, then dress the crusts on a folded napkin. (2253). CROUSTADES OF THRUSHES (Croustades de Grives). Bone five or six thrushes, leaving on the thighs and two-thirds of the stumps; season them on the opened side and fill with baking forcemeat (No. 81), mingled with a spoonful of plain, raw pork forcemeat (No. 73); bestrew this dressing with a pinch of chopped truffles, and lay in the center a small slice of cooked foies-gras or half a good pullet's liver, seasoned and partly cooked with melted fat pork. Reconstruct the birds to their original shape, but do not sew them, only uphold the legs with a slender wooden skewer; cover over with a small band of buttered paper, and range them in a narrow sautoir lined with fat pork, moistening to half their height with good unskimmed fat. Boil for two minutes, salt over, and remove the sautoir on one side, keeping them for ten to twelve minutes without boiling. These thrushes should merely poach; leave them till partly cold in their liquid, then drain off to pare. Cut six hollow crusts ( Fig. 42) slit them around, and fry lightly in butter, then empty out the centers and cover the hollow with a layer of forcemeat. In the middle of each of these crusts lay one thrush, cover over with a very thin slice of fat pork, and place these on a small, lightly buttered baking sheet and put this one inside another, so as not to have the crusts brown too rapidly. Cook the thrushes in a slack oven for ten to twelve minutes, and as soon as they are nicely done remove and cover them at once with a thin coating of brown sauce (No. 414) reduced with game fumet (No. 397) and Madeira. Glaze the surface of the sauce to let it acquire a brilliancy and luster, then dress and serve. (2254). CUPOLA OF CODFISH à LA BISCAYAN (Coupole de Morue à la Biscayenne). Butter a cupola-shaped mold, coat the inside with a layer of butter and dust over with white bread-crumbs, then pour into the mold three well-beaten eggs, shuffle them around so they moisten the entire surface, drain off the surplus egg and bread-crumb the mold once more; with this double breading it will be found easy to cover the mold with a layer of rice prepared as follows: Cook half a pound of rice with just sufficient fish stock (No. 195) to cover, and when dry finish it with butter and grated parmesan; beat it up vigorously and lay it aside to get cold, then use it to spread half an inch thick over the entire interior surface of the mold. Soak two inch-square pieces of salt codfish for eighteen hours, changing the water three times in the meanwhile. Fry four ounces of onions cut into three-sixteenths inch dice in two gills of oil, add to this four crushed and chopped cloves of garlic, a pint of thick tomato purée (No. 730), a pint of broth (No. 194a) and six ounces of capers; cook the codfish in this preparation, and when done and the stock quite consistent let it become cold, afterward using it to fill the cupola, finishing the top with another layer of the rice. Place the mold on a small baking sheet for half an hour in the oven, then detach the rice with the blade of a knife and invert it on a hot dish; surround the cupola with sweet peppers sautéd in oil and bestrew the whole with chopped parsley. (2255). CUTLETS OF TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA BABANINE (Côtelettes de Filet de Bœuf à la Babanine). Cut up in squares a pound of raw tenderloin of beef, well-trimmed and free of all fat and sinews, then chop it up very fine. Chop separately a quarter of a pound of beef-marrow, then chop the two together. Season with salt, pepper and nutmeg; mix in slowly half a pint of cream while continuing to chop; roll out and flatten a small ball of this hash, place it in the oven to try its consistency; if the preparation be too firm add a little more cream, if too soft a few raw egg-yolks. Divide the preparation into eight equal parts, roll each one separately on a table dredged with rice flour, shape them like cutlets, arrange them on a buttered pan, pour over a little melted butter, and cook in a quick oven for six or eight minutes. Serve separately a Lithuanian sauce (No. 487). (2256). CUTLETS OF TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA BIENVILLE (Côtelettes de Filet de Bæuf à la Bienville). Cold roast or braised tenderloin of beef is used to make these cutlets; trim one pound of beef free from fat or sinews; cut it into three-sixteenths of an inch squares, and the same quantity of cooked mushrooms cut the same size. Reduce some brown Madeira sauce (No. 492) in a saucepan, add to it some raw egg-yolks, and a little good butter, then mix in the beef fillet, also the mushrooms. Heat the preparation well, and when boiling pour it in a dish to let it become perfectly cold, then divide it into twelve equal parts. Roll them out on a table dredged with grated bread-crumbs; shape them in form of cutlets, dip them in beaten egg and then roll them in bread-crumbs; flatten the tops with the blade of a knife, so as to make them smooth and equal-sized, then fry them in very hot fat until they have assumed a good color, and serve them with well-buttered gourmets sauce (No. 472). (2257). CHICKEN CUTLETS à LA ADOLPHE HARDY (Côtelettes de Poulet à la Adolphe Hardy). Chop up finely one pound of raw chicken fillets after suppressing all the sinews and fat; add half the same quantity of fresh butter, season and mix the whole well together. Divide the preparation into two inch in diameter balls and shape them like a cutlet; dip in beaten eggs and bread-crumbs and fry in clarified butter; drain and decorate with favor frills (No. 10). Range them in a circle, filling the center with a garnishing of minced cèpes fried in butter, drained and moistened with cream reduced with the cèpes, season and just when ready to serve finish with a piece of butter, lemon juice and chives minced very fine. FIG. 420. An illustration of a chicken fillet. (2258). CHICKEN CUTLETS à LA CLARENCE (Côtelettes de Poulet à la Clarence). Fry lightly in butter and lemon juice six well-pared chicken fillets cut into half hearts; place them under a weight to press lightly and divide each one into halves through the thickest part and trim neatly again. Bone the legs, suppress the nerves and fat and fry them in butter, then allow to cool; pound these with the same quantity of foies-gras from a terrine, adding about six egg-yolks and proper seasoning; pass this through a sieve and then mix in four tablespoonfuls of chopped truffles, a little melted glaze (No. 402) and a dash of cayenne and nutmeg. With this preparation cover both surfaces of each fillet, range them on a lightly buttered baking sheet and let get cold on ice; detach them from the sheet, heating it underneath, then roll each separate one in bread-crumbs, dip in beaten egg, roll once more in the crumbs, and smooth the breading with the blade of a knife. Plunge a few chops at a time into hot frying fat to brown nicely, then drain and insert a small favor frill (No. 10). Dress them in a circle on a forcemeat ring poached in a plain border mold ( Fig. 139), hollowed on the top; in the center of the ring range minced fresh mushrooms thickened with well-reduced béchamel sauce (No. 409). (2259). GROUSE OR PRAIRIE HEN CUTLETS à LA SéGARD (Côtelettes de Tétras ou de Poulet de Prairie à la Ségard). Braise the fillets from the breast of a grouse, remove the skin and nerves and chop up finely; add six ounces of butter, season with fine spices and mix in three tablespoonfuls of game cream forcemeat (No. 75); with this preparation shape some cutlets, dip them in beaten egg and breadcrumbs and fry in clarified butter over a good fire. Serve separately, but at the same time a tomato sauce (No. 549) mixed with half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (2260). CUTLETS OF KINGFISH, MAYONNAISE MOUSSELINE (Côtelettes de Kingfish, Mayonnaise Mousseline). Make a very delicate fish quenelle forcemeat (No. 90); mold this into cutlet -shaped molds, and poach until sufficiently consistent to be able to egg and bread-crumb; fry in clarified butter, and when a fine color dress on napkins. Garnish the ends with paper favor frills (No. 10) and serve with a mayonnaise mousseline sauce (No. 615) separately. (2261). LOBSTER CUTLETS à LA SHELLEY, OR WITH CREAM SAUCE (Côtelettes de Homard à la Shelley, ou à la Sauce à la Crème). Cook in a court bouillon (No. 38) one lobster of two and a half pounds, take out all the meat, cut one pound of this into three-sixteenths inch squares, add to it half a pound of cooked mushrooms cut the same as the lobster, and mix this salpicon with a velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with mushroom essence (No. 392), and into which has been added a little meat glaze (No. 402); season, stir well over the fire, and when the preparation reaches boiling point, pour it into a vessel to get cold. Have a bottomless cutlet mold five-eighths of an inch high by three and three-quarters inches long and two inches wide; butter and lay it on a piece of buttered paper slightly larger than the mold, garnish the bottom and sides with a light layer of pike forcemeat (No. 90), set the salpicon in the center and cover with more forcemeat; poach this lightly, unmold and set it aside till cold, then dip it in beaten eggs, then in bread-crumbs; fry in clarified butter, drain and serve on napkins with favor frills (No. 10) and a separate lobster sauce (No. 488) containing chopped truffles. With Cream Sauce. --Have a lobster croquette preparation (No. 880), mold it to the shape of a cutlet, bread-crumb and fry the sauce as for the above; when a fine color, dress the cutlets and garnish with favor frills (No. 10), serving them with a separate cream sauce (No. 454). (2262). CUTLETS OF PHEASANT à LA REGINALD (Côtelettes de Faisan à la Réginald). Cut up a pound of the white meat of a cooked pheasant free of fat and skin into three-sixteenths inch squares, also four ounces of truffles; mingle these with reduced béchamel (No. 409) and meat glaze (No. 402), season properly and let get cold. Divide the preparation into one and three-quarters inch in diameter balls, roll and lengthen them on one end in the shape of a cutlet and lay them in bread-crumbs; then dip in beaten eggs and again in the bread-crumbs, flatten them down to half an inch in thickness and mold them into cutlet -shaped bottomless molds; unmold and fry in very hot white fat or clarified butter, drain and trim with fancy favor frills (No. 10). Dress either in a circle or in a straight row, and serve at the same time a well buttered velouté sauce (No. 415), into which squeeze the juice of a lemon; strain it through a tammy and then add chopped parsley and small three-sixteenths of an inch pieces of cooked mushrooms and red beef tongue. (2263). CUTLETS OF SQUABS à L'ALBUFéRA (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux à l'Albuféra). To be prepared the same as the signora ( No. 2269 ); replace the slice of truffle by a braised cock's-comb, having it fall to a glaze in Madeira and half-glaze (No. 400). Serve separately a poivrade sauce (No. 522) with truffles. (2264). CUTLETS OF SQUABS à LA JARDINIèRE (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux à la Jardinière). Thrust the legs inside as many young pigeons as needed, and split them in two lengthwise, flatten, then trim each half cutlet -shaped, the leg bone to take the place of the handle, season and roll in butter after breading them over, broil and dress on a jardinière garnishing (No. 677), decorating the leg with a paper frill (No. 10); serve. (2265). CUTLETS OF SQUABS à LA LAURISTON (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux à la Lauriston). Truss the legs inside of six prepared squabs; split them in two lengthwise, beat down to flatten, season and pare into cutlet shapes. Lay them in a sauté-pan with butter, shallots, mushrooms and truffles, all finely chopped, and cut up chives; cook together for half an hour without browning, then drain off the butter and place the cutlets under the pressure of a weight; let the herbs get quite cold, then mix them with some chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), and with this preparation cover each inner side of half a squab; dip them in beaten eggs and roll them in bread-crumbs, smooth well the breading and fry in clarified butter. Dress the birds in a circle, garnish the handle with a frill (No. 10) and fill the inside with a purée of green peas ( No. 2742 ). Serve a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Marsala wine separately, adding to it a dash of cayenne pepper. (2266). CUTLETS OF SQUABS à LA DE LUYNES (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux à la de Luynes). Prepare the cutlets the same as for the Lauriston, only replace the forcemeat by a well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407) with lemon juice added. Cover the cutlets with this and when cold dip them in eggs, roll in bread-crumbs, and fry in clarified butter; dish up and fill the hollow of the circle with asparagus tops. Serve separately a well-buttered half-glaze sauce (No. 413) into which mingle lemon juice and chopped parsley. (2267). CUTLETS OF SQUABS à LA PéRIGUEUX (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux à la Périgueux). After dressing the pigeons as for jardinière ( No. 2264 ), pour over a Périgueux sauce (No. 517), to which add a garnishing of small chicken quenelles, laid through a cornet on to a buttered baking sheet into bead shapes a quarter of an inch in diameter, then poached in boiling water and drained. (2268). CUTLETS OF SQUABS à LA PROVENç ALE (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux à la Provenç ale ). Prepared the same as the jardinière ( No. 2264 ), then fried in oil with minced onion, and a clove of garlic; drain off the oil and replace it by white wine, espagnole sauce (No. 414) and tomatoes. Cover the saucepan and finish to cook; just when ready to serve, add minced mushrooms and chopped parsley. (2269). CUTLETS OF SQUABS à LA SIGNORA (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux à la Signora). Have some well-cleaned and singed young pigeons; make an incision down the entire length of the backs and bone them by beginning at this incision and following the line of the carcass on both sides, then take out all the bones leaving a drumstick on the same side of each pigeon; season. Mix well together some chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), with as much cooked forcemeat (No. 73); spread out a layer of it on the inside of the squab, and in the center on the back place a fine slice of peeled truffle, having it three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; cover this over with another layer of the forcemeat, and wrap this in the boned pigeon, shaping it like a cutlet; dip in melted butter, then in bread-crumbs. Butter a baking sheet, and range either buttered molds or rings shaped like cutlets on top, set the pigeons in these, sprinkle butter over, then place them in a moderate oven, and let cook for twenty minutes. Remove the sheet from the fire, drain off the pigeons and decorate the legs with paper frills (No. 10); dress them in a circle, and serve separately a queen sauce (No. 530). (2270). CUTLETS OF SQUABS IN PAPERS (Côtelettes de Pigeonneaux en Papillottes). Draw, singe and clean nicely some young pigeons, cut an incision in the skin between the rump and the breast; thrust the legs inside, split the pigeons in two lengthwise and pare them to resemble cutlets, then fry lightly in butter with lemon juice without letting acquire a color; set them under a weight and trim them again into the required shape. Place some oil, grated fat pork, chopped shallot, mushrooms, parsley, salt, allspice and eighth-inch squares of ham into a sautoir; when these ingredients are well fried, but not browned, add some half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and Madeira wine. Coat some heart -shaped sheets of paper with oil, on one of the halves lay a thin slice of fat pork, over this some of the above prepared sauce and then a pigeon cutlet on top, finishing with more of the sauce and a thin slice of cooked ham; fold the empty half of paper over on the full one, pinch the edges well together to enfold all and enclose hermetically, then lay them on a well-buttered dish intended for the table; set it in the oven to brown the paper and heat the cutlet. The paper should swell up; serve as soon as done. (2271). SWEETBREAD CUTLETS, MODERN STYLE (Côtelettes de Ris de Veau à la Moderne). Cut one pound of sweetbreads into slices; season and cook with some butter in a sautoir, turning them over when done on one side; drain, let get cold under a weight, then cut up into small quarter-inch dice pieces; lay them in a tureen with half a pound of cooked mushrooms cut the same size, and a quarter of a pound of un smoked beef tongue cut in three-sixteenths inch dice; mix this salpicon with some allemande sauce (No. 407), bring to a boil, stir well with a reducing spatula and set it away to cool in a dish; when cold shape it into cutlets, dip them in beaten eggs, then in bread-crumbs and fry; then dress in a circle, garnish with favor frills (No. 10) and pour a financière sauce (No. 464) into the bottom of the dish. (2272). SWEETBREAD CUTLETS à LA TALLEYRAND (Côtelettes de Ris de Veau à la Talleyrand). Braise some unlarded sweetbreads and set under a weight to get cold; cut one pound of these into quarter-inch dice-shaped pieces with the same quantity of artichoke bottoms, and mushrooms cut the same, and four ounces of truffles cut in three-sixteenths inch dice and mingled with a béchamel sauce (No. 409) thickened with egg-yolks and fine butter. After this preparation is cold divide it into equal parts and shape them as cutlets; dip in egg and bread-crumbs, fry to a fine color; dress in a circle, garnish with favor frills (No. 10), pouring a cream of soubise sauce (No. 543) in the center. (2273). VEAL CUTLETS, POGARSKI (Côtelettes de Veau, Pogarski). Chop up one pound of fillet of veal free of all sinews, mix it in with ten ounces of butter, two ounces of bread-crumbs, half an ounce of salt, and nutmeg; roll about three ounces of this on a table, besprinkle with rice flour and shape them into the form of cutlets; dip in beaten eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and fry in clarified butter; glaze each cutlet over with a brush and dress them in a circle with paper favor frills (No. 10) on the ends. Garnish with fried potatoes cut in five-eighths inch balls and serve separately a tomato sauce (No. 549) mixed with half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (2274). CUTLETS OF YOUNG HARE à LA FAVORITE (Côtelettes de Levraut à la Favorite). Take both fillet and minion fillets, suppress the sinews and cut the meat lengthwise in two or three pieces; flatten and pare into half hearts, salt and lay them on a buttered baking sheet; bend them all to the right and give them the shape of a cutlet. Cut each minion fillet in three equal pieces, streak them on their length with truffles and place on the outside edge of the cutlets, cover over with bards of fat pork or else melted butter and cook in a brisk oven; drain and decorate with fancy favor frills (No. 10). Lay these cutlets on bread-crumb croûtons cut the same size, dressing them in a circle, and fill the center with a stew composed of quenelles made with the leg and shoulder meats, truffles, mushrooms and espagnole sauce (No. 414), well reduced and beaten with some fumet (No. 397) made of the hare's carcasses and bones; serve more of this sauce apart at the same time. (2275). YOUNG RABBIT CUTLETS à LA PRéVILLOT (Côtelettes de Lapereaux à la Prévillot). Take four very tender young rabbits, remove the hind part of them and cut them in two lengthways through the center, bone the thighs leaving on the leg bone; remove all the sinews, then season and stuff them with godiveau of rabbit (No. 84), made with the minion fillets and fillets, mixing into it some cooked fine herbs (No. 385); sew them up and shape them into cutlets, stiffen and color these lightly in butter on both sides, then set them under a light weight and when cold pull out the threads and pare them all alike into cutlet form; dip them in egg and bread-crumbs. Prepare a fumet (No. 397) with the rabbit parings; when ready to serve have some hot clarified butter in a sautoir, put in the cutlets and cook to a fine color; drain, wipe and trim the handles, dress and pour around a Prévillot salpicon (No. 749), and serve the fumet separately, reduced with a little espagnole (No. 414). (2276). ESCALOPS OF TENDERLOIN of BEEF WITH TRUFFLES (Escalopes de Filet de Bœuf aux Truffes). After paring a medium-sized tenderloin, cut it lengthwise in two, then across in pieces three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; trim them round-shaped an inch and a quarter in diameter. Place them one beside the other in a well-buttered stewpan, add some slices of the truffle of the same dimensions; cover with melted butter and when ready to serve put the stewpan on a moderate fire for a few moments. Drain off the butter, and finish with a reduced Madeira sauce (No. 492). FIG. 421. An escalop of tenderloin with truffles. (2277). ESCALOPS OF BEEF PALATES WITH PURéE OF CHESTNUTS (Escalopes de Palais de Bœuf Purée de Marrons). Prepare and cook the beef palates the same as for palates à la béchamel (No. 1326); when cold and pressed cut them into oblongs two and three-quarters inches by one and one-half inches. Cover both sides of the pieces with a layer of delicate chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), mixing in with it an equal quantity of cooked fine herbs (No. 385). Dip in eggs and fresh bread-crumbs, and fry them to a fine color. Dress them crown-shaped, and garnish the center of the crown with a consistent purée of chestnuts (No. 712). FIG. 422. A plate of beef palates arranged in a ring form and filled with purée of chestnuts at the center of the ring. (2278). ESCALOPS OF CHICKEN, FINANCIèRE (Escalopes de Poulet Financiàre). Lift off the breasts from four fine chickens; remove the minion fillets, and suppress the skin; cut the breasts crosswise into three-sixteenths of an inch thick slices, pare these lightly to ovals and range them in a sautoir with clarified butter. Streak the minions with truffles, form them into circles, and place in a buttered sautoir. Sauté the prepared escalops on a hot fire, drain off the butter, and add quenelles, mushrooms, truffles, and some financière sauce (No. 464). Poach the minion fillets; dress the escalops inside a decorated chicken cream forcemeat border, or else in a croustade, and serve separately a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Madeira, or if for white, replace this by some good velouté sauce (No. 415). (2279). ESCALOPS OF FAT LIVERS à LA VILLENEUVE (Escalopes de Foies-Gras à la Villeneuve). From a good fresh and firm raw fat goose liver cut seven or eight escalops one and a quarter inches in diameter by three-sixteenths of an inch thick; pare them into ovals or rounds, season and range on a sautoir; surround with fine slices of raw truffles, cut the same diameter, season and sauté them, pour over the whole some good half-glaze (No. 400) and Madeira. Boil up the liquid, then push the dish into a slack oven, basting them with their liquid. Twelve to fifteen minutes will suffice to poach the liver in this stock. At the last moment, dress the escalops on a dish in a close circle, and dress the slices of truffles around, one overlapping the other; thicken the stock with a little good sauce, pour it over the liver and truffles, and serve immediately. (2280). ESCALOPS OF FAT LIVERS à LA RULLI (Escalopes de Foies-Gras à la Ruili). Braise for forty minutes in a mirepoix (No. 419) with Madeira some duck's or geese livers, wrapped in thin slices of fat pork or caul fat and buttered paper; put them into a small vessel, and pour the stock over, then let get cold in this; remove them from the stock and cut them into slices a quarter of an inch thick; pare them into rounds an inch and a quarter, and have the same quantity of truffles and mushrooms sautéd in butter. Fry some shallots in butter, add chopped up parsley, meat glaze (No. 402) and some well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407), and with this cover over the livers, mushrooms and truffles. Have small sheets of buttered paper, lay on the livers, partly overlapping the livers lay a slice of truffle, and partly overlapping the truffle lay a slice of mushroom; cover again with a little more of the sauce, and leave to get very cold; remove from the paper, then roll the escalops in bread-crumbs, afterward dip them in beaten egg, again in bread-crumbs, again in the egg, and in the bread-crumbs once more; smooth the crumbs with the blade of a knife, and fry them a fine color; dress on a folded napkin with a bunch of fried parsley to decorate. (2281). ESCALOPS OF FAT LIVERS WITH RISOT, PéRIGUEUX SAUCE (Escalopes de Foies-Gras au Risot, Sauce Périgueux). Prepare three-quarters of a pound of Piedmontese rice into a risot (No. 739). Cut up the quarter of a fat liver cooked and cold into small escalops; put them in a sautoir with half as many cooked truffles also cut up; add three spoonfuls of Madeira sauce and as much melted meat glaze (No. 402). Keep the stew hot. Lastly finish the risot with fresh parmesan, fine butter, and prepared red pepper (No. 168). Pour half of this into a large buttered plain dome-shaped mold, press it well on the sides in such a way that a hollow is formed in the center; fill this with the foies-gras stew and cover with the remainder of the rice; keep it in a heater for seven to eight minutes, then turn it out on a dish, covering the bottom of it with a little Périgueux sauce (No. 517). (2282). ESCALOPS OF LAMB OR VEAL à LA HABIRSHAW (Escalopes d'Agneau ou de Veau à la Habirshaw). Lift off the fillet from a loin of lamb or veal, remove all fat and sinews, cut it up into small slices three-sixteenths of an inch thick, flatten, pare and shape them into rounds; they should each weigh one ounce after being trimmed; fry these in butter over a brisk fire, drain off the butter and add salt, pepper, minced cèpes, meat glaze (No. 402), a spoonful of Madeira wine and chopped parsley. Cut some cucumbers across into an inch and a quarter thick slices, and remove from them pieces with a column tube an inch and a half in diameter, pare and take out the insides with a smaller tube, three-quarters of an inch in diameter; line a baking sheet with thin slices of fat pork, lay the cucumbers on top and fill in the insides with cooked fine herbs (No. 385), into which mix a little chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89); cover over with more slices of pork and cook them slowly in the oven; when the cucumbers are sufficiently done dress them in a circle which will form a border and fill the inside with the escalops. (2283). ESCALOPS OF PHEASANTS WITH OLIVES (Escalopes de Faisans aux Olives ). Raise the breasts of two raw pheasants, cut them in twelve thin escalops of equal thickness, oval-shaped and rather large, season and range them in a sautoir with clarified butter to stiffen them simply on one side, drain them on to a baking sheet covered with buttered paper and lay another sheet of the same on top; then let them cool under the pressure of a light weight. With the pheasant parings prepare a good forcemeat (No. 91), fasten on a round dish a rice croustade foundation cut into a ring, having it half an inch thick; take up the escalops one by one and with an oval pastry cutter slightly narrower than they themselves pare so as to have them all of even size. Cover the stiffened side with a thin layer of a preparation made with half purée of truffles and half purée of foies-gras mingled with a little melted glaze (No. 402) and a sixth of its quantity of the above raw pheasant forcemeat. Smooth the surfaces neatly and replace the escalops in the same sautoir as the butter; push this into a slack oven to poach the preparation and the escalops. Drain them off and dress in a circle on the rice ring fastened on to the dish, fill in the hollow center with a garnishing of large Spanish olives, glaze the escalops lightly with a brush and pour over the garnishing a little good Madeira sauce (No. 492) reduced with pheasant fumet (No. 397); serve a sauce -boatful of the sauce at the same time. (2284). ESCALOPS OF SWEETBREADS à LA CARêME (Escalopes de Ris de Veau à la Carême). Braise some unlarded sweetbreads; when cold cut them into slices three-eighths of an inch thick and shape them into rounds an inch and a quarter in diameter; add to them half their quantity of mushrooms sliced thick and a quarter as many sliced truffles, mix with an allemande sauce (No. 407), season correctly and dress inside a border of rice, prepared as in No. 737. (2285). ESCALOPS OF KERNEL OF VEAL à L'ARNOLD (Escalopes de Noix de Veau à l'Arnold). Cut some thin slices from the round bottom of veal, pare them shapely an eighth of an inch thick by one and three-quarters inches in diameter, range in a buttered sautoir on a brisk fire and fry both sides to a fine color, then drain off the butter and replace it by some sherry wine, mushroom catsup, anchovy essence, finely shredded lemon peel, cream and velouté sauce (No. 415); heat the whole, removing the sautoir at the first boil. Dress the slices of veal, reduce the sauce and pour it over; garnish around with small triangle croûtons of bread fried in butter. (2286). ESCALOPS OF YOUNG HARE à LA ROEDERER, GARNISHED WITH QUENELLES (Escalopes de Levraut à la Roederer, Garnies de Quenelles). Prepare the escalops in the following manner: raise the fillets and minion fillets from a young hare, remove all the sinews, and cut them up into escalops; fry in butter with sliced fresh truffles, drain off the butter and detach the glaze with white wine; slice some ham thinly, and from these remove small rounds with a tin tube, adding them to the other ingredients, then heat up the whole without boiling. Drain off the escalops, and dress in a circle of game quenelles ( Fig. 75). Reduce the white wine with as much half-glaze sauce (No. 413), and when this becomes rich and succulent season properly, strain and pour it over the whole. (2287). FAT LIVERS à LA TOULOUSAINE--WHOLE (Foies-Gras Entier à la Toulousaine). Select a fine, raw, fresh and white fat liver that has not yet been put in water or milk; remove the gall, and stud each side with a row of raw truffles; season and butter over with a brush; wrap it first in thin bards of fat pork, then in a flat of pie paste (No. 144), closing all the apertures carefully. Lay it on a baking sheet and cook for an hour and a quarter in a slack oven. After it has been removed, unwrap, take away the fat pork and dress the liver on a long dish, garnishing around with small molded quenelles, cocks'-combs and mushrooms; serve at the same time an espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with Madeira and an infusion of Ceylon cinnamon. FIG. 423. A decorative plate filled with two fat livers and garnished with quenelles, cocks'-combs and mushrooms around them. (2288). HASH à LA SAM WARD-- TENDERLOIN of BEEF (Hachis de Filet de Bœuf à la Sam Ward). Have a pound and a half of cold braised or roasted tenderloin of beef; three ounces of cooked mushrooms, three ounces of cooked potatoes , all cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, and one ounce of cooked ham cut in one-eighth of an inch squares. Fry in butter without browning an ounce of chopped shallot, then add the ham, mushrooms, meat and potatoes ; mix in a little velouté sauce (No. 415) and purée of tomatoes (No. 730); do not allow to boil. Season to taste and arrange the hash on a very hot dish; surround it with pieces of bread fried in butter. (2289). HASH à LA SHEPPLER-- TENDERLOIN of BEEF (Hachis de Filet de Bœuf à la Sheppler). Half a pound of cold tenderloin of beef cut in small three-sixteenths of an inch squares, half a pound of mushrooms cut the same size, an ounce of finely chopped shallots; fry these in butter, then add the tenderloin and the mushrooms, also a little espagnole sauce (No. 414), salt, pepper and chopped parsley. Dish this hash in a circle of noodles cooked and finished with parmesan cheese, and serve. (2290). CORNED BEEF HASH (Hachis de Bœuf Salé). Have four ounces of boiled potatoes cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, put them in a saucepan, and moisten with sufficient beef stock (No. 194a) to cover them entirely. Season with pepper and nutmeg, and half an ounce of butter; simmer until the stock is reduced; add six ounces of corned beef cut the same size as the potatoes ; warm without boiling, and serve when the meat is very hot. (2291). CORNED BEEF HASH, AMERICAN STYLE (Hachis de Bœuf Salé à l'Américaine). Put in a large frying-pan one ounce of butter; when hot add four ounces of potatoes , and six ounces of corned beef, both cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares. Season with pepper and nutmeg, and fry, slowly inclining the pan so that the hash assumes the shape of an omelet. When a fine color drain off the butter, and turn it on to a long dish the same as an omelet. (2292). HASHED CHICKEN, ANCIENT STYLE (Hachis de Volaille à l'Ancienne). Raise the breasts of a roast chicken, remove the skin and sinewy parts and cut the meat into three-sixteenths of an inch squares; also cut a shallot into one-eighth inch squares; fry all lightly in butter without coloring, then add chervil, parsley and mushrooms, all well chopped; fry once more and mix with velouté sauce (No. 415); warm the preparation thoroughly and thicken with egg-yolks, cream, butter and lemon juice. Dress and garnish around with heart -shaped bread croûtons fried in butter. An equal quantity of potatoes cut the same size as the chicken may be added, and when the whole is dressed strew the top with chopped parsley. (2293). HASHED CHICKEN, BAKED (Hachis de Volaille au Gratin). Cut a pound of the white meat of a chicken into three-sixteenths inch squares. Fry one shallot in butter without allowing it to brown, add some reduced béchamel sauce (No. 409) and the chicken, seasoning with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and nutmeg. Place on the edges of the basin of a dish a border of potato, pushing it through a pocket furnished with a star-shaped socket; fill the inside of this border with the hash, bestrew with bread-crumbs, pour butter over and bake in a hot oven. (2294). HASHED LAMB à LA CéLESTINE--BAKED (Hachis de Agneau à la Célestine--au Gratin). Pare a kernel of a raw leg of lamb, make with it a little quenelle forcemeat (No. 92) and when passed through a tammy mix into it a few spoonfuls of raw chopped truffles. Suppress the skin and sinews from a pound of cooked lamb's meat, either the saddle or leg; chop it up and add to it a quarter of a pound of cooked lamb's meat, either the saddle or leg; chop it up and add to it a quarter of a pound of chopped mushrooms and two ounces of ham chopped the same. Reduce a few spoonfuls of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), incorporating into it slowly the mushroom broth and two tablespoonfuls of Madeira wine; when well reduced and thick withdraw it from the fire to stir in the prepared hash; heat this without boiling, season, and let it get slightly cold. Use half of the prepared forcemeat to cover the bottom and sides of a pie dish ( Fig. 183); fill in the hollow center with hash, cover it over at once with the remainder of the forcemeat, smooth the surface and bestrew with bread-crumbs; pour some melted butter over and bake lightly in a slow oven. (2295). HASHED LAMB, CREOLE STYLE (Hachis de Agneau à la Créole). Have one pound of lean, cold leg of lamb without skin, fat or sinews; chop it up finely and place it in a high saucepan in a bain-marié ( Fig. 122) with a little brown sauce (No. 414), a few peeled and quartered tomatoes, fried in butter, some finely shredded green peppers and plenty of seasoning. Dress the whole in a rice border, made by boiling some rice in slightly salted water with some butter; when dry place it in a plain border mold (No. 139), liberally buttered, and set it in the oven covered over for ten minutes to dry more thoroughly. Invert it on the center of a dish, and dress the hash in the middle. (2296). HASHED LAMB WITH BANANAS (Hachis d'Agneau aux Bananes). Take six ounces of lean, skinless and nerveless cold lamb cut in one-eighth of an inch squares; fry a tablespoonful of finely chopped onion in butter and when done, but not browned, add to it a quarter of a pound of cooked and finely minced potatoes ; moisten with a little stock (No. 194a), reduce for a few moments to the consistency of a sauce, and add the lamb cut into squares; heat up all without boiling and dress on a dish, surrounding the hash with slices of bread cut in triangles and fried in butter. Decorate the top of the hash with two bananas peeled and cut lengthwise in two, roll in flour, fry them in very hot oil, drain and cut them across in two and with these quartered fruits garnish the top of the hash. (2297). HASHED MUTTON à LA OMER PACHA (Hachis de Mouton à la Omer Pacha). Suppress all the fat, sinews and skin in order to obtain one pound of lean, cold leg of mutton; chop it up finely and place it in a bain-marie ( Fig. 122) with four tablespoonfuls of reduced sauce; add to this some cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and chopped parsley, seasoning with salt, pepper and nutmeg; add meat -glaze (No. 402) and a piece of fresh butter. Fry in hot clarified butter some peeled tomatoes, cut across in two and slightly pressed out; season them with salt, mignonette and chopped parsley, and dress these halved fried tomatoes in a ring with the hash laid in the center; decorate the top with fried croûtons of bread cut in the shape of crescents. (2298). PARTRIDGE HASH à LA CLéMENCEAU (Hachis de Perdreaux à la Clémenceau). Roast two partridges on the spit; lay them aside to cool, then lift off the breasts, suppressing the skin, bones and sinews; cut these meats into eighth of an inch squares, having half as much mushrooms cut the same size, and as many peeled truffles as mushrooms; add to it the cooked livers, cut exactly a like size. Make a light roux (No. 163), add to it the gizzards and broken up carcasses, one bay leaf, sage, cloves and minced shallot; fry together with the roux, moisten with a quart of stock (No. 194a), reduce to half and pass it through a tammy without pressure, then again reduce well and add the salpicon; heat up without boiling, season properly and dress the hash inside a portato border; bestrew the top with bread-crumbs and parmesan, pour over butter and brown under the salamander ( Fig. 123). This hash may be accompanied by poached eggs laid on round slices of toasted bread to be handed around at the same time, and it may also be served without the border, surrounding it simply with croûtons of bread fried in oil. (2299). HASHED PHEASANT (Hachis de Faisan). Chop up the best parts of a cooked and pared pheasant; put the hash into a small saucepan; chop up also three peeled truffles. With the pheasant bones prepare a small game fumet (No. 397) and thicken it with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413); reduce this with two spoonfuls of Madeira and when very hot pour it over the hash, mixing in the truffles, and heat up the whole without boiling. Dress on a dish and surround with oval game quenelles, cut in two across, bread -crumbed and fried. (2300). HASHED VEAL CAKES, BRITTANY STYLE (Hachis de Veau en Galettes à la Bretonne). Have one pound of lean leg of veal without any fat or sinews whatever, chop it up and mingle with it half a pound of fresh fat pork, equally chopped, and season with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and mignonette; chop again for a few minutes, then put this hash into a vessel and stir well into it two egg-yolks and a quarter of a pound of mushrooms fried in butter and minced very fine; roll this preparation on a flour ed table into one inch and three-quarters in diameter balls, then flatten them down to three-eighths of an inch in thickness with the blade of a knife; dip them in beaten eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and smooth the surfaces nicely. Heat some melted butter in a sautoir, range the cakes in this merely to stiffen them on both sides, then drain off half of the fat and moisten to their height with some gravy (No. 404); boil up the liquid and place the saucepan in the oven for one hour, keeping it well covered and basting frequently with their own liquid; remove them from the sautoir with a skimmer, dress them in a deep dish and cover over with minced white onions prepared beforehand, but having half of the strained stock from the cakes added at the last moment. (2301). VENISON HASH, AMERICAN STYLE AND WITH POACHED EGGS (Hachis de Chevreuil à l'Américaine et aux Œufs Pochés). Fry in a sautoir some shallots, parsley and chives; do not color them; moisten with half white wine and half stock (No. 194a), add as much espagnole sauce (No. 414), reduce, then put in two-thirds of venison and one-third of mushrooms, both cut up in quarter-inch squares. Prepare a border with portato croquette preparation softened with eggs, push it through a cornet on to the edge of the inside basin of the dish, using a channeled socket; then fill the border with the hash, bestrew it with bread raspings, pour over butter and brown in a hot oven. A more simple hash can be prepared with cold roasted venison and cooked potatoes , equal quantities of both cut in quarter-inch squares. Heat without boiling in a poivrade sauce (No. 522), seasoned to taste. Dish it up very hot and surround with croûtons fried in butter. (2302). HASHED WOODCOCK IN A CROUSTADE WITH SOFT EGGS (Hachis de Bécasses en Croustade aux Œufs Mollets). Line a low croustade mold ( Fig. 152) with fine foundation paste (No. 135), form an outer edge and egg it over twice; cover the bottom and sides with buttered paper and fill it with uncooked rice, bake in a moderate oven and then empty of its contents. Take the meats from six cooked woodcock and cut them into small three-sixteenths inch squares, after suppressing all the bones, skin and sinews. Fry the intestines in butter, pound these with the meat from the legs, etc., and make of it a purée to place in a saucepan with the fragments and parings; add a few minced shallots and boil up for some moments, then put in some espagnole sauce (No. 414), pass the whole through a tammy and reduce to the consistency of a half-glaze sauce (No. 413); now add the woodcock meats and season properly. Fill the croustades with this hash and on top of it range either well drained poached eggs ( No. 2925 ) or soft eggs ( No. 2949 ). This hash can also be dressed in a bread croustade fried in butter. (2303). YOUNG RABBIT HASH GARNISHED WITH CROQUETTES (Hachis de Lapereaux Garni de Croquettes). Trim nicely the meats of one or several cold roasted young rabbits, cut them up into quarter-inch squares. Reduce some espagnole sauce (No. 414) in a sautoir, either with champagne or good white wine, to the consistency of half-glaze, add to it the meats and season well; heat it up without boiling in a bain-marie for one hour, dish up the hash and surround it with small round and flat young rabbit croquettes, made with cold rabbit free of bones, sinews or fat, and cut up into three-sixteenths inch squares, with the same of truffles and mushrooms; mix all these together with espagnole sauce (No. 414), finished with rabbit fumet. Fry, wipe, salt and dress them around the hash, scattering chopped parsley over the whole. (2304). "PAIN" OF CHICKEN à LA VILLARS (Pain de Volaille à la Villars). Prepare a chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89); dilute with a little Madeira sauce (No. 492). Butter a cylindrical-shaped low mold, decorate it with a few fanciful cuts of truffles and fill it with the forcemeat; poach by putting it in a saucepan with water to half its height; bring the water to the boiling point and poach in a slack oven; when firm to the touch in the center remove from the oven and unmold. Have the breasts and minion fillets well pared and free of sinews, then cut into escalops; sauté them on a brisk fire with some minced truffles, season and drain off the butter, replacing it by a little Madeira and half-glaze (No. 400), adding two dozen small channeled mushroom heads (No. 118); when the whole is very hot dress the mushrooms around the "pain" and the escalops and truffles in the center of it. Serve a Madeira sauce (No. 492) at the same time. (2305). "PAIN" OF CRAWFISH, CHARTREUSE (Pain d'écrevisses, Chartreuse). With some raw salmon and pike meats prepare a cream forcemeat of fish (No. 76); prepare also a fine montglas with truffles, mushrooms and lobster -claw meat, cut in small Julienne; mingle all with some good thick brown sauce (No. 414) reduced with Madeira and the truffle broth. Take a part of this montglas and use it to fill seven or eight scallop shells, smooth and round the preparation on top in the shape of a dome and cover with a thin layer of fish cream forcemeat (No. 76). Butter a small, narrow, pyramidical mold, keep it on ice for a few moments and then line the sides and bottom with fish cream forcemeat (No. 76), leaving a hollow space in the center; fill this in with the montglas and close the opening with a layer of the same forcemeat. Poach the "pain" for twenty-five minutes in a bain-marie, or until it is firm to the touch in the center, keeping it covered with a round piece of paper; stand the shells steadily on a baking sheet, push into a slack oven for ten to twelve minutes, and before taking them out cover the tops with a little good velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced and finished with red butter (No. 580); take out at once and keep them warm for two minutes at the oven door, then remove and on each one lay a slice of lobster. Invert the "pain" on a small cooked noodle paste (No. 142) foundation an inch and a quarter high, it being slightly wider than the mold; coat the forcemeat with a little velouté sauce and place a slice of lobster exactly on the center of the "pain." Dress the shells around its base and serve at the same time a sauce -boatful of velouté sauce finished with red butter. FIG. 424. A "pain" placed at the center of a plate and with montglas in shells garnished around it. A slice of lobster is placed exactly on the center of the "pain". (2306). "PAIN" OF PHEASANT WITH CREAM (Pain de Faisan à la Crème). Pound the raw meats taken from a pheasant; season and rub through a sieve; return this to the mortar to pound again with four egg-yolks and three-quarters as much butter as there is pulp. Put this preparation into a thin iron vessel and beat it on ice to have it smooth and acquire a body, mixing in gradually about a gill of raw cream. Fry a small part of this in the oven in a diminutive mold to judge of its consistency and rectify it if found necessary. Prepare a montglas of cooked foies-gras, truffles and very red freshly cooked and tender beef tongue; put all into a small sautoir to thicken with two or three spoonfuls of good velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with pheasant fumet (No. 397) and keep it warm in a bain-marie. Butter the inside of mold ( Fig. 150), using a brush dipped in clarified butter, and fill it up with the forcemeat; smooth the top, cover with a round of buttered paper, and poach it in a bain marie for twenty minutes or until firm to the touch. After removing it from the oven wipe dry and invert it on a rice croustade foundation ( Fig. 9a) fastened on a dish; it should be an inch thick and a very little wider than the mold; fill the hollow in the twist with the montglas and cover the forcemeat lightly with a brush dipped in the same velouté sauce (No. 415). Send a sauce -boat of this same sauce to the table with the "pain." (2307). "PAIN" OF PIKE (Pain de Brochet). Pound to a pulp half a pound of pike meat, and press it through a sieve; work it in a mortar with half a pound of fresh butter, two ounces of sifted flour, salt and allspice; mix in gradually four eggs, and a pint of cream, and set this preparation into small buttered molds, cover over with a buttered paper, and close the lid; but should the molds not be provided with covers, then lay over a sheet of buttered paper, on top set a tray with a weight on it, and cook them in a bain-marie kept at the boiling point for an hour and a half. Unmold, dress, and serve separately either a Madeira sauce (No. 492) or else a lobster sauce (No. 488), but to either one or the other add some mushrooms, lobster cut in fillets and small nonpareil capers. The "pains" may be surrounded by crawfish tails or carp 's milts sautéd in butter with fine herbs. (2308). "PAIN" OF YOUNG RABBITS à LA MAINTENON (Pain de Lapereaux à la Maintenon). Bone four young rabbits, reserving the minion fillets; suppress the sinews from the meats and cut them into dice; also cut exactly similar a third as much fat pork; fry both these in butter with parsley, truffles and mushrooms, all finely chopped, salt, pepper, nutmeg and fine spices; when cold pound and press through a sieve, adding half as much panada, first pounding it, then mixing it in gradually with the forcemeat until well incorporated, then put in twelve egg-yolks singly, and one pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414) well reduced with game fumet (No. 397). Grease a cylindrical mold with sponged and softened butter, decorate it with fanciful cuts of truffles, and fill with the prepared forcemeat; cover with bards of fat pork, and then poach; unmold, glaze and fill the center with a stew composed of truffles and mushrooms. Cut the minion fillets on the bias in three lengthwise pieces, pare them evenly, score and streak with truffles; turn them into a ring form, and lay them into a generously buttered sautoir, cover over with buttered paper, and cook in a brisk oven; glaze and dress them on top of the "pain." Cut quarter-inch thick slices of brain, and from them remove twelve rounds with an inch and a quarter tin tube, dip in egg and bread-crumbs, and fry; garnish the "pain" around with these and serve with a sauce -boat of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with game fumet (No. 397). (2309). PATTY à LA PALMERSTON--LARGE, HOT (Gros Pâté Chaud à la Palmerston). Prepare a hot pie crust as indicated for hot pie à la Bontoux ( No. 2314 ), but do not fill it. Make a forcemeat with four ounces of chicken chopped up very fine, four ounces of chopped lean veal and a pound of beef kidney suet well skinned and chopped; mix the whole well together and chop once more, seasoning with salt, spices and nutmeg. Pound well in the mortar with two ounces of pâté-à-chou panada (No. 121), add to the forcemeat a little at a time, and one whole egg; pound well together until it becomes exceedingly smooth, then moisten with a little water to soften; cover the bottom and sides of the pie with this forcemeat. Have some escalops of sweet- bread fried in butter, with chicken livers and bacon cut in quarter-inch squares and blanched, some lean cooked ham cut the same size, and minced veal kidney briskly fried in butter. With this preparation fill up the hot pie and cover with a layer of the above forcemeat and over this place a flat of foundation paste (No. 135), fastening it on the sides; cut away all the surplus paste around, pinch the edges and egg over. Decorate the top with designs out out of puff paste, egg these twice and bake the pie in a slack oven; when ready to serve raise up the cover and pour in a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) mingled with a little tomato sauce (No. 549). (2310). PATTY à LA RICHELIEU--HOT, LARGE (Gros Pâté Chaud à la Richelieu). Butter a hot pie mold, lay it on a small baking sheet covered with a round piece of buttered paper, and line the mold with paste (No. 135); let it reach half an inch above the mold, cover the bottom and sides with buttered paper, then fill it up with rice and cover with a sheet of buttered paper. Dampen the inside paste and place a layer of the same on top, flatten the two layers together, cut off the surplus paste around the edge, pinch the top crest and the edges, egg it over and bake for one hour. Cut the cover inside of the border, empty the patty, egg over inside and outside, return to the oven, without the cover, until it assumes a nice color. Put into a buttered sautoir twelve blanched lambs ' sweetbreads, season and moisten with stock (No. 194a), let fall to a glaze and remoisten; allow the liquid to reduce once more, and continue until the sweetbreads are moderately cooked; drain, trim and divide into slices three-eighths of an inch thick by one and a quarter inches in diameter, add to them a half a pound of mushroom heads cut transversely into thick slices, and an equal amount of rounds of red beef tongue the same size. Mingle these garnishings with a little velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with the mushroom broth and a few spoonfuls of glaze (No. 402). Arrange this inside the pie, forming into a dome on top, and around it dress a chain of halved quenelles of veal molded with a soupspoon (No. 155) and poached; in the center range a pyramid of small round peeled truffles cooked when needed with Marsala wine. Cover the quenelles lightly with the velouté sauce. Serve the pie with the remainder of the velouté in a sauce -boat. FIG. 425. A pie mold with paste, filled with slices of forcemeat in ring form and with round truffles at the center pyramidically. (2311). QUAIL PATTIES--SMALL (Petits Pâtés de Cailles). Bone thoroughly three or four quails; divide each in two parts, season and cover the inside with forcemeat (No. 81) in which has been added half as much raw game forcemeat (No. 91) and chopped truffles, and season with game pie spices (No. 168); envelop, giving the quail an oval shape. Cut some layers of pie paste (No. 145) into ovals seven inches by four inches; on the center of one put a thin slice of fat pork (No. 67); over this spread a thin layer of chopped game forcemeat (No. 66), place half a quail on top and moisten the paste all around; wrapping with this paste, fold over the side, then roll out the paste on each end, moisten the top of the paste and bring the two ends together on the top; cover the paste with a thin oval layer of puff paste (No. 145). Make a small opening in the top, range the patties on a baking sheet, egg them over, make fanciful cuts with the tip of a knife, and cook for forty minutes in a moderate oven. Pour into the opening a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and Madeira. (2312). REEDBIRD PATTY--LARGE, HOT (Gros Pâté Chaud de Mauviettes). Butter a hot pie mold ( Fig. 153) and line it with pie paste (No. 145). Bone the breasts of about thirty reed-birds; fill them with game forcemeat (No. 91) and an equal quantity of foies-gras mixed together, having some chopped truffles added. Heat some melted fat pork in a sautoir; when very hot range the birds on it simply to stiffen them, season and let get cold. Fill the mold with the reedbirds and game forcemeat (No. 91), alternating one and the other and intermingling in slices of raw truffles; have it dome-shaped, then cover with thin slices of fat pork and this with a flat of the same paste, fastening the edges together; cut a small hole in the center, decorate it, egg over, and cook the pie for an hour and a quarter in a moderate oven; after it has been ten minutes from the fire, take off the mold and open and suppress the pork. Pour in a few spoonfuls of brown sauce reduced with a fumet (No. 397), and mix with it a little Madeira; put back the cover and serve. (2313). SWEETBREAD PATTY à LA McALLISTER--LARGE, HOT (Gros Pâté Chaud de Ris de Veau à la McAllister). First blanch the sweetbreads, then set them under a weight, and when cold escalop and fry them in butter with raw ham cut in dice-shaped pieces and peeled truffles; moisten with Madeira wine and let it fall to a glaze. Line a plain hinged pie mold ( Fig. 153) with foundation paste (No. 135); fill the bottom and sides with a layer of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), mixed with half as much foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78) and chopped truffles; finish filling the mold with the sweetbreads, lay a bed of forcemeat on top, rounding it slightly; moisten the edges of the paste and cover with a flat of paste, cut flush with the mold and pinched all around; decorate the top with lozenges made of puff paste fragments (No. 146); egg over twice, and cook in a moderate oven for two hours and a quarter. When done, unmold and fill the pie with Madeira sauce (No. 492). (2314). PIE à LA BONTOUX--LARGE, HOT (Gros Pâté Chaud à la Bontoux). Make a pie crust in a mold, imitating the pinchings of a Strasburg pâté de foies-gras pie with a pâté de foies-gras pie paste (No. 135). Cover the inside with buttered paper and fill it with rice, cover with a round of paper, moisten the edges, and cover with a lid of the same paste; fasten to the crust of paste, cut off the surplus around, pinch the edges, decorate the dome with leaves of noodle paste (No. 142), and in the center place an imitation artichoke made of the same paste; set it in a moderate oven after egging over twice, and when done remove the lid, empty and egg the exterior surfaces, then let attain a fine golden color. In case there be an empty foies-gras pie crust on hand it can be utilized. Fill either one or the other with a bed of macaroni mingled with reduced velouté sauce (No. 415) and tomatoes, finished with butter, parmesan, and meat glaze (No. 402); mix in also with the macaroni an escalop of foies-gras, truffles and hare quenelles made with hare forcemeat. This is made like game forcemeat, substituting hare for game (No. 91). Roll in sheets of buttered paper, three-quarters of an inch in diameter, and when poached remove the paper and cut into thick slices. Heat the garnishing well without boiling, and with it fill the crust. (2315). EEL PIE--HOT (Pâté Chaud d'Anguilles). Cut into slices two pounds of skinned eels (No. 57), having it well cleaned, suppressing the head and thin parts; cut the remainder into three-inch pieces, and be careful to abstract all the blood; wash, wipe dry, then bone the pieces and separate the meats; lard each one with thin slices of truffle; lay the fish in a tureen, season and pour over a few spoonfuls of brandy or Madeira wine; let macerate for a couple of hours. Fry in a sautoir with some butter a few spoonfuls of shallots and mushrooms; lay in the eel fillets and let them simply harden while turning them over, then add the Madeira marinade and two spoonfuls of brown sauce (No. 414); at the first boil remove the sautoir from the fire and bestrew the fish with chopped parsley. Prepare a fish forcemeat (No. 90), finishing it with four spoonfuls of chopped truffles. Cover the bottom of a small baking sheet with a round sheet of heavy paper; on it set a buttered hot pie mold with hinges ( Fig. 153); cover the bottom and sides with foundation paste (No. 135), and cover the paste with a layer of the fish forcemeat, then fill up the empty center with the eel fillets and fine herbs, alternating them with layers of forcemeat; fill till dome-shaped on top above the edge of the mold, then smooth it neatly and lay over another flat of the same paste, attaching it to the sides of the mold; fasten it to the projecting borders of the inside paste previously dampened with a brush; cut it away evenly, press it down and pinch it tastefully through its thickness. Make a small aperture on the summit of the dome; moisten the surface and decorate with imitation paste leaves, or any other fanciful design FIG. 426. A pie mold filled with paste is placed on top of a plate. Paste is covered with a layer of fish forcemeat and with eel fillets and fine herbs filled at the center of the paste until it become a dome-shaped on top. of the same, then brush over the entire top and border with egg; set the pie into a moderate oven to cook for an hour and a half, being careful to cover with a sheet of paper as soon as the paste is well dried. After taking the pie from the oven, lay it on a dish, unmold and pour into the inside through the aperture on top, a few spoonfuls of good half-glaze sauce (No. 413) reduced with Madeira wine. (2316). FAT LIVER PIE, ALSATIAN--LARGE, HOT (Gros Pâté Chaud de Foies-Gras à l'Alsacienne). Line a hot pie mold ( Fig. 152) with foundation paste (No. 135) made with egg-yolks, not having it too fine; pinch the edges prettily and fill it three quarters full with baking forcemeat (No. 81) mingled with half as much raw game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91); cover this forcemeat with a round of buttered paper, egg the edges of the pie and cook it in a slow oven for one hour, then take it out and suppress a part of the forcemeat; keep the pie warm. Select two fine halves of fat liver of equal size, season with salt, then butter them with a brush, cover with thin bards of fat pork and inclose in an envelope of paste pie (No. 144), fastening them on tightly so that the liver can thoroughly poach smothered; place them on a baking sheet and cook for an hour in a slack oven. Prepare a garnishing of coarse macaroni one and a quarter inches long; mix in some large Julienne of cooked beef tongue; also have eighteen uniform-sized peeled mushroom heads. After the livers have been taken out of the oven, unwrap and cut each half into crosswise slices slightly on the bias; between each one of these lay a fine slice of peeled truffle freshly cooked in Madeira. Arrange the livers to give them a nice shape, heat them in a slack oven, glazing with a brush. Take the pie from the heater and fill the empty space with the macaroni garnishing; lift up the slices of liver one by one with the aid of a palette, and dress them one beside the other on top of the garnishing; coat with a little Madeira sauce (No. 492) reduced with the truffle stock and then surround the base with the mushroom heads. Serve at the same time a sauce -boatful of Madeira sauce (No. 492). FIG. 427. A pie mold filled with paste is placed on top of a plate. Pieces of livers are aligned at the center of the paste and are garnished with mushroom heads around the border of the paste. (2317). PLOVER PIE--LARGE, HOT (Gros Pâté Chaud de Pluviers). Make a hot pie crust the same as for Bontoux ( No. 2314 ). Bone one dozen plovers or more according to the size of pie; stuff them with game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), into which incorporate one-eighth of an inch squares of truffles and range them in a sautoir one beside the other; moisten with a little mirepoix stock (No. 419) prepared with white wine and cook on a moderate fire until done; then lay them in another sautoir with espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with game fumet (No. 397), and a garnishing of mushroom heads and medium-sized peeled truffles; when all the ingredients are very hot fill the hot pie crust and serve. (2318). PIES WITH GRAVY --SMALL (Pétits Pâtés au Jus). Take one pound of lean meat from the thick loin end and free it of fat and sinews; chop and pound it with five ounces of chopped fat salt pork, and two ounces of bread crumbs; season with salt and pepper, and chopped parsley. Line some round channeled tartlet molds with fine foundation paste (No. 135); cover the bottoms with a layer of the above forcemeat, set in the middle a ball of salpicon à la financière with truffles (No. 667), and finish with another layer of the forcemeat; cover with a flat of foundation paste (No. 135), place on this a round flat of thin puff paste (No. 146) one inch in diameter, egg over, and with the point of a knife make a fanciful rosette on the top. Let cook for half an hour in a slack oven; remove, lift off the covers, and pour in some half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Madeira wine; unmold and serve. FIG. 428. An illustration of an unfilled small paste on the left and a small paste filled with gravy on the right. (2319). WOODCOCK PIE--HOT (Pâté Chaud de Bécasses). Bone six very clean, singed woodcock, keeping the heads which should be cleaned, the eyes imitated with quenelle forcemeat, and a round piece of truffle for the pupil; cook the intestines in butter, and when cold pass through a sieve and mix them with some game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), seasoned highly with salt, pepper, duxelle, and chopped parsley; stuff the birds with this, enclose well the dressing, and lay them in bottomless oval molds the same size as themselves; cover with bards of fat pork, and cook in a moderate oven. Make a fumet (No. 397) with the bones, adding to it some espagnole sauce (No. 414) in the act of being reduced; take away a third, and to the remaining two-thirds add some truffles and mushrooms; let both garnishing and birds be cold. Line a hot pie mold ( Fig. 152) with foundation paste (No. 135), leaving it reach above the top; fill the center with the birds and garnishing alternated, then wet the top part of the paste, and cover over with a flat of the same; make an edge reaching half an inch above the level of the mold, pinch it on the side and top, and decorate the summit either with noodle paste (No. 142), forming an aperture in the center, or puff paste parings; egg over twice; bake in a hot oven for an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half; add a gill of Madeira wine to the remaining two-thirds of sauce and pour it into the hot pie, then serve. (2320). POTTED TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA NELSON (Terrine de Filet de Bœuf à la Nelson). To prepare this dish it will require a covered pie dish which can stand the heat of the oven. Cut slices from a well-trimmed tenderloin of beef free of sinews, and season them with pepper and salt; cover the bottom of the pie dish with a layer of good butter, spread over this some minced onions, and on the onions a bed of minced potatoes . Season with salt and pepper, and set the slices of tenderloin on top. Place the pie dish over a hot fire for a few minutes, then put it into a moderate oven for forty-five minutes; add a tablespoonful of clear gravy (No. 404), and the same quantity of meat glaze (No. 402), Worcestershire sauce, and mushroom catsup; sprinkle over the surface chopped hard-boiled eggs and parsley. Serve it on a dish over a folded napkin. (2321). POULPETONNIèRE OF PIGEONS (Poulpetonnière de Pigeons ). To be made with two pigeons. Line a bottomless oval mold two inches high by six inches long and four inches wide with thin slices of fat pork, place over an eighth of an inch thick layer of godiveau (No. 82). Mix in a bowl two spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and two spoonfuls of sweetbread parings or roast veal, either of these to be chopped up, mixing it in well; season with salt and pepper, and add some reduced velouté sauce (No. 415). Lay a layer of this in the oval mold, over this lay two pigeons cut in four pieces, fried in butter, then drained and moistened with a little gravy (No. 404) and brown sauce (No. 414), cooked for half an hour and cooled. Spread over some fine herbs, finishing with another layer of godiveau; cook in a slack oven, remove the mold, dress and pour over the remainder of the potted pigeon sauce after it has been strained and thickened with butter. (2322). TENDERLOIN of BEEF PUDDING WITH OYSTERS (Pouding de Filet de Bœuf aux Huîtres). Pour a pound of sifted flour on the table, make a hole in the center, so that the flour forms a crown, and in the hollow of the crown set three-quarters of a pound of beef kidney suet, after removing the skin and fibers, and chopping it up well; add half an ounce of salt, half a pint of water, more or less, according to the quantity the paste can absorb, and in order to obtain a firm paste without its crumbling; let it repose for one hour or more, then roll it out to three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; butter the inside of a dome-shaped mold, line it nicely with the above paste, then cut some slices of tenderloin, about two ounces in weight each, trim them and season them with salt and pepper. Fry in butter without browning two ounces of chopped onions, add to it the slices of tenderloin, leaving them in just time enough to stiffen, then remove them and lay them in an earthen bowl; add to the butter one teaspoonful of flour and let cook for a few minutes; moisten with stock (No. 194a) and white wine, and with this make a little stiff sauce; pour it over the tenderloin, and when all is nearly cold fill the mold with layers of the tenderloin, the sauce and some raw oysters, drained and well dried, removing the hard parts of the oyster. When the mold is nearly full, wet the edges of the paste, and cover with an upper crust, pressing it down on to the lower crust; cover it over with a damp, buttered and flour ed cloth, fastening it on tight, then plunge it into hot water to boil for one hour and a half to two hours. Unmold and serve with an English brown sauce (No. 1571). (2323). LAMB PUDDING--MINION FILLETS à LA GLADSTONE (Pouding de Filets Mignons d'Agneau à la Gladstone). Fry lightly in butter one ounce of chopped onions and shallots, fry separately some yearling lamb minion fillets, then mingle the two together, adding espagnole sauce (No. 414), some Harvey sauce, gravy, salt and pepper. Line a mold ( Fig. 151), from which the inside has been removed, with beef suet paste, made as explained in woodcock pudding ( No. 2325 ), fill it up with alternate layers of the meat and minced potatoes ; pour the sauce over, moisten the edges of the paste and cover over with a flat of the same paste, lay on a buttered, flour ed soft towel and tie it all around with a string, then plunge the pudding in boiling water and leave it to cook for two hours; remove the towel, unmold, glaze with meat glaze (No. 402), spread on with a brush and serve. (2324). THRUSH PUDDING (Pouding de Grives). Butter and line a dome form mold with a woodcock pudding paste ( No. 2325 ), made with beef suet, butter, salt and flour. Fry in butter over a quick fire, some fat pork, ham and twenty-four boneless thrushes; as soon as done, drain off the fat and add salt, pepper, chopped parsley, Madeira sauce and half-glaze (No. 400). Place all of this in the dome and cover with a flat of the same paste; lay a wet and buttered cloth over and fasten it strongly underneath on the rounded side, set this in boiling water and let cook for an hour and a half, unwrap and turn it out of the mold on a hot dish and pour over a good Madeira sauce (No. 492) with game essence added (No. 389), serving a part of it separately. (2325). WOODCOCK PUDDING (Pouding de Bécasses). Cut up two clean raw woodcocks, dividing each one into five or six pieces, then season. Prepare a paste with a pound of flour, three-quarters of a pound of finely chopped beef suet, a little water and salt; give it two turns like a puff paste, roll it out and use it to line a half spherical-shaped mold; bestrew the bottom with raw onions, shallot, fresh mushrooms and parsley all finely chopped, and on this range the pieces of woodcock, dredging them over with chopped parsley. Cook the intestines taken from the birds with grated fat pork, press through a sieve and dissolve with a little half-glaze (No. 400), then pour it over the woodcocks. Close the opening with a layer of the same paste, fastening it well to the edges, and place the large part of the mold on the middle of a wet towel and tie the ends firmly on the top or round part of the mold. Cook the pudding for two hours in boiling water, then drain off the mold, untie the towel and turn the pudding over on a dish, remove the mold and cover the bottom of the dish with a little sauce reduced with game fumet (No. 397) and truffle peelings; glaze the paste with a brush and serve with a separate sauce reduced with game fumet. (2326). CHICKEN QUENELLES à LA DREW (Quenelles de Volaille à la Drew). Butter some oval molds three inches long by two wide and two and a quarter inches deep; decorate them with cuts of truffles and cover this with a layer of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), then poach in a slack oven. Prepare some forcemeat croûtons so that when they are trimmed and fried they will be exactly the same size as the quenelles and each a quarter of an inch thick; these are to be made of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78), half of each, mixed well and rubbed through a sieve. Spread this on sheets of strong buttered paper and poach in a slack oven; when cold dip in beaten eggs and bread-crumbs, and fry to a fine color; drain, wipe and dress these around a croustade ( Fig. 8) made of fine foundation paste (No. 135), fastened with paste on to the center of a dish, pouring a little suprême sauce (No. 547) around. Unmold the quenelles and lay them on the forcemeat croûtons; fill the croustade with whole peeled truffles and channeled fresh mushrooms (No. 118); cover these garnishings with suprême sauce (No. 547); finish when ready with raw egg-yolks, cream and fresh butter, range some trussed crawfish on top of the garnishing, then serve. (2327). CHICKEN QUENELLES à LA RICHELIEU (Quenelles de Volaille à la Richelieu). Decorate some oval-shaped molds with fanciful cuts of very black truffles. Pound one ounce of truffles with the same quantity of cooked rice and half as much fresh butter, adding one or two spoonfuls of béchamel sauce (No. 409), pass all through a sieve and let get very cold. Garnish half of the molds with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), lay the prepared truffle purée in the center, cover over with more forcemeat and poach them in a slack oven; as soon as they are firm to the touch, unmold and dress them crown-shaped; serve separately a Périgueux sauce (No. 517). FIG. 429. An illustration of a oval-shaped chicken quenelle forcemeat with fanciful cuts of black truffles lay in the center. (2328). CHICKEN QUENELLES, BRETONNE (Quenelles de Poulet, Bretonne). This entrée is to be dressed on a paste foundation that covers the bottom of a dish, the sides of it to be decorated, and it should have a round flat support in the center, shaped rather on a slope and two inches high; this support is to be made of fried bread covered with forcemeat and poached in a slack oven. In this manner the quenelles will have a firm foundation to stand against, and the mushrooms being supported by this prop cannot impair the solidity of the circle, but in order to be perfectly safe it were better that the bottom of the dish be provided with an outstanding ledge, thus giving more strength to the circle. Prepare a pretty garnishing of turned mushrooms (No. 118) of even size, and cooked very white; have some minced onions also prepared, reduced with good béchamel sauce (No. 409), and thickened off the fire with two egg-yolks, finishing with a dash of cayenne. Pound the raw meats of a large chicken, mixing in a third as much pâte-à-choux panada (No. 121), adding it very slowly so that the meats will take some time to pound, then put in about four or five spoonfuls of the minced onions. When all is well mingled add two or three raw yolks; pass this forcemeat through a sieve, lay it aside in a metal bowl, smooth it on ice, and mold it into about fifteen handsome quenelles (No. 154); poach and remove carefully with a skimmer; drain on a cloth, and dress them at once in a uniform circle, slightly spreading outward; arrange the mushrooms on top of the support, and cover them with a little good velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced with the mushroom broth and parings; serve more of this sauce apart. FIG. 430. A dish with paste as a foundation is filled with quenelles in a ring form and with mushrooms arranged pyramidically at the center of the ring. (2329). QUENELLES OF CHICKEN WITH CONSOMMé (Quenelles de Poulet au Consommé). Prepare a quenelle forcemeat with the breasts of two chickens the same as for No. 89; form a small quenelle and throw it into a little boiling broth; remove it from the fire and poach it for about ten minutes, cut it in two to be assured of its delicacy, and if found too hard add two or three spoonfuls of allemande sauce (No. 407) to the forcemeat, and if too soft a little panada (No. 121), pounding it well and adding only a small quantity at a time; then place the forcemeat in a tin vessel and lay it on ice. Put the four well-roasted legs and all the fragments of the chickens into a saucepan, with the exception of the livers and gizzards, moisten to the height of the meats with some good stock (No. 194a), then boil and skim; add an onion stuck with a clove, a minced carrot and a bunch of parsley garnished with a bay leaf; let cook for one hour on a very slow fire, then strain, skim off the fat, clarify and pour it through a napkin; it should be of a fine color. An hour and a quarter before serving butter a sautéing pan liberally, having it large enough to hold twelve soupspoon quenelles, and mold them as explained in No. 155. Twenty minutes before serving put this sautéing pan on the range and moisten the quenelles with some of the boiling broth (No. 194a); cover and set it on one side to poach without boiling; as soon as they feel hard under the pressure of the finger, and have risen to the surface of the broth, drain them on to a white cloth and lay them either in a vegetable dish or a silver one and pour the boiling prepared consommé over. (2330). QUENELLES OF FISH, MONTGLAS (Quenelles de Poisson à la Montglas). This entrée is to be dressed in the center of a carved border made of rice croustade (No. 160). Prepare a fish quenelle forcemeat (No. 90) with pike perch; when strained put it into a thin metal vessel, and with a spoon incorporate in, while working it on ice, two spoonfuls of good béchamel sauce (No. 409) reduced with a coffeespoonful of powdered curry, diluting with the mushroom liquor; keep the forcemeat on ice. With the head and parings of the pike perch make a good white wine court-bouillon (No. 39); strain, free it of fat, and reduce to a half-glaze. Put on to reduce three gills of velouté sauce (No. 415), and incorporate the court-bouillon slowly into it, also a few spoonfuls of the reduced mushroom broth. Strain the sauce when succulent and sufficiently thickened; pour it into a small saucepan and stir it occasionally on the side of the range. Prepare a plentiful montglas, composed of truffles, mushrooms, and cooked lobster -claw meat; mingle in a few spoonfuls of reduced velouté sauce (No. 415), and keep it in a bain-marie; prepare also a fine salpicon of trimmed and poached oysters, add a few spoonfuls of good reduced velouté sauce and the oyster liquor, finishing with a coffeespoonful of anchovy essence, paste or purée; let this preparation get cool, then divide it into small parts, and roll each one to the shape of a long olive. With the fish forcemeat mold some quenelles with a soupspoon (No. 155); stuff them with the salpicon rolled in olive -shapes, and cover with more of the forcemeat; smooth the surfaces nicely; poach these quenelles in salted water without allowing the liquid to boil, and as soon as the forcemeat stiffens drain on to a cloth. Dress the montglas in the center of the rice border, and between the latter and the montglas range the quenelles standing almost upright; cover them lightly with the prepared sauce, and serve at the same time a bowlful of the same, buttering it well, and finishing it at the last moment with a piece of lobster butter (No. 580). FIG. 431. A dish with a rice croustade that is filled with quenelles around the border and montglas in the center of the croustade. (2331). QUENELLES OF FOIES-GRAS, STUFFED à LA FINANCIèRE (Quenelles de Foies-Gras Fourrées à la Financière). Fasten a bread or rice croustade on a dish as shown in Fig. 431, hollowing it one inch only on the top; in the center place a rice support slightly conical in shape and two inches high. Have this croustade fastened on a dish and keep it covered. Prepare a montglas of truffles; mix it with a very thick brown sauce (No. 414), leave to cool, then divide it into small parts and roll each of these into long olives. Pound a raw foies-gras, season and pass it through a sieve; pound also half as much breast of raw chicken and add slowly to it half the same quantity of bread panada (No. 121); press this forcemeat through a sieve and return it to the mortar, season and pound once more, incorporating in gradually the pounded foies-gras and three or four egg-yolks; season highly; smooth by beating on ice, then try a small piece to judge of its consistency. With the bones, fragments of chicken and broth prepare a suprême sauce (No. 547); keep it in a bain-marie. Butter a dozen quenelle molds, decorate them with truffles ( Fig. 75), fill them full of forcemeat, form a depression in the center, place in one of the montglas olives and cover with more forcemeat so that it lies exactly in the center of the quenelle; smooth dome-form with the blade of a small wet knife to have it a perfect shaped quenelle. Range these molds on a deep baking pan containing a little hot water, cover with buttered paper and poach in a slack oven. Remove and dress them almost upright on the croustade, leaning them against the support, and finally cover FIG. 432. A rice croustade with rice support placed in the center is filled with quenelles around the border and forcemeat in the middle. with a little of the suprême sauce. Fill the empty space in the center with a tastefully arranged cluster of mushrooms and imitation cocks'-combs made of veal palates, masking them with more of the sauce, and in the middle lay a fine glazed truffle; cover very lightly with the sauce and serve what remains in a sauce -boat. (2332). QUENELLES OF GROUSE, LONDONDERRY (Quenelles de Tétras, Londonderry). Obtain some oval-shaped molds three inches long by two and a quarter wide, they being half an inch thick; butter them over with cold fresh butter and decorate with fanciful cuts of very black truffles ( Fig. 75); cover the bottoms with grouse quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) and fill up the center with a salpicon of grouse and mushrooms, half of each, thickened with Madeira sauce (No. 492), then let stand till cold. Cover over with more of the forcemeat, smooth the surface and poach in boiling water, having just sufficient to reach halfway up the molds. When firm to the touch unmold, drain and dress on a dish bottom having a support on top filled with truffles; cover the quenelles with Madeira sauce (No. 492) and game fumet (No. 397), and also serve a sauce -boatful of the sauce. (2333). QUENELLES OF PARTRIDGE à LA STUART (Quenelles de Perdreau à la Stuart). Have oval-shaped molds, and decorate them with fanciful cuts of very black truffles and red beef tongue; garnish half of each mold with a delicate partridge cream forcemeat (No. 75); lay in the center some cold cooked fine herbs (No. 385) reduced with velouté sauce (No. 415), and cover with more of the forcemeat; poach them in a slack oven, and serve with a separate sauce -boat of béchamel sauce (No. 409) finished with essence of truffles (No. 395). FIG. 433. An oval-shaped quenelle with fancy cut black truffles garnished on top of it. (2334). QUENELLES OF PHESANT--FRIED (Quenelles de Faisan Frites). With some raw pheasant meat taken from the breasts prepare a quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), and when passed through a sieve put it in a tin vessel and cook until smooth; mix in with it two spoonfuls of chopped truffles; use this to fill a dozen quenelle molds ( Fig. 75); have the tops quite high and smooth. Range these molds on a raised-edge baking tin containing a little hot water; boil the liquid up twice, then cover the molds with buttered paper and poach uncovered in a slack oven; when firm to the touch remove. Cool them off partly before unmolding, then dip in eggs, then in bread-crumbs, fry and serve on a folded napkin with fried parsley on top. (2335). QUENELLES OF SALMON --STUFFED (Quenelles de Saumon Fourrées). Fasten on to the center of an entrée dish a wooden bottom an inch and a half in thickness; cover it with a thin flat of noodle paste (No. 142); in the middle of this fasten a small round support cut sloping, and on top set a small basket, all of these being covered with noodle paste; the inside must also be covered, and the outside with ornamental leaves cut from the same paste. Egg over this paste and dry it for a few hours. Prepare a forcemeat with ten ounces of salmon, eight ounces of panada (No. 121), eight ounces of lobster butter (No. 580) and four egg-yolks; rub it through a sieve and when very smooth try a small piece to rectify if necessary; let this harden on the ice for twenty minutes, stirring it frequently. Make a fine truffled montglas with mushrooms and truffles thickened with a good velouté sauce (No. 415), reduced and finished with a few tablespoonfuls of fish glaze (No. 399); let this preparation get cold and divide into small parts and roll into FIG. 434. A dish fastened with a wooden bottom in the center and a small round support cut sloping with a small basket is fastened at the middle of this wooden bottom. Noodle paste is used to cover them. Wooden bottom is surrounded with quenelles and the small basket is filled with truffles. long-shaped olives. Have the forcemeat very smooth and form it into quenelles with a spoon (No. 155), and stuffing each one with a little montglas poach them in salted water, drain on a cloth and decorate the smoothest side with a truffle lozenge, fastening it on with a little of the uncooked forcemeat. Dress these quenelles in a circle around the base on the dish, inclining them somewhat; fill the basket with small truffles, cover the quenelles lightly with a little good lean velouté sauce (No. 416) reduced with fish court-bouillon (No. 38) and mushroom broth, having a separate sauce -boat of the same sauce. The truffles in the basket may be replaced by mushrooms or a small pyramid of crawfish tails or shrimps dressed around a bed of fresh parsley. (2336). SPRING TURKEY QUENELLES à LA PROVIDENCE (Quenelles de Dindonneau à la Providence). Decorate some oval-shaped molds ( Fig. 75) with red tongue, truffles and pistachios; fill them half full with some very mellow turkey quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), and lay in the center a royal salpicon (No. 751); cover with more forcemeat and poach them in a slow oven; unmold and dress them crown-shaped, filling the well with shrimps rolled in a little chicken glaze (No. 398), lemon juice and lobster butter (No. 580). Dress over a printanière sauce (No. 546) and serve a separate sauce -boat of the same sauce. FIG. 435. An oval-shaped mold filled with different type of forcemeat and is decorated with red tongue, truffles, and pistachios. (2337). WOODCOCK QUENELLES à LA D'ARTOIS (Quenelles de Bécasses à la d'Artois). Butter some pieces of strong paper three inches by four, spread on them a layer of woodcock quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), oval-shaped, two and a half inches long by one and a half wide and a quarter of an inch thick; garnish the centers with a brown montglas (No. 747), and cover with another layer of the quenelle forcemeat, having it dome-shaped, and smoothing with a knife. Decorate the top with truffles and red tongue; cover with thin slices of fat pork and a strong buttered paper, then poach them in a slack oven until they are firm to the touch; dress them crown-shaped in a dish, cover them with half-glaze (No. 400) and Madeira sauce (No. 492); serve separately a sauce -boat of the same sauce. FIG. 436. An illustration of an oval-shaped woodcock quenelles decorated with truffles and red tongue on top of it. (2338). SALPICON OF CHICKEN, BAKED (Salpicon de Volaille au Gratin). Take one pound of white meat of a cooked chicken, cut it into small dice and put the pieces in a saucepan with four spoonfuls of cooked lean ham, and as much mushrooms, all to be cut alike, and mingle in a few spoonfuls of good reduced béchamel sauce (No. 409), finishing the preparation with a small piece of melted chicken glaze (No. 398). Pour the whole into a small pie dish ( Fig. 183), smooth it to a dome and cover with a layer of duchess portato preparation ( No. 2785 ), smooth again, butter over the top and bestrew with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan; bake for a quarter of an hour in a slack oven and serve in the same dish. (2339). SHELLS BENOîTON (Coquilles Benoîton). Prepare the same sauce as for à la Villa ( No. 2340 ), mixing into it a third each of whole braised chestnuts (No. 654), fine mushroom heads and whole small truffles; strew the tops with un smoked beef tongue and green pistachios, both cut up in small one-eighth inch squares; then dredge with bread-crumbs and butter. Brown in a moderate oven for ten to fifteen minutes and serve. (2340). SHELLS OF OYSTERS à LA VILLA (Coquilles d'Huîtres à la Villa). Poach the oysters, drain and suppress the hearts. Sauté in butter half as much escalops of cooked lobster, and half as much white part of cooked chicken as lobster. Cut the poached oysters in five-eighths of an inch squares, mingle with the lobster, chicken and béchamel sauce (No. 409), thickening with egg-yolks, cream and fresh butter; use this preparation to fill up some buttered and bread -crumbed clean oyster shells; when very full sift over each a little fried bread-crumbs, and set them in the oven a few minutes before serving. (2341). SHELLS FILLED WITH CRAWFISH TAILS (Coquilles Garnies de Queues d'écrevisses). Prepare a salpicon with the meats picked from the large claws and the tails of crawfish; add to it a third as much cooked mushrooms, cut in dice shape, and mingle with some good reduced thick béchamel sauce (No. 409); with this fill eight or ten silver or china table shells ( Fig. 438); smooth the preparation to a dome and cover with a layer of the cream fish forcemeat (No. 76). Range the shells on a small baking sheet, dredge the forcemeat with grated parmesan and brown for five minutes under the salamander ( Fig. 123); keep the shells hot at the oven door for five minutes longer, then dress them symmetrically on a wooden foundation covered with white paper; surround this foundation with green parsley leaves. FIG. 437. An illustration of a plate of shells filled with crawfish tails and are arranged pyramidically. (2342). SHELLS FILLED WITH SHRIMPS AND OYSTER CRABS (Coquilles Garnies de Crevettes et de Crabes d'Huîtres). Put the oyster crabs into a saucepan on the fire, with a little white wine, and when poached drain and lay them in a sautoir with the same amount of cooked and shelled shrimps fried in butter; add lean béchamel cream sauce (No. 411) that has been well seasoned; with this fill some buttered and breaded silver shells ( Fig. 438) or else clean clam shells; throw bread-crumbs over, baste with butter and brown in a hot oven. FIG. 438. An illustration of a shell. (2343). SHELLS OF BEEF PALATES à LA MARINIèRE (Coquilles de Palais de Bœuf à la Marinière). Have some beef palates cooked and pressed as explained for à la béchamel (No. 1326), cut them in fillets of a quarter of an inch square by one inch in length. Place in a saucepan two ounces of butter, and some finely chopped shallots and mushrooms; moisten with a little white wine, add a little velouté sauce (No. 415), reduce, season to taste, then add the beef palates, heat and thicken the sauce with egg-yolks and cream. Butter well some shells ( Fig. 438), besprinkle over with bread-crumbs and fill them with the above preparation, keeping them slightly dome-shaped on top. Cover with béchamel sauce (No. 409), dredge over some grated bread-crumbs and parmesan cheese, and pour melted butter over the top. Brown them nicely in a warm oven and arrange them on a napkin with green sprigs of parsley around. (2344). SHELLS OF CHICKEN à LA SHAW (Coquilles de Poulet à la Shaw). Cook two tender chickens, each one to weigh two pounds and a half, in a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419), and when done strain the stock over and let get cold in this; then suppress the skin, fat and bones and cut up the meat into five-eighths inch squares. Cook the livers with the fat skimmed from the mirepoix stock and chop them up when cold; also chop up six hard-boiled eggs, the yolks and whites separately. Put the chicken meat into a sautoir with the chopped livers and eggs, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Place two ounces of butter in a saucepan with two ounces of flour, stir it well, then remove the saucepan from the fire and mix into it the stock from the chickens, having two gills of it; then boil it up, stirring continuously, and add a gill of cream; simmer the whole and thicken with six egg-yolks diluted with a little cream without allowing it to boil, rolling the ingredients into the sauce while tossing without using any spoon, and season properly; lastly add a glassful of sherry and half a teaspoonful of lemon juice; fill up the shells, dredge over parmesan cheese and color in a hot oven or under the salamander ( Fig. 123). (2345). SHELLS OF CHICKEN OR SWEETBREADS (Coquilles de Volaille ou de Ris de Veau). Have either some silver or china shells ( Fig. 438) or else some scallop shells; butter and dredge over with bread-crumbs; mince some braised white meat of chicken or else sweetbreads with half as many mushrooms and put it into a sautoir; mix with velouté sauce (No. 415); let all boil, then thicken with raw egg-yolks, cream and fresh butter. Fill the shells with this preparation, bestrew the tops with bread-crumbs and a little grated parmesan, and baste with melted butter; brown in a brisk oven. (2346). SHELLS OF FISH (Coquilles de Poisson). Cook a prepared sea bass in a court-bouillon (No. 38), then drain, suppress the skin and bones and only use the meat after shredding it well; reduce some velouté sauce (No. 415) with mushroom essence (No. 392) and the court-bouillon; season properly and thicken with egg-yolks and butter, then stir in the fish. Butter some shells ( Fig. 438), besprinkle with bread-crumbs, fill them with the fish preparation, having the tops slightly dome-form; bestrew with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan, baste over with butter, then brown in the oven; serve as soon as they have attained a good color. (2347). SHELLS OF FROGS (Coquilles de Grenouilles). Fry in butter one pound of frogs ' legs without letting them acquire a color; butter some shells ( Fig. 438), bread-crumb the insides, and fill the bottoms with a cream béchamel (No. 411); place on top cooked and minced mushrooms, and over this the boned frogs ' legs; cover with more béchamel, make another bed of mushrooms and frogs, and finish with béchamel; dredge the tops with bread-crumbs fried in butter, set them in the oven, and when very hot and nicely browned serve at once on folded napkins. (2348). SHELLS OF LOBSTER (Coquilles de Homard). Kill two two-pound lobsters by plunging them into boiling water for two minutes; break off the claws, and put them into a saucepan with the bodies; cover with a court-bouillon (No. 38), and allow the liquid to boil for twenty minutes while covered; then remove the saucepan from the fire and leave the lobsters to partially cool off in this stock; drain them. Suppress the claw shells, and cut the meats up into three-sixteenths of an inch squares; lay them in a small saucepan, detach the tails from the bodies, rub the creamy parts of the latter through a sieve, and strain the lobster stock; put this on the fire to reduce to a half-glaze, and incorporate into it slowly a quart of reduced béchamel sauce (No. 409); season with a pinch of cayenne pepper; the sauce should be reduced to a proper degree and seasoned. Cut the lobster tails lengthwise in two, take out the meats, and cut them into slices; butter the insides of the shells ( Fig. 438), strew over with bread-crumbs, and dress the pieces of lobster crown-shaped inside of these, alternating them with a slice of truffle; lay them in a sautoir, one very close to the other; add the dice-shaped pieces of lobster to the sauce and pour this over the contents of the shells. Besprinkle with parmesan, and color the tops, using a salamander ( Fig. 123); then dress the shells on folded napkins in a circle, garnishing the center with green parsley sprigs. (2349). SHELLS OF MUSSELS OR OYSTERS BAKED (Coquilles de Moules ou d'Huîtres au Gratin). Suppress the black foot (the appendage) of some mussels and cut them up into two or three pieces; place these in a highly seasoned allemande sauce (No. 407); add to it chopped parsley, and fill the shells ( Fig. 438) already buttered with this preparation; dust over with fried bread-crumbs, and leave them in the oven for a few minutes before serving. Oysters may be prepared exactly the same way. (2350). SHELLS OF OYSTERS BAKED IN THEIR NATURAL SHELLS (Coquilles d'Huîtres en Coquilles Naturelles au Four). Open some oysters, detach them from their shells, leaving them in the deep one; pour over a little melted butter mixed with chopped parsley, strew the tops with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan, and then range these shells very straight on a bed of salt spread over a baking-sheet; cook them for seven or eight minutes in a moderate oven, and after taking them out wipe the bottoms of the shells carefully, and lay them on napkins to serve. (2351). SHELLS OF OYSTERS IN THEIR NATURAL SHELLS (Coquilles d'Huîtres en Coquilles Naturelles). Poach and drain three dozen oysters; fry colorless in butter three shallots, moisten with white wine and the oyster liquor, and dilute with béchamel sauce (No. 409). Cook and despumate; thicken with egg-yolks, butter, and cream; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, stirring so that the sauce thickens properly; then add the oysters to it, and with this fill the well-cleaned, deep oyster shells; sprinkle over fried bread-crumbs and butter, then brown them in the oven. (2352). SHELLS OF OYSTERS ROASTED AND ENGLISH STYLE IN NATURAL SHELLS (Coquilles d'Huîtres Rôties et à l'Anglaise en Coquilles Naturelles). Lay some very clean medium-sized oysters on the broiler, on the flat side of the shell; when hot, turn over and lay the hollow side to the fire until they are open, then take off the flat shell and serve the oysters in the hollow one, laying a small piece of fresh butter on each. For English style prepare the oysters as for roasted in shells, and instead of butter season them with salt, pepper, and finely chopped fresh mushrooms; add a little lean velouté sauce (No. 416) to each, bestrew with bread-crumbs fried in butter, push in the oven for a moment and serve. (2353). SHELLS OF OYSTERS IN THEIR NATURAL SHELLS WITH FRIED BREAD (Coquilles d'Huîtres en Coquilles Naturelles au Pain Frit). Heat some butter in a small saucepan; mix in with it some white bread-crumbs, stir continuously and let it get a light brown color, then remove from the fire and drain. Poach and drain some oysters; lay six of their natural shells on a baking sheet having an inside perforated sheet to hold the oysters level, or cover the bottom of the pan with a bed of salt. Take up a heaping teaspoonful of the fried bread-crumbs and pour it into each shell; on top place one or two oysters and cover with a little well seasoned velouté sauce (No. 416); bestrew the surfaces with grated parmesan and on each set a small piece of butter; push the shells into a moderate oven for five or six minutes, then remove and dress in a circle on a folded napkin, with a sprig of parsley in the center. (2354). SHELLS OF SCALLOPS, PARISIAN STYLE (Coquilles de Pétoncles à la Parisienne). Open seven or eight large scallop shells; detach the meats as well as the white and red milts, and poach them in a little white wine; drain and cut them into dice pieces; keep this salpicon on one side. Fry in butter, chopped up onions and shallots; add raw mushrooms cut in dice shape and cook until their moisture is evaporated, then add the prepared salpicon five or six minutes later; season and thicken with a good béchamel sauce (No. 409) reduced when ready to use. Boil once more for a few minutes without ceasing to stir; it should be quite consistent, and finish it away from the fire with a pinch of cayenne pepper and a piece of fresh lobster butter (No. 580). Lift this stew up with a spoon, and with it fill the shells; cover the preparation with bread-crumbs, brush over with melted butter, and bake for ten minutes in a moderate oven. Dress the shells as soon as they are removed from the fire. (2355). SHELLS OF SPINAL MARROW OR BRAINS (Coquilles d'Amourettes ou de Cervelles). After the spinal marrow or brains have been prepared and cooked as explained in No. 1549, drain and cut them up in one-inch length slices, butter the interiors of either china or silver shells ( Fig. 438), cover the insides with white bread raspings, fill the shells with the pieces of spinal marrow, and pour over a white Italian sauce (No. 484). Cover the tops with some well-seasoned béchamel sauce (No. 409), besprinkle with bread-crumbs and parmesan cheese, add a little butter, and brown in a hot oven. Dress them crown-shaped on a folded napkin, garnishing with sprigs of green parsley. (2356). SHELLS OF SQUABS BAKED (Coquilles de Pigeonneaux Gratinées). After the squabs have been plucked, singed, drawn, well cleaned and boned, divide each one into four or six pieces, according to the size of the bird, then fry these colorless in butter with minced fresh mushrooms; after they are well done, pour off the fat and replace it by allemande sauce (No. 407), adding a little finely cut up chives. Butter some shells ( Fig. 438), bestrew the bottoms with a little bread-crumbs and fill them with the squabs; sprinkle more bread-crumbs over mixed with grated parmesan and brown with a salamander or in a hot oven. Instead of bread -crumbing the tops may be covered with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and coated with butter, then breaded and browned in the oven, or else cover the shells with a thin flat made of puff paste fragments (No. 146), egg them over twice and bake in a moderate oven. (2357). SHELLS OF VEAL OR LAMB SWEETBREADS, à LA HARPER (Coquilles de Ris de Veau ou d'Agneau, à la Harper). Braise unlarded sweetbreads; when cooked place them in a dish, pour over the stock and let get cold; merely cut them up into small three-sixteenths inch pieces, add to these half as much fresh mushrooms and a quarter as much unsmoked but salted red beef tongue, all cut the same size, and mix the pieces into some béchamel sauce (No. 409), seasoning with salt and pepper to taste. Butter some shells ( Fig. 438), besprinkle each with bread-crumbs, fill with the above preparation and dust the tops with bread raspings and grated cheese; pour melted butter over and brown the surface to a fine color in a hot oven, then dress and serve on folded napkins. (2358). SHELLS OF TERRAPIN WITH HAZEL- NUTS (Coquilles de Terrapène aux Noisettes). Have a thick and well-seasoned béchamel sauce (No. 409); mix in with it four ounces of roasted hazel- nuts pounded to a pulp with a gill of sherry wine. Butter some shells, dust over with bread-crumbs, and fill the bottoms with the béchamel; over this lay some boned terrapin, sprinkle over a little fine sherry, and pour more sauce on top; throw over some bread-crumbs fried in butter and of a fine color, then set the shells in the oven, and serve when the surfaces are nicely browned. (2359). SOUFFLé OF CHICKENS (Soufflé de Poulet). Have a quarter of a pound of very white roasted chicken meat, pare it free of all sinews, fat or skin, then pound it to a pulp with an ounce of butter, a tablespoonful of béchamel sauce (No. 409) and two egg-yolks; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg and rub the whole through a sieve; put it back into a vessel to heat, mixing in slowly two tablespoonfuls of well-drained whipped cream, then stir in two very stiffly beaten egg-whites and a teaspoonful of finely chopped truffles. Butter a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) lightly, or small paper cases ( Fig. 439) stiffened in the oven; fill them up and cook in a moderate oven; it takes about twelve or fifteen minutes to cook the soufflé in the pan; serve at once. Guests had better be kept waiting for a soufflé than to have the soufflé wait for them. It must be served immediately it leaves the oven, otherwise it loses its greatest merit, namely a beautiful appearance. FIG. 439. An illustration of a small paper case. FIG. 440. An illustration of a souffle in a small paper case. (2360). SOUFFLé OF CHICKEN à LA DELSART (Soufflé de Poulet à la Delsart). Pound half a pound of the white meat of a cooked chicken with two ounces of butter, two spoonfuls of béchamel (No. 409), and two raw egg-yolks; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Stiffen some buttered or oiled paper cases in the oven, and ten minutes before serving incorporate into the preparation two egg-whites beaten to a stiff froth, and two tablespoonfuls of well-drained, whipped cream; fill the cases, prepared as for soufflé of chicken ( No. 2359 ), and place them in a moderately heated oven for ten to twelve minutes, then glaze them over with a brush. (2361). SOUFFLé OF FAT LIVERS WITH TRUFFLES (Soufflé de Foies-Gras aux Truffes). Pound six ounces of fat livers with two ounces of rice thoroughly cooked in broth until perfectly dry; add one whole egg, season and press the preparation through a sieve, putting the purée into a bowl; make it very smooth by stirring into it four spoonfuls of raw chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), and two well-beaten-up egg-whites. Fill with this some paper cases ( Fig. 439) previously buttered and stiffened in the oven; set them in the oven for ten to twelve minutes, and glaze them with some light chicken glaze (No. 398), using a brush for this purpose. (2362). SOUFFLé OF GAME à LA LUCIE (Soufflé de Gibier à la Lucie). Pound four ounces of cooked game meat with two ounces of rice boiled in broth until dry and consistent; add two tablespoonfuls of game glaze (No. 398), two raw egg-yolks and half an ounce of melted butter, then press all through a sieve, and beat the preparation thoroughly. Ten minutes before serving mix in half an ounce of truffles cut in one-eighth inch squares, and two egg-whites beaten to a stiff froth. Butter some paper cases ( Fig. 439), stiffen them in the oven, then fill them three-quarters full with the soufflé preparation, set them in the oven for about ten minutes, and when done glaze the tops with a little game glaze (No. 398) and serve without delay. (2363). SOUFFLé OF LOBSTER IN CASES (Soufflé de Homard en Caisses). Plunge a two-pound lobster into boiling water so as to kill it quickly, and when cold split it lengthwise in two, take out the meat from the half tails, cut it up and pound the pieces with two or three spoonfuls of good reduced velouté sauce (No. 415); finish with some red butter (No. 580), adding also a piece of fresh butter; press this through a sieve, and put the purée back into the mortar, and with the pestle pound it well to make it have a good, consistent body, allowing it to absorb very slowly three gills of good raw cream; season and finally add two spoonfuls of the creamy part from the bodies, a dash of cayenne pepper and two spoonfuls of whipped cream. With this preparation fill either some round buttered paper (No. 439), silver (No. 438) or porcelain cases, wiped dry and buttered; dredge over the insides with bread-crumbs and fill the cases and lay them on a baking sheet; push them into a slack oven and let the preparation cook from fifteen to twenty minutes; it should be cooked in a very hot oven, otherwise it will become black. After taking the soufflés from the oven, glaze the surfaces with a little of the same reduced velouté sauce, finish with red butter (No. 580), and serve them at once. (2364). SOUFFLé OF PARTRIDGE à LA HAGGINS (Soufflé de Perdreau à la Haggins). Pound half a pound of cold partridge meat to a pulp, add to it half an ounce of foies-gras, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg and put in four tablespoonfuls of game glaze (No. 398) and half an ounce of butter; press this through a fine sieve and place the purée in a metal basin to heat up lightly, incorporating in slowly four raw egg-yolks and four very stiffly beaten whites. When the preparation is thoroughly mixed, transfer it to some small buttered paper cases ( Fig. 439), stiffened in the oven, having them three-quarters of an inch full; push them into a slack oven fifteen to twenty minutes before serving; glaze over with a brush dipped in game glaze (No. 398) and serve them instantly they leave the oven; they must not be standing. Truffles cut in eighth of an inch squares may be added to the soufflés if so desired. (2365). SOUFFLé OF PHEASANT à LA ANDREW (Soufflé de Faisan à la Andrew). Take the cooked meats from a roasted pheasant, suppressing skin, bones and sinews, pound them to a pulp with half as much cooked rice, and also one ounce of very fresh fat liver. Make an essence (No. 389) with the parings; reduce half a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414); add it to the essence and when very thick put it with the pheasant pulp and strain the whole through a sieve into a tin basin and work well while adding some chopped truffles. Twenty-five minutes before serving heat the preparation in a bain-marie and incorporate into it seven raw egg-yolks one by one, and three ounces of fresh butter, working it in well, and then stir in five egg-whites, beaten to a very stiff froth. Butter a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182), fill it half full with the preparation and push it into a slack oven; it ought to take from fifteen to twenty minutes to cook; when done, glaze over with game glaze (No. 398) and serve at once. (2366). SOUFFLé OF WOODCOCKS WITH TRUFFLES (Soufflé de Bécasses aux Truffes). Suppress all the meats from three roasted woodcocks and pound it to a pulp; fry the intestines and liver in butter, add this to the pulp and press through a sieve; dilute with a heaping spoonful of game glaze (No. 398) and remove from the fire; stir the preparation until it loses its greatest heat, then add four egg-yolks, an ounce of melted butter, an ounce of peeled truffles cut in small dice, and proper seasoning, and incorporate in slowly four beaten egg-whites, and if found necessary an ounce of boiled rice may also be added. Put this either into a buttered souffle pan ( Fig. 182) or else in buttered paper cases ( Fig. 439) stiffened in the oven. If for cases of half a pint capacity, they will require fifteen minutes, but all depends upon their size. (2367). CHICKEN LIVERS, SURTOUT WITH MUSHROOMS OR IN RICE BORDER WITH CURRY (Surtout de Foies de Volaille aux Champignons ou en Bordure de Riz au Kari). Cover the middle of a dish with a three-quarters of an inch thick layer of foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78) and poach in a slack oven. Fry some chicken livers in butter with a little blanched shallot and half as much minced mushrooms as there are livers; season with salt and pepper and dilute with Madeira sauce (No. 492). Dress these livers on the forcemeat surtout and sprinkle chopped parsley over; serve very hot. In a Rice Border with Curry. --Make an Indian rice ( No. 1872 ) border, dress on a hot dish and fill the center with fried chicken livers the same as the above, adding some curry powder. (2368). WILD PIGEON SURTOUT, BAKED (Surtout de Pigeons Ramiers, au Gratin). After the pigeons have been picked, singed and nicely cleaned, cut them lengthwise in two, then trim, removing the legs and a part of the backbone; season and fry in butter till three-quarters done, drain off the butter, cover with velouté sauce (No. 415) thickening with raw egg-yolks and a little fresh butter; leave the sautoir on the fire and roll the pigeons in until well mingled with the sauce. Spread in the middle of an oval baking dish a half-inch thick layer of godiveau (No. 84); place the pigeons on top and pour the sauce over; besprinkle with bread-crumbs and grated cheese, baste with butter and brown in a hot oven or with a salamander ( Fig. 123). (2369). BEEF TART OR PIE à LA PEREZ (Tarte de Bœuf à la Perez). These pies are made in deep china dishes ( Fig. 183), suitable to be put in the oven. Butter the bottom of the dish and garnish it with a thin layer of finely minced onions; over this put a layer of cooked potatoes cut into thin slices, and on top of the potatoes a thick layer of slices of tenderloin of beef; season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, chopped parsley, and chopped-up mushrooms; set a few whole egg-yolks here and there, then cover with another layer of onions and potatoes , both minced fine. The dish should now be quite full of the dressing, and dome-shaped on top. Roll out some cuttings of puff paste (No. 146) to an eighth of an inch in thickness; cut from it a band half an inch in width and sufficiently long to reach around the edge of the dish; wet the edge, and set the band over it, moisten and cover the whole with a rolled-out flat of the same paste an eighth of an inch in thickness; press down the paste on to the band, at the bottom of the dome, and cut away the superfluous paste all around the dish, outside the edge; then with a small knife cut grooves into the band through its thickness. Make a hole in the center of the dome in the paste, decorate around this with imitation leaves made of paste, brush it twice with beaten egg, and set the pie on a baking sheet. Cook it for an hour and a quarter in a moderate oven, and should it threaten to brown too soon cover with sheets of wet paper, and when ready to serve pour into the pie an espagnole sauce (No. 414), reduced with some clear gravy (No. 404). Set it on a dish over a folded napkin. (2370). CHICKEN TART OR PIE à LA MANHATTAN (Tarte de Poulet à la Manhattan). Have two young chickens, singe, draw and cut them up into six or eight pieces; lay them in a saucepan containing small blanched onions and a bunch of parsley garnished with bay leaf; moisten with stock (No. 194a), cook slowly and thicken with kneaded butter (No. 579). Fill the bottom of a deep pie dish ( Fig. 183) with peeled and pressed halved tomatoes, cover with a layer of lightly parboiled fried bacon cut into three-quarters of an inch pieces; season with salt, mignonette and nutmeg, and range the chicken on top with portato balls five-eighths of an inch in diameter and boiled in salted water, also the small onions. Chop up four ounces of veal and three ounces of fat pork; season with salt, nutmeg and pepper; pound in the mortar and rub through a sieve; to this forcemeat add two tablespoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385), an ounce of bread-crumbs and one whole egg; roll this on a flour ed table into three-quarter inch balls and drop them here and there while putting the chicken in the dish. Moisten the edge of the dish, place on a small band made of puff paste parings half an inch wide and one-eighth of an inch thick; moisten this and cover with a flat of puff paste parings; pinch the edges together, cut away all the surplus from around the edge of the dish, egg over twice and bake in a moderate oven for half or three-quarters of an hour, then serve. (2371). CHICKEN TART OR PIE à LA RIGOLO (Tarte de Poulet à la Rigolo). Cut up a pound and a half young chicken into four pieces, bone these and season with salt and pepper; sauté them colorless in butter with fresh mushrooms and a tablespoonful of onion, each chopped up separately; when the whole is fried add a tablespoonful of flour, mix well and moisten with stock (No. 194a); boil, skim and simmer until thoroughly cooked, then add some imitation cocks'-combs made of beef 's palate and cocks' kidneys, a broiled sliced sausage having the skin removed and the gizzard cooked and cut in quarter-inch squares, seasoning with salt, pepper and chopped parsley. Make a few quenelles with the chopped chicken livers, season well and mix in some bread-crumbs and raw egg-yolk; roll this preparation into balls, three-quarters of an inch in diameter. Fill a deep pie dish ( Fig. 183) with the above chicken stew, dropping the balls among it, also some small hard-boiled egg-yolk balls; finish the pie the same as pie à la Manhattan ( No. 2370 ). (2372). CHICKEN TART OR PIE, AUSTRALIAN STYLE (Tarte de Poulet à l'Australienne). Singe, draw and cleanse well some young chickens, cut them up into eight pieces: two wings, two thighs, two backs and two breastbones; fry these colorless in butter, moisten with stock (No. 194a), season and cook slowly while covered; remoisten several times, then add some allemande sauce (No. 407); garnish the bottom of a pie dish ( Fig. 193) with slices of fried ham, lay the chicken on top, intercalating the pieces with small hard-boiled egg-yolks, chopped-up raw mushrooms and fine herbs; pour the sauce over and cover with a layer of chicken forcemeat (No. 73). Make a flat of puff paste parings, lay it over the top, pinch the edges, egg the surface twice and decorate with puff paste leaves; bake the pie in a hot oven for thirty to forty minutes. (2373). LAMB MINION FILLET TART OR PIE à LA MANNING (Tarte de Filets Mignons d'Agneau à la Manning). Remove the fat and sinews from some yearling lamb fillets, wrap them up in thin slices of veal suet, and roast till rare, then cut them into escalops and range the pieces in a buttered deep pie dish ( Fig. 183), intercalating the thin slices of suet with the slices of fillet. Fry in butter some cut-up shallot, add to it mushrooms and chopped parsley, and moisten with a little espagnole sauce (No. 414) and good gravy (No. 404); pour this over the fillets and cover the edge of the dish with a band of puff paste, and the top with a flat of the same rolled to an eighth of an inch thickness; stick this to the band of paste, egg the surface and cook it for one hour in a moderately heated oven. After withdrawing the pie from the fire, make an opening in the middle of the upper crust, and fill the inside with a brown Madeira sauce (No. 492) finished with mushroom essence (No. 392). (2374). LOBSTER TART OR PIE à LA A. HERAULT (Tarte de Homard à la A. Hérault). Boil two two-pound lobsters in a court-bouillon (No. 38); drain, and let get cold; detach the tails and claws; remove all the creamy parts and rub them through a fine sieve, then pick the meat from the tails and claws, and cut them into slices. Partly fry two ounces of shallot cut into one-eighth of an inch squares, with two ounces of butter; when partially fried add half a pound of chopped fresh mushrooms, and let fry together; pour in a quart of allemande sauce (No. 407), season with salt, nutmeg and cayenne, also chopped parsley, and mix well, adding the creamy parts and the pieces of lobster; transfer all this into a deep pie dish ( Fig. 183), and set on the edge, slightly dampened, a narrow puff paste (No. 146) band, and over all a layer of puff paste fragments; cut it away evenly all around the outer edge, and decorate the top with leaves made of paste; pinch the edges around the pie, and egg over the surface twice, then cook it for twenty to thirty minutes in a hot oven, and serve as soon as it is done. (2375). LEG of MUTTON TART OR PIE, CANADIAN (Tarte de Gigot de Mouton à la Canadienne). Butter the interior of a pie dish ( Fig. 183); range on the bottom some blanched salt pork and slices of mutton from the leg; on top lay a bed of potatoes , baked in the oven, peeled and cut in slices; season each layer with salt, pepper, nutmeg, chopped parsley, and chopped onions fried in butter, and pour a little good clear gravy (No. 404) over. Wet the edges of the dish, lay on a narrow band of paste, moisten and cover the whole with a flat of puff paste fragments, decorating the top with devices of the same paste, egg it over twice, and bake in a moderate oven for an hour and a quarter. (2376). OYSTER TART OR PIE, SMITH STYLE (Tarte aux Huîtres à la Smith). Poach in their own liquor three dozen medium oysters, drain and remove the muscles or ligaments. Fry in two ounces of butter, four ounces of bacon cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, two ounces of onions cut the same size, and half a pound of peeled and seedless tomatoes cut into five-eighths of an inch pieces; add the oyster liquor, reduce the whole with a pint of velouté sauce (No. 415), and when well done and seasoned nicely, add the oysters. Place all of this into a deep pie dish ( Fig. 183), and lay on the edge, after slightly wetting it, a narrow band of puff paste (No. 146) an eighth of an inch thick and half an inch wide; moisten the top of this band, and cover the whole with a layer of paste made of fragments of puff paste; cut away the extending edges, and decorate the top with bits of the paste rolled out to one-eighth of an inch in thickness; pinch the edges round the border, and egg over the surface twice, then cook the pie in a hot oven for twenty to thirty minutes, and serve on a folded napkin. Either salt or smoked bacon can be used. (2377). PIGEON TART à LA BRITANNIA (Tarte de Pigeons à la Britannia). Singe three c lean pigeons; divide each one in two parts, beat, remove the surplus bones without boning them, then season with salt, pepper, and cayenne pepper. Cover the bottom of a pie dish ( Fig. 183) with thin slices of bacon, bestrew with a spoonful of onion, and one of mushrooms both chopped separately, range the halved pigeons in the dish intermingled with more slices of bacon, and a few hard-boiled eggs cut in two; bring it to a dome. Pour a few spoonfuls of good clear gravy (No. 404) into the bottom of the dish; cover with a layer of half paste the same as for the beef pie No. 2369 . Decorate the summit, egg over, and cook for an hour and a quarter in a slack oven, covering with paper should it threaten to burn. (2378). LOIN of PORK TART OR PIE--ENGLISH STYLE (Tarte de Longe de Porc à l'Anglaise). Have a loin of fresh pork, bone, remove the fat and cut from it slices three-eighths of an inch thick; beat to flatten slightly, seasoning with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Butter the inside of a pie dish ( Fig. 183) and lay over some thin slices of raw salted and smoked ham, seasoning with prepared red pepper (No. 168), chopped shallot and onions; on this place a bed of raw sliced potatoes , and the pieces of meat above, dropping sage leaves here and there; pour a little good cold gravy (No. 404) into the bottom of the dish; moisten the edge with a brush dipped in water, lay on it a band of paste an eighth of an inch thick and half an inch wide; wet the top of this slightly and cover the pie with a layer of foundation paste (No. 135) or puff paste parings, having it an eighth of an inch in thickness; adhere this on the band, cut away all the surplus paste from the outside and make deep marks all around with the back of a knife; egg the surface twice and cut a hole in the center. Cook this pie in a moderate oven for an hour and a quarter more or less, according to its size; this time being allowed for one containing a pound and a quarter of meat and potatoes . (2379). RABBIT TART OR PIE WITH FINE HERBS (Tarte de Lapin aux Fines Herbes). Suppress the skin from two good rabbits; draw and wipe well the meats; separate them at the joints, bone the shoulders and the legs, decrease the size of the backbones without boning then entirely and split each one in two. With the necks, bones and a few game parings, make a small fumet (No. 397) with white wine. Cut half a pound of bacon into small slices; put them in a sautoir with butter, and heat for five minutes while stirring, then remove with a skimmer, leaving the fat in the pan, and into this throw two spoonfuls each of onions, shallots and mushrooms; fry together for two minutes, then add the pieces of rabbit; season highly, being sparing of the salt, and besprinkle with pulverized wild thyme. Cover the bottom of a pie dish ( Fig. 183) intended for the oven with a layer of the bacon; on this place the pieces of rabbit, intermingling them with the fine herbs and bacon; pour into the bottom a few spoonfuls of the prepared fumet reduced to nearly half-glaze. Wet the edges of the dish, cover it with a thin band of puff paste fragments (No. 146) or fine foundation paste (No. 135); wet this band also. Cover the whole with a flat of puff paste parings, cut off the surplus around the edge of the dish, egg over twice and cook for an hour and a quarter in a slow oven; make a hole on the top and pour in the remainder of the fumet. (2380). VEAL TART OR PIE à LA DICKINSON (Tarte de Veau à la Dickinson). Suppress all the fat and sinews from a kernel of veal; cut it up into thin slices, having them an inch and a half in diameter. Butter a pie dish ( Fig. 183) that can go into the oven; set slices of bacon and ham on the bottom, and over these the sliced veal, alternated; season with salt, pepper and parsley; add finely cut-up potatoes , chopped shallots or onions, then continue to fill with the same until the dish is quite full and well rounded on top; pour some clear gravy (No. 404) into the bottom, lay a small band made of puff paste parings on the edge of the dish, and a flat of the same paste on top; cut away the surplus paste around the dish, decorate and egg the pie over twice; bake it in a medium oven for one hour and a half for a dish containing a quart. (2381). TIMBALE à LA NANTAISE (Timbale à la Nantaise). Line a timbale mold the same as for No. 2383 , cook it lightly, and when removed from the oven, unmold, open on the cut end, empty it of its contents, and keep warm. Prepare a garnishing composed of a few dozen poached oysters or else crawfish tails or red shrimps (either of them shelled), or slices of cooked lobster -tail meat, four ounces of peeled truffles previously cooked in Madeira wine, and a few dozen small salmon quenelles rolled on a flour ed table and poached. Range these garnishings in a sautoir and keep them well covered. Put on to reduce a few gills of good béchamel (No. 409), stir slowly into it the oyster broth, also a few spoonfuls of good court-bouillon (No. 38) reduced to a half-glaze; finish the sauce with a pinch of cayenne pepper and lobster butter (No. 580) and a handful of grated parmesan. Cover the garnishings with this sauce, set them in layers in the timbale, alternating with the remainder of the sauce; close the top with the removed lid and serve at once. FIG. 441. A decorative plate with a timbale. (2382). TIMBALE OF CHICKEN, PARISIAN STYLE--LARGE (Grosse Timbale de Poulet à la Parisienne). Butter a cold oval timbale mold, decorate with fanciful cuts of truffles and cover this decoration with a layer of consistent chicken quenelle forcemeat, having it half an inch deep at the base and diminishing the thickness toward the top. Fill the inside of the timbale with a well-pared boneless chicken fricassée ( No. 1861 ), into which mix a Toulouse garnishing (No. 766), having both thoroughly cold. Cover the top with a layer of forcemeat and place the mold in a saucepan containing boiling water, withdraw it to one side at the first boil and finish cooking the timbale in a slack oven. Let it rest for fifteen minutes after removal, then unmold and pour around a little velouté sauce (No. 415) with essence of truffles (No. 396); serve more of this sauce separately. FIG. 442. An oval-shaped timbale decorated with fanciful cuts of truffles. (2383). TIMBALE FOR EPICURES (Timbale des Gourmets). Butter a large timbale mold ( Fig. 441) slightly wider on top than on the bottom; cover the bottom with a piece of paper and line with rather thick timbale paste (No. 150). With the tip of a small knife cut all round the bottom paste ( Fig. 441), following the outlines of the sides in a way not to decrease the thickness; leave the cut piece of paste in its same position, then cover the bottom and sides with buttered paper and fill the timbale with common flour; close the opening firstly with a round of paper, then with a flat of the same paste; stand it on a small baking sheet and cook for three-quarters of an hour in a slack oven. After removing it from the fire, allow to cool for a few moments, then invert it on a baking sheet to open on the cut side, and empty out the contents; take off the paper and keep the timbale for five minutes at the oven door, glaze it with a brush and fasten it on to the center of a dish, then with a cornet filled with chicken cream forcemeat (No. 75) form a garland all around the upper edge; leave the timbale in a warm heater to poach this border slightly. Place in a saucepan a garnishing composed of fine cocks'-combs, round truffles and very white and uniform mushroom heads; baste with two or three spoonfuls of good chicken stock (No. 188), cover the saucepan and keep it in a bain-marie. In another saucepan place a garnishing of cooked beef fries cut in inch and a half length slices; mix with these an equal quantity of large Italian macaroni, cooked till tender and cut into the same lengths as the fries; add also the same quantity of large fillets of cooked tongue cut likewise, and mingle these ingredients with some good béchamel (No. 409) reduced with the mushroom broth, raw cream and melted meat glaze (No. 402). Heat the stew on a slow fire, stirring it unceasingly and not allowing the sauce to boil and incorporate into it a piece of fresh butter and a handful of parmesan. Now take the timbale from the heater, fill it up with the stew and on top dress the garnishing of the truffles, combs and mushrooms laid in the shape of a dome; cover these with two or three spoonfuls of good light velouté sauce (No. 415), and serve the timbale at once. FIG. 443. A decorative plate of a timbale that has a hole at the center and is filled with truffles, combs and mushrooms. (2384). TIMBALE OF FILLETS OF SOLES à LA GAULOISE (Timbale de Filets de Soles à la Gauloise). Fill the timbale paste, prepare and cook a case as explained in No. 2383 . After the case is taken from the oven open it on the cut to empty. Glaze the inside with a brush, and dress it on a dish; keep it warm in a heater. Poach the fillets of sole in butter, salt and lemon juice; set them under a light weight, pare and keep them warm likewise. Add to a well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407) some minced truffles and mushroom heads; fill the timbale with a layer of sole on top of the truffles and mushrooms, then more sole, and continue the operation until the timbale is entirely filled. Garnish around with Milanese macaroni croquettes, and the top with trussed crawfish. Milanese Macaroni Croquettes are to be made with cooked macaroni cut into half-inch lengths and mingled with allemande sauce (No. 407), adding a salpicon of tongue, truffles and mushrooms; when cold dip in beaten eggs, then in bread-crumbs and fry in hot frying fat. (2385). TIMBALE OF LOBSTER à LA D'AUMALE (Timbale de Homard à la d'Aumale). After a lobster has been cooked in a court-bouillon (No. 38), drain, and lay it aside to get cold; then pick out the meat and cut it up into escalops, not having them too thick--about a pound altogether; add to these slices two medium-sized blanched oysters after suppressing the hard parts; add also half a pound of mushrooms and four ounces of truffles. Butter with unmelted butter a half spherical, plain, round or oval mold; decorate it with fanciful cuts of truffles, and keep the decoration in place with a thick pike quenelle forcemeat (No. 90) mixed with lobster coral; fill up the inside with the above preparation, and finish with more forcemeat. Poach it in a slack oven for three-quarters to one hour; unmold, and serve separately a béchamel sauce (No. 409), with lobster butter (No. 580) added to it. (2386). TIMBALE OF PULLET (Timbale de Poulardes). Cut each of two pullets into five pieces, and five ounces of bacon into thin squares; warm these in a saucepan with some butter, then add the pieces of chicken, and fry them while tossing; season, put in the livers and three or four peeled and sliced truffles. When the chickens are partly done moisten them with a little white wine and reduce quickly; then pour the stew into a tureen. Butter a timbale mold, bestrew chopped noodles over the sides and bottom, and then line it with fine paste (No. 142); cover the sides and bottoms with veal chopped forcemeat (No. 65), finished with a few cooked fine herbs (No. 385). Pour the stew into the timbale, leaving as little empty space as possible, and covering over with a flat of the same paste; fasten this to the edge, and egg over the whole, then push the timbale into a moderate oven to cook for one hour. After removing it cut a small opening in the middle of the crust, and pour in a few spoonfuls of good half-glaze sauce (No. 413); close the opening and invert the timbale on a dish to serve. (2387). TIMBALE OF SQUABS à LA BERCHOUX (Timbale de Pigeonneaux à la Berchoux). Draw, singe and clean six squabs, then cut them each in four. Line a two-quart buttered timbale mold with foundation or short paste (No. 135); coat it over with a layer of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness. Melt four ounces of grated fat pork in a saucepan with as much lean bacon cut into quarter-inch squares; add the squabs, and fry the whole together over a bright fire. When the squabs are nicely browned, drain off the fat and moisten with a quarter of a bottle of white wine, then reduce, add some espagnole sauce (No. 414), and season to taste, adding half a pound of small mushroom heads, and four ounces of minced truffles, then let the whole get cold. Fill up the timbale with separate layers of squabs, mushrooms, bacon, and sauce, and cover over with more quenelle forcemeat, and besides this a lid of puff paste (No. 146); cook in a moderate oven, and when the timbale is done, remove it from the fire, dress, take off the lid, and pour in some espagnole sauce (No. 414) with Madeira; serve the timbale very hot. Instead of cutting the squabs in two, they may be boned and stuffed with delicate chicken quenelle forcemeat, then laid in oval-shaped rings and braised, finishing them as for the others. (2388). TIMBALE OF SWEETBREADS, MODERN--LARGE (Grosse Timbale de Ris de Veau à la Moderne). Butter a large oval mold as for timbale à la Parisian ( No. 2382 ), allowing one quart for eight persons; decorate the bottom and sides with fanciful cuts of truffles, and hold these up with a thick layer of solid chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89.) Cut up in half-inch squares one pound of braised, unlarded sweetbreads that have been left to cool in their stock, also as much cooked lean ham. Put four ounces of butter into a sautoir with two ounces of onion cut in small one-eighth of an inch squares, and when done without browning add four ounces of minced fresh mushrooms; when these have evaporated their moisture add the sweetbreads and ham; season and moisten with two gills of Madeira; let the latter reduce entirely, then pour in some brown sauce (No. 414) and the sweetbread braise stock; reduce once more and transfer the whole to a dish to get cold. Fill the timbale mold with this preparation; spread a half inch thick layer of forcemeat on a sheet of buttered paper, having it the same size as the timbale, turn over the sheet to fasten the forcemeat to the forcemeat in the timbale; attach it well to the top; poach the timbale by placing it in boiling water that reaches halfway up; boil this and push the timbale into a slack oven for an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half, or until the forcemeat be perfectly firm; remove the paper, unmold on a dish and pour around a Madeira sauce (No. 492), serving more of it in a sauce -boat. (2389). TIMBALE OF YOUNG HARE (Timbale de Levraut). Bone a young hare, cut it up into sixteen pieces, and put these into a saucepan with melted fat pork, two tablespoonfuls of chopped onions and half a pound of bacon cut in half-inch squares and blanched. Fry these meats over a good fire, season with salt and spices, and when well stiffened throw in a pound of medium-sized mushrooms turned and channeled (No. 118), also a glassful of white wine; cover the saucepan, reduce the liquid quickly and leave till cold. Butter a plain timbale mold six inches in diameter by six inches high, strew the bottom with a handful of freshly and finely cut-up noodle paste (No. 142), or else pretty pieces cut out with a column tube; apply them all over the inside surface, wetting lightly with water, then line the mold with foundation paste (No. 135), having it rolled out very thin; now cover the bottom and sides with a thin layer of chopped game forcemeat (No. 67). Fill the timbale with the hare and some game quenelles (No. 733) intermingled; cover with a layer of the same forcemeat and over this a round flat of the paste, attaching it to the lower one at the edge. Place the timbale on a small baking sheet and push it into a moderate oven to cook for one hour and a quarter; after removing from the oven, invert it on a dish, make a hole in the center and pour into the inside a brown sauce (No. 414) reduced with Madeira and game fumet (No. 397) made with the hare parings and the mushroom peelings, then strained through a tammy. (2390). TOURTE OF PALATE OF BEEF, PARISIAN STYLE (Tourte de Palais de Bœuf, à la Parisienne). Prepare, cook and press the palates of beef as described in à la béchamel (No. 1326), then cut them in one and a half inch squares. Heat half a pound of lard, brown in it two ounces of finely chopped onions, and half a pound of chopped mushrooms; add the palates, season with salt, pepper, chopped chives and parsley; drain off the grease, and add to it half its quantity of godiveau forcemeat (No. 82) quenelles and increase the garnishing by adding an espagnole sauce (No. 414) finished with Madeira. Prepare an empty tart, ancient style (No. 174); when the tart is done, raise up the cover, remove the paper pad, and fill the interior with the above garnishing, and replace the cover before serving. (2391). TOURTE OF CHICKEN (Tourte de Poulet). Divide two small chickens into eight pieces each, suppressing all the bones. Melt in a sautoir three or four spoonfuls of chopped fat pork; add to it a quarter of a pound of bacon cut in large dice and fry these for four or five minutes; lift them out with a skimmer, leaving the fat in the sautoir, and into it put three spoonfuls of chopped shallot and onion; fry colorless, then add double the same quantity of chopped mushrooms, and as soon as these have evaporated their humidity, put in the chickens, a bunch of parsley and aromatic herbs; fry together and at the end of ten minutes put back the bacon, and when the meats are half cooked moisten with half a glassful of dry white wine; let reduce quickly to a glaze and pour over two or three spoonfuls of half-glaze sauce, then take out the meats and let get cold. Prepare about a pound of chicken godiveau (No. 82). Lay on a pie dish (No. 83) a rather thick layer of foundation paste (No. 135), having it eight inches in diameter; in the center spread a layer of the chicken godiveau six and a half inches in diamter; on this place the chickens, dressing them in a dome, and adding a few cooked mushrooms; then cover the entire dome with the remainder of the godiveau; wet the lower flat at the base of the dome and cover over with a large layer of puff paste (No. 146), press it on to the lower one and fasten the two together, decreasing the thickness, then cut very round. Wet the top layer and lay on the free surface around the dome a band of puff paste made in six turns, having it three-eighths of an inch thick; fasten the two ends, cut bias together, and wet this over; decorate the dome with fanciful cuts of paste, egg it over, as well as the bands of puff paste, and cook the tart in a moderate oven for forty minutes. After taking it out slip it on to a large dish and cut off one-third of the top of the dome to open it, and pour in a few spoonfuls of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), having more in a sauce -boat, and adding to it a few cooked mushrooms. Pigeon or rabbit tarts can be prepared the same. (2392). TOURTE OF FILLETS OF SOLES à LA FINANCIèRE (Tourte de Filets de Soles à la Financière). Make a band tart the same as explained in No. 173; remove and detach it from the baking sheet, dress on a dish and keep warm. Cook five or six well-pared sole fillets in butter, having them seasoned and cut into escalops, laying them in a sautoir with sliced truffles, a few dozen poached oysters and small fish quenelles (No. 90) molded with a small coffeespoon (No. 155), then poached; add some good lean velouté sauce (No. 416), reduced with the broth from the truffles, mushrooms and oysters. Dress this garnishing in a dome in the empty tart, ornament the surface with two sole fillets decorated with truffles, two large cooked crawfish, their tails shelled, and four large quenelles, each one having a truffle lozenge placed on the center. Between the quenelles and the fillets lay a FIG. 444. A tart dress on a dish and is garnished with truffles, crawfish, tails, quenelles and mushroom heads. mushroom head, turned (No. 118) and cooked very white; on top place a small round scooped-out quenelle, and on this a round peeled truffle; glaze this truffle and the fillets of sole, cover the mushrooms with a little velouté sauce and serve more of it as a separate sauce. (2393). TURBAN OF FILLETS OF FLUKES OR SMELTS --STREAKED (Turban de Filets de Carrelets ou d'Eperlans, Bigarrés). Raise the four fillets, peel off the skin, cut them lengthwise in two, then into slices, having them six inches long by one wide; make bias incisions on half the thickness, and set into every one a thin slice of truffle. With a fish quenelle forcemeat (No. 90) make a crown-shaped border, rounded on the top, using mold ( Fig. 139); lay on it the streaked slices slanting in such a way as to cover the surfaces so that the truffles are seen on top; lay over strips of buttered paper, and cook this turban in a slack oven; drain off the butter and fill up the empty space with mushrooms, truffles and oyster kernels, cover with an allemande sauce (No. 407) reduced with cream and well buttered, and lay a garnishing of fried milts around the turban. (2394). TURBAN OF LOBSTERS GARNISHED WITH SHELLS (Turban de Homards Garni de Coquilles). Kill the lobsters by plunging them into boiling water for one minute; suppress the tail shells and cut up the tail meat into transversal slices a quarter of an inch thick, and dress them crown-shaped on a ring made of raw pike quenelle forcemeat (No. 90), alternating each slice with one of truffles and mushrooms; cover this crown with a velouté sauce (No. 416) well-reduced with court bouillon and wine (No. 419); dredge over with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan cheese, and besprinkle with butter; brown it in the oven and then garnish the center of the turban with a garnishing of mushrooms; pour over these a lobster sauce (No. 488) with some cayenne pepper added, and garnish around the turban with small shells filled with lobster and cream béchamel. Prepare as follows: Put into a bowl half a pound of lobster meat cut in quarter-inch squares, and the third of its quantity of cooked mushrooms cut exactly the same. Reduce a pint of béchamel sauce (No. 409) with some of the mushroom broth and cream; mix it in with the salpicon, season with nutmeg, salt and cayenne pepper, and use this preparation to fill some scallop or silver shells ( Fig. 438) previously buttered and bread -crumbed; when they are all full, strew over more bread-crumbs and parmesan, besprinkle with butter, and brown them in a hot oven, or else with a red-hot shovel, or under a gas salamander ( Fig. 123). (2395). VOL-AU-VENT à LA DIEPPOISE (Vol-au-vent à la Dieppoise). For this there must be prepared a vol-au-vent crust, as explained in No. 180; remove the cover to empty it out thoroughly, then keep it warm, or if it has been made some time beforehand just heat it in a slow oven for a few minutes. Reduce some lean velouté sauce (No. 416), then thicken it with egg-yolks, fresh butter and lemon juice, strain through a tammy and keep it in a bain-marie; add to it some cooked mussels, some fish ( sole ) quenelles, mushrooms and shrimps. When all is very hot, fill the crust, cover with the lid and serve. (2396). VOL-AU-VENT à LA FINANCIèRE (Vol-au-vent à la Financière). Prepare a vol-au-vent crust as explained in No. 180; when cooked lift off the cover, empty out the interior and keep it warm. Prepare a garnishing of whole peeled truffles, turned and channeled mushroom heads (No. 118), cocks'-combs and quenelles, as many of one as of FIG. 445. A decorative plate of vol-au-vent garnished with truffles, mushroom heads, cocks'-combs and quenelles. the other, and enough to fill the crust; put this garnishing into a sautoir and mingle in a financière sauce (No. 464). When very hot pour it into the crust, dressing the cocks'-combs in a circle, and inside of this the truffles and mushrooms, having a fine braised, larded and well-glazed sweetbread on top. The financière garnishing can be replaced by a Toulouse (No. 766) or Aquitaine (No. 640) garnishing. (2397). VOL-AU-VENT à LA NESLE (Vol-au-vent à la Nesle). Take some well-buttered allemande sauce (No. 407) reduced with mushroom essence (No. 392); add to it some chicken quenelles made of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) molded with a coffeespoon (No. 155), small turned and cooked mushrooms and cooked lean ham cut in three-eighth inch squares. When both the garnishing and crust are very hot fill up in layers alternated with slices of calf 's brains cooked when ready to use and then well drained. Decorate the top with fine trussed crawfish, and serve. (2398). VOL-AU-VENT, ANCIENT STYLE--LARGE (Gros Vol-au-vent à l'Ancienne). Reduce some velouté sauce (No. 415) with sweetbread stock, and thicken it with egg-yolks; run it through a tammy, and mix in with this sauce some godiveau quenelles (No. 155, Fig. 81), medium-sized mushroom heads, cocks'-combs, slices of liver, and minced truffles. Fill the crust, as explained in à la financière ( No. 2396 ), with this very hot garnishing, and replace the cover by small, pretty kernels of sweetbreads and trussed crawfish. (2399). CHICKEN VOL-AU-VENT WITH MUSHROOMS --LARGE (Gros Vol-au-vent de Volaille aux Champignons). Prepare the crust as for the financière ( No. 2396 ), reduce some velouté sauce (No. 415) with mushroom stock, and when done thicken with raw egg-yolks diluted with a little cream, then incorporate a piece of fresh butter, pass it through a tammy, and add to this sauce some braised white of chicken free of skin, sinews, or fat, and half the same quantity of mushroom heads or cut-up mushrooms. When the crust is very hot, also the garnishing, fill and lay the cover over, then serve. The chicken may be replaced by braised sweetbreads or spring lamb, either of which should be well pared and cut in slices. (2400). SALT CODFISH VOL-AU-VENT--LARGE (Gros Vol-au-vent de Morne Salée). Cut some salted codfish in two-inch pieces, pare them evenly, and lay in cold water to soak for twenty-four hours, changing the water every six hours; the last change must be slightly tepid. When ready to cook put it into a saucepan containing cold water; bring this slowly to a boiling point and leave for three-quarters of an hour without allowing it to actually boil; drain, take off all the skin and bones, and then shred it in flakes; put these in a saucepan with cream béchamel sauce (No. 411). With this prepared fish fill a vol-au-vent crust the same as described in No. 180, dress it on a very hot dish, and serve. It can also be prepared with eggs, adding to the fish hard-boiled eggs and finely chopped parsley and chives. (2401). VOL-AU-VENT OF FROGS AND SOUBISE EGGS (Vol-au-vent de Grenouilles et d'Œufs Soubise). Prepare the vol-au-vent crust as in No. 180. Fry colorless in a pan with butter some frogs ' legs; drain, bone, and lay them in a saucepan. Boil some eggs for eight minutes to have them very hard; shell and cut lengthwise in two, then across in two; add them to the frogs ' legs, and also some well-buttered soubise sauce (No. 543); butter it well, heat all very slowly, and then fill the vol-au-vent crust, placing the removed cover on top. (2402). VOL-AU-VENT OF OYSTERS (Vol-au-vent d'Huîtres). Prepare either one large or sufficient small vol-au-vent (No. 180). Poach a few dozen large oysters in white wine and their own liquor, and when well drained, pare and lay them in a small saucepan. On the other hand, put on to reduce two gills of good béchamel sauce (No. 409), incorporating into it slowly a part of the oyster juice, and when the sauce is considerably reduced and thick, finish it with a little cream; pour this over the oysters, and heat them in a bain-marie ( Fig. 122) without allowing them to boil; at the last moment fill the vol-au-vent with this prepared garnishing, and serve very hot. (2403). VOL-AU-VENT à LA DELMONTéS--SMALL (Petits Vol-au-vent à la Delmontés). These small vol-au-vent are prepared the same as explained in No. 180. Prepare also a brown espagnole sauce (No. 414) with Marsala wine, into which mix equal parts of cooked un smoked beef tongue, cut in balls three-eighths of an inch in diameter with a vegetable spoon, foies-gras quenelles made with foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78) of the same size, or else replace these by marrow quenelles (No. 353) of the same diameter, small mushrooms and the cutaneous part of a calf 's head cut the same size; properly heat the whole, and fill the small vol-au-vent crusts with it; on each one place a round quarter-inch in diameter slice of calf 's brains breaded and fried, over this a stuffed Spanish olive (No. 695), and the whole surmounted by a ball of truffle glazed over with meat glaze. (2404). VOL-AU-VENT à LA LUCINI--SMALL (Petits Vol-au-vent à la Lucini). Prepare the small vol-au-vent (No. 180); when cooked take off the covers, empty out the insides and replace these covers by a game quenelle (No. 91) one inch and a half in diameter by an eighth of an inch thick; poach and bread-crumb them by dipping them in Villeroi sauce (No. 560), then rolling them in bread-crumbs, then fry to a good color. Put into a saucepan some brown sauce (No.414) and Madeira wine; add to this some game fumet (No. 397) mixed with a garnishing composed of two-thirds of small young rabbit quenelles (No. 91) molded in a small coffeespoon (No. 155) and one-third of small turned mushroom heads (No. 118), or in case there be no small ones then cut-up others in two or four pieces. With this garnishing fill the small crusts, lay the Villeroi quenelle on top and in the center of it a round slice of truffle one inch in diameter and glaze over. (2405). VOL-AU-VENT OF OYSTERS à LA MAINTENON--SMALL (Petits Vol-au-vent d'Huîtres à la Maintenon). Set into a saucepan some fresh butter and lemon juice, place it over a hot fire, and add to it some fine raw oysters; after poaching and draining them cut them into pieces, return to the saucepan and season with nutmeg, pepper and salt, and then add some pike quenelles (No. 90); also some cut-up truffles and mushrooms; add a little velouté sauce (No. 415) and thicken it just when ready to serve with raw egg-yolks diluted with a little cream and fine butter. Fill the small vol-au-vent crusts with this, keeping all very warm, put on the cover and serve on a folded napkin. (2406). VOL-AU-VENT, PARISIAN STYLE--SMALL (Petits Vol-au-vent à la Parisienne). Have a brown (No. 414) or Madeira sauce (No. 492) and add to it some half-inch squares of veal or lamb sweetbreads, stoned olives cut in four, turned mushrooms (No. 118) and small chicken quenelles. Fill prepared small vol-au-vent crusts with this garnishing and range trussed crawfish on top, then cover. (2407). VOL-AU-VENT OF REEDBIRDS, DIPLOMATE--SMALL (Petits Vol-au-vent de Mésanges Moustaches à la Diplomate). With six turns of puff paste prepare eight small vol-au-vent crusts (No. 180); after taking them out of the oven detach them from the baking sheet and press on the center of the paste to enlarge the hollow space, and keep them warm. Roast two dozen reedbirds, having them rare; remove the breasts without any bones, suppress the skin and lay them in a small sautoir; mix with them an equal proportion of halved game quenelles, molded with a spoon (No. 155) and poached when wanted in salted water; also add three dozen cooked truffles trimmed into small olive shapes; mix these garnishings with a not too thin but very hot Madeira sauce (No. 492), and with this fill up the warm vol-au-vent crusts; instead of a cover close the apertures with a ring made of puff paste, and in the center have a large Spanish olive standing upright, stuffed with game baking forcemeat (No. 81) and foies-gras. Dress these vol-au-vent on a folded napkin and send them to the table at once. (2408). VOL-AU-VENT OF SALMON TROUT à LA RéGENCE--SMALL (Petits Vol-au-vent de Truite Saumonée à la Régence). The only difference between bouchées and small vol-au-vent is that bouchées are filled with either a salpicon or a purée, while vol-au-vent are filled with small, distinct garnishings. Prepare eight or ten small vol-au-vent crusts (No. 180); cook them in a brisk oven; remove and detach them from the pan, impress a hollow in the center with the finger and keep them warm. Put into a small saucepan a garnishing composed of a pound of salmon-trout escalops, twelve small poached oysters, twelve mushrooms or cut up morils, twelve small fish quenelles (No. 90) rolled on a flour ed table and poached, also some small cut-up poached milts; cover these with a rich and very hot Normande sauce (No. 509), finishing with a piece of lobster butter (No. 580). Fill the warm vol-au-vent crusts with this garnishing, cover lightly with some of the sauce instead of a lid, and close the aperture with a pretty mushroom head, turned and very white, left in its natural state. Dress the vol-au-vent at once on folded napkins; they can also be filled with one garnishing only. COLD SERVICE (Service Froid). (2409). COLD DISHES (Le Froid). The cold service is the most elegant and artistic one of the culinary art. It requires taste, skill and much study in order to learn the necessary moldings, modelings and requisite cookery. Ornaments render the socles and the pieces beautiful and coquettish; their appearance should be neat and precise; the pieces must be well defined and designed before beginning; prepare all the needed materials beforehand so that when the work has once begun there will be nothing to delay the progress. Wax flowers and leaves are very useful, therefore a good workman must learn to make them in great variety. Any ordinary cook can attain renown by studying the complicated ways of preparing cold dishes, but he must give his sole attention to this special part which helps to increase his reputation and develop his ideas, for by it he elevates his trade to a positive art. The manner of properly preparing sauces, side dishes, roasts and pastries should of course be executed with as much care as the cold. Jellies should be tasty, limpid and transparent; if they be defective, then the handsomest pieces are open to criticism. Hâtelets and jelly garnishings greatly enhance the appearance of the pieces, therefore care should be used that they are most beautiful and all croûtons cut with precision and symmetry. Cold pieces should be prepared beforehand, for they must not be hurried nor left to be finished at the last moment. (2410). ASPIC OF COCKS'-COMBS AND KIDNEYS à LA MAZARIN (Aspic de Crêtes et de Rognons de Coqs à la Mazarin). Braise some cocks'-combs and kidneys, and when cold drain and wipe well. Cover the combs with a white chaudfroid (No. 596), and the kidneys with a blond chaudfroid made by mixing half brown chaudroid (No. 544) and half white chaudfroid (No. 596). Coat with jelly a plain cylindrical or channeled mold, having it rather high, and fill the bottom with the combs dressed in a ring, one overlapping the other, and cover with jelly; lay on top a garnishing of the kidneys, cover with more jelly and when this has hardened dress on some roasted chicken fillets, sliced and pared round-shaped, and covered with ravigote chaudfroid (No. 595); lay these in a circle and continue to fill up the mold, alternating the combs, kidneys and chicken; when very full let get cold and unmold on a small low socle made of stearine. Place a mandrel in the empty space in the mold, and on it a cup filled with small cases containing whole glazed truffles, and decorate around with small timbales (No. 3, Fig. 137) filled with jelly and foles-gras. (2411). ASPIC OF FOIES-GRAS (Aspic de Foies-Gras). Incrust a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) in ice. Unmold on a small baking sheet a terrine of foies-gras; remove all the grease and keep it for one hour on ice. Cut this foies-gras into three-eighths of an inch thick slices, using a knife dipped in hot water, and then cut these slices into inch and a quarter rounds with a pastry cutter also dipped in hot water. Lift up these rounds one by one with a fork and immerse them in a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594), having it thin and almost cold; range them at once on a baking sheet and let this sauce get quite stiff on the ice. Cut out some rounds of cooked truffles very nearly the same diameter as the foies-gras, only have half as many; glaze them with a brush and range them at once on a baking sheet. Pour a quarter-inch thick layer of jelly into the mold, and when it has become quite hard dress on it a ring of the foies-gras rounds, the smooth side uppermost and slightly overlapping each other, but alternating every two with a round of truffle; cover this crown with cold jelly an inch and a half in thickness, and again form two more distinct crowns exactly the same as the first one in order to fill up the mold, pouring jelly between each. Keep the mold on ice for one hour or more. In order to turn it out it is only necessary to dip the mold into warm water, wipe dry, and invert it on a cold dish. (2412). ASPIC OF FOIES-GRAS--SMALL (Petits Aspics de Foies-Gras). On a bed of chopped-up ice lay ten timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137); decorate the bottoms of each with a ring of truffles filled with a piece of red tongue, and the sides with fanciful cuts of truffles and egg-white dipped in half-set jelly to make them adhere to the cold molds, then pour into each one an eighth of an inch thickness of jelly. Unmold a terrine of foies-gras, remove from it cylindrical pieces a quarter of an inch less than the diameter of the molds and the same height; range them in the molds, finish filling up with more jelly and set them on ice for half an hour longer. Dip the timbales into hot water to facilitate the unmolding, and dress in a circle either on an inch and a quarter high foundation ( Fig. 8) without the central vase, or else simply on a cold dish; fill up the inside of the circle with chopped jelly and set croûtons of jelly around. FIG. 446. An illustration of a small timbale garnished with fanciful cuts of truffles. (2413). TERRINE OF FOIES-GRAS IN ASPIC-WHOLE (Terrine Entière de Foies-Gras en Aspic). Unmold a terrine of foies-gras; scrape it neatly with a knife on top and sides to remove all the exterior grease, and keep it on ice. Procure a mold of the same shape but an inch wider in diameter and an inch deeper; incrust it in pounded ice; decorate the bottom and sides with fanciful cuts of truffles, tongue, egg-white, and pistachios, dipping each piece into half-set jelly before fastening them on; cover this decoration with a layer of jelly, and pour in more to lay half an inch thick in the bottom. Place the foies-gras exactly in the center and finish filling the mold with cooled-off jelly; keep on ice. Put a rice foundation bottom one inch and a half in height on a plated metal tray with a half-inch high straight edge (the rice foundation should be one inch and a half less in diameter than the tray), turn the aspic out of its mold on to the rice foundation, fastening a small basket on top secured by a skewer, and filling it with small glazed truffles. Decorate around the rice foundation with triangular jelly croûtons, as shown in the drawing. FIG. 447. A large and fanciful of aspic decorated truffles, tongue, egg-white and pistachios around it. A small basket that is fasten on top of it is filled with small truffles. (2414). ASPIC OF LOBSTER (Aspic de Homard). Prepare a wooden foundation about two inches thick and furnished with a slightly raised border on the outer edge so as to uphold the entrée when dressed. The aspic mold should be chosen slightly narrower than the bottom of the dish, which is to be covered with paper. Suppress the shells from the tails and claws of two or three small cooked lobsters; cut the tails lengthways in two and also split the claw- meat in two, then put them into a vessel and season. Prepare a garnishing of carrots cut into balls with a small vegetable spoon, blanch and lay them in the vessel and with them mix gherkin balls cut the same size, small cooked Brussels sprouts, small blanched olives stuffed with anchovies, and a seasoning of salt, oil and vinegar. Incrust on ice a dome-shaped mold wider than its height, decorate the sides and bottom with designs of hard-boiled egg white, truffles and gherkins; coat the mold rather thickly with jelly; fill the inside with the halved lobster tail and claws, pressing the red side of the meat against the jelly; fill up the hollow space with the prepared carrot balls seasoned as for a salad and finished with mayonnaise sauce with jelly (No. 613). Let the aspic harden on ice for one hour at least. Incrust also on ice twelve small timbale molds (No. 2, Fig. 137); decorate the bottoms with rounds of truffles, the sides with small round pieces of white of egg and coat them over lightly with jelly; as soon as this is hard fill them up with lobster cream, the same as for No. 2470 , and keep them for twenty-five minutes on ice. Just when ready to serve dip the dome mold into hot water, wipe it off quickly and invert the aspic on the raised-edge foundation; on top of it fasten a small lobster cream "pain" molded in a channeled mold, and against the edge of the bottom of the dish unmold the lobster cream timbales, after dipping the molds into hot water. This is to be served with a separate mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). FIG. 448. A decorative plate served with a dome-shaped aspic and is garnished with small timbales around it. (2415). ASPIC OF OYSTERS (Aspic d'Huitres). Blanch some oysters, drain, wipe and cool; coat them over with a liberal layer of remoulade sauce (No. 628), to which liquid jelly has been added. Decorate a cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) with fanciful cuts of truffles, egg-white, gherkin and the red part of lobster, dipping each piece in half-set jelly and fastening them on to the bottom and sides of the mold; pour in a layer of jelly, having it half an inch thick, and on it dress the oysters in a circle, one overlapping the other; pour in more jelly to cover these another half inch and continue until the mold be full, then leave for several hours to become very cold; unmold and garnish around with chopped jelly and croûtons. (2416). ASPIC OF PARTRIDGE --MINION FILLETS (Aspic de Filets Mignons de Perdreau). Pare twelve partridge minion fillets; remove all sinews and thin skin and streak them with semicircles of truffles graduated in size; season and bend their thin ends in one direction; poach in a little butter and lemon juice; drain and when cold pare nicely. Incrust a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) in ice. Decorate the sides on the top and bottom with an even chain of round pieces of truffle and red beef tongue, cut out with a tin tube an inch and a quarter in diameter; these pieces are to be dipped in half-set jelly and the red and black colors alternated, letting each chain be at an equal distance from the minions. Decorate the sides in the center as shown in Fig. 449, with the streaked fillets, dipping one at a time in half-set jelly and applying the streaked side to the mold; in order to succeed with this it will be found necessary to incline the mold on ice and turn it around as soon as the jelly hardens and the separate fillets are fastened on firmly. Coat the decoration with a thick layer of jelly and fill the mold with a partridge preparation à la Montgomery ( No. 2549 ); leave it to cool on ice for one hour. When prepared to serve, dip the mold in hot water and invert the aspic on a bed of cold jelly on the bottom of a dish; fill the center with foies-gras balls three-quarters of an inch in size covered with brown chaudfroid (No. 594); on top place very white cooks'-combs brushed over with jelly and surround these with a chain of small truffles dipped in jelly; keep the aspic on ice for half an hour before serving. FIG. 449. Top and bottom sides of an aspic is decorated with truffles and red beef tongues. The center is then garnished with fillets. This entree is serve in a decorative plate. (2417). ASPIC OF PHEASANT (Aspic de Faisan). Clean two young pheasants; truss them as for an entrée (No. 178), and braise white; cool off, remove the breasts (fillets) and pare into the shape of escalops one inch in diameter by three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; cover each one with foies-gras. Pound the remainder of the meats and rub through a sieve; put the pulp in a vessel, and add to it a pint of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) prepared with truffle essence (No. 395), and a pint of strong jelly (No. 103); let this get very cold, and with it thickly cover the escalops; leave to cool on ice. Besides this make a purée with one partirdge, and dilute it with white chaudfroid (No. 596); season highly, rub through a sieve, and mix in as much white jelly (No. 103) as chaudfroid. Coat a cylindrical fancy mold (No. 150) with white jelly, and incrust it very firmly in ice. On the bottom of this mold lay a bed of jelly three-quarters of an inch in thickness; on it arrange some slices of truffles one overlaying the other, each slice to be an inch in diameter and an eighth of an inch thick; on top of these place the escalops; pour on a layer of the white chaudfroid half an inch thick, and on this a row of escalops overlapping each other; cover these with more white jelly; now pour in a layer of chaudfroid, and continue the process until the mold be full; leave till very cold, then invert it on a small socle, either of stearin or carved rice (see No. 10). (2418). ASPIC OF PULLET à LA CUSSY (Aspic de Poularde à la Cussy). Raise the fillets from six medium chickens, weighing about two pounds each; suppress the epidermis, and remove the minion fillets, from which suppress the sinews and fine skin; pare the large fillets into half- hearts and place them in a buttered sautoir with the pointed ends lying toward the center. Make five gashes on each minion fillet and fill them in with graded scalloped rounds of truffle; roll them up crown-shaped, place them on pieces of buttered paper and with a pocket fill the center with a chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and foies-gras well-mingled, having half of each; lay on top a round piece of red beef tongue, and set these in a buttered sautoir; pour over some clarified butter and lemon juice, and cover each one with a sheet of buttered paper and let cook in a moderate oven. When cold cover the minions with half-set jelly and the large fillets with white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596); when this is cold repeat the operation and lay them on a baking sheet one beside the other without allowing them to touch; detach them by slipping a thin-bladed knife under, then pare them into half- hearts all of the same size. Decorate a plain or channeled cylindrical mold with fanciful cuts of truffles, tongue, gherkin, egg-white, or pistachios, dipping them singly into half-set jelly, and applying them symmetrically on to the bottom and sides of the very cold mold, having them only on the top and bottom, leaving the center undecorated. Coat over with jelly so as to support the decorations, then lay the minion fillets half an inch from the bottom, and at even distances from one another; fill it up with jelly half an inch above the minions, and when this is set dress on the large fillets, one overlapping the other, the pointed ends downward; then fill up with jelly and let it get perfectly hard. Have a plain dish covered with a tin bottom, and spread this with ravigote butter (No. 583) and a round of white paper over; unmold the aspic on this, and fill the center with a wooden support with a cup filled with cut-up vegetables on top, held on with a skewer. Around the bottom range chopped jelly and crusts. (2419). ASPIC OF QUAILS -- BREASTS (Aspic de Filets de Cailles). Raise the breasts and minion fillets from three or four quails, pare and beat lightly, season and poach in butter and lemon juice, keeping them rare; cool them off under the pressure of a light weight between two buttered papers. Detach the minion fillets from the carcass and streak them with truffles; poach them also in butter and lemon juice, bending them slightly. Divide each large fillet into two pieces, pare them neatly and dip them one by one in a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594); range them as fast as they are done on a baking sheet to harden the sauce, then pare. Cut some croutons of very tender red beef tongue, having them the shape of fillets, only half as many, and trim them nicely. Imbed a fancy cylindrical mold ( Fig. 148) in ice; on the bottom lay a thin bed of jelly and on this dress the minion fillets, pressing them down on the sides that are streaked; cover them gradually with cold jelly to have it form a thickness of about an inch, then let it set; dress the fillets in a circle on this, laying them on their smoothest side and alternating every two with a croûton of red beef tongue; cover this circle with another layer of the jelly half an inch thick and form more circles with the fillets, proceeding as for the others. Fill the mold with cold jelly, put the mold aside on ice for an hour, and just when ready to serve invert the aspic on a bed of jelly hardened on a dish and surround it with small paper cases filled with small truffles covered with a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594). (2420). ASPIC OF TONGUE à LA PICQUART (Aspic de Langue à la Picquart). To make this aspic use a mold having four rounded top uprights without the central tube; decorate the flat part of the mold between the uprights with rounded bits of hard-boiled egg-whites and the uprights each with three rosettes, also of the egg-white; coat with a thick layer of jelly and fill each upright with tongue cut in slices three-sixteenths of inch thick, well pared and cut round, then reconstructed as before; keep the thinnest end of the tongue at the bottom of the mold. Put a solid piece of tongue in the center of the mold to hold up the cupid. Set the mold on ice, fill it with jelly and when this is exceedingly cold unmold the aspic on a stand made in two pieces, one of which is nine inches and a half in diameter by one inch and a half high, the other eight and a quarter inches in diameter, and one and a half inches high; both should be covered with montpellier butter (No. 582), besprinkled with chopped parsley. Garnish around the base of the aspic with chopped jelly and surround the upper tier with triangular croutons of clear FIG. 450. A pretty aspic of tongue decorated with a cupid at the center which is filled with small glazed truffles. At the ground of the aspic, chopped jellies are used to garnish the ground it. jelly and the lower one with timbales of foies-gras made in molds (No. 3, Fig. 137); in the center of the aspic place a cupid supporting a vase filled with small glazed truffles. (2421). ASPIC OF VEAL WITH MACéDOINE ARTICHOKES --KERNEL (Aspic de Veau aux Artichauts Macédoine). Braise a kernel of veal after larding the inside parts with veal udder, ham and truffles; put it in an oval mold to cool, pressing down well. Unmold, and cut it into slices. Decorate a larger mold with vegetables, coat it by pouring in some jelly and turning the mold so that the jelly covers the vegetables, then pour in more jelly to have a quarter of an inch in thickness at the bottom and lay the sliced kernel over, having reformed it to its original shape, then fill up entirely with slightly cool jelly. When perfectly cold unmold on a dish and surround the meat with chopped jelly, lay on top some artichoke bottoms filled with macédoine (No. 2650) and decorate the summit with three Bellevue hatelets (No. 2526). (2422). ASPICS WITH SHRIMPS--SMALL (Petits Aspics aux Crevettes). Shell one hundred shrimp tails, having them cooked very red; keep them covered in a cool place. Make a quart of good aspic jelly (No. 103). Incrust in ice ten timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137); decorate them with fanciful pieces of truffles or gherkins, covering the decoration with a thin layer of jelly, then pile on the shrimp tails symmetrically all around, sticking them in with the point of a larding needle after dipping them one at a time in half-set jelly. When the sides are covered, fill the hollow in the center with a bed of green asparagus; on top of the asparagus lay some jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), on this chopped mushrooms, and so on until the mold is full, finishing with mayonnaise. Keep the aspics on ice for three-quarters of an hour before unmolding and dress them on a bed of jelly on a dish to prevent them from slipping off. (2423). VOLIèRE GALANTINE OF PHEASANTS à LA CASIMER PéRIER (Volière Galantine de Faisans à la Casimir Périer). 5 1/4" Handwritten inscription. FIG. 451. A decorative dish with beautiful designed birds' heads as the side holders. On top of this dish, two pheasants in their natural appearance are placed on small oval socles, facing the opposite direction on each side of the dish. An ornamental tree with an eager stand on top of it and a dog waited below the tree are placed at the middle of these two pheasants. Procure two fine English pheasants with handsome plumage, remove the skin with the feathers from the neck and upper breast, also the wings and tails, being careful not to destroy their beauty. Fix the heads in such a way that they retain their natural appearance. Bone the pheasants, spread them open on a cloth. Prepare half a pound of peeled truffles cut in quarter-inch squares, half a pound of fat livers the same size; make a forcemeat with three-quarters of a pound of white game breasts and one pound and a quarter of pork tenderloin, also adding two pounds of fat pork. Chop the whole separately and very finely, season with galantine spices (No. 168) and pound to a pulp; press it through a sieve, afterward adding some finely chopped truffle peelings; mix this well with the squares of truffles and fat livers, also a few pistachios. Season the pheasants, divide the forcemeat in two parts, one for each bird, and fill them with it; roll the two galantines in separate napkins, tie firmly at both ends and in the center; cook in a game stock made with parings of white meat game; when well done take them out and leave to cool off slightly; rewrap in the same napkins after cleansing them in clear water, having them six inches long; tie them up tight at the ends and leave to cool under a light weight; unwrap when cold and glaze over with a not too thick brown chaudfroid (No. 594). Ornament one end with the head, and the other with the tail, placing the wings on the sides, keeping them in position with skewers; the necks should be strongly salted and have a rather thick wire inserted in the bone of the head, then stuffed with cotton so that it resumes its original size and shape; finish with an oval piece of cardboard about three inchesin length. Dress the pheasants on small oval socles from four to five inches high, these to be made of tin covered with noodle paste (No. 142), glazed and decorated, then placed on a larger socle, regarding the details for which see drawing. These tin socles can be replaced by others made either of stearin or carved rice, or else an oval pie crust the same size as the tin ones. On the edge of the socle lay small cases, each one to contain a truffle glazed over with game glaze (No. 398), or garnished with foies-gras, or else small boned birds stuffed, braised and glazed with brown chaudfroid (No. 594). (2424). VOLIèRE GALANTINE OF PHEASANT à LA WADDINGTON (Volière Galantine de Faisan à la Waddington). Prepare one pheasant instead of two as described in the Casimir Perrier; dress it exactly the same and stand it on an oval socle four to five inches high by seven and a half inches long and four inches wide; place this on another oval socle about six inches high, eleven and a half inches long and eight inches wide. Pick off all the meat from a young rabbit, cut it in small dice and fry them in fat pork over a brisk fire; when cold, pound and add the same quantity of grated fresh fat pork; pound all together again and season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg; press it through a sieve and mix in with the preparation a quarter as much fat pork cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, and then blanched, and as much truffle cut the same size. With this fill twelve timbale molds (No. 2, Fig. 137), cover with very thin slices of fat pork, and bake in a moderate oven for half an hour; remove and set aside to cool. Decorate some timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137), with cuts of truffles and egg-white, pour a little jelly into the bottom of each mold. Unmold the No. 2 timbales, remove all the fat from the bottoms and sides, pare nicely and then put them into the No. 1 molds, filling up with jelly; when very firm, unmold and arrange them around the small socle of the galantine exactly under the pheasant, placing a border of jelly croûtons outside. (2425). BALLOTINES OF LAMB CUPOLA SHAPED (Ballotines d'Agneau en Forme de Coupoles). Bone two shoulders of spring lamb, remove all fat and sinews and fill them with a stuffing made with half a pound of veal, half a pound of fresh fat pork and a quarter of a pound of cooked and finely chopped ham; season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, chopped parsley and chives; mix into it some truffles, pistachios and cooked tongue, all cut into three-sixteenths of an inch dice pieces. Spread the shoulders on the table, season and put in the dressing; sew up to enclose it well, giving each a round form, then braise with very little moistening, putting them into a saucepan lined with bards of fat pork and wetting with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419). When well done place them in oval cupola-shaped molds and let cool off under a weight; remove, wash the molds well and decorate with fanciful cuts of truffles, pistachios and tongue dipped in half-set jelly; coat the inside of the mold with a layer of white chaudfroid, return the meats as before and finish filling with jelly. Unmold when thoroughly cold and dress on long dishes on a socle of rice two inches high, the size of the the cupola. Have prepared some red lambs ' tongues, salted, blanched and braised for two hours in a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419) the same as the shoulders; drain, skin and set under a weight; strain their stock over and when very cold pare them all of uniform size and oval-shaped; the size is three inches long by two wide and a quarter of an inch thick; glaze and dress around the lamb cupolas, one overlapping the other. Garnish around the dish with chopped jelly and croûtons and lay some croustades filled with a macédoine of vegetables ( No. 2650 ) mingled with a little mayonnaise (No. 606). Stick Bellevue hatelets ( No. 2526 ) on top of each cupola. (2426). BALLOTINES OF QUAIL à LA TIVOLIER (Ballotines de Cailles à la Tivolier). Remove all the meats from three young rabbits; keep the minion fillets aside and suppress the sinews from the remainder; pass the meat twice through the machine ( Fig. 47), weigh and allow double the same quantity of un salted fat pork. Chop up the pork fat, add the rabbit meat and chop together once more. Chop up also eight ounces of lean ham cooked separately and mix this in with the rabbit, seasoning with salt and spices for game galantines (No. 168). Bone twelve quails, equalize the meats, removing half of the fillets to lay them in the places that are bare of meat; spread a third of the forcemeat over the birds and on each one lay four small truffles, wrapped in udder, placing them in lengthwise; on each side of these truffles put slices of well-seasoned rabbit tenderloin, and over another third part of the forcemeat and four more truffles; lay at each end and in the center the remainder of the tenderloins and forcemeat over the whole. Close up the quails, sew and wrap them in slices of fat pork, then in a cloth; tie it firmly to keep the galantines in good shape. Line a braiziére ( Fig. 134) with bards of fat pork, lay the boned quail on top with the game carcasses around; moisten with plenty of mirepoix stock (No. 419). Two hours' cooking will be quite sufficient; take off and put them under weight in molds the same shape as the ones used for ballotines of squabs à la Madison ( No. 2427 ) and when very cold unmold and wash the same molds and decorate them with truffles and white of egg; cover the decorations with a light coating of jelly; fill them with the quails and jelly; leave on ice for two hours then turn them over and dress them on a trimmed rice socle two inches high; garnish around with chopped jelly and over this cold artichoke bottoms ( No. 2501 ). Garnish the center with small crescents of red beef tongue glazed with jelly. (2427). BALLOTINES OF SQUABS à LA MADISON (Ballotines de Pigeonneaux à la Madison). Bone twelve squabs, previously singed and cleaned; season with salt and pepper. Cut into quarter-inch dice a quarter of a pound of peeled truffles, a quarter of a pound of fat pork, a quarter of a pound of fat livers, a quarter of a pound of lean ham and a quarter of a pound of pistachios; put all of these into a vessel and pour some Madeira wine over. Prepare a forcemeat with half a pound of chicken meat, half a pound of lean pork, both free of sinews, and a pound of fresh fat pork; run twice through the machine ( Fig. 47), pound to a pulp and rub through a sieve ( Fig. 97). Put this forcemeat in a vessel, add to it half a pound of liver forcemeat (No. 81), and the chopped truffle peelings; mix the salpicon in with and divide it up into twelve equal parts. Lay one of these into each boned squab, inclose it neatly in the skin and lay each bird in an oval dome-shaped mold three and three-eighths inches long, two and three-eighths inches wide and one and three-quarters inches deep. Range these molds on a baking sheet, cover over with another one and cook in a slack oven for about forty-five minutes; after removing lay small boards on top of each, they to be a quarter of an inch thick, three and a quarter inches long and two and a quarter inches wide, of the same oval shape as the molds themselves. Set these aside to cool with a board over and weights on top; then unmold, clean the molds properly and decorate them with fanciful cuts of truffles; cover with a light coat of jelly and another coat of white chaudfroid (No. 596); place one of the ballotines in each, fill up with jelly and unmold again when cold; they are to be dressed on the platforms as explained later on. Place on a round dish, as shown in Fig. 452, a round-shaped stearin socle an inch and a half thick by seven and a half in diameter; fasten a slanting center support to the middle of this and on it have three metal uprights held firmly by the FIG. 452. A plate filled with oval dome-shaped squabs that are garnished with fanciful truffles and are arranged in a pyramid form with a small beautiful vast fasten on top of it. Cut vegetables are placed inside the vast. upraised edges of the dish. Each one of these uprights is provided with four platforms attached by movable hinges and beside has two sharp points near the edge so as to keep the ballotines in place. They are kept together by another small platform that is fastened to each upright by means of a small hook. On top lay a stearine vase garnished with cut vegetables to imitate flowers or other objects. Between each shelf at the base place a fine emptied tomato filled with seasoned macédoine ( No. 2550 ) dressed with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613). Fill the basin of the dish with chopped jelly and clusters of truffle set at intervals, and around it set evenly cut croutons. Place on the large socle or on another dish. Have a socle made the same as represented in Fig. 453; this can be of mutton and veal fat, partly mixed with virgin wax to produce more firmness, or else it can be made of stearine. When the pieces composing the socle, or properly speaking the body of the socle, such as the three griffons, the three shells and the stearine support, are modeled they are to be scraped the same as described in No. 56. Take a round board an inch and a half high and thirteen inches in diameter; cover it with a sheet of white paper and lay it on a large, round silver dish or tray; in the center arrange the principal parts of the socle; on the base of this socle place the three griffons and on these the three shells so they are supported by them, and the handles of the shells lie in the hollow parts of the socle intended to hold them firmly; these different parts are to be fastened with royal icing (No. 101). The base of the socle can be garnished between the griffons by laying on the board some cases of larks glazed over with chaudfroid or "pains" of foies-gras or else croustades of rice filled with streaked minion fillets; on top of these lay, two emptied mushrooms one and a half inches in diameter, stuffed with foies-gras, then fastened together to form balls, glazing them over with chaudfroid. The shells are to be filled with glazed truffles or crescents of tongue covered with jelly, or else substitute shells of foies-gras removed with a spoon and sprinkled over with chopped jelly. The socle is now ready to receive either a ballotine Madison or a galantine of partridge à la Clémentine ( No. 2491 ) or any other cold piece. The advantage of using the decorated socles is that any dish can be placed on them to give a finer appearance, yet the dish can be simply laid on the table on top of a plain silver dish, if a plainer service be required. Fig. 453. An illustration of a beautiful socle designed with two lion with wings placed on each edge of the socle. At the bottom of this socle, vegetables are garnished around it. (2428). STRIPED BASS OR SEA BASS à LA MANHATTAN ( Bass Rayée ou Bass de Mer à la Manhattan). Raise the fillets from a striped bass; remove the skin and bones, pare each one into an oval two inches by three inches, and lay them in a buttered sautoir; season with salt, pepper, and very finely chopped onion; moisten with white wine, and cook smothered in the oven; now lay them under the pressure of a light weight, pare once more, and when exceedingly cold cover entirely with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), and return them to the ice-box. Prepare a pound of very fresh, boneless and skinless bass, put in a sautoir two tablespoonfuls of onions, and six ounces of clarified butter; first fry the onion lightly, then add the well-drained fish; season with salt, nutmeg, and cayenne pepper, and cook in a moderate oven; drain and let get cold; now suppress all the small bones from its meat and pound it well, slowly adding the stock mingled with a few spoonfuls of bechamel sauce (No. 409) reduced with mushroom essence (No. 392) until it becomes quite thick. Rub the forcemeat through a sieve, and place it in a vessel on ice to beat up well, incorporating into it a gill of jelly (No. 103); try a small part to discover whether sufficiently firm, and then add a little dissolved isinglass; thicken on ice and put in the value of a pint of unsweetened and well-drained whipped cream. Coat some No. 2 mousseline molds ( Fig. 138) with jelly, dredge over chopped lobster coral, and fill with the preparation; keep them on ice, and when very hard unmold and dress in a circle one beside the other on a round or oval dish into the bottom of which a little jelly has been poured and allowed to harden; in the center dress the escalops of bass; surround with chopped jelly and croûtons; brush the fish over with almost cold jelly, and keep the dish very cold until ready to serve, sending it to the table accompanied by a fine herb mayonnaise sauce (No. 612). (2429). BASTION à L'AMéRICAINE (Bastion à l'Américaine). Bone thoroughly six chickens weighing two pounds each; suppress the sinews and trim the meats evenly. To six pounds of chopped forcemeat for chicken galantines (No. 65) add one pound of lean cooked ham, well chopped, and half a pound of chopped truffle peelings; mix the whole well together with two gills of Madeira wine and one gill of brandy. Spread out the boned chickens on the table, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, and fill each one first with an eight-ounce layer of forcemeat, then here and there lay two ounces of peeled, sliced truffle, a few pistachio nuts and some red beef tongue cut into quarter-inch squares, and over these spread another eight-ounce layer of forcemeat; repeat with the same quantity of truffles, tongue and pistachios and finish filling the chickens with the remainder of the forcemeat, dividing it equally between the chickens; they should all be of equal weight, about two pounds each. Enclose the stuffing well and roll them up into long, well-rounded shapes; wrap each galantine tightly in a cloth, tie it on both ends, also in the center, and place them in a saucepan with the bones, parings and a dozen calves ' feet split lengthwise in two; moisten with stock (No. 194a) and boil, skim and cook slowly for two hours, then drain. Fifteen minutes later unwrap and re-enclose them again in a clean cloth, tie as before and make a loop on one end to hang them up by, and let get cold, suspended from a hook, and to the other end attach a weight to pull the cloth down and thereby pressing the FIG. 454. An illustration of a baston molded in the shape of a handsome castle. galantine. After they have been left hanging for six hours, unwrap and lay them aside in a cool place. Have a bastion mold the same as shown in Fig. 454; it is made in two pieces, one large one and a smaller one on top; incrust it in chopped ice and decorate according to the illustration with tongue, truffles and egg-whites; imitate the door with chopped pistachios mixed with jelly and coat the decoration with a thick layer of jelly; lay it flat on a very straight table, also the tower, then unwrap the galantines, pare off the ends and put one at each end or turret, two in the center and one cut lengthwise in two and placed in the mold so that the flat side faces the door, thus making five galantines for the large mold; now place one in the tower mold and with the pieces left over fill the four cupolas surmounting the four towers; allow the molds to get thoroughly cold for six to eight hours, then unmold on a long socle and trim around with square croûtons to imitate the battlements; stick a small pointed ornament in each cupola. The piece is now ready to serve. (2430). PRESSED CORN BEEF (Bœuf Pressé à l'éarlate). Remove the bones from a piece of breast or brisket of beef weighing about twelve pounds; put it in a brine of saltpetre (No. 15). After salting for eight days, drain and wash the meat; put it in a soup pot with plenty of water; let come to a boil, skim and leave to cook very slowly for four or five hours. When the meat is thoroughly done, untie the string, tighten the meat in the cloth, and fasten it like a boned turkey at both ends. Lay it under the press or a weight and as soon as the corned beef is cold undo and glaze it with some meat glaze (No. 402). Cut it in thin slices, replace as it was before cutting, garnish the dish with chopped-up jelly, or parsley sprigs, and serve. (2431). RIBS of BEEF à LA BOURGEOISE (Côtes de Bœuf à la Bourgeoise). Select a three- rib piece from the thinnest end of the ribs; remove two of the bones, leaving the middle one only. Lard the lean part of the meat with lardons (No. 1, Fig. 52) of raw, salted and un smoked ham, season with mignonette and allspice, wrap it up in bards of bacon and tie. Garnish the bottom of a buttered braizière ( Fig. 134), with sliced onions and a carrot, a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123), and moisten with one gill of Madeira wine, one gill of brandy, and a sufficient quantity of stock (No. 194a) to immerse the meat to three-quarters of its height. Boil, skim, and let cook for two and a half to three hours, turning the meat over and basting frequently; then remove it from the fire, and leave it in the stock to get about two-thirds cold, then take it out and lay it under a weight, and when completely cold pare it nicely into the shape of a cutlet; scrape the surface of the bone, and glaze the meat. Set it on a dish, and garnish around with pear -shaped carrots and turnips, previously blanched and cooked in white broth with a little sugar, and reduced to a glaze. Clarify the stock in the braizière in order to make a jelly (as explained in No. 103), garnish the dish with this jelly chopped up, and cut triangular-shaped croûtons; fasten into the meat three handsome hatelets of vegetables (No. 2526); trim the bone with a large paper frill (No. 10). (2432). RIBS of BEEF IN BELLEVUE (Côtes de Bœuf en Bellevue). After the ribs of beef are prepared, cook them the same as for à la Bristed (No. 1329), adding several calves ' feet. When the meat is well cooked, remove it from the fire, strain the gravy, and clarify it. Pare the meat well, and glaze. Have a jelly-coated mold sufficiently large to contain this, put it in and fill the entire mold with jelly, leaving it on the ice till ready to serve. Unmold it on a large dish, garnish around with chopped jelly, and form an outside border to oblongs or triangles of jelly. (2433). RUMP of BEEF à LA MODE (Pièce de Bœuf ou Pointe de Culotte à la Mode). For this dish use a piece of beef prepared as for à la mode à la bourgeoise (No. 1340). When nearly cold put it into an oblong mold four inches deep and four inches wide by eight inches long; lay the mold on ice. Range some balls of braised carrots half an inch in diameter on the bottom of the mold. Place the meat on top, covering with stock; harden and arrange over some carrots; cover with partly set jelly, and when this is cold add the rest of the meat, and when entirely cold cut in half-inch thick slices. Range on a long dish in a straight line and garnish around with chopped jelly. Another way is to have the meat arranged in the same mold as above, skim all the fat from the beef stock, strain it through a fine sieve and add to it as much strong jelly and a quarter bottleful of white wine; boil and cool. With this jelly cover the slices of beef, allow to get cold, unmold and dress on a long dish, and garnish around with small carrots, cut pear -shaped; cook and let fall to a glaze. Then season, cool and roll in a little cold jelly; surround these with slices of gherkin. Beef à la mode can also be placed in a mold and have another larger one decorated with carrots, turnips and gherkins; protect the decoration with a heavy layer of jelly; unmold the smallest mold and place the contents in the largest or decorated one; fill up with jelly, let get cool, then unmold by dipping it in hot water; garnish around with chopped jelly, and outside of it arrange triangle or oblong jelly croûtons. (2434). TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA BOUQUETIèRE (Filet de Bœuf à la Bouquetière). Prepare and cook a fine tenderloin, the same as described in l'Ambassade (No. 1441), only omitting the larding. Let it get cool, keeping it very straight, and when thoroughly cold trim it to a nice shape, and pour over it a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594); when the chaudfroid is firm cover it entirely with half-set jelly. Put the tenderloin on top of a two-tier foundation, made either of rice or hominy, the bottom one being two inches thick, the top one three-quarters of an inch, and shaped symmetrically. Fill each of thirty small paper cases with a different vegetable, or several of each kind--say three of each--such as green peas, string beans , flageolets or kidney beans , Brussels sprouts, beets, cauliflower, artichoke bottoms, mushrooms, truffles and celery, seasoned and mixed with a little mayonnaise (No. 606). Prepare fifteen roses cut from turnips, and fifteen cut from carrots, each one inch in diameter, blanched and cooked separately in white broth (No. 194a). Set a rose on the top of each and alternate the colors when decorating the upper tier with fourteen of these, and the lower one with sixteen; force some chopped jelly through a cornet or a bag between each case around the bottom and the edge, and outside of this place a row of jelly squares. Garnish the top of the tenderloin with five hatelets of vegetables ( No. 2526 ), imitating natural flowers, the center one representing a vase decorated with small flowers. (2435). TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA EVERS (Filet de Bœuf à la Evers). This tenderloin is to be prepared and cooked exactly the same as for à la Bienvenue (No. 1445); when done, pare it nicely, and cut it into quarter of an inch thick slices; lay these in an oblong mold the same shape as the tenderloin but smaller than the one to be decorated. Reduce the gravy, add some aspic jelly (No. 103), (test the consistency of this by putting a small quantity of it in a mold on the ice, and if it should not be firm enough add some gelatine ), fill in the mold containing the meat with this, and set it aside on ice to get very cold. Decorate the largest mold with pieces of tongue, pistachio nuts, and white of egg; cover the decoration with a heavy layer of jelly; unmold the one containing the meat, lay it in the center of the decorated one, and fill it in with jelly. Fill the entire center up to the inside of the dish destined for the tenderloin, edge with jelly, and when very firm unmold the tenderloin on to the center of it. Lay on each end half a nicely carved rice vase, these being filled with imitations of small truffles made of mousseline of foies-gras, and then rolled in finely chopped truffles. When cold dip them in partly cold jelly, and arrange chopped jelly all around, also oblong-shaped jelly croutons, and fasten three hatelets decorated in Bellevue ( No. 2526 ) on the top of the meat. (2436). TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA LUCULLUS (Filet de Bœuf à la Lucullus). In order to arrange this tenderloin it will be necessary to have eight molds in two series of four each, four to be decorated and four in which the tenderloins are molded, these being an inch narrower in diameter than those to be decorated. Prepare and cook the tenderloin as explained in l'Ambassade (No. 1441); when done, cut it into slices and reshape the meat into its original form and fill the four smallest molds with it. Reduce the stock with aspic jelly (No. 103), (if necessary add some isinglass to have it very firm), pour over the meat in the molds and set on ice to get very cold. Decorate the four larger molds (see Fig. 455) intended to receive the tenderloin after they are decorated; cover the decoration with a layer of thick jelly, unmold the smaller ones, put their contents inside the larger ones and fill up with very firm jelly. After the jelly is very firm unmold the whole on a cloth, set at the bottom of the slope on each side of the bridge a strong tin square three and a half inches in width and three inches high, having rounded corners and beat in the center to form a right angle; these squares are intended to keep up the tenderloins on the inclined slope, and are most necessary; place the small molds at the ends, and set around the piece twenty-four small croustades made of short paste (No. 135), and filled with goose livers taken from a terrine of foies-gras; around these throw some chopped jelly, making a very regular border of croutons of the same. Stick two hatelets, one at each end, and in the center put a small figure holding up a cup filled with glazed truffles. FIG. 455. An illustration of a pyramid-shaped mold with a little angel carrying a vast, that is fasten at the top of the mold. Glazed truffles are used to fill up the small vast. (2437). TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA NOAILLES (Filet de Bœuf à la Noailles). This tenderloin must be prepared exactly the same as for à la Bayonniase (No. 1443); when cold trim it nicely and glaze it with meat glaze (No. 402), using a brush for the purpose. Cover it with jelly and set it on a symmetrically carved rice foundation, garnishing around with mushrooms, truffles, scallops of foies-gras and chicken mousselines made in tartlet molds. The mushrooms are to be cooked and emptied with a vegetable scoop, then filled with a foies-gras, pressed through a tammy and glazed in a white chaudfroid (No. 596). The chicken mousselines should be covered with green chaudroid (No. 595), and scallops of foies-gras to be covered with a brown chaudfroid (No. 594), the truffles glazed. Arrange this garnishing around the tenderloin with chopped jelly and croutons of jelly, but do not decorate it with hatelets. (2438). TENDERLOIN of BEEF à LA VIOLETTA (Filet de Bœuf à la Violetta). Have the tenderloin prepared and cooked the same as for à la Bayonnaise (No. 1443), and when completely cold pare it to the needed size to fit in an oblong mold, previously decorated with a variety of vegetables blanched and cooked in broth (No. 194a). Cover this decoration with a heavy coating of jelly; cut the tenderloin nine inches long by three and a half wide; trim it nicely and lay it in the center of the mold and imbed it in ice, laying it in very straight. Fill up the mold with cold melted jelly, and when it becomes quite cold and the jelly thoroughly firm, unmold it on an oval dish, and garnish around with some finely chopped jelly. Select eight equal-sized, large, ripe and very firm tomatoes; plunge them into boiling water to peel off the skins, and empty the insides through an inch and a quarter opening on the stalk end. Shred some lettuce leaves and cooked beet-root, season them with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and thicken the whole with a little jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), mixing in with it some whipped cream; fill the tomatoes with this, and put the covers on again; coat them over with partly cold jelly; also have eight cooked artichoke bottoms, garnish each one with asparagus tops seasoned and thickened with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), adding to it some whipped cream. Place on top of the asparagus a small black truffle glazed with jelly; garnish around the inside of the dish with chopped jelly. Lay the prepared garnishings over, and intercalate around these a row of jelly croûtons ( Fig. 457). (2439). TENDERLOIN of BEEF, GRENADINS ROCHAMBEAU (Filet de Bœuf, Grenadine Rochambeau). Prepare twelve tenderloins into half- heart shapes, each one weighing four ounces; lard one-third of them with larding pork, cut as represented in No. 3, Fig. 52, another third with truffles, and the last third with salted un smoked tongue; braise them in a mirepoix stock (No. 419), and glaze, then cool and pare. Dress them in a circle on a round dish, alternating the various lardings, and fill the center with some foies-gras scooped from a terrine with a spoon; arrange chopped jelly around, surrounded by a border of jelly croutons. (2440). TENDERLOIN of BEEF WITH CROUSTADES MACéDOINE (Filet de Bœuf aux Croustades Macédoine). Prepare, lard, braise and glaze a fine tenderloin the same as for à la Bienvenue (No. 1445); put it aside to cool, keeping it very straight, then pare and glaze. Set it on a small rice foundation two and a half inches high and symmetrically carved ( Fig. 9a). Garnish around with small croustades made of foundation paste (No. 135); fill these croustades with a small vegetable macédoine ( No. 2650 ); season well and thicken with a ravigote mayonnaise (No. 612); sprinkle over some very finely chopped chervil, and garnish around the croustades with a row of chopped jelly. Decorate the top of the tenderloin with some Bellevue hatelets ( No. 2526 ). (2441). TENDERLOIN of BEEF WITH VEGETABLES, MAYONNAISE (Filet de Bœuf aux Légumes, Mayonnaise). Prepare and cook a tenderloin the same as for à la Chanzy (No. 1447), keeping it quite rare; glaze it over several times and leave till cold. The drawing that accompanies this dish will show the way to prepare the meat for a supper, or for serving at a small sideboard supper. First take an oval-shaped drum, three inches high and hollow in the center, fasten it on an oval board a quarter of an inch thick and an inch wider than the outlines of the drum; on top of this drum lay an oval wooden socle an inch and a half high and slightly curved in the center, it being two inches narrower all around than the drum itself, thus forming a shelf. Decorate all around the drum with small sticks of vegetables, such as carrots and turnips, cut out with a tin tube five-sixteenths in diameter, and blanched separately in salted water; lay them in regular rows one over the other formed of the two distinct colors, being careful to dip each piece in half-set jelly to make it adhere to the form; when the drum is all decorated, glide it on to a long dish, the bottom being filled with jelly; keep it in a cool place at forty-two degrees temperature. Pare and cut up the tenderloin in crosswise slices, each a quarter of an inch thick, dress them on the second curved-shape form, glaze and cover over with jelly. Have a garnishing of Brussels sprouts, celery roots, and cucumbers, all of uniform size, also some green peas, all of these to be dressed in small clusters, alternating the various colors; these must be placed on the shelf between the drum and the curve; put chopped jelly in the dish around the piece. Serve mayonnaise sauce (No. 606) at the same time. FIG. 456. An illustration of an oval-shaped drum decorated with small sticks of vegetables around it. An oval socle is placed on top of the drum and is decorated with different vegetables. Slices of tenderloin are placed on top of the socle. (2442). BORDERS OF DIFFERENT SHAPED JELLY CROûTONS (Bordures de Différentes Formes en Croûtons de Gelée). Procure very firm and very clear jelly (No. 123) cooled on tin plates two inches high; unmold when very cold on wet napkins having all the moisture squeezed out, then spread on the table without any creases whatever. The jelly can be cut into many shapes (see Figs. 457 to 465, jelly croûtons for borders). Lay them on the edge of the inside of the basin with regularity. They must be cut very evenly. The effect they produce can easily be seen on the different designs the plates offer. Round croûtons are cut with a round pastry cutter that has been well heated in hot water. The thickness of the croûton should be in proportion to its diameter. FIG. 457. An illustration of jellies cut into diamond-shaped. FIG. 458. Illustration of jellies cut into two layers of cubes. FIG. 459. An illustration of jellies in the shaped of rectangular. FIG. 460. Jellies cut into triangular form. FIG. 461. An illustration of triangular cut of jellies. FIG. 462. An illustration of jellies in the shaped of rectangle. FIG. 463. An illustration of jellies in cubes. FIG. 464. Illustration of jellies in dome-shaped. FIG. 465. An illustration of a four leyer jelly cut into round-shaped. (2443). VEGETABLE BORDERS (Bordures de Légumes). Boil and cook in salted water some carrots, turnips, green peas and whole string beans ; keep them all slightly firm. Cut the carrots into three-sixteenths of an inch to a quarter of an inch thick slices, according to the size of the border; lay these slices on a napkin to dry, then cut half-rings from them with a column tube and coat them with half-set jelly. Fasten them on by dipping into half-set jelly, and then placing them tastefully on the edge of the basin of a very cold dish; range the string beans in lozenge form between the half-rings at the base and the green peas on the center of the half-rings on top. FIG. 466. An illustration of half-ring carrots with jellies placed in between two half-rings. FIG. 467. An illustration of a ring made out of vegetables. FIG. 468. Two layers of half-ring carrots with green peas placed on the center of them. (2444). BUTTER BORDERS (Bordures en Beurre). These borders are not very practical; they can only be made when the temperature is very low and are only mentioned in case there be no other resources available; yet they can be of great utility. The butter should be well kneaded to remove all foreign matter that it might contain; it should be colored green or red; spread it out on sheets of paper three-sixteenths of an inch thick, then leave to cool; invert these on wet napkins, and remove the paper; cut it into rounds, rings, or triangles. Dress them on the border of a dish, alternating the colors; the dish must be kept in the refrigerator until required. FIG. 469. An illustration of butter borders cut into triangle-shaped with a round hole on the middle. (2445). MOLDED JELLY BORDER (Bordure de Gelée Moulée). Incrust a metal border mold, either of tinned copper or tin, on ice; decorate it with fanciful cuts, either of truffles, tongue, egg-white, pistachio nuts or vegetables, done by dipping them in half-set jelly. When the mold is decorated, coat this decoration with a layer of jelly, done by rolling the jelly in the mold on the decoration until there is a layer sufficiently thick to protect it; fill up with jelly. When sufficiently firm unmold the border on a dish, having the basin filled with very firm jelly. The border can be filled with foies-gras, chaudfroid, etc. FIG. 470. A molded jelly decorated with fanciful cuts vegetables. (2446). LAMBS ' BRAINS WITH MAYONNAISE (Cervelles d'Agneau à la Mayonnaise). Steep six lambs ' brains in fresh water for half an hour; skin them by lifting off the thin cuticle enveloping them, also the sanguineous fibers, and return them to fresh water to soak for two hours more. Place them in a saucepan with sufficient boiling water to cover, adding salt and vinegar, and let boil slowly for twenty minutes. When cold and drained, dress in a circle, placing between every brain a crouton of red lambs ' tongue cut to resemble cocks'-combs; decorate all around with garnishing of eggs ( No. 2513 ), gherkins and beets; fill the center of the circle with some green mayonnaise with fine herbs (No. 612), and surround with pretty clear jelly croutons. (2447). CASES OF LOBSTER à LA RAVIGOTE--SMALL (Petites Caisses de Homard à la Ravigote). Place nine or twelve small china cases two inches in diameter on ice to become thoroughly cold. Split across in two the meats taken from six cooked lobster claws, and cut these up into small rounds, using a vegetable cutter one and a quarter inches in diameter for the purpose, and lay them in a small-sized vessel with half as many rounds of truffles cut the same size as the lobster FIG. 471. A plate of small cases lobster placed on top of a folded napkin. and two or three spoonfuls of gherkins cut in slices; season with salt, a dash of cayenne pepper, oil and vinegar and let stand for fifteen minutes; drain off the seasoning; fill the cases with the preparation mixed with mayonnaise printanière, and cover the top with a layer of mayonnaise (No. 606), finished with tarragon vinegar; smooth the jelly sauce and dress the cases on a folded napkin. (2448). CASES OF SNIPE WITH JELLY--SMALL (Petites Caisses de Bécassines à la Gelée). This entrée should be served on a dish having its bottom covered with cooked paste (No. 131) and the outer edge decorated with an open-work border of the same; and in the center a cone-shaped support, first covered with paper then with chopped jelly. This support must have a hole through the top in order to sustain a hatelet. Bone six large snipe, stuff them with chopped forcemeat (No. 77); to this add the chopped entrails of the bird sautéd in butter and sew them up to keep the stuffing in. Maintain them in shape with a band of buttered paper. Range them in a narrow sautoir lined with fat pork and aromatic herbs, moisten with half a glassful of white wine and reduce on a brisk fire; then moisten to about their height with stock (No. 194a); season and mask over with fat pork. Boil the liquid for five minutes and then remove the saucepan to a slower fire, or to a slack oven to cook for half an hour, then let cool off in their own stock. Unwrap the snipe, pare and split them lengthwise in two, shape them properly to fit the half- heart paper cases and range the halved birds on a small baking sheet and set them aside to cool for a quarter of an hour. Now take up each half snipe, one by one, and dip them in a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) thickened when required to have it quite firm; return them to the sheet and remove them separately when hard, to suppress any surplus sauce; brush them over lightly with jelly and lay each half in a half- heart -shaped case having its bottom covered with chopped jelly. Range the cases around the support, the point upward, leaning them against the border; insert a garnished hatelet into the top of the support. Surround the bottom of the dish with a chain of triangle jelly croûtons. FIG. 472. A dish covered with cooked paste at the bottom and in the center, decorated with a cone-shaped support. Placed the cases of snipe around the support. At the bottom of these snipe, jellies are used to garnish around them. (2449). CASES OF THRUSHES WITH JELLY--SMALL (Petites Caisses de Grives à la Gelée). For this entrée have a border of jelly the center being filled with a round piece of wood of the same diameter and height as the border and covered with white paper. Bone eight thrushes, spread them out on the table and season; fill them with a fine game forcemeat (No. 91), some foies-gras and truffles made into balls. Cover them with a band of paper to hold them in a round shape, then range them on the bottom of a small sautoir covered with fat pork, putting them quite close to one another; salt over and moisten to nearly their height with a good unskimmed stock (No. 194a), and cover over with more fat pork; boil up the liquid, then withdraw the saucepan and put on the lid. Cook the boned birds for three-quarters of an hour in a slack oven; they should but simmer, as they only require to be poached, and let cool off in this same liquid. Unwrap, FIG. 473. A border made out of jelly place at the center of a plate. Cases of thrushes are placed on top of this border. are, cover by dipping each one singly into a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) thickened on ice; after this sauce is cold, pare the birds and place them in round porcelain cases; dress these on the border. Garnish around the cases with jelly cut in three-sixteenths inch squares. (2450). CéLESTINES OF PULLET à LA TALLEYRAND (Célestines de Poularde à la Talleyrand). Cut up into eighth of an inch squares a pound of braised and cold white pullet meat, free of fat and bones, also a quarter of a pound of peeled truffles cut in the same sized squares. With the leg meats from which the skin, bones and fat have been removed, prepare a purée and dilute it with half a pint of brown chaudfroid (No. 594); press through a tammy into a tin bowl and thicken the preparation on ice, adding to it the truffle and chicken salpicon. Cut some slices of unsmoked red beef tongue three-sixteenths of an inch thick, and these into rounds two and a quarter inches in diameter; cover one of the sides with the preparation, having it well rounded on top, smooth with a knife and let cool off on ice, then mask over with brown chaudfroid. Decorate the surfaces of these with truffles, cover with half-set jelly and dress them in a circle. Cut some medium-sized apples in two, peel and core, then lay them on a buttered baking sheet and sprinkle over with powdered sugar, and let cook for a few moments in a hot oven. When done and cold, use these apples to fill in the center of the circle; garnish around the célestines with chopped jelly and outside of this lay evenly cut jelly croutons ( No. 2442 ). (2451). CHAUDFROID OF CHICKEN à LA CLARA MORRIS (Chaudfroid de Poulet à la Clara Morris). Raise the fillets from six medium two-pound chickens; remove the skin and cuticle, pare them carefully into half- hearts; salt over and lay them in a buttered sautoir in such a way that all the pointed ends are in the center; cover with clarified butter and squeeze over the juice of a lemon; place them on the fire to fry without coloring, then drain and put them under a weight to press lightly; pare them on the fire to fry without coloring, then drain and put them under a weight to press lightly; pare them again so that they are all the same shape. Bone the second joints, keeping on half of the drumstick bones, remove the sinews and season the meats with salt, pepper and nutmeg; stuff the inside with a quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which mix a quarter as much foies-gras rubbed through a sieve and the same quantity of truffles, tongue and pistachios cut in three-sixteenths inch squares. Enclose the dressing well and sew the skin together to envelop it completely, then place these legs in a sautoir covered with thin slices of fat pork, moisten with mirepoix and white wine stock (No. 419), cover with buttered paper and cook them in a moderate oven. When done, drain off and place them under a weight to get cold, then cover them with either a white or brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594). Prepare a garnishing composed of cooked channeled mushrooms (No. 118), carrot balls blanched and cooked in white broth (No. 194a), and seasoned with salt, pepper, oil, vinegar and fine herbs, and some glazed truffle balls. Dress the chaudfroid around a bread support covered with ravigote butter (No. 583), and fill in the intersections with the garnishing; around lay chopped jelly and small cases filled with asparagus tops covered with green mayonnaise with fine herbs (No. 612). On the top set a round piece of glazed truffle, and around the cases a chain of lozenge-shaped jelly croutons. (2452). CHAUDFROID OF DOE BIRD, PLOVERS, BUSTARDS OR WOODCOCK WITH FUMET (Chaudfroid de Courlis, Pluviers, Vanneaux ou Bécasses au Fumet). Pick, singe and clean nicely eight doe birds; draw and truss them for roasting like plovers ( No. 2119 ); put them to roast, remove, and when cold detach the breasts, suppress the skin and cut each breast in three pieces--one breastbone and the two wings. Break up the fragments and put them in a saucepan with minced shallots and carrots, parsley, thyme and bay leaf, moisten with white wine stock (No. 194a), and espagnole sauce (No. 414); boil, skim and simmer for thirty minutes, then strain; remove all the fat and reduce to half-glaze, adding jelly; pour this sauce into a tin basin and leave to cool on ice while stirring unceasingly until it becomes the proper consistency. Dip each one of the pieces of bird into this chaudfroid to cover with a thick layer, and when thoroughly cold brush them over with half-set jelly. Decorate a border mold with fanciful cuts of truffles and egg-whites, coat it with a thick layer of jelly, and fill with a well-seasoned macédoine ( No. 2650 ) garnishing dressed with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); unmold it as soon as it is cold, and fill the center with a pad of rice; on this have a sloping pyramid of rice; cover this over with thick jelly forced through a pocket. Dress the chaudfroids, leaning them against the pyramid and holding them up with sticky jelly forced through a cornet; on top insert a Bellevue hatelet ( No. 2526 ) and place fine jelly croutons around the border; push chopped jelly into all the intersections between the chaudfroids. Proceed the same for plovers, woodcock or bustards. (2453). CHAUDFROID OF YOUNG GUINEA FOWLS (Chaudfroid de Jeunes Pintades). In order to dress this entrée solidly it will be found necessary to unmold a border of very smooth and hard jelly on a dish decorated at the bottom with a few fanciful cuts of truffle and egg-whites; coat over the mold and fill the inside of this border with a foundation made of wood or stearine covered over with white paper and having fastened on to its center a column-shaped wooden support; enlarge this especially toward the bottom with thick chopped-up jelly and keep the dish on ice. Truss three small, clean young guinea fowls; cook them in the pan, keeping them quite rare and let them get partly cold in their own stock, then drain them off and carve in five pieces; remove the upper breastbones and the fillets, and lay these under a light weight till cold. Suppress also the thick second joint bone, leaving on the drumstick only; cut this much shorter, and place the legs under a weight to cool. Pare the pieces nicely, suppressing all the skin; dip them singly into a blond chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), lifting them out with a large fork, and range them at once on a baking sheet, some distance apart from each other so as to harden the sauce. Now take them off this sheet to cut away the surplus of sauce and dress them pyramidically against the support in the center of the dish, the legs underneath and the fillets and upper breast parts on top, being careful that this pyramid does not incline toward the jelly but leans against the support, which must also be covered with paper. Mask the pieces of chicken with half-set jelly laid on with a brush, and keep the dish on ice for twenty minutes before serving. FIG. 474. A plate with a ring form of hard jelly place in the middle. Three small guinea fowls are dressed pyramidically at the center of the jelly ring. (2454). CHAUDFROID OF LARKE (Chaudfroid de Mauviettes). Bone two dozen c lean larks; spread them open on the table and season; prepare a boned game forcemeat (No. 66), season highly and add to it a few spoonfuls of liver baking forcemeat (No. 64), and some of the fried lark intestines, also a few spoonfuls of raw, chopped truffles. Use this forcemeat for filling the birds, and roll them up into balls, sew them up with coarse thread, and cook for twenty minutes in a very little good, reduced stock, and covered over with fat pork; remove from the fire and cool them off in their own stock, then drain, unwrap, and trim each one neatly, and rounded. Take them up one by one, and dip them in a brown chaudfroid (No. 594), thickened properly on ice; lay them at once on a grate, and let the sauce harden in the ice-box. Pare the larks from any excess of sauce, cover with a light layer of jelly applied with a brush, and when this has become quite cold, dress them in a pyramid form on a cold dish, and surround with more jelly. (2455). CHAUDFROID OF PARTRIDGES à LA BéATRICE (Chaudfroid de Perdeaux à la Béatrice). Have four partridges picked, singed, drawn, and well cleaned; remove the legs, bone, suppress the sinews and stuff them with game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91) and cooked fine herbs (No. 285); braise and set them under a weight. Raise the fillets, and sauté them in butter without coloring; lay them under a weight also, then pare them as well as the legs into half- hearts, and cover both with brown chaudfroid (No. 594) prepared with game fumet (No. 397) extracted from the carcasses; repeat this operation until the coating of chaudfroid be of a sufficient thickness, then leave to cool, and cover over with another layer of half-set jelly. Dress all the pieces on an empty swan ( No. 3597 ), with an opening on the top or back part of the swan, and surround with small "pains" prepared as follows: Decorate some mousseline molds (No. 2, Fig. 138) with fanciful cuts, either of truffles, tongue, or pistachios dipped in half-set jelly; coat them rather thickly with jelly, and fill with a game "pain" preparation made with game parée of the fillets and parings mixed with chaudfroid, béchamel (No. 593), and well drained, whipped cream; add a small salpicon of truffles and tongue cut in one-eighth of an inch squares, and when the molds are thoroughly cold, invert and range them around the swan; surround with chopped jelly and a border of jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2456). CHAUDFROID OF FILLETS OF PHEASANTS (Chaudfroid de Filets de Faisans). This entrée is suitable to be served at a dinner or a buffet. It is dressed on a socle composed of a wooden base, having in its center a support made in tiers, the whole being covered with white paper; on the very top of this there should be a hold intended to receive a hatelet. The platform of this support is ornamented with a small overhanging border made of modeling fat or cardboard. Detach the fillets from the breasts of three large, cooked and cold pheasants, leaving the upper part of the breast --the part against the fillet adhering to the frame--then cut them up and remove, first the skin and bones, then divide each one into parts on their length, and also divide each of the fillets in three, pare them in equal shapes and sizes and cut them square on one end so as later to be able to dress them standing upright. Pound all the parings of the breast meats with as much cooked foies-gras, then rub through a sieve, season this pulp and set it in a thin iron vessel to dilute with two gills of melted game glaze (No. 398) and four to five gills of brown chaudfroid (No. 594) in such a manner that when the preparation becomes cold it acquires a certain firm consistency. After it is smooth spread it on a baking sheet in even, thin layers, cover them very lightly with cold jelly, using a brush, and range on top the eighteen fillets in a straight line, one beside the other, pressing them down lightly; now cover them with a thin layer of the same preparation and let get thoroughly cold on ice. After removing it, eat with the tip of a small knife dipped in hot water, following the outlines of the fillets most minutely, then heat the bottom of the sheet with a wet cloth so as to be able to detach the cut-out pieces. Take them up one by one to smooth and stand them upright on another sheet on their square ends; let them get cold on ice once more for a quarter of an hour. Remove the fillets one by one and dip them into a fine flowing brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) in such a way that their size does not increase much, then return them to the same sheet just as they were before, (meaning upright), and let the sauce harden. With the same preparation cover the upper breast pieces, being careful that they assume their original size and shape, and smooth the surfaces nicely. When thoroughly hard dip these pieces into the same chaudfroid sauce to cover lightly and not allowing them to become misshapen. After the chaudfroid sauce is quite hard, take the fillets one by one and cut away the excess of sauce, then dress them at once upright on the lower tier, or more properly speaking on the wooden foundation (therefore around the central support); now dress the upper breast parts, also upright on the upper tier, leaning them against the support, and brush over lightly with a brush dipped in jelly both fillets and the others; surround the base with a cord of jelly pushed through a cornet so as to maintain the meats level, and also surround this base with chopped jelly, laying over a chain of small paper cases filled with truffles masked in chaudfroid. On the extreme top of the support stick a small hatelet into the hole made for the purpose. Keep the entrée cold till needed. FIG. 475. A socle with wooden base and a two tiers support at the center is placed at the center of a plate. Fillets of pheasants are arranged in a dome-shaped around the support. On the very top of the support, a small hatelet is sticked on it. Chopped jellies are used to garnished around the base. (2457). CHAUDFROID OF PRAIRIE HEN --GROUSE (Chaudfroid de Poule de Prairie--Tétras). Prepare a fine garnishing composed of large cooked cocks'-combs, poached chicken kidneys, round truffles and mushroom heads; glaze the truffles with a thin layer of brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594), the combs and kidneys remaining in their natural state glazed with half-set jelly. Cut the breasts of two cold roast pheasants into quarter of an inch thick slices, suppressing the skin; have them well pared and of uniform size, dip each one separately in brown chaudfroid, and range them at once on a baking sheet, keeping them somewhat apart; let the sauce harden on ice. Incrust a large dome-shaped mold in ice, coat it over with an eight of an inch thick layer of jelly, and when this is set dress on to the bottom and around the mold the prettiest pieces, intermingling them with the garnishings; fill up the mold with some half-set jelly. One hour after dip the mold in hot water, wipe dry and turn the chaudfroid over on a dish foundation covered with white paper; surround with small crimped paper cases, each one containing a small truffle dipped in brown chaudfroid. Fasten one garnished hatelet in the center of the dome, lay chopped jelly all around, and jelly croûtons around this. (2458). CHAUDFROID OF PULLET, PLAIN (Chaudfroid de Poularde, Simple). Draw, clean and truss two pullets of two pounds each as for an entrée (No. 178); put them into a saucepan and cover with stock (No. 194a), adding a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf; boil, skim and cook slowly on the side of the fire until done, then transfer them to a vessel and pour the stock over; let get partly cold and drain off to cut into pieces, first removing the two legs and from them suppressing the second joint bones, retaining only the drumstick bones to answer for holding the frill; put these legs under the pressure of a weight, then begin to cut the fillets from the breast, leaving on a piece of the bones with the breast meat; pare the whole well free of all skin and sinews; dip all the pieces into a partly cold white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), lifting them out with a large fork to range on top of a baking sheet, or else a heavy sheet of tin, one beside the other but without touching; a grate may be used. Set one ice to harden the sauce, then remove each piece and pare, trimming off the surplus chaudfroid sauce and giving them a handsome shape. Dress in a pyramid and cover the chaudfroid with a half-set jelly applied with a brush; keep on ice for twenty minutes, then trim the pinion bones and drum sticks with fancy paper frills (No. 10) and decorate the dish and chickens with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons. (2459). CHAUDFROID OF QUAILS à LA BAUDY (Chaudfroid de Cailles à la Baudy). This entré is dressed on a wooden foundation covered with white paper, and bordered on the outside edge with small beads of butter forced through a cornet. It has a paper -covered support in the center two to three inches in diameter and about the same height as the quails. Singe and bone eight fresh quails, leaving on the thighs, season the insides and fill the empty space with a layer of fine galantine forcemeat (No. 66), mingled with foies-gras and truffles cut in small dice, also a piece of raw truffle in each; all of these to be properly seasoned; cover over with another layer of the forcemeat and bring the two sides together so that the quails retain their original shape, then sew them up. Truss the thighs, and tie each bird up in a separate piece of muslin. Range the quails in a deep sautoir lined with fat pork, moisten to their height with a good stock (No. 194a) and boil up the liquid, then withdraw it to a slower fire and cook the quails for twenty to thirty minutes while covered, and let them get partly cold in their stock. Drain, unwrap, and tie them up tighter in the same cloths to keep them in shape, and when quite cold cut each one lengthwise in two; fasten the two halves together with a small wooden skewer, and cover the quails with a white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596). When the sauce becomes quite cold, stick one of the reserved legs in each half bird, and withdraw the skewer. Dress these boned quails almost upright on the foundation that is on the dish, leaning them against the support: garnish the center of this with chopped jelly, and surround the base of the bottom with small crimped paper cases filled with glazed truffles. FIG. 476. A wooden base with small beads of butter forced through cornets around it as ornament, is placed at the center of a decorative plate. Quails are arranged in a ring-shaped in the center of the base. Chopped jellies are used to garnish the center of the ring. (2460). CHAUDFROID OF FILLETS OF REDHEAD DUCK AND VENISON (Chaudfroid de Filets de Canard Tête Rouge et de Venaison). Raise the fillets from five redhead ducks, without the wings or minions; pare them into half- hearts; season and sauté in clarified butter, keeping them rare; then drain and cool off under a light weight between two pieces of buttered paper; remove the skin, pare them again to have all alike, and dip in a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) reduced with game fumet (No. 397), properly thickened on ice; range them at some distance apart on a baking sheet to harden the sauce; decorate with ornaments of truffles dipped in jelly, and coat the whole in half-set jelly. Cut ten pieces of very red beef tongue, not too thick, but of the same shape and size as the fillets; lay a duck fillet on each piece of tongue, making it adhere, and let get cold. Dress these upright against a vegetable salad cut in small dice, and thickened with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), then molded in a small pyramidical mold. Surround the bottom with a thick rope of jelly pushed through a pocket. On the top of the pyramid place a cluster of jelly cut in small squares. Chaudfroid of Venison --Cut a fillet of venison into slices; dip them in a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) properly thickened on ice, then lay to cool on a baking sheet; when cold, pare and dress in a circle; glaze over with jelly, fill the center with chopped jelly, and outside with a border of jelly croûtons. (2461). CHAUDFROID OF SNIPE IN PYRAMID (Chaudfroid de Bécassines en Buisson). Dress this entrée on a wooden dish bottom, composed of three shelves, all to be covered with white paper. Bone fifteen to eighteen small snipe, keeping the heads and a part of the intestines aside, the latter to be cooked in melted butter and pressed through a sieve. Scald the heads, pick out the eyes, replace them with a little forcemeat and a round of truffle to imitate the original; place in the oven to poach the forcemeat. Spread the snipe out on the table, season and cover with a layer of game galantine forcemeat (No. 66). Put in the center of each one a piece of raw foies-gras and a piece of cooked truffle, cover with another layer of the forcemeat, then roll the boned snipe into ball shapes. Cover each one with a separate piece of buttered paper and range them in a narrow sautoir lined with fat pork; moisten to their height with good stock (No. 194a) and cover with more of the pork, then put on the lid and let cook slowly for twenty-five minutes; leave them to cool in their own stock. Unwrap the snipe, pare and shape them properly and fill with foies-gras any crevices that may have been caused by the cooking. Pare them all alike and of a nice shape. Range them at once on a small baking sheet and put aside in a cool place for a quarter of an hour; take them up one by one and dip them in a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) thickened on ice so that they are entirely covered, and return them immediately to the sheet to drain off the sauce, and keep cold for another half hour, then pare them once more of any surplus of sauce. At the last moment force some sticky chopped jelly through a pocket between the shelves, dress the snipe over, letting them form into a pyramid, and between each one dress one of the heads, and glaze it over with a brush. Push a thick rope of chopped jelly around the pyramid on the bottom of the dish and surround this with fine croûtons. Cover the snipe lightly with jelly applied with a brush, so as to render them glossy. FIG. 477. An illustration of snipes arranged in pyramid form. At the bottom of the snipes, triangular cut jellies are used to garnish around them. (2462). CHAUDFROID OF TURKEY à LA PéRIGORD (Chaudfroid de Dinde à la Périgord). Braise and put away to cool a fine six to eight pound turkey; remove the fillets, free them from skin and sinews, and cut each one into six pieces, making them as long as possible; trim them all the same shape and size, and cover over one side with a thin layer of foies-gras taken from a terrine, pounded and rubbed through a sieve; let get quite cold. Prepare a chaudfroid with a quart of reduced velouté sauce (No. 415) and the braise stock, strained, skimmed and reduced to a pint, with as much aspic jelly (No. 103) added. Let the chaudfroid be cold enough to cover the meat well. Then dip the pieces one by one into it and remove them with a fork, placing one beside the other on a tray or on a grate. Let get cold, then cover them once more, exactly the same as before, and finish by covering with half-set jelly. Dress them on the bottom of a dish around a support, both the foundation and support being made of tin, having a hole in the summit and covered with noodle paste (No. 142), dried in the open air and glazed over with game glaze (No. 398). Decorate all around with small glazed truffles set in small white crimped paper cases. Insert into the top of the support a tasteful hâtelet ornamented with a fine glazed truffle and a cocks'-comb. (2463). CHICKENS éCARLATE à LA DERENNE (Poulets écarlate à la Derenne). This piece is dressed on an oval wooden bottom covered with white paper and fastened on a long dish, having in the center a slightly conical-shaped wooden support also covered with paper and a hole bored in the top to hold a hatelet. Cook in water four large calves ' tongues or small red beef tongues; drain and cool under a weight. Break the breast bone of four small, singed and cleaned chickens, then remove the bone and fill up the empty space with galantine forcemeat (No. 65) mixed with truffles and cooked foies-gras cut in dice; then sew up the breast skin on the back. Truss these chickens with the legs bent under the skin, lard the tops and wrap each one in a small piece of fine muslin wihtout tightening them too much; cook for one hour in stock (No. 194a), but very slowly, so as not to spoil their shape, then let get very cold, drain and untruss. Detach the breasts from the back part of the chicken and cut them up in slices, then once across, keeping them in good shape, and return them to their original places. Lay the chickens on a grater, cover over with white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), properly thickened, and let it get cold. Dress the chickens upright on the oval foundation laid on the dish, leaning them against the support and alternating each one with a tongue previously pared, skinned and cut in lengths, but returned to the original position, then glazed over with a brush. Surround the chickens on the base with a piping of chopped thick jelly pushed through a cornet and between every tongue and chicken lay a well-rounded peeled truffle cooked in white wine and glazed over with a brush. Lay all around the outside of the foundation triangular crusts of very clear jelly, and fasten a hatelet into the top garnished with jelly and a peeled truffle. It is advisable to serve this dish with a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606) in a separate sauce -boat. FIG. 478. Four chickens placed at the center of a plate with hatelet sticked at the center of them. Triangular cut jellies are garnished around the border of the chickens. (2464). CHICKEN FILLETS à LA MIREBEL (Filets de Poulet à la Mirebel). Raise and pare twelve chicken breasts; remove the minion fillets and the skin from the larger ones as well as the pellicle covering the minions and the sinews. Streak half of the minion fillets with truffles and the other half with red beef tongue, then shape them like turbans; lay them on a buttered baking sheet and place in the oven for a few minutes to poach; remove and set under a light weight until cold. Cover with half-set jelly and fill the interiors with a purée of foies-gras pushed in through a cornet, and on top of each lay a small, very white, cooked channeled mushroom (No. 118) covered with half-set jelly. Poach the larger fillets in butter and lemon juice, lay them under a weight and pare again into half- hearts, cover over with jelly and decorate with fanciful star-shaped cut of truffles and tongue dipped in half-set jelly. For this use a round mold two and a quarter inches in diameter, and one-eighth of an inch deep. Cut and then arrange in the pieces of truffle and tongue as shown in Fig. 479, first dipping them in half-set jelly; when this is hard, unmold and place these stars on the largest part of the fillet and cover the whole with half-cold jelly. (These stars are used for lamb cutlets, Leverrier.) Fill the basin of a dish with chopped jelly; after the large fillets are cold decorate with favor frills (No. 10) and dress them in a circle; surround with more chopped jelly and croutons, laying the minion fillets around. Cut up some lettuce-hearts, season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, mix thoroughly, drain and place this salad in the center of the dish; serve a vinaigrette mayonnaise separately. FIG. 479. An illustration of a star-shaped cut of truffles or tongue. (2465). CHICKEN BREASTS à LA RENAISSANCE (Filets de Poulet à la Renaissance). Pare ten chicken breasts without the minion fillets; beat them thin, then season and poach in clarified butter and the juice of a lemon laid in a sautoir, keeping them rare; drain and range them on a tray, cover with a buttered paper and set a light weight on top until they become cold. Streak the minion fillets with slices of truffles and shape them into rings; place them in a buttered sautoir and cover with buttered paper; poach in a slack oven, drain them, and when cold cover over with half-set jelly. Drain off all the butter from the pared breasts and take them up one by one with a broad fork, dip five of them into a white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), and range them at once on a tray, keeping them slightly apart, and then put it on the ice to harden the sauce. Dissolve the remainder of the sauce in a bain-marie and add to it a purée of ravigote herbs (No. 623) pounded without any butter, but having two spoonfuls of the cold chaudfroid sauce added; strain and color with a little spinach green (No. 37). Stir this sauce on ice until of the proper thickness, and with it cover the other five fillets, the same as the first ones, and when the sauce has become cold pare off all the superfluous sauce around, then dress all these breasts in a crown-shape on a thick layer of jelly set on the dish. In the center of this crown range a pyramid of large Spanish olives stuffed with a purée of foies-gras mingled with brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594); around dress the streaked minion fillets and in the center of each lay a small round glazed truffle. (2466). CHICKEN BREASTS à LA GALLIER (Filets de Poulet à la Gallier). Trim a rice socle eight inches in diameter and two inches high. Remove the sinews well from twelve chicken breasts, suppress the skin and pare nicely, then fry them white in clarified butter and lemon juice; season with salt, drain, and lay them under a light weight; trim them into half- hearts, and split them in two through their thickness; then cover one part of each with foies-gras taken from a terrine, pounded and rubbed through a sieve, and place the other part on top of this, pressing one on the other lightly and evenly. Cover half of these double fillets with a ravigote chaudfroid (No. 595), and when it is cold brush over with partly solidified jelly; decorate the others with truffles, and cover also with partly cold jelly. When cold cut away the surplus of chaudfroid and jelly and ornament the pointed ends with favor frills (No. 16). Dress the fillets in a circle on the socle, intercalating the two kinds, having first one covered with chaudfroid, then one covered with jelly; fill up the inside with some well-seasoned vegetable macédoine ( No. 2650 ) thickened with a little jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); decorate around the socle with chopped jelly and croûtons of jelly; on top of the macédoine lay round pieces of glazed black truffle. On the edge of the socle around the fillet have a border of stuffed mushrooms covered with chaudfroid (see No. 2517 ). (2467). CHICKEN FRICASSEE--CHAUDFROID (Fricassée de Poulet--Chaudfroid). Prepare a fricassee with a good, large chicken the same as for fricassee of chicken ( No. 1861 ), add two dozen large mushroom heads turned and channeled (No. 118). Remove the pieces of chicken singly and suppress all the skin and most of the bone, then range them on a tray; remove the mushrooms and set them aside to get cold, strain the sauce into a small saucepan without thickening it with eggs, and let get cold while stirring, incorporating into it slowly a few spoonfuls of cold jelly, then thicken it slightly on ice, stirring it the same as a chaudfroid sauce. Take up the pieces of chicken with a fork, and immerse them thoroughly in the sauce, not having it too thick; do the same with the mushrooms, and leave to drain well; dress them as quickly as each piece is done in a pyramid form on a very cold dish; cover with half-set jelly, using a brush for the purpose, and dress the mushrooms around the chickens, surrounding these with a border of jelly pushed through a cornet. Keep the dish for one-quarter of an hour in the ice-box before serving. (2468). CHICKENS SAUTéD à LA SHERMAN (Poulets Sauté à la Sherman). Incrust a fancy border mold in chopped ice, having it decorated with truffles and egg-white; coat the decoration with a thick layer of jelly and fill the center with slices of tongue, mushrooms, ham and truffles; pour the sauce obtained from the chicken over, and let get cold, then mask with a thick layer of jelly to finish filling the mold; have this get quite hard. Cut up four young chickens, each weighing a pound and a half; they must be well drawn, singed and cleaned; take four pieces from each, namely, two wings and two legs, pare and sauté in butter to a fine color; drain off the butter when done and detach the glaze with a little Madeira wine and espagnole sauce (No. 414); when the whole is reduced to perfection mix in an ounce of isinglass dissolved in a little broth (No. 194a); this sauce when cold should be of the consistency of a lightly thickened chaudfroid. Take out the chickens, strain the sauce through a tammy, remove a part of it, and into it mix some unsmoked red beef tongue, mushrooms, truffles and lean cooked ham, all cut in eighth of an inch thick by one and a quarter to one and a half inches in diameter slices, adding the chicken to the remainder of the sauce. Unmold the border, and when the chicken has cooled in its sauce dress it inside the border, and finish covering with the nearly cold sauce. Garnish around with a border of jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). Keep the dish in the ice-box, and cover entirely with the nearly cold jelly applied with a brush. Decorate with fancy paper frills (No. 10), then serve. (2469). CHICKEN ROASTED WITH JELLY, CUT UP AND GARNISHED WITH TONGUE (Poulet Rôti à la Gelée, Découpé et Garni de Langue de Bœuf). Roasted with Jelly. --Select a fine two pound and a half to three pound chicken; it must be very tender; draw, singe and free it of all the pin feathers, then truss it to roast (No. 179); cover with a bard of thin fat pork, then roast it on the spit, basting it frequently, and when done and of a fine color, remove and let it get cold. Untruss and glaze with chicken glaze (No. 397), and surround it with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons, cut either into triangles, oblongs, lozenges, ,etc. Cut up and Garnished with Salted Un smoked Beef Tongue. --After the chicken has been cooked and is cold, the same as for the above, cut it up into five pieces, pare them nicely and glaze over. Cut from the thick part of a tongue some slices three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; pare them into oblongs three inches long by one and three-quarters wide, and cover well with half-set jelly. Dress the chicken around an upright conical support placed in the middle of a dish, having it covered with green butter (No. 583); decorate around with chopped jelly, and over this place the oblongs of tongue in a circle, one overlapping the other. On top of the support have some ornamental piece, either a figure or a cup filled with jelly cut in squares of an eighth of an inch. This dish can be accompanied by a separate remoulade sauce (No. 624). (2470). CREAM of LOBSTER (Crème de Homard). Fasten a wooden paper -covered foundation on a dish, having in its center a flat support two inches high, forming a step with a hole in the top. Decorate the bottom and interior of ten large timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137) with gherkins or truffles dipped in half-set jelly, coat the molds lightly with jelly, turning them around on ice. Suppress the shells from the tails and claws of three small cooked lobsters, split the claws in two lengthwise and readjust them with half-set jelly to their original shape; keep them on ice. Cut up the tail meats and pound them with a few spoonfuls of good velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with mushroom liquor, and mix in two spoonfuls of the creamy parts from the bodies, also a dash of cayenne pepper; pass the whole through a tammy and pour the preparation into a vessel to smooth while stirring it vigorously with a spoon; incorporate FIG. 480. A plate with a foundation fasten in the middle of it. Triangular cut jellies are used to garnish around the foundation. Cylinder-shaped truffles or gherkins with jelly are placed in a ring form at the center of the foundation. Lobster claws are dressed at the middle of the ring with chopped jellies surrounding them. into it slowly four gills of oil, two spoonfuls of tarragon vinegar and two gills of aspic jelly (No. 103); beat the preparation on ice to thicken, then mix in at once the value of three or four gills of unsweetened whipped cream. When finished, fill the small molds with this preparation and let it harden on ice; at the last moment dip each mold separately into hot water, wipe them off quickly and invert them on the bottom of the dish around the support; cover this latter with a coat of thick chopped jelly and stick an untrimmed hatelet in the hole on top; now dress the lobster claws upright in a triangle against the hatelet, placed there with the purpose of holding them up, and fasten them on with sticky jelly; brush them over with half-set jelly and surround the base with green parsley leaves or water cress. Arrange around the dish small, even triangles of jelly, cutting off the tips, and serve with mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). (2471). CUTLETS OF LAMB, IMPERIAL (Côtelettes d'Agneau à l'Impériale). Trim eight to ten lamb cutlets taken from the rib near the loin of two racks, four from each rack; suppress the chine bone and fibrous skin from the rib bones, pare them, leaving only the kernel on; beat this lightly, replace the fat by lamb quenelle forcemeat (No. 92) so as to give them their original shape, season and fry on both sides in butter; when done drain on a baking sheet and cover with buttered paper, then set them under a light weight to cool; pare them once more. Put into a saucepan a few spoonfuls of tomato sauce (No. 549), strained through a tammy, and dilute it slowly with brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594); thicken this lightly on ice, remove and dip the cutlets into it one by one, covering them entirely; range them at once on a tray and keep in a cool place to harden the sauce. Detach the cutlets from the sheet, free them of all surplus sauce and trim the handles with fancy favor frills (No. 10); dress in a circle, filling the center with whole asparagus tops seasoned with salt and pepper and dressed with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); cover the tops of the asparagus with glazed truffles cut in slices, surround the meats with chopped jelly and place around a border of jelly croûtons. (2472). CUTLETS OF LAMBS ' KERNELS IN BELLEVUE (Côtolettes de Noix d'Agneau en Bellevue). Pare and sauté twelve lamb cutlets; place them under a light weight and cut away the kernels; cover these with a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594). Decorate an aspic mold and fill it with layers of the kernels and jelly alternated and leave for two hours on ice; then unmold, dress on a dish bottom an inch and a half thick and one inch in diameter larger than the aspic and surround with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons. Place a large Bellevue hatelet ( No. 2526 ) in the center. (2473). CUTLETS OF LAMB WITH ASPIC (Côtelettes d'Agneau à l'Aspic). Procure twelve cutlets cut from the covered ribs of a spring lamb and nicely pared; lard them with lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52), made of veal udder, truffles and red beef tongue. Line a sautoir with slices of fat pork, place the cutlets over and moisten with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); set it on the fire and at the first boil push it into the oven. When done drain and cool off under a weight, pare once more so that the lardons can be seen well. Decorate an aspic mold, range the cutlets inside of it in a circle, placing a crouton of tongue between each one, and pour in sufficient jelly to fill the mold to within a quarter from the top; after this has become firm finish filling the mold with jelly and lay it aside on ice for two hours. When prepared to serve unmold the aspic on a dish, having the basin covered with very firm jelly, or on a small, low, decorated socle. Fill the center with a blanquette of lamb sweetbreads prepared with truffles, and surround the whole with chopped jelly and croutons. (2474). CUTLETS OF LAMBS ' KERNELS WITH MAYONNAISE (Côtelettes de Noix d'Agneau à la Mayonnaise). Fry twelve fine spring lamb chops; press them under a weight and cut out all the parts except the kernels; pare and replace the trimmings by pâte de foies-gras and dip them into a jellied mayonnaise (No. 613) so as to cover them entirely with a thick layer of it. Range some cut-up lettuce leaves on a dish, reserving the hearts for decorating; around the lettuce dress the kernels of lamb and decorate the whole with the lettuce hearts, hard-boiled eggs, anchovies, olives, etc.; surround the edge of the dish with chopped jelly and croutons of the same. (2475). CUTLETS OF LAMB WITH TOMATOED CHAUDFROID (Côtelettes d'Agneau au Chaudfroid Tomaté). Fry in butter a dozen fine short-handled spring- lamb cutlets; put some blond chaudfroid sauce (No. 596) into a saucepan and mix in with it a few spoonfuls of tomato purée (No. 730), so that it acquires a light red tint; thicken it by putting the saucepan on ice and moving constantly with a spoon, and when thick dip the cutlets in so as to have them well covered. Range them at once on a baking sheet slightly apart, but all on the same side, and allow the same to harden in a cool place; detach them, pare and decorate the kernels with a rosette formed of pickled gherkin and truffles dipped into half-set jelly; cover the whole with a coating of jelly, cool, then dress in a circle on a dish, having the handle bones under and the kernels on top; fill the center with chopped jelly. (2476). CUTLETS OF LOBSTER à LA LOWERY (Côtelettes de Homard à la Lowery) . Chop up three hard-boiled eggs, the whites and yolks separately, also some pistachios. Incrust a cylindrical mold in ice; divide the bottom into six even parts with sticks of truffles dipped in half-set jelly and in one of these put the white, in another the yellow, and in a third the green; repeat, then pour over a little jelly, and when hard add sufficient to have it three-eighths of an inch thick; over this lay in a circle some lobster escalops covered with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), one overlapping the other; pour more jelly over, and continue this process until the mold is full; leave it on ice to get thoroughly cold, invert it on a dish and surround with cutlets prepared as follows: Have some bottomless cutlet molds; lay them on sheets of oiled paper, and cover the bottom of each one with a bed of jellied mayonnaise having raw fine herbs added to it; on top place small, well-seasoned slices of lobster, also sliced truffles, and cover with a little white jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), strewing the whole with finely chopped truffles; when very cold unmold and dress them in a circle around the aspic; trim the thin ends with a fancy favor frill (No. 10), and place a border of stuffed olives (No. 695) around the cutlets, and chopped jelly and croûtons outside the whole. (2477). CUTLETS OF PHEASANTS IN CHAUDFROID (Chaudfroid de Côtelettes de Faisans). The accompanying drawing, Fig. 481, is the model of a mold in which the cutlet preparation is hardened; this is made of thick tin, open on both ends, but it can be closed by covers that fit on the mold itself. This mold when closed measures three inches in height and two in width, it being shaped like a half- heart, but for preparing a large quantity double molds can be employed, they having almost a whole heart -shape appearance; if these are used, after the preparation is hardened and unmolded, it is to be cut in two through the center from the top to the bottom and each half made into a single cutlet; in this way there will be sufficient of them to dress three or four dishes. With the breast meat cut from a large cold roasted pheasant, an equal amount of cooked foies-gras, one or two gills of melted game glaze (No. 398), and two or three gills of brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) reduced with pheasant fumet (No. 397), make a preparation, and when smooth and of a desired consistency mix in with it a fine salpicon of cooked foies-gras and truffles, half of each; then stir it on ice to thicken sufficiently so that the truffles and livers do not fall to the bottom. Pour it into the cutlet mold, laying on ice, and wrapping the mold in a sheet of paper imbed it completely in pounded ice and keep it thus for five or six hours. At the expiration of this time dip the mold in warm water to unmold the preparation, and then cut it at once into two parts, from top to bottom; smooth the surfaces well and keep for a quarter of an hour on ice. After removing them, divide across in slices each three-eighths of an inch in thickness, and take these up one by one on a broad fork and dip in some brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) properly FIG. 481. An illustration of a mold with its covers that is made of thick tin. Both end of this mold can be open. thickened; drain it off well and range the cutlets on a cold baking sheet slightly apart. Lay this on ice for half an hour to harden the sauce; detach the cutlets from the sheet and pare off any surplus of sauce, and stick a pretty favor frill (No. 10) into each; dress them in a close circle on a foundation placed on a dish and covered over with paper; fill in the empty space in the circle merely with chopped jelly and surround the foundation with large croutons of jelly. Keep the dish in the ice-box until needed. FIG. 482. A dish with a circle foundation at the center, is garnished with triangle-shaped jellies around the foundation.Cutlets of pheasants are dressed on top of this foundation in a ring form. Chopped jellies are used to filled the empty of the ring. (2478). VEAL CUTLETS à L'ANACRéON (Côtelettes de Veau à l'Anacréon). Lard some veal cutlets cut from a rack with tongue and fat pork, a half of each; braise or poêler them while basting frequently, then lay them under a weight to reduce to five-eighths of an inch in thickness; pare neatly and cover over with cream forcemeat (No. 75), and decorate with a handsome truffle rosette; range a buttered paper on top of each and poach in a slack oven; when cold mask the surfaces with half-set jelly and dress flat in a circle, filling the center with an asparagus salad ( No. 2621 ); surround with chopped jelly and croûtons. (2479). CUTLETS OF WOODCOCK, PONIATOWSKI (Côtelettes de Bécannes, à la Poniatowski). Dress this cold entrée on a wooden foundation covered with noodle paste (No. 149), fastening it on to a dish; decorate the sides of the foundation, and place a support in the center surmounted by a small fancy tin vase, both covered the same as the foundation; the top of the base is flat and closed; it is simply to be dressed with three fresh woodcock heads with feathers, and held in shape, arranged in a triangle; surround their base with chopped jelly and a chain of truffle balls. Cut the meats of three cooked, cold woodcock into a fine montglas, put this in a saucepan with half as much cooked foies-gras, and as many truffles cut exactly like the meats; combine this montglas with some good, partly warm, succulent brown chaudfroid (No. 594), reduced with game fumet (No. 397); smooth the preparation and use it to fill twelve to fourteen tin cutlet -shaped molds brushed over with jelly; equalize the tops and leave to cool one hour on ice. Dip these cutlets in hot water, unmold on a baking sheet and smooth the surfaces once more; lift them up one by one, dip into a good brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) slightly thickened on ice, and return them at once to the sheet to have this sauce get thoroughly cold on ice. Surround the base of the support with a very thick layer of chopped, sticky jelly, pushed on through a pocket. At the last moment detach the cutlets from the sheet, pare neatly, fasten a small fancy favor frill (No. 10) in each, and dress them in a circle around the support on the foundation; coat with jelly so as to give them a brilliant appearance. FIG. 483. A foundation covered with noddle paste is fasten in the center of a dish. A support surmounted by a small fancy vase is place in the center of the foundation. Cutlets of woodcocks are arranged around support. Three fresh woodcocks' heads with feathers are placed in the small vase. (2480). CUTLETS OF WOODCOCK à LA SARAH BERNHARDT (Côtelettes de Bécasses à la Sarah Bernhardt). Take seven or eight fresh round Périgord truffles, all of equal size and very clean; peel, salt and cook them for seven or eight minutes in a little Madeira wine and leave them to cool off in this liquid. Remove all the meats from three woodcock roasted rare, keeping aside three or four of the fillets; pound the remainder of the meats with a part of the cooked intestines and three-quarters as much cooked foies-gras; season and rub through a sieve; put this purée into a vessel and beat it up for two minutes with a spoon, incorporating into it slowly four spoonfuls of good melted game glaze (No. 398) and one gill of liquid brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) reduced with game fumet (No. 397) and essence of truffles (No. 395); when all is well mingled add gradually to the preparation two and a half ounces of fresh butter, wiped and divided into small pats; the whole should now be very smooth without being frothy. Drain the truffles, stand them upright on a cloth to mark the tops with a tube from a column box an inch in diameter; remove this marked piece and empty the truffles out with a vegetable spoon; pound these removed pieces with as much cooked foies-gras, season the preparation and lay it in a bowl to beat up for a few moments so as to have it smooth. Prepare a montglas with half of the woodcock fillets laid aside, and an equal quantity of red beef tongue mingled with a little good reduced and thick Madeira sauce (No. 413). Moisten with a brush dipped in cold jelly a dozen tin cutlet -shaped molds, cover the bottoms and sides with the woodcock preparation, leaving an empty space in the center; fill this up with some of the cold montglas; cover with more of the preparation and smooth it at once; keep the molds for one hour on ice, then unmold them and cover with a layer of brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594). Put a few spoonfuls of this chaudfroid sauce into a vessel, thicken it while stirring on ice and mix with it the remainder of the woodcock fillets cut in small dice and twice as much cooked foies-gras cut the same; use this preparation for stuffing the emptied truffles; range them as soon as done on a small baking sheet and close the opening with a round piece of cooked foies-gras cut out with the same tube used for marking the truffles; glaze over the whole with a brush; keep this baking sheet on ice for half an hour. Harden a thick layer of jelly on a dish and on top of it set a narrow wooden foundation covered with white paper; on this dress the truffles piled in a pyramidical form, then push chopped jelly through a cornet into all the intersections, as well as around the truffles, to maintain them in position. Around this board dress the cutlets in a circle after inserting a fancy favor frill (No. 10) into each. (2481). LOBSTER DOME GARNISHED WITH SMALL CASES (Dôme de Homard Garni de Petites Caisses). Pound the cooked meat of two or three lobster tails with a spoonful of prepared red pepper (No. 168), two spoonfuls of béchamel (No. 409), and a piece of lobster butter (No. 580); pass the whole through a sieve and then set it in a vessel to mix with an equal quantity of white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596) and two gills of mayonnaise (No. 606). Mix in with this preparation the claw meat cut in small dice. Incrust a dome-shaped mold wider than its height on ice; decorate the top and sides with fanciful cuts of gherkins, black truffles, lobster coral, tarragon leaves and red shrimp tails split in two, being careful to dip each separate decoration in half-set jelly. Harden a layer of jelly on the bottom of the mold, and when cold set another dome-shaped mold inside of it, having it filled with pounded ice, but half an inch narrower than the first one; pour some half-set jelly between the intersections of the two molds to fill up the empty space entirely, and as soon as this is hard remove the smaller mold, after replacing the ice by warm water. Thicken the lobster preparation on ice while stirring, and pour into it two spoonfuls of good tarragon vinegar and some blanched cut-up tarragon leaves; pour all this into the empty coated mold and let rest for one hour. Unmold the dome on to a socle of carved rice two inches high (see Fig. 9a), having it round, and surround its base with the small cases, as described herewith: Put a dozen small china cases on ice to have thoroughly cold. Split across in two the meats of four or five lobster claws; cut these same meats into small rounds with a tin tube, having them half an inch in diameter and an eighth of an inch thick; lay them in a small vessel with half the quantity of rounds of truffles and two or three spoonfuls of rounds of gherkin, all being of the same size as the lobster; season with salt, a dash of cayenne, oil and vinegar, leaving them to macerate from twelve to fifteen minutes. Drain off the seasoning and thicken it with blond chaudfroid sauce, made by mixing white and brown chaudfroid, mingled with two spoonfuls of mayonnaise (No. 606) and a pinch of chopped tarragon leaves. Fill the cases with this preparation, covering the tops with a layer of mayonnaise finished with tarragon vinegar. (2482). DUCKLING, WITH SPANISH OLIVES (Caneton aux Olives d'Espagne). Singe, draw and clean a duckling, then bone it from the ribs. Mix in a vessel equal quantities of liver baking forcemeat (No. 64) and chicken forcemeat (No. 73); add two spoonfuls of tomato purée (No. 730) and a large salpicon of cooked foies-gras. With this dressing fill the body and breast of the duckling where the pouch was; sew up the skin underneath, and truss it with the legs thrust inside as for an entrée (No. 178); lard over and wrap it in thin muslin, then cook slowly for one hour in some stock (No. 194a). Drain off the duckling, tighten the cloth and let get cold, after unwrapping and untrussing it; detach the breast, keeping it whole, and cut it into slices without misshaping it; then return it to its original place. Wipe the duckling well, and cut a piece from underneath so that it will stand plumb, and set it on a grate; cover it over with some excellent brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594), finished with tomato sauce (No. 549) and reduced with Madeira wine. After this sauce has drained off well keep the duckling for ten minutes in the ice-box; remove and dress it on a thick layer of jelly that has stiffened on a dish, and surround both sides and front with a garnishing of large Spanish olives, stuffed with foies-gras and covered with brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594). (2483). FOIES-GRAS IN BORDER (Foies-Gras en Bordure). Open a terrine of foies-gras; suppress all the top fat and keep on ice for two or three hours. Fill a fancy border mold ( Fig. 470) with fine cold aspic jelly (No. 103), and put it on ice for one hour. Cut up the contents of the terrine with a thin steel spoon the size and shape of a tablespoon, dipping it each time into warm water; should this cutting be neatly done the pieces will each acquire the shape of the spoon, rounded lightly; lay all of these as fast as they are done on a cold baking sheet, one beside the other, repairing those that may have been broken during the process, and put them away on ice for a quarter of an hour. Just when prepared to serve dip the border mold into warm water, wipe neatly, and invert the mold on a cold dish, having a wooden or tin foundation in the center exactly the same size and covered with white paper; on this foundation dress the pieces of foies-gras pyramidically, placing the poorest looking ones underneath, and piling the remainder into a steep pyramid. (2484). FOIES-GRAS IN CRADLE, TO BE CUT IN SLICES (Foies-Gras en Berceau, pour être Coupé en Tranches). Prepare one pound and a half of baking forcemeat (No. 64); let this forcemeat become quite cold, then pound and rub it through a sieve. Chop up two pounds of lean veal with a pound and a quarter of fresh fat pork, and pound this to a pulp also; season and lay it in a bowl to mix with three or four raw, chopped truffles, and add liver baking forcemeat. Butter cradle-shaped molds, and cover the insides with a thin layer of the forcemeat, leaving an empty space in the center; fill up this vacancy with large strips of raw foies-gras, season and intermingle them with forcemeat and cut-up raw truffles; cover this over with more of the forcemeat and with slices of fat pork. Lay the mold on a raised-edge baking sheet containing a little water, push it into a slack oven and bake for an hour and a quarter; when removed, cool under the pressure of a slight weight. These pies are useful for cutting up in slices. (2485a). GALANTINE OF CHICKEN (Galantine de Poulet). Singe one large chicken, suppress the neck and drumsticks, also the pinion bones; split it in two down the back and bone it entirely. Spread the chicken out on a table, remove part of the breast meats and lay them on the skin where there is no meat. Also remove the meat from the legs, suppress the sinews and chop them up and place in a vessel; also chop up three-quarters of a pound of lean veal and an equal amount of fresh fat pork and add it to the legs; add a quarter of a pound of blanched fat pork, cut in half-inch squares, and an equal quantity of cooked red beef tongue; add a few quartered truffles and a few peeled pistachios; season and pour over a few spoonfuls FIG. 484. An illustration of a boned chicken wrapped into a cloth in oblong shape and is tied in the center and both ends. of Madeira wine. Season the inside of the chicken, fill it with the contents of the bowl, alternating with the forcemeat, then roll the boned chicken into an oblong shape, sew it up and wrap it in a cloth, tightening it well, then tie it at the two ends and in the center. Place it in a long saucepan with the broken-up bones and two or three calves ' feet; moisten liberally with stock (No. 194a) and boil while skimming; cook the boned chicken slowly for an hour and a half, then drain; ten minutes later unwrap, remove the thread and wrap it up once more in the same cloth, after it has been well washed, tying it this time with five rows of string--two at the ends, one in the center, and two between; let cool off under a light weight for six hours. After it is finally unwrapped, pare and glaze with white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596) so as to be able to decorate with truffles; cool and cover with a layer of partly cold jelly, dress on a small rice or hominy socle ( Fig. 9a), and surround with chopped jelly and croûtons ( No. 2442 ) prepared with the galantine stock itself. (2485b). TRUFFLE DECORATIONS (Ornaments en Truffles ). For these decorations select large, mellow, sound black marbled truffles; cut them into thin slices a sixteenth of an inch thick, and arrange them as in shown Fig. 485. These truffle decorations are taken up with a metal needle, then dipped into half-set jelly, and applied to the object required to be decorated, the principal aim being to dispose them very regularly, and arrange them with taste. Truffle decorations can also be made by cutting the truffles as thin as a thread with a knife, and placing them at once in Madeira wine until required for use, then drip and lay them on a napkin. With these imitate the outlines of landscapes or any other ornamentation, using them for tracing designs imitating pen or pencil drawings. When the design is finished coat over with half-set white jelly. FIG. 485. An illustration of different fanciful cut of truffles. (2486). GALANTINE OF CHICKEN à LA D'ORLéANS (Galantine de Poulet à la d'Orléans). Bone two young chickens weighing two pounds each; leave on only the white meat adhering to the breasts, and suppress the leg meats; remove some of the breast meat adhering to the skin and place it where the skin is bare. These chickens when boned and stuffed should only weigh two pounds and a half each. Fill them with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which mix a salpicon of truffles, pistachios, tongue and foies-gras, all cut in quarter-inch squares; let cook in a stock (No. 194a) for two hours, unwrap, wash out the cloths and rewrap them as before; hang them up by one end on a hook, and to the other end fasten a sufficiently heavy weight; leave them hanging for twelve hours; unwrap and pare them alike, then cover with an ordinary white chaudfroid (No. 596); decorate the tops with fanciful designs of truffles dipped in half-set jelly so they adhere well to the galantines; when thoroughly fastened coat over with jelly spread over with a funnel made for this purpose ( Fig. 526), and stand them against the support; place one on each side. The cup is filled with small truffles. Arrange some squares of jelly around the support, and chopped jelly between the support and croûtons, as shown in the drawing. FIG. 486. A beautiful support with a small vase on top of it, is placed in the center of a dish. Chicken breasts decorated with fanciful truffles are arranged at both side of the support. Cubes of jellies are placed around the support and chopped jellies are used to fill the vase. (2487). GALANTINE OF DUCKLING, PEAR -SHAPED (Galantine de Caneton en Forme de Poire). Bone a cleaned and singed duckling, leaving on one leg; season the inside meats and fill with pounded galantine forcemeat (No. 65) mixed with half as much baking forcemeat (No. 81), and a salpicon of lambs ' sweetbreads, mushrooms and truffles, to be cut in quarter-inch squares, also some cooked and cold veal udder. Restore the duckling to its original shape, sew it up, inclosing its contents, and mold it in a bottomless mold, shaped like a pear; braise in a mirepoix stock (No. 419) for an hour and a half in a slack oven, basting frequently. When done drain and place this mold on a buttered baking sheet and leave it to cool under the pressure of a weight; glaze over with a light green chaudfroid sauce (No. 595), smear one side of the galantine with a piece of wadding that has been rubbed on very finely powdered carmine, and coat with a layer of half-set jelly; at the end stick in either a natural or artificial pear -stalk with a few leaves around and surround, when dished, with a border of chopped jelly and croûtons. (2488). GALANTINE OF EEL (Galantine d'Anguille). Skin a large Niagara eel, take out the middle bone, season and fill it with fish quenelle forcemeat (No. 90), mixing into it truffles and pistachios, seasoning it well. Inclose this dressing in the eel and lay it in a well-buttered Savarin mold, baste over with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419) and cover with bards of fat pork. Place this mold in a low saucepan containing a little water and push it into a slack oven; when the fish is properly done, remove and leave it to cool off in the mold under the pressure of a light weight, then turn it out and dress on a round dish; cover over with Cambridge butter (No. 570), decorate with cuts of truffle, the red part of a lobster, tarragon leaves and a small stalk of chervil; garnish around with quartered hard-boiled eggs ( No. 2513 ) and fill the center with a macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ) dressed with mayonnaise (No. 606); serve with a separate tartar sauce (No. 631). (2489). GALANTINE OF GOSLING, MELON -SHAPED (Galantine d'Oison en Forme de Melon ). After singeing and boiling a gosling remove all its meat, spread out the skin on a buttered napkin, cut up the breast into five-eighths of an inch squares, suppress all sinews from the legs and add as much pork meat and veal meat to obtain a pound and a half in all; chop this well, then chop separately a pound of fat pork, and half a pound of beef marrow. Pound all well together and mix in with the pulp a clove of crushed and chopped garlic, some finely cut-up mushrooms, salt, spices No. 2 (No. 168), and a few egg-yolks. Lay this forcemeat on the skin and close up the napkin, giving it a round shape; tie and cook in a stock (No. 194a). Unwrap and then retighten the napkin and flatten lightly, so as to give it the shape of a melon; let cool for twenty-four hours, afterward imitate a melon by cutting eight half-inch deep grooves from top to bottom, glazing it over with white chaudfroid (No. 596) colored with yellow. Paint it with spinach green (No. 37) to imitate a cantaloup melon, and coat with layers of half-set jelly. Imitate the stalk and melon leaves with modeling fat (No. 56) and dress it on a dish, garnishing around with chopped jelly and croûtons of jelly. (2490). GALANTINES OF GUINEA FOWL à LA LYTTON (Galantines de Pintades à la Lytton). Bone entirely three young guinea fowls, spread them on the table, remove the thigh meats, suppress the sinews of the fillets and all the superfluous fat; cut the fillets in two on their thickness and use them to lay where the meat is lacking, then fill them with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) mingled with a salpicon of truffles, pistachios and udder, all cut in three-sixteenths inch squares and well mixed; they should, when stuffed, each weigh two pounds. Cover the entire outside with very thin slices of fat pork and wrap them up in napkins; roll all the same thickness and put on to cook in some stock (No. 194a) for one hour and a half, then drain, unwrap and wash out the napkins; wrap them up again without the fat pork and hang them on a hook, fastening a weight to the end of each one so as to have them well pressed; when very cold unwrap once more and pare again; cover them over with white chaudfroid (No. 596), decorate with black truffles, coat with jelly and dress them on a dish against an upright or sloping supporting piece, it being two inches across at the summit and six at the base by five inches in height, covered over with ravigote butter (No. 583), and strew chopped parsley over. Set a cup on top of the summit, filled with truffles. Make truffle balls with foies-gras taken from a terrine, pounded and rubbed through a sieve; when very cold form this into inch and a quarter diameter balls, roll them in truffle peelings that have been finely chopped and passed through a sieve. When these imitated truffles are very cold dip them in half-set jelly and lay each one in a white paper crimped case the same size as themselves; place these also between the galantines and garnish all around with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2491). GALANTINES OF PARTRIDGES à LA CLéMENTINE (Galantines de Perdreaux à la Clémentine). Choose three nice partridges; bone and open them on the table; decrease the thickest parts of the meats to place them on the thinner spots, then season well; cover with game galantine forcemeat (No. 66) pounded and forced through a sieve. On this place lengthways some lardons (No. 1, Fig. 52) of blanched fat pork, some truffles, cooked beef tongue and foies-gras; cover with more forcemeat and repeat the operation, finishing with the forcemeat; enclose well in the partridge skin and roll up in separate cloths, tying them at both ends and in the center; the three must be of the same weight--a pound and a half apiece--and rolled to the same length. Simmer them in some stock (No. 194a) for two hours; drain and leave cool partly, then roll them up tight in a clean cloth, tie both ends and the center again and hang them up, fastening a ten-pound weight or more to the bottom of each one; leave till quite cold, then unwrap and pare to an equal size and shape; cover with white chaudfroid (No. 596); decorate with truffles and mask over with jelly, then leave to get quite cold. These galantines are to be dressed on a round dish with swan support dressed on the stearine foundation; place a galantine between each swan. Bone a partridge thoroughly, remove all the skin and sinews and cut it up in small quarter-inch pieces, fry them in oil with garlic, mignonette and cayenne, wet with good vinegar and broth and let simmer; when the meats are done and the moisture reduced add a little jelly. Prepare some pretty, red peeled tomatoes, empty them, arrange on a baking sheet, fill them with this preparation, replace the covers and when cold glaze over with half-set jelly and lay them between the galantines. Have a griffon socle prepared as for the ballotines à la Madison (see Fig. 453), place in the shells of the socle some stuffed mushroom heads ( No. 2517 ) glazed with brown chaudfroid (No. 594). Garnish the bottom of the socle with cases of stuffed thrushes or larks all glazed over with blond chaudfroid; between each of these cases lay a carved hominy croustade filled with chopped jelly, with the streaked minion fillets formed into rings on the top. Finish decorating the whole with a stearine cup placed on the support, having it filled with small glazed truffles; around the base place a garland of smilax or other greens. FIG. 487. A support with a small vase is placed in the center of a plate. Three partridges in baking sheets are dressed around the support. Fanciful cut truffles are used to garnish the partridges. Small glazed truffles are used to fill the small vase. (2492). GALANTINES OF PARTRIDGES AND SLICED IN BELLEVUE (Galantines de Perdreaux en Tranches et en Bellevue). Procure two or three fresh, plucked and singed partridges; bone them through the back; suppress the largest sinews from the legs and fillets, and season; remove all the meat attached to the bones and carcasses. Prepare a fine forcemeat (No. 65), pound and mix with it the chopped parings of the birds and half as much liver baking forcemeat (No. 81); pound, strain and season. Put into a bowl some strips of blanched fat pork a quarter of an inch square, mix with them some truffles and red beef tongue, cut the same. Fill the partridges with the forcemeat; reconstruct them to their original shape and sew up; wrap them in small cloths, tying them at the ends and in the center. Cook these galantines slowly for one hour and a quarter in some good unskimmed stock (No. 194a). After taking them out, remove the cloths and wrap them up once more, only much tighter, and let cool off under a light weight; finally, unwrap, pare, glaze and serve, either whole or cut up, garnished with jelly. In Bellevue. --Have a boned partridge cooled under a weight as for the above; cut it into slices; pare them into even ovals all of the same thickness, then glaze with game glaze (No. 398) on one side only, using a brush; lay on the center of each a thin slice of truffle cut out with a column tube. Let a thin layer of clear jelly harden on a small baking tin; when stiff, range the slices on top, pressing the pieces down on the glazed side, one beside the other, then pour in between them enough cold jelly to reach as high as the slices; cool this for one hour on ice. At the last moment slit all around these slices with the heated tip of a small knife, then warm the bottom of the pan with a cloth dipped in hot water to enable the slices to be removed with the jelly attached, and dress in a circle on a cold dish. Garnish the center with chopped jelly and around with croûtons of jelly ( No. 2442 ). (2493). GALANTINE OF PARTRIDGE, ELIZABETH (Galantine de Perdreau Elisabeth). Pare some quarter-inch thick slices of a boned partridge prepared as in Bellevue ( No. 2492 ) into half- heart shapes; glaze and on each one lay a fine slice of black and well marbleized truffle, cover with jelly and dress them in a circle, filling the center with a Russian salad ( No. 2645 ), and around with artichoke bottoms, garnished with seasoned macédoine ( No. 2650 ). (2494). GALANTINE OF PHEASANT à LA LORENZO (Galantine de Faisan à la Lorenzo). Fry colorless in butter one pound of fat chicken livers; keep half of the finest ones aside. Chop up finely one pound of partridge meat and the same quantity of fat pork; season highly with salt, cayenne pepper, and nutmeg; stir well together, adding four egg-yolks and half of the liver well pounded; press the whole through a tammy and then put in an onion cut in one-eighth of an inch squares, blanched and fried colorless in butter, and some finely chopped parsley. Bone a pheasant, spread it open on the table, remove half of the thickness of the fillets, equalize the meats throughout the entire surface of the skin, then lay a third of the prepared forcemeat over, on this half of the livers laid aside, and the same quantity of quartered truffles; now another layer of the forcemeat, and scatter here and there the rest of the livers and as many truffles; spread all that remains of the forcemeat, and enclose the whole well in the pheasant skin; sew and roll the galantine in a napkin; tie it firmly at both ends and in the center, and place it in a braziere with a knuckle of veal and the game carcasses, a bunch of garnished parsley (No. 123), an onion containing two cloves, and a carrot cut in four; moisten with plenty of stock (No. 194a), cook slowly for two and a half hours, then leave to cool off in the stock for one hour; unwrap and remold it once more, this time placing it under a weight. When the galantine is thoroughly cold, unwrap and pare it nicely, then cover it over with brown chaudfroid (No. 594), and decorate with cut-up truffles, pistachios, tongue, and egg-white; lay it on a small three-inch thick socle made of carved rice. Prepare sixteen larks by boning and filling them with forcemeat composed of half foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78) and half game forcemeat (No. 75) and chopped truffles; cook them in No. 3 mousseline molds, having the breasts downward; prepare the same number of streaked partridge minion fillets, form them in the shape of rings two and a quarter inches in diameter, and lay each one on a separate piece of buttered paper; fill the centers with game cream forcemeat (No. 75), and poach in a slack oven. Put some No. 1 mousseline molds on a baking sheet, having ice around; on the bottoms form an eye of egg-white and truffle, and coat the mold with brown chaudfroid (No. 594); lay the cold unmolded larks in the center and fill up with chaudfroid. Turn them out only when very cold and arrange them around the galantine with the minion fillets between. Decorate around the socle with finely chopped jelly made with the stock. Bellevue hatelets may be fastened in the top of galantine if so desired. (2495). GALANTINE OF PHEASANT CUT UP (Galantine de Faisan Découpé). This entrée is dressed on a wooden foundation fastened to a dish and covered with white paper, having in its center a small convex-shaped support made of tin, quite low, and covered with white paper. Singe two c lean pheasants, bone the largest one by splitting it down the back, remove the meats from the legs and decrease the thickness from the breast meat; then cut this up into large shreds and lay them in a bowl, adding the breast meat of the other pheasant, pared and cut the same; also add strips of raw truffle, strips of blanched fat pork or udder, strips of foies-gras and lastly a few shreds of lean cooked ham or cooked red beef tongue; season highly, pour over some Madeira wine and let macerate for one hour. Chop up the leg meats with the carcass parings and mix them with a chopped forcemeat made of game meats and lean veal and as much chopped fat pork, then season. With this chopped forcemeat and the macerated meats in the bowl prepare the boned pheasant the same as the boned pullet No. 2497 , sew it up and wrap it in a cloth, then cook it for one hour and a half, cooling it off afterward under a weight. Pare the cold boned pheasant, cut it in slices and dress them one overlapping the other on the support, and glaze over lightly with a brush. Surround both sides of these slices with a few boned larks covered with brown chaudfroid (No. 594), and around these push a rope of chopped jelly through a cornet; surround the paper -covered bottom with pretty croûtons of jelly, and on one end of the galantine of pheasant stick a hatelet garnished with truffles. FIG. 488. A dish fasten with a wooden foundation that is covered with white paper. Triangular chopped jellies are garnished around the foundation. Slices of pheasant are placed on top of the foundation and few larks are used to garnished along the side of the pheasant. A hatelet decorated with truffles is sticked at one end of the pheasant. (2496). GALANTINE OF PIGEONS (Galantine de Pigeons ). Bone three large, tender, clean and singed pigeons, season the inside meat and fill them with forcemeat (No. 65), mingled with a little baking forcemeat (No. 81) and a few spoonfuls of truffles cut in dice. Return them to their former shape, sew up and wrap each one in a separate piece of muslin, then cook them for one hour in a good stock; when done properly, unwrap, tighten more and let get cold under the pressure of a weight. When ready to use, take the pigeons from the cloths, glaze them over, cut in slices and dress with jelly. (2497). GALANTINE OF PULLET OR CAPON à LA MOZART (Galantine de Poularde ou de Chapon à la Mozart). This cold entrée can be dressed on a support slightly higher in the middle, covered with cooked paste (No. 181) and dried in the air. Singe a not too fat pullet, split it down the back, bone entirely, and season the inside. Prepare this pullet the same as a galantine of turkey à la Berger (No. 2499), and sew it up; wrap it well and cook for one hour and a half to two hours in clear, unskimmed stock (No. 194a), having the pullet bones added, and two or three boned and blanched calves ' feet, some roots, onions and aromatic herbs. When the boned pullet has cooked for a sufficient length of time, drain it off and unwrap it; wrap it up once more and reshape it, tying it very tight, and then place it to cool under the pressure of a weight. When cold, pare off the ends and cut it up into equally thick slices, and divide each of these slices into two; dress them neatly in a single row on the support; garnish around with cocks'-combs and mushrooms covered over with chaudfroid, intermingled with chopped jelly, and besides have a few small cases filled with glazed truffles. FIG. 489. A dish with a support that has slight curve in the middle is covered with cooked paste. Slices of pullets with cocks'-combs and mushrooms garnished around them are placed on the support. At one end of the pullet, placed a few triangular chopped jellies. (2498). GALANTINE OF SUCKLING PIG (Galantine de Cochon de Lait). Prepare a suckling pig the same as for No. 1810, singe and bone it completely without piercing the skin, keeping on the four feet and removing the head. Remove the meat or fat from the different parts where there is too much. Stuff the galantine with a salpicon of truffles, one pound of red tongue mixed with pork forcemeat (No. 68) and a pound of blanched fat pork --the truffles, red tongue and fat pork cut in three-sixteenth inch squares. Season with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and nutmeg; wrap it up in a cloth and roll without pulling or shortening the length of the skin and keeping the feet in their natural position. Lay it in a braziere lined with fat pork and garnish around with vegetables and uncooked pig's feet; moisten with white wine, season with salt and whole peppers, and let cook without boiling for four to five hours. Drain, cool, unwrap partly and roll up again, then tie the cloth firmly at both ends of the galantine, and hang it up with a sufficiently strong weight on the bottom. When thoroughly cold, unwrap and glaze it a dark color; put back the head, which has been blanched for half an hour and allowed to cool, and decorate the whole with fanciful cuts of egg-white, tongue, truffles, gherkins and ornamental hatelets; dress on a rice foundation and surround with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons. (2499). GALANTINE OF TURKEY à LA BERGER--BONED TURKEY (Galantine à la Berger). Bone a small turkey after having cut off the wings, the legs and the neck. Begin by cutting the skin down its entire length, commencing from the middle of the neck and ending at the middle of the rump, using a small thin knife and following the outlines of the rib bones; then remove the breast bone and the second joint bones, suppress the meat from the latter and chop it up finely; remove all sinews from the fillets, cut away a part of their thickness and place them where the legs were taken from. Prepare a well-seasoned chopped forcemeat (No. 65), mix well together, adding half a gill of brandy, truffle essence (No. 395) and one ounce of chopped truffles. Cut half a pound of fat pork into half-inch squares, blanch and drain; have also half a pound of unsmoked red beef tongue cut in half-inch squares, five ounces of peeled truffles cut in pieces, and three-quarters of a pound of duck or goose livers, parboiled, cold and cut in half-inch dice. With this and the forcemeat stuff the turkey, then wrap it up in a cloth and let cook in some good stock for two hours. Drain off well, take off the cloth and wrap it up again before setting under the press. When thoroughly cold unwrap, pare and cover with a white fecula chaudfroid sauce (No. 593), and decorate with fanciful cuts of very black truffles and pistachios dipped in half-set jelly; as soon as this is quite hard, cover with half-set jelly and dress on a trimmed croûton of cooked hominy or rice. Garnish around with chopped jelly and have an outside border of jelly croûtons. Stick one Bellevue hatelet ( No. 2526 ) in the center of the turkey, and two garnished hatelets ( No. 2526 ) on each side. FIG. 490. A pretty mold with four angels sit on each side of the dish are holding a dish that is dressed with a turkey. Chopped jellies are used to garnish around the dish. Hatelets are sticked on both sides and the center of the turkey. GARNISHINGS FOR COLD DISHES (Garnitures Pour Pièces Froides). (2500). GARNISHING OF ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS FILLED WITH MACéDOINE (Garniture de Fonds d'Artichauts Garnis de Macédoine). Artichoke Bottoms. --Trim some small round artichoke bottoms two inches in diameter; rub over with lemon and blanch in plenty of water; cook them in a white stock (No. 182) seasoned with salt and lemon juice, putting in also half a pound of chopped beef marrow; cover with buttered paper and boil slowly. When the bottoms are well done remove from the fire, place them into a stone bowl, cover with buttered paper and leave to cool in their liquid; wash them off in boiling water, marinate and drain. Lay each bottom on a turnip cut out to imitate the base of a vase, and fill with either macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ) or a separate vegetable: carrots, turnips, green peas, cauliflower, string beans , asparagus tops, crawfish tails, or else a salpicon of tongue, truffles and mushrooms mixed in even parts and mingled with mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). (2501). GARNISHING OF ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS, IMPERIAL (Garniture de Fonds d'Artichauts à l'Impériale). Prepare and cook some artichoke bottoms as in No. 2500 ; they must be thick and not too broad; wipe dry and lay them on a small baking sheet; keep on ice. Prepare a cooked truffle salad, they to be cut in quarter-inch dice, small green asparagus tops and celery roots cut up the same as the truffles; season this salad with salt, oil, vinegar and mustard. Drain off this seasoning one hour later and thicken it with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613). With this preparation fill the hollow parts of the artichoke bottoms, arranging each one in a pyramid; smooth the surface and cover lightly with jellied mayonnaise, decorate with fanciful cuts of gherkins and replace on the ice for ten minutes before serving. (2502). GARNISHING OF EGGS à LA DEVELLE (Garniture d'Œufs à la Develle). Cut in two crossways seven or eight shelled hard-boiled eggs; use only the halves with the rounded ends and from them remove all the yolks and rub through a sieve; put this into a small vessel and add to it a little cold aspic jelly (No. 103); (scoop the whites out lightly). Pound the cooked meats of a small lobster, press through a sieve into a bowl and season with salt and a dash of cayenne; add first two spoonfuls of white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), then some mayonnaise sauce (No. 606), and lastly a few spoonfuls of the cold jelly; stir this preparation on ice to harden, then take up sufficient of it with a spoon and fill the hollow egg-whites, smoothing the tops dome-shaped; lay them in the ice box; when cold take them in the hand one by one and dip into a chaudfroid sauce, but only on the garnished side and as far down as this begins; have the sauce hardened. Dress on jelly rings cut out with a pastry cutter, keeping the dish very cold. When the eggs are ready decorate the tops with fanciful cuts of truffles and a few small shrimp tails; dip them one by one in half-set jelly and stand them upright, each one inside of one of the jelly rings. (2503). GARNISHING OF EGGS à LA JARDINIèRE (Garniture d'Œufs à la Jardinière). Divide in two crossways fifteen hard-boiled eggs; keep only the halves having the roundest end and cut these off so that they stand upright. Remove the yolks from these halves and scoop the white out lightly, then fill up the hollow with a little finely cut macédoine salad ( No. 2656 ) dressed with mayonnaise (No. 606); smooth them into a dome and put aside on ice, then cover the dome with small carrot and gherkin balls cut in halves; brush over with half-set jelly and dress. (2504). GARNISHING OF EGGS, JULIETTE (Garniture d'Œufs Juliette). Fry thin slices of ham in butter without coloring; drain off the fat and place the ham under a weight; detach the glaze from the pan with a little Madeira wine, a small quantity of half-glaze (No. 400), and as much jelly (No. 103); reduce well. Pare the ham into half- hearts and cover them entirely with the sauce. Decorate a timbale mold (No. 1, Fig. 137) with pistachios and truffles; coat the decoration with a thick layer of the sauce and place in the center some small soft eggs just cooked enough to allow to peel; on these lay the ham, shredded fine, and the remainder of the sauce; when perfectly cold fill up with jelly, and as this becomes thoroughly cold invert the whole on a dish, having a layer of jelly on its bottom; surround with chopped jelly and croutons ( No. 2442 ). (2505). GARNISHING OF EGGS à LA JUSTINE (Garniture d'Œufs à la Justine). Boil hard seven or eight eggs; when very cold, drain and shell. Incrust in pounded ice seven or eight tin molds the shape of half eggs, only just a little wider and higher; coat these with jelly. Cut each egg lengthways in two; take out the yolks and scoop out the whites with a vegetable spoon, leaving only a thin envelope; fill the empty inside of these half eggs with a chicken "pain" preparation ( No. 2543 ), having it lightly buttered. Take up the stuffed eggs one by one on a wide fork passed under the flat side; dip them in a good brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) reduced with pheasant fumet (No. 397); drain off the sauce and let the eggs cool, then pare the surplus of it, and decorate with thin cuts of truffles and gherkins; now place a half egg in each mold, and pour cold jelly around to fill up the spaces; when cold, unmold and dress in a rosette as a garnishing. (2506). GARNISHING OF EGGS à LA ROUENNAISE (Garniture d'Œufs à la Rouennaise). Divide in two lengthways seven or eight shelled hard-boiled eggs; take out the yolks to pound and rub through a sieve. Harden on a small baking sheet on ice a layer of fine jelly, having it a quarter of an inch thick; from this cut out with a heated pastry cutter eight oval crusts, having them two and a quarter inches long by one and a quarter inches wide; form rings of these with a narrower pastry cutter, and detach them from the pan by warming it underneath; dress them in a rosette on a cold dish and keep it on ice. Fill the half eggs with a salpicon of cooked duckling fillets mixed with mushrooms and a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594) mixed with soubise sauce (No. 543); smooth the preparation into domes, and cover the eggs entirely with a thin layer of white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596). When this is quite cold, decorate the surfaces with fanciful cuts of truffles and with strings of pounded egg-yolk mixed with chaudfroid; lay one egg inside of each jelly ring. (2507). GARNISHING OF EGGS, BARREL-SHAPED (Garniture d'Œufs en Forme de Baril). Cut off both ends of seven or eight shelled hard -boiled ( eggs imitate the shape of a small barrel); empty them from top to bottom with a small tin tube, and fill up the hole with a salpicon of lobster and truffles mingled with a thick mayonnaise (No. 606); lay them on a baking sheet, and let stand on ice for half an hour. On removing them, decorate the sides with thin fillets of anchovies, dipped in half-set jelly, and cover over the top platforms with a pyramid of chopped jelly. (2508). GARNISHING OF HARD-BOILED EGGS, BASKET-SHAPED (Garniture d'Œufs Durs en Forme de Corbeille). Cut off straight the ends of the hard-boiled egg and across through the center; take out the yolk from the upper parts, and fill them to a pointed shape with a salpicon of vegetables cut in small squares, and combined with a little mayonnaise (No. 606), or simply fill them with jelly. FIG. 491. An illustration of a hard-boiled eggs cut into half with the yolk replaced by small cut vegetables. (2509). GARNISHING OF HARD EGGS IN CHAUDFROID (Garniture de Chaudfroid d'Œufs Durs) Have two oval pastry cutters--one two and a quarter inches long by one and quarter wide, and another half an inch less in diameter; cut some slices of very red cooked beef tongue three-sixteenths of an inch thick, and cut them into ovals with the largest cutter; remove the center with the smallest cutter; glaze over the rings with a brush and dress on the bottom of a cold dish. Cut lengthways in two six shelled hard-boiled eggs, take out the yolks, garnish each half with a foie-gras purée preparation, having chopped truffles added; smooth the surfaces dome-shaped. Dip the half-stuffed eggs into a brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594), thickened to a proper consistency, and drain off the surplus, then dress a half egg into each ring. After the sauce is thoroughly cold decorate the tops with fanciful cuts of truffles, and dress. (2510). GARNISHING OF HALVED HARD-BOILED EGGS (Garniture de Moitiés d'Œufs Durs). Cut some hard-boiled eggs lengthwise in two even parts, and a third across on the most rounded end; try and obtain the eggs all of even size. Dress the border so that the yolks face the exterior of the dish; on top of the whites place a small lozenge of angelica, or one of very thin and very red beetroot. Which ever is used should be cut very thin. All egg borders should be dressed very regularly. FIG. 492. An even cut hard-boiled egg is placed with a small lozenge of angelica on top of the whites. (2511). GARNISHING OF EGGS, MOSCOVITE (Garniture d'Œufs Moscovite). Have a thin layer of aspic jelly (No. 103) three-eighths of an inch thick; harden on ice on a small baking sheet; from it cut out with a hot pastry cutter seven or eight rings sufficiently large to hold up the eggs inside of them. Cut crossways, two-thirds from the top, seven or eight shelled hard-boiled eggs; take out the yolks and pound them with a few anchovies and a piece of butter; rub this through a coarse sieve so it falls through like vermicelli, and keep cold. Scoop out the insides of the eggs lightly with a vegetable spoon, and fill them with a fine salpicon of crawfish mingled with thick tartar sauce (No. 631); leave for two minutes on ice; smooth the preparation into a dome form, and lay the eggs inside the jelly rings, to stand for a quarter of an hour longer on ice. After they are removed take up the vermicelli yolks with a fork, and cover the domes of the eggs with it. (2512). GARNISHING OF EGGS, POLISH STYLE (Garniture d'Œufs à la Polonaise). Cut in small dice the cooked meats of some lobster claws, add to this salpicon the same quantity of oysters poached in white wine and half as much salt, cucumber or gherkin, and beside this the white of seven or eight hard-boiled eggs, also cut up in small dice; season the salpicon with oil, vinegar and mustard, and let macerate for one hour; drain on a sieve and return it to the same vessel to combine with some mayonnaise (No. 606). Dress this preparation in a small croustade, smooth the top and decorate with the egg-yolks pounded with a little ravigote butter (No. 583) pushed through a cornet. (2513). GARNISHING OF DECORATED QUARTERED EGGS (Garniture d'Œufs Durs en Quartiers Décorés). Choose some hard-boiled eggs, all of uniform size; cut them across the rounded ends and then lengthwise in four even-sized quarters; dress them so that the yolks face outward. The whites may be decorated with small fanciful cuts of very black truffles, red tongue and pistachios, by dipping them into half-set jelly, and applying them tastefully on the very cold eggs ( Fig. 493). FIG. 493. An illustration of 3 slices of quarter hard-boiled egg. Small fancy cut of black truffles, red tongue, and pistachios are used to decorate around the whites. (2514). HARD-BOILED EGGS STUFFED WITH SALPICON (Œufs Durs Farcis au Salpicon). Incorporate some rather firm jelly into a little purée of foies-gras, spread it out on a baking sheet to half an inch in thickness and leave to cool. With a pastry cutter remove from it some rounds two inches in diameter, and from these remove the center with an inch and a quarter pastry cutter. Place these rings in small shallow crimped paper cases. Cut some hard-boiled eggs in two through the center of their height, empty the interior of each half and refill them to a point with a half-inch salpicon of chicken, truffles, tongue and mushrooms, combined with a little jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); strew chopped parsley over. Lay these eggs on the rings and cover lightly with jelly. (2515). GARNISHING OF HARD-BOILED EGGS, VASE SHAPE (Garniture d'Œufs Durs en Forme de Vase). Cut off a third of the length of the egg; use the most rounded end for the upper part and the pointed end for the base; stick these two parts together with white chaudfroid (No. 596); take out the yolk and replace it by chopped jelly ( Fig. 594). FIG. 494. A hard-boiled egg, cut in uneven length where the end of the most rounded part is stick with the base of the other part. Yolk of the upper part is removed and replaced by chopped jelly. (2516). GARNISHING OF WHOLE HARD-BOILED EGG-YOLKS (Garniture de Jaunes d'Œufs Durs Entiers). Have some small, even sized hard-boiled egg-yolks; stand them on rings cut from gherkins or beef tongue; lay in a circle a fillet of anchovy two-thirds the height of these yolks; besprinkle the inside of this circle with finely chopped truffles, and on top place a green pistachio nut ( Fig. 495). FIG. 495. A half hard-boiled egg that is stand on a ring cut of gherkin is placed in a circle of a fillet of anchovy. A green pistachio nut is placed on top of it. (2517). MUSHROOMS STUFFED AND GLAZED WITH CHAUDFROID (Champignons Farcis Glacés au Chaudfroid). Select even-sized mushrooms about an inch in diameter; empty out the interiors and fill them up with foies-gras rubbed through a sieve. Fasten them together, two by two, to form a ball, then glaze over with brown chaudfroid (No. 594); lay them on top of a ring of cooked beef tongue and on the summit place a circle cut from hard-boiled egg white; fill the center of this circle with a round piece of very black truffle and coat the whole with half-set jelly ( Fig. 496). FIG. 496. An illustration of a ring beef tongue with a circle cut of hard-boiled on top of it. A round black truffle is used to garnished the center of the egg. (2518). GARNISHING OF STUFFED SPANISH OLIVES (Garniture d' Olives d'Espagne Farcies). Stone some large Spanish olives with a tin tube sufficiently large to remove the stone; pare the olives very straight at both ends and fill up the hollow space with anchovy butter (No. 569); on top of the butter lay a green pistachio nut ( Fig. 497). FIG. 497. An olive filled with anchovy butter and garnished with pistachio nut on top of the butter. (2519). GARNISHING OF OYSTERS IN CROUSTADES (Garniture d'Huitres en Croustades). Drain and wipe some large blanched oysters; remove the muscle part and replace it by a round piece of lobster cut the same size. Make some small oval fine foundation paste croustades; cover he insides with buttered paper, fill with rice, bake and empty; fill them halfway up with cooked mushrooms, cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, mingled with a little well-seasoned blond chaudfroid, made by mixing a little brown chaudfroid (No. 594) with white chaudfroid (No. 596), and over these lay the oysters; put in a layer of half-set jelly, applying it with a brush, and decorate each croustade with chervil leaves; cover with more jelly. (2520). GARNISHING OF OYSTERS WITH JELLY (Garniture d'Huitres à la Gelée). Open some large oysters, poach, remove the muscle and split them in two through their thickness; cover both sides with a layer of jellied mayonnaise (No. 613) and reshape them as before; then lay them slightly apart on a baking sheet; brush the surfaces several times with half-set jelly, and keep them for a few moments on ice; afterward remove by cutting away the jelly all around with a plain pastry cutter dipped in hot water; detach the oysters from the sheet, beating this underneath, then dress. (2521). HAM DECORATED à LA GATTI (Jambon Décoré à la Gatti). Have a ham prepared and cooked the same as for jelly ( No. 2524 ); leave a part of the rind on the handle end, and cut it into sharp points by raising up the edge of each point on one side; glaze the ham with white chaudfroid (No. 596), all except the rind, which must be glazed with meat glaze (No. 402). Decorate around the ham with a design of branches made of fillets of truffles and very green pistachios; decorate the top with a rosette of truffles. Place the ham on a silver dish, having two tiers covered with ravigote butter (No. 583); decorate around the dish bottom with halved eggs filled with chopped jelly, as shown in Fig. 498; surround the ham with chopped jelly, and the base with square jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). Insert a piece of wood to take the place of the handle, and trim it with a fancy frill (No. 10), and a hatelet on one side. FIG. 498. A ham placed on top of a two tiers dish with halved eggs garnished around the bottom tier and square jellies garnished around the upper tier. Fanciful cut truffles are decorated on top of the ham and chopped jellies spread around the ham. A hatelet is inserted on top of the ham. (2522). HAM GLAZED WITH SUGAR (Jambon Glacé au Sucre). Hams are usually purchased already salted and smoked, for the pickling only succeeds when a large quantity are done at one time. The most essential point to observe is to have them recently smoked, of a young pig of a good breed. The easiest way to cook a ham is as follows: Cut off the end handle of a ten pound ham, shorten the loin bone, suppress a thin layer of the outside of the ham that is oversmoked, and then soak it for three hours in water; afterward place it in a large soup-pot or sauce -pan, covering with cold water; stand the vessel on the fire and bring it gradually to a boil, then drain off this water, and replace it by tepid water; add some whole spices and aromatics. It must cook about fifteen minutes for each pound, or two and a half hours in all. Take the vessel from off the fire, and leave the ham to cool in its liquid. Remove, drain thoroughly, lift off the rind, and pare nicely, keeping it a pretty shape; bestrew with fine sugar, and stand it on a baking tin; glaze to a fine color in a hot oven, remove, and when cold dress it on a bread foundation covered with ravigote butter (No. 583) and chopped parsley; surround the bottom of the dish with chopped jelly and cut-out croûtons (for these see No. 2442 ). (2523). HAM TRUFFLED à LA FLORIAN (Jambon Truffé à la Florian). In order to succeed with this dish it will be found necessary to have an oval bomb-shaped copper-tinned mold, nine and a half inches long, six and three-quarters inches wide and four inches deep. This mold must be oiled on the outside and laid on an oiled marble slab, having the opening downward; around it place an iron ring twelve inches in length, ten inches wide and five and a half inches deep; place this ring in such a way that the mold will fit exactly in its center, fill the space between the mold and the ring with plaster of Paris wetted with a little water; smooth the top nicely and leave it to harden; turn this ring over and take out the mold. Pare a twelve-pound freshly salted smoked ham neatly, unsalt it for ten hours, and boil it in water for an hour and a half, then braise in a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419) for three hours or more until the bones are easily detached from the meat; remove them, and pare the ham shapely, suppressing the skin and all the smoked parts, then lard it in every direction with quartered truffles and pistachios. Place this ham in the mold, the mold in the ring filled with plaster, and on the ham lay a board one inch less in diameter than the mold, and half an inch thick. Put under the press (No. 71), and when cold unmold and trim. Glaze over with pink chaudfroid, decorate with truffles and pistachios dipped in half-set jelly, cover over with jelly and lay it on a carved rice socle, having this ranged on an oval dish. Decorate the top with three hatelets, and around with chopped jelly and a border of jelly croûtons (see Fig. 461). FIG. 499. A ham placed in an oval-shaped mold is decorated with fanciful cut truffles and sticked with three hatelets on top of it. The ham is garnished with triangular cut jellies.. (2524). ENGLISH HAM WITH JELLY (Jambon Anglais à la Gelée). If freshly salted and smoked it is unnecessary to soak it; simply wash off in warm water, pare and saw the handle bone short, then put it into a large vessel, cover with cold water and bring this to a boil, adding aromatic herbs; close the lid and leave to boil for three hours slowly, but continuously and regularly. Remove the vessel from the fire and allow the ham to cool off in this liquor. (A ham is cooked when the meat on the handle bone becomes soft.) Drain it off, suppress the FIG. 500. Slices of ham arranged in a ring-shaped are placed on top of an oval board that is fasten on a dish. Chopped jellies are used to fill the center of the ring. A hatelet is sticked at one end of the ham. Triangular cut jellies are garnished around the board. thick end bone and a part of the rind, leaving the leg end covered; pare and remove all the upper part to cut up into even slices. Lay the ham on an oval wooden board covered with white paper and fastened on a dish, dress the cut slices in a circle on top of the ham and fill the center with chopped jelly; glaze the rind and the remaining whole piece with a brush and surround the base with a string of thick jelly pushed through a pocket; dress fine triangles of jelly ( No. 2442 ) all around; fasten a jelly-decorated hatelet in the opposite end from the handle, slanting it outward (see drawing, Fig. 501). (2525). HAMS of CHICKEN WITH ZAMPINO (Jambons de Poulet Garnis de Zampino). Bone thoroughly two good chickens weighing two pounds each, leaving on only the drumstick bones; separate each one in two lengthwise, season and fill each half with galantine forcemeat (No. 65) and long shreds of cooked veal udder, also of very red beef tongue, raw foies-gras and quartered raw truffles, proceeding exactly the same as for boned chicken ( No. 2485 ); bring the meats close together in order to sew up and wrap each of the halved boned chickens in a white cloth; cook for one hour in unskimmed white broth (No. 194a); drain the galantines and unwrap; lay on a baking sheet some bottomless molds in the shape of hams, having a slot in the thin end to allow the drumstick to pass through, place the chickens in these and let get cold under the pressure of a light weight. Pare and disengage the pinion bone. They may now be cut in slices, reconstructing them as before, and keeping in shape with a thin skewer; cover the entire surface with white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), that has become slightly thickened on ice. After this sauce is cold cover over the hams on the drumstick end with brown chaudfroid (No. 594), imitating the real skin of a pared ham; trim each ham bone with a frill (No. 10); dress them two by two on a rice foundation, withdraw the skewers and decorate the hams with fanciful cuts of very black truffles; surround with thin slices of zampino three inches in diameter and cut in two across and dress them around the foundation, one overlapping the other. Surround with a piping of chopped jelly and some jelly croûtons. Zampino of Modena. --Take one leg of a fresh pig about fifteen inches long, leaving the foot adhering; bone it carefully not to split the skin, turn the skin back and then remove the meat and fat; salt the skin plentifully, and leave it in brine for four to five days. After this time chop up coarsely ten pounds of lean pork meat with five pounds of beef, and mix these with five pounds of very finely chopped fresh pork rind. Season the mixture with ten ounces of salt, one ounce of crushed black pepper corns , a heavy pinch of cinnamon, a small pinch of saltpeter and one gill of red wine; mingle thoroughly. Now wash the skin in fresh water to extract all the salt, turn it over to its normal position, and fill it with the above mixture; tie it firmly at the extreme end, and unwrap with a strong inch-wide tape, beginning at the smallest end of the zampino (that is, near the foot ). Lay the zampino in a large kettle, cover plentifully with cold water, and stand it on a slow fire to have the liquid almost reach boiling point; then remove the kettle to a corner of the range and let barely bubble for an hour and a half to an hour and three-quarters. Take from the fire and leave to cool in the liquid; drain and remove the tape. This zampino can be served hot with string beans as described in No. 1820. (2526). MISCELLANEOUS, COLD HATELETS, BELLEVUE VEGETABLES; CROûTONS, CHOPPED TRANSPARENT JELLY AND STICKY CHOPPED JELLY (Hâtelets Froids Divers en Bellevue, de Légumes; de Croûtons et Gelée Hachée Transparente et de Gelée Hachée Collante). Cold hatelets are to be prepared with plain or double white cocks'-combs enveloped in jelly, and round, black, unpeeled truffles glazed over with meat glaze (No. 402). Others are made of trussed crawfish from which the small legs have been suppressed and the body shells rubbed over with a little oil, channeled mushrooms (No. 118) coated with jelly, chicken or game quenelles (No. 91), decorated and molded in Bellevue or simply covered, or else carved vegetables blanched separately. These hatelets can also be composed of crawfish, lemons, truffles and mushrooms, having one small glazed truffle on top, a lightly oiled trussed crawfish under this truffle, and then a fine channeled glazed mushroom, having the upper part rounded, then a lemon cut into points; first one-half of the lemon, placed with the points upward, then a round piece of truffle and the other half of the lemon, the points downward, and finished with a glazed channeled mushroom, having the rounded end toward the bottom. Lean Hatelets for Fish are composed of shrimps, crawfish, truffles, mushrooms or lemon. Cocks'-combs are not admissible for this kind of hatelets. Bellevue Hatelets. --Prepare these hatelets as follows: Cut out with a tin tube three-fourths of an inch in diameter and an eighth of an inch in thickness, small rounds of chicken, cooked beef tongue and truffles; take pieces from the center with a smaller tin tube one-eighth of an inch in diameter; run a hatelet through six of these rounds, beginning first by putting a small round whole truffle, then a round of chicken, tongue and truffle; begin again with another round of chicken, tongue and truffle, leaving a space between each. Cut off the upper crust of a loaf of bread, this to be six inches high; spread over the top to replace the crust a layer of butter a quarter of an inch thick; on top place the hatelet cases or molds ( Fig. 501); run through the metal hatelets decorated with the rounds exactly in the center, stand them upright, then fill the molds with cold jelly (No. 103) and keep them in a cool place for several hours. When ready to serve the pieces unmold these hatelets and run a fine unpeeled, round and black truffle on each one, then stick them into the piece. Carrots and turnips can be substituted for the chicken and tongue. FIG. 501. An illustration of a case holding three tubes where a hatelet is placed in the center tube. Two other hatelets are placed at each side of the case. FIG. 502. An illustration of a small hatelet. FIG. 503. A tall diamond-like hatelet. FIG. 504. A hatelet with the center part surrounded by jelly. Vegetable Hatelets. --These hatelets are composed of vegetables or roots, imitating vases of various kinds; they are turned and carved with a knife, and formed of several pieces, then filled with artificial flowers made of vegetables, such as roses, camelias, lilies, or daisies; these flowers are colored by dipping them in a solution of aniline dissolved in alcohol and diluted with water. If these flowers are well made they can imitate the natural ones most marvelously. They can be used plain, without any coloring, but this is a matter of taste. For Chopped Transparent Jelly the fragments of jelly croûtons are generally used, chopping them on a moistened cloth with a large knife; they should be chopped sufficiently fine, still not allowing them to get thick looking; they may also be cut into small fine lengthwise strips, afterward cutting them across in small squares; in this way they are sure to remain transparent. FIG. 505. An illustration of a trophy-like hatelet FIG. 506. A multi-layer hatelet. FIG. 507. A trophy-like hatelet. Sticky Chopped Jelly is used for pushing through a pocket or paper cornet around a cold meat piece, and is also frequently used to cover the surface of a high foundation that is to be used as a support. In order to obtain a sticky jelly, chop it up on a wet cloth, and sprinkle it over from time to time with some hot water, until it forms into a soft compact mass. This must be used at once. (2527). KERNEL OF VEAL WITH MAYONNAISE TOMATOED SAUCE (Noix de Veau à la Sauce Mayonnaise Tomatée). Lard thoroughly a kernel of veal with ham and fat pork, cover it with slices of udder, and then braise. Have a dome-shaped terrine or mold; put the kernel in; strain in the stock, add to it a little gelatine if not consistent enough, and when cold turn it on a dish. Remold into another mold of similar shape, but an inch larger in diameter, decorated with cuts of vegetables; fill with jelly and when cold dress it on a carved rice socle and garnish around with balls of turnips and carrots, blanched and cooked in stock (No. 194a) with a little sugar, and glazed; dress a butter border ( No. 2444 ) or one of vegetables ( No. 2443 ) on the edge of the dish, and serve apart a mayonnaise (No. 606) with some tomato purée (No. 730) added. (2528). KINGFISH FILLETS à LA VALENçAY (Filets de Kingfish à la Valençay). Pare oblong shape and cook ten to twelve small fillets of kingfish in a sautoir with white wine court-bouillon (No. 39); drain and let cool under a weight; trim them nicely, dip them singly into a white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), ranging them immediately on to a baking sheet to cool off the sauce, then pare off the surplus of it. Decorate a third part of them on the smooth side with fanciful cuts of truffles or gherkins; cover them over with half-set jelly applied with a brush, and let this get cold, then dress them on an inch-high socle in pyramid form, placing the decorated ones on top. On one side fasten a hatelet garnished with shrimps. Uphold the fillets of fish on both FIG. 508. Slices of kingfish fillets decorated with fanciful cut truffles are placed on top of a board that is fasten on a dish. Triangular cut jellies are garnished around the board. Lobster tails are arranged on each side of the fillets and a hatelet filled with shrimps is fasten on one side of the fillet. sides with thick chopped jelly pushed through a cornet and surround, both right and left, with five or six large crawfish bodies, emptied and refilled with a salpicon of crawfish or lobster tails, combined with a salad of small vegetables dressed with mayonnaise (No. 606). Stand these bodies upright to form a half circle, and brush over with half-set jelly; surround the base of the dish with fine jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ), and serve with a sauce -boat of mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). (2529). CHICKEN LEGS SHAPED AS DUCKLINGS (Cuisses de Poulet en forme de Canetons). Cut the leg three-quarters of an inch from the joint. Remove the bones belonging to the second joint, as well as a third part of the drumsticks; stuff the legs with quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), introducing into it half as much foies-gras forcemeat (No. 78); mix in a third as much small three-sixteenths of an inch squares of tongue and mushroom, half of each, and raw fine herbs. Shape them to represent ducklings. Put in a sautoir some thin slices of fat pork and place the ducklings one beside the other. Braise, cool and pare off the under parts neatly, so that these imitated ducklings can stand plumb on their base, then glaze them with white chaudfroid (No. 596), and form the wings with crawfish claws. Make artificial eyes and form the beak by cutting the bone slanting. Surround with green parsley leaves, and serve with a bowl of ravigote sauce (No. 623). (2530). LEG of MUTTON à LA GARRISON (Giget de Mouton à la Garrison). Line a buttered saucepan with onions, carrots and slices of round of veal, slices of fat pork and ham; in the middle lay a leg of mutton having the thick loin end boned, and add a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, also two boned calves ' feet; moisten with stock (No. 194a), white wine and Madeira wine, a pint of each; let fall to a glaze and remoisten with stock; when it begins to boil skim and cover with a sheet of paper; push into the oven for four or five hours until the leg is thoroughly cooked, then transfer it to an oval vessel and leave till cold. Have a few dozen carrots and turnips cut in balls, also some small onions; blanch these and cook each kind separately in broth (No. 194a); when fallen to a glaze allow them to cool, thickening with a little jelly (No. 103). The leg being cold, trim it nicely, glaze over with meat glaze (No. 402), dress it in the center of a dish and surround with the jellied vegetables and jelly cut in eighth of an inch squares arranged in clusters. Decorate the leg with anchovy fillets, chervil and tarragon, dipped in half-set jelly, and surround by horseradish ribbons (No. 98). Skim the fat from the stock, add a seasoning of oil, vinegar, salt, mignonette, capers and gherkins, and serve in a sauce -boat when cold. Place on the bone the silver handle shown in Fig. 164. (2531). LOBSTER OR SPINY LOBSTER à LA RAVIGOTE (Homard ou Langouste à la Ravigote). Boil a lobster in a plain court-bouillon (No. 38) and let it cool off under a weight with the tail stretched out. Remove the tail meats from underneath, leaving the shell attached to the body; pare the meats on the thickest end and cut them up into slightly bias slices so as to have them somewhat wider; season and place them flat on a tinned-copper tray; decorate the tops with lobster, eggs, tarragon leaves and chervil; cover the decorations with half-set jelly and keep in a cool place. Break the shells of the large claws so as to remove the meats and divide these in two lengthwise, then brush them over with half-set aspic jelly (No. 103). Cut in dice the meats of a small boiled lobster, put the pieces in a bowl with an equal quantity of cooked truffles, a few spoonfuls of cooked mushrooms and raw gherkins; season this salpicon and stir it on ice into some thick mayonnaise (No. 606), and with it cover ten to twelve small cooked equal-sized artichoke bottoms. Turn over the lobster body and fill the empty tail with thick jelly pushed through a pocket; dress at once in its natural state, the red side uppermost, on a long dish, moistening it with half-set jelly, laid on with a brush, to prevent the lobster from slipping off. On the top of the shell, from one end to the other, push two thick strings of butter previously softened in a cloth and an inch and a quarter apart; between these strigs range a bed of chopped jelly, and on top of this dress the slices of lobster, one overlapping the other. On the right and left of the head lay the jelly covered claws and around the body have chopped jelly surrounded with the garnished artichoke bottoms, and around them a border of pretty jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). Serve at the same time a ravigote sauce (No. 623), having the creamy parts of the lobster added to it. (2532). LOBSTER IN A BORDER (Homard en Bordure). Cut into quarter-inch squares, on the bias, the tail meat of two boiled lobsters, also the claws cut into four pieces; lay them in a deep dish and season with salt, oil and vinegar. Incrust in ice a plain border mold ( Fig. 139), coat the inside with clear jelly (No. 103); cut some hard-boiled eggs into four pieces, that is once lengthwise and then each half egg once across; fasten to the yolks small sprigs of green chervil dipped in jelly, and fill the border mold with these eggs; then pour into the bottom a little melted jelly; let it set, add about half an inch more, and when this begins to harden fill up the mold, and let it remain on ice until the jelly is perfectly firm; then turn the mold over on a cold dish. Fill the inside empty space as high as the jelly with a vegetable salad ( No. 2650 ), thickened with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); dress on top the slices of lobster, covering the whole with jellied mayonnaise; cover with more jelly, and set on top the claws dipped in jelly. A mayonnaise printanière (No. 612) should be served separately. (2533). LOBSTER TAILS IN THEIR SHELLS (Queues de Homards dans leurs Coquilles). Detach the bodies, claws and tails from five small cooked lobsters; open the claw shells to remove the meats. Cut the five lobster tails lengthways, both meat and shell together; remove the meats from these ten halved shells, wipe the shells neatly, and fill the bottoms with a layer of preparation made with the lobster parings, truffles and mushrooms, mingled with a little chaudfroid sauce (No. 606), and finished with a dash of cayenne pepper. Season the tall meats and cut them up slanting without spoiling their shape, and dip them into half-set jelly; then replace each one in its half shell, the red side uppermost, and lay them aside in a cool place. This entrée is to be dressed on a dish foundation having in the center a pyramidical support, both of which are to be covered with white paper, then with a layer of thick chopped jelly pushed through a pocket; the halved tails are to be dressed with the points upward, five on each side; the claws are to stand upright on top of the support, and surrounded by green parsley leaves. The base of the halved tails is also to be surrounded by fresh parsley, and the bottom of the dish with pretty jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). As soon as the entrée is dressed place it in the ice-box until ready to serve, then send it to the table with a separate mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). FIG. 509. Five lobsters with tails pointed upward, are placed on a dish with a foundation that has pyramidical support in the center. Claws are sticked on top of the support and with green parsley leaves surrounded them. Jelly croutons are garnished around the fondation. (2534). LOBSTER OR SPINY LOBSTER WITH MAYONNAISE (Homard ou Langouste à la Mayonnaise). Cook a large lobster; drain and let get cold with the tail stretched out. Detach the large claws and divide the body lengthwise in two; remove the meats whole from each halved tail, and cut them up slanting, but without deforming them. Wipe well the empty tail shells and fill them half way with chopped jelly, then return the meats to the shells upside down so that the red part in uppermost. Suppress the black vein from the center of the bodies, also the creamy parts, and rub these through a sieve and add them to a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). Dress the two halves of the lobster on a napkin or dish, and in the hollow space formed by the shells place a bunch of parsley leaves; on this dress the lobster claws in their shells, after suppressing half of them, and surround the lobster on the bottom of the dish with a string of chopped jelly, and around this lay either croûtons of jelly or halved hard-boiled eggs filled with a salad of vegetables ( No. 2630 ); serve the mayonnaise sauce separately. (2535). MOUSSELINES OF FOIES-GRAS à LA DANA (Mousselines de Foies-Gras à la Dana). Prepare a frothy preparation with foies-gras in the following manner: Pound one pound of foies-gras taken from a terrine, pass the pulp through a sieve, season, lay it in a thin iron vessel and beat well, adding a gill of melted glaze (No. 402) and two gills of brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594), to make the preparation of a good consistency when cold. After it has become smooth stir in slowly the equal quantity of a pint of well-drained whipped cream without sugar. Range on pounded ice fifteen quenelle molds ( Fig. 76); cover the insides of those to half their height with the frothy preparation, forming a hollow in the center, and into this lay a slice of foies-gras three-sixteenths of an inch thick and cut egg -shaped; finish filling the molds with the same preparation, smooth the tops, having them perfectly flat, and then set the molds on ice for one hour. Dip them into hot water, unmold the mousselines on a cold baking sheet and cover each one with brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594). After this has become quite cold dress the mousselines in a pyramid inside a jelly border. Garnish around the border with clear jelly cut into very small dice, and outside of this place a row of jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2536). MOUSSELINE OF KINGFISH à LA BRIèRE (Mousseline de Kingfish à la Brière). Scale two or three fresh kingfish, weighing about two pounds; suppress the head and thin tail end, the fins and gills. Put into a sautoir two soupspoonfuls of chopped onions and shallots, add half a pound of clarified butter cooked to hazelnut (No. 567) and fry the onions and shallots lightly; put in the well-wiped fish and season with salt, nutmeg, a dash of cayenne, a pinch of thyme leaves and bay leaf; fry over a brisk fire until done. Remove the skin, pour the whole into a sieve laid over a large dish, so as to be able to collect all the liquid and butter, and let this as well as the fish get cold on ice. Take all the bones out of the fish and pound the meat, adding gradually the well-strained butter and liquid, also a few spoonfuls of good béchamel sauce (No. 409) reduced with the fish stock. Press this forcemeat through a sieve and smooth it in a vessel, mixing in with it slowly a few spoonfuls of very thick jelly (No. 103); try a small part of this preparation in a small mold on ice, and if not quite firm add more dissolved jelly until perfectly thick. When cold on the ice incorporate into it slowly about one pint of very firmly whipped cream, drained and sugarless. Stir the preparation again for a few moments, then pour it into a high mold incrusted on ice, coated with jelly, and bestrew with chervil leaves; let the mousseline harden for a couple of hours and at the last moment dip the mold into hot water so as to easily unmold it on a rice foundation two inches high; fill the bottom of the dish with half-set jelly, surround the foundation with quartered hard-boiled eggs standing erect, and these with a string of chopped jelly or jelly croûtons. Serve at the same time a sauce -boat of mayonnaise (No. 606), finished with tarragon and chopped chervil. (2537). MOUSSELINE OF LOBSTER (Mousseline de Homard). Select a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) and incrust it in pounded ice; cut some crosswise slices of large green gherkins, of equal size and thickness, lift them up with the pointed end of a larding needle, dip into half-set jelly, and then arrange them symmetrically against the sides of the mold; coat this decoration lightly with jelly. Cut up into quarter-inch dice the claw meat of four lobsters and enclose them in a small saucepan. Pound the tail meat with two or three spoonfuls of béchamel (No. 409), pass it through a sieve and return it to the mortar to pound once more, adding three or four gills of blond chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), a few spoonfuls of jelly (No. 103) and a few drops of tarragon vinegar; season highly and set the preparation in a saucepan to thicken lightly while stirring on ice; incorporate into this five or six spoonfuls of well-drained whipped cream. After FIG. 510. An illustration of a cylindrical mold with a hatelet garnished with fine shrimps placed on top of it. this preparation is well smoothed add to it the dice pieces of claw meat and with the whole fill up the coated mold; put on ice for one hour. Just when ready to serve dip the mold in warm water and invert the contents on a dish having a small support fastened to the center; on top of this place a hatelet garnished with fine shrimps or crawfish of graduated sizes, and serve at the same time a separate mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). (2538). MOUSSELINE OF PHEASANTS, PRINCESS (Mousseline de Faisans, Princesse). This cold entrée is dressed on a carved rice croustade slightly hollowed out on top to form an outspreading ledge. Incrust in chopped ice a plain pyramidical flat-top mold. Take the meat of two breasts of cooked pheasants and half a cooked foies-gras; with these make a preparation the same as for a chaudfroid of fillets of pheasants ( No. 2456 ); before thickening it on ice put a quarter of this into a saucepan and incorporate in it two spoonfuls of black pounded truffles; thicken the two preparations separately on ice. Moisten the interior of the mold with a brush dipped in jelly, fill it to a third of its height with the white mixture, and when this is cold pour in a layer of the black one inch deep, and on this another of the white, of the same thickness as the first, then another one of black, the same as before, and finish filling with the white; cover with a buttered white paper and leave to cool for two hours. Lastly dip the mold in hot water and turn it over to unmold on the croustade; surround the base with a row of sticky chopped jelly ( No. 2526 ) and on this lay a chain of small, crimped paper cases, each one filled with a round of truffle. On top of the mousseline fasten a hatelet garnished with mushrooms of graduated sizes, and surround this with chopped jelly; lay around some cases the same as the lower ones, only somewhat smaller, also filled with truffles. FIG. 511. A plate with a carved rice croustade where mousseline is placed on top of it. Small paper cases filled with round truffles are placed around the bottom and the top of the mousseline. Hatelet garnished with mushrooms is fasten on top of the mousseline. (2539). MOUSSELINE OF PULLET (Mousseline de Poularde). Poach in butter four well-pared pullet fillets; when cold pound them with a third of their quantity of the very best butter; season and rub through a sieve. Put this pulp into a thin iron vessel and beat it for five minutes with a spoon to have it smooth, then incorporate slowly three gills of blond chaudfroid sauce (No. 596); try a little of this preparation on ice to rectify if necessary, and when perfect thicken it on ice, stirring in a quarter as many truffles, red beef tongue and cooked mushrooms, the whole cut in three-sixteenths of an inch dice, also the volume of a pint of well-drained whipped cream. With this preparation fill an oval mold decorated with truffles and coated with a light coating of jelly, or else several quenelle molds, covered with half-set jelly, having used a brush for this purpose; then smooth the top nicely and keep the mold on pounded ice for one hour. At the last moment unmold the mousseline on a cold dish and surround the base with pretty jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). FIG. 512. An illustration of a mousseline with fancy cut truffles garnished on top of it. (2540). MOUSSELINE OF WOODCOCK (Mousseline de Bécasses). Simply dress this on a channeled rice croustade foundation fastened on a dish. Remove some rounds of cooked truffles with a cutter, and use them to decorate symmetrically the interior sides and bottom of a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) imbedded in ice, dipping them one by one in half-set jelly to be able to fasten them on, then coat over the entire inside of the mold lightly with half-set jelly. Pound the breast meats of three cooked woodcock with an equal quantity of cooked foies-gras, half as much cooked and chopped-up truffles and a very little of the cooked intestines from the birds; season and pass the whole through a sieve. Put this pulp into a thin metal vessel and stir into it gradually three gills of brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594), increased with a few spoonfuls of warmed jelly (No. 103); the chaudfroid sauce should be reduced with a game fumet (No. 397) prepared with the woodcock legs and bones; thicken the preparation properly by stirring it on ice and with it fill up the mold; then harden it on ice for one hour. When needed dip the mold in hot water, wipe dry and invert the mousseline on the rice foundation, surrounding it with a bed of chopped jelly. FIG. 513. A cylindrical mousseline is dressed on top of a rice croustade foundation that is fastened on a dish. The foundation is surrounded with chopped jellies. (2541). TENDERLOIN of MUTTON à LA HENRY CLAY (Filets de Mouton à la Henry Clay ). Raise the tenderloins from two saddles of mutton, and the sirloins or meats from four racks; remove the skin, pare and lard with medium lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52); season with salt, pepper, nutmeg, fine herbs and shallots. Cover the bottom of a braziere with slices of fat pork, carrots, onions and a bunch of parsley, garnished with thyme, bay leaf and a clove; lay the fillets on top, moisten with stock (No. 194a) and Madeira wine, cover with buttered paper, then bring to a boil and set in the oven for one hour; when done lay them on a deep dish and strain the stock over; glaze and dress on a rice croustade, and garnish around with breasts of mutton in chaudfroid, prepared as follows: Braise the breasts, set them under a weight to cool, pare by removing the skin and fat, and then cut the meat into small half- hearts; cover their surfaces with foies-gras taken from a terrine, pounded and rubbed through a sieve; when cold mask them with chaudfroid made with the fillet and breast stock, and some poivrade (No. 523) added, and when cold pare and trim with fancy favors (No. 10). Dress them in a circle, one overlapping the other, around the rice socle, and outside of the breasts place chopped jelly surrounded by jelly croutons ( No. 2442 ) cut very regular and dressed symmetrically. Serve at the same time a sauce -boat of printanière mayonnaise (No. 612). (2542). SMALL "PAINS" OF CAPON WITH TARRAGON (Petits Pains de Chapon à l'Estragon). Select some timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137), imbed them in chopped ice, and decorate the bottoms and sides with cut-up gherkins and blanched tarragon leaves, being careful to dip these decorations in half-set jelly when using. Take the value of two or three gills of capon purée, and mix with it a few spoonfuls of velouté sauce (No. 415); put this into a small saucepan and dissolve gradually with a gill of good aspic jelly (No. 103) and a few spoonfuls of tarragon vinegar. Stir this preparation on ice to thicken, and use it to fill the empty molds. One hour later dip these timbales in warm water; unmold the timbales and dress them at once in a circle on a cold dish. Garnish the center with chopped jelly and around with jelly croûtons. (2543). SMALL "PAINS" OF CHICKEN à L'éCARLATE (Petits Pains de Volaille à l'écarlate). This entrée requires to be dressed on a wooden foundation fastened on a dish; cover it with white paper, and decorate its thickness with a border in relief; in the center of this foundation place a wooden support also covered, it being as high as a six-sided timbale mold about the same size as timbale No. 1, Fig. 137. Pound the white meats of a large chicken with an equal quantity of foies-gras, both to be cooked; add two spoonfuls of velouté sauce (No. 415), season and strain through a sieve. Put this pulp into a thin metal vessel, and mix in an equal quantity of liquid blond chaudfroid (No. 596), and four spoonfuls of cooked truffles cut in small dice. Incrust the molds on ice; coat with half-set jelly, and line the sides only with narrow strips of red beef tongue, cut the same height as the molds. Thicken the preparation on ice and with it fill the lined molds; leave to harden for one hour. When required for serving, dip the molds in hot water in order to unmold the "pains," and dress them on the foundation around the support, placing one on its summit; decorate all the tops with a large mushroom head channeled through the thickness and hollowed in the center so that it is capable of holding a small truffle ball. On the central "pain" fasten a small hatelet garnished with a truffle and cocks'-comb slightly larger than the rest. FIG. 514. An illustration of a plate of "pains" with truffle balls and mushrooms decorated on top of them. A hatelet garnished with truffle and cocks'-comb is fasten on top of the central "pain". (2544). SMALL "PAINS" OF CHICKEN à LA FREYCINET (Petits Pains de Poulet à la Freycinet). Have a baking tin with a raised border an inch and a half high; range on it some timbale molds (No. 2, Fig. 137), and surround them with finely chopped ice; pour into the bottom of each mold some jelly to an eighth of an inch in thickness and on top set a round slice of truffle a quarter of an inch narrower than the diameter of the bottom mold; decorate the sides with fanciful cuts of truffles or egg-white dipped in half-set jelly; coat over the interior of the mold or else brush it with a layer of the jelly and fill it up with the following preparation: Pound half a pound of the white meat of a braised and cold chicken to a pulp, after removing the skin, fat and bones; add to it half a pint of velouté sauce (No. 413) well reduced with mushroom essence (No. 392) and a pint of jelly (No. 103); pass the whole through a tammy into a thin metal bowl and lay it on ice; incorporate and mix well with it the same quantity of whipped cream, drained for two hours on a sieve. Fill the molds half full and place in the center a ball of foies-gras taken from a terrine with a round five-eighths of an inch vegetable spoon dipped in hot water; finish filling up with the preparation, smooth the tops and let get thoroughly cold. Unmold the timbales and dress them in a circle on a cut-out rice socle two inches high by eight inches in diameter; place in the center of the socle a sloping support, having it three inches high and five inches in circumference at the base and two inches in circumference on the top; on this top fasten a stearine cup, filling it with very small black and glazed truffles. (2545). "PAIN" OF GAME à LA BARTHOLDI (Pain de Gibier à la Bartholdi). Have made beforehand a round wooden socle nine inches and a half in diameter by two and a half inches in height. At half an inch from its top have a curve two inches high in the shape of an ogive, reducing the part that rests on the dish to the diameter of eight and a half inches; also hollow it out a quarter of an inch deep on top, leaving a three-quarter-inch border all around; exactly in the center bore a half-inch hole through the entire depth. Moisten the socle lightly, and cover it over with noodle paste (No. 142), or English paste (No. 134), rolled out very thin, and let dry in the air; then glaze it over with very light meat glaze (No. 402), and decorate by applying to the glaze fancifully cut pieces of either of the pastes used or a wreath of flowers. Make one or two preparations (the cut represents only one), one white with partridge meat, and the other brown with grouse meat. For the White Preparation. --Pound one pound of the white meat of some braised cold partridges, boned and free of fat; add to it half a pound of foies-gras, and continue to mash the two together, adding one pint of velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with the braised stock, strained and skimmed, having added to it an ounce of well-dissolved gelatine; strain the whole through a fine sieve, and set it away to get cold in a metal vessel. Instead of gelatine half a pound of very clear jelly (No. 103) may be substituted. For the Brown Preparation. --Proceed exactly the same as for the white, but instead of the white partridge meat and velouté sauce use grouse or prairie chicken meat and espagnole sauce (No. 414), reduced with mushroom essence (No. 392); strain through a fine sieve, and lay it aside in a metal vessel. Fry two young and tender prairie hens in butter with chopped-up fresh mushrooms; season with salt, pepper, and chopped parsley, and let them get cold. Bone and suppress the skin, pound the meat to a pulp and rub it through a sieve; mix in a few spoonfuls of game quenelle forcemeat (No. 91), and add and mingle to the whole the same quantity of truffles, tongue, liver and pistachios, all cut up in small three-sixteenths of an inch squares. Line some small mousseline molds (No. 3, Fig. 138), with very thin slices of fat pork, and fill them up with the above preparation; arrange them on a baking sheet, one beside the other, without allowing them to touch, and bake them in a slack oven; leave them to cool off under a weight; decorate No. 2 mousseline molds, either with truffles, egg-white, or pistachios; coat with a thin layer of jelly; pour a quarter-inch thick layer of jelly in the bottom of the mold; when cold place the contents of the No. 3 mousseline molds on it, and finish filling with jelly; keep in a cool place. Incrust in chopped ice a mold made in graduated tiers. The design as represented is plain, without any decoration; if decorated, then decorate the upper edge of the sides of each tier with fanciful cuts of truffle and egg-white dipped in half-set jelly; coat over evenly the inside of the mold with jelly. Place the two preparations on ice, beat them up well and fill the bottom tier with the brown preparation; lay in the center some slices of truffle and let it get cold; then fill another tier with white preparation, using slices of foies-gras instead of truffles, and continue the same operation until the mold is all filled; then let it get quite cold, leaving it on the ice for several hours so as to harden the contents. Unmold the "pain" on to the socle, ran through the center a wooden support which must be made to hold up the subject on its summit, and decorate each tier with jelly croûtons cut into long triangles, having the pointed end cut off and dressed upright; the height of these croûtons for the lower tier dressed on the socle must be an inch and a half, then diminish FIG. 515. A tower-like "pain" is unmolded on a socle and with triangular cut jelly croutons garnished around each tier of the "pain." An imitation of the statue of Liberty is fasten on top of the "pain." Chopped jellies are used to decorate around the socle. the height one-eighth of an inch for each tier, so that those on the fifth tier are only one inch high; decrease their thickness and width also. Stick on top of the support a stearine figure in imitation of the statue of Liberty. Push through a cornet between all the croûtons some finely chopped jelly, and decorate the bottom of the socle as high as the basin with more chopped jelly; or surround the base with the same mousseline-shaped timbales. (2546). "PAIN" OF GAME, DIANA (Pain de Gibier à la Diana). 5 1/4" Handwritten inscription FIG. 516. A mold where the frieze is upheld by the trunk of a tree which contain many branches and the base is covered with foliage. Flowers and leaves are used as decoration for the frieze. On each end of the frieze, there is a statue of a deer's head. The "pain" is molded in three tiers and two hatelets are fasten on each side of the two bottom tiers. A statue of a girl with an animal is placed on top of the "pain." This "pain" is dressed on a socle, the frieze being upheld by the trunk of a tree having many branches, these to form a support; the branches are modeled over wire, the surface of the base is covered with foliage and the frieze decorated with leaves and flowers. On top of the socle place a surtout of carved rice of similar shape, to be ten inches long by seven inches wide, or one of tin covered with noodle paste (No. 142). Have three oval molds, the largest ten inches long, by seven inches wide and two inches high, the medium-sized one eight and five-eighths inches long, and three and a half inches high and five and a quarter inches wide; the smallest to be seven and one-eighths inches long, four and five-eighths inches wide and three inches high. Line the inside of these molds with slices of fat pork an eighth of an inch thick. Make three different preparations, one for each mold; for the largest have a young hare "pain" preparation, made as follows: Cut two pounds of young hare meat into large squares; fry in melted chopped fat pork with mushrooms, truffles and fine herbs, salt, aromatics and spices; when the hare is cooked take from the fire and set away to cool, then pound it well, adding four egg-yolks, half a pound of foies gras from a terrine and one pound of cream panada (No. 120). After all has been well pounded and passed through a sieve, add six ounces of unsmoked cooked beef tongue, half a pound of truffles and one pound of calves ' udder, all cut in three-eighths inch squares; mix thoroughly and fill the largest mold; stand it in a sautoir with boiling water and let bake in a slack oven for three hours; cool under a weight, unmold and remove the fat part from the bottom and sides, pare the "pain" neatly, smooth and set it in the ice-box. For the medium-sized mold prepare the following: Cut two pounds of prairie- hen meat in squares, fry on a brisk fire in grated fresh fat pork; pound all thoroughly together, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Pound eight ounces of panada and mix it slowly into the preparation, press it through a sieve and mingle into this forcemeat a quarter of a pound of truffles cut in quarter-inch squares and as much fat pork cut exactly the same. With this preparation fill the medium-sized mold, having lined it with slices of fat pork an eighth of an inch thick; stand it in a sautoir with boiling water and let cook in a slow oven for two hours and a half, then cool under a weight. Unmold the "pain," pare and smooth it and leave it in the ice-box. For the smallest mold pound thoroughly one pound of roasted pheasant, partridge or quail meat from which all bones, fat, skin and sinews have been removed, with half a pound of foies-gras from a terrine; season, strain, return to a vessel and add a pint of cold half-glaze sauce (No. 413) well reduced with essence of mushrooms (No. 392) and twelve egg-yolks. Fill the mold with this preparation, stand it in a flat saucepan containing boiling water, place it in the oven, and when poached, cool, unmold and set it in the ice-box. After cleaning the molds well apply the lozenges correctly, dipping each one in half-set cold jelly. Begin at the bottom of the mold with a lozenge of egg-white cut in half across its length, keeping the lozenges of truffles on the right and the lozenges of tongue on the left. The beauty of this decoration consists in applying and joining them nicely, putting them rather close on the bottom of the mold and a little further away toward the top to allow for the spread of the mold. Coat each mold with jelly (No. 103), having it an eighth of an inch thick at the bottom, and leave it to cool. The lozenges for the large mold are one and three-eighths inches long by three-quarters of an inch wide; for the medium size, one and a quarter inches long by one and one-sixteenth inches wide; and for the smallest, one and one-eighth inches long by five-eighths of an inch wide. Put the "pains" into these decorated molds and finish filling with cold jelly that is not set; stand them in the ice-box for six hours, then unmold the largest carefully on the rice surtout. On the largest place the next size and the smallest on top; in the center of this one place a pretty subject, and at each end of it fasten a garnished hatelet and two larger ones below on the lower "pain." Surround the base of the surtout with jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2547). "PAIN" OF LIVER WITH SALPICON (Pain de Foie au Salpicon). Mince a pound and a quarter of raw calf 's liver; fry it quickly in melted fat pork with aromatic herbs, parsley, thyme, bay leaf, truffle and mushroom peelings and chopped blanched shallot; remove as soon as done and leave to cool, then mix in four ounces of foies-gras parings from a terrine. Pound and return it to the mortar and add slowly one pound and a half of chopped raw veal and fat pork, the same as a galantine; pound the whole well together, press once more through a sieve and season properly. Put this preparation into a vessel and stir in a third as much truffles, cooked veal udder and cooked red beef tongue, all cut into small squares. Cover the bottom and sides of a large charlotte mold with thin slices of fat pork; put the preparation in the center and cover over with more pork; place the mold in a saucepan containing hot water to reach a third of its height; let this come to a boil, then remove to a slower fire or a slack oven. Cook the "pain" for an hour and a quarter and leave to cool for four hours; unmold, take off the pork to smooth the surfaces neatly, then glaze and decorate with fanciful cuts of gherkin, red beef tongue and truffles dipped in half-set jelly. Dress on a bread croûton covered with ravigote butter (No. 512) and decorate around with chopped jelly and croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2548). "PAIN" OF PARTRIDGES à LA MONTGOMERY (Pain de Perdreaux à la Montgomery). Cut three raw partridges in pieces as for a sautéd chicken, fry with chopped fat pork, truffles, mushrooms, fine herbs, salt, aromatics and spices; when well done, put aside to cool, remove the meat and divide in half-inch squares, then pound and add nine egg-yolks, half a pound of foies-gras, and three-quarters of a pound of flour and milk panada (No. 121); when a smooth pulp is obtained press it through a sieve and mingle in six ounces of salted, unsmoked red beef tongue, nine ounces of truffles, and fifteen ounces of udder, all to be cut into three-sixteenths inch dice. Fill a plain oval dome-shaped mold six inches long by four inches wide with the preparation; cover with fat pork, and then set it in a sautoir with a little water and cook in a slack oven for three hours; turn it out after it is thoroughly cold, remove the fat pork, smooth the surfaces and set it in a larger mold decorated with truffles, coated with a light coat of white jelly (No. 103), and another one of white chaudfroid (No. 596); finish filling the mold with jelly, and when exceedingly cold invert it on a bread support two inches high covered with lobster butter (No. 580); surround with chopped jelly, and garnish around the support with jelly croûtons and cases of thrushes prepared as follows: Bone some thrushes, keeping one leg on each that must not be boned; stuff the birds with game forcemeat (No. 91), season with salt, pepper, mushrooms, parsley and truffles, all to be finely chopped. Then also cook some whole truffles, rounded to an inch in diameter, and when both of these are cold glaze the birds over with brown chaudfroid (No. 594), and decorate the leg with a favor frill (No. 10); lay the thrushes in oval cases, and the truffles in small round ones; arrange all of them around the support intercalating the birds and truffles. FIG. 517. An illustration of a "pain" with fancy cut truffles decorated on top of it. (2549). "PAIN" OF YOUNG RABBIT (Pain de Lavraut). Suppress all the meats from a young rabbit, also the skin and sinews, and use the bones to make a game fumet (No. 397). Fry in butter the large fillets, the minion fillets and the leg meats; as soon as they are cooked take them out of the sautoir. When cold pound the leg meats finely, adding the fillets, and minion fillets then pound again with half as much cooked foies-gras, season and rub through a fine sieve. Put this pulp into a thin metal basin, and beat it for a few moments with a spoon in order to have it smooth, and incorporate into it slowly three gills of brown chaudfroid (No. 594), some game glaze (No. 398), and melted gelatine. Try a little of this preparation on ice to judge its consistency, and if not correct thicken it at once by beating it for a few moments longer on the ice, while mixing in more melted gelatine add two ounces of fresh butter broken into small bits, and when of a proper consistency stir in a few spoonfuls of cooked truffles cut in dice pieces, and an equal quantity of red beef tongue cut the same. Pour the whole into a plain cylinder mold coated over with a little half-set jelly applied with a brush, and imbed the mold on chopped ice; harden the contents for a couple of hours, then unmold it on a cold dish; surround with chopped jelly and croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2550). ROAST LARDED PARTRIDGES (Perdreaux Piqués et Rótis). Truss two partridges after singeing, drawing and cleaning them well; lard them and roast either on the spit or in the oven. Let get cold, and when ready to use glaze them over with a brush dipped in game glaze (No. 398), and dress, either whole or cut up, on a dish and surround with jelly. (2551). PORK LIVER PIE OR TERRINE (Pâté ou Terrine de Foies de Porc). Terrine. --Take three pounds of the breast of fresh pork, chop it finely into a forcemeat; chop separately two pounds of pig's liver after soaking it in cold water and straining through a sieve. Put the whole into a vessel large enough to have all thoroughly mixed, add one-third of an ounce of salt for each pound and one coffeespoonful of pepper for the same quantity, prepared red pepper (No. 168), nutmeg to taste, a pinch of chopped parsley, a bay leaf, a pinch of thyme, six eggs and three and a half ounces of flour; stir the whole thoroughly until a very smooth paste is obtained. Line the bottom of one or several earthen jars, fit to be put in the oven, with slices of fat pork, then fill them with the paste; cover with another slice, having notched the fibrous parts; place it in the oven and let bake slowly. A terrine weighing four to five pounds requires three to four hours to bake. When done drain off the fat and replace it with good melted leaf lard, cover with a board and place a two-pound weight on top. After it is cold cover with a light layer of lard, and serve either in the same jar, or else cut it with a spoon. Pie. --The above preparation can also be made into a pie by baking it in a mold, proceeding as directed in No. 2557 . (2552). ROAST PEACOCK ADORNED WITH ITS PLUMAGE (Paon Rôti et Paré de son Plumage) Procure a young peacock with very brilliant plumage; cut off half of the rump with the tail feathers attached to it and spread them into a fan, then dry; also remove the wings with their plumage and the head with all the beautiful neck feathers as far down as the breast, including the skin; stuff the neck with wadding and insert a stiff wire in the middle to hold it in its natural position. Pick the peacock, draw, singe and free it of feathers; truss for roasting (No. 179) and stuff with a dressing made with a pound of soaked and well-pressed bread-crumbs, the same quantity of chopped beef marrow, and season with spices (No. 168), chopped shallot fried colorless in butter and raw liver chopped up finely. Cook in a moderate oven, basting over frequently with butter, and when cold dish it up on a carved rice socle; adorn it with its plumage; surround with chopped jelly and a border of jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ) and serve separately a cold poivrade sauce (No. 620). (2553). PHEASANT STUFFED à LA PRINCE ORLOFF (Faisan Farci à la Prince Orloff). Open a fresh pheasant through the back; bone it, leaving on the pinions and drumsticks, then season the meats. Take all the meat from another fresh pheasant and chop it up finely, mixing in an equal quantity of chopped fresh fat pork; season this forcemeat and add to it a quarter of its quantity of cooked foies-gras cut in large dice and as much truffles. Use this preparation to fill the boned pheasant, bring the meats together and sew it up, giving it its original form; truss and brush over with butter, then wrap it in a fine cloth, tying it well, and cook it very slowly for an hour and a quarter in good stock (No. 194a). Drain off the pheasant, untie and wrap it again in the same cloth after washing it, then let get cold. One hour before serving unwrap the pheasant, separate the back from the breast, cutting it off, then divide this in two lengthwise pieces; cut the two halves in transversal slices, reshape and put the breast back into its former place from whence it was taken. Cover the whole pheasant with a white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596) reduced with pheasant fumet (No. 397) and afterward thickened on ice. Place the pheasant on ice till needed and then decorate the pinions with paper frills (No. 10); now dress it on a small oval foundation covered over with white paper and fastened on a long dish; surround it with a thick cord of chopped jelly pushed through a pocket, and decorate the edges of the dish with jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ) and two clusters of medium-sized stuffed truffles. (2554). CHICKEN PIE--TO BE CUT UP (Pâté de Poulet pour Découper). Procure two oblong corrugated pie molds ten inches long, four inches high and four inches wide, buttered with cold butter; stand them on a sheet of buttered paper, and line with pie paste (No. 144). Bone thoroughly four tender chickens of about two and a half pounds each; suppress the fat and thigh sinews, also the minion fillets; season with No. 2 pie spices (No. 168). Put into a vessel some ham, tongue, truffles and fat pork, all cut in three-eighths of an inch squares; season and baste with Madeira wine. Prepare a forcemeat with one pound of finely chopped pork free from sinews, and one pound of fresh fat pork; mix together and chop once more; season. Cover the bottom and sides of the paste with this forcemeat, and fill the pie in alternate layers with chicken forcemeat and the salpicon, finishing the whole with forcemeat; cover with thin slices of fat pork; on top place a bay leaf and a sprig of thyme. Cover with a flat of the same paste, fasten both together, clip off the surplus paste around the edge, form and pinch a crest, and cover the whole with another flat made of puff paste parings (No. 146); egg over and cook in a slack oven for two hours. Should the crust brown too quickly, lay over a double sheet of wetted paper, and when the pie is done remove and let cool partly; fill it up with consistent jelly made from the fragments of chicken, and after the pie is thoroughly cold cut it into slices, and dress in a straight row on a cold dish surrounded by chopped jelly and croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2555). DUCKLING PIE à LA ROUENNAISE (Pâté de Canneton à la Rouennaise). Prepare two pounds of cold pie paste (No. 144), having it rather firm; let it rest for an hour and a half in a cool place. Cut off the pinions, legs and necks from two clean ducklings, bone them entirely, leave the fillets adhering to the skin, remove half the fillet through its thickness and lay on the skin that has no fillet, and detach the meat from the legs to suppress the sinews, then chop up finely; in with this mix a pound and three-quarters of boned turkey forcemeat (No. 65); pound both together for a few moments with four ounces of chopped truffles and four ounces of raw chopped ham, seasoning with No. 2 pie spices (No. 168). Place this forcemeat in a bowl and add to it a third of its volume of baked liver forcemeat (No. 64), passed through a sieve, also a few spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and half a pound of blanched fat pork cut in quarter-inch squares. Prick the skin of the boned ducklings with a larding needle and fill their insides with a part of the forcemeat, placing the liver well seasoned in the center; reshape the duck to its original appearance. With the bones and parings prepare a succulent stock. Place on a small baking sheet covered with strong, well buttered paper a smooth oval hinged mold; line this mold with two-thirds of the paste and cover the bottom and sides with thin slices of fat pork; on this place a layer of the forcemeat and set one of the stuffed ducklings on the bottom, then cover over with more forcemeat and another duckling on top, finishing with the remainder of the forcemeat, having it dome-shaped on the top, then cover with thin slices of fat pork and over this place a flat of the same paste; press it down on the base of the dome and against the projecting edges of paste to fasten the two together; cut away any surplus paste close to the edges and pinch it with a pair of pincers, or else decorate the dome with fanciful cuts of the same paste; cut a small hole exactly in the center, which is intended to act as a chimney for the steam to escape. Egg over the surface and set the pie in a moderate oven; as soon as it begins to brown cover over with paper and cook for an hour and a half. An hour after the pie has been removed from the oven pour in through the opening on top a few spoonfuls of duck fumet (No. 397) reduced to a half-glaze and mixed with a little Madeira wine and jelly; close the opening with a pad of paste. Half an hour later take off the mold and let the pie cool for twelve hours before serving. (2556). GAME PIE DRESSED à LA LESAGE (Pâté de Gibier Dressé à la Lesage). Prepare six pounds of cold pie paste, the same being described in No. 144; after it has well rested roll out three-quarters of it to three-eighths of an inch in thickness; raise the paste with the hands several times, leaving it rest between each; place it on a sheet of buttered paper, and when it attains the height of about six inches, is rounded and properly equalized, thicker on the bottom than on the top, then pinch on the outside a row toward the right, another toward the left, and wrap several strong sheets of buttered paper around and tie with several strings. Fill the bottom and sides with bards of fat pork, and on the bottom spread a layer of forcemeat made of three pounds of pork meat, one pound of young rabbit meat, four pounds of fat pork, six ounces of prepared No. 2 pie spices (No. 168), and ten egg-yolks. Having finely chopped and pounded all these ingredients together, spread a layer in the bottom of the pie, and over it place a boned pheasant with the inside meats larded with fat pork and ham, and seasoned with salt, pepper, nutmeg, chopped parsley, chives and chopped bay leaf, and filled with some of this same forcemeat. Bone twelve woodcock and prepare them the same as the pheasant. Cut into three-sixteenth inch squares some carrots and onions; fry the onions first in butter, add the carrots and the woodcock intestines; moisten with a little broth and Madeira wine, and as soon as done (that is, when the moisture is thoroughly reduced) pound all finely and press through a sieve; let stand till cold, then mix into it some of the above forcemeat, adding eight ounces of cooked lean ham cut in one-eighth inch squares, and four ounces of chopped truffle peelings. Fill the boned woodcock, and in the center of each lay a small peeled truffle. Place eight of these birds around the pheasant, cover with more of the forcemeat, and in the center set the four remaining ones, with whole truffles laid around, also eight partridge fillets larded with lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52), and seasoned; cover with more of the forcemeat to form a dome, and on this lay thin slices of fat pork and a little thyme and bay leaf on top. Wet the edges of the pie, and lay over a cover of the rolled-out paste; fasten both together, cut the crust straight, equalize it and pinch it all around; make a chimney on the top, place several rows of noodle paste (No. 142) leaves on, and in the center arrange a noodle paste artichoke made as follows: Take a flat of paste about one-sixteenth of an inch thick, fold it in two three times, then roll it in a ball an inch and a quarter across, make two cross-shape incisions half an inch deep on the centre of the ball so as to divide it in eight parts partly open to represent an artichoke; egg over several times and bake in a moderate oven for three or four hours; leave it to cool partly, then fill the pie either with game fumet (No. 397) mixed with jelly or with chaudfroid (No. 594) made with essence of game (No. 397) or else with fresh butter and lard mixed, half and half. Filling it in this way the pie will keep much longer. It will take nearly twenty-four hours to thoroughly cool off a pie of this size. (2557). GOOSE PIE à LA ADOLPHE HARDY--FILLETS (Pâté de Filets d'Oie à la Adolphe Hardy). The Crust for the Pie. --Make a pie paste with three pounds of flour and one pound of butter, as described in pie paste No. 144; keep it in a cool place to rest for two hours. Have a round, plain, bottomless mold six and a half inches in diameter by six inches in height; line it with some strong buttered paper. Roll out three-quarters of the paste to a round, eighteen inches in diameter and half an inch in thickness; dredge it with flour; fold it in two, and bring the two ends toward the center in the shape of a pocket; equalize the thickness of the paste by using the rolling pin. Line the unbuttered mold with it, pressing it against the sides, and having it a little thicker toward the bottom; leave for two hours on ice, unmold and pinch it all around, beginning at the bottom and inclining the pinching toward the left, and the second row toward the right; surround the pie by another mold, a quarter of an inch wider and a quarter of an inch higher than the last one; fill the bottom and sides of the pie with sheets of buttered paper, and fill it either with rice or very dry flour; cover over with a round of paper, wet the upper edges and over the top lay a flat of the same paste; fasten the two together and cut away the paste from the border, three-quarters of an inch higher than the mold; pinch it all around and on top; cut a hole in the center, and insert therein a cardboard tube, called a chimney. Decorate the cover or dome with leaves or flowers made of thin noodle paste (No. 142), brush with egg twice, and leave for one hour in the ice-box; form a small artichoke ( No. 2557 ) of exceedingly thin noodle paste; egg it over twice and bake it in a small noodle- paste ring. Bake the pie crust or timbale in a moderate oven for one hour, having it assume a beautiful color; as soon as done cut off the cover at the base of the dome by slipping a small thin knife between the two pastes; remove the cover, empty the inside rice and paper, and glaze the interior with a brush dipped in melted meat glaze. Terrine of Goose Fillets. --Have half a pound of the kernel or bottom round of veal, remove the sinews, chop and pound it up finely. Chop separately a pound of fresh fat pork, mix the two together, season with pie spices (No. 168), and pound the whole, incorporating in slowly one gill of stock (No. 194a). Lard some goose fillets with medium lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52); season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Cover the bottom and sides of a No. 3 terrine (about two quarts) with thin slices of fat pork, masking over with a layer of the above forcemeat; lay in the fillets more forcemeat and some small, whole, peeled truffles, having alternate layers, and finishing with forcemeat well rounded on top; cover with a bard of fat pork, then the lid, and cook for about an hour and a half in a slack oven; let get cold under a light pressure, leaving it on for twenty-four hours; unmold the terrine, suppress all the fat, and lay the contents inside the timbale or pie crust. Cook half a pound of leaf lard, half a pound of butter and the fat suppressed from the terrine; when clarified pass it through a strainer, leave to cool without having it set, then pour it into the pie; lay on the cover and finish filling with more of the fat. Pull out the cardboard chimney, range the paste artichoke on top, and let the pie get thoroughly cold in the ice-box for twelve hours. (2558). HAM PIE (Pâté de Jambon). Select a fresh, smoked ham, detach the kernel and under kernel; free these meats from their hard parts and cut them into inch and a half squares; if the meat be very salty it will require unsalting either in water or milk for a few hours before cutting up; lard each piece with a bit of truffle, passing it through from one side to the other. Melt half a pound of lard and when hot add to it the squares of ham and fry for a few moments only. Prepare a chopped forcemeat (No. 65); mix in four ounces of chopped truffle parings, pound the whole and add half a pound of lean and finely chopped cooked ham, and half a pound of fat pork cut in small three-sixteenths inch squares; season with red and white pepper, nutmeg and a little salt. Line a cold pie mold with short paste (No. 135), cover the bottom and sides of this with a layer of the prepared hash and fill the center, alternating the squares of ham with another layer of the hash; finish by giving it a dome form on top and cover with bards of fat pork; moisten the inside of the crest with a brush, then add a layer of paste; form this into a pretty crest, pinch the top and sides, egg over twice and range a puff paste (No. 146) cover over the whole, having it only a quarter of an inch thick; egg this twice also, score the entire surface and form a chimney in the center of the paste. Bake for three hours to three hours and a half. Should the pie brown too quickly cover over with strong, wetted paper. Two hours after removing it from the oven pour sufficient good jelly (No. 103) through the chimney to fill it well. (2559). HARE PIE IN A DISH (Pâté de Lièvre dans un Plat). Remove the meats from two young hares, keep the tenderloins and minion fillets apart and pare the remainder, suppressing all the skin and sinews; cut the meats into pieces and range them in a sautoir with half a pound of grated fat pork, the liver, the lights, and a tablespoonful of finely chopped onions; toss the whole over a brisk fire without letting it attain color, then take off to cool; chop and pound with three-quarters of a pound of grated fresh fat pork and four ounces of fresh pork tenderloins. Pare the reserved tenderloins and minion fillets, cut them in half-inch squares and add to them half a pound of peeled and cut-up truffles; season with salt and pepper and throw over a gill of Madeira wine and as much brandy. Two hours later put in the cooked meats. Line a deep pie dish, fit to go in the oven, with thin slices of fat pork, pour in the preparation and cover with a slice of the same pork, thyme and bay leaf, then lay over a foundation paste (No. 135) cover, egg it twice and bake in a moderate oven; when done allow to cool, remove both cover and pork, clean the dish, place on a folded napkin, then decorate the edges of the pie dish with a border of jelly croûtons and the center with chopped jelly. (2560). HARE PIE WITHOUT A MOLD (Pâté de Lièvre Sans Moule). Cut some large fillets from the back of a hare, divide them into good-sized square lardons (No. 1, Fig 52) and lay them in a vessel with as much fat pork cut exactly the same size and shape and a few raw truffles cut likewise; season highly and pour over a few spoonfuls of Madeira wine or brandy. Cut off the meats from the legs and shoulders, lay them in a frying pan with melted fat pork and an equal quantity of cut-up calf 's liver; season and fry over a brisk fire; as soon as the meats are brown remove to cool; pound and rub this through a sieve, then add this forcemeat to as much chopped fresh pork, raw, pounded and seasoned highly and mixed with cooked fine herbs (No. 385). Roll out on a flour ed table a flat of cold pie paste (No. 144) twenty inches long by fifteen wide; spread it on a baking sheet and cover the center with a layer of the prepared forcemeat, giving it an oblong shape; then alternate the garnishing and the forcemeat, the last layer being forcemeat, and cover this with thin slices of fat pork. Moisten the edges of the paste, fold over the flaps on the sides so as to enclose the contents, roll out the ends, moisten the top and bring these ends over on the center, wet again and cover with a three-sixteenths of an inch oval flat of puff paste (No. 146), sufficiently large to cover the pie; on this flat make small openings to act as chimneys; put in pasteboard cylinders to uphold the paste. Egg over the paste and score it with the tip of a small knife. Place the pie in a moderate oven to bake, covering the top with sheets of buttered paper, and let cook for two hours. A quarter of an hour after taking it from the oven pour into the holes a few spoonfuls of game fumet (No. 397) mixed with a little Madeira wine and melted jelly (No. 103), then set it aside to cool for twelve hours before serving. This same method may be employed for the preparation of chicken, game or fish pies. (2561). LAMB PIE-- LOIN (Pâté de Longe d'Agneau). Bone two loins and two shoulders of spring lamb; cut the loin meats into squares, lard them with larding pork and season with salt, pepper, nutmeg and spices. Chop up the shoulder meats free of all sinews and fat and add to it the same weight of fat pork, season with salt, pepper, nutmeg and spice, then pound the whole in a mortar, mixing in a little Madeira wine. Clean well and butter a pie mold, line it with ordinary pie paste (No. 144) and cover the bottom and sides with thin slices of fat pork; mask these with a layer of the forcemeat and place some slices of cooked ham on the bottom, then a layer of the forcemeat and the larded squares over, finishing with more forcemeat, having the mold quite full and rounded on the top; cover with bards of fat pork and in the center place a bay leaf and a sprig of thyme. Cover the pie with a flat of paste, having a raised edge on the border, pinch it all around and decorate the top with imitation leaves cut from puff or noodle paste and a paste artichoke ( No. 2556 ) in the center. Egg the surfaces and cook in a medium oven, then fill up with jelly when the pie is thoroughly cold. (2562). GOOSE LIVER PIE (Pâté Froid de Foies-Gras d'Oie). This cold pie, as shown in Fig. 518, is intended for very large suppers. Make a preparation the same as terrine of foies-gras, cook it in a long square-shaped tin mold and let get cold under a weight; keep it for five or six hours on ice. Butter a tastefully decorated cold pie mold, lay it on a baking sheet covered with strong buttered paper, and line it with foundation paste (No. 135) made with egg-yolks; cover the bottom and sides with buttered paper, and fill it up with common flour, then cover with another buttered paper, and close the opening on top with a flat of the same paste, FIG. 518. An illustration of a dish fasten with a pie mold that is filled with slices of pie in a ring form. The center of the ring is filled with chopped jellies. Triangular cut croutons of jelly are used to garnish around the base. fastening the two edges together; cut the top straight and pinch it prettily, then egg it over. Cook this paste for one hour and a quarter in a slack oven, so that it acquires a fine color, and as soon as it is removed open it by cutting the cover on a level with the edges and lift it off and empty out the contents; dry the inside for a few moments at a warm heater. When the crust is thoroughly cold unfasten the hinges of the mold so as to remove it, then glaze over the inside with a brush; cover the bottom with a layer of chopped jelly, and on this dress the terrine preparation cut in slices, having them in long squares of equal size and thickness; put the poorest ones at the bottom, and when this garnishing has reached nearly to the top finish filling with the prettiest slices, dressing them in a compact circle, and filling the inside of this with fine chopped jelly. Fasten the pie on a cold dish, surround the base with croûtons of jelly ( No. 2442 ), and on top of the chopped jelly lay a fine truffle, peeled and cooked in wine. (2563). GOOSE LIVER PIE, CUT UP (Pâté de Foies-Gras Découpé). This entrée is dressed on a crescent-shaped support, slightly circular, and made of tin; cover it with noodle (No. 142) or cooked paste (No. 131); this support should not be fastened on the center of the dish; being of a half-circular form it should stand at one side on the edge of the hollow center so that the garnishing can be dressed inside the crescent. Prepare a chopped forcemeat for game pie (No. 67); season it highly and mix with it an equal quantity of baking liver forcemeat (No. 86), pounded and passed through a sieve. Cut into large fillets one good raw foies-gras, set them in a bowl with raw, peeled and quartered truffles; season and pour over a few spoonfuls of Madeira wine or brandy. Butter a large cradle mold, line it with thin foundation paste (No. 135), and fill the bottom and around with the prepared forcemeat; on top of this range the foies-gras, fillets and truffles; cover over with more of the forcemeat, having it slightly rounded on the top, and set over this a flat of the same paste, fastening it well on the outer edges. Make a small opening in the center of the cover, egg it over, then lay this pie on a baking sheet and push it into a moderate oven to cook for one hour and a quarter, being careful to cover the paste with a buttered paper as fast as it browns. After removing it from the fire, pour into the opening a few spoonfuls of jelly (No. 103), mixed with a little melted glaze (No. 402) and Madeira wine. Before cutting the pie into slices it must be unmolded and kept for twenty-four hours in a cool place, so that the paste is slightly softened, otherwise it will be likely to crumble when cutting. Have the slices all of equal thickness, and dress them neatly in a half circle on the support. In the empty space it has formed range a tasteful cluster of round and peeled truffles cooked in wine and glazed over; surround these truffles and the pie with a thick piping of chopped jelly forced through a cornet. (2564). COLD STRASBURG LIVER PIE (Pâté Froid de Foie de Strasburg). Line a pie mold the same as No. 2557 . Prepare a forcemeat with half a pound of very fresh lean pork, and half a pound of exceedingly white and fresh lean veal, free of all sinews and fat, and both chopped finely and separately; chop up the same weight of fat pork, and a half pound of liver; pound and pass through a sieve; pound also half a pound of cooked lean ham with some FIG. 519. A plate fasten with a cylindrical pie mold that is dressed with a dome-shaped liver pie. Cubes jellies are used to garnish around the base of the mold. truffle peelings; rub this also through a sieve, and mix the whole together, seasoning with foies-gras spices (No. 168). Cover the bottom and sides of the pie with a thick layer of this forcemeat, place a fine well-seasoned goose liver in the center, then some peeled truffles, and cover with more forcemeat, rounding it well on top; finish the pie the same as No. 2557 , baking it in a slack oven for three hours or more, according to its size; when cold fill it with butter and lard mixed together. (2565). COLD QUAIL PIE (Pâté Froid de Cailles). Prepare a forcemeat as described in No. 67, and press through a sieve; mix into it a quarter of a pound of plain foies-gras cut in quarter-inch squares; have twelve small peeled truffles. Bone twelve quails, leaving them whole; season and fill with the above forcemeat, and in the center lay one of the truffles; enclose the contents well. Butter a low pie mold, line it with foundation paste (No. 135), and cover the sides and bottom with thin slices of fat pork; over this set a layer of the forcemeat, and then a bed of the quails on the bottom; on top of these place more forcemeat containing a salpicon of fat pork and red beef tongue, mixed with an equal quantity of the forcemeat, then another bed of the quails, and finish with forcemeat raised to a dome. Cover with a thin bard of fat pork, some bay leaves, and a flat of the same paste; smooth the summit; pinch all around and on top, and decorate the dome with noodle paste leaves; egg over twice, and bake the pie for two hours and a half; cool partly and then fill with jelly (No. 103) made of quail fumet (No. 397) and Madeira wine. (2566). COLD SALMON PIE (Pâté Froid de Saumon). Cut four pounds of fresh salmon meat into large fillets; season them with salt and pepper, and put them in a vessel with two or three raw truffles also cut in fillets; pour over a little Madeira wine and leave to macerate for one hour. With some raw pike or gurnet, the salmon parings, panada, butter or veal udder and egg-yolks prepare a delicate forcemeat (No. 90), and when strained place it in a vessel to beat smooth and mix in with it a few spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385), and the fish marinade. Butter an oblong metal pie mold selected proportionately to the quantity of fish and forcemeat, lay it on a baking sheet covered with paper and line it with cold pie paste (No. 144). Mask the bottom and sides of this paste with a layer of the forcemeat and in the hollow center dress the fillets of salmon and truffles, alternated by layers of forcemeat; the mold should be full so that when cooked there remains little or no empty space (the top layer must be of the forcemeat ). Wet the edges of the paste and cover over with a flat of the same, fastening it on the edges; then cut away the paste on a level with the mold and pinch it all around. Cover the top surface above the border with a fake cover--meaning a simple layer of puff paste (No. 146) cut the same shape as the top of the pie--and in the center of this make a small opening; egg over and decorate the top with designs made with the tip of a small knife, and cook for an hour and a half in a moderate oven, being careful to cover the paste with paper as soon as it becomes dry. A quarter of an hour after the pie has been removed from the oven pour into the hole on top a few spoonfuls of good jelly (No. 103) mixed with fish essence (No. 395) and reduced to a half-glaze, also a few spoonfuls of Madeira wine. Let it get cold for ten hours. At the last moment cut the pie into slices, and dress these, one overlapping the other on a long dish, and surround with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons. (2567). COLD SNIPE PIE (Pâté Froid de Bécassines). Peel and cook some truffles in a little Madeira wine, cut them in four and season; singe and bone ten snipe, season them, and with their intestines, a few good chicken livers, some fragments of ham and aromatic herbs, prepare a baking forcemeat (No. 64). Have a chopped game forcemeat (No. 67), pound and mix with it the baking forcemeat in equal quantity, a bit of garlic, and the truffle parings; force the whole through a sieve. With some cold pie paste (No. 144) line a low-hinged bottomless mold, place it on a baking sheet over buttered paper, and cover the bottom and sides with the prepared forcemeat; in the hollow center dress the snipe, alternated with more of the chopped forcemeat and the quartered truffles; pile up the mold, cover with thin bards of fat pork, then with a layer of the same paste, fastening it on the edge of the under paste; cut it away evenly and pinch the edges; make a small hole in the top of the dome and decorate the latter with a few imitation noodle paste leaves (No. 142), then egg over both top and border. Cook the pie for an hour and a half to two hours in a moderate oven; after it has been removed pour into the hole on top some game fumet (No. 397) and finish it the same as a duckling pie ( No. 2555 ). Let it be remembered that if all game pies, such as partridge, pheasant, reedbird, etc., have a slight bit of garlic mixed in with the forcemeat it will add greatly to the aroma, that is if it be not too predominant. (2568). COLD VEAL AND HAM PIE (Pâté Froid de Veau et de Jambon). Butter a large pie mold, line it with pie paste (No. 144), and lay it on a buttered paper, and this on a tart plate; garnish the insides with thin slices of fat pork. Fill the bottom and sides with forcemeat made with two pounds of fresh pork and veal, half of each, and two pounds of fat pork; season with salt, pepper and fine herbs; on this forcemeat lay slices of cooked lean ham, and over a layer of forcemeat; on this a layer of thick slices of kernel of veal larded with fat pork (No. 2, Fig. 53), and seasoned highly; put in more forcemeat with finely chopped lean ham; place slices of fat pork over, and a bit of thyme and bay leaf; cover with a flat of the same paste, forming a crest, pinch the edges and egg over twice; on top lay a cover of puff paste (No. 146); make a hole in the center to act as a chimney. Egg over twice; bake in a moderate oven for two hours and a half. To be well assured of its being done thrust a trussing needle through, and if it penetrates easily and comes out hot and dry, then the pie is sufficiently cooked; when cold fill with jelly. (2569). COLD WOODCOCK PIE (Pâté Froid de Bécasses). Bone six woodcocks, remove the pouches and gizzards, and fry the intestines by mixing in with them two pounds of game forcemeat (No. 67); pound and pass them through a sieve. Fry the fragments of the birds in butter with a small mirepoix of onions, carrots, thyme, bay leaf and celery root, all cut in small dice. Bone twelve larks, season and fill them with the boned turkey forcemeat mixed with their intestines previously fried in butter; press through a sieve, and season with fine spices (No. 168) and brandy. Line a pie mold with pie paste (No. 144); cover the bottom and sides with thin slices of fat pork, and at the bottom lay three of the woodcocks and six of the larks; then another bed of the forcemeat, the three other woodcocks and the six other larks; finish with more forcemeat and a bard of fat pork; wet the inside edge, cover with a flat of paste, and fasten it down; smooth the top nicely, pinch it all around and on the summit, and bake in a moderate oven; when cold fill the pie with partly cold jelly (No. 103) prepared with game fumet (No. 397). (2570). PIG'S HEAD (Tête ou Hure de Porc). Have a well scalded and cleaned pig's head, singe and bone without destroying the skin, beginning from underneath; fill it with layers of fine pork forcemeat (No. 68), placing on each one some lardons of fat pork (No. 1, Fig. 52), pistachios, truffles and quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which chopped-up ham has been mixed, and then rolled into the same sized pieces as the lardons. When the head is filled sew it up and reshape it as before, then wrap it in a cloth and cook in a stock (No. 194a) for four hours; unwrap and return it to the cloth to give it the shape of the head; unwrap once more, pare well, glaze over with meat glaze (No. 402), and dress on a low socle; put in glass eyes and place natural fangs in the mouth; decorate the head with tongue, hard-boiled egg-white and pistachios; surround with chopped jelly and a border of croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2571). LARDED PULLET WITH JELLY (Poularde Piquée à la Gelée). Break the breastbone of a not too fat pullet; fill in the breast and stomach with a large salpicon made of cooked veal udder, truffles and cooked foies-gras, mixed with a little fine galantine forcemeat (No. 65). Cut the legs from the pullet, truss, and steep the breast for two minutes in boiling water to stiffen the meats and facilitate the larding with lardons (No. 3, Fig. 52). Cook FIG. 520. A decorative dish with a foundation that served with a pullet. Chopped jellies are used to garnish around the pullet whereas round truffles are used to garnish around the foundation. the pullet in a little stock (No. 194a), basting over frequently; finally glaze it at the oven door. When cold untruss, detach the legs and cut each of them in two, then cut both breasts in slices and return them to their former place. Lay the pullet on a wooden foundation covered with white paper and fastened on a dish; rearrange the two pieces of each leg, thrusting a small hatelet through, in their original places, only in a contrary direction; on each pinion set a pretty favor frill (No. 10). Surround the pullet with a thick piping of chopped jelly forced through a cornet and the bottom of the dish with a row of round peeled truffles all of the same size, then cook in wine and glaze over with a brush. A mayonnaise with fine herb sauce (No. 612) can always accompany this cold piece. (2572). PYRAMID OF CRUSTACEANS à LA ROCHELAISE AND PYRAMID OF CRAWFISH (Buisson de Crustacés à la Rochelaise et Buisson d'écrevisses). To be able to dress this entrée correctly it will be found necessary to fasten a wooden foundation on a dish, having it two inches narrower than the basin of the dish itself; cover it with white paper and in the center attach a wooden support also to be covered with paper; this latter must be in the shape of a pyramid, its base measuring four and a half inches, its top two inches and its height four inches; cover its surface with a layer of butter. This pyramid or buisson is to be composed simply of large slices of lobster tails and of red shrimps, after suppressing their beards. The shrimps are stuck into the butter on the pyramid in regular circles, but having each row lay in a contrary direction; the slices of lobster are also laid in close circles just on top of the rows of shrimps. As soon as all are dressed cover both shrimps and lobster with half-set jelly applied with a brush. In order to insure its safety it is advisable to push a thick string of sticky jelly ( No. 2526 ) through a cornet, exactly underneath the circle of lobster slices, so as to give them a good support. The hollow formed by the upper row of shrimps can be filled in with chopped jelly or parsley leaves, or else with a crimped paper case filled with a round truffle. Surround the bottom of the dish with a chain of pretty jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ) cut into oblongs, having one overlap the other. Keep the buisson in a cold room and serve it with a sauce -boat of mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). FIG. 521. A decorative dish with a foundation is garnished with a chain of jelly croutons. Lobster tails and red shrimps are arranged pyramidically on top of the foundation. Pyramid of Crawfish. -- Crawfish intended for this dish should be chosen as large as possible and cooked in a white wine court-bouillon (No. 39), then left to cool in the stock. When cold break off the small legs. Generally a buisson of shellfish is dressed on a tin step shelf made with projecting ledges, each one furnished with hooks on which the crawfish can be hung; these ledges are movable and are placed at any desired distance from each other, according to the length of the fish, but there must be no openings left between. The pyramid ought first to be fastened on to the center of a large dish and the empty space filled in with parsley leaves or water cress; surround the base with a bush of green, then fasten on the crawfish by the tails, beginning at the lower ledge. Between the edge of the dish and the pyramid dress the remainder of the crawfish, laying them down flat with the heads turned outward and the claws hanging over. This pyramid after being dressed should be laid on a large tray; have this placed in the center of the table. The green and the pronounced red of the crawfish form a pleasant contrast for the eye to rest upon. (2573). SADDLE OF VENISON à LA HARDER (Selle de Chevreuil à la Harder). Roast to a fine color a medium-sized saddle of venison, after having marinated it for two days, and then larded it with lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52); glaze and let stand till cold, then raise up the sirloin part and cut it in pretty slices, either bias or lengthwise. Add to some Madeira poivrade sauce (No. 620) the same quantity of jelly; reduce, despumate and pass it through a tammy; put it away on ice to cool, stirring it incessantly in the meantime until very nearly cold, then dip each slice into this chaudfroid and restore them to their respective places, reshaping the saddle as originally, and entirely cover over with the chaudfroid; then dress on a long dish. Place around on a bed of jelly some artichoke bottoms, having some garnished with small carrot balls, others with turnips, others with cauliflower, others with string beans cut lozenge-shape, and others with English green peas; all of these vegetables to be cooked separately, cooled, well seasoned and mixed with a little jellied mayonnaise (No. 613). At the ends place two fine cauliflowers boiled in salted water and butter, left to cool in their liquid, then drained properly and laid in a vessel to have a seasoning poured over of oil, tarragon vinegar, salt and pepper; baste several times with this seasoning, then drain and cover with jellied mayonnaise. Around the whole lay a pretty border of evenly cut jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2574). SALMIS OF PARTRIDGES --COLD (Salmis Froid de Perdreaux). Roast two partridges, cut them up, being careful to have all the pieces nicely pared, and to suppress the skin, leaving on as little bone as possible; range these when prepared on a small baking sheet and keep them in a cool place; have also a round serving dish laid aside on the ice. Prepare a salmis sauce (No. 536) with the parings and bones; strain it into a small saucepan to cool, while stirring occasionally, then incorporate into it slowly two spoonfuls of Madeira wine and several more of good cold jelly (No. 103); beat this on ice to thicken as a chaudfroid sauce. Dip each piece of game singly into this sauce to envelop thoroughly; drain and dress in a pyramid form in the center of a cold dish, reserving the choicest pieces for the top; leave the entrée on ice for another quarter of an hour. Garnish the wings and legs with paper frills (No. 10), surround the base of the pyramid with chopped jelly or croûtons of jelly ( No. 2442 ), and small glazed truffles laid in cases. (2575). COLD SALMIS OF QUAILS à LA BALZAC (Salmis Froid de Cailles à la Balzac). Roast eight quails; remove the breasts and break up the legs and bones. Fry some shallots in butter, moisten with white wine and half-glaze sauce (No. 413); put in the broken-up carcasses and let simmer for twenty minutes, then strain through a sieve, and add two gelatine leaves, so as to thicken to a good consistency. Decorate some pigeon ballotine molds, the same as ballotines à la Madison ( No. 2427 ), with fanciful cuts of egg-white and tongue; coat with jelly and lay the breasts in the center; finish filling with the cooled-off jelly; unmold the ballotines, range them in a circle on a bread socle covered with green butter (No. 583), and fill the center with chopped jelly, and around with croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2576). SALMON DARNE, DECORATED (Darne de Saumon Historiée). Cut a darne or thick five-inch slice from the middle of a large salmon after it has been scaled, emptied and cleaned. Lay it straight on the grate of a fish -kettle, salt it over liberally and let it macerate for half an hour. Boil in court-bouillon (No. 38). (It should remain at the boiling point until cooked.) Leaving it in the fish -kettle until thoroughly cold, drain off the darne, then remove the skin, wipe the fish, and cover the surfaces with a thin layer of Montpellier butter (No. 582), softened to a proper degree. Slide the darne at once on to a wooden dish foundation covered over with white paper; smooth the butter well, and set it aside in a cool place to harden. Fill the hollow in the center of the darne with a variegated vegetable salad; decorate the top with strips of green butter alternated with mayonnaise, and decorate the sides with a fine relief wreath made of green and white butter, and ornamented with fanciful bits of gherkin, lobster and FIG. 522. A thick slice of salmon filled with vegetable salad at the center and is garnished with strips of green butter on top is dressed on a foundation. Hard-boiled eggs and chopped jellies are used to garnish around the base. Wreath, gherkin, lobster and truffles are used to decorate around the side of the salmon. cooked truffles. Surround the base of the fish with quartered hard-boiled eggs standing upright ( No. 2513 ), alternated with small clusters of chopped jelly or cooked green peas. Serve with a sauce -boat of mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). (2577). SALMON SLICED AND DECORATED (Tranches de Saumon Historiées). Take two two-inch slices from the middle of a large salmon; after cleaning them nicely lay them in salt for one hour; place them on the grate of a fish -kettle and cover profusely with cold water, adding to it a large sprig of parsley and a gill of vinegar; set the kettle on the fire, skim the liquid and at the first boil withdraw it to one side so as to have it quiver only for forty to forty-five minutes; let cool in the stock, then remove the fish with the grate and let drain for half an hour. Trim the slices, lift off the skin, wipe neatly, lay them on a baking sheet and cover the sides with a layer of Montpellier butter (No. 582); smooth it nicely and set aside on ice to cool. Decorate the sides and tops of these slices of fish with fanciful cuts of truffles, gherkins and hard-boiled egg-whites, being careful to dip each piece into half-set jelly before applying it. Dress the two slices on a thin wooden double support covered with white paper, and in the center of the dish on both sides arrange a cluster of macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ) dressed with mayonnaise (No. 606); on the salad lay a large cooked crawfish and surround the slices with halved hard-boiled eggs, having the yolks hidden under a round piece of truffle. On both ends of the support fasten two tasteful hatelets of red prawns, slanting them outward. Serve with the fish a separate mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). FIG. 523. A metal dish dressed with two thick slices of salmon. Fanciful cuts of truffles are used to decorate the salmon. Half hard-boiled eggs are garnished around the salmon, and two hatelets of prawns are fasten on each ends of the salmon. (2578). SLICE OF SALMON WITH JELLY (Tronçon de Saumon à la Gelée). Cut from the middle of a large clean salmon a slice ten inches long; salt it over well and lay it on the grate of a fish -kettle on the belly side; tie it down to the grate with a string to keep it in place, and cover it with cold white wine court-bouillon (No. 39); heat the liquid while skimming, and at the first boil withdraw it to one side so as to keep it quivering for one hour, then allow it to get partly cold in its own stock. Remove the fish with the grate and let it become thoroughly cold, then leave it to drain for a couple of hours; wipe it off very cautiously, leaving the skin as entire as possible; now slide the fish on an oval wooden foundation covered with white paper and fastened on a long dish; support the slice on both sides so as to maintain it level, and cover the surface with half-set jelly applied with a brush. Surround it with small artichoke bottoms or hard eggs, à la Develle ( No. 2502 ), fill with a vegetable salad ( No. 2650 ), and decorate around with jelly crusts cut in triangles; serve at the same time two sauce -boats of tartar sauce (No. 631). FIG. 524. A long slice salmon is placed on top of a foundation that is fasten on a metal dish. Half hard-boil eggs are used to decorate at each side of the salmon. Triangular cut jellies are garnished around the foundation. (2579). SALMON à LA AVELANE (Saumon à la Avelane). Prepare and cook a salmon the same as explained à la Déstaing ( No. 2580 ); when cold cover it with butter, then with several coats of jellied mayonnaise (No. 613). Decorate with fanciful cuts of jelly dipped in partly cold jelly, forming a medallion as shown in drawing. Coat over with a layer of jelly (No. 103) by means of a funnel having a handle and spring stopper ( No. 3654 ). Place the salmon on the socle and garnish both sides with halved eggs decorated with truffles; between these place small mounds of chopped jelly. FIG. 525. A whole salmon, served on a dish that is placed on a pretty mold. Decorative havled eggs are used to garnish along both sides of the salmon. (2580). SALMON à LA DESTAING (Saumon à la Destaing). Have a very fresh twelve to sixteen-pound salmon; dress, that is, scrape off the scales, suppress the gills, and empty it by making an incision in the belly; wash it very clean, pare off the fins, and lay the salmon on a fish -kettle grate, on its side, the head resting toward the left; cover with cold white wine court-bouillon (No. 39) and stand the kettle on a hot fire; remove it at the first boil, and keep the liquid at boiling heat, without allowing it to boil up, for one hour for a twelve-pound salmon, and one hour and a half for a sixteen-pound one. Let it cool off in its own stock, then drain well for two hours. Remove the skin and sanguineous parts in the center so that the meat itself is entirely exposed, then slide it on a board of its own dimensions. Place a small bread croûton, shaped like the tail (a slightly lengthened triangle), at the extreme end of the tail, it being shaved down to almost nothing; fill the empty part of the fish with butter. Work some butter in a bowl and when very white, smooth and frothy, use it to cover the entire fish; have a strong straight band of paper, one inch in width, pass it over the butter several times until smooth, following the outlines of the salmon, and let get thoroughly cold; now cover it with a sufficiently thick and smooth layer of half-set red jelly, decorate this with truffles, pistachios, hard egg-white, and the red part of lobster meat; imitate the eye, mouth and gills, covering it over with more jelly. Dress it either on a socle or large dish, and surround with small shrimp aspics molded in timbale molds (No. 2. Fig. 137), decorated with eggs and truffles, filling them with a salpicon of shrimp mingled with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), and fillets of sole, pared round. Cover with jellied mayonnaise, to which add chopped tarragon and chervil, then mask this over with jelly. Serve some mayonnaise sauce (No. 606) separately. (2581). SALMON à LA FARRAGUT (Saumon à la Farragut). Prepare and cook the fish as à la Destaing ( No. 2580 ); cover with creamy white butter and let it get thoroughly cold; on the central part lay a thin band of crawfish butter (No. 573), an eighth of an inch thick by ten inches wide, so as to entirely cover this part of the fish. Decorate the top with fanciful bits of truffles, crawfish tails, anchovies and tarragon leaves; when the fish is very cold, cover it over with light red half-set jelly, and place it on its socle or dish; garnish around with sixteen small crawfish tartlets prepared as follows: Make some tartlets with fine foundation paste (No. 135), and when cold fill them either with crawfish tails or oysters, clams, etc., that have been laid in a marinade, and then cover with half-set jelly. Between these tartlets place sixteen white onions about one and three-eighths inches in diameter, from which cut off about an eighth of the stalk end, and as much from the root end; blanch for five minutes in plenty of water, then refresh and cook slightly firm in white wine court-bouillon (No. 39); drain, empty, and fill them up with Cambridge butter (No. 570), or else marinate them for two hours in oil, vinegar, salt and pepper. Place these onions on round pieces of beetroot one inch in diameter, and empty them with a half-inch tube. Cut eight more onions in three even parts across and use only the two end pieces; blanch them in salted water and vinegar, drain and fill with jellied ravigote mayonnaise, made by mixing ravigote sauce (No. 623) with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); place them over the others, and arrange small sprigs of green water cress on top. A printanière mayonnaise sauce (No. 612) is to be served separately. (2582). SALMON à LA MODERN, ON SOCLE (Saumon à la Moderne sur Socle). The fish, as represented in Fig. 526, is laid on its belly on a long wooden foundation covered over with white paper; the foundation with the fish is placed on a socle, and this is standing on a large tray. Every part is movable and independent, so that the piece can be easily transported. The tray is made of wood of oval form, with rounded prolongations on each end; it stands on several feet; the body of the tray is simply covered with white paper, and it has an open-work, silvered border. The socle is oval and hollow, it being made of two pieces of wood, one wider than the other, but fastened together in the center by a solid wooden support; the outlines of the socle are made of small pieces of board, or simply of strong cardboard covered with a thin layer of modeling fat (No. 56). The ornaments on the frieze and base of the socle are white and modeled in fat. The waterfall forming the frieze is made in pieces, stamped in a plaster cast, and put together, and are upheld by a tin band projecting out all around the top of the socle. The balls can also be made in plaster casts in two separate pieces, then put together. The two small socles placed on the rounded ends of the tray can be made of fat on a mandrel, or else molded in stearine; they are movable but are held in place by a wooden peg fixed in the tray, and passing up through the base of the socle; each one of these is filled with macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ), dressed in a pyramid and surmounted by slices of lobster. To cook the salmon whole it should be drawn through the gills, after scaling, and the inside filled with an ordinary bread stuffing (No. 61), then trussed; fasten it erect on the grate of a fish -kettle with string; cover with white wine court-bouillon (No. 39); heat up the liquid, skimming it at the first boil, and leave it on one side of the fire to quiver for an hour to an hour and a half; remove and cool partly on one side of the fire to quiver for an hour to an hour and a half; remove and cool partly on the grate out of the water. Untie it when cold, drain and lay it on the oval foundation, supporting it in two places on each side with wedges and supports, so as to keep it in position. These supports are hidden under sprigs of parsley leaves, then brushed over with half-set jelly. The small trout which constitute the garnishing on the front of the tray are cooked au bleu, as directed in No. 1297, well drained and laid in two symmetrical rows on a bed of chopped sticky jelly ( No. 2526 ); they are then covered over with jelly the same as the salmon. These two rows of trout are separated by a cluster of round, peeled and cooked truffles after being covered with jelly (No. 103) or meat glaze (No. 402); this cluster of truffles may be replaced by one of red shrimps or simply by fresh parsley leaves. This dish as represented in the design is intended for a sideboard supper or a ball; it must be accompanied by four sauce -boats of mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). 4 1/2" Handwritten inscription. FIG. 526. A salmon laid on a foundation that is placed on top of a socle. This entree is then served with a tray which, has a rounded prolongations on each end. Three hatelets are fasten at the middle of the salmon. Small trouts and chopped jellies are placed around the tray. Socles surmounted by slices of lobster and are filled with salad are place at each end of the tray. (2583). SALMON à LA RéGENCE, ON SOCLE (Saumon à la Régence sur Socle). Arrange and cook the salmon the same as for Destaing ( No. 2580 ); cover with a very smooth layer of white butter, then with one or two coats of jellied mayonnaise (No. 613). When cold decorate to imitate the head of the fish and ornament the surface with small truffle crescents graduated in size, or else with a large oval medallion about half the length of the salmon. Let the fish be very cold, then cover with a coating of half-set jelly; lay it on a socle and garnish around with a border of halved eggs filled with macédoine ( No. 2508 ); between this border and the fish place lettuce hearts cut in four. Serve a well-seasoned printanière mayonnaise (No. 612) with the salmon. (2584). SALMON à LA SEYMOUR (Saumon à la Seymour). Have a salmon prepared and cooked the same as Destaing ( No. 2580 ); carefully suppress the skin and the brown parts of the meat; fill the inside with butter and cover with several layers of pale pink jelly; decorate with fanciful cuts of egg-white and pistachios and garnish around with marinated lobster escalops covered with white jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), on which strew truffles, gherkins and egg-white, each of these to be chopped up separately; then mask with jelly; decorate with basket-shaped eggs ( No. 2508 ); also have lettuce hearts cut in four and at each end place green water cress. Accompany this fish by a sauce -boat of ravigote mayonnaise sauce (No. 612). (2585). SALMON à LA COURBET (Saumon à la Courbet). Have the salmon already prepared and cooked the same as the Destaing ( No. 2580 ); cover it with softened and smooth crawfish butter (No. 573) and decorate through a cornet; dredge the whole surface lightly with lobster coral chopped exceedingly fine and sifted through a sieve. Lay the fish on a socle and garnish around with lobster escalops covered with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613) and strew the surface with finely chopped truffles; between the escalops place clusters of fine large shrimp tails covered with jelly, and between each moscovite egg garnishing ( No. 2511 ). Insert in the fish three hatelets composed of crawfish and decorated quenelles. Serve a mayonnaise cardinal sauce (No. 608) at the same time. (2586). SALMON, RUSSIAN STYLE (Saumon à la Russe). Prepare and cook the salmon the same as for Destaing ( No. 2580 ); cover with white butter, then with mayonnaise (No. 606), into which stir as much slightly dissolved jelly (No. 103); cover it well through a funnel the same as explained for à la Avelane ( No. 2579 ) and scatter over truffles, egg-white, lobster coral and parsley, all finely and separately chopped. Imitate the eyes and gills and garnish around with Polish eggs ( No. 2512 ), and between each egg place large oysters, blanched, marinated and covered with a white chaudfroid (No. 596). Decorate the intersections with lettuce and water cress and serve with a sauce -boat of tartar sauce (No. 631). (2587). SALMON, VENETIAN STYLE (Saumon à la Vénitienne). Cook and prepare the salmon the same as the Destaing ( No. 2580 ); cover it with ravigote butter (No. 583), and lay over this on its entire surface one or several beds of jellied mayonnaise (No. 613) of a light green shade; decorate with gherkins, capers, branches of chervil and tarragon leaves, imitate the eyes and gills and cover the whole with a thin layer of jelly. Dress the fish on a dish or socle and garnish around with paupiettes of smelts laid over some artichoke bottoms; between these put quartered eggs ( No. 2513 ); intersect clusters of water cress and lettuce hearts cut in four and chopped jelly. Decorate with three hatelets, two of shrimps and one of crawfish. A green mayonnaise sauce (No. 612) accompanies this salmon. (2588). SALMON, WITH MONTPELLIER OR CAMBRIDGE BUTTER (Saumon au Beurre de Montpellier ou au Beurre de Cambridge). The salmon must first be prepared and cooked the same as for the Destaing ( No. 2580 ); cover it either with Montpellier butter (No. 582), or Cambridge butter (No. 570); decorate through a cornet and in the center form a medallion; lay here and there olives, capers and sliced pickled gherkins, and garnish around with trussed crawfish, lettuce hearts, water cress and hard eggs cut as barrels ( No. 2507 ), also oysters covered with ravigote jelly. Serve a remoulade sauce (No. 624) separately. (2589). SLICED SHEEPSHEAD WITH JELLY (Tranches de Sheepshead à la Gelée). Cut off two fine slices of raw sheepshead, salt over and leave to macerate for one hour. Fry in butter or oil a root and a minced onion; add root mirepoix with aromatics, parsley and a clove of garlic; moisten with white wine court-bouillon (No. 39), having plenty of it so as to cover the fish well, and boil the liquid for an hour, then strain. Put the slices of sheepshead into a deep earthen dish, suitable to be placed in the oven, cover over with the marinade stock and then with a strong paper; allow the liquid to boil up once before pushing the dish into a slack oven to cook the fish slowly for twenty minutes. After taking it out drain off the slices, remove the skin and lay them in a deep serving dish; strain the stock, lift off all the fat from the surface and mix in with it the same amount of very thick aspic jelly (No. 103) and a dash of good vinegar; pour this into the dish containing the fish and decorate the top with thin slices of lemon. After the jelly has become hard serve the fish accompanied by a sauce -boat of grated horseradish, mixed with a little good cream. (2590). SHELLS OF CAPON WITH JELLY (Coquilles de Chapon à la Gelée). Cut up into small dice the white meats of a capon; put them in a bowl with a third of their quantity of cooked mushrooms cut the same size; season with salt, oil and vinegar, and let macerate for half an hour, then drain off the seasoning and put the salpicon into a mayonnaise (No. 606), stirring into it two spoonfuls of gherkins likewise cut in dice pieces. With this preparation fill some shells, have the tops bomb-shaped and cover over with a thin layer of mayonnaise, then smooth the surface with a knife, decorate the top with fanciful cuts of truffles, gherkins and some beets; dress the shells on a folded napkin with sprigs of parsley in the center. (2591). SHELLS OF PERCH OR RED SNAPPER (Coquilles de Perche ou de Red Snapper ). Cold shells are prepared with the same materials as the hot shells, using the cold meats of perch, red snapper, salmon, bass, sole, halibut, turbot, lobster or crawfish, the manner of preparation differing only. Cut the cold fish into small three-eighths of an inch dice and put them into a bowl with a third as much cooked mushrooms, as many truffles and a few spoonfuls of gherkins cut the same as the fish; season with salt, oil and vinegar and let macerate for a quarter of an hour. Drain the seasoning from the salpicon and replace it by a jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), and with this preparation fill up the shells, smoothing the surface to a dome and covering them over with a layer of the same mayonnaise; decorate the tops with details of smoked salmon, truffles, egg-white and gherkins, cut out with a column tube. Surround the base of each one of the domes with a string of chopped jelly pushed through a cornet. (2592). SOCLES AND ORNAMENTS (Socles et Ornaments). These socles, as represented by Fig. 527-528, are made on a stand covered with modeling fat (No. 56) and cut out with a knife, then ornamented either through a cornet or else with a border of fanciful pieces stamped in a mold or molded. These two socles, although differently ornamented, are both constructed on the same principle and on the same plan. FIG. 527. A socles made on a stand is covered with modeling fat and is ornamented through a cornet. Three oval galantines garnished with fanciful cut truffles are placed on the center of the socle. A small statue of bird is fasten on top of the eggs. Small socles are intended for decorating a sideboard of small dimensions; they can also be placed on a dinner table, either to figure as a center-piece--should there be no other--or at the ends of the table if there be two, but in that case it will be necessary to have the upper garnishings and decorations dressed on a dish, instead of being directly on the socle, so they can be readily removed and handed to the guests. In either case the socles should be fastened on a large dish or tray. FIG. 528. A socles made on a stand is covered with modeling fat and is ornamented through a mold. Cases of game are arranged in a ring form in the middle of the mold. A statue of a man is fasten on top of the cases. Each socle stands on a solid, wooden, hollow drum that answers for a base; on top of the socle is another low-shaped drum, also made of wood and covered with white paper, having in its center a thin wooden support forming a pyramid and arranged in such a way that it can afford a perfect support to the garnishings; this support has on its top a small platform on which can be laid any desired object or subject. FIG. 529. An illustration of a pretty stand. The garnishings on the first of these socles ( Fig. 527) is composed of small cold chicken or partridge galantines made oval, then cut up, reconstructed and covered over with a blond chaudfroid (No. 596). They stand almost upright, leaning against the central support, but to be more assured of their safety it were advisable to inclose each galantine on the bottom with a solid wooden or cardboard shoe, the shape of a horseshoe. The galantines are decorated after they are dressed, and are then covered with the half-set jelly. Exactly on top of these galantines lay a row of small paper cases filled with truffles, and fasten them against the central support. On the platform above is set a small modeled or cast subject. The base of the small drum on which the galantines rest is surrounded by a row of round, even-sized truffles, peeled and glazed over with a brush. FIG. 530. An illustration of a mold with the statues of four satyrs seated on the rocks. An oval socle with jelly-liked entree placed on top of the satyrs. The garnishings for the second socle consist of seven or eight large crimped paper cases shaped into half- hearts, pointed on one end and rounded on the other. These cases are filled with a frothy foies-gras preparation made the same as for pheasant cutlets, smoothed dome-shaped and covered with brown chaudfroid sauce (No. 594). The figure on top represents a satyr seated on a rock, under which is laid a row of small cases containing truffles. The base of the small drum on which the garnishings repose may be decorated with small cases of truffles or with fine jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). Let it be observed that the garnishings for these socles can be modified or replaced by others. (2593). SOLES à LA MAZAGRAN--FILLETS (Filets de Soles à la Mazagran). This entrée is to be dressed on a wooden foundation fastened to a dish having a pyramidical wooden support in its center, both to be covered with white paper. First prepare a small variegated macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ); let it macerate for two hours in its seasoning, then drain it off, and dress the salad with thick mayonnaise (No. 606), and keep it on ice. Suppress the shells from the FIG. 531. A wooden foundation is fastened to a dish with pyramidical support in the center. Slices of fillet are placed around the support and triangular cut jellies are decorated around the foundation. Two claws and tails are used to garnish the top of the fillets. claws and tails of two lobsters simply cooked in a court-bouillon (No. 38), and left till cold; split the claws in two through their thickness, and brush over with half-set jelly, so as to be able to fasten them together again; also divide the tail meats into several slices from top to bottom, and wet each slice with half-set jelly, so as to be able to reshape them as before; keep these tails and claws on ice. Cook the fillets of three soles in a baking tin with white wine court-bouillon (No. 39), and as soon as done drain and range them on another baking tin and cover over with buttered paper; let cool off under a weight, then pare them all of the same length, not too freely, suppressing only the thin ends. Take the fillets up one by one, dip them into a white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596), reduced with a part of the stock they are cooked in, and range then once more on the same tin, keeping them a slight distance apart; cool them off on ice, and then cut away the surplus sauce. With the prepared salad, mingled with the fragments of lobster tail, cover the pyramidical support all around so as to increase its thickness, but keeping it in the same shape; smooth and cover over with a layer of jellied mayonnaise (No. 613). Against this pyramid dress the fillets of soles standing upright, one overlapping the other, and cover them with half-set jelly put on with a brush. On top of the pyramid dress the two prepared claws and tails, surround them with a thick string of chopped jelly to keep them in position and cover them as well with the half-set jelly. Place all around the bottom of the dish even-sized fine jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ), and keep the dish for ten minutes on ice, then serve with a separate mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). (2594). STURGEON OR STERLET, LIVONIENNE--SMALL (Petit Esturgeon ou Sterlet Livonienne). Clean the fish and put it in a fish -kettle to moisten with white wine court-bouillon (No. 39); boil and leave to cool off in its stock, then dress it on a dish, having carefully preserved the fish perfectly whole; let get thoroughly cold in the ice-box. Cover over with half-set jelly or else with fish -glaze (No. 399) and crawfish butter (No. 573); decorate it around with trussed crawfish, herring paupiettes (No. 789), cucumbers stuffed with vegetables, gherkins, olives, chopped jelly and croûtons. Serve a mayonnaise ravigote sauce (No. 612) at the same time. (2595). SWEETBREADS à LA MIRABEAU (Ris de Veau à la Mirabeau). Braise (No. 12) the sweetbreads first, and as soon as done put them in the press ( Fig. 71) or under a light weight; cut them in two on their thickness; with a two inch in diameter pastry cutter cut out some round pieces, cover with blond chaudfroid (No. 596), and decorate each with a handsome rosette of very black truffles; cover over with half-set jelly, and range them on top of a macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ), dressed with mayonnaise piled into a high dome; have a border of jelly croûtons around, and serve tartar sauce (No. 631) separately. (2596). TERRINE OF DUCKS ' LIVER à L'AQUITAINE (Terrine de foies De Canards à l'Aquitaine). Put two and a half pounds of fat ducks ' liver in a terrine, after removing the gall, seasoned with foies-gras spices (No. 168) and larded with large fillets of raw truffles. Pound the truffle parings with five ounces of fresh chopped fat pork and six ounces of very white lean veal or pork meat, free from sinews, also chopped up finely, and four ounces of raw lean ham, adding the liver parings, salt and spices. Infuse a piece of cinnamon stick in a little Madeira wine, pass it through a sieve and mix it with the forcemeat, also six spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385); season the whole to perfection. Cover the bottom and sides of a medium No. 3 terrine with thin bards of fat pork, lay on a bed of the prepared forcemeat and then range in the livers, pressing them closely together mask over with a thick layer of the forcemeat and cover with a thin bard of fat pork; set on the cover and place the terrine on a small raised-edge baking pan containing a little hot water; push it into the oven to bake for an hour; remove and lay it away to cool with a light weight on top; when thoroughly cold fill it to the edge with lard and butter, melted together. This terrine is to be served either whole, by suppressing the fat, or by unmolding it on a dish without cutting it up and merely removing the fat pork and grease, or else in the terrine itself. Decorate with chopped jelly and croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2597). TERRINE OF KERNEL OF HAM (Terrine de Noix de Jambon). Raise the kernel from a fresh ham; suppress the rind and lard with large lardons (No. 1, Fig. 52), seasoned with salt, pepper, nutmeg and parsley. Put it in a vessel with carrots, minced onions, a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123), salt, pepper and Madeira wine; let macerate for forty-eight hours in a cool place, turning it over frequently. Cover the bottom and sides of a terrine that can stand the oven with chopped forcemeat (No. 68); lay the kernel in the center, cover with more forcemeat and the whole with bards of fat pork; put on the lid and place the terrine in a deep baking tin containing water; push into a slack oven for three hours; remove, place a round of wood fitting the inside of the terrine over and a light weight on top; when cold, remove this round of wood and cover the surface with chopped jelly; then serve. (2598). TERRINE OF HARE (Terrine de Lièvre). Choose a fresh-skinned and c lean hare, remove the fillets from the back, the minion fillets and the kidneys, reserving these apart. Take the meat from the shoulders and legs and chop it well; mix with it an equal quantity of boned turkey forcemeat (No. 65), and an equal quantity of baking forcemeat (No. 64); mix well. Pare the large fillets from the hare's back; cut them up into big squares and put into a vessel with the minion fillets and kidneys cut likewise, adding as much blanched fat pork cut the same, a few raw truffles and a piece of foies-gras; season these meats and pour over a few spoonfuls of brandy and Madeira wine, then let macerate for a few hours. Select a proper-sized cooking terrine, cover the bottom and around with thin slices of fat pork and fill it up in layers, intermingling each layer of forcemeat with a bed of the squares prepared before-hand, and finishing with forcemeat on top; cover the whole with fat pork. Set the terrine on a baking pan with a little hot water and let bake for one hour and a half to two hours in a slow oven; after removing, put it away in a cool place, with a weight laid on top, for three-quarters of an hour at least, and serve it only after twenty-four hours has elapsed; remove the fat from the top, and garnish with chopped jelly and croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2599). TERRINE OF LARKS (Terrine de Mauviettes). Bone two or three dozen larks; season, cook a part of the intestines with fat pork and then pass them through a sieve. Prepare a pound and a half of chopped galantine forcemeat (No. 66), place it in a vessel and mix in with it a few spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385), chopped truffles and the intestine pulp. Spread the larks on the table and lay in each one a forcemeat ball. Line a terrine used for cooking and proceed to fill it exactly as described for terrine of ducks ' liver à l'Aquitaine ( No. 2596 ). Bake slowly for an hour and a quarter; let it cool, pressing it slightly half an hour after it leaves the oven; when cold garnish with jelly. (2600). TERRINE DE NéRAC (Terrine de Nérac). Cut off the feet and wings from a medium-sized partridge; bone and season with allspice (No. 168); take out the liver and carefully remove the gall from it, then pound and mix it to pound again with half a pound of chopped pork forcemeat (No. 68). Cut up some cooked ham, some tongue, truffles, fat pork, and the minion fillets taken from the partridge, in quarter-inch square pieces; mix all in with the forcemeat, and with it fill the boned partridge, proceeding the same as for a boned chicken ( No. 2485a ). Line a terrine of the same capacity as the boned partridge (one that can be placed in the oven) with slices of fat pork; on top of this set a layer of the pork forcemeat, and then put in the partridge with the breast downward; finish filling up with truffles and more forcemeat, and lay slices of fat pork on top. Set the cover on and fasten it all around with strips of paper dipped in a flour and water paste; bake it one and a half to two hours, more or less, according to the size and thickness of the terrine. After removing and unfastening it put inside a smaller cover that can easily enter the top, to take the place of its own, and press lightly under a weight; drain off all the grease arising over the inside cover which is used for pressing it, and when the contents are perfectly cold remove the small cover and pour back the grease previously removed, and after this has cooled off cover the whole with melted lard. Return the original cover to the terrine after washing it well; fasten it on again with pasted tin foil and keep it in a cool place. When wanted for use take off all the grease, unmold, dress and garnish around with chopped jelly, or it may be served in its own terrine. (2601). TERRINE OF PLOVERS AND LARKS (Terrine de Pluviers et Mauviettes). Take off the fillets from eight plovers; remove their skin, lay them in a vessel and season with salt and spices, and moisten with a little brandy and Madeira. Detach and cut up the leg meats; put four ounces of fat pork in a sautoir, and when melted add the intestines without the gizzard and pouch; fry all together over a brisk fire with half a pound of chicken livers, the cut-up leg meats, and some chopped shallots and mushrooms; when this is cold pound it with an equal quantity of chopped-up fresh fat pork, and press the preparation through a sieve. Cover the bottom and sides of a terrine with thin bards of fat pork; over this a layer of forcemeat; fill the center with the skinned plover fillets; on this lay a layer of the prepared forcemeat; on this some larks boned and stuffed with game forcemeat made with a pound of game, the same of fat pork, a few truffles and pistachios, and small squares of ham; now place another layer of the forcemeat, more fillets, and so on until the terrine is quite full; all these ingredients should be well seasoned; range on top a bard of the fat pork and the cover; put it in a low saucepan containing a little water; cook in a moderate oven for an hour and a half, and when the meats are done press down lightly, and set it aside to cool. Fill the terrine with melted butter and lard, half of each, and use only when cold. (2602). TERRINE OF PORK LIVER (Terrine de Foies de Porc). Procure two pounds of the whitest pork liver, three pounds of fresh fat pork, four ounces of onion and one ounce of shallot, both chopped very finely and separately, four ounces together of salt, pepper, fine spices (No. 168), and a little powdered thyme, six ounces of flour, one ounce of truffles, one ounce of pistachios, and two ounces of tongue, these three latter to be chopped separately. Work the whole well together to obtain a compact paste, then divide it into three parts. Line the inside of a terrine with thin slices of fat pork, place in it one of the parts, and on it lay a bed of quarter of an inch squares of fat pork, then another one of the parts of forcemeat, another layer of fat pork squares, and on these the third or remaining part. The terrine should be filled to one inch below the edge, then covered with bards of fat pork; place a bay leaf on top, and set on the cover. Push the terrine into a moderate oven, standing on a baking sheet, and when cooked remove and lay a round of wood on it the size of the inside of the terrine; place under the press so as to press it down lightly, and leave it thus to cool for twelve hours. (2603). TERRINE OF SNIPE (Terrine de Bécassines). Bone two snipe, divide each one in two parts and lay them in a dish with five or six peeled and cut-up truffles, and as much cooked ham fat, or fat pork; season the meats and truffles highly and pour over a little Madeira wine. Take the meat from the leg of a hare, cut it in pieces and fry in a saucepan with double its quantity of chicken or game livers until well done, then add the birds' intestines and leave to cool; chop this up with a third as much raw and chopped fresh pork, and then season the whole; put it in a mortar to pound with the same amount of fresh fat pork previously chopped and pounded with the truffle parings; add to this forcemeat a pinch of prepared spices (No. 168). Five minutes later set it in a vessel and incorporate with it the Madeira wine used for marinating the snipe. Cover the bottom and sides of a terrine with slices of un salted fat pork and these with a layer of the prepared forcemeat; range the pieces of snipe, truffles and ham in the center, alternated with the remainder of the forcemeat; the terrine should now be quite full. Smooth the top with a knife and cover with slices of fat pork; put on the lid and set it in a baking pan with a glassful of hot water; push it into a moderate oven to cook for an hour and a half. When the water in the pan evaporates pour in some more, and when done take it out and leave to cool partly, then set a light weight on top, and when thoroughly cold take the contents from the terrine, divide in two across, return one-half to the terrine, cut up the remaining half into oblong pieces and dress them again in a circle in the same terrine. Garnish the center with chopped jelly. (2604). TERRINE OF WILD RABBITS (Terrine de Lapins Sauvages). Cut off the limbs of two or three wild rabbits previously skinned, cleaned, and the meats nicely wiped; bone the four limbs and the back, cut the back fillets in pieces, also the meat from the legs, and lard them with shreds of raw ham and bits of truffles; lay them in a vessel to season with pulverized wild thyme, and pour over a few spoonfuls of brandy or Madeira wine; let macerate for two or three hours, adding a few spoonfuls of cooked fine herbs (No. 385). With the minion fillets and the nicest parings prepare a forcemeat, mix with it an equal quantity of baking forcemeat (No. 81), and to this dressing add the marinade from the meats. Cover the bottom and sides of a cooking terrine with a layer of the prepared forcemeat, then begin to fill it with the pieces of rabbit intermingled with large lardons of foies-gras and truffles, both raw, but seasoned, and alternate the forcemeat with layers of the meats; cover the top with forcemeat and thin slices of fat pork over all. Set the terrine into a deep baking pan containing hot water, and bake for one hour and a quarter to one hour and a half in a moderate oven; after it has been removed one quarter of an hour set a weight on top and allow to cool off. (2605). TIMBALE OF PHEASANTS WITH TRUFFLES (Timbale de Faisans aux Truffes). Remove the meat from the breast of two raw pheasants. Chop up the fleshy part of the legs with one fillet and the carcass parings, and with it mix an equal quantity of fat pork, a few raw truffles and fragments of foies-gras; pound well and pass through a sieve. Cut into large squares the remaining breast meats and lay them in a vessel with as much cut-up raw foies-gras; season highly and pour over a few spoonfuls of Madeira wine; keep this in a cool place for two hours. Butter a large dome-shaped mold, broader than it is high; line it with cold pie paste (No. 144) and cover with a layer of the forcemeat, filling the empty space with the contents of the vessel; cover the top with a thick, well-rounded layer of the same, and then lay several slices of fat pork on all; close up the aperture of the mold with a flat of the same paste, fastening it to the edges, and in the center bore a small opening. Now lay the timbale on a small-sized baking sheet and let it cook for about an hour and a half in a slack oven; after it has been removed for a quarter of an hour pour into the hole two or three gills of brown chaudfroid (No. 594), reduced with pheasant fumet (No. 397) and Madeira wine, and let it cool for twenty-four hours before unmolding. When ready to serve invert it on the table, lift off the mold and cut from the bottom a slice about an inch thick, then begin cutting the dome into even slices, not too thick, from the top to the bottom; restore these to their original shape on the piece cut from the bottom. Dress the timbale on a wooden foundation attached to a dish and covered with white paper; have small holes perforated at equal distances around the edges of this foundation and into these stick a dozen small hatelets, each one being garnished with two peeled truffles, one larger than the other. On the summit of the dome insert another hatelet garnished with large truffles; surround the foundation either with handsome jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ), or else with slices of pie cooked in a cradle mold. FIG. 532. A foundation fasten on a dish is surrounded with handsome jelly croutons on the base. A dome-shaped timbale is placed on the center and a dozen of hatelets are fastened around the foundation. On top of the dome, a hatelet garnished with large truffles is inserted. (2606). BEEF TONGUE à LA ROCHEFORT (Langue de Bœuf à la Rochefort). Prepare and cook a tongue, as explained in red beef tongue, No. 2608 ; after it is cold cut away the entire center of the tongue, as in the accompanying design ( Fig. 533); cut this part into slices, reconstruct and glaze it nicely with a brush dipped in partly set jelly. Set it on a plain or carved rice foundation; ornament the ends of the tongue with fanciful cuts of truffles, egg-whites, and pistachio nuts; on the foundation place a shell made of grease, filled with slices of foies-gras, and FIG. 533. A beef tongue set on a rice foundation is served in a metal dish. Cubes of jellies are garnished around the foundation. Carrot balls and chopped jellies are decorated at one end of the tongue. Two hatelets are sticked at one side of the tongue. chopped jelly sprinkled over; stick two garnished hatelets in the thick end, and at the tip of the tongue a croûton of jelly laid in tiers ( Fig. 465), one on top of the other. Garnish the sides with glazed carrot balls, and the ends with chopped jelly; surround the socle with chopped jelly and croûtons of jelly cut in squares. (2607). RED BEEF TONGUES ARCADE (Langues de Bœuf écarlate en Arcade). Prepare and cook the tongues in water, lay them in a mold having the shape of a tongue two and a quarter inches thick, then place them under a weight to get cool; pare, and cover them with a brown chaudfroid (No. 594) and decorate with designs of egg-white, truffles and pistachio nuts. Mask the decoration with a partly solidified jelly, and arrange these tongues on a silver-plated support, as represented in the accompanying Fig. 534; garnish around with chopped jelly and a border of jelly croûtons. FIG. 534. A mold having the shape of four tongues is placed on a silver-plated support which, has four angel statues on each corner. The beef tongues are laid in the mold and a vase-liked hatelet is fastened on the center of the mold. (2608). RED BEEF TONGUES, SMOKED (Langues de Bœuf écarlate Fumées). Cut off the windpipes and prick the tongues with the point of a trussing needle; rub over with pulverized saltpetre, mingled with as much brown sugar, and place them in an earthen or wooden vessel between layers of white salt, with thyme, bay leaf, basil, juniper berries and cloves. Put a board over with a weight on top; turn them after three days and cover so that the air cannot enter and repeat the operation every three days during the period of twelve. To cook, place them in a stock pot after washing in several waters; cover with a sufficient quantity of water to allow them to swim, adding a bunch of parsley garnished with two carrots and two onions; boil slowly for an hour to an hour and a half until thoroughy cooked, which can be ascertained by inserting the point of a trussing needle deep into them; remove from the stock and wrap in a wet cloth; leave to cool, then dress them in a circle leaning against a croûton with the tips downward; garnish with jelly and serve. (2609). RED BEEF TONGUES WITH JELLY (Langues de Bœuf écarlate à la Gelée). Cut away the fat and cartilaginous part from six beef tongues, wash and wipe them well, then prick them with a larding needle; rub each tongue over, using half an ounce of saltpetre for each one. Lay them in a bowl, covering them with a layer of salt; set a board over with a weight on top, and leave them there for twelve hours, then range them in an earthen vessel or wooden tub. Cover them with a brine prepared as follows: Have eight quarts of water and one pound or more of salt; test the brine, to see whether it be strong enough, by putting in an egg or potato, and if it floats on the surface then the brine is sufficiently strong. Boil it, adding half a pound of brown sugar, and let get cool before pouring it over the tongues; leave them in this pickle for twelve to fifteen days, setting them in a very cool place, and laying a board over with a weight on top so as to keep them continually under the brine, turning them over in it every three days; when they are to be used, place them in plenty of cold water, and set on the fire to boil for three or four hours according to their size; when done plunge them into fresh water, remove their skins, press them down under a weight, trim them nicely, then cut out the entire center of the tongue, leaving a piece underneath and at both ends; cut this square piece into thin slices, return them to their original position, then glaze the tongue with meat glaze (No. 402); dress it on a dish over a layer of bread spread with green butter (No. 583), and decorate it through a cornet with the same butter. Garnish around with chopped jelly, having a border of nicely shaped jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). (2610). CALVES ' TONGUES à LA MACéDOINE (Langues de Veau à la Macédoine). Cook six calves ' tongues, salted as the beef tongue No. 2609 , in salted water for eight days, and unsalted in fresh water for six hours; when done remove and lay them to cool under a weight. After suppressing the skin, pare them rounded at the thick end, and cut the two surfaces off straight, then split each one lengthwise in two or three, brush over with meat glaze (No. 402) and cover with a little half-set jelly to give them brilliancy. Besides this prepare a vegetable macédoine with Brussels sprouts, small clusters of cauliflower, balls of potatoes and carrots, string beans sliced or cut in lozenges, asparagus tops and green peas; all of these vegetables should be blanched separately; season the salad and form it symmetrically into a pyramid on the middle of a dish. Dress the halved tongues upright in a circle around with their pointed ends upward, and surround the whole with jelly, serving a tartar sauce (No. 631), or cold ravigote (No. 623) apart. (2611). BROOK TROUT à LA CARêME (Truites de Ruisseau à la Carême). Scale, wash and draw the fish without opening their bellies; wrap them up in sheets of buttered paper and cook them in a white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); when done, drain, unwrap and remove the skin carefully. Lay them in a deep dish, one beside the other, placing them very straight; strain the stock over and allow to cool off thoroughly in this, then take them from the liquor, wipe dry, dress and cover one-half with white jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), and the other half with green ravigote (No. 623) mixed with jellied mayonnaise. Decorate the tops with egg-white, truffles, anchovy fillets, gherkins and pistachios; surround with chopped jelly and croûtons, and serve a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606) at the same time. (2612). TROUT WITH JELLY, TARTAR SAUCE (Truites à la Gelée, Sauce Tartare). Let the fish be very fresh for it loses its best qualities when kept from the water or on ice for any length of time. Clean the fish through the gills without opening or scaling it. Lay it on the belly side on the fish grate, cover with cold and strained white wine court-bouillon (No. 39), heat the liquid and skim; at the first boil withdraw it to one side, so that it quivers for fifteen minutes. Remove the fish with the grate, and let drain for a couple of hours, then slide it on a wooden foundation concealed by white paper and fastened on a large dish; support the fish upright, so it will not fall, and cover over with slightly reddened cold jelly; garnish the two ends with clusters of shrimps and surround the foundation with jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ); fill up the spaces between the fish with bunches of fresh parsley leaves or chopped jelly; serve tartar sauce (No. 631) with the fish. FIG. 535. A trout laid on a foundation is served in a metal dish. Triangular cut jellies are garnished around the foundation. On each end of the trout, two clusters of shrimps are sticked on it. (2613). TURBOT à LA RéMOULADE (Turbot à la Rémoulade). Place some slices of turbot cooked in a court-bouillon (No. 38), in a deep dish; pour over oil, vinegar, salt, pepper and chopped parsley. Decorate a border mold ( Fig. 138), with fanciful cuts of egg-white, truffles, pistachios and red lobster meat; cover these with a thick layer of jelly (No. 103), and fill it up with shrimps dressed with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); unmold when the border becomes very firm, and fill the center with a pad of rice, or of veal and mutton fat, half of each; lay the pieces of turbot on top, having suppressed all the bones and skin therefrom; cover the fish with remoulade sauce (No. 624), mixed with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613), and serve separately a sauce -boat of remoulade sauce. (2614). TURKEY à LA STEVENS--STUFFED (Dinde Farcie à la Stevens). Fry one onion in two ounces of butter with four ounces of fresh mushrooms chopped up; season with salt, nutmeg, fine pepper, parsley, thyme and bay leaf; moisten with half a pint of white wine, and set it on a slow fire to let fall to a glaze, then dilute with very thick and well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407), strained through a tammy and cooled off. Put this into the mortar gradually with the same amount of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), and with a spoon mix in some truffles and red beef tongue, cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, and pistachios. Bone the breast of a young turkey, fill the empty space with the above dressing, truss it and wrap it up in several sheets of buttered paper, then put it to cook in an oval-shaped saucepan lined with bards of fat pork, and moisten to half its height with a mirepoix and white wine stock (No. 419); it requires fifteen minutes cooking for each pound of turkey when stuffed. Half an hour before serving untie the turkey and let it assume a fine color, then remove and lay it on a dish to cool off. With the stock prepare a jelly and use for making some small aspics of foies-gras ( No. 2412 ), molded in timbale molds (No. 2, Fig. 137), and garnish around with them, placing them on chopped jelly and surround with jelly croûtons, and stick on the top three or five hatelets; trim the drumsticks with favor frills (No. 10), then serve. (2615). TURKEY IN DAUBE à LA VERNEUIL (Dinde en Daube à la Verneuil). After picking, singeing and drawing a large turkey, lard it with lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52), seasoned with salt, pepper, nutmeg, chives and pulverized thyme and bay leaf. Line a braziere ( Fig. 134), with slices of fat pork, raw lean ham, carrots, onions, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, a clove of garlic, a gill of brandy and two split calf 's feet or knuckle of veal; lay in the turkey. Boil, skim, then set the braziere in the oven for three or four hours until perfectly cooked. Blanch and cook separately some turnip balls three-eighths of an inch in diameter, and some short sticks of carrots one inch long by three-eighths of an inch in diameter. When the turkey is cooked put it into an earthen or a tin vessel, strain the stock over and when three-quarters cooled remove the FIG. 536. An illustration of a decorative molded daube placed on the middle of a plate. Three hatelets are fastened on top of the daube and triangular cut jellies are decorated around it. bones and skin from the meat. Mold the daube in a mold about one inch shorter and narrower than the mold to be decorated, placing in layers of turkey, calf 's feet, truffles and pistachios. Decorate the larger mold, the shape of the one in Fig. 536, with the carrot sticks cut lengthwise in two and the rounded side applied to the sides of the mold, and the turnip balls also cut in two and the convex side applied; the half lozenges on top to be of turnips and the smaller lozenges above of truffles, below which place a row of small green peas. Coat the decoration and fill the bottom with jelly, and when hardened unmold the smallest mold and place it in the decorated one. Fill up with cold liquid jelly, let get thoroughly cold on ice, and when sufficiently firm unmold on a cold oval dish; garnish around with chopped jelly and triangular jelly croûtons dressed upright. On top fasten three hatelets and on the first platform range a symmetrical border of jelly squares all around. (2616). TURKEY OR GOOSE IN DAUBE (Dindon ou Oie en Daube). Draw a turkey cock; singe and lard it with large lardons (No. 2, Fig. 52); season with salt, pepper, nutmeg and chives, then stuff it with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), into which mix quarter-inch squares of red beef tongue and lean ham. Place the turkey in a braziere lined with slices of fat pork, carrots, minced onions, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme, bay leaf, a clove of garlic, a gill of brandy and a split knuckle of veal. Boil, skim and simmer gently and allow to braise for three and a half to four hours. Blanch separately some carrots and small onions, both trimmed into five-eighths of an inch balls, and when the turkey is partly cooked remove it from its stock, strain the liquid, wash the saucepan, and return the turkey to it with its strained and skimmed stock; range around the carrots and onions and finish cooking the vegetables and turkey slowly. When well done, drain, untruss and lay it in an oval stone or tin vessel with the vegetables around, pour the stock (which should be sufficiently consistent to form a jelly) over and let cool off, then unmold the turkey on a long cold dish; surround the base with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons ( No. 2442 ). A goose in daube can be prepared the same way as the turkey. (2617). YOUNG TURKEY BREASTS, GUSTAVE DORé (Filets de Dindonneau à la Gustave Doré). Raise the breasts from two turkeys; remove the minion fillets and the skin, and sauté them in butter and lemon juice; set them separately under a weight to cool, then pare and cover over twice with white chaudfroid (No. 596), the same as for chaudfroid of turkey Périgord ( No. 2462 ). Decorate with cuts of truffles, and cover with half-set jelly. Pare the four minion fillets, remove the light skin, and the sinews, and range them in a buttered sautoir, one beside the other, shaping them like crescents; cover over with buttered paper, and poach in a hot oven for a few moments, then cool them off and coat over with a brown chaudfroid (No. 594). Cut some slices of unsmoked red beef tongue three-sixteenths of an inch thick, and from these pare slices the same shape as the minion fillets, and cover them with jelly. Dress the turkey breasts on a cut-out rice support, and around a pad of bread covered with green butter (No. 583); decorate around this support with finely chopped jelly, and on it lay the minion fillets and tongue intercalated, and outside of the jelly place some triangular-shaped croûtons ( No. 2442 ), cut much longer than their width. On top of the support have a vase made of vegetables, filled with small stuffed mushrooms, as explained in No. 2517 . (2618). WILD BOAR'S HEAD, DECORATED (Hure de Sanglier, Décorée). Cut off the head of a wild boar or wild pig at the neck, near the shoulders; singe and scrape carefully; when well cleaned bone it, beginning under the lower jaw, and when thoroughly boned rub it over with four ounces of salt and one of powdered saltpetre. Lay the head in a vessel with thyme, bay leaf, basil, mace, cloves, juniper berries and carrots; leave it in two days, rub it over once more and let remain six days longer; drain, open, suppress all the aromatics, remove the greater part of the meats, and cut these into half-inch squares. Have a pound of truffles in a vessel with a pound of pork minion fillet cut in half-inch pieces, the boar's tongue and a calf 's tongue, both to be pickled (No. 15), cooked and cooled under a weight, then cut in three-eighths inch squares; also have a pound of blanched fat pork cut up the same size, and a quarter of a pound of green pistachios; season highly and mix these ingredients with a forcemeat prepared with two pounds of lean pork, a pound of lean veal and three pounds of fresh fat pork, the whole chopped finely and forced through a sieve. Fill the head with this preparation, close and sew up the aperture, fill the mouth with carrots so as to keep it open, cut off the ears and cook them separately in stock (No. 194a), keeping them firm; tie the head in a cloth and boil it for five hours over a slow fire; set it to cool for half an hour, unwrap it and reshape the head as near as possible by wrapping tightly around it a linen band, beginning at the snout and finishing at the base of the head; press lightly; when entirely cool unwrap. This head may be shaped in a specially made mold, then unmolded and glazed. Reconstruct the head with imitated eyes and fangs, and glaze over the well-pared ears with meat glaze and fasten on with skewers; lay it on an oval stand made of rice, in two parts, the lower part one and a half inches high the top part one inch high; on the edge of the lower one place a wreath of oak leaves; garnish the lower tier with truffles in paper cases and the base with chopped jelly and croûtons, and ornament the head with some hatelets. FIG. 537. A boar head is laid on a two tiers foundation and is served on a metal dish. On the lower tier, chopped jellies and croutons are used to garnish around it. Truffles in paper cases are used to decorate the upper tier. Two hatelets are fastened on top of the head. Head Cheese. -- Salt a pig's head for three days in a light brine or in sea salt; cook it in remoistening (No. 189), with onion, thyme and bay leaf added. After it is done bone it entirely and cut the meat into half-inch squares. Also cut a few slices from the fatty cheek part and with them line a square tin mold. Put the squares of meat in a receptacle sufficiently large to contain them, and mix together; add four finely chopped shallots, pepper, nutmeg, a soupspoonful of chopped parsley, a glassful of good white wine and a pint of melted jelly (No. 103); mix all together. Pour all of this into the larded mold, place it in the oven and let cook slowly for half an hour. Remove and cover with a board, having a pound and a half weight on top. Cut in slices and serve cold. (2619). WOODCOCK à LA VALèRE (Bécasses à la Valère). Roast six woodcocks; let them get cold, then raise the fillets from them all; suppress the skin and pare into the form of half- hearts, all the same size. Pound the remainder of the meats and the insides, from which the gizzard and pouches have been removed and to which half as much foies-gras has been added, the whole fried in butter. With this forcemeat mash the fillets on the side that adheres to the breast-bone. Put the broken bones into a saucepan with half a pint of white wine, a bay leaf and a minced shallot; let simmer slowly for half an hour, then run it through a fine sieve; add this fumet to an espagnole reduced to the consistency of a sauce, then add some jelly, cool on ice, stirring continually, and when the chaudfroid is sufficiently consistent cover the woodcock fillets; after it becomes quite cold cover with half-set jelly (No. 103), pare and dress on a dish in a circle on a nicely carved rice foundation, one and a half inches high. Lay chopped jelly around and garnish the center with some salpicon tartlets made of foundation paste (No. 135), cooked white and filled with a salpicon of game, red tongue and mushrooms, mingled with a little brown chaudfroid (No. 594). Surround with jelly croûtons of two shades alternated, brown and white --the former made of brown jelly and the latter of white. COOKED SALADS (Salades Cuites). (2620). DRESSINGS OR SEASONINGS FOR SALADS, TARRAGON AND CHILI VINEGAR (Assaisonnements pour Salades, Vinaigre à l'Estragon et au Poivre de Chili ). Rémoulade Sauce, Piementade with Tomatoes, Tarragon and Chili Vinegars. --The quantity of salad to be seasoned and the necessary proportions must be taken into consideration when using these dressings. When a salad is served no oil should ever remain at the bottom of the bowl; the quantity of oil varies according to the salad. It generally takes three to five spoonfuls of oil for one of vinegar. This can be varied according to taste. Americans do not like the taste of oil in which the taste of the olive is prominent, and therefore prefer a neutral olive oil. When a salad is prepared away from the dining-room it is better to put the salt and pepper in a bowl, dissolve them with the vinegar, add the oil and mix well; then pour this over the salad, and stir it in a common salad bowl before removing it to the one intended for the table, this being a much cleaner method. There are glass decanters for mixing the seasonings, adding to them an egg-yolk and a little mustard; shake this well, and by so doing a light mayonnaise is obtained that can be poured over the salad. Another way is to put the salt and pepper into a spoon, add the vinegar, mix with a fork, pour it over the salad and afterward the oil, or else put the salt and pepper into the salad, stir, then add the oil, stir once more and lastly pour in the vinegar, stirring it well again. Tarragon Vinegar. --Fill a two-quart jar two-thirds full with layers of tarragon leaves, shallots and onions; pour over some very strong vinegar and use it two months later, filtering it before doing so. Chili Pepper Vinegar. --Put into a quart jar half its height of Chili peppers, cover with strong wine vinegar, and three months later it can be used, either with the peppers or filtered. (2621). ASPARAGUS SALAD (Salade d'Asperges). Cut the tender parts of asparagus into pieces of equal length and tie them in bunches, then cook them in salted water and leave them to get cold. A few minutes before serving mix them in a bowl with a third of their quantity of pared crawfish tails; season with salt and pepper. Rub through a sieve the yolks of six hard-boiled eggs, dilute this with oil and vinegar, and pour over this sauce the asparagus and crawfish, then arrange the salad symmetrically in a salad bowl and add the seasoning to it. (2622). BAGRATION SALAD (Salade à la Bagration). Have some very white lettuce leaves, some anchovies, marinated tunny fish, stoned olives, beetroot cut small, minced gherkins and escalops of lobster. Season the lettuce leaves and lay them at the bottom of a bowl; also season the other ingredients with a little mayonnaise (No. 606), lay them on top of the lettuce, and dredge over and around a border of chopped truffles to decorate. Place on top quartered hard-boiled eggs, in the center a pretty lettuce heart, and around this some chervil, tarragon, water cress, parsley, burnet and chives, all chopped up very fine and divided into six parts, arranging them tastefully around the lettuce heart. (2623). BEEF SALAD WITH TOMATOES (Salade de Bœuf aux Tomates). Scallop or trim in slices some cold boiled or braised beef, pare the pieces round-shaped, and season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, also very finely cut-up chervil and chives; lay all on a plate or salad bowl, giving it a dome-shape, and garnish around the salad with peeled and quartered tomatoes. (2624). CAPON SALAD à LA MORTIMER (Salade de Chapon à la Mortimer). Have a cold roast capon, cut off the thighs and the breasts; suppress all the skin, fat and bones. Divide the meat into slices three-sixteenths of an inch thick, and these into round pieces an inch in diameter; lay them in a deep dish, and season with salt, pepper, oil, vinegar and mustard. Now put into a salad bowl half a pound of salted cucumbers, half a pound of potatoes , a quarter of a pound of minced red radishes, a quarter of a pound of celery or celery knob, all being minced up very fine; season with salt, pepper, oil, vinegar, chopped chervil and tarragon, and mix thoroughly. Cut into eight pieces sufficient artichoke bottoms to form a border, dip the tips of each piece into finely chopped parsley. Prepare rounds of truffles one inch in diameter by one-eighth of an inch in thickness; arrange the vegetables at the bottom of a a cold dish, lay the capon on top, cover with a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606), and surround the whole with the artichoke bottoms; inside this border lay symmetrically the slices of truffles, and inside of these slices of beetroot cut smaller than the truffles, and on top of the beets smaller bits of gherkin; finish the center with a small cluster of truffles. Send this salad to the table to show the guests before removing it to stir and serve. (2625). CHICKEN SALAD, AMERICAN STYLE-- CHICKEN MAYONNAISE (Salade de Poulet à l'Américaine--Mayonnaise de Poulet). Cook a four-pound chicken in some stock (No. 194a); the time allowed for this varies considerably, according to the age of the chicken, but the usual length of time is about two hours. When the chicken is done put it into a vessel, pour its own broth over, and let it cool therein; remove it, and begin by lifting off all the skin and white parts from the breasts; cut the meat into dice from five to six-eighths of an inch, and lay them in a bowl, seasoning with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar. Chicken salad may be prepared either with lettuce or celery, the latter being generally preferred. Choose fine white celery, wash it well, drain and cut it across in one-eighth of an inch thick pieces or else in Julienne; dry them in a cloth to absorb all the water remaining in them. Put at the bottom of a salad bowl intended for the table some salt, pepper, oil and vinegar; mustard can be added if desired; mix the seasoning in with the celery. For lettuce prepare an ordinary lettuce salad. Lay the pieces of chicken on top, and cover the whole with a layer of mayonnaise sauce (No. 606); decorate the surface with quartered hard-boiled eggs, anchovy fillets, olives, capers and beets; place some lettuce leaves around, and a fine lettuce heart in the center. Chicken Mayonnaise. --Cut into five pieces a roasted chicken weighing two pounds and a half, remove the skin and pare nicely. Season the chicken the same as for No. 2625 ; two hours later toss it in the vessel with jellied mayonnaise (No. 613) and dress it pyramidically without any green salad; cover with jelly mayonnaise, and garnish around with halved eggs, olives, capers, anchovies, beetroots and chopped jelly. (2626). MIGNON SALAD (Salade Mignonne). Pare four heads of endive or escarole that are not too large, suppress the outer leaves, and wipe the others well without washing them; cut either of these salads across in two parts, put the upper part of the leaves in a bowl, cut up the other half into large Juliennes, and season with salt, pepper and some fine oil. Cut in medium Julienne four peeled truffles cooked in wine, season them also with salt and oil, cut up the same as the truffles two breasts of chicken cooked in butter and lemon juice without attaining a color; let them get cold and lay them on a plate. Shell four hard-boiled eggs, rub the yolks through a sieve and set this in a bowl, diluting with some mayonnaise (No. 606), a good spoonful of mustard and a dash of vinegar; add one after the other, first the truffles, then the endives, and lastly the chicken breasts, all previously drained of their seasoning. Dress the salad in a salad bowl, and decorate the top with truffles, beetroot, gherkins and lobster coral. (2627). CHICKEN SALAD WITH VEGETABLES (Salade de Poulet aux Légumes). Cut up a large roast chicken into eight pieces, four from the breasts and four from the legs, suppressing the pinions and carcass; remove the breast bone and the second joint bones, then cut the meats and the fillets each in two or three pieces, taking off the skin; put them in a vessel to season with salt, oil and vinegar. Prepare a macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ), cut in small dice; for instance, carrots and turnips blanched and cooked in stock (No. 194a), also green peas and string beans boiled in salted water. After all these vegetables have been cooked and drained lay them in a bowl and season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar; mix in some cut-up gherkins and beets, and let macerate for one hour. Drain off the seasonings and finish with mayonnaise, slightly thickened with jelly (No. 606). Dress the chicken and the vegetables in a dome-shape on a cold dish; cover this with a layer of the same mayonnaise, and decorate near the top with a row of sliced truffles; divide the dome between the truffles and the bottom into panels by means of round slices of gherkins. Surround the base of the dome with slices of beets and potatoes , overlapping. Garnish the top with string beans . FIG. 538. A bowl filled with chicken and vegetables that are arranged in a dome-shape. String beans are garnished on top of the dome. (2628). CRAB SALAD (Salade de Crabes). Cook some crabs as explained in bisque of crabs (No. 198); pick the meat from the shells and put it on the ice; serve when very cold, seasoned with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar; sprinkle over the whole some finely cut-up chives and chervil, also some chopped lobster or crab coral. (2629). CRAWFISH SALAD à LA MAINTENON (Salade d'écrevisses à la Maintenon). In order to dress this salad in an elegant manner, and with a required solidity, it is better to fasten a wooden bottom to the dish, covering it with white paper and having on the upper outer edge a small wooden or cardboard ledge, and in the center a thin support equally covered with white paper. Detach the tails from the bodies of six or eight dozen large, cooked crawfish; suppress the tail shells and claws. Pare the meat from the tails, put it into a bowl, and season with salt, oil and vinegar; empty the crawfish bodies, and rub the insides through a sieve. Stuff about fifteen of these bodies, when well cleaned, with a salpicon composed of poached oysters and cooked truffles; mix in with it the meats from the claws, and the parings from the tails, and stir in a good white chaudfroid sauce (No. 596). Let the preparation become firm by keeping the stuffed bodies for half an hour in the refrigerator. Cut in small quarter-inch squares some cooked and cold fillets of sole and salmon, also some anchovy and herring fillets, some marinated tunny- fish, poached eggs, potatoes and salt cucumbers; put this salpicon into a bowl, and season it with salt, oil, vinegar and mustard, then let macerate for one hour. Drain off the seasoning, and add to it a mayonnaise with jelly (No. 613). Dress it dome-shaped on the wood fastened to the dish, and let it get firm for a quarter of an hour in the ice-box; remove the dish from the ice, and cover the dome with a layer of jellied mayonnaise (No. 613). Stick in the crawfish tails one by one, with the point of a larding needle so that they lay symmetrically against the dome in two graduated rows; cover them at once with half-set jelly, and garnish the hollow of the second or top row with a bunch of green leaves or a bunch of chopped jelly. Send a sauce -boat of mayonnaise (No. 606) to the table at the same time. FIG. 539. A dish dressed with crawfish tails in a dome-shape. A bunch of green leaves is sticked on top of the dome. (2630). CRAWFISH SALAD WITH JELLY (Salade d'écrevisses à la Gelée). Detach the tails from the bodies of several dozen cooked crawfish; suppress the shells from the tails and largest legs; pare the meats, season, and keep them covered. Prepare a macédoine salad ( No. 2650 ), cut into small dice, add to it the legs and parings of shrimps, also cut in dice; season with salt, oil and vinegar, and let marinate for one hour. Select a plain border mold with a narrow cylinder, imbed it in broken ice, and decorate its sides with eggs cut in two, alternated with some small vegetable balls dipped in half-set jelly; fill up the empty space in the mold gradually with some partly cold jelly (No. 103). Drain the salad on a sieve, lay it back into the bowl and mix in with it a jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); stir it on ice for a few minutes. Unmold the border on a cold dish; place into the cylindrical space a wooden foundation of exactly the same diameter, having on the center a light upright support, both being covered with white paper; lay the salad around this support, giving it a pyramidical shape, smooth the surfaces, and cover it with a thin layer of thick jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); keep for two minutes on ice. Stick in the crawfish tails one by one, using a larding needle for the purpose, first dipping them in half-set jelly, then fasten them to the salad in three graduated rows, each one laying in a different direction, and forming a pyramid. As soon as each row is finished coat it over with some half-set jelly to consolidate it; in the hollow of the third or top row lay a pretty lettuce heart, and serve a sauce -boat of mayonnaise sauce (No. 606) at the same time as the salad. FIG. 540. Three layers of molded crawfish is placed in a dish pyramidically. Chopped jellies are garnished around the base. A lettuce heart is placed on top of the pyramid. (2631). FISH SALADS (Salades de Poissons). These consist principally of perch, trout, turbot and salmon. For these salads the fish must be boiled or cooked in a court-bouillon (No. 38) beforehand, so that they are cold when needed for use. They can also be made of sautéd fillets of fish; in either case the skin and bones must first be removed. Put the fish into a bowl and season it with salt, oil and vinegar; it is generally arranged shaped as a pyramid on a cold dish, alternating and upholding the pieces of fish with a mixed cooked vegetable salad ( No. 2650 ) cut in quarter-inch dice or balls five-sixteenths of an inch in diameter. When the salad is dressed, smooth the surface, and cover it with a layer of mayonnaise with jelly (No. 613), then let it get firm for half an hour in a cold place, decorating it afterward with pieces of pickled cucumber and truffles. Surround the base with halved hard-boiled eggs, standing upright one against the other, after cutting off a quarter of their length on the round end, so as to enable them to stand erect against the salad. A row of small lettuce hearts cut in four, and simply salted, may be arranged above the eggs, and also fasten a lozenged cut of very red and thin beetroot over the cut end of the egg, on top of the yolks ( Fig. 492). Instead of an egg border, one of jelly may be substituted, decorated with shrimp tails, hard-boiled eggs, crawfish and stoned olives. (2632). FROG SALAD (Salade de Grenouilles). Have one pound of very white medium-sized frogs, cooked in a little mushroom broth, and seasoned with salt, pepper, butter and lemon juice; when cold cut the meats into three-eighths of an inch squares, and put them in a vessel with cooked artichoke bottoms, potatoes and hard-boiled eggs, all cut the same size as the frogs; season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and macerate for fifteen to twenty minutes. Drain the salad on a sieve, return it to the vessel, and dress it with a consistent mayonnaise (No. 606), finished with mustard and chopped tarragon; arrange it in a salad bowl, smoothing the top to a dome. Split some lobster claw meat in two, season and form into a rosette in the center of the salad; decorate around with truffles and gherkins, having a lettuce heart exactly in the middle. (2633). HERRING SALAD WITH POTATOES (Salade de Harengs et Pommes de Terre). Wash four salted herrings, soak them in milk for several hours, then drain and dry them. Remove the fillets and cut them into half-inch squares; cut into three-eighths inch squares eight ounces of cooked potatoes ; add a four-ounce apple, peeled and cored, then minced very finely, half a pound of roasted veal cut in quarter-inch squares, a four-ounce pickled beetroot cut in three-sixteenths inch squares, and four ounces of salt cucumbers cut equally into quarter-inch squares. Put into a salad bowl the potatoes , herrings, apples and veal; season with oil and vinegar, a little hot water or broth (No. 194a), salt, pepper, mustard and some chopped chives, all well mixed; smooth the surface with a knife and decorate it with anchovy fillets, pickled cucumbers, beets, capers, pickled cherries and the yolks and whites of hard-boiled eggs, chopped up very fine, also some chopped parsley. (2634). IMPERIAL SALAD (Salade Impériale). Cut off some green asparagus tops one inch in length; cook them in salted water in an untinned copper basin; drain and lay them in a bowl, seasoning with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar. Cut some cooked truffles into large Julienne the same length as the asparagus, season them the same, and half an hour later lay them on top of a sieve to drain well, then add them to the asparagus and mingle them both with a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606), having a little mustard added. (2635). ITALIAN SALAD (Salade Italienne). Cook in salted water one pint of green peas, half a pint of string beans , half a pint of carrots and as much turnips, both of these pushed through a tin tube; they should be a quarter of an inch in diameter, and three-eighths of an inch long. First blanch the carrots and turnips, then cook them in broth (No. 194a) with salt and sugar, and when done drain and leave them to get cool. Put into a salad bowl the carrots, green peas, some green peppers, string beans , turnips and finely cut-up chervil, tarragon, chives and finely chopped parsley; season with salt, pepper, vinegar and oil, mixed well together. Cut some beets and potatoes in an eighth of an inch thick slices, remove some rounds from these with a vegetable cutter three-quarters of an inch in diameter, then season; set the beetroots alternated with the potatoes around the base; near the top place a row of round slices of pickles half an inch in diameter; divide the height between the potatoes and the pickles with fillets of anchovies into six panels; in the center of these place a round slice of mortadelle and on the top lay some small channeled mushrooms (No. 118). (2636). JAPANESE SALAD (Salade Japonaise). Cook some peeled potatoes in broth (No. 194a), cut two pounds of them in slices while still warm, and season them with salt, pepper, olive oil, vinegar, also half a pint of white wine, some chervil, chives, tarragon, shallot, parsley and burnet, all finely and separately chopped up. Cook some mussels with minced onions, branches of celery, mignonette, but no salt, adding a little vinegar and water; set them on a good fire, toss them frequently, and when done so that they open take them from the shells and cut away their foot or black appendage. Put the potatoes into a bowl with one pound of the mussels, or else very small clams may be substituted, stir them up lightly, and dress in a salad bowl, covering the surface with slices of truffles cooked in champagne. Set the salad in a cold place for one hour, and when serving it mix in the truffles. (2637). LAMB SALAD à LA SOMER (Salade d'Agneau à la Somer). Cut slices of braised lamb a quarter of an inch in thickness; arrange on a deep dish in straight rows over a bed of sliced cooked potatoes . Decorate the whole with some anchovy and bloater fillets, slices of pickled gherkins, capers, small pickled onions, chopped chervil and chives, salt, pepper, oil, vinegar and mustard. Garnish the dish with hard-boiled eggs ( Fig. 492) and lozenge-shaped pieces of beetroot, also a few tarragon leaves. Serve without stirring, so as to avoid breaking the slices of meat. (2638). LOBSTER OR SPINY LOBSTER SALAD, AMERICAN STYLE (Salade de Homard ou de Langonste à l'Américaine). Cook two medium lobsters weighing three pounds each, let get cold, then break the shells and remove the meat from the tails and claws, cutting it into five-eighth inch dice; season all with salt, pepper, oil, vinegar and mustard, and let macerate for half an hour. Drain, and range them in a salad bowl over a bed of white and well-seasoned lettuce leaves; dress it dome-shaped, and cover the surface with a firm and consistent mayonnaise (No. 606); decorate with the lobster claws, hard-boiled eggs, olives, capers, beets and pickled cucumbers, laying on the extreme top a pretty white lettuce head. (2639). MAZARIN SALAD (Salade à la Mazarin). Boil in salted water two heads of celery knobs; let them get cold, then cut them up into fine slices, and with an inch diameter column tube ( Fig. 168) remove all that it is possible to obtain, then range the pieces in a salad bowl. Cut the white ends of two celery stalks into pieces one and a half inches long, wash them well, and split them finely lengthwise; lay them in cold water for half an hour. Drain them off, and add to them the celery knob in the salad bowl, also eight ounces of cooked truffles cut into pieces the same size as the knobs. Season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and mix well by tossing them in the bowl in such a way as not to break the truffles. Pound four hard-boiled egg-yolks, rub them through a sieve, add to them a tablespoonful of mustard, half a pint of oil and a little vinegar; mix this in with the celery and truffles; range it in the bowl for the table, and sprinkle over some chopped chervil, chives and tarragon. (2640). MIRABEAU SALAD (Salade à la Mirabeau). Have some shrimp tails, blanched oysters, truffles cooked in white wine, and potatoes baked in their skins, and cut into bits while hot, also the truffles. Season each article separately with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar; macerate them from fifteen to twenty minutes, then drain and mix them together in a bowl, and thicken with a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606), and a little tarragon mustard. Dress the salad in a salad bowl, smooth the surface, and decorate the top with some shrimp tails and truffles kept aside for this purpose. (2641). NORWEGIAN SALAD (Salade à la Novégienne). For this salad have one pound of salted anchovies (sardels), soak them in cold water for two hours, and then wipe them with a cloth to remove the white skin covering them; cut off the fillets, pare the ends either on one side or the other, and split them across in two. ( Herrings may be used instead of anchovies. ) Cut into quarter-inch squares some boiled potatoes , boiled celery root, boiled and pickled beetroot, raw russet apples, and roasted tenderloin of beef, having half a pound of each kind, also half a pound of minced cabbage blanched for fifteen minutes, and then drained and cooled; put all these into a bowl, season highly with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and mix together thoroughly. Range the pieces in a salad bowl, garnish the edge and inside of the bowl with a row of well-drained pickled oysters, about three dozen in all, and cover with a jellied mayonnaise (No. 613); inside of this row of oysters make another one of olives stuffed with anchovy butter (No. 569); divide the surface in quarters, and on one quarter lay chopped hard-boiled egg-white, on the next quarter some finely chopped chervil and chives, the third quarter filled with hard-boiled egg-yolks, and the last quarter with chopped beetroot. Decorate the oysters with slightly blanched tarragon leaves dipped in jelly, and lay between each olive a thin slice of pickled cucumber, and stick in the center a finely pared bunch of white celery, previously laid in cold water to curl nicely. (2642). OYSTER SALAD (Salade d'Huîtres). Half-fill a salad bowl with white and finely cut lettuce leaves; place on top some pickled oysters cut in two or three pieces, and cover with a layer of mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). Decorate the top with lobster coral, beetroot, pickled cucumbers, capers, hard-boiled eggs and small pickled oyster crabs, or else use young pepper grass, two inches long, and well washed. (This cress can be sown in pots and will grow during the whole season; the smaller the plant the better and stronger is the taste.) (2643). SALMON SALAD (Salade de Saumon). Cook some slices of salmon; when cold separate the meat in flakes. Mince some celery very fine, place it in a salad bowl with the salmon over it; season with oil, vinegar, salt and pepper, mixed in another vessel and thrown over it. Pour over some ravigote mayonnaise sauce (No. 612), decorate the top with tarragon leaves, lobster coral, quartered hard-boiled eggs and fanciful cut of truffles. (2644). PARISIAN SALAD (Salade Parisienne). Cut in quarter-inch squares some artichoke bottoms, beetroots and celeriac, boiled in water, and some cooked potatoes . Lay these vegetables in a bowl with a sliced, salted and pickled cucumber; add some marinated tunny- fish, season and pour over some good sweet oil. Pass through a sieve six cooked egg-yolks, beat them with a spoonful of olive oil, a tablespoonful of mustard and tarragon vinegar. Dress the vegetables, cover them with this sauce, and decorate the top with anchovies, olives, truffles, shrimp tails and a few fanciful cuts of red beef tongue. (2645). RUSSIAN SALAD (Salade Russe). Lay in a salad bowl two ounces of celeriac cut in fine Julienne, four ounces of boiled and cold potatoes , cut in quarter-inch squares, four ounces of artichoke bottoms, each one divided into sixteen pieces, four ounces of well-pared roast sirloin of beef, cut in quarter-inch squares, four ounces of string- beans cut lozenge-shaped, two ounces each of chicken, ham and tongue cut into three-sixteenths of an inch squares; season with salt, pepper and vinegar. Cover the whole with a highly seasoned mayonnaise sauce (No. 606), in which some mustard is mixed, and garnish all around the outer edge with cucumbers and gherkins cut in fine slices, alternating them, and having one overlapping the other, then toward the center decorate with another row of sliced truffles, inside of these a row of beetroot, inside a row of anchovies and capers, and in the center lay a fine lettuce heart. There may be arranged outside of the cucumbers, and upright against the salad bowl, a row of thin slices of sausage. (2646). RUSSIAN SALAD FOR LENTEN DINNERS (Salade Russe au Maigre). Have some small quarter-inch carrot balls, small sticks of turnips, both blanched and cooked separately in water with some butter, salt and sugar, green peas and lozenge-shaped string beans , both cooked in salted water. Lay these vegetables in a salad bowl in four distinct sections, cover them over with a mayonnaise (No. 606), highly seasoned, and set on top four groups, one composed of smoked salmon, one of fillets of sole, one of salt herring, and one of egg-white, all cut into quarter-inch dice. Decorate with fillets of anchovies, sliced pickled cucumbers, capers, olives, shrimps, beetroots and truffles, and in the middle set a fine lettuce heart. (2647). SHRIMP SALAD (Salade de Crevettes). Skin the shrimps, already cooked in un salted water, season them with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and serve them in a salad bowl on top of lettuce leaves, and sprinkle over some chopped parsley; lay a lettuce head on top, or, if preferred, when the shrimps are dressed, cover them with a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606), and instead of laying them in the salad bowl they may be set inside a border made as follows: Coat a border mold ( Fig. 470) with some clear jelly (No. 103), decorate it through a cornet with lobster butter and Montpellier butter (No. 580), then fill it up with whipped jelly. Unmold and surround it with quartered hard-boiled eggs, and garnish the inside of the border with some seasoned lettuce; on top of this lay the seasoned shrimps in a pyramid, and sprinkle some chopped parsley over them; set on the summit a lettuce heart, and serve a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606) separately. COOKED VEGETABLE SALADS (Salades de Légumes Cuits). (2648). CARDOON OR CELERY SALAD (Salade de Cardons ou de Céleri). Have one pound of cardoons, remove the stringy outside coat, and cut them into inch-long pieces, then cook them the same as cardoons with half-glaze ( No. 2710 ). When done, drain and fry them in a pan with some oil, adding one clove of garlic, salt and sweet Spanish peppers, and half a gill of vinegar. Let boil up only once, then lay the cardoons in a salad bowl, pour the liquid over, stir well and serve. (2649). CAULIFLOWER MAYONNAISE SALAD (Salade de Choux-fleurs, Mayonnaise). Lay some fine, white, cooked, cold and seasoned cauliflower in a spherical-shaped mold; unmold it over a salad bowl, and cover it entirely with a highly seasoned mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). Garnish it around with slices of pickled beetroot and dredge over some fine herbs and capers. (2650). MACéDOINE SALAD (Salade Macédoine). Have four ounces of artichoke bottoms, four ounces of celery knob, four ounces of beetroot, four ounces of turnips all cut in quarter-inch squares, four ounces of string beans , cut lozenge-shaped, four ounces of asparagus tops and four ounces of green peas, all cooked separately in salted water, then refreshed, except the beetroots, which must be cooked whole and cut into squares afterward. Season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and mix with a fine herb mayonnaise (No. 612). (2651). OKRA AND SWEET PEPPER SALAD (Salade de Gombo et de Piments Doux). Cut the ends and stalks from some tender, stringless okras; cook them in salted water, refresh and drain, then lay them in a salad-bowl. Throw some sweet peppers into hot fat, peel off the skins and cut them in Julienne, add them to the okras, and season with a fine herb mayonnaise (No. 612). (2652). POTATO AND BEETROOT SALAD (Salade de Pommes de Terre et Betteraves). Cut some cold boiled potatoes in three-sixteenths inch slices, also some cooked and pickled beetroots; remove twenty-four rounds from each of these, using a one-inch diameter vegetable cutter, and range them crown-shaped, one overlapping the other, intercalating the beets and the potatoes , both previously seasoned. Fill the hollow in the center with finely cut, seasoned lettuce, romaine or escarole, and cover with a layer of very thick mayonnaise (No. 606); decorate the summit with anchovy fillets and tarragon leaves; surround the border with quartered hard-boiled eggs. (2653). POTATO AND HERRING SALAD (Salade de Pommes de Terre et de Harengs). Cut in three-eighths of an inch squares, four pounds of potatoes cooked in salted water, half a pound of sour apples cut in four, peeled and minced, eight medium-sized vinegar pickles also minced, and four salted herrings boned and cut in three-eighths inch dice, previously unsalted in cold water. Put the potatoes into a bowl, season them with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and when the seasoning is well mixed add the apples, pickles and herrings, a tablespoonful of finely chopped onion, and four spoonfuls of pickled beetroot cut in quarter-inch squares; mix all the ingredients thoroughly, then range the salad on a dish or in a salad bowl. (2654). HOT POTATO SALAD (Salade de Pommes de Terre Chaudes). Cook twenty potatoes , either in water or steam, leaving on their skins; drain as soon as done, peel and cut into slices; lay them in a bowl with two or three gills of boiling broth (No. 194a) poured over, season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and add two spoonfuls of finely chopped white onion. This salad can be served with roast veal, lamb or mutton. (2655). POTATO SALAD IN BORDER WITH TRUFFLES (Salade de Pommes de Terre en Bordure aux Truffes). For a plain portato salad put some fresh boiled and sliced potatoes into a bowl, season them with salt and pepper, oil, vinegar and chopped fine herbs. For a Bordered Salad with Truffles, have some carrots and turnips sliced one inch long by three-quarters wide; take out pieces with a three-eighth inch column tube, and put them to cook in salted water; when done drain them, and set on the center of each piece of carrot and turnip one asparagus top an inch and three-quarters long; range them crown-shaped, intercalating the carrots and turnips, and set some chopped jelly around. Garnish the center with the portato salad dressed dome-shaped; cover the potatoes with round slices of truffle and then serve. (2656). OYSTER PLANT SALAD (Salade de Salsifis). Scrape two pounds of oyster plants, plunge them as soon as they are done in water acidulated with vinegar, then cut into inch long pieces. Dilute two spoonfuls of flour with two quarts of water, add to it salt and the juice of a lemon, a medium-sized onion, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf; boil up the liquid, then put in the oyster plants, and let simmer until they are thoroughly cooked, then set them aside to drain and get cold, and cut each one into four pieces lengthwise. Range these in a salad bowl, season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, also some chopped parsley, and half an hour before serving cover with a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606). (2657). STRING BEAN SALAD (Salade de Haricots Verts). Have one pound of small string beans ; if too large cut them lengthwise in two, and cook them in salted water in an untinned copper vessel; refresh them and drain. Put them into a salad bowl and season with salt and pepper, adding one tablespoonful of vinegar and three of oil. (2658). WHITE BEAN SALAD (Salade de Haricots Blancs). When the white beans are cooked the same as for No. 2701 , and cold, put them in a salad bowl with a little shallot, chives and parsley, all finely chopped, and for each quart of beans add two tablespoonfuls of vinegar and six of oil, salt and pepper; stir well and serve. RAW VEGETABLE SALADS (Salades de Légumes Crus). (2659). CABBAGE SALAD-- WHITE OR RED (Salade de Choux--Blancs ou Rouges). Have either a very fresh white or red cabbage; suppress the outer leaves, also the hard parts and core; mince it up finely, and lay it in a bowl, sprinkle over some salt, and let macerate for one hour, then drain off its liquid and season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar. A cabbage salad, called cold slaw, is made by shredding the cabbage as finely as possible and seasoning it with salt, pepper, oil, vinegar and tomato catsup. (2660). CELERY SALAD AND CELERY KNOB SALAD (Salade de Céleri et Salade de Céleri Raves). Remove the first stalks, which are generally hollow, and put the good ones into a bowl of cold water; cut each stalk into pieces one inch and a half long, then divide these pieces into lengths the same as a large Julienne; wash well, drain and dry them thoroughly; season with salt, pepper, mustard, oil and vinegar. Celery Knob. --Choose these very tender, peel and cut them into thin round slices, set them in a bowl in layers, salting each one separately. One hour later pour off the water and season with oil, vinegar, ground pepper and mustard. Macerate for one hour in its seasoning, and then serve. (2661). CUCUMBER SALAD, ENGLISH STYLE (Salade de Concombres à l'Anglaise). Select the tenderest cucumbers, peel off the rind, slice the interior finely, and lay them in a dish, sprinkle over some fine salt, and let macerate for fifteen minutes; season them, after straining off the liquid, with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, adding some chopped parsley. English Style. --The same, only add a very finely minced onion. (2662). CUCUMBER AND TOMATO SALAD (Salade de Concombres et Tomates). The same as for English style, only adding very firm, finely sliced and peeled tomatoes as well as the onion. (2663). EGGPLANT SALAD, PROVENçAL (Salade d'Aubergines Provenç ale ). Peel and slice some eggplant into quarter of an inch thick slices, pare it in rounds one and a quarter inches in diameter, lay them in salt for ten minutes, then sponge them off and season with pepper, garlic, oil and vinegar; then add the same quantity of water cress and a few hard-boiled eggs. (2664). GERMAN SALAD WITH CROûTONS (Salade Allemande aux Croûtons). Blanch in boiling water one pound of sauerkraut for five minutes, refresh and add to it one pound of red cabbage previously pickled in vinegar. Cut up the sauerkraut to make the pieces shorter, and lay them in a bowl with three ounces of very fine chopped onions, blanched and refreshed; add to this one ounce of grated horseradish and a tablespoonful of chopped chervil. Season with salt, pepper, six tablespoonfuls of olive oil and two of vinegar, and serve in a salad bowl with a ring of round croûtons on top made of fragments of puff- paste (No. 146), one and a quarter inches thick, cut with a round pastry-cutter, then cooked in a very slack oven. (2665). ONION SALAD--BERMUDA (Salade d'Oignons de Bermude). Mince the onions very finely, either with a knife or the machine, and season them with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar. (2666). TOMATO SALAD (Salade de Tomates). To peel tomatoes throw them into boiling water; cut them in slices across and season with salt, pepper, vinegar and a little oil; arrange them in a salad bowl. (2667). TRUFFLE SALAD à LA GAMBETTA (Salade de Truffes à la Gambetta). Mince six fine peeled Piedmontese truffles, weighing eight ounces, put them into a bowl with three artichoke bottoms, previously cooked and cut into eight pieces. Rub through a sieve four hard-boiled egg-yolks, lay them in a bowl with two tablespoonfuls of mustard, work well together, then incorporate three gills of oil and tarragon vinegar; rub the bottom of a salad bowl with a clove of garlic, set the truffles in, and the artichokes over; cover all with some mayonnaise (No. 607), mixing in also some tarragon, chervil, chives and parsley, all finely chopped. GREEN SALADS (Salades Vertes). (2668). CHICORY SALAD (Salade de Chicorée). Select the chicory heads; having yellow hearts and very fine leaves; cut away all the green and wash the white part, drain and shake well in a napkin or wire basket to remove all the water. Season with salt, pepper, oil, vinegar, chervil and tarragon, or, instead of these herbs use a piece of bread -crust after rubbing a clove of garlic over it. This piece of bread is called a capon. (2669). CORN SALAD OR LAMB'S LETTUCE SALAD (Salade de Mâche ou Doucette). This salad can be mixed with monk's beard and slices of cooked beetroot. It should be well picked and all the yellow leaves removed; clean the roots, cut them off when too large, and divide the stalks into two or four parts; add cooked slices of beetroot and chopped chervil; season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar. Monk's beard may be mixed with it, half and half. (2670). DANDELION SALAD (Salade de Dent-de-lion). This salad takes the place of wild chicory, especially in winter, and by growing it in cellars it can be had very white and tender. Prepare and season it the same as monk's beard ( No. 2674 ). (2671). ESCAROLE AND ENDIVE SALAD (Salade d'Escarolle et d'Endive). Take the leaves when quite yellow, remove the hard parts, and split each leaf in the center its entire length; it is always preferable not to wash these salads, as the leaves can be cleaned by wiping them. Season with salt, pepper, oil, vinegar and finely chopped chervil and tarragon. (2672). LETTUCE SALAD, PLAIN (Salade de Laitue, Simple). Choose freshly gathered and well-filled lettuce heads, suppress the hard leaves, keeping only the yellow ones; pick them off the stalks, retaining the heart whole, the size of an egg, and cut it in four. Split each leaf through the center, wash them at once, drain, wipe and shake the salad well to extract all the water, then place it in a salad bowl, sprinkling over some chopped chervil and tarragon. Put into a bottle four egg-yolks, two spoonfuls of vinegar and eight of oil, some salt and pepper; shake the seasoning up well in the bottle, and pour it over the lettuce, stirring it until it is properly mixed. (2673). LETTUCE AND ANCHOVY SALAD (Salade de Laitue aux Anchois). This is made with well washed and dried lettuce by shredding it up finely; season and lay it in a salad bowl, cover with a mayonnaise sauce (No. 606), decorated with fillets and anchovies, hard-boiled yolks and whites of eggs, and some finely chopped herbs. A lettuce salad may be served garnished with hard-boiled eggs and plenty of herbs. Lettuce salad may also be seasoned with sweet or sour cream instead of oil. (2674). MONK'S BEARD SALAD (Salade de Barbe de Capucin). This salad is very much liked and is exceedingly wholesome. Clean it well by wiping the leaves with a towel--do not wash it; season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, adding a few slices of beetroot. (2675). COS LETTUCE SALAD (Salade de Romaine ). Remove all the green leaves until the yellow ones are reached; wipe each leaf well, and split them lenghtwise, then cut into two-inch long pieces, continuing as far as the heart; split it in four; place in a salad bowl and season the salad with chervil, tarragon, all finely cut, egg-yolks (one egg for two persons) and dilute with eight spoonfuls of oil and two of vinegar; add salt, pepper and green mustard; mix well when ready to serve. The egg-yolks may be suppressed. (2676). WATER CRESS AND APPLE SALAD (Salade de Cresson aux Pommes d'Arbre). Have very clean and green water cress; season it only when ready to serve with a very little oil, salt, pepper, vinegar and some sour apples cut in slices. Pepper water cresses are prepared the same. VEGETABLES (Légumes). An illustration of different type of vegetables. (2677). ( ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS à LA FLORENCE (Fonds d'Artichauts à la Florence). Prepare and cook some artichoke bottoms the same as for la Villars ( No. 2682 ); fill the hollow in the center with minced truffles and mushrooms fried in butter, this to be drained off and the preparation mingled with well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407); let get cold after they are filled dome form, and smooth neatly with a knife; then lay them on a buttered sheet, bestrew with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan, pour butter over and color in a hot oven. Dress them in a circle, filling the center with blanched artichoke bottoms, cut in six parts, pared and cooked in butter; pour over a buttered supréme sauce (No. 547) and send to the table. (2678). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS à LA JUSSIENNE (Fonds d'Artichauts à la Jussienne). Turn some artichoke bottoms the same as mushrooms (No. 118), rub them over with lemon and cook in a seasoned white stock (No. 182), to which add pieces of marrow; drain when well done. Mince a few mushrooms, cut them into strips and fry them in butter; drain off the latter and replace it by thick béchamel sauce (No. 409); cover the artichoke bottoms with this, mask over with allemande sauce (No. 407), reduced with a little jelly (No. 103), into which mix more mushrooms and chopped truffles; allow to cool; roll them in white bread-crumbs, dip in beaten eggs, again in bread-crumbs and fry to a fine golden color; drain, wipe and arrange them on a dish in a circle, having the center filled with sliced cooked sweet potatoes, cut three-eighths of an inch thick and one and a quarter inches in diameter. Serve separately a Colbert sauce (No. 451). (2679). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS à LA MONTGLAS (Fonds d'Artichauts à la Montglas). Have some artichoke bottoms prepared and cooked the same as for la Villars ( No. 2682 ); drain and fill the hollow centers with a montglas garnishing cut in small sticks, composed of red beef tongue, truffles, mushrooms and some cooked white meat of a chicken; mingle them with a well reduced allemande sauce (No. 407), and remove from the fire at the first boil and leave till cold; then fill the artichoke bottoms, forming them bomb-shaped on top; cover with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), smooth and strew bread-crumbs and grated parmesan over the entire surface. Range them on a small baking sheet, pour plenty of clarified butter over and finish cooking in a slack oven, basting frequently. (2680). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS à LA MORNAY (Fonds d'Artichauts à la Mornay). Wipe dry ten to twelve cooked artichoke bottoms, all of the same size; fill the hollow side with a foies-gras baking forcemeat (No. 81), mixed with a few spoonfuls of chopped cooked truffles; smooth the top of the preparation and cover with a layer of well-reduced Mornay sauce (No. 504); bestrew the sauce with parmesan cheese, and brown for two minutes under a salamander ( Fig. 123). (2681). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS à LA SOUBISE (Fonds d'Artichauts à la Soubise). Prepare a soubise purée (No. 723). Select some equal-sized cooked artichoke bottoms, drain and wipe them on a cloth; cover the hollow side with a part of the soubise purée (No. 723) and let it get cold, then over this lay a thin layer of delicate raw chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89); besprinkle with bread-crumbs, and brush over with butter. Range these artichoke bottoms in a sautoir with some good gravy (No. 404), and heat them well while browning slightly. (2682). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS à LA VILLARS (Fonds d'Artichauts à la Villars). Procure twelve raw artichoke bottoms; when turned ( Figs. 547-548) and pared blanch them in salted water and cook in white stock (No. 182), with aromatics and a little white wine, keeping them slightly firm; drain on a cloth and then cut out the bottom with a two and a quarter inch diameter tin cutter. Lay them in a sautoir, moisten with a little chicken bouillon (No. 188) and a small piece of butter. Reduce the liquid entirely. Mince some white onions, blanch them for a few minutes, fry them lightly in butter and moisten with broth (No. 194a) and cream, half of each, adding the same quantity of minced fresh mushrooms; reduce and leave to cool. Drain the artichoke bottoms, cover the hollow side with the preparation, and this with a layer of raw cream forcemeat (No. 75); strew over bread-crumbs and grated cheese, and lay them in a sautoir with a little stock (No. 194a); color in a moderate oven, and dress on a well-buttered reduced cream velouté sauce (No. 415). (2683). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS FRIED (Fonds d'Artichauts Frits). Pare off the bottoms of some young, tender and stringless artichokes; after cutting away the green part divide each one in four, remove the choke and cut the leaves at half an inch from the bottom; divide each quarter in four and throw them at once into a pan of water acidulated with vinegar; drain and lay them in a vessel with salt, pepper, oil and lemon juice. Prepare a frying paste with flour, diluted with water, adding a few egg-yolks and a little olive oil; whip the whites to a stiff froth and beat them into the paste; dip each piece of artichoke into this and plunge them in hot frying fat; cook slowly, drain, wipe and salt over with salt; dress on a folded napkin with a bunch of parsley on top. (2684). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS STUFFED--LEAN (Fonds d'Artichauts Farcis au Maigre). Pare eight or ten raw artichoke bottoms, blanch them in salted water and cook them in a white stock (No. 182) with aromatic herbs and a little white wine, keeping them rather hard, then drain them on a cloth. Prepare a duxelle (No. 385) composed of chopped onions, shallots, truffles and mushrooms, mingled first with a little smooth cream frangipane panada (No. 120), then with a little sauce; season the preparation and finish it with some raw egg-yolks, chopped parsley and a few spoonfuls of salted anchovy fillets cut in small dice. With this forcemeat cover the artichoke bottoms, smooth and bestrew with bread-crumbs; range them in a small deep baking dish, capable of being placed in the oven, and besprinkle lightly with oil; finish cooking in a slack oven, basting over frequently. (2685). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS WITH BAKED CAULIFLOWER (Fonds d'Artichauts aux Choux-Fleurs Gratines). Have some artichoke bottoms cooked and prepared as for la Villars ( No. 2682 ); drain and fill the hollow centers with flowerets of cauliflower; cover with béchamel sauce (No. 409), bestrew the top with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan, baste over with butter, and range them at once on a buttered baking sheet; bake in a moderate oven and dress in a circle on a dish; pour béchamel cream sauce (No. 411) in the center, or else a brown half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (2686). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS WITH CREAM BéCHAMEL, BAKED (Fonds d'Artichauts Béchamel à la Crème, au Gratin). Drain some cooked artichoke bottoms (No. 545-548) on a cloth, selecting those of equal size; fill the hollow in the center with a layer of delicate chicken godiveau (No. 82); cover this with cream béchamel sauce (No. 411) and besprinkle the surface with grated parmesan, pouring some butter over. Range them at once in a sautoir, having its bottom covered with a little good gravy (No. 404); baste over with more melted butter and bake in a moderate oven for twenty minutes; they should be of a nice color. Dress in a circle on a dish and pour some cream béchamel in the center. (2687). ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS WITH MARROW (Fonds d'Artichauts à la Moelle). In case there be no fresh artichokes canned ones can be procured at any time of the year. Drain and range the cooked bottoms in a flat saucepan; moisten with a little good unskimmed stock (No. 194a) with white wine; heat them simply over a slow fire, but if too hard boil them until perfectly done. Soak two or three pieces of raw beef marrow, without the bone; wrap them up in fine pieces of muslin and poach for a quarter of an hour in stock (No. 194a). Just when prepared to serve drain the artichoke bottoms carefully, wipe them on a towel, and drain the pieces of marrow as well unwrap these and let get partly cold; then cut them across in thick slices and glaze them with a brush; keep them for a few moments at the oven door, then set one slice in the hollow of each artichoke bottom; dress these on a dish, cover with a little brown sauce (No. 414) reduced with Madeira wine, not having it too consistent. For garnishing artichoke bottoms, a macédoine of vegetables (No. 680) may be substituted for the marrow, or else green peas, Parisian style ( No. 2745 ), with which mix a quarter as much cooked chicken, using only the white part cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares. (2688). ARTICHOKES, QUARTERED (Quartiers d'Artichauts). To prepare these artichokes the hard outside leaves must first be removed, the remaining ones shortened and the bottoms pared; then divide them in four, blanch in salted acidulated water until the choke detaches easily; throw them into cold water, drain and pare once more (see Fig. 545). They can be cooked in several ways, either sautéing in butter to finish the cooking and adding just when ready to serve some meat glaze (No. 402), lemon juice, seasoning and chopped parsley. Or they can be cooked in a white stock (No. 182), and then served in their natural state, either by filling the space between the leaves and the bottom with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) that has had cooked fine herbs (No. 385) mingled in, then poached and covered with villeroi sauce (No. 560), breaded and fried. Those not stuffed may also be breaded à la villeroi and fried. They can also be braised in a sautoir lined with bards of fat pork; moisten with mirepoix stock (No. 419), and cover with more bards of fat pork. When done dress them in a vegetable dish, and have half of their stock skimmed and strained over; reduce the other half with espagnole sauce (No. 414), and when well reduced fill some hollowed-out bread -crusts (No. 51) with blanched marrow; cover with a part of this last sauce, and serve the remainder in a sauce -boat. (2689). ARTICHOKES --WHOLE--à LA BARIGOULE (Artichauts Entiers à la Barigoule). Pare eight medium-sized artichokes; suppress the hardest leaves from the bottom ( Fig. 544) and cut the upper ones off straight on the pointed end; empty out the inside, or more properly speaking the chokes ( Fig. 543), wash thoroughly and drain well, turning them upside down so as to FIG. 542. An illustration of a whole artichoke. FIG. 543. An illustration of a halve artichoke with the inside being clean. FIG. 544. An illustration of a halve artichoke placed upside down where the hardest leaves at bottom being suppressed. FIG. 545. An illustration of the leave of the artichoke. FIG. 546. An illustration of an artichoke leave quarter in size. FIG. 547. An illstration of a cook artichoke. FIG. 548. An illustration of a side view cook artichoke. have no water left in the inside. Pour some oil in a pan; when very hot fry the tips of the artichoke leaves in it. Should the bottoms be thin, then lay another one inside, thus having two bottoms to one artichoke. To make the dressing, chop up half a pound of fresh fat pork with half a pound of butter; add three finely chopped small shallots, a spoonful and a half of chopped parsley, salt, pepper, nutmeg, a pound of finely minced or chopped mushrooms, and a gill of Madeira wine. Have all these ingredients properly mingled, divide in eight parts, and fill the inside of the artichokes with them; cover with bards of fat pork, tie with two rows of string and lay them in a saucepan with slices of fat pork; on the bottom place carrots, onions, a bunch of parsley with thyme and bay leaf, moisten with half stock (No. 194a) and white wine; boil, skim and then cook in a moderate oven for one hour or longer, until the leaves detach easily; drain the stock, skim and reduce it with espagnole sauce (No. 414) to half-glaze, adding lemon juice. Untie the artichokes, suppress the fat pork and dress; cover lightly with a part of the sauce, serving the remainder separately. (2690). ARTICHOKES --WHOLE--à LA RACHEL (Artichauts Entiers à la Rachel). These proportions are for six artichokes : Pare them by removing the hardest leaves next to the stalk, suppress the green bottom part and cut off the tip of each leaf straight; empty the inside by removing all the choke ( Fig. 543), wash and drain well. Cut a medium-sized onion and one shallot into small squares, fry in butter and add one pound of fresh mushrooms chopped very finely; place the saucepan on the fire and keep stirring with a spoon until the mushrooms have their moisture reduced, then add some chopped parsley and fresh bread-crumbs; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg and pour in a little béchamel (No. 409). Fill the artichokes bomb-shaped with this and lay on top one fine turned or channeled mushroom (No. 118); cover with bards of fat pork, tie with two turns of string and braise in a low saucepan lined with pieces of fat pork, moistening with white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419); drain this off when done, skim the fat and reduce to a quarter-glaze. Dress the artichokes and pour a little of the stock over. Serve separately a velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with mushroom essence (No. 392), the rest of the stock and a little well-buttered tomato purée (No. 730); serve. (2691). ARTICHOKES --WHOLE--BOILED, WITH WHITE OR VINAIGRETTE SAUCE (Artichauts Entiers Bouillis, à la Sauce Blanche ou à la Vinaigrette). Select artichokes of a medium size; remove the hardest leaves from the base, pare the bottoms well, suppressing all the green part, then cut off the tips of each leaf straight (see Fig. 543). Put them into a saucepan of boiling salted water and cook until the leaves detach, then drain, remove the choke, and washing them in their own liquor range them on a napkin bottom downward to have them drain thoroughly; serve at the same time either a white sauce (No. 562) or else a vinaigrette sauce (No. 634). Boiled and cold artichokes are served with a vinaigrette sauce. (2692). BOILED ASPARAGUS WITH HOLLANDAISE OR MOUSSELINE SAUCE (Asperges Bouillies, à la Sauce Hollandaise ou à la sauce Mousseline). Have the asparagus freshly picked, if practicable; trim the tops, and scrape or peel the stalks; then pare them into equal lengths, and tie them in small bunches, separating the larger ones from the smaller. Fasten them well with string. Boil the asparagus in plenty of salted water in an untinned copper basin, plunging them into the liquid; cover the vessel and let cook slowly. As soon as they are done drain them on a sieve, and afterward untie the bunches on a cloth and dress them symmetrically in a pyramid on a folded napkin; carefully reserve the handsomest ones for the top. Send to the table at the same time a good Hollandaise sauce (No. 477), or else a vinaigrette sauce. Vinaigrette. --Put into a vessel six hard-boiled egg-yolks rubbed through a sieve, smooth nicely while beating with a spoon, and incorporate slowly two gills of good oil, two spoonfuls of cold velouté sauce (No. 415), a little vinegar, mustard, pepper, chopped parsley or chervil. Serve this sauce the same time as the asparagus, or else serve them with a Hollandaise mousseline sauce (No. 477). (2693). ASPARAGUS, COUNTESS STYLE-- HEADS (Têtes d'Asperges à la Comtesse). Scrape some green asparagus, cut them, leaving the tops two and a half inches long, and tie these into small bunches; cook in salted water, and when done cut off the strings and dress them in a pyramid; garnish around with bouchées filled with asparagus tops and mushrooms as follows: After the asparagus is cut off for the above break the remaining tender parts of the stalks, and cut them into quarter of an inch thick pieces; cook in salted water, and drain; put these into a saucepan with as much cooked mushrooms cut into quarter-inch squares, and dilute with good buttered velouté (No. 415); season properly, and fill very hot bouchées (No. 11) with it. Serve a velouté sauce apart, having it thickened at the last moment with egg-yolks, cream, a liberal piece of fresh butter and lemon juice. (2694). ASPARAGUS IN SMALL BUNCHES-- HEADS (Têtes d'Aspergus en Petites Bottes). Scrape the stalks of some medium-sized asparagus; cut them from the top end into two and a half inch lengths, and with these form small bunches, holding them together by two rings cut from a carrot about two inches in diameter; cook them in salted water. Use these small bunches for garnishing hot or cold removes, pouring a little Hollandaise sauce (No. 477) over, or else a vinaigrette sauce (No. 634), both to be well seasoned. (2695). ASPARAGUS TOPS à LA MAINTENON (Pointes d'Asperges à la Maintenon). Have all the asparagus of the same size, not too slender; break off the stalks at the beginning of the tender part; strip off the heads, and cut the tender part into inch lengths; put the heads aside to cook separately. Plunge the lengths into boiling salted water placed in an untinned copper pan; boil quickly, keeping them slightly hard, then wipe on a cloth, and put them into a thin sautoir with melted butter; season, heat rapidly while tossing, then remove. The asparagus can now be laid in a little velouté (No. 415) and chicken purée (No. 713). Serve the asparagus in a vegetable dish, surrounded with croûtons of bread shaped like a cock's-comb, and fried in butter, just when prepared to dish up. (2696). ASPARAGUS TOPS FRIED à LA MIRANDA (Pointes d'Asperges Frites à la Miranda). Bend and break off the tender part of the asparagus into one inch lengths; blanch them well in salted water; drain and dip in fine cracker dust, then in beaten egg, and finally in bread-crumbs; fry, drain, salt, and dress on a folded napkin, laying a bunch of fried green parsley on top. Serve apart a sauce made with one hard-boiled egg-yolk mingled with one raw yolk, mustard, salt and pepper; beat vigorously, stirring in a little olive oil and tarragon vinegar. (2697). ASPARAGUS TOPS WITH CHEESE (Pointes d'Asperges au Fromage). Scrape some medium-sized asparagus; cut them into quarter of an inch lengths, cook in salted water, keeping them slightly hard, drain and put them into a sautoir with butter, and toss for a few moments over the fire to evaporate all the moisture. Drain off the butter, season and dress on a vegetable dish; cover the surface with freshly kneaded butter, into which mix as much grated parmesan as the butter can absorb; salt, if found necessary, adding a little cayenne pepper; push into a hot oven, and serve as soon as it browns. (2698). FRESH BEANS, WITH CREAM AND ENGLISH STYLE (Fèves Fraîches à la Crème et à l'Anglaise). Take freshly picked, shelled and tender beans ; put them to blanch in salted water with a small bunch of savory added, then transfer them to a saucepan with hot butter; season. Fry them for two minutes on a hot fire to evaporate their moisture and thicken with a few spoonfuls of reduced béchamel (No. 409); remove from the fire and stir in a large piece of butter divided in small pats; finish with a little nutmeg and serve with puff- paste croûtons around. English Style. --Blanch some fresh green beans in salted water until the skin detaches easily, then let get cold and suppress these skins; sauté the beans in butter, season with salt, nutmeg and finely cut-up fresh savory. Transfer them to a vegetable dish and serve with thin slices of butter laid on top. (2699). LIMA BEAN S, THICKENED, MAîTRE D'HôTEL (Haricots de Lima Liés Maitre d'Hôtel). Have a pound of medium-sized, freshly picked lima bean s; boil them in salted water in an untinned copper saucepan, then drain. Put four ounces of butter in a sautoir, heat it well, add the beans and sauté, seasoning with salt and chopped parsley; stir in a little velouté sauce (No. 415) and fresh butter, squeeze the juice of a lemon over, then serve. (2700). RED BEANS, SMOTHERED (Haricots Rouges à l'étuvée). Steep a pound of red beans for six hours in cold water, drain, put them into a saucepan and moisten to double their height with cold water; add half a pound of blanched bacon, a carrot cut in four, and a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf. When the beans are three-quarters done, take out the carrots and herbs and put in one pound of small onions fried in clarified butter, also a pint of red wine; continue to boil until thoroughly done, then drain, and put them back into a sautoir and thicken with a little espagnole sauce (No. 414), seasoning with salt, pepper and chopped parsley. Dress the beans and surround them with the bacon cut up in slices. The rod beans may be replaced by white or black beans . (2701). WHITE BEANS, THICKENED, MAîTRE D'HôTEL AND BRETONNE (Haricots Blancs Maitre d'Hôtel Liés et Bretonne). Put a pound of dry white beans to soak in cold water for six hours; place them in a saucepan and cover to three times above their height with cold water; set this on the fire and withdraw the saucepan to the side of the range at the first boil; add to it two ounces of butter, let cook, and when they crush easily under the pressure of the finger drain and transfer to another saucepan; season with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and nutmeg; add a little thickened maître d'hôtel butter and chopped parsley. Bretonne. --Add chopped onions, cooked colorless in butter, to the above, and instead of the maître d'hôtel butter substitute espagnole sauce (No. 414), finishing with chopped parsley. (2702). BEETROOT FRITTERS à LA DICKENS; BEETROOTS WITH BUTTER AND FINE HERBS AND BEETROOTS WITH CREAM (Beignets de Betteraves à la Dickens; Betteraves au Beurre et fines Herbes et Betteraves à la Crème). Cut some beetroots cooked as below in slices, each one an eighth of an inch thick; wipe dry and place on half of them a quarter of an inch thick layer of the following preparation: Fry two well-chopped onions colorless in butter; add four ounces of chopped mushrooms and a pinch of minced chervil, salt and pepper; on this layer place another round of beetroot, and from the whole remove rounds an inch and a half in diameter; dip these in frying batter (No. 137) and plunge into very hot frying fat, drain, wipe and dress as a garnishing around a meat remove. With Butter and Fine Herbs. --These beets can be cooked in boiling water or by steam without suppressing the stalk or root end; select them always of a fine red; peel after they are done and cut them up into quarter-inch thick slices and from these remove rounds two to two and a half inches in diameter; lay them in saucepan with salt, pepper and a little vinegar; sauté for a few moments and serve; chopped parsley and chives can be scattered over the top. With Cream. --After the beetroots are cooked and cut into slices, as above, simmer them in fresh cream, seasoning with salt, cayenne pepper and nutmeg; thicken just when ready to serve with egg-yolks and fresh butter. (2703). BRUSSELS SPROUTS à LA BARONESS (Choux de Bruxelles à la Baronne). Clean, prepare and cook the sprouts the same as for sautéd ( No. 2704 ); the only difference to be observed is that instead of boiling them entirely have them only three-quarters cooked. Put them into a saucepan with as many chestnuts also three-quarters cooked; moisten with fresh cream, season with salt and nutmeg, and let simmer together until done and the liquid sufficiently reduced. (2704). BRUSSELS SPROUTS SAUTéD (Choux de Bruxelles Sautée). Select three pounds of the freshest and firmest Brussels sprouts, having them of as uniform size as possible; pare and plunge them into an untinned vessel full of boiling water to cook green; when done drain, refresh in cold water, drain once more, wipe and pare again. Put six ounces of butter into a sautoir and when hot add the sprouts; season with salt and shake them in the butter; sprinkle in some chopped parsley, and if so desired they can be mingled with a little velouté sauce (No. 415). (2705). CABBAGE IN BALLOTINES--STUFFED (Choux Farcis en Ballotines). Cut each of two clean cabbages in half, plunge them into boiling salted water and boil for fifteen minutes; then drain, refresh and press out all the water. Dampen some pieces of linen six by five inches; lay over each a thin slice of fat pork four by three inches, and on this spread a blanched cabbage leaf, mincing the heart -leaves up finely. Fry in lard four ounces of finely chopped onion, and one pound of chopped mushrooms; when the moisture has been evaporated from the latter add the minced cabbage, season with salt and pepper, then add half a pound of cooked sausage meat, and half a pound of boiled rice; thicken this preparation with a few raw egg-yolks and range it in the center of the spread-out leaves; roll each one in the shape of a sausage, then in the bards of fat pork, and lastly in the linen; tie both ends the same as a boned turkey. Lay them in a sautoir, cover with more slices of fat pork, and pour in some unskimmed broth (No. 194a), then let cook for two hours; free the stock from fat, strain it through a sieve and reduce it with as much espagnole sauce (No. 414). Unwrap the ballotines, remove the pork and dress them in the center of a dish, covering over with a third part of the sauce, and serving the remainder in a sauce -boat. (2706). CABBAGE, PEASANT STYLE (Choux à la Paysanne). Parboil half a cabbage for fifteen minutes, remove the core, drain and braise; when well done drain once more and suppress the hard parts; mash the remainder with a spoon, seasoning with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Have a linen bag two and a quarter inches in diameter; fill it with the seasoned cabbage and tie it firmly, pressing it down tight; lay this under a weight to get thoroughly cold, then cut it into even slices; remove the pieces of linen and dip each slice in beaten egg and then in bread-crumbs; fry in clarified butter and dress in a circle. To fill the center chop up finely the other half of the cabbage, after blanching it for ten minutes and draining very dry; put it into a saucepan with fresh butter, and fry colorless; season, moisten with broth (No. 194a), and let simmer until thoroughly done and the liquid reduced, then drain off the fat and thicken with a little velouté sauce (No. 415) and fresh butter; lay this inside the circle as described above. (2707). RED CABBAGE à LA MONTARGIS (Choux Rouges à la Montargis). Divide two red cabbages in four pieces, remove the core and the hard stalks from the leaves; mince finely, wash and drain. Place in a saucepan half a pound of butter, and half a pound of bacon cut in quarter-inch squares; first blanch them, then let fry in the butter, and add the cabbage, salt, pepper and nutmeg; moisten with a pint of broth (No. 194a) and a gill of brandy. Have six sour apples, peel, round and core them with a tin tube five-eighths of an inch in diameter; lay them in with the cabbage, and cover the top with a buttered paper; cook in a slow oven for two hours and a half. Just when ready to serve remove the fat and dress the cabbage in the center of a dish with the apples around, arranging a small Chipolata sausage (No. 754) between each one. (2708). KOHL-RABIES, HOUSEKEEPER'S STYLE (Choux Raves à la Ménagère). Cut some medium-sized kohl-rabies in four equal parts, or if very large, then in six or eight; peel and pare them into crescent olive form, obtaining about three pounds in all. Blanch these in boiling salted water, refresh and drain once more. Put six ounces of butter into a saucepan and when very hot and cooked to hazel- nut (No. 567) lay in the blanched kohl-rabies and toss them so they do not color; moisten with broth (No. 194a), let cook, reduce to a glaze and when serving dilute with a pint of béchamel sauce (No. 409), also adding three ounces of fresh butter, a very small lump at a time. (2709). KOHL-RABIES, STUFFED (Choux Raves Farcis). Shape them perfectly round and all of uniform size; empty out the insides and stuff them while raw, or else blanch them first in boiling salted water for a few moments; the stuffing consists of godiveau forcemeat (No. 85), having truffles, mushrooms and parsley, all chopped up, mixed in with it; range them in a sautoir lined with fat pork and moisten with a little gravy (No. 404); when done drain and strain the stock, remove all of its fat and reduce it with as much espagnole sauce (No. 414). Lay the kohl-rabies over the sauce and serve. (2710). CARDOONS WITH HALF-GLAZE (Cardons à la Demi-glace). Remove the large strings from a head of cardoon; cut the tenderest parts into four-inch lengths and throw them at once into cold acidulated water, then plunge them into boiling water, also acidulated with citric acid or vinegar; blanch until the downy skin detaches, rubbing with a cloth and drain to plunge at ounce into an abundance of cold water. Pare the cardoon, suppressing the superficial threads, and range them in a saucepan lined with fat pork; cover with more pork and moisten with unskimmed broth (No. 194a) mixed with a little white wine; add the cut-up pulp of a lemon, salt and aromatics, cover the saucepan and finish cooking very slowly. At the last moment drain them on a tammy, then on a cloth and cut them up into even lengths to dress in a pyramid on a dish, covering over with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) reduced with Madeira wine. Cardoons may be covered with a velouté sauce (No. 415) or else a brown sauce (No. 414), having some poached marrow cut into large dice added. (2711). CARROTS, COLBERT (Carottes à la Colbert). Take a few dozen small, new carrots of uniform-size, trim them pear -shaped, blanch for a few moments in salted water, drain and lay them in a saucepan with a little butter, salt, a pinch of sugar and white broth (No. 194a); cook until they fall to a glaze, and should they then not be sufficiently tender, remoisten and reduce the liquid once more; finish with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413), butter and lemon juice. (2712). CARROTS GLAZED OR WITH FINE HERBS (Carottes Glacées ou aux Fines Herbes). Turn or cut out with a spoon ( Fig. 91) some carrots, shaping them to resemble olives; blanch, then sauté in butter with a little sugar; moisten with broth (No. 194a) and cook slowly until reduced to a glaze, and the moistening reduced the same, in the meanwhile having the carrots done; add a little root glaze (No. 403) and then dish up in a pyramid. For Fine Herbs add to the carrots prepared as for the above some chopped parsley and finely cut-up chives. (2713). CARROTS, VIENNESE STYLE (Carottes à la Viennaise). Scrape some large carrots and cut them up into balls with a vegetable spoon five-eighths of an inch in diameter; blanch them in salted water until half done, then drain, place them in a saucepan with white broth (No. 194a), salt and a very little sugar; finish cooking, letting the liquid fall to a glaze, and just when ready to serve thicken with a little well-buttered velouté sauce (No. 415), to which add lemon juice, fine herbs and meat glaze (No. 402). (2714). CARROTS WITH CREAM (Carottes à la Crème). Cut some carrots into inch lengths; from the red parts remove cylindricals with a round vegetable cutter five-sixteenths of an inch in diameter; blanch until half done, then drain and sauté in butter with a little sugar; moisten with white broth (No. 194a) and put on to cook; when ready to serve boil with cream and thicken with egg-yolks and fresh butter. (2715). STUFFED CAULIFLOWER à LA BéCHAMEL--BAKED (Choux-fleurs Farcis à la Béchamel au Gratin). Prepare, cook and drain the cauliflower the same as for fried bread-crumbs ( No. 2718 ); scoop out the hearts and fill them with veal godiveau (No. 85), into which mix parsley and chives, both finely chopped. Place the cauliflower stalk downward on a buttered dish and cover over with allemande sauce (No. 407), into which mix half as much cooked herbs (No. 385). Strew the top with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan, pour butter over and push into a moderate oven for ten minutes; baste at frequent intervals and color the cauliflower; remove and decorate around with heart -shaped croûtons fried in butter, then serve. (2716). CAULIFLOWER à LA VILLEROI, FRIED AND SAUTéD WITH FINE HERBS (Choux-fleurs à la Villeroi, Frits et Sautés aux Fines Herbes). à la Villeroi. --This is to be cooked and drained the same as for white sauce ( No. 2719 ), then covered with well-reduced allemande sauce (No. 407) into which mingle chopped-up fresh mushrooms and chopped parsley; when thoroughly cold immerse in beaten eggs, then in bread-crumbs, smooth the breading and fry it a golden color; drain, salt and dress on a folded napkin, laying a bunch of fried parsley on top. Fried. --Have the cauliflowers cooked and well drained, then dip each piece in beaten eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and fry to a fine color. Sautéd with Fine Herbs. --After the cauliflowers are boiled and drained the same as for the above, divide in flowerets and sauté in butter, seasoning with salt, pepper and chopped parsley. (2717). CAULIFLOWERS WITH CHEESE--BAKED (Choux-fleurs au Fromage Gratinés). Suppress the hard parts from some cauliflowers, divide in small flowerets and cook in salted water. When they are tender and drained range them in layers in a vegetable dish with a little reduced béchamel (No. 409); bestrew with grated parmesan and pour over some butter; give them a dome shape and cover with a layer of thick béchamel, finished with grated parmesan and butter; dredge evenly with more parmesan and color nicely in the oven for twelve minutes. (2718). CAULIFLOWERS WITH FRIED BREAD-CRUMBS (Choux-fleurs à la Mie de Pain Frits). Divide some cauliflowers into separate flowerets all of uniform size; pare the stalks to a point, wash and drop them into a saucepanful of hot water, then boil the liquid very slowly. When the pieces are three-quarters cooked salt the water and withdraw the saucepan to allow them to finish cooking much slower; in this way they remain firmer; drain, dress the cauliflowers and cover over with butter having fried bread-crumbs added to it. (2719). CAULIFLOWERS, BROCCOLI, OR SEA KALE, WITH WHITE, BUTTER OR CREAM SAUCE (Choux-fleurs, Brocolis et Choux de Mer à la Sauce Blanche, au Beurre à la Crème). For serving whole with sauces the cauliflowers should be chosen very white and close; cut off the bottom of the stalks, clean the inner parts well, removing the outer peel and leaves covering the stalk, then lay them in a well-tinned and very clean saucepan containing hot water and a little butter; remove to the side of the range to cook slowly until three-quarters done, then salt the water and finish cooking. Dress on a folded napkin, the stalk end downward, and serve apart either a white sauce (No. 562), a butter sauce (No. 440), or a cream sauce (No. 454). Broccoli, a long-stalked cauliflower, can be prepared the same way, also sea kale; the only difference to be observed is that these must be served with slices of toast, buttered with fresh butter. (2720). CELERY WITH BéCHAMEL AND CROûTONS (Céleri Béchamel aux Croûtons). Cut into large squares, each one inch in size, the yellow stalks of a head of celery; blanch them in water, drain and place in a saucepan with a quart of white broth (No. 194a), an ounce of butter and a coffeespoonful of powdered sugar; cook so that the liquid reduces, and when the celery is done add to it a pint of béchamel sauce (No. 409), some grated nutmeg and salt. Just when serving incorporate two ounces of fresh butter; pour into a vegetable dish and garnish around with bread croûtons shaped like small hearts ( Fig. 40) and fried in butter. (2721). CELERY STALKS WITH HALF-GLAZE, ESPAGNOLE AND MARROW, OR VELOUTé SAUCE (Pieds de Céleri à la Demi-glace, à la Sauce Espagnole à la Moelle ou à la Sauce Veloutée). Suppress the outer hard stalks from eight or ten tender, but not too large celery heads; cut the remainder into four or five-inch lengths and pare the roots to a point. Wash them carefully and blanch for twenty minutes; refresh and range them in a saucepan to cover with unskimmed broth (No. 194a); lay a buttered paper or a thin slice of fat pork on the top and cook very slowly. Drain, wipe well, pare and dress them on a dish; mask over entirely with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) reduced with Madeira wine, or else an espagnole sauce (No. 414) with marrow, or a velouté sauce (No. 415) reduced with mushroom essence (No. 392) and buttered when ready to serve. (2722). CELERIAC MIRABEAU OR à LA VILLEROI (Céleri-rave Mirabeau ou à la Villeroi). Mirabeau. --Peel the celeriac, cut them either into balls with a large vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) or in the shape of cloves or crescents; blanch in salted water, drain and place in a deep buttered sautoir; cover with broth (No. 194a) and finish cooking while glazing; dress and pour over some Mirabeau sauce (No. 500). à la Villeroi. --Cut the celeriac into four pieces; pare them like cloves of garlic, having one pound in all; blanch in salted water, drain, place in a saucepan, adding half a pint of stock (No. 194a), and a little sugar; cook, drain once more, and when cold cover over with a Villeroi sauce (No. 560) with mushrooms and chopped parsley; lay on a baking sheet to cool, after which pare off the surplus sauce, dip them in eggs and bread-crumbs and fry to a fine color; dress on a folded napkin, with a bunch of parsley leaves on top. (2723). CèPES, PROVENçAL STYLE (Cépes à la Provenç ale ). Wash and wipe some cèpes heads after suppressing the stalks; split them in two through their thickness and fry in oil over a brisk fire, with some chopped onions, a clove of garlic and bay leaf, seasoning with salt and pepper. When their moisture has been reduced add a little reduced espagnole sauce (No. 414) and tomato sauce (No. 549); boil up once or twice and finish with chopped parsley and lemon juice. Take out the garlic and bayleaf, dish them up and surround with croûtons of bread (No. 51), fried in oil. (2724). CèPES BAKED WITH CREAM (Cèpes Gratinés à la Crème). Suppress the stalks from some clean cèpes; divide the heads and salt over, flour them briskly and put them into a sautoir with hot butter, moisten with a little good raw cream, adding chopped onions and parsley and a bunch of fennel; finish cooking very slowly while covered for three-quarters of an hour, then remove with a skimmer, lay them in a bowl, and thicken the gravy with some good béchamel sauce (No. 409); let this reduce without ceasing to stir and when the sauce becomes succulent add to it the cèpes and let cook for two minutes. Pour the stew into a vegetable dish, bestrew with bread-crumbs and bake for ten minutes in a quick oven; serve the cèpes in this same dish. (2725). CèPES MINCED IN CROUSTADES (Cèpes émincés en Croustades). Trim some bread croûtons into ovals three inches long by two inches wide and half an inch thick; slit them all around an eighth of an inch from the edges and fry in clarified butter; remove the tops and empty them completely. Peel some cèpes, cut them in two through their thickness, salt over and leave them for twenty minutes, then mince them finely and fry in butter; drain this off and transfer them to a saucepan, adding some sour cream; finish cooking, then mingle in a little béchamel sauce (No. 409) and meat glaze (No. 402); add a small bit of finely cut-up green fennel and fill the croustades with this preparation; serve at once, very hot. (2726). CèPES STUFFED (Cèpes Farcis). Choose cèpes of even size one inch and three-quarters to two inches in diameter, firm and fresh; remove the stalks and scoop out the heads from the stalk end with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91), then peel and salt over; chop up the stalks and parings, mix with them some fat pork and cooked ham, both chopped, bread-crumb panada (No. 121), chopped parsley with a clove of garlic, a few raw egg-yolks, salt and pepper. A quarter of an hour after fill the hollow spaces with the prepared dressing and strew with bread-crumbs; range them in a sautoir, pour over butter or oil and cook very slowly for one hour in a slack oven, while covered; serve with their own stock, thickened with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) or béchamel sauce (No. 409). (2727). CHESTNUTS WITH GRAVY (Marrons au Jus). Remove the shells from several dozen large chestnuts, then scald so to be able to peel off the red skins; put them into a buttered flat saucepan, salt and moisten to their height with good broth (No. 194a); boil the liquid and withdraw the saucepan to a slower fire to have the chestnuts cook while remaining whole. When tender the moisture should be entirely reduced; glaze with a brush before serving. (2728). CHICORY TIMBALES (Timbales de Chicorée). Have some chicory prepared the same as for cream ( No. 2729 ), strain it through a sieve; put one pound of this into a saucepan with four ounces of finely chopped cooked mushrooms, seasoning with salt, pepper and nutmeg; mix in singly four whole eggs, two yolks and lastly a gill of cream. Decorate some timbale molds (No. 2, Fig. 137), or a larger one, with fanciful cuts of truffles and tongue; fill these with the preparation and lay them in a sautoir on the fire; pour in boiling water to reach to half their height, boil and finish poaching in a slack oven; unmold and serve separately a Hungarian sauce (No. 479). (2729). CHICORY WITH CREAM (Chicorée à la Crème). Pick eight chicory heads, suppress all the green leaves, wash well, and cut the bottoms into a cross; plunge into boiling salted water, and let cook for twenty-five to thirty minutes; refresh, drain, press out all the moisture, and pick over carefully to remove any small straws or other impurities that may be found among the leaves, then chop up finely. Heat some butter in a saucepan, put in the chicory, and dry it over a brisk fire for ten minutes without ceasing to stir; add a heaping tablespoonful of flour, some salt, nutmeg, sugar and rich cream; when very hot and ready to serve incorporate four ounces of fresh butter. If to be served as a vegetable pour it into a vegetable dish, and surround with bread croûtons (No. 51) fried in butter. (2730). CORN ON THE COB--BOILED (Mais Bouilli en Tige). Select white and close-grained corn; open the husks without tearing, and remove the silk found between these and the corn; brush over, and close up the husks, tying them at the ends, or remove them entirely from the stalk end, either way being optional, then cut the stalks off straight at both ends. Boil them in water to which add a quarter as much milk and salt. They take about twenty to twenty-five minutes to cook. Dress in a napkin, serving butter at the same time. (2731). CORN CUT UP, SUCCOTASH AND CORN PANCAKES (Mais Coupé, "Succotash," et Crèpes de Mais). Cut-up Corn. --Boil the corn without the leaves the same as for on the cob ( No. 2730 ); split the grains with a knife through the center their entire length; press down forcibly with the back of a knife to extract all the inside parts without the skin; season in a pan with salt, pepper and fresh butter; toss well, and serve very hot in a vegetable dish. Succotash. --Use corn that has been cut the same as in the preceding paragraph, having as much lima bean s or string beans . Sauté both corn and beans together in butter, adding salt and pepper. The succotash can be thickened with a little velouté sauce (No. 415), or béchamel sauce (No. 409). Corn Pancakes. --The same preparation as for ordinary unsweetened pancakes, mixing in as much cut-up and chopped corn. Make pancakes a quarter of an inch thick; color well, and serve them very hot. (2732). CUCUMBERS FRIED, BREADED ENGLISH STYLE AND FRIED à LA VILLEROI (Concombres Frits, Panés à l'Anglaise et Frits à la Villeroi). Fried. --Cut some peeled cucumbers in slices a quarter of an inch thick by one and three-quarters inches in diameter; empty out the center seed parts with a three-quarter inch diameter tube; salt over for fifteen minutes, then drain, wipe, dip them in flour, and fry to a fine golden color in very hot frying fat. Fried Breaded English Style. --Cut the cucumbers in two-inch lengths and then once across in the center; peel, remove the inner seeds, round the corners, and cook them in salted water. Drain, wipe, immerse in beaten eggs, bread-crumb English style, and fry to a nice color, having fennel sauce (No. 463), served apart. Fried à la Villeroi. --Prepare and cook the cucumbers the same as the glazed ones ( No. 2733 ), and cover with cold Villeroi sauce (No. 560); place on a baking sheet to cool; take them up with a thin knife; dip each piece in egg and bread-crumbs, fry to a good color, and dress on a folded napkin. (2733). CUCUMBERS GLAZED (Concombres Glacés). Split some cucumbers crosswise into two-inch pieces, having them an inch and a half in diameter, and each of these lengthways and across to obtain four quarters; peel and remove the seeds; pare them into the shape of cloves, add garlic, and cook in salted water; drain, wipe on a cloth, and put them in a thin sautoir with melted butter to reduce their humidity, then pour off the butter, and moisten with some gravy (No. 404), letting this fall to a glaze. (2734). CUCUMBERS STUFFED (Concombres Farcis). Peel the cucumbers and cut them in inch lengths; empty each piece with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91), retaining a quarter of an inch at the bottom; blanch, then cook in consommé (No. 189) and drain. Fry a little onion in butter, add some chopped mushrooms, evaporate their humidity, then throw in some chopped truffles and parsley, also a little gravy (No. 404); simmer and add soaked and well-pressed bread-crumbs and raw egg-yolks. Stuff the cucumbers with this, stand them on a dish, bestrew the cucumbers with bread-crumbs and a little grated parmesan, pour over melted butter and finish cooking brown in a moderate oven. Dress in a vegetable dish on a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (2735). EGGPLANT à LA DUPERRET--BROILED (Aubergines Grillées à la Duperret). Peel some eggplants, cut them up into three-eighths of an inch thick slices, each one to be three inches in diameter; season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, and let marinate for two hours, then drain off and dry; baste over with oil and broil them on a slow fire; dress with maitre-d'hôtel butter (No. 581) poured over. Eggplant can also be prepared by cutting it up three-quarters of an inch in thickness and three inches in diameter; score and besprinkle with fine salt; leave for one hour, then wipe dry and season with salt and black or red pepper, pour over a little oil, and turn them frequently before broiling to a fine color on a slow fire. Fry a little well-chopped shallot, mushroom and parsley in butter, season with salt and pepper, add a little espagnole sauce (No. 414), and lemon juice. Dish up the eggplant and pour the sauce over after incorporating a small piece of fresh butter. (2736). EGGPLANT IN CASES à LA MORTON (Aubergines en Caisses à la Morton). Butter some cases, either of paper or china; cover the bottom of each with a slice of peeled eggplant an eighth of an inch thick, and around with small bands of the same, exactly like an apple charlotte; cut up the remainder of the plant in squares, and fry them colorless in butter, then drain. Chop up as much cooked chicken meat as eggplant, and mix both together with mushrooms, truffles and chopped parsley, seasoning with salt, pepper and nutmeg, adding a very little thick allemande sauce (No. 407). With this preparation fill the cases, smooth the tops and bestrew with bread-crumbs; pour a little oil over and push into a moderate oven; when done drain off the fat, cover over with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and serve. (2737). EGGPLANT à LA ROBERTSON (Aubergines à la Robertson). Have some peeled eggplants cut in half-inch diameter slices, sprinkle over with salt, and leave them to marinate for twenty minutes, then wipe and fry in oil over a brisk fire; color them to a light golden brown, season and drain; dress in a circle, intercalating a layer of béchamel sauce (No. 409) between each slice; fill the center of the circle with more eggplant, cooked smothered with a piece of butter, then pressed through a sieve. Cover the whole with thick béchamel, and scatter on white bread-crumbs and a little grated parmesan; pour over fresh butter and brown in a hot oven, serving as quickly as it assumes a fine color. (2738). EGGPLANT STUFFED AND BAKED (Aubergines Farcies Gratinées). Divide some small eggplants, each one in two, without peeling them; score and fry, then drain and empty out the center with a spoon, leaving a layer a quarter of an inch thick against the peel. Chop up the parts that have been removed, adding as much soaked and well-pressed bread-crumbs, and a clove of crushed garlic; cook the preparation for a few moments, season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, and remove from the fire until it loses its greatest heat, then finish with a few raw egg-yolks and chopped parsley. Fill the interior of the halved eggplants with this, smooth the tops and range them on a baking sheet; pour over plenty of oil and cook in a slack oven. When a fine color dress them on an espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with tomato sauce (No. 549) and run through a fine sieve. (2739). EGGPLANT FRIED (Aubergines Frites). Peel some eggplants; cut them into three-eighths of an inch slices, and from these remove round pieces two and a half inches in diameter, using a pastry cutter for the purpose; roll them in flour and then fry to a fine color, or they can be fried plain without any flour. Another Way is to cut peeled eggplant into three-eighths of an inch slices and divide these into squares; salt over and drain for fifteen minutes on a sieve; wipe on a cloth and flour them quickly, a few at a time; drop them into very hot frying fat, and when done and of a fine color drain, salt and dress either kind on a napkin. Breaded Eggplant. --Cut each slice a quarter of an inch thick; remove from them rounds two and a quarter inches in diameter; dip them in flour, then in beaten egg, and lastly in bread-crumbs; smooth the breading with a knife and fry to a fine color; drain and dress on a napkin. (2740). ENDIVES OR ESCAROLES GLAZED (Endives ou Escaroles Glacées). Wipe the endives well, cut them of an even length and range them in a flat buttered saucepan; season and baste over with butter; cook on a slow fire while covered and with no other moistening, turning them over once only. At the last moment drain off the endives; arrange them on a dish and unglaze the saucepan with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) or light béchamel (No. 409), then strain the sauce over. (2741). GREEN PEAS --MANGETOUT--à LA FLEURETTE (Petits Pois Mangetout à la Fleurette). These are prepared with "mangetout" peas, a species of very tender peas, the pods of which are eaten as well as the contents. String the threads on both sides of the pod from some "mangetout" peas after they are partly cooked; drain and put them in a saucepan with some fresh cream; let simmer until the peas are entirely cooked, and just when serving season with salt, a little sugar, finely cut-up chives and a dash of vinegar. They can be thickened with egg-yolks, cream and fresh butter just before serving. (2742). GREEN PEAS, ENGLISH STYLE, AND PURéE OF GREEN PEAS (Petits Pois à l'Anglaise et Purée de Pois Verts). Boil some green peas in an untinned copper vessel containing boiling salted water and a few mint leaves; when cooked, drain and place them in a sautoir with salt, sugar and fresh butter, divided in small pats, mixing it into the peas without stirring them. Dress in a vegetable dish and lay small bits of butter on top. Purée of Green Peas. --To obtain a purée pound the cooked and drained peas in a mortar, adding some very thick béchamel (No. 409); season with salt and sugar, press through a fine sieve, and return to the saucepan to boil; stir in some fine butter at the last moment. (2743). GREEN PEAS, FRENCH STYLE (Petits Pois à la Française). Put one pint of fresh-shelled green peas into a saucepan with a little cold water, stirring in a piece of butter; add salt and a bunch of parsley; cook with the lid on. When sufficiently done and the liquid reduced add a small piece of kneaded butter (No. 579); then take from the fire and finish by incorporating a large piece of butter divided in small bits. The peas should be well buttered and thickened so that the liquid be entirely absorbed. With Sugar. --Prepare them exactly the same, only adding a pinch of powdered sugar. (2744). GREEN PEAS, HOUSEKEEPER'S STYLE (Petits Pois à la Ménagère). Take half a pound of lean un smoked bacon cut in quarter-inch squares; blanch, drain and put them into a saucepan with four ounces of butter; fry the bacon colorless, then add a spoonful of flour and when this begins to brown moisten with a quart of stock (No. 194a); add three quarts of shelled fresh peas, a bunch of parsley and three green onions. When the peas are done remove the parsley and onion, drain off the stock, thicken it with a little kneaded butter (No. 579) and pass it through a sieve; put it back with the peas, boil both together again and remove from the fire; thicken with egg-yolks diluted in cream, at the same time incorporating a piece of fresh butter. (2745). GREEN PEAS, PARISIAN STYLE--SMALL (Petits Pois fins à la Parisienne). Cook some small green peas in a pan or small copper vessel with salted water, a large green onion and a bunch of parsley; as soon as done, take out the parsley and onion, drain through a colander without refreshing and put the peas into a sautoir with a pinch of sugar and nutmeg, thickening with a little velouté sauce (No. 415); take the peas from the fire, toss well and dress in a vegetable dish, garnishing around with puff paste croûtons. (2746). GREEN PEAS WITH BRAISED LETTUCES (Petits Pois aux Laitues Braisées). Blanch and braise fifteen lettuce heads; drain them to pare, fold and trim evenly; put them back into the sautoir and pour over a few spoonfuls of half-glaze (No. 400) so as to be able to heat them up. At the last moment dress them in a circle on a dish, alternating each one with a thin bread-crumb crust fried in butter and then glazed with a brush. In the hollow of the circle dress a garnishing of small green peas cooked in salted water and simply finished with a piece of fresh butter. (2747). GREEN PEAS WITH SHREDDED LETTUCES (Petits Pois aux Laitues Ciselées). Put a pound and a half of fresh green peas, recently shelled, into a saucepan with two tender lettuce heads shredded up coarsely, one small onion, a bunch of parsley, salt, a pinch of sugar and sufficient cold water to reach to about their height; cover the saucepan and cook for twenty to twenty-five minutes on a hot fire. Suppress the parsley and onion, thicken the liquid with a small piece of butter kneaded with flour (No. 579), and finish off the fire with a lump of fresh butter divided in small pats. (2748). HOP STALKS OR POINTS FRIED AND WITH VIENNESE SAUCE (Pointes ou Tiges de Houblon Frites et à la Sauce Viennaise). Select the white parts of some young hops; these should be picked from the 15th of May to the 15th of June; blanch them in boiling water with salt, drain and lay them on a dish to season with salt and lemon juice, roll in rice flour, dip them in frying batter (No. 137), not too thick, plunge into hot fat, and when done drain, salt and serve. Viennese. --After the hops have been cooked in salted water, drain well and place them in a vegetable dish, covering over with Viennese sauce (No. 558). (2749). JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES à LA SALAMANDER (Topinambours à la Salamandre). Pare Jerusalem artichokes into three-quarter inch rounds, or else in the shape of a pigeon's egg; cook in salted water, drain and sauté in butter without letting attain a color. Prepare a purée by placing some peeled Jerusalem artichokes in a saucepan to boil; drain when done, and cover over with a damp cloth; dry in the oven, then press through a sieve. Return this purée to the saucepan; season with salt, nutmeg, fresh butter and egg-yolks, and form it into a border inside a dish, either pushed through a channeled socket pocket or else modeled with the hand; lay the sautéd Jerusalem artichokes in the center, strew grated parmesan over, cover with some rather thin cream béchamel sauce (No. 411), and then more parmesan; color in a brisk oven, serving it immediately after it is baked to a golden brown. (2750). LENTILS WITH BACON (Lentilles au Petit Salé). Soak a pound and a half of lentils for six hours, after picking and washing them in several waters; put them into a saucepan with half a pound of unsalted and blanched lean breast of bacon, some carrots, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, an onion with one clove stuck in it, pepper, nutmeg and stock (No. 194a); boil, skim, and simmer until thoroughly done, and after removing the carrots, parsley, onion and pork, drain off the stock, toss the lentils in butter, and season with salt, pepper, chopped parsley and lemon juice, or they can be sautéd with a little allemande sauce (No. 407). Dress and surround with well-pared slices of the bacon, and over this pour a little gravy (No. 404), then serve. (2751). LETTUCES CHOPPED WITH CROûTONS (Laitues Hachées aux Croûtons). Pick and pare nicely some lettuce heads by removing the green leaves from the bottom of the stalk; detach all the leaves separately, and wash them in several changes of water, then blanch, refresh and drain; press down well to extract the liquid; pick over to remove all straws and other impurities that may be attached to the lettuce, then chop it up finely, and lay it in a saucepan with a piece of butter; dry over the fire, and season with salt and nutmeg, adding a pinch of flour; moisten with some clear gravy (No. 404), and then dress. Surround the lettuce with croûtons fried in butter. The gravy may be replaced by cream and the flour by velouté sauce (No. 415) or espagnole sauce (No. 414). Cos lettuce can be prepared and served the same way. (2752). LETTUCES STUFFED AND FRIED (Laitues Farcies et Frites). Pare and wash some lettuce heads in several changes of water, blanch them in a copper basin and cook in boiling, salted water for twenty minutes; drain, refresh and press out the liquid from each one separately. Spread them on a cloth, open the leaves, and fill each lettuce with a forcemeat ball an inch and a half in diameter, prepared as follows: Take a quarter of a pound of cooked chicken meat, the same of cooked ham, the same of cooked mushrooms, and add a pound of veal udder, a quarter of a pound of soaked and pressed-out bread-crumbs, salt, pepper, chopped parsley, minced chives and five egg-yolks, the whole to be well pounded in a mortar. Enclose the forcemeat ball in the lettuce. Wrap each of these in a slice of fat pork, braise for one hour, drain and dip in egg and bread-crumbs, either whole or cut in two, fry to a fine color, and serve with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) apart. (2753). LETTUCES WITH HALF-GLAZE SAUCE --STUFFED (Laitues Farcies à la Sauce Demi-Glace). Blanch some pared and well-washed lettuces for ten to twelve minutes; drain on a sieve, and press them singly to extract all the water, then double them over and range them in a sautoir lined with fat pork; season and moisten with broth (No. 194a), cover with buttered paper and cook for one hour on a slow fire. Drain the lettuces once more, open them and stuff with veal quenelle forcemeat (No. 92), closing them up again carefully; return to a clean sautoir one beside the other and pour over a little gravy (No. 404); cook once more for twenty minutes on a slow fire, drain and shape them prettily. Dress on a dish in a circle, and cover over with a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (2754). LETTUCES WITH THICKENED GRAVY --BRAISED (Laitues Braisées au Jus Lié). Trim some lettuce heads by removing the green leaves from the stalks; pare these stalks to a point, wash the lettuces in several waters, changing it each time, and then blanch for ten minutes in a copper basin with boiling salted water; drain on a sieve, press each one separately to extract all the liquid, and fold them lengthwise in two, wrapping each one in a thin slice of fat pork tied on with a thin string. Range them in a sautoir, braise in a mirepoix stock (No. 419) and broth (No. 194a) half of each, and cover with buttered paper; let cook for one hour and a quarter on a slow fire or in the oven, being careful to baste occasionally during the operation. Drain the lettuces, dress them in a circle; strain the stock, remove its fat and reduce it well with a little espagnole sauce (No. 414); pour a third part of this over the lettuces and serve the remainder separately. (2755). MACéDOINE à LA MONTIGNY (Macédoine à la Montigny). Cut carrots into small quarter-inch cylindricals, turnips into five-sixteenths inch in diameter balls, string beans into lozenges; also have small flageolet beans and peas. Blanch and cook each vegetable separately, drain, fry together colorless in butter, and mingle in a good soubise sauce (No. 543), thickening when ready to use with a little fresh butter and seasoning. Bread-crumb and egg over some small teaspoon chicken quenelles (No. 155), fry them in clarified butter, drain and range them around the dressed macédoine. FIG. 549 An illustration of mushrooms on the ground. (2756). MUSHROOMS à LA RAYNAL--MOUSSERONS (Champignons Mousserons à la Raynal). Prepare a foundation paste (No. 135) croustade, having it broad and rather high; place it on a baking sheet and fill it with a preparation made with a pound and a half of mushrooms cooked for five minutes in a little butter and broth (No. 194a); season with salt, then drain; when they are done cut them up finely and add the pieces to a chicken purée (No. 713), having it the consistency of a thick sauce, mixing in some raw egg-yolks. Push the filled croustade into the oven and let cook without browning. Have prepared a dozen mushroom heads, each one an inch and a half in diameter, suppress the stalks, scoop out the inside and chop up the fragments and stalks very fine; fry them in butter until quite dry, add lemon juice and let cool; mix this with the same quantity of chicken forcemeat (No. 86) and chopped parsley, season well and use this to fill the mushroom heads, forming them slightly rounded on top; lay them on a baking pan, scatter bread-crumbs over and pour on some butter; slip a little broth into the bottom and place in the oven for half an hour; dress these mushrooms on top of the croustade and serve. (2757). MUSHROOMS à LA DUMAS--ORONGES (Champignons Oronges à la Dumas). Remove the skin from some oronges; mince finely and fry in oil; when the moisture has all evaporated, season and drain in a colander. Put some fresh oil in the pan, add to it parsley and a clove of garlic and afterward the drained oronges with the addition of a little salt and cayenne pepper; dress on a baking dish, dredge over bread-crumbs to cover and push into the oven. Turn eighteen whole mushroom oronges, having them an inch and three-quarters in diameter; chop up the stalks with the removed parts from the inside. Have a sautoir on the fire, set into it a quarter of a pound of butter with as much oil; in this fry colorless four finely chopped and blanched shallots, a clove of garlic, the chopped oronges and a heaping tablespoonful of chopped parsley; when there is no more moisture, add half a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414). Remove the garlic, stuff the whole oronges with this preparation, bestrew with bread-crumbs, pour butter over and place them in a baking pan; moisten with mushroom liquor and cook in a moderate oven for twenty minutes, and garnish the baked preparation around with these. (2758). MUSHROOMS à LA RIVERA--MORILS (Champignons Morilles à la Rivera). Select large-sized morils; cut off the stalks, wash well and throw them into a saucepanful of tepid water; leave to soak for half an hour, then take them up, one by one, and rub them several times through the hands, being careful not to break them and changing the water each time so as to remove all the adhering sand, then drain. Cut some lean ham into one-eighth inch dice pieces, fry in butter, add the morils and toss both together, then moisten with half a pint of good sherry and a little Malaga; season and cook slowly for half an hour. Fry some sweet Spanish peppers in oil; when done and well drained, add a little meat glaze (No. 402) and lemon juice. Dress the morils in the center of a dish and surround with the sweet peppers; bestrew with chopped parsley. (2759). MUSHROOM CRUSTS AND WITH TRUFFLES --MOUSSERONS (Croûtes aux Champignons Mousserons et Croûtes aux Champignons Mousserons aux Truffes). These are prepared in various ways. Flat crusts are made three inches in diameter and a quarter of an inch thick, to be covered over with butter and placed in the oven to attain a fine color. Or cut off the tops of some rolls or flutes, empty out all the crumbs, coat the inside with fresh butter and put them into the oven to color nicely. Turn and channel (No. 118) one pound of sound mushroom heads; wash them in clear water, then place in a saucepan with a small piece of butter, salt, lemon juice and a little water, boil for a few moments, keeping the vessel closed. Reduce some velouté sauce (No. 415) with this mushroom liquid, add to it the mushrooms, remove at the first boil and thicken with four egg-yolks, a little cream and fresh butter; fill or cover the crusts with this and serve at once. For Mushroom and Truffle Crusts. --Prepare the same way, only adding minced truffles to the mushrooms; they may be colored in the oven by besprinkling the tops with bread-crumbs and cheese, pouring butter over, then set in the oven for a few moments. (2760). MUSHROOMS SAUTéD IN THICKENED BUTTER --MOUSSERONS (Champignons Mousserons Sautés au Beurre Lié). Turn one pound of mushroom heads (No. 118); peel the stalks and cut them up into medium-sized pieces. Put some clarified butter in a sautoir, add all the mushrooms, set it on the fire and let cook with salt and lemon juice and white wine. Just when ready to serve add a little béchamel sauce (No. 409); thicken with two egg-yolks and dilute with a gill of cream. (2761). MUSHROOMS SERVED UNDER A GLASS COVER AND WITH CREAM (Champignons Servis Sous Cloche en Verre et à la Crème). Have some round slices of bread, three inches in diameter and three-eighths of an inch thick. Cut off the stalks from some very fresh mushroom heads, channel (No. 118) and sauté range these on the slices of bread (the heads downward); season with salt and pepper and lay a single slice on a dish so that each individual guest can be supplied with a separate one. Cover with a bell made either of glass or silver and push them into the oven for twenty minutes. After removing lift off the bells and cover the mushrooms with a white wine velouté sauce (No. 415) or a white wine espagnole sauce (No. 492). FIG. 550 An illustration of mushrooms served in a plate under a glass cover. Under a Glass Cover with Cream. --Fry some turned mushroom heads in butter; moisten with fresh cream, season with salt and pepper; cover and simmer until the cream becomes partially reduced. Have slices of bread prepared the same as for the above, put a slice on each plate, and on these dress the mushrooms in a pyramid form, pouring a part of their liquid over each; put on the bells and lay them to bake in a slack oven for twenty minutes, then serve with the bells still on. (2762). MUSHROOMS STUFFED IN CASES WITH MADEIRA --MOUSSERONS (Champignons Mousserons Farcis en Caisses au Madère). Procure twelve mushrooms, each an inch and three-quarters in diameter; remove both peel and stalks; wash and with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) scoop out the centers until the firm mushroom meat is reached, then wash the whole, and chop up the stalks. Have some hot butter and in it fry a little shallot, parsley and truffles, all well chopped; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, and dilute with half a pint of well reduced allemande sauce (No. 407); fill the insides of the mushroom heads with this dressing. Prepare paper cases the same size as the mushroom heads, coat them with oil, and stiffen in the oven; into each case place a little Madeira wine, and one mushroom with the stuffed side uppermost; bestrew with bread-crumbs, pour over a little butter, and bake in the oven; when done to a fine color baste with Colbert sauce (No. 451), and serve. (2763). OKRA OR GUMBO, GARNISHED WITH BARLEY BéCHAMEL CROUSTADES (Gombo Garni de Croustades d'Orge, Béchamel). Procure young and tender okras; cut off both ends, keeping the gumbo two inches long; blanch them in a copper pan with boiling salted water, drain and lay them in a sautoir one beside the other; moisten to their height with mirepoix stock (No. 419), let simmer until cooked and the stock reduced to a glaze; dress, cover over with well-buttered béchamel sauce (No. 409), garnishing around with barley béchamel croustades, made according to the following directions. Barley Béchamel Croustades. --Boil some pearl barley in salted water for three hours, drain, put into a sautoir, and dilute with a well-buttered and highly seasoned sauce. Fill some hollow croustade tartlets with this, forming a cover with a round piece of savarin (No. 148) an inch and a quarter in diameter and three-eighths of an inch thick, having it buttered and glazed in the oven. (2764). ONIONS BOILED, HOLLANDAISE OR SOUBISE SAUCE (Oignons Bouillis, Sauce Hollandaise ou Soubise). Peel medium-sized onions, each one weighing two ounces; boil them in salted water, and when done, drain, wipe carefully, and dress them in clusters or in a row, covering over with Hollandaise sauce (No. 477) or a well-buttered soubise sauce (No. 543). (2765). ONIONS BRAISED (Oignons Braisés). Peel eighteen onions, weighing an ounce and a half each, being careful not to break them; cut off the stalks and roots and make a crosswise incision on the root end; sauté them in butter or fat with salt and a pinch of sugar, browning slightly; then range them in a sautoir with bards of fat pork; moisten with a little veal blond stock (No. 423), just sufficient to cover, and cook slowly while reducing the liquid. Dress in a vegetable dish and pour the stock over, or else cover with matelote sauce (No. 498), having reduced it with the stock. (2766). ONIONS, WHITE OR BERMUDA--STUFFED (Oignons Blancs Ordinaires ou d'Espagne Farcis). Take either common white onions or Bermudas of medium size, each weighing about three ounces; plunge those selected into boiling water for two minutes, then drain and peel off the outer skin; empty the insides with a vegetable spoon (No. 91), blanch for a few moments, drain and stuff them with chicken forcemeat (No. 79), incorporating as much cooked fine herbs (No. 385); bestrew the tops with bread-crumbs, pour butter over and lay them in a sautoir lined with fat pork; moisten to a third of their height with broth (No. 194a), then cook until they attain a color in a moderate oven; dress on a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and serve. (2767). PARSNIP CAKES FRIED IN BUTTER (Galettes de Panais Frites au Beurre). Cut three pounds of young parsnips in six or eight pieces, according to their size, after they have been peeled and washed; boil them in water with salt and butter; when cooked drain off well, then pound and season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Press this pulp forcibly through a sieve, incorporate a little butter, then leave to cool. Divide the preparation into two-inch diameter balls, roll these in flour, flatten to half an inch in thickness and fry in clarified butter; drain and dress on napkins with fried parsley on top. (2768). GREEN PEPPERS STUFFED (Piments Verts Farcis). Plunge the peppers into hot fat, leaving them in sufficiently long to be able to detach the outer skin by rubbing with a cloth; cut off the stalk ends and empty out the seeds, etc. Prepare a forcemeat with finely chopped onions and fry it in oil with as much cut-up peppers; let get cold, then mix in a quarter of a pound of cooked sausage meat (No. 68), a quarter of a pound of chopped fresh mushrooms and a little thick tomato purée (No. 730). Put the whole into a saucepan on the fire, boil, thicken with bread-crumbs and season with salt, pepper and nutmeg; when partially cold stir in four egg-yolks. Fill the peppers with this, lay them on a baking pan covered with thin slices of fat pork, pour butter over and set in a moderate oven for fifteen minutes; dress in a circle, pouring a little light half-glaze sauce (No. 413) in the center. (2769). SWEET PEPPERS SAUTéD (Piments Doux Sautés). Plunge the sweet peppers in hot fat, or broil them, to be able to remove the light skin; divide each one in two, cut away the hard parts and sauté slowly in oil, cooking them at the same time; season with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168), finely chopped shallot and parsley; dress in a vegetable dish and serve. Instead of fresh sweet peppers canned ones can be substituted, these being imported from Spain. (2770). POTATOES, ANNA (Pommes de Terra Anna). Select long-shaped potatoes ; they must be peeled and cut into the form of a large cork; mince them finely, and soak in water for a few moments; drain and wipe on a cloth. Butter and bread the inside of a thick copper pan, having a well-fitted cover; range on the bottom and sides a thin layer of the potatoes , one overlapping the other, then fill entirely with the remaining ones in separate layers, covering each with butter free from moisture, softened by working in a napkin; mask the upper layer with the same, and close with the lid. Cook the potatoes for three-quarters of an hour in the oven; a quarter of an hour before serving take from the fire, drain off the butter and cut a cross through the potatoes yet in the sautoir, and turn each quarter over with the aid of a palette; put back the drained-off butter and return to the oven until ready, and invert on a dish to serve. These potatoes may be made in a smaller pan; in this case they should not be cut but turned over whole before putting in the oven the second time. FIG. 553 An illustration of a metal pan with cover. (2771). POTATOES BAKED (Pommes de Terre Rôties). Wash and brush medium-sized potatoes , wipe dry and lay them on a dish, then push into a hot oven for thirty to forty minutes; when done serve on a napkin, or else they may be steamed or boiled, then baked and peeled; cover with butter, color in the oven, and serve in a vegetable dish. (2772). POTATOES BIARRITZ--BAKED (Pommes de Terre au Gratin à la Biarritz). Put a pound of peeled potatoes to boil in salted water; drain as soon as done, and dry in the oven; rub through a sieve, then put this purée into a saucepan to dilute with a little clear gravy (No. 404), and add meat glaze (No. 402), two shallots previously fried in butter, chopped parsley, salt, pepper, nutmeg, a quarter of a pound of raw ham cut in three-sixteenths inch squares and four egg-yolks. Put aside the eighth part of this preparation, and dress the remainder dome-form on a baking dish; to the eighth reserved part add four egg-yolks and a little cream; beat well, and then stir in two well-whipped egg-whites; cover the dome with this, bestrew it with bread-crumbs, pour melted butter over, and set it in the oven for twenty minutes to heat and bake to a fine color. (2773). POTATOES, BIGNON (Pommes de Terre Bignon). Turn some raw potatoes into rounds two and one-eighth inches in diameter; make an opening in them of one and one-eighth inch, leaving a thickness of a quarter of an inch; blanch these hollow balls for a few moments in salted water, then turn them over to drain well. Prepare a forcemeat with a shallot fried colorless in butter, adding some sausage meat (No. 68), and let cook together; put in salt, pepper, bread-crumbs, chopped parsley, and a few egg-yolks, and with this preparation fill the holes in the potatoes ; strew bread-crumbs over, then parmesan cheese, sprinkle over melted butter, and range them as fast as they are ready in a sautoir lined with bards of fat pork; pour more butter over, and put on the lid, then set it in an oven to finish cooking the potatoes ; when done remove the cover and brown them nicely; range neatly in a vegetable dish on a little half-glaze (No. 400). (2774). POTATOES BOILED IN THEIR SKINS OR PEELED, ENGLISH STYLE, PERSILLADE BALLS (Pommes de Terre Bouillies en Robe ou Pelées à l'Anglaise, en Boules Persillade). Boiled in Their Skins or Peeled. --Wash some uniform-sized potatoes ; cook them either by steam or in salted water from twenty-five to thirty minutes, and when nearly done (if in salted water ) drain and cover with a damp cloth; put them into the oven until all their moisture has evaporated, and serve in folded napkins, with or without skins, or in a covered vegetable dish, so they keep hot. Boiled English Style. --Peel some raw potatoes ; pare them in the shape of large olives, and put them in a saucepan with salt and water; cover and let the liquid boil until the potatoes are done, then drain off the water and cover over with a cloth. Close the saucepan and set it in the oven for a few moments to dry them well; pour a little melted salt butter over and dress in a vegetable dish. Persillade Balls are potatoes formed into balls three-quarters of an inch to one inch in diameter with a vegetable spoon (No. 91), and cooked the same as the English. Serve them in a vegetable dish, pour salted butter and chopped parsley over. (2775). POTATOES, BORDELAISE--NEW (Pommes de Terre Nouvelles à la Bordelaise). Select small, uniform-sized new potatoes ; rub the peelings off with a cloth and sauté them in lard, keeping the pan covered until done and of a fine color, then drain and sauté in butter with a little chopped shallot, a trifle of garlic, salt and fine herbs. In case there be no new potatoes , pare old ones into olive forms, wash and boil partly in salted water, then drain and finish cooking in butter the same as the new ones. (2776). POTATOES BROILED WITH FRIED BREAD-RASPINGS (Pommes de Terre Grillées à la Chapelure Frite). To prepare broiled potatoes boiled ones are generally used, cut in half-inch thick slices; lay them on a double-hinged broiler, salt and baste with melted butter, then place the broiler over a slow fire, and cook the potatoes to a good color; dress them in the center of a dish. Fry fresh bread-crumbs in butter, and when a fine golden brown pour over the potatoes , and serve. (2777). POTATOES, BUSSY (Pommes de Terre Bussy). After having the potatoes prepared the same as for the dauphine potatoes ( No. 2783 ), and before dividing it into balls, mix in some chopped parsley. Take up some with a teaspoon, detach it with the finger, and let fall into hot frying fat; when of a good color drain dry, and dress on a folded napkin. (2778). POTATOE CAKES (Gâteaux de Pommes de Terre). Bake eight potatoes in the oven, and when done cut them lengthwise in two, empty out entirely, and place this in a saucepan with two finely chopped shallots fried in butter, and a pound of lean meat, either of veal or lamb or dark poultry meat, chives, salt, pepper, nutmeg, two ounces of butter, six egg-yolks, and two gills of velouté sauce (No. 415). With this preparation make inch and a half diameter balls flattening them down to five-eighths of an inch in thickness; roll in beaten egg-white, then in flour, and fry in a pan with clarified butter. Dress on a folded napkin in a circle with fried parsley in the center. (2779). POTATO CAKES WITH HAM (Galettes de Pommes de Terre au Jambon). Lay in a saucepan one pint of mashed potatoes ( No. 2798 ), rubbed through a sieve; mix in with it a lump of butter, a pinch of sugar, nutmeg, a handful of grated parmesan, six raw egg-yolks, two beaten whites, a little salt and four ounces of cooked and finely chopped lean ham. Heat a griddle or frying-pan, butter well the surface, take the preparation up with a spoon, and let it fall on it in rounds three inches each, keeping them slightly apart; cook them on a slow fire, turning over; when nicely colored and hardened drain and serve hot. The preparation may be let fall into three-inch diameter rings, five-sixteenths of an inch thick, filling them to the top; in this way the cakes will be more uniform than when cooked as above. (2780). POTATOES CHOPPED WITH CREAM, AND BAKED (Pommes de Terre Hachées à la Crème et au Gratin). Peel some boiled potatoes after they are cold; chop them up and lay in a sautoir with butter, salt, nutmeg, white pepper and cream; boil and simmer until the preparation has acquired a sufficient consistency, then serve in a vegetable dish. Baked. -- Butter the bottom of a dish, bestrew it with bread -raspings, and fill slightly bomb-shaped with chopped potatoes and cream as the above; dredge more bread -raspings over, pour on some butter, wipe the edges of the dish, and bake in a hot oven. (2781). POTATOES, CREAM OF, BAKED (Crème de Pommes de Terre au Gratin). Cut up some boiled potatoes the same as for duchess ( No. 2785 ). After they have steamed take from the fire and stir in a piece of butter; work rapidly with a large fork to make a purée, but do not rub it through a sieve; season with salt, nutmeg, a pinch of sugar, and for three or four gills of the purée add four or five raw egg-yolks and a handful of parmesan cheese, diluting very slowly with a gill and a half of rich, raw cream, so as to have the preparation as smooth as for a pudding; when this degree is acquired stir well on the side of the range for two minutes to heat slightly, then remove and incorporate two or three ounces of fresh butter divided in small pats. Pour the preparation at once into a small vegetable dish, lay it on a baking tin and brown the surface lightly in the oven. Eight or ten minutes will be sufficient. Serve in the same dish. (2782). POTATO CROQUETTES, IN SURPRISE AND MAÏSIENNE (Croquettes de Pommes de Terre en Surprise et à la Maisienne). Obtain one pound of very hot mashed portato preparation ( No. 2798 ), and rub it through a sieve; put it into a saucepan with two ounces of butter, work it well with salt, nutmeg and four egg-yolks; let get cold, then form it into cylindrical croquettes an inch in diameter by two and a quarter inches in length; roll them in bread crumbs, then in beaten egg and again in bread-crumbs; smooth this breading with a knife, and fry a few at a time in hot frying fat; drain and dress on a napkin. In Surprise. --Use the same preparation as for the above; form into round croquettes instead of cylindricals, and in the center of each one insert a half-inch diameter ball of consistent chestnut purée (No. 712); bread-crumb and fry them the same as the portato croquettes. Maïsienne Croquettes. --Have a pound of the mashed portato preparation ( No. 2798 ), put it into a saucepan with an ounce of butter, two egg-yolks, half a pint of béchamel sauce (No. 400), and the same quantity of green corn, the grains scraped free of skin; mix well and leave till cold; with this form two and a half inch cylindrical croquettes, having them an inch and a quarter thick; roll in eggs and bread-crumbs, fry in plenty of hot frying fat, drain and serve on folded napkins. (2783). POTATOES, DAUPHINE (Pommes de Terre Dauphine). Bake two pounds of potatoes , cut them lengthways in two, remove sufficient pulp to obtain a pound, and mix this with a quarter as much pâte-à-chou (No. 132), eggs, a little cream, salt and nutmeg. Divide it to make inch and a half balls, lengthen them to the shape of an egg, roll in butter, then in bread -raspings, and fry in hot frying fat. (2784). POTATOES, HALF-GLAZE (Pommes de Terre Demi-Glace). Prepare potatoes the same as for gastronome ( No. 2789 ), lay them in a sautoir with clarified butter, without having them previously boiled; when nearly done change into another saucepan and moisten with a little gravy (No. 404), espagnole sauce (No. 414) and meat -glaze (No. 402); cover the pan and cook so that the liquid be reduced to the consistency of a half-glaze as soon as the potatoes are finished. (2785). POTATOES, DUCHESS (Pommes de Terre Duchesse). The same preparation as the marchioness ( No. 2797 ), adding a handful of grated parmesan; roll in one and three-quarter inch diameter balls, lengthen these and roll them in bread-crumbs to have them assume an oblong form two and five-eighths inches by one and three-quarter inches; flatten to the thickness of half an inch, cut off the four corners, dip them in melted butter, then in bread-crumbs and lay them on a liberally buttered baking sheet, pouring more butter over; push into a very hot oven and when of a fine color remove from the oven and serve. (2786). POTATOES, PARISIENNE (Pommes de Terre Parisienne). Cut them with a three-quarters of an inch diameter vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91); fry slowly in plenty of hot fat and when three-quarters done drain this off and lay them in a sautoir with clarified butter, toss, season with salt, sprinkle over with chopped parsley and serve. (2787). POTATOES FRIED AND CHANNELED (Pommes de Terre Cannelées Frites). Put some frying fat (No. 55) in a pan provided with a wire basket (Fig. 121). Peel raw potatoes , cut them in slices with a channeled knife (Fig. 157), having each one about an inch and a half in diameter and three-sixteenths of an inch thick; throw them into cold water immediately, soak for one hour, then drain; put them into a wire basket, and plunge into the warm frying fat; then cook, keeping them at the same degree of heat, stirring about several times; when done and nicely colored, drain, wipe, salt and dress in a pyramid. (2788). POTATO FRITTERS (Beignets de Pommes de Terre). Imitate small eggs with portato croquette preparation ( No. 2782 ); leave them till quite cold on ice, then cut each one lengthwise in two, thus obtaining two halves for every egg, then cut these again in two on their length; dip these separate quarters in a light frying batter (No. 137), then in hot frying fat and fry to a fine golden color. Dress on a folded napkin. (2789). POTATOES, GASTRONOME (Pommes de Terre Gastronome). From some raw potatoes trim cylindricals one inch in diameter by an inch and a quarter long; blanch them for ten minutes, then drain off and finish cooking in clarified butter; when done pour this butter off and add salt, lemon juice, a small quantity of meat glaze (No. 402), chopped truffles and a little Madeira wine. Range and serve in a vegetable dish. (2790). POTATO HOLLANDAISE WITH MELTED BUTTER OR HOLLANDAISE SAUCE (Pommes de Terre à la Hollandaise au Beurre Fondu ou à la Sauce Hollandaise). Cut potatoes into inch balls with a round vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91); cook them in salted water, and a few moments before they are finished drain off the water and cover with a damp cloth, then lay them in the oven for a few minutes; return to a saucepan and pour over slightly melted salty butter or else use a well-buttered Hollandaise sauce (No. 477). (2791). POTATOES, HOUSEKEEPER'S STYLE (Pommes de Terre Ménagère). Cut a quarter of a pound of lean, un smoked bacon into three-eighths of an inch squares; blanch and fry in butter two ounces of chopped onion; moisten with broth (No. 194a), having just sufficient to moisten, and let the bacon cook so that when done the liquid will all be reduced; add about a pound of mashed potatoes , and season with salt, pepper, nutmeg and chopped parsley. (2792). POTATOES, JULIENNE OR STRAW (Pommes de Terre Julienne ou Pommes de Terre Paille). Peel the potatoes and cut them in eighth of an inch slices and these into fillets. For straws the fillets are much thinner than for Julienne; fry the same as the channeled ( No. 2787 ). (2793). POTATOES, LONG BRANCH (Pommes de Terre Long Branch). Cut up some peeled potatoes with the machine ( Fig. 552); these pieces can be obtained several yards long. Soak them in cold water for some hours, and fry the same as channeled potatoes ( No. 2787 ) in white fat. FIG. 552 An illustration of a machine with the function of cutting potatoes. (2794). POTATOES, LYONNESE (Pommes de Terre Lyonnaise). Pare some cooked potatoes into cylinders one inch in diameter, cut them three-sixteenths of an inch thick and sauté in butter; mince finely one medium-sized onion; fry it in butter, and when nicely colored mix in the sautéd potatoes and season with salt and pepper; toss them again for a few moments, drain off the butter and dress. (2795). POTATOES, MAîTRE D'HôTEL (Pommes de Terre Maître d'Hôtel). Boil the potatoes the same as for plain boiled No. 2774 ; leave them to cool partly, then pare into cylindricals an inch in diameter, and these into three-sixteenths of an inch slices; place them in a saucepan having its bottom well buttered, season with salt and nutmeg, and moisten to three-quarters of their height with broth (No. 194a). Boil slowly until the liquid be reduced, then remove from the fire and stir in a few bits of butter, chopped parsley and lemon juice. They can also be prepared by using raw potatoes pared to the same size and thickness as those for the above; set them in a buttered saucepan, moisten with veal blond (No. 423), season and cook on a brisk fire in such a way as to have the liquid almost dry by the time the potatoes are done; just when serving add a few small lumps of butter, lemon juice and chopped parsley. (2796). POTATOES, MARSHAL (Pommes de Terre Maréchal). Mince some raw potatoes ; wash and wipe well on a cloth; put them in a flat saucepan with butter; season and cook very slowly while covered, tossing them frequently; when soft beat them up and dress in layers in a vegetable dish; bestrew each of these with grated parmesan, pour melted butter over and bake for half an hour in a slack oven. (2797). POTATOES, MARCHIONESS (Pommes de Terre Marquise). Peel and cut up some raw potatoes ; boil them in salted water, drain it off as soon as they are done and cover over with a clean cloth; let steam for a few moments in a slack oven, then remove and rub a few at a time through a sieve; put this purée into a saucepan, and for each pound stir in quickly one ounce of butter, five raw egg-yolks, salt, nutmeg, a pinch of sugar and two tablespoonfuls of good raw cream. Pour the preparation on a flour ed table, roll it into thick cork-shaped pieces and cut these across in ovals two inches wide, three inches long and half an inch thick; range them in a copper baking pan with hot clarified butter and brown on both sides in the oven, turning them over while cooking. (2798). POTATOES, MASHED, IN SNOW, IN PURéE OR BAKED (Pommes de Terre en Neige, en Purée, ou au Gratin). Boil mealy potatoes , the same as described in No. 2774 ; pass them through a small hand strainer ( Fig. 553), or a large pressure strainer if for larger quantities ( Fig. 554). For Snow Potatoes use the purée as it leaves the strainer ( Fig. 553), put it in a napkin and form it into a ball inside of this; remove the napkin slowly to have the ball remain whole and serve in a covered vegetable dish. FIG. 553 An illustration of a small hand strainer. FIG. 554 An illustration of a large pressure strainer. In Purée. --After removing the potatoes from the strainer, put the purée in a saucepan, adding one ounce of butter for each pound, and a gill of milk; serve. Baked Mashed Potatoes. --Lay the potatoes in a baking dish, smooth the top nicely, bestrew with bread-crumbs and parmesan, pour butter over and bake in the oven, or substitute portato croquette preparation ( No. 2782 ); dress in the center of a baking dish in pyramid form and mark with a knife in large stripes from top to bottom; brush over with beaten eggs, baste with melted butter and brown in a not too hot oven. (2799). POTATOES, MELLOW (Pommes de Terre Fondantes). Prepare a few dozen small potatoes , giving them the shape of a pigeon's egg, all of uniform size; lay them in a sautoir with melted veal kidney fat, or good lard, and cook slowly while turning so that they color on all their surfaces; when done, press down slightly with a palette so as to flatten without breaking; they should now be oval-shaped. Pour off the fat from the pan and cover with butter; put in the potatoes , one beside the other, and keep them in the oven from ten to twelve minutes, to have them absorb the largest part of the butter while turning and basting; salt over and dress in a vegetable dish. Another way is to prepare by first boiling olive -shaped potatoes , then crushing them one after the other in a cloth; place on a buttered baking sheet, pour slightly melted fresh butter over and color in a hot oven, basting at frequent intervals with the butter while cooking; dress in a vegetable dish. (2800). POTATOES, PONT-NEUF (Pommes de Terre Pont-Neuf). These are potatoes cut in square lardon shapes, three-eighths of an inch by two inches in length, to be fried and dressed the same as the channeled potatoes ( No. 2787 ). (2801). POTATOES, PROVENçAL (Pommes de Terre à la Provenç ale ). Trim raw potatoes to the shape of corks, then cut them across three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; wipe perfectly dry and sauté slowly in oil so they have plenty of time to cook, then add a little garlic and a little onion all finely chopped; salt them and finish in the oven just when serving; drain off the butter and strew over with chopped parsley and lemon juice. (2802). POTATOES, SARAH (Pommes de Terre Sarah). Cut some raw potatoes into corkscrew shapes with a special machine ( Fig. 555); fry till half done in not too hot fat; drain and place them in a sautoir with clarified butter to finish cooking, seasoning with salt, and adding chopped parsley and lemon juice. FIG. 555 An illustration of a tool with the function of cutting potatoes into corkscrew shapes. (2803). POTATOES, SARATOGA (Pommes de Terre Saratoga). Mince the potatoes very finely in the machine ( Fig. 556), or cut thinly with a knife; lay them in cold water for twelve hours, changing it several times, then drain and fry in very hot white lard; when finished they should be exceedingly white and dry. FIG. 556 A machine used to mince potatoes finely. (2804). POTATOES SAUTéD (Pommes de Terre Sautées). Boil some long unpeeled potatoes in salted water; remove their skins and when partly cold pare into the shape of corks, then in three-sixteenths inch slices and put them in a pan with melted butter; season and sauté over a moderate fire to have them slightly browned; bestrew with chopped parsley and serve at once. (2805). POTATOES SAUTéD WITH ARTICHOKE BOTTOMS AND TRUFFLES (Pommes de Terre Sautées aux Fonds d'Artichauts et aux Truffes). Trim long potatoes , shaping them into cylinders one inch in diameter; cut them into three-sixteenths of an inch thick slices, drain and dry on a cloth; also trim small artichoke bottoms, cut them in four pieces, and pare. Heat a liberal quantity of good oil in a sautoir; put in the potatoes and artichoke bottoms, and cook while tossing to have them attain a color; drain when done, and add salt and butter; shake off of the fire until the butter dissolves, then add minced truffles cooked in Madeira wine, tossing continually in the meanwhile; serve up in a vegetable dish. (2806). POTATOES IN THE SHAPE OF AN OMELET (Pommes de Terre en Forme d'Omelette). Boil a few raw, peeled potatoes in salt and water; when cooked drain off the water, and let steam for five or six minutes; invert them on a clean cloth to dry all the moisture, and return them to a pan containing melted butter; fry for two minutes, then break by chopping them up with an iron palette until well crumbled, adding a little melted butter from time to time; season; brown nicely while tossing incessantly; lastly bring the potatoes to the front of the pan to have them all together, and shape the mass like a folded omelet; color it nicely, adding a little more butter, and invert it on a small long dish. Another Way is to peel boiled cold potatoes ; chop them up or else cut them in small three-sixteenths of an inch cubes; sauté them in a pan with clarified butter, season with salt and chopped parsley and let color nicely, tossing them unceasingly; bring the preparation forward to the front of the pan, assemble it together, and shape it like a folded omelet; color, adding a little more butter, and when finely browned drain off the fat and turn it over as an omelet on a long dish. (2807). POTATO SHAVINGS (Pommes de Terre en Copeaux). These are to be cut with a special machine ( Fig. 557); they are shaped like thin spirals. Leave them soak in cold water for two hours, then drain well, and place inside a hinged double broiler to keep them apart; fry the same as the channeled potatoes ( No. 2787 ). FIG. 557 An illustration of a machine uses to shave potatoes. (2808). POTATOES SOUFFLéD (Pommes de Terre Soufflées). Good souffléd potatoes can best be made by using those called Holland potatoes . First trim the raw potatoes in ovals of equal size, two and a quarter inches long by one and a quarter wide, and then proceed to slice them lengthwise three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness. As quickly as they are cut throw them into a bowl of cold water, leaving them in for twenty-five minutes. Heat two panfuls of fat, one of fresh beef kidney suet, the other having previously been used for other purposes and therefore its strength being somewhat extracted, it should be clean and white. Wipe the sliced potatoes on a cloth, dry them thoroughly, put them in a basket and plunge them into the oldest fat, leaving them cook until they become soft, but do not let them take color. Remove and place them on a large sieve to drain and cool for a few moments, and just before serving plunge the potatoes into the fresh, hot fat, toss them, remove those that do not soufflé, also those that soufflé badly; set them to cool, and return them again to the hot fat. Should they not soufflé at the second immersion, it is useless to try again. Salt the potatoes before serving, dress around the meat, or on a napkin in a separate dish. (2809). POTATOES IN SURPRISE (Pommes de Terre en Surprise). Wash and brush medium-sized potatoes , wrap them in separate sheets of damp paper; range on a baking tin, and cook in a slack oven for thirty to forty minutes; remove, unwrap and make an opening on one side of each potato; empty the contents with a small spoon ( Fig. 91), pound this to a pulp with fresh butter, salt, nutmeg and egg-yolks; refill the potatoes , close the aperture with the piece removed, and lay them on a buttered baking tin, having the opening uppermost. Push into a slack oven for twenty minutes, then dress on or inside of a folded napkin. (2810). POTATO TARTLETS (Tartelettes de Pommes de Terre). Prepare mashed potatoes the same as for duchess ( No. 2785 ); make it rather firm with egg-yolks, butter and parmesan; with it fill some large buttered molds lined with puff paste parings (No. 146), rolled out thin; press down well, and smooth the tops. Place on a baking sheet and push in a hot oven; unmold when nicely colored and dress as a garnishing or on a folded napkin. (2811). POTATO TIMBALE à LA PARMENTIER (Timbale de Pommes de Terre à la Parmentier). Remove some rounds with a three-quarter inch diameter tin tube from slices of potatoes three-sixteenths of an inch thick; sauté them in butter for two minutes, then drain. Line the bottom of a buttered timbale mold with part of these rounds, and the sides with separate rows laid on flat, intercalating them in such a way that a round of portato lays between two others of the next row. Prepare a purée with a pound of potatoes boiled in salted water, drained and covered with a damp cloth, then dried in the oven; rub through a sieve and stir in two ounces of butter, one whole egg, one yolk, salt and nutmeg. Fill the timbale with this, lay the cover over and push into a moderate oven to cook for half an hour or more; when removed let stand for ten minutes, and invert on a hot dish. (2812). POTATOES, VIENNESE (Pommes de Terre Viennoise). To be made with the same preparation as Marchioness ( No. 2797 ); divide it into balls, roll these on a table, covered with rice flour, to look like a Vienna loaf,--thick in the center and pointed at the ends. Imitate the gashes in the center of its length, egg over twice and cook in a hot oven. Serve on a folded napkin. (2813). POTATOES WITH MINCED TRUFFLES (Pommes de Terre aux Truffes émincées). Peel raw potatoes and cut them into one-inch diameter corks, then across in three-sixteenths of an inch slices; wash, wipe well and lay them in a thin sautoir with melted butter, seasoning with salt; cover and cook in a slack oven, being careful to shake them about frequently until they are slightly browned, then add a quarter as much minced truffles cut one inch in diameter and an eighth of an inch thick; drain off the butter and baste with a small quantity of good Madeira wine, meat glaze (No. 402), and lemon juice. Pour into a vegetable dish and serve. (2814). PUMPKIN FRIED IN SMALL STICKS (Potiron en Bâtonnets Frits). Peel and remove the inside part of a pumpkin or marrow squash so that only the meat remains; cut two pounds of this into small sticks an inch and a half long, and three-eighths of an inch across; lay them in a vessel, strew salt over and let macerate for fifteen minutes, then drain, wipe and dip quickly in flour; plunge a few at a time into very hot fat; when cooked, drain, salt and dress on a napkin. (2815). PURSLAIN, GREEN OR GOLDEN à LA BARBANçON (Pourpier Vert ou Doré à la Barbançon). Clean three pounds of the golden purslain; blanch in salted boiling water, drain and finish cooking in some good blond veal stock (No. 423), thickening with a little kneaded butter (No. 579), and adding four ounces of lean cooked ham cut in squares. Dish it up and garnish around with small tartlets prepared in the following manner: Cook some of the purslain in salted water after it has been cleaned; drain and press out all the liquid, then fry it in butter, season and add bread-crumbs and raw egg-yolks. Line some round tartlet molds with thin puff paste (No. 146), fill them with the preparation, strew over grated parmesan and cook in a moderate oven; turn them out to range around the purslain, laying between each one a small marinated purslain stalk dipped in light frying batter (No. 137) and fried to a fine color. (2816). COS LETTUCE à LA RUDINI--STUFFED ( Romaine Farcie à la Rudini). Remove the green stalk leaves from six cos lettuces; cut each one lengthwise in two, remove the centers or hard parts, and blanch in boiling salted water; drain properly, and lay them on a cloth; suppress all the hard part from the leaves and stuff each half with veal quenelle forcemeat (No. 92), into which mix the insides of four cooked and skinned sausages, also a coffeespoonful of finely cut-up chives. Roll the romaines into muff-shapes, wrap them around with fat pork, then braise and drain; strain and reduce the stock with espagnole sauce (No. 414), and pour this over after it has been well reduced. (2817). SALSIFY OR OYSTER PLANT à LA POULETTE, SAUTéD OR FRIED (Salsifis ou Scorsonères à la Poulette, Sautés ou Frits). à la Poulette. --Scrape some oyster plants to remove their covering of brown skin, cut off the tops and thin end parts, and throw them as quickly as they are done in cold water acidulated with vinegar; divide them into two and a half inch lengths, and cook in a white stock (No. 182), into which add chopped beef kidney suet and sliced lemon pulp; let cook slowly, and when they crush under the pressure of the finger, then drain. Sauté them colorless in butter, season, drain off the fat, and put in a little velouté (No. 415); roll them in the sautoir and thicken with egg-yolks and butter, finishing with lemon juice and chopped parsley. Sautéd With Fine Herbs. --Are first to be cooked the same as the poulette, then cut across in slices a quarter of an inch thick, and sautéd in butter, seasoning with salt, pepper, chopped parsley and lemon juice. Fried. --Prepare the same as for the poulette, drain and season with salt, pepper, lemon juice and chopped parsley; dip them into frying batter (No. 137), and fry slowly in plenty of hot white fat; drain, salt, and dress on a folded napkin with a bunch of fried parsley on top. (2818). SORREL WITH GRAVY (Oseille au Jus). Pick some clean, tender sorrel leaves; wash well, changing the water. Put them into a saucepan with a little salt and water; dissolve while stirring with a spoon; throw the sorrel into a colander and when cold press it through a sieve. Put this purée with a little prepared white roux (No. 163), and cook it for a few moments while stirring; moisten with a small quantity of gravy (No. 404); reduce the purée, mixing well all the time; season and finish with a little half-glaze (No. 400). (2819). SAUERKRAUT GARNISHED (Choucroute Garnie). Butter the bottom of a saucepan; lay in two pounds of fresh sauerkraut washed in several waters; in the center arrange a quarter of a pound of bacon and a quarter of a pound of goose or chicken fat; moisten to its height with broth (No. 194a), and in the middle lay an eight-ounce cervelas sausage, one onion or carrot cut in four and a garnished bunch of parsley (No. 123); cover over with buttered paper and cook for two hours or more; the moistening should be reduced when the sauerkraut is done; drain off the fat, take out the bacon, sausage and vegetables, and add to the sauerkraut one gill of white wine, a piece of kneaded butter (No. 579) and three ounces of plain butter divided in small pats. Suppress the bacon rind, cut it and the sausage into slices and dress them around the sauerkraut as a garnishing; thicken the sauce with some espagnole (No. 414), and serve separately. (2820). SPINACH WITH BéCHAMEL SAUCE AND WITH CREAM (épinards à la Béchamel et à la Crème). Pick some fresh, tender spinach, using only the leaves; when well cleaned and washed in several waters plunge into boiling salted water, and blanch for five or six minutes; drain, refresh and press out every particle of moisture. Chop finely and put into a saucepan with hot melted butter. Season, place the saucepan on a brisk fire for a few moments without ceasing to stir until the moistening is reduced, and finish with two spoonfuls of thick béchamel (No. 409), and another piece of butter. With Cream. --After the spinach has been prepared as for the above, and thoroughly dried, add to it a little flour, moisten with cream and stir constantly. Just when ready to serve incorporate a piece of fresh butter, then dress and garnish around with puff paste crescents or small bouchées filled with béchamel (No. 411). (2821). SPINACH à LA NOAILLES (épinards à la Noailles). Carefully pick the spinach, removing the largest stalks; wash it several times, changing the water, then blanch in an untinned copper vessel with salted water, letting it boil incessantly. When the stalks are tender enough to crush under the pressure of the finger, drain the spinach in a coarse colander, refresh and drain again; press out all the water, pick over to remove any straws or other impurities and then chop it up; force this through a coarse sieve; place the pulp in a saucepan with a piece of butter, put the saucepan on the fire, stir continuously until the moisture is evaporated, then besprinkle with flour; moisten with some thick veal blond (No. 423), adding a little meat glaze (No. 402), salt and nutmeg. A moment before serving stir in a piece of fresh butter. The flour can be replaced by some velouté sauce (No. 415). (2822). SPINACH à LA ROUGEMONT (épinards à la Rougemont). Have the spinach picked and prepared the same as for à la Noailles ( No. 2821 ). Brown a piece of butter to hazel- nut (No. 567), put in the spinach, place the pan on a hot fire, stir continually until the spinach is consistent and the moisture evaporated; season with salt and nutmeg; thicken with espagnole sauce (No. 414), a little chicken glaze (No. 398), and fresh butter; dress it in a dome-form and decorate around with small bouchées of sweetbreads, mingled with very rich and thick financière sauce (No. 464). (2823). SPINACH, ENGLISH STYLE (épinards à l'Anglaise). Pick and wash the spinach in several waters; blanch it in an untinned copper vessel with boiling, salted water; drain well and cut it up without chopping; now put it into a saucepan on the fire, season with salt and pour it into a vegetable dish, cover with small bits of fresh butter, set on the cover and serve very hot. (2824). SQUASH -- MARROW --WITH PARMESAN (Citrouille au Parmesan ). Peel the squash and cut it into quarter-inch thick slices; from these remove twenty-four round pieces with an inch and a quarter diameter cutter; blanch, drain, and sauté them in butter over a brisk fire, seasoning with salt and nutmeg; dress them in a circle, one overlapping the other, on a dish that is fit to be placed in the oven. Cut as much of the squash into five-eighths of an inch squares, blanch by dropping them into boiling salted water, continuing the boiling process for fifteen minutes, then drain and fry them in butter, salt over, and lay them in the center of the circle; dredge grated parmesan cheese on top, pour on some butter, and color in a hot oven; strew chopped parsley over the surface, and when serving squeeze the juice of a lemon over the whole. (2825). STRING BEANS à L'ALBANI (Haricots Verts à l'Albani). String some medium-sized tender beans ; cut them into lozenges, and boil in salted water placed in an untinned copper pan. Drain them off, sauté in butter, and thicken with a little velouté (No. 415) and chicken glaze (No. 398), adding the juice of a lemon. Dress, bestrew with chopped parsley, and surround with triangular croûtons (No. 51), on which lay quartered artichoke bottoms sautéd in butter, and mingled with meat glaze (No. 402) and lemon juice. (2826). STRING BEANS à LA BOURGUIGNONNE (Haricots Verts à la Bourguignonne). Cut two ounces of onion into squares; blanch in boiling salted water, drain, and fry colorless in butter; add to it some lean un smoked bacon cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares, an equal quantity of lean cooked ham cut the same and fried in butter, also two pounds of cleaned string beans ; fry until the latter have evaporated their moisture, seasoning with salt; moisten with a pint of stock (No. 194a), and as much red wine, and when the beans are done and the liquid reduced add a little espagnole sauce (No. 414), butter, lemon juice, and a small pinch of finely sliced chives. (2827). STRING BEANS à LA PETTIT (Haricots Verts à la Pettit). Prepare and cook some string beans the same as with butter ( No. 2829 ), but they should only be partly done; drain, wipe, and sauté them in a sautoir with butter without allowing to attain color, then pour off the butter and substitute some good sweet cream; let simmer until this is almost reduced, seasoning with salt and nutmeg. Thicken when ready to serve with a thickening of egg-yolks, cream, and a small lump of fine fresh butter. (2828). STRING BEANS SMOTHERED (Haricots Verts étuvés). Choose string beans not too small but tender and fresh; cut them up and put them into a buttered sautoir, salting lightly; moisten to about their height with broth (No. 194a), cover the sauce pan, and cook the beans slowly, adding a little more broth as fast as it reduces. When the beans are done they should be dry, then baste them over with two or three spoonfuls of good thickened half-glaze sauce (No. 400); finish off the fire with some good fresh butter divided in small pats. Pour into a vegetable dish and serve. (2829). STRING BEANS WITH BUTTER (Haricots Verts au Beurre). If the beans be young and tender leave them whole; if large and yet tender, cut them in two or three lengthwise fillets; string and plunge the beans into boiling water in a copper pan; salt and cook them over a brisk fire without covering; keep them slightly hard; drain and throw in cold water, then spread them quickly on a cloth to wipe away all the moisture; put them at once into a vessel with fresh butter divided into small pieces, and stir them about with two forks without breaking, or else toss until the butter is dissolved; season and serve immediately. (2830). SWEET POTATOES, BOILED AND WITH LOBSTER CORAL (Patates Bouillies et au Corail de Homard). This tubercle originally came from the island of St. Domingo, and may be prepared in various ways. Boiled. --Wash, cut off the ends, and lay them in a large-mesh basket; cook them by steam for twenty minutes or else in boiling water. They can be served either in their skins or peeled. With Lobster Coral. --After the sweet potatoes are boiled, cut them into olive -shapes; lay them in a vegetable dish, pour melted butter over, and strew the top with finely chopped lobster coral. (2831). SWEET POTATOES SOUFFLéD AND SWEET POTATO CROQUETTES (Patates Soufflées et Croquettes de Patates). Souffléd. --Cut them up raw into quarter-inch slices, pare them oval-shaped two and three-quarters by one and a half inches, then fry slowly in white fat to have them cook without coloring or stiffening; drain and ten minutes later throw them back into hot fat; they should puff out considerably. Croquettes. --After the potatoes are roasted cut them lengthwise in two and empty out the insides; to this add salt, nutmeg, egg-yolks and fresh butter; mix well together, and when the preparation is thoroughly cold roll it up into inch and three-quarter diameter balls, dip them in eggs, then roll in bread-crumbs and fry to a fine golden brown; dress in a circle, having a bunch of fried parsley to decorate the center. (2832). SWEET POTATOES ROASTED AND BROILED (Patates Rôties et Grillées). In the Oven. --Wash and cut off both ends, pare them olive -shaped, lay them on a baking pan, cover with butter and roast in a moderate oven for about thirty minutes; when done serve inside of a folded napkin. Broiled. --In order to have them broiled cut some steam-boiled, peeled potatoes in slices three-eighths of an inch thick, then trim olive -shaped and lay them in a double broiler; salt and coat over with melted butter and broil on a slow fire; dress them inside a folded napkin. (2833). TOMATOES à LA BOQUILLON (Tomates à la Boquillon). Have very plump tomatoes, plunge them into boiling water, peel off the skins and cut them into four pieces; place these in a saucepan with salt, pepper, fresh butter and sugar, cover and let cook on a brisk fire for a few moments; they are then ready to serve. (2834). TOMATOES à LA FROSSART (Tomates à la Frossart). From the stalk end of the tomatoes suppress with a pastry cutter a round piece an inch and a half in diameter; empty out the insides, drain and fill them with chicken forcemeat (No. 75), adding to it as much foies-gras from a terrine pressed through a sieve, truffles, mushrooms, chopped parsley, salt, pepper, nutmeg and grated parmesan. Fill the tomatoes through a pocket and bake them in a slack oven for fifteen minutes. Range them in a circle, pour Madeira sauce (No. 492) in the center and on each tomato lay a round piece of glazed truffle. (2835). TOMATOES, PROVENçAL STYLE--STUFFED (Tomatoes Farcies à la Provenç ale ). Tomatoes for stuffing must be selected of uniform size; cut off the tops an inch and a half in diameter, extract all the seeds, salt the insides and then drain; fill them with the following preparation: Fry some finely chopped onions in oil with a little crushed garlic and finely chopped mushrooms; when these have rendered up their moisture add chopped parsley, moisten with espagnole sauce (No. 414) and meat glaze (No. 402), season and thicken with bread-crumbs. Fill the tomatoes, range them on a baking tin, cover the tops with bread-crumbs, pour oil over and bake for half an hour in a moderate oven. (2836). TOMATOES à LA TRéVISE (Tomates à la Trévise). Cut twelve medium, sound tomatoes across in two through their thickest part; extract all the liquid and lay them one beside the other on a buttered baking tin. Have a pint of good white wine mirepoix stock (No. 419), into which pour four tablespoonfuls of tomato purée (No. 730) and sufficient bread-crumbs to thicken, adding salt, pepper, a quarter of a pound of finely chopped ham and chopped parsley. Fill the halved tomatoes with this preparation, dredge bread-crumbs and grated parmesan over, pour on some oil and let brown nicely in a hot oven; dress them on top of a buttered thickened half-glaze sauce (No. 413), mixing into it more butter and lemon juice. (2837). TOMATOES BAKED (Tomates Gratinées). Remove the skins by plunging the tomatoes into boiling water; cut each one across in two, press out the seeds and lay them in a large frying pan with melted butter; season and reduce all their moisture. Range them in a buttered baking dish, the round parts on the bottom and scatter over cooked fine herbs, composed of shallot fried in butter with chopped mushrooms, chopped ham, parsley and bread-crumbs; pour butter or oil over and bake for fifteen minutes in a slack oven. (2838). TOMATOES BROILED, HOT MAYONNAISE SAUCE (Tomates Grillées, à la Sauce Mayonnaise Chaude). Throw some sound tomatoes in boiling water to remove the skin; cut them across in two, season with salt and pour oil over. Place them on a hinged double broiler and broil on a slow fire, basting frequently with oil. Dress them on a hot dish and cover with hot mayonnaise sauce (No. 433). The mayonnaise sauce may be served separately if desired. Tomatoes are frequently served broiled without any sauce, simply cooked as above. (2839). TOMATOES IN CASES, BAKED (Tomates en Caisses Gratinées). Throw some tomatoes into boiling water to peel off their skins readily; cut them in two through their thickest part, press out all the liquid and seeds and fill them with a forcemeat made with cold chicken meat, cut from the legs, as much bread-crumbs and as much cooked fine herbs (No. 385) as bread; season well and stir in a few egg-yolks. Lay each half tomato in an oiled case ( Fig. 439) stiffened in the oven, bestrew bread-crumbs and grated parmesan over, baste with butter and bake in a moderate oven. (2840). TOMATOES, QUEEN STYLE (Tomates à la Reine). Throw some small tomatoes an inch and three-quarters to two inches in diameter into boiling water; peel off the skins and open them on top, then take out the seeds, salt the insides and drain off all their water. Fill them with well-seasoned chicken cream forcemeat (No. 75), adding to it the same amount of cooked fine herbs (No. 385) and on top lay a channeled mushroom (No. 118), then cover with a thin bard of fat pork. Arrange the tomatoes on a buttered baking tin and set them in a moderate oven for fifteen minutes; dress in a circle and pour in the center a well-buttered suprême sauce (No. 547), adding chopped-up truffles to it. (2841). TOMATOES à LA GIBBONS--SAUTéD AND FRIED (Tomates Sautées et Frites à la Gibbons). Split the tomatoes in two through their thickness, drain off their liquid and season; sauté them in butter and oil, half of each, strew over chopped parsley and place them in the center of a dish; garnish around with fried tomatoes prepared as follows: Plunge some small tomatoes in boiling water, peel and cut them in four even parts; season with salt, pepper, oil and vinegar, dip them into frying batter (No. 137), then in hot frying fat, drain, salt and arrange them around the sautéd tomatoes. (2842). TOMATOES STUFFED WITH FRESH MUSHROOMS (Tomates Farcies aux Champignons Frais). Chop up some clean fresh mushrooms, fry a chopped onion, and add it to these, and continue to fry until all the moisture is evaporated, then season and remove from the fire. Bind it with a little sauce, then with an equal quantity of bread-crumbs soaked and pressed, a few raw egg-yolks, adding some chopped parsley. Select fine, sound tomatoes, smooth and round, of even size, but not too large nor too ripe; cut out a piece from the top in order to open and empty out partially, then salt and drain them for a quarter of an hour, filling them afterward with the mushroom preparation, and smoothing the tops nicely. Range the tomatoes in a small bordered baking pan, bestrew them with bread-crumbs and pour over some oil; cook for three-quarters of an hour in a slow oven. (2843). TRUFFLES IN A NAPKIN OR IN A CROUSTADE ( Truffles en Serviette ou en Croustade). Choose one pound of the finest medium-sized, round and well-marbled truffles; clean and brush over; wrap each one separately in a thin slice of fresh pork. Fry slowly in butter without coloring one ounce of raw lean ham, cut from the kernel and the sinews removed, as much carrot and the same of onions, all three to be cut in eighth of an inch pieces, one bay leaf, thyme, a small slice of garlic and one clove. When these ingredients have been fried colorless moisten with a quarter of a bottleful of champagne or white wine and let boil, then skim and simmer for twenty minutes. Add the truffles and cook slowly for ten minutes; thicken the stock very slightly with a bit of kneaded butter (No. 579) and close the saucepan hermetically; set it in a bain-marie for half an hour. Dress the truffles in a folded napkin ( Fig. 557). Butter the sauce, pass it through a tammy and serve it in a sauce -boat the same time as the truffles. These can also be dressed in a basket made of border paste (No. 131), decorated with fanciful cuts made of the same paste, or even one made of carved bread. In either case have the basket very tasteful and elegant and spread out open on the top. FIG. 557 A plate of truffles that are dressed in a folded napkin. (2844). TRUFFLES IN SHELLS, BAKED (Truffes en Coquilles, Gratinées). Peel some truffles and put the parings into a saucepan with a little Madeira wine, parsley, thyme and bay leaf; let boil and leave in a bain-marie ( Fig. 122) for half an hour. Cut the truffles in three-sixteenths inch slices, warm them in butter, drain this off and replace it by thick béchamel (No. 409), the above truffle essence and cream, seasoning with salt, nutmeg, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and Madeira wine, then reduce. Butter some silver shells ( Fig. 438), strew over with bread-crumbs and fill with the truffles, then sprinkle over more bread-crumbs and grated parmesan; pour melted butter over and brown in a hot oven; serve. The minced truffles can be replaced by small whole ones trimmed into balls or olives. (2845). TRUFFLES STUFFED (Truffes Farcies). Select seven or eight large, unpeeled truffles, having them very clean, round and of equal size; put them into a narrow saucepan one beside the other and cook them for eight or ten minutes while covered, adding salt and white or Madeira wine; leave them to get partly cold in this stock. Place in a small saucepan a few spoonfuls of cooked purée of foies-gras; mingle with it a little good reduced and thickened Madeira sauce (No. 492), add some raw egg-yolks and seasoning. Drain the truffles, cut a round piece from the top, remove it and empty the insides with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91); cut up a part of these removed pieces and add them to the foies-gras. Use this preparation to fill the truffles; close the opening with the removed cover and return them to the original saucepan with a little of their broth and a little melted glaze (No. 402); heat them for ten minutes while basting, then remove and cook the contents, while covered, for seven or eight minutes longer, off the fire. Dress them in a vegetable dish and pour over their own stock. (2846). TRUFFLE TIMBALE à LA PéRIGORD (Timbale de Truffes à la Périgord). Decorate a timbale mold with fanciful cuts of noodle paste (No. 142); dampen these and line the mold with a layer of fine foundation paste (No. 135) an eighth of an inch in thickness; cover both bottom and sides of the timbale with very thin bards of fresh fat pork. Peel as many medium-sized truffles as the timbale will hold, having them black and mellow; put them to cook in a foies-gras terrine, seasoning with salt, pepper, nutmeg, sprigs of parsley, thyme and bay leaf, also some minced ham and Madeira wine; place the terrine in the oven and as soon as the liquid comes to a boil take it out and let stand till cold, leaving the truffles in with the stock. Suppress the thyme and bay leaf, drain off the stock and reduce it with a pint of financière sauce (No. 464) reduced to the consistency of a succulent sauce; transfer the truffles to the timbale, cover with a part of the sauce and lay over a flat of the same paste. Cook the timbale in a hot oven for three-quarters of an hour and serve unmolded; pour the remainder of the sauce into an aperture on top; serve at once. (2847). TURNIPS GLAZED (Navets Glacés). Prepare some cylindricals of turnips one inch in diameter and one and a half inches long, having them beveled on both ends; blanch these in salted water, refresh and when well drained put them into a frying pan containing very hot butter. Color and season with salt and a pinch of sugar; drain once more, then place them in a sautoir and moisten with broth (No. 194a). When cooked the liquid should be reduced to a glaze. (2848). TURNIPS, WITH SPANISH, BéCHAMEL OR ALLEMANDE SAUCE (Navets à la Sauce Espagnole à la sauce Béchamel ou à la sauce Allemande). Trim some turnips into seven-eighths of an inch balls, or in the shape of crescents, olives or cloves of garlic; blanch in salted water, drain and sauté them colorless in butter, seasoning with salt and sugar; drain off the butter, lay them in a saucepan, and moisten with gravy (No. 404) and espagnole sauce (No. 414), finishing to cook quite slowly. The espagnole sauce can be replaced by béchamel sauce and cream (No. 411), or else allemande sauce (No. 407) and broth (No. 194a), finishing with chicken glaze (No. 398) and fresh butter. (2849). TELTOW TURNIPS WITH CHESTNUTS (Navets de Teltow aux Marrons). Scrape and throw the turnips into tepid water, then plunge into boiling salted water placed in a well-tinned saucepan; boil over a moderate fire, and when done drain and put them back into a saucepan with a piece of butter and a little sugar; toss for a few moments, and moisten with broth (No. 194a); season and thicken with a little butter, into which stir some flour slightly browned in the oven; reduce to a short sauce, then pour into a vegetable dish; spread them over to form a hollow in the center to be filled with whole chestnuts cooked in broth ( No. 2727 ). EGGS (Œufs). FIG. 558 An illustration of a basket of eggs on the right and a chicken in a basket on the left. (2850). EGGS (Œufs). The eggs of chickens are most generally used. Boiled eggs should be moderately cooked; they are the most nourishing and easily digested; duck eggs are as nutritive as those of chickens. After these, the best are pheasant eggs, but they are very scarce. In order to discover whether an egg be fresh, hold it against the light of a candle, and if transparent without being spotted then it is fresh. The white of an egg consists of one part of albumen and one part solid matter, this appearing as an envelope to the albuminous liquid, and has the appearance of white flakes, also of a fatty substance formed of olein and stearine. The yolk is composed partly of albumen, partly of a fatty matter containing olein, and another part that is colored, besides one of a solid membranous composition. (2851). EGGS AU MIROIR à LA JOCKEY CLUB (Œufs au Miroir à la Jockey Club). Suppress the thin skin from one half of a white veal kidney; divide it, take out the fibrous fat, and then cut the meat into small dice. Heat some butter in a pan, put with it the kidneys, season and toss on a bright fire to have them cook rapidly, then remove with a skimmer, and set into a small vessel. Into the pan the kidneys were stewed in put two or three spoonfuls of half-glaze sauce (No. 413), and as much tomato purée (No. 730), reduce all to a third, mixing in a spoonful of Madeira wine; boil up once or twice, then take it from the fire and return the kidneys, also half as much cooked truffles cut exactly the same size as these; the sauce should be consistent. Cook six eggs au mirior on a large buttered dish, that is, baste the egg yolk with boiling butter several times while cooking in the oven; this will make them very glossy; cut them into rounds with a pastry cutter (three inches in diameter), take up with a palette, and dress in a circle on the bottom of a dish; heat the kidneys without boiling, and dress them inside the circle. (2852). EGGS AU MIROIR à LA LULLY (Œufs au Miroir à la Lully). Butter a large dish or baking pan; break in six eggs, pour boiling butter over the yolks, and put in a very hot oven or under a salamander ( Fig. 123); when done properly cut them rounded with a pastry cutter two and a quarter to two and a half inches in diameter; take them up with a large palette and dress on a dish on slices of ham of the same dimensions, and three-sixteenths of an inch thick, and the ham on croûtons of fried bread cut the same, having taken them from the kernel part of a good raw ham; fry them in butter in a pan, turning them over. Fill the center of this circle with a hash made of sliced and seasoned ducks ' livers mingled with a little brown Madeira wine sauce (No. 492). FIG. 559 A plate of two eggs cut in round-shaped, served together with ham underneath them. (2853). EGGS AU MIROIR à LA MEYERBEER (Œufs au Miroir à la Meyerbeer). Peel off the skin from two mutton kidneys; split them lengthwise on the roundest side without separating the parts, run two small wooden skewers through each kidney, season and roll in oil, then broil for eight or ten minutes, turning them over in the meanwhile. Cook two eggs in a china dish ( Fig. 567), having them glossy on top; cut them round-shaped with a two and a half inch pastry cutter and take them up with a palette and dress on a hot dish with some tomato sauce (No. 549) underneath. After removingthe kidneys from the fire glaze them with a brush, pull out the skewers and divide each one in two. Dress them on both sides of the eggs, the cut side uppermost, and fill the hollow with a consistent Périgueux sauce (No. 517); serve. (2854). EGGS AU MIROIR à LA PROVENçAL (Œufs au Miroir à la Provenç ale ). Pick out three or four even-sized tomatoes, cut them through their thickest part in two, suppress the seeds and put them into a pan with some oil; season and cook on both sides until they have reduced their moisture, then take them from the pan and dress on a serving dish capable of being put in the oven; bestrew with chopped parsley mingled with a bit of garlic and a pinch of dry bread-crumbs, pour over some oil and let brown for ten minutes; remove and lay on top of each tomato one miroired egg cut round with a pastry cutter two and a quarter inches in diameter. (2855). EGGS AU MIROIR à LA TIVOLIER (Œufs au Miroir à la Tivolier). Toast some slices of bread cut into rounds two and a half inches across and on each one place a layer of chopped marrow; set into a hot oven. Fry raw ham cut in one-eighth inch squares in a pan with lard; drain this off and finish with butter, meat glaze (No. 402) and lemon juice. Fry some eggs in a pan; gloss by putting them in the oven and sprinkling with boiling butter; dress the marrow toasts with the ham around; pare the eggs with a two and a half inch pastry cutter, lift them up one after the other to place on top of the toast. Dress in a circle, garnish around with the tomatoes and serve with a good Madeira sauce (No. 492), sprinkling chopped parsley over the whole. (2856). BOILED EGGS (Œufs à la Coque). When only a few eggs are required proceed as follows: Boil some water in a saucepan, remove it from the fire, and plunge the eggs into the liquid with a skimmer, being careful not to break the shells; cover the saucepan to allow the water to boil up again, and from this time cook the eggs for three minutes. Should they be large or freshly laid take the saucepan off after three minutes, leaving the eggs one minute longer in the liquid. FIG. 560 An illustration of a tools used to boil eggs. Eggs may also be plunged into cold water, put over a brisk fire and taken off at the first boil. Another Way is to plunge them into boiling water and let cook for one minute after the water has boiled up again, then withdraw the vessel from the fire, and leave them in the water for five minutes. Eggs are cooked by steam in four minutes. The ordinary method is the first mentioned. However it is very difficult to tell exactly how long to boil an egg, for some like them scarcely heated through, while others prefer the whites slightly hard. Boiled eggs are generally eaten from their shells with a spoon, but many empty the contents into a glass or cup, seasoning with salt, pepper, and a little fresh butter, then mixing thoroughly. Boiled eggs should be served in folded napkins or in imitated chickens made of china. (2857). HARD-BOILED EGGS AND AURORA (Œufs Durs et à l'Aurore). These should not be cooked too long, still they only attain a proper degree after they have boiled ten to twelve minutes. On removing from the fire they must be thrown into cold water, and left to cool for at least fifteen minutes; drain and shell, without injuring any of the white part, which should remain intact. Aurora. --Cut lengthwise in halves eight hard-boiled eggs; take out the yolks and divide each halved white in four parts; put these in a sautoir, season with salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168) and nutmeg, and dilute with well-reduced béchamel (No. 409), into which mix finely cut-up chives; dress this in a baking dish. Rub the yolks through a wire sieve directly over the eggs, besprinkle with salt, brush over with hazel- nut butter (No. 567), and heat for a few moments in a hot oven; serve at once. The chives may be replaced by mushrooms and truffles, both finely minced, adding to the bechamél a quarter as much soubise sauce (No. 543). (2858). HARD-BOILED EGGS à LA BENNETT (Œufs Durs à la Bennett). Boil eight eggs hard, the same as for Aurora ( No. 2857 ); shell and lay them in tepid water until needed. Mince eight ounces of white onions, blanch for a few moments in salted water, drain and wipe on a cloth; lay these in a saucepan on a fire with melted butter; fry slowly while stirring until they be cooked, then season with salt, pepper and nutmeg; thicken with béchamel (No. 409), having reduced it with a little mushroom broth and melted meat -glaze (No. 402); add as much minced mushrooms as onions, and an ounce of fresh butter, and then drain the eggs, wipe and cut them crosswise, remove the yolks, press them through a sieve and mix well with the sauce. This sauce must be succulent but not too thick; strain it through a tammy. Dress the white parts in layers intercalated with the onion and the mushroom stew and pour the sauce over. (2859). HARD-BOILED EGGS à LA BENOIST (Œufs Durs à la Benoist). Cook six eggs, the same as for Aurora ( No. 2857 ); shell and cut them lengthways in two; remove the yolks and rub these through a sieve. Prepare a well-reduced béchamel (No. 409) thickened with raw egg-yolks; when cold mix in the six cooked egg-yolks, as much mushrooms, and half as many truffles as mushrooms, all to be chopped up separately, and then beat in three very stiffly beaten egg-whites. Cover the bottom of a dish with a layer of veal godiveau (No. 85) with chives, having it a quarter of an inch thick; replace the egg-yolks by a little montglas and fasten the two halves together; lay these reshaped eggs over the godiveau and cover the whole with the beaten egg preparation; pour over butter, push in a moderate oven to heat the eggs well and color them nicely. (2860). HARD-BOILED EGGS WITH NOODLES à LA CAROLLI (Œufs Durs aux Nouilles à la Carolli). Blanch some finely shredded noodles in salted water for three minutes, drain and lay them in a saucepan with salt and nutmeg; leave to simmer for a few moments, then range them on a vegetable dish with grated parmesan strewn over. Boil eight eggs hard, the same as Aurora ( No. 2857 ), cut them across in slices, dress them in layers over the noodles, then a layer of minced fresh mushrooms; season each one of these with salt, pepper and nutmeg and mask the surface with béchamel (No. 409) reduced with the mushroom broth, seasoned with prepared red pepper (No. 168) and well buttered. Strew the top with grated parmesan and melted butter and bake in a hot oven. (2861). HARD-BOILED EGGS à LA GIBSON (Œufs Durs à la Gibson). Mince some drained, blanched celery -roots; fry them colorless in butter, then cook in broth (No. 194a) with a little sugar; reduce the liquid to a glaze, add some béchamel (No. 409) and thicken with eight hard egg-yolks pounded with as much butter and then rubbed through a sieve; add also the whites of these eight eggs minced up finely and mix them together with the sauce. Butter and bread-crumb eight small silver shells ( Fig. 438); fill them with the prepared eggs, strew bread-crumbs and parmesan over, baste with butter and bake in a hot oven. (2862). HARD-BOILED EGGS à LA WASHBURN (Œufs Durs à la Washburn). Take the whites of eight hard-boiled eggs; cut them in thin slices or in quarter-inch dice, also some cooked truffles and mushrooms; with these fill eight medium-sized shells ( Fig. 438), alternating the three different ingredients; cover with some reduced soubise (No. 543). Smooth to a dome and mask this with a thin layer of chicken cream forcemeat (No. 75); dredge white bread-crumbs over all, pour on a little melted butter and bake for two minutes in the oven; serve at once. (2863). HARD-BOILED EGG CROQUETTES (Croquettes d'Œufs Durs). Chop twelve cold hard-boiled eggs in three-sixteenths inch squares, also half a pound of mushrooms the same size. Reduce a quart of béchamel (No. 409), season and add to it a little meat glaze (No. 402) and chopped truffles, mix in the egg salpicon and take off at the first boil. When this preparation is cold form it into croquettes, either round, cylindrical or flat ovals; immerse them in eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and fry to a fine color; drain, salt and serve on a folded napkin with sprigs of fried parsley on top. FIG. 561 Two rolls of croquettes serve on a folded napkin. (2864). HARD-BOILED EGGS, NEW YORK STYLE (Œufs Durs à la New Yorkaise). Have six eggs boiled hard, the same as for Aurora ( No. 2857 ); shell and split them lengthwise in two; remove the yolks and pound them in a mortar with an ounce of melted butter, salt, pepper, nutmeg, two raw egg-yolks and a gill of béchamel (No. 409), beating the whole well together; then stir in half as much chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89). Fill the halved eggs with this preparation, rounding the tops well; range a layer of this same on the bottom of a dish, lay the stuffed eggs over, pour on some butter and dredge with parmesan cheese; push into a moderate oven to heat and brown to a fine color; pour Colbert sauce (No. 451) around and serve. (2865). HARD-BOILED EGGS, RUSSIAN STYLE (Œufs Durs à la Russe). Boil six eggs hard, the same as for Aurora ( No. 2857 ); cut them in two lengthwise, remove the yolks, and chop up separately two ounces of ham, four ounces of tongue, and four ounces of chicken, mingling all together with béchamel sauce (No. 409); pound the yolks with half as much butter. Put a bed of the chicken salpicon on a dish capable of going into the oven, range the halved egg-whites over and cover with the remainder of it; bestrew with bread-crumbs and parmesan cheese, pour over butter and bake in a moderate oven; decorate around with some round caviare canapés (No. 777) and serve. (2866). FRIED EGGS à LA EUGèNE ANDRé (Œufs Frits Eugène André). Cut tomatoes in two through their thickness, press out and fry in oil with shallots, a little garlic and chopped parsley; finish with a little meat glaze (No. 402). Dress in a circle, filling the center with cèpes fried in oil, with fine herbs, lemon juice and a little brown sauce (No. 414). Heat some butter in a pan and when very hot slip in the eggs broken beforehand on a plate; season the whites with salt and scald the yolks with boiling butter; when the eggs are fried, slip them over the tomatoes and cèpes and serve. FIG. 562 A plate of tomatoes and cepes with fried eggs. (2867). FRIED EGGS à LA MONTEBELLO (Œufs Frits à la Montebello). Poach some eggs; when cold pare and wipe on a cloth; season and roll simply in flour then plunge them into hot frying fat, and as soon as dry and nicely colored remove with a skimmer, drain on a cloth and lay each one on a plain croûton of bread sautéd in clarified butter. Dress the eggs on a dish and cover over with Montebello sauce (No. 502). (2868). FRIED EGGS NEAPOLITAN STYLE, TURNED OVER (Œufs Frits Retournés à la Napolitaine). Heat either oil, lard or butter in a small, deep pan; incline it slightly, and break an egg in the liquid; cook and bring it over with a perforated spoon to have it attain a long, well-rounded shape; as soon as done drain, and cook another one the same way, until sufficient are ready, and when all are well drained lay each one on a separate croûton (No. 51). Dress in a circle, and fill the center with Neapolitan macaroni ( No. 2959 ); pour over the eggs some tomato sauce (No. 549) reduced with espagnole sauce (No. 414) and good gravy (No. 404). (2869). FRIED EGGS TURNED OVER--à LA SOLE (Œufs Frits des Deux Côtés--à la Sole ). Break two eggs on a plate and season; pour some clarified butter in a small pan, and when it reaches hazel- nut (No. 567), slip in the eggs carefully, and pour more butter over. When they are cooked underneath, turn them over, and a minute after slide them on a dish with the butter; baste over with a coffeespoonful of good vinegar heated in a pan. (2870). FRIED EGGS WITH BROWN BUTTER (Œufs Frits au Beurre Noir). Break four or five eggs into a frying pan containing some hot butter; scald the yolks with the butter, and cook until glossy; season, remove carefully with a large skimmer, and lay them on a dish. Put more butter into the pan, and when slightly brown without burning, strain it over the eggs; put a little vinegar in the frying pan, and pour it over the eggs through a strainer. (2871). FRIED EGGS WITH CHOPPED PARSLEY (Œufs Frits au Persil haché). Heat clarified butter in a small pan; break two very fresh eggs on a plate, season with salt, and pour them carefully in the pan; fry slowly, and then slip them on a dish, throwing over a little chopped parsley. (2872). FRIED EGGS WITH HAM OR BACON (Œufs Frits au Jambon ou au Petit Salé). Broil on a slow fire either some ham or bacon; put one or the other on a dish, and slip fried eggs over it. (2873). EGGS MOLDED à LA BEDEORD--IN COCOTTES AND EGGS COCOTTES (Œufs Moulés en Cocottes à la Bedford et Œufs Cocottes). Cover the bottoms and sides of a few cocottes, a small earthen saucepan standing on three feet, able to go in the oven ( Fig. 563), with a layer of liver baking forcemeat (No. 64), thickened with a little raw forcemeat thinned with duxelle sauce (No. 461) and Madeira wine; break a fresh egg over, season the white with salt and pour a little hot butter over the top. Place these cocottes in a sautoir containing a little hot water; poach the eggs for eight to ten minutes in a slack oven, and after removing bestrew with truffles and cooked beef tongue, cut either in small dice or chopped up; dress the cocottes on a dish or on a folded napkin. FIG. 563 An illustration of a small earthen saucepan. Eggs Cocottes. --Have small cocottes ( Fig. 563); butter the interiors and cover the bottoms with a preparation made with a few finely chopped shallots, slightly fried in butter, to which add a few finely chopped fresh mushrooms; after these have evaporated all their moisture, add some chopped parsley, salt, pepper, nutmeg and chopped truffles. Break an egg in each cocotte, pour boiling hot melted butter over and stand the cocottes on a baking sheet; push into a medium hot oven for ten minutes, then serve. (2874). EGGS MOLDED à LA COLBERT--IN CASES (Œufs Moulés en Caisses à la Colbert). Butter a few china cases, covering the bottom and sides with a chopped raw truffle preparation mingled with chicken cream forcemeat (No. 75). In the hollow center of each break a fresh egg, season the top and butter over with a brush; place the cases on a small raised-edge baking pan having hot water at the bottom, and poach them for six to eight minutes in a slack oven; after removing wipe nicely and cover the tops with a layer of Colbert sauce (No. 451). FIG. 564 Cases with eggs served in a folded napkin. (2875). EGGS MOLDED à L'éCHIQUIER--IN CASES (Œufs Moulés en Caisses à l'échiquier). Prepare a paste with fresh lobster butter (No. 580), an equal amount of white bread-crumbs, some chopped parsley and half as much cooked and chopped crawfish or lobster tail. With this paste cover the bottom and sides of some round china cases shaped the same as the paper cases shown in Fig. 439, leaving an empty space in the center, and into this break a fresh egg; season and cover with a little butter. Set the cases on a small baking pan containing a little hot water, push it into a slack oven and cook the eggs; pour a little velouté sauce (No. 415), over each egg, having it well buttered with lobster butter, and sprinkle chopped lobster coral over the whole. (2876). EGGS MOLDED à LA PARISIAN, ALSO CALLED TALLEYRAND, POLIGNAC, POLISH SOYER (Œufs Moulés à la Parisienne, Dits Talleyrand, Polignac, Soyer). Eggs à la Parisienne are molded in mousseline molds (No. 1, Fig. 138), or else in oval ones of the same size. Cut two truffles into small dice; butter eight molds, strew the insides with the truffles and into each one break a whole fresh egg, salt and baste the top with a little butter; lay the molds in a sautoir with hot water reaching to half their height, and poach in a moderate oven for eight to ten minutes; when done to perfection turn out the eggs on a dish, covering the bottom of it with a little poivrade sauce (No. 522). Instead of buttering the molds they may be wetted in the inside with melted meat glaze (No. 402) and bestrewn with chopped parsley, truffles, mushrooms or cooked red beef tongue, or else a mixture of all these. (2877). EGGS MOLDED WITH FOIES-GRAS--IN CASES (Œufs Moulés en Caisses aux Foies-Gras). Brush over with butter six round crimped paper cases ( Fig. 439) having them three inches across at the opening, two at the bottom, and an inch and a quarter high. Rub a little pâté-de-foies-gras from a terrine through a fine sieve, and mix slowly into it some melted glaze (No. 402), and as much chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) as foies-gras. Spread a layer of this on the bottom of each case, poach the forcemeat in a slack oven, and then break an egg on top of each one; scald the yolks with hot melted butter applied with a brush; season the whites with salt, and range the cases on a grate; lay this on a baking-sheet, and cook the eggs in a slow oven from eight to ten minutes, then place each case inside another paper one, having it larger and very clean, and dress on a folded napkin. The foies-gras forcemeat can be replaced by one of fish, game or chicken, with a salpicon of either shrimps, mushrooms or truffles. (2878). ARGENTINE OMELET (Omelette à l'Argentine). Break six fresh eggs in a bowl; season with salt and white pepper; beat with a whip or fork, and strain through a strainer into another vessel; beat again with a few bits of butter laid here and there. Set an omelet pan on a hot fire, and in it have three ounces of very hot butter; skim, then pour in the eggs all at once; stir lightly with a spoon, and when the eggs begin to thicken bring them foward in the pan; fill the center with peeled eggplant cut in quarter-inch squares, fried in butter and thickened with a little half-glaze (No. 400). Close the omelet with a single stroke of the handle, remove the pan from the fire, and with the spoon close it entirely. Put more butter in the pan, and incline it so that it can slip under the omelet, then color it nicely, and turn it over on a dish; garnish around with an Argentine sauce (No. 429). FIG. 565 A metal plate with an omelet. (2879). BACON OMELET (Omelette au Petit Salé). For three raw eggs cut one ounce of bacon in quarter-inch thick slices; suppress the rind, and cut into small quarter-inch squares after paring off the smoked parts that cover the bacon; fry these pieces in butter, add the eggs, and finish the same as parsley omelet ( No. 2903 ). (2880). BEEF PALATE OR LAMB'S TROTTERS OMELET (Omelette au Palais de Bœuf ou aux Pieds d'Agneau). Cut some beef palates or boned lamb's trotters in quarter-inch squares, and put them into a bordelaise sauce (No. 436); fill the interior of an omelet with the preparation, pouring the sauce around. (2881). BERTINI OMELET (Omelette à la Bertini). Prepare and cook an omelet the same as Argentine ( No. 2878 ). Pour into a risot, thickened with parmesan, a little half-glaze (No. 400) and velouté (No. 415) and with it fill the omelet. Cut some celery hearts or roots in quarter-inch squares, blanch, cook in broth (No. 194a) and let fall to a glaze; add velouté reduced with white wine, season and pour this around the dressed omelet. (2882). BONVALET OMELET (Omelette Bonvalet). Fry a tablespoonful of chopped onion in butter with two ounces of chopped morils or mushrooms; add salt, pepper, nutmeg, chopped parsley, marinated tunny fish cut in quarter-inch squares, meat glaze (No. 402) and cooked ham cut in three-sixteenths of an inch pieces. With these ingredients fill an omelet, and finish it the same as an Argentine ( No. 2878 ); pour around an espagnole sauce (No. 414) containing minced gherkins. (2883). CHEESE OMELET-- SWISS OR PARMESAN --WITH CRUSTS AND FONDUE (Omelette au Fromage de Gruyère ou au Parmesan aux Croûtes Garnies de Fondue). Beat up eight eggs in a bowl and season; mix in four spoonfuls of fresh Swiss cheese cut up in small dice, adding two spoonfuls of grated parmesan, and also one of grated Swiss, then a piece of good butter divided in small pats. Make the omelet over a good fire, fold and turn it on to an oval dish; surround both sides with small round hollowed crusts (No. 52) filled with fondue ( No. 2954 ). (2884). CHICKEN LIVER OMELET (Omelette aux Foies de Volaille). Cut some chicken livers in three-eighths of an inch squares; sauté them in butter, dilute with a little Madeira wine and half-glaze (No. 400); fill the inside of the omelet with this, and finish the same as Argentine ( No. 2878 ), pouring the sauce around. (2885). CLAM OMELET-- HARD AND SOFT (Omelette aux Lucines Molles et Dures). Blanch small clams; remove the hard parts and mix in well-buttered allemande sauce (No. 407); fill the inside of an Argentine omelet with this, and pour what remains of the sauce around. (2886). CREAM OMELET--PLAIN (Omelette Nature à la Crème). Break seven or eight eggs in a vessel, season and beat lightly, mixing in a few small pieces of butter and two spoonfuls of raw cream. Melt some fresh butter in an omelet pan, pour in the eggs, stir quickly with a large spoon and thicken properly, keeping the omelet mellow; when it detaches from the bottom bring it forward to roll over; turn it rapidly on a long dish and form it prettily, shaping the ends under so as to have them pointed; brush the surface with melted butter and throw over some chopped parsley. (2887). DESJARDINS OMELET (Omelette à la Desjardins). Fry in oil (for three eggs ) one peeled tomato cut across in two, pressed and divided in small three-eighth inch squares, half as much minced fresh mushrooms, a little onion cut in squares and fried in butter, olives cut in eight pieces, salt, cayenne, nutmeg, chopped parsley and meat -glaze (No. 402). With this preparation fill the inside of a parsley omelet ( No. 2903 ); decorate the top with thin anchovy fillets to imitate lozenges; fill each one of these through a cornet with solid tomatoed béarnaise sauce (No. 433), and on each point set a little bit of chopped parsley; pour around a half-glaze sauce (No. 413), finished with lemon juice and plenty of butter. (2888). DUXELLE OR COOKED FINE HERB OMELET (Omelette à la Duxelle ou aux Fines Herbes Cuites). Chop up some onions and shallots very small; fry them in a little grated fat pork or butter, put in some finely chopped fresh mushrooms, and when these have evaporated their moisture add some chopped parsley and two spoonfuls of chopped truffles, mixing in a little velouté sauce (No. 415). Prepare the omelet the same as the parsley and fill it with the preparation; surround each side with hollow half-round-shaped crusts (No. 52) to be filled with tomato purée (No. 730). (2889). FINE HERB OMELET--RAW (Omelette aux Fines Herbes Crues). Chop or cut finely some fine herbs, such as parsley, chervil, tarragon and chives; mix them in with the eggs, and finish the same as the parsley omelet, or either of these herbs may be used separately in making a chervil, tarragon or chive omelet. (2890). FROG OMELET (Omelette aux Grenouilles). Sauté some large frogs in butter, bone and lay the meats in a sautoir, adding well-buttered allemande sauce (No. 407) and soubise sauce (No. 543), half of each. Fill and finish an omelet the same as the parsley omelet ( No. 2903 ), and pour around half suprème sauce (No. 547) and half soubise sauce, keeping it rather thin. (2891). OMELET, GERMAN STYLE (Omelette à l'Allemande). Dilute two tablespoonfuls of flour in a bowl with two whole eggs, one yolk and a gill of cream, salt, pepper and nutmeg; strain through a fine wire sieve and then add finely cut-up chives. Put four ounces of clarified butter in a pan to heat, pour in the preparation, spreading it over the entire surface of the pan; prick the omelet as fast as it swells up, and turn it over when of a fine color; add a little more butter and brown nicely on the other side before serving. With this quantity several omelets can be obtained. (2892). GREEN OMELET WITH FINE HERBS, SPINACH, OR WITH SORREL CRUSTS (Omelette Verte aux Fines Herbes aux Croûtes d'épinards ou d'Oseille). Chop up parsley leaves, chervil, tarragon and clean sorrel leaves, put them into a saucer and mix in some finely shredded chives. Break eight eggs in a bowl, mix with them the chopped herbs, season and beat; melt some butter in an omelet pan, pour in the eggs and stir with a fork to thicken; as soon as the omelet detaches from the pan fold over and turn it out on a long dish; moisten the top with a brush dipped in maître d'hôtel butter (No. 581) and surround with some hollowed-out bread -crusts filled in with a fine purée of spinach (No. 729); glaze these over also. With Sorrel. --Chop up a full handful of sorrel leaves , free of stalks; after having them well washed and cleansed, fry in butter and mix with beaten eggs. Make an omelet the same as the above and serve without any garnishing. (2893). HAM AND GREEN PEA OMELET (Omelette au Jambon et aux Petits Pois). Make an omelet with three eggs the same as a parsley omelet ( No. 2903 ), only suppressing the parsley; when done, and before folding it, put in two tablespoonfuls of lean cooked ham cut in three-sixteenths inch squares, or else only one spoonful and one of green peas cooked English style ( No. 2742 ). (2894). HAVANESE OMELET (Omelette Havanaise). Chop up some chicken livers and mushrooms; fry the livers in butter, add the mushrooms and moisten with port wine and espagnole sauce (No. 414), then reduce. Cut some peeled tomatoes in two, press to extract the juice and fry them in oil, also sweet Spanish peppers. Fill the inside of an omelet with the tomatoes, the chopped liver, the sweet peppers and the mushrooms; finish the same as the Argentine ( No. 2878 ). Surround the omelet with the peppers and pour over a little thin Colbert sauce (No. 451). (2895). SMOKED HERRING OMELET (Omelette aux Harengs Saurs). Pour three ounces of partly melted butter in a vessel, beat it up with a spoon, mixing in with it four egg-yolks, one after the other. When the preparation becomes frothy, add to it two small spoonfuls of flour, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and lastly three stiffly beaten egg-whites. Mix into this paste the fillets of four smoked herrings heated in the steam of boiling water until the skin is sufficiently softened to remove, then cut them into large dice, suppressing all the bones. Butter the bottom of a large frying pan with melted butter put on with a brush, and when hot pour in the preparation; cook the omelet in a slack oven, pricking it several times with a fork; brush the top with butter and slide it on a dish. (2896). HUNTER'S OMELET (Omelette au Chasseur). Mince some cèpes finely; fry them in oil over a hot fire with a little garlic, salt and pepper; add these to an omelet prepared as follows: Fry a little bread-crumbs or small croûtons in butter, mix them into beaten eggs seasoned with salt and pepper and make the omelet as explained for parsley omelet ( No. 2903 ). Fill the omelet with the cèpes. Pour a hunter's sauce (No. 480) around when dressed. (2897). KIDNEY OMELET (Omelette aux Rognons). Use either veal or mutton kidneys; cut them up small, sauté in butter over a brisk fire, drain and put them back into the pan with half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and white wine; take out the kidneys, reduce the sauce, butter it and replace the kidneys to warm up again, then fill the inside of an omelet with the preparation, and finish it as the Argentine ( No. 2878 ), pouring the sauce around just when ready to serve. (2898). OMELET à LA ANDREWS (Omelette à la Andrews). Have a chicken has prepared as for No. 2292 ; with it fill a slightly cooked omelet prepared the same as an Argentine ( No. 2878 ); invert it on a dish that may be placed in the oven. Roll some noodle paste (No. 142) out very thin; allow it to dry a little in the air, roll it on itself to facilitate mincing it finely, then boil in salted water, drain and replace it in the saucepan with milk, white pepper, salt, nutmeg and butter; let simmer for twenty minutes so that nearly all the milk is absorbed, then cover the omelet with these noodles, bestrew with bread-crumbs and parmesan cheese, sprinkle butter over and let brown in a hot oven; pour around a little bigarde sauce (No. 435). (2899). MUSHROOM OR SWEETBREAD OMELET (Omelette aux Champignons ou aux Ris de Veau). Cut up some mushrooms or cooked sweetbreads and place them in a sautoir with allemande sauce (No. 407), season, fill an omelet with either the mushrooms or the sweetbreads and finish by pouring the sauce around. (2900). ONION AND HAM OMELET (Omelette aux Oignons et au Jambon). Mince finely four ounces of white onions (new ones if in season); fry them slowly in butter or oil, stirring until they become tender and lightly colored, then add two ounces of cooked lean ham cut in one-eighth inch squares; drain off the whole. Break eight eggs in a bowl, season with salt, pepper and a little sugar; beat them up well and run through a colander, then add the onion, the ham and some chopped parsley. Heat a little butter in a pan, pour the eggs in and make the omelet over a hot fire without ceasing to stir, keeping it mellow; fold over and turn it with one stroke on a long dish; decorate with strings of tomato sauce (No. 549) put on with a brush. (2901). OYSTER OMELET (Omelette aux Huitres). Blanch raw oysters in their own liquor; drain and roll in velouté sauce (No. 415) or béchamel sauce (No. 409) reduced with the oyster liquor, thickening with raw egg-yolks; dilute with a little cream and fresh butter and finish the same as an Argentine omelet ( No. 2878 ). (2902). OMELET WITH CAVIARE à LA STOECKEL (Omelette au Caviar à la Stoeckel). Dilute some caviare gradually with cream béchamel (No. 411) and with it fill a chopped parsley omelet ( No. 2903 ). Blanch a few cucumbers cut the shape of cloves of garlic, cook in white broth (No. 194a) and have them so that when done the liquid has fallen to a glaze; remoisten with sour cream sauce; place these cucumbers around the omelet. (2903). PARSLEY OMELET (Omelette au Persil). Parsley omelet is frequently confounded with fine herb omelet. Use only eggs, seasoning and chopped parsley. Chop up some very green fresh parsley, put it into the corner of a napkin and dip this in several waters; remove the cloth at once and squeeze out all the moisture. Break eight eggs into a vessel, add the parsley, also pepper and salt. Melt some butter in a pan, pour in the beaten eggs and set it on the open fire; move the pan rapidly with the left hand, using a stew-spoon in the right hand. When the omelet is done fold it on both ends, turn it over on to a dish and shape it prettily. (2904). PHYSIOLOGICAL OMELET (Omelette Physiologique). Blanch some oysters or mussels in their own liquor; drain and cut into pieces, removing the feet from the mussels and the muscles from the oysters; add as much marinated tunny fish and as much fresh smoked herring meat and carp milt cut in three-eighths of an inch dice. Fry some shallots in butter, add the oysters, milt, herring and tunny fish, all cut in three-eighths of an inch squares, also parsley, chives, chopped mushrooms, salt, pepper, nutmeg and lemon juice. Fill an omelet with this preparation, the same as an Argentine ( No. 2878 ), and pour around a rather thin cream béchamel (No. 411). (2905). SAUSAGE OMELET (Omelette aux Saucisses). Sausage omelets can be made with Lubeck, Frankfort or fresh sausages. For the unsmoked ones, first broil them, then take off the skins and cut them up into small pieces. For Lubeck sausages, fry them in a pan, then cut them up. Plunge Frankfort sausages into boiling water, peel off the skin and divide the meats into small bits. Mix either of this with the uncooked omelet and finish the same as a parsley omelet ( No. 2903 ). (2906). SHRIMP OMELET (Omelette aux Crevettes). Cut each shrimp in quarter-inch squares and mingle with an allemande sauce (No. 407) well buttered with lobster butter (No. 580); season, adding lemon juice, and just when ready to serve fill the omelet with the same and finish as for an Argentine omelet ( No. 2878 ); pour the sauce around. The shrimps may be replaced by lobster or hard -shell crab meat. (2907). SPANISH OMELET (Omelette à l'Espagnole). This is to be prepared with a tablespoonful of chopped onion, as much peeled and cut-up green pepper, half a crushed clove of garlic and one peeled tomato cut across in two, pressed and divided into quarter-inch squares; fry the onion, garlic and the pepper colorless in oil, add the tomatoes and cover the saucepan; let simmer for fifteen minutes, seasoning with salt and pepper. Break six eggs in a bowl, beat well, season and mix in a third part of the preparation. Make a mellow omelet, fill the center with the solid remaining part and pour the sauce around the whole. Instead of mixing the tomato preparation with the eggs the omelet can be filled with it when made. Pour around a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413). (2908). TRUFFLE OMELET (Omelette aux Truffes). Mince some cooked peeled truffles and put them in a sautoir to mingle with either allemande sauce (No. 407) or else half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with Madeira. Fill the inside of an omelet with these truffles and pour the sauce around. (2909). EGGS ON A DISH (Œufs sur le Plat). There is very little difference between eggs on a dish or miroir eggs, for they are both cooked the same way, the only difference being that the first ones are served on the same dish they are cooked in, while the miroir eggs are basted with boiling butter while cooking and cut in rounds as soon as done with a two and a half inch pastry cutter; take them up with a palette and serve on a plate or dish. FIG. 566 An illustration of a dish. FIG. 567 An illustration of a china egg dishes dressed with two eggs. To Prepare Eggs on a Dish. --These eggs should be cooked in china egg dishes ( Fig. 567); to do them properly first butter the dish with fresh or un salted butter, break the eggs into the dish, and salt over the whites but not the yolks so as not to discolor them; set the dish on a thick, cold baking sheet and push it at once into the oven so that they receive more heat from the top than bottom; as soon as the yolks are glossy remove the dish from the oven and, if necessary, finish cooking on top, being careful not to have the whites done too much. Eggs cooked in this way are generally served on the same dish, with or without a garnishing. (2910). EGGS ON A DISH, BERCY (Œufs sur le Plat à la Bercy). Fry in a pan two or three sausages; pour the fat into a small egg dish ( Fig. 567), leaving the sausages in the pan, then break four eggs into the dish. Pour over some melted butter, salt over the whites and cook in the range oven, leaving them in till they are glossy. Skin the sausages, cut them up and dress around the eggs, serving with a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and tomato sauce (No. 549), reduced together and strained through a fine sieve. (2911). EGGS ON A DISH, BIENVENUE (Œufs sur le Plat à la Bienvenue). Lay through a pocket on the inside edge of the basin of a dish a border made of portato croquette preparation ( No. 2782 ) softened with an egg; fill the center of this border with a bed of duxelle or cooked fine herbs (No. 385); break over some raw eggs without injuring the yolks, season with salt and pepper, and put in the center of the yolks; dredge with grated Swiss cheese, pour on some butter and cook the eggs in a hot oven. Serve as soon as removed. (2912). EGGS ON A DISH, CONDé (Œufs sur le Plat à la Condé). Through a pocket provided with a channeled socket form a border of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) and baking forcemeat (No. 81), well mixed together, laying it in the inside of the basin of the dish. Butter the bottom of this dish, season with salt and pepper, and break in a sufficiency of eggs without disturbing the yolks; strew the whites with duck's liver cut in one-eighth of an inch squares, and over the whole scatter grated parmesan cheese; pour on some butter and cook in a hot oven. Garnish around with three-quarters of an inch round chicken croquettes. (2913). EGGS ON A DISH, CREOLE STYLE (Œufs sur le Plat à la Créole). Fry colorless in oil one tablespoonful of chopped onions, as much finely cut-up hot pepper, a quarter of a clove of crushed garlic and a peeled tomato cut in two, pressed out, then divided into small squares; simmer, reduce, and when of a sufficient consistency add two tablespoonfuls of cooked rice, salt and cayenne pepper. With this preparation cover the bottom of a dish fit for the oven; break over the eggs carefully, keeping the yolks entire, pour on melted butter, season with salt on the white of the eggs, and in the center of the yolk put a little pepper, and cook in a moderate oven. (2914). EGGS ON A DISH, ENGLISH STYLE (Œufs sur le Plat à l'Anglaise). Suppress the rind from some bacon, cut it up very thin and fry in butter without browning. Break some eggs into a buttered china egg dish ( Fig. 567), season the whites with a little salt only, and the yolks with a little pepper placed in the center; cook in the oven, having more heat on top than on the bottom. Serve as soon as done, surrounded with the bacon. (2915). EGGS ON A DISH, FERMIèRE (Œufs sur le Plat à la Fermière). Cut the gall from one chicken liver, mince the latter and put it into a pan with butter and a spoonful of chopped onions; season and cook, but not too quickly, while turning over; remove the liver with a skimmer and put one spoonful of chopped up mushrooms into the pan; let the moisture reduce. Place this in the bottom of an egg dish, on this the liver, break two eggs over, season, pour over some melted butter and cook in the oven. (2916). EGGS ON A DISH, MONACO (Œufs sur le Plat à la Monaco). Put into a sautoir one gill of tomato juice and a spoonful of melted glaze (No. 402); add a small bunch of aromatic herbs and tarragon leaves, reduce the liquid until it is the consistency of a syrup, then take out the herbs and pour the liquid into a large egg dish. Break six eggs in a dish, salt the whites, pour over some melted butter and cook in the oven until they become glossy. (2917). EGGS ON A DISH, OMER PACHA (Œufs sur le Plat à la Omer Pacha). Melt a little butter on a dish that can go in the oven; when heated break in twelve eggs, one beside the other, keeping the yolks whole; cook in a moderate oven for five to six minutes. Fry in butter two ounces of chopped onions and as much cut-up green peppers, add three gills of tomato sauce (No. 549) and half the quantity of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and white wine; reduce, not having it too thick, then add bacon prepared by mincing un smoked bacon; fry it in butter, moisten with gravy (No. 404) and Madeira wine, then cook and reduce the moistening entirely; pour this prepared sauce over the eggs or else serve in a separate sauce boat. (2918). EGGS ON A DISH, PLUMEREY (Œufs sur le Plat à la Plumerey). Remove the whites from four eggs, keeping the yolks in their shells; mix with these whites half a gill of soubise (No. 723) and half a gill of tomato purée (No. 730); butter a dish plentifully and pour into it the white of eggs, soubise and tomato mixture. Lay the yolks over and cook in a slack oven, bestrewing the top with raw fine herbs. Between each yolk place a round croquette an inch in diameter, made of grated cooked ham mixed with béchamel sauce (No. 409). (2919). EGGS ON A DISH, ROSSINI (Œufs sur le Plat à la Rossini). Butter the bottom of a dish, break on it four eggs, being careful to keep the yolks whole. Fry some fat chicken livers cut in escalops that have been seasoned and rolled in flour; garnish around the eggs with these. Cook the eggs in a moderate oven, cover the livers with Périgueux sauce (No. 517) and serve. (2920). EGGS ON A DISH, VENETIAN STYLE (Œufs sur le Plat à la Vénitienne). Cut in dice pieces equal quantities of anchovy fillets, broiled and peeled sweet peppers from which the seeds have been removed and good sound tomatoes, scalded, peeled and the liquid squeezed out. Bestrew the bottom of an egg dish with these ingredients, pour over some oil and heat lightly. Break four eggs into the dish, season the whites, and cook in the oven; when removed lay the dish inside of another and serve. (2921). EGGS ON A DISH WITH BACON (Œufs sur le Plat au Petit Salé). Butter the dish, break in the eggs without spoiling the yolks, season and set for an instant on the fire and finish cooking in the oven; surround with slices of broiled smoked bacon. (2922). EGGS ON A DISH WITH CèPES (Œufs sur le Plat aux Cèpes). Peel and chop up two or three cèpes heads; melt some butter in a large egg dish, bestrew the bottom with chopped cèpes and these with parsley; season and heat for two minutes. Break six eggs into this dish, and cook in the oven, having them glossy. Eggs can also be prepared with canned mushrooms. (2923). EGGS ON A DISH WITH CHOPPED HAM (Œufs sur le Plat au Jambon Haché). Butter the bottom of a small egg dish ( Fig. 567), cover it with a layer of cooked and chopped lean ham and over this pour a little melted meat glaze (No. 402). Break four eggs into the dish, salt the whites, and cook in the range oven, letting them get glossy on top. They may also be prepared with boiled tongue instead of ham. (2924). EGGS ON A DISH WITH TOMATOES (Œufs sur le Plat aux Tomates). Scald two small partly ripe tomatoes in order to remove the skins, divide each one in two, cut them up small, salt over and drain in a sieve; sauté in butter and range them on the bottom of a small buttered egg dish ( Fig. 567); break four eggs into this, salt the whites, scald the yolks and cook in the oven, glossing the tops. (2925). POACHED EGGS à LA BOëLDIEU (Œufs Pochés à la Boëldieu). Poach two or three eggs; scald two tomatoes just sufficiently to be able to peel off the skins; drain and cut them in slices, then in dice; put the pieces in a pan with oil and sauté on a brisk fire until they have reduced their humidity without dissolving; season highly, and bestrew with chopped parsley. With these tomatoes fill two or three hollowed-out bread crusts (No. 52), and on each lay one of the poached eggs heated at the oven door, basting them over with good reduced velouté sauce (No. 415); range these crusts on separate plates. Fig. 568 Two poached eggs with tomatoes are dressed on a metal plate. (2926). POACHED EGGS à LA BOURGUIGNONNE--BAKED (Œufs Pochés à la Bourguignonne au Gratin). Boil water in a saucepan; add salt and a dash of vinegar. Crack six very fresh eggs and drop them slowly in a deep dish, keeping them whole; slip them into the boiling water, and when done, and found to be of a proper consistency, remove them with a skimmer, and transfer to cold water; pare each one singly. Butter thoroughly a baking dish, bestrew it with bread-crumbs and then a layer of grated parmesan; pour over butter, and lay on the eggs; mask them with a well-seasoned béchamel sauce (No. 409), sprinkle with grated parmesan and butter, and bake in a hot oven. When done strew over some chopped fine herbs and squeeze over the juice of a lemon. (2927). POACHED EGGS à LA MIRABEAU (Œufs Pochés à la Mirabeau). Prepare a cooked foies-gras and cut seven or eight oval-shaped slices of the same dimensions as the poached eggs; pound the parings of liver with two pounded raw peeled truffles, season and add a spoonful of raw chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89), and two egg-yolks; put this into a strong paper cornet and push it through to form a high string all around the upper edges of the slices of foies-gras. Range these on a small raised baking sheet, having the bottom covered with a thin layer of half-glaze sauce (No. 413) reduced with Madeira wine; keep for two minutes in a slack oven to warm the liver and poach the forcemeat. Remove and dress in a circle on a dish, placing a poached egg on each one; heat at the oven door while basting over with good velouté sauce (No. 415). (2928). POACHED EGGS à LA VILLEROI (Œufs Pochés à la Villeroi). Poach seven or eight eggs just sufficiently not to have the whites break; when refreshed, pared and well wiped, dip them one by one into a thick Villeroi sauce (No. 560); range as fast as they are done on a small baking sheet, slightly apart, and leave until the sauce hardens, then detach the eggs from the sheet, suppress the superfluous sauce, and roll them first in fresh bread-crumbs mingled with parmesan, then in beaten eggs; lastly plunge the eggs, one at a time, into plenty of hot frying fat to cook to a good color; drain and dress in a circle on a thin bed of chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) poached on a dish to prevent the eggs from slipping off; surround each one with a string of consistent tomato purée (No. 730), mixed with béarnaise sauce (No. 433). Serve at once. (2929). POACHED EGGS à LA WRIGHT SANFORD (Œufs Pochés à la Wright Sanford). Blanch some straight thick vermicelli in boiling water for two minutes; drain and return them to the saucepan, adding fresh mushrooms previously minced, washed, drained, fried in butter, and moistened with a little Madeira wine and half-glaze sauce (No. 413), and reduced; season, then dress the whole in the center of a dish, and garnish around with poached eggs ( No. 2931 ). (2930). POACHED EGGS. MATELOTE (Œufs Pochés Matelote). Poach some eggs the same as for poached eggs with gravy ( No. 2931 ); prepare and fry in clarified butter some oval crusts (No. 52) measuring two and a quarter by two and three-quarter inches. Cook in butter one minced onion, add to it a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, and a clove of garlic and mushroom peelings; moisten with red wine and thicken with kneaded butter (No. 579); boil all slowly for half an hour, skim and pass it through a tammy; add small cooked mushroom heads and small glazed onions. Dress the eggs on the fried crusts; range them in a circle, and pour the garnishing in the center. (2931). POACHED EGGS WITH GRAVY (Œufs Pochés au Jus). The eggs must be very fresh and selected of uniform size. Only a few at a time can be poached. Boil some salted water acidulated with vinegar in a saucepan; quickly crack three or four eggs, one at a time, on the edge of the saucepan; open and drop them over the water exactly in the spot where it bubbles; with a small, deep, long-shaped skimmer gather the egg together, turning it incessantly, so that it assumes a long form, then remove the pan to the side of the fire until the envelope of the yolk be sufficiently hardened not to break. The difficulty consists in giving the egg a sufficient solidity without allowing the yolks to harden, for these should remain perfectly mellow. As soon as each egg is done, lift it up delicately with the skimmer and drop it in a plentiful supply of cold water so that it hardens, then take it up very carefully, pare neatly, and return it at once into cold water. Just when ready to serve, warm the poached eggs, either in their own water that has been strained through a sieve, or on a small baking tin, in a slack oven; dress them in a vegetable dish and baste over with clear gravy (No. 404) and serve. Poached eggs are also served simply on slices of toast, without any sauce whatever. (2932). POACHED EGGS WITH PURéE OF CHICKEN SUPRêME (Œufs Pochés à la Purée de Volaille Suprême). Poach eight eggs, the same as for those poached with gravy ( No. 2931 ); prepare some croustades, either of bread or paste, and fill them half full with chicken purée (No. 713), having all very hot; lay on the well-drained poached eggs, thoroughly heated at the oven door, and cover with buttered suprême sauce (No. 547). They can also be prepared with a purée of mushrooms (No. 722), game (No. 716) or truffles (No. 731). (2933). POACHED EGGS WITH SPINACH (Œufs Pochés aux épinards). After poaching the eggs the same as with gravy ( No. 2931 ), dress them on a spinach garnishing, or else one of chicory (No. 729). (2934). SCRAMBLED EGGS à LA COLUMBUS (Œufs Brouillés à la Columbus). After the eggs are nearly done mix in with them some cooked lean quarter-inch squares of ham; cut some slices of raw blood pudding (No. 1772), fry them in butter over a brisk fire, then arrange them on a baking sheet and allow to cool off; bread-crumb and dip in egg, then fry to a fine color. Also sauté some slices of beef brains over a quick fire. Dress the scrambled eggs, putting half the preparation on a dish and the brains in the center; cover these with the remainder of the eggs and surround with the fried slices of black pudding. Garnish the top with very thin half slices of sausage. Fig. 569 An illustration of a plate of scrambled eggs with fried black pudding placed around the eggs. (2935). SCRAMBLED EGGS à LA DUXELLE AND WITH ANCHOVY CROUSTADES (Œufs Brouillés à la Duxelle et aux Croustades d'Anchois). Fry in butter some chopped onions, shallots and mushrooms; mix with these a little reduced velouté sauce (No. 415). Break five or six eggs in a bowl, season, beat lightly and pour them into a saucepan, having previously buttered the bottom with one ounce of fresh butter; beat them over a slow fire with a whisk until they begin to thicken, then use a spoon, and work till smooth, incorporating about an ounce and a half more butter divided in small pats; season and throw in the fine herbs and some chopped parsley; finish with a little raw cream so as to keep them mellow. In case the eggs have to wait, then put the saucepan in a bain-marie having the water only tepid, and continue beating with the spoon. Dress the eggs in a vegetable or any deep dish, smooth the top and drop over some tomatoed half-glaze; surround with small hollow round crusts (No. 52) filled with reduced béchamel sauce (No. 409), finished with anchovy purée and a halved anchovy dressed in a ring the size of the opening on the croustade, the anchovy to be filled through a cornet with cold béarnaise sauce (No. 433), having lobster coral sprinkled over the top. (2936). SCRAMBLED EGGS à LA JéRôME (Œufs Brouillés à la Jérôme). Cook some eggs the same as for scrambled with gravy ( No. 2940 ), mixing in when nearly done a salpicon either of partridge, woodcock or any other seasonable game cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares; dress, pour around the sauce and garnish with the stuffed eggs. For the Sauce. --Prepare a game fumet (No. 397) with the fragments of game, reducing it with espagnole sauce (No. 414). Stuffed Eggs. --Have hard-boiled eggs prepared as follows: Boil some eggs for ten minutes, throw in cold water, shell and remove the white from the pointed ends only with a tin tube half an inch in diameter; empty out the interiors with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) and pound this with well seasoned béarnaise sauce (No. 433), mixing in chopped-up mushrooms; fill and re-form the eggs with this stuffing, roll in flour, then in beaten eggs and bread-crumbs and fry to a fine color. (2937). SCRAMBLED EGGS à LA MARTINEZ (Œufs Brouillés à la Martinez). Broil four sweet Spanish peppers, selected with meaty and plump insides; suppress their skins by rubbing with a cloth, then divide each one in two; fry in butter and oil, half of each, season with salt, drain off the fat, and mix in a little meat glaze (No. 402) and chopped parsley. Scramble eight eggs, thickening over a slow fire, and when almost done mingle in some artichoke bottoms cut in quarter-inch squares, and fried in butter, and some cooked ham cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares. Dress the whole in a vegetable dish, smooth the surface dome-shaped and pour around tomato sauce (No. 549) and half-glaze sauce (No. 413), mixed. Arrange the peppers in a circle, one overlapping the other, and serve the remainder of the sauce separately. (2938). SCRAMBLED EGGS IN A RISOT BORDER WITH DUCKS ' LIVERS (Œufs Brouillés en Bordure de Risot aux Foies de Canard). Make a risot (No. 739), mixing in with it some cooked ducks ' livers cut in quarter-inch squares. Butter a plain, round-top border mold ( Fig. 138), fill it with the risot, pressing it firmly; keep warm and unmold just when ready to serve. Fill the center with scrambled eggs ( No. 2940 ), mixing in some chopped truffles. Garnish around the eggs with small escalops of foies-gras rolled in Madeira sauce (No. 492). (2939). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH FINE HERBS (Œufs Brouillés aux Fines Herbes). Have some eggs scrambled the same as with gravy ( No. 2940 ); to avoid having lumps in them they should not be cooked excessively, and above all be well stirred; mix in one tablespoonful altogether of chopped parsley, chives and chervil. Should it be necessary to keep them any length of time before serving, then add a little good velouté sauce (No. 415). Surround with puff paste crescents baked in a slack oven. (2940). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH GRAVY (Œufs Brouillés au Jus). Break six eggs in a saucepan with two ounces of butter, a gill of cream or milk, and season with salt and pepper. Lay the saucepan containing the eggs on a slow fire and stir by beating vigorously with a small wire whip ( Fig. 154); as soon as they attain a consistency, remove the saucepan from the fire and continue the same process for two minutes longer; when finished pour it out on a dish and surround by bread croûtons (No. 51) fried in clarified butter. Throw over some reduced clear gravy (No. 404), mixing a little meat glaze (No. 402) into it. (2941). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH LOBSTER, GARNISHED WITH VILLEROI OYSTERS (Œufs Brouillés aux Homards, Garnis d'Huîtres à la Villeroi). Add to some nearly finished scrambled eggs, prepared the same as for gravy ( No. 2940 ), a salpicon of lobster cut in three-sixteenths of an inch dice. Dress the eggs when finished, smooth the surface and garnish around with Villeroi oysters (No. 698), or else mussels or scallops. The lobster salpicon can be replaced by one of shrimps or of crabs. (2942). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH MUSHROOMS (Œufs Brouillés aux Champignons). Prepare the scrambled eggs the same as with gravy ( No. 2940 ); when almost done mix in a salpicon of mushrooms cut in quarter-inch squares; dress and pour around a little Madeira sauce (No. 492) and surround with croûtons of bread fried in butter (No. 51). (2943). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH SWEETBREADS (Œufs Brouillés aux Ris de Veau). Braise some sweetbreads and then put them under a weight to cool; cut them up in quarter-inch squares and warm in butter. Prepare some scrambled eggs the same as with gravy ( No. 2940 ) and when nearly done add the sweetbreads and mix them in with the eggs. Dress on the center of a dish, pour around a little half-glaze sauce (No. 413) and surround with half- heart croûtons (small) of bread fried in butter (No. 51). The sweetbreads may be replaced either by un smoked salted tongue, ham, or even thin pieces of un smoked beef or squares of bacon fried in butter. (2944). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH SWISS AND PARMESAN CHEESE (Œufs Brouillés au Fromage de Gruyère et au Parmesan ). Beat eight eggs lightly in a bowl, pour them into a saucepan having its bottom buttered with two ounces of fresh butter; season and thicken on a slow fire while beating unceasingly, and as soon as cooked incorporate an ounce of butter and two of grated parmesan. Remove it from the fire and then pour in a little good velouté sauce (No. 415) and raw cream; finish with a few spoonfuls of Swiss cheese cut in dice and softened in cold milk. Dress the preparation in a deep dish and surround with puff- paste crescents. Scrambled eggs may be prepared with the Swiss cheese or with grated parmesan, mixing in three ounces of either. Surround with triangle-shaped bread croûtons fried in butter (No. 51). (2945). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH TOMATO PURéE (Œufs Brouillés à la Purée de Tomates). Select two or three good tomatoes; put them beside each other in a wire basket and plunge into boiling water for two minutes simply to scald and remove the skins; drain off and press through a sieve; should the purée be too thin put it on a hair sieve to drain, then warm and season it. Scramble seven or eight eggs in a saucepan the same as for scrambled with gravy ( No. 2940 ); when properly thickened remove and mix in the prepared purée; pour the whole into a deep dish. Sprinkle over with half-glaze (No. 400), using a brush, and surround with bread croûtons (No. 51). (2946). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH TOMATOES AND CHIVES (Œufs Brouillés aux Tomates et à la Ciboulette). Scald some tomatoes, peel and cut across in two, then into squares, and sauté in butter; add them to the scrambled eggs when nearly done, also some finely cut-up chives (see scrambled eggs with gravy, No. 2940 ). (2947). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH PéRIGORD TRUFFLES (Œufs Brouillés aux Truffes du Périgord). Cut two ounces of Périgord truffles into three-sixteenths inch squares, after they have been peeled and cooked with salt and Madeira wine, put this salpicon with a little melted meat -glaze (No. 402) into a small saucepan and set it in a bain-marie. Break four eggs in a bowl, season and beat to mix well, then pour them through a fine strainer into a saucepan, having its bottom covered with half an ounce of butter; put the saucepan on a slow fire and thicken the eggs while beating steadily with a small tinned wire whip. When almost done remove from the fire and mix in slowly about half an ounce of butter broken up small, finishing with a few spoonfuls of raw cream; add the truffles and dress in a vegetable or any other deep dish. (2948). SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH PIEDMONT TRUFFLES (Œufs Brouillés aux Truffes du Piémont). Prepare the scrambled eggs the same as for No. 2940 , only salting them less; mix with them two spoonfuls of grated parmesan. Have two ounces of white truffles cut up into thin fillets; put the eggs in a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182), make a hole in the center and in it place the truffles; pour some barely melted butter over, and on top place anchovy fillets. Cover the whole with the eggs so that the truffles are inclosed in the center; set this pan in a slack oven for a few moments and serve at once. (2949). SOFT EGGS à LA CHIPOLATA (Œufs Mollets à la Chipolata). As for poached eggs these must be of the freshest so as to have them well shaped, all of the same size, while cooking. Partly fresh eggs form into cavities when taken from their shells, giving them an ungainly appearance. Put the eggs into a strainer and plunge this into boiling water; cover the vessel and allow the liquid to boil steadily for five minutes, should the eggs be large; leave them for thirty seconds in their water off the fire; then remove them from the strainer, and plunge into cold water for twelve to fifteen minutes before breaking off their shells; remove these, then return them to the cold water. Just when ready to serve heat them in salted water that must not boil; drain and dress them on hollow crusts (No. 52) and garnish around with a Chipolata garnishing (No. 657). Fig. 570 A plate of two poached eggs dressed with crusts and garnished with chipolata garnishing. (2950). SOFT EGGS FOR EPICURES (Œufs Mollets des Gourmets). Fry in clarified butter some hollowed crusts the shape of an egg (No. 52), having one for each; line the interiors with a bed of foies-gras purée, and range a hot soft egg over. Pour into a sauce -pan some tomato purée (No. 730), strained through a fine sieve, and incorporate, beating it in, some lobster butter (No. 580), a dash of tarragon vinegar, and a little shallot cut in one-eighth of an inch squares, and blanched. Dress the crusts ( Fig. 570), and pour the sauce over. (2951). SOFT EGGS WITH PURéE OF SORREL (Œufs Mollets à la Purée d'Oseille). Prepare a purée of sorrel garnishing (No. 728), finish it with a little half-glaze (No. 400), butter it well, and dress in a vegetable dish; smooth the surface, and on it arrange six soft eggs, prepared as explained in No. 2949 . Baste the sorrel with half-glaze applied with a brush. FARINACEOUS (Farinages). (2952). RICE CROQUETTES WITH SALPICON (Croquettes de Riz au Salpicon). Pick and wash half a pound of rice; blanch, drain and refresh; place it in a saucepan to moisten with broth (No. 194a) to three times its height; add a quarter of a pound of butter and a seasoning of salt, pepper and nutmeg. When the rice is sufficiently cooked (in twenty or thirty minutes), mix into it a salpicon weighing a quarter of a pound, composed of tongue, truffles, chicken, game and mushrooms --all to be mixed evenly after cutting in three-sixteenths of an inch squares. Leave this stand till cold, then form into round, flat, oval or oblong croquettes; dip in beaten eggs, then in bread-crumbs, and fry to a fine color. Dress on a folded napkin with fried parsley on top. (2953). FEDELINI VERMICELLINI AU CARDINAL (Fedelini Vermicellini au Cardinal). Have half a pound of small, straight vermicelli, one-sixteenth of an inch in diameter. Begin by plunging it in an abundance of boiling salted water for about three minutes, then drain and put it back in a saucepan with four ounces of butter divided in small lumps, and two ounces of grated parmesan, adding salt, pepper, nutmeg, béchamel sauce (No. 409), four ounces of minced mushrooms, two-ounces of crawfish butter (No. 573). Have two ounces of truffles sliced sufficiently large, and an eighth of an inch thick, then fried in butter, drained and rolled in meat glaze (No. 402). Alternate the fedelini in a vegetable dish with layers of minced truffles, covering each one with grated parmesan; bestrew the top with bread-crumbs and grated cheese, pour butter over, and brown in a hot oven, or under a salamander ( Fig. 123). (2954). FONDUE WITH PIEDMONTESE TRUFFLES (Fondue aux Truffes du Piémont). Take a pound of soft, fresh Swiss cheese and cut it up into quarter-inch squares. Break twelve egg-yolks in a bowl with two tablespoonfuls of flour; mix well together and dilute with a pint of cream, then strain through a sieve. Put the cheese into a saucepan on a slow fire with two tablespoonfuls of milk, stir it about with a spoon until it no longer forms into strings, then pour in the prepared yolks. Heat all on the fire, stirring with a spoon until it assumes the consistency of a cream (but it must not boil), then add a little butter and peeled and finely minced Piedmontese truffles. Pour the whole into a deep dish and dredge the top with finely chopped truffles. (2955). GNOCQUIS (Gnocquis). Put into a saucepan two gills of water, adding an ounce of butter, salt and pepper; let come to a boil, then put in a quarter of a pound of flour and an ounce and a half of grated cheese; stir the preparation for two minutes on the fire and beat in quickly three eggs, one after the other. Dredge the table with flour, pour the paste on it, divide it into small bits and rolling each one out into a string on the table, cut them so as to obtain three-eighths of an inch in diameter balls, and poach these for five minutes in boiling milk. Put an ounce of butter into a saucepan, fill it with flour and moisten with the milk the gnocquis were boiled in, then add grated parmesan cheese and the gnocquis, stir well, heat the gnocquis thoroughly and serve. Gnocquis can also be made with semolina, also with chicken quenelle forcemeat (No. 89) added to the same weight of cream cake paste (No. 132). (2956). GNOCQUIS, ROMAN STYLE (Gnocquis à la Romaine ). Range a pound of sifted flour in a ring, form a hollow in the center and in it put salt, two ounces of butter, four ounces of mashed potatoes passed through a fine sieve, and a little hot water. Make a firm paste and divide it into small pieces to form three-fourths of an inch diameter balls; press them on a grater, throw into boiling water for fifteen minutes, then drain and serve in a soup tureen in layers alternated with parmesan cheese; pour over hazel- nut butter (No. 567) and some gravy (No. 404) reduced with espagnole sauce (No. 414) and tomato purée (No. 730). (2957). LAZAGNETTES, PHILADELPHIA STYLE (Lazagnettes à la Philadelphie). Blanch half a pound of lazagnettes. (These are thin bands of paste three-sixteenths of an inch wide.) Drain and put them in a saucepan to cover with some broth (No. 194a); boil and reduce this to almost nothing, then add four ounces of cooked lean ham and eight ounces of mushrooms, both to be cut in small three-sixteenths inch squares; dish in separate layers of lazagnettes and parmesan and cover with thin béchamel sauce (No. 409), into which have mixed meat -glaze (No. 402) and tomato sauce (No. 549). (2958). MACARONI à LA BRIGNOLI ( Macaroni à la Brignoli). Braise a piece of beef by placing it in a saucepan lined with bards of fat pork, onions, carrots and a bunch of parsley; moisten with a pint of broth (No. 194a) and let fall to a glaze, then remoisten and let fall once more to a glaze; pour in sufficient broth and white wine to reach to the height of the meat. Cook for four hours in a slack oven, strain, skim off the fat and mingle into the sauce a third as much tomato purée (No. 730). Boil some macaroni in salted water for twelve to fifteen minutes, drain and put it in a saucepan with a pint of gravy (No. 404); when this is absorbed dress two-thirds of the macaroni in layers with grated parmesan between; form a hollow in the center and in it arrange sliced truffles previously cooked in a sautoir with cocks'-combs and minced mushrooms, having them simmered with a little tomato sauce (No. 549) and half-glaze (No. 400). Cover over with more macaroni and grated parmesan, pour on a part of the prepared stock and serve the remainder in a sauce -boat. (2959). MACARONI BAKED ( Macaroni au Gratin). Dress the macaroni, cooked as for the Parisian ( No. 2961 ), in a buttered and bread -crumbed dish; smooth the top neatly, strew with bread -raspings and butter, and bake in a hot oven. (2960). MACARONI, NEAPOLITAN STYLE ( Macaroni à la Mode de Naples). Line a saucepan with sliced carrots and onions, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, and on top lay a three-pound piece of rumps of beef. Into this make three holes some distance apart from each other, and each an inch in diameter; in one place some grated fat pork, in the other a little garlic and in the third hard egg, chopped and seasoned with salt, pepper and parsley. Put the meat into the saucepan with some fat, and color it on a slow fire or in the oven. Around lay a few boned calves ' feet, moisten with two bottles of wine, one red and one white, and a quart of broth (No. 194a); when the beef is half-cooked, add twelve tomatoes cut in two and pressed out, and a pint of espagnole sauce (No. 414); cover the saucepan, paste on the lid with a paste made of flour and water and push it into a moderate oven for six hours; remove, skim off the fat and strain the stock. Cook a pound and a half of macaroni three-sixteenths of an inch in diameter in salted boiling water from twelve to fifteen minutes; when sufficiently done drain and range it in a large vegetable dish or soup tureen in separate layers of macaroni and grated cheese. Baste over with the beef stock and continue until it is all used, and when ready to serve stir well and send to the table, using the meat only for stock. (2961). MACARONI, PARISIAN STYLE ( Macaroni à la Parisienne). Boil a pound of macaroni in salted water from twelve to fifteen minutes, putting it in only when the water boils. Avoid breaking it for it can always be cut the desired length after cooking. When cooked drain and return it to the saucepan, season with a little salt, pepper and nutmeg, and add half parmesan and half Swiss cheese, finishing with a little bechamel sauce (No. 409) and a large piece of butter. Toss in the saucepan, without using a spoon, and when well mingled and the cheese forms into threads then it is done. Pour it into a vegetable dish and serve. (2962). MACARONI WITH CREAM AND TRUFFLES ( Macaroni à la Crème aux Truffes). After cooking and blanching the macaroni the same as for the Parisian, drain and lay it in a saucepan to season with salt and nutmeg; add a pint of cream and let simmer until this is reduced, then transfer it to a vegetable dish in layers, alternating each one with grated parmesan and some finely shredded truffles, finishing with the chopped truffles. Pour over melted butter and serve. (2963). MACARONI WITH GAME PURéE ( Macaroni à la Purée de Gibier). Pound the meats of a cooked partridge, free of skin or bones; add to it six ounces of butter and six gills of meat gravy, prepared the same as in No. 2960 . Blanch the macaroni for twelve minutes, drain and dress it in layers-- macaroni, grated parmesan and game purée. Serve separately a half-glaze sauce (No. 413) with essence of game (No. 389). (2964). MACARONI MEZZANI GRANDI à LA CAVALLOTTI ( Macaroni Mezzani Grandi à la Cavallotti). Boil half a pound of this macaroni, which is a quarter of an inch in diameter. Chop up separately some cooked lean ham, some cooked cold chicken fillets and livers, mushrooms and truffles; place these ingredients in a saucepan with reduced gravy (No. 404) and finish with a few spoonfuls of tomato sauce (No. 549); keep this preparation in a bain-marie ( Fig. 122). After the macaroni is cooked, drain and return it to the saucepan to mix in a gill of rich gravy; boil while stirring at times and when the gravy is all absorbed add two ounces of butter divided in small pats, also two ounces of grated parmesan. Dress the macaroni in a vegetable dish and spread a part of the sauce over; strew with parmesan, pour a little hazel- nut butter (No. 567) over and serve very hot, with the remaining gravy in a sauce -boat. (2965). MACARONNICELLI à LA LUCINI (Macaronnicelli à la Lucini). Boil a pound of macaronnicelli; drain and put it in a sautoir with half a pound of butter. Cut five peeled tomatoes crosswise in two; press them well and fry in butter over a brisk fire, keeping them very whole. Grate half a pound of Swiss and parmesan cheese, half of each. Chop up a medium onion, fry it in butter with four ounces of cooked lean ham and as much bacon, both cut in three-sixteenths inch squares; drain off the butter and replace it by espagnole sauce (No. 414) and meat gravy; let cook for fifteen minutes, then dress the macaronnicelli in a vegetable dish, alternating each layer with one of the grated cheese; cover the surface with the halved tomatoes and pour the sauce over the whole. (2966). SPAGHETTI MACARONI à LA LAURENCE ( Macaroni Spaghetti à la Laurence). Cook the spaghetti in boiling water for ten minutes; drain and finish in some veal blond (No. 423) in such a way that when the paste is cooked the moistening will be entirely reduced, then dress it in a vegetable dish intercalated withlayers of grated parmesan. Serve the following sauce separately: Chop up two ounces of onions, fry it in butter with six ounces of minced ham, a bunch of parsley garnished with thyme and bay leaf, mignonette, an uncrushed clove of garlic, six halved and well-pressed-out tomatoes, melted meat glaze (No. 402) and espagnole sauce (No. 414); boil together for fifteen minutes, then strain through a tammy and pour in a sauce -tureen to serve at the same time as the macaroni. (2967). SPAGHETTI MACARONI à LA PRATI ( Macaroni Spaghetti à la Prati). Take half a pound of cold braised sweetbread escalops, one inch in diameter by three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness, and a quarter of a pound of cooked lean ham cut the same size and shape; fry both lightly in butter and moisten with some gravy (No. 404), espagnole sauce (No. 414) and Madeira wine; add two ounces of salted un smoked tongue and one ounce of truffles. Blanch a pound of spaghetti in salted water for ten minutes, drain and put it back in the saucepan with melted glaze (No. 402), butter and a little of the gravy from the above stew; simmer and when finished cooking incorporate four ounces of grated parmesan; arrange two-thirds of this spaghetti in a circle on a dish, pour the stew in the center and cover with the remainder of the spaghetti. (2968). SPAGHETTI MACARONI, QUEEN STYLE ( Macaroni Spaghetti à la Reine). Plunge one pound of spaghetti into boiling salted water, and when cooked drain in a colander without refreshing; return it to the saucepan with some chicken purée prepared as follows: Pound some roast chicken meat to a pulp with a pint of béchamel (No. 409); rub it through a sieve and put it in the saucepan with the spaghetti, adding salt, prepared red pepper (No. 168), nutmeg and meat glaze (No. 402). When thoroughly mixed incorporate slowly some butter and grated parmesan. Dress in a vegetable dish, scatter fine fillets of tongue and truffles over and pour on some clear half-glaze (No. 400). (2969). SPAGHETTI MACARONI, SALVINI ( Macaroni Spaghetti à la Salvini). Cook in boiling and slightly salted water one pound of spaghetti macaroni, having it boil for twelve to fifteen minutes; drain and dress it in layers in a large vegetable dish or soup tureen, beginning with a layer of the macaroni; strew this with grated parmesan and continue till finished. Baste over with beef gravy prepared as follows, and serve very hot: Take three pounds of rump of beef. Select a saucepan rather larger than the piece of beef, cover its bottom with bards of fat pork and sliced onions, having sufficient to conceal the bottom; lay in the meat, salt and pepper over, add a clove of garlic and a garnished bunch of parsley, cover the saucepan, put it on the fire and let fall to a glaze. When the meat is browned have two ounces of extract of tomatoes dissolved in a quart of broth (No. 194a), and add a spoonful at a time to the saucepan until the onions are well melted, then continue adding the remainder of the tomatoes and another quart of broth; cook the whole slowly for six hours. (2970). NOODLES à LA LAUER (Nouilles à la Lauer). Mince fine one pound of noodle paste (No. 142), rolled out to a sixteenth of an inch in thickness; cook it in boiling water for a few moments, then drain; add to it salt, pepper, nutmeg, six ounces of butter, and four ounces of grated parmesan, also a little béchamel sauce (No. 409); mix all together and serve. (2971). NOODLES, BAKED (Nouilles au Gratin). Butter a baking dish, lay in the same preparation as for Lauer ( No. 2970 ), smooth nicely, and dredge over with bread-crumbs and grated parmesan; pour on melted butter, brown in a hot oven and serve. (2972). NOODLES SAUTéD IN BUTTER (Nouilles Sautées au Beurre). Blanched noodles can be sautéd in butter, drained and seasoned with salt and pepper, then slightly browned in the oven. (2973). NOODLES WITH FRIED BREAD-CRUMBS (Nouilles à la Mie de Pain Frite). Prepare the noodles as for the Lauer ( No. 2970 ), but instead of using six ounces of butter, have only two, and finish precisely the same. Fry a handful of bread-crumbs in butter, and when a fine color throw over the dressed noodles. It is then ready to serve. (2974). POLENTA (Polenta). A dried and crushed corn resembling semolina. Have a quart of water boiling in a saucepan, drop in like rain one pound and a half of polenta; boil for a few moments, adding a little salt and three ounces of butter, then stir in briskly a little grated parmesan. When cooked, pour it into mousseline molds (No. 2, Fig. 138), previously coated with meat glaze (No. 402); when the polenta is hard, unmold, or else have the molds buttered, and when the polenta is thoroughly cold unmold and cut each one into slices; spread a little melted butter and grated parmesan between each, then restore them to their respective positions; remold and place in the oven for twenty-five to thirty minutes, then unmold and serve with a cream sauce (No. 454). (2975). RAMEKINS (Ramequins). Pour a pint of milk into a saucepan, add to it five ounces of butter, and when this boils remove it from the fire, and stir in twelve ounces of flour; beat and dry it on the fire. Remove the saucepan from the range and then incorporate five more ounces of butter, also five ounces of grated parmesan, six whole eggs and two yolks, a pinch of pepper, two heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar and eight ounces of Swiss cheese, cut in quarter-inch squares; mix the whole well together, adding a little whipped cream. Have this paste the consistency of a pâte-à-chou, then drop it with a round spoon on a buttered pan into balls measuring an inch and a quarter in diameter; egg them over and decorate each ramekin with thin slices of Swiss cheese put on in form of a rosette. Cook in a medium oven. As soon as done take them out and detach from the pan to dress and serve at once on a folded napkin. (2976). RAVIOLES à LA BELLINI (Ravioles à la Bellini). Prepare some ravioles as explained in No. 158. After being blanched and drained put them in a saucepan and cover with broth (No. 194a); cook for a few minutes, then drain and dress in layers in a vegetable dish, alternating each one with grated parmesan; pour over some thickened gravy (No. 405), mixed with meat glaze (No. 402) and tomato purée (No. 730), then serve. Ravioles can also be prepared the same way, and when drained and placed in the vegetable dish pour over some melted butter, strew over grated parmesan and bake in a moderate oven for a few minutes. (2977). RICE à LA MANHATTAN--LEAN (Riz au Maigre à la Manhattan). Chop up two ounces of onion; fry it in butter, add a pound of rice and heat both together. When exceedingly hot moisten to three times its height (the rice one-third and the moistening two-thirds) with broth (No. 194a); let boil and cook in a slack oven for twenty minutes. Incorporate with the rice, when done, six ounces of grated parmesan. Pour two-thirds of this into a casserole or vegetable dish; make a hole in the center and fill it with shelled crawfish tails or shrimps and poached oysters, after removing their muscles, or else with mussels and minced mushrooms; pour over lean velouté sauce (No. 416) reduced with essence of mushrooms (No. 392) and chicken glaze (No. 398); mix well and cover the whole with the remainder of the rice; put in a hot oven for fifteen minutes and serve. (2978). RICE, ORIENTAL STYLE (Ris à l'Orientale). Wash well and drain one pound of rice, place it in a saucepan with three quarts of boiling water, cover and push it into the oven; when the rice is dry and sufficiently done pour it on a sieve. Put three-quarters of a pound of clarified butter cooked to hazel- nut (No. 567) in a saucepan, add to it the drained rice and cover with a wet cloth; place the lid on the saucepan to close it hermetically, then set it in a moderate oven for fifteen minutes. Serve the rice in a vegetable dish. (2979). RISOT à LA FRANCATELLI (Risot à la Francatelli). Chop up a two-ounce onion, fry it colorless in butter and add one pound of Piedmont rice, a few slices of raw smoked ham and six small chipolata sausages; moisten to double the height of the rice with broth (No. 194a), boil, put on the lid and place the saucepan in the oven for twenty minutes, then remove the ham and sausages, and incorporate four ounces of hazel- nut butter (No. 567), four ounces of grated parmesan and a very little salt and prepared red pepper (No. 168). Put two-thirds of this risot into a vegetable dish; garnish the top with a circle of escalops of sweetbreads fried in butter, and the center with the sausages, having suppressed the skin and cut them into slices; cover with the remainder of the risot. Serve separately a very thick rich sauce, into which mix some tomato paste and a little espagnole sauce (No. 414). (2980). RISOT à LA RISTORI (Risot à la Ristori). Prepare a risot the same as with Piedmontese truffles ( No. 2981 ); dress half of it in a casserole or vegetable dish so as to cover the bottom and sides; in the center place a garnishing of cocks'-combs and kidneys, escaloped duck's liver and sliced truffles; cover this garnishing with espagnole sauce (No. 414) reduced with Marsala wine; mask with the remainder of the risot and this with peeled halved tomatoes pressed out and fried in oil, keeping them as whole as possible. Serve apart a little clear gravy (No. 404) and grated parmesan. (2981). RISOT WITH PIEDMONTESE TRUFFLES (Risot aux Truffes du Piémont). Put six ounces of butter in a saucepan; when it begins to heat add to it two ounces of chopped onion and fry for a moment, then put in a pound of unwashed but well-picked rice. When this becomes quite hot moisten to double its height with broth (No. 194a), and cook very slowly while covered for twenty minutes. When done add six ounces of butter in small lumps, and four ounces of grated parmesan, stirring them in with a large carving fork, also two tablespoonfuls of meat glaze (No. 402) or chicken glaze (No. 398). Range the risot in a casserole or vegetable dish, cover the top with two ounces of fresh white Piedmont truffles, warmed in a little butter. Serve a clear gravy (No. 404) at the same time. (2982). SOUFFLé, CREAMY, WITH CHEESE (Soufflé Crémeux au Fromage). Place twelve raw egg-yolks into a saucepan; beat them with half a pound of partly melted butter, season with pepper and nutmeg and stir the preparation on a slow fire the same as a cream, so that it thickens, without ceasing to stir, and without letting it boil; when done remove from the fire and stir in three-quarters of a pound of grated Swiss and parmesan cheese (the preparation should remain mellow); add to it first five beaten egg-whites, mixing thoroughly but gently, and then two or three spoonfuls of whipped cream. Pour this preparation in a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182), lay it on a small baking sheet and cook it from eighteen to twenty minutes in a slack oven. Strew over grated parmesan before removing and serve at once. (2983). SOUFFLé WITH PARMESAN CHEESE (Soufflé au Fromage de Parmesan ). Have a gill of water in a saucepan, with two ounces of butter, a pinch of sugar, some whole peppers and salt; let the liquid boil, then remove and stir in a quarter of a pound of flour; thicken the paste by beating it vigorously over a slow fire until it detaches from the saucepan; pour it into a basin and let get partly cold while stirring about with a spoon. Incorporate six or seven egg-yolks, a quarter of a pound of grated parmesan and two ounces of butter divided in small pats, adding them all very slowly without ceasing to stir. At the last moment work in five beaten-up egg-whites, and lastly two or three spoonfuls of good whipped cream. With this preparation fill a buttered soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) two-thirds full, lay it on a small baking sheet and cook for twenty-five minutes in a slow oven. This quantity is sufficient for eight persons. (2984). SOUFFLé WITH SWISS CHEESE (Soufflé au Fromage de Gruyère). Put a quarter of a pound of flour into a saucepan with two ounces of fecula, two ounces of butter, five ounces of grated cheese, having half Swiss and half parmesan, a pinch of pepper and some sugar; dilute slowly with a pint and a half of good milk, and stir the preparation on a slow fire to thicken; let it dry on a very low fire until it detaches from the saucepan, then remove and let get partly cold. Now incorporate a piece of butter and six or seven egg-yolks; heat it for two minutes on a slow fire without ceasing to stir. At the last moment incorporate into the preparation five or six egg-whites beaten to a froth, and a quarter of a pound of fresh Swiss cheese cut in small dice. Pour the whole into a buttered soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) and lay it on a small baking sheet; place it in the oven to cook for twenty-five minutes. (2985). SOUFFLéS WITH SWISS AND PARMESAN CHEESE --IN CASES (Soufflés en Caisses au Fromage de Gruyère et au Fromage de Parmesan ). Melt five ounces of butter in a saucepan; to it add seven raw egg-yolks; set the saucepan on the fire, and stir the preparation until it begins to thicken, then put in five ounces of parmesan cheese, and five ounces of Swiss cheese, half a teaspoonful of black pepper, a little salt, a pinch of sugar, and two beaten egg-whites, mixed in after the preparation has lost its first heat. Twenty minutes before serving incorporate five very firmly beaten whites, and use this to fill round buttered cases ( Fig. 439) stiffened in the oven; cook the soufflés in a slack oven; serve promptly. (2986). TAGLIARELLI IN CROUSTADE (Taglaharelli en Croustade). Cook half a pound of tagliarelli (small thin bands of paste three-sixteenths of an inch wide) in salted water for a few moments; drain and put them into a sautoir to season with salt, pepper and nutmeg; add a little béchamel (No. 409), fresh butter, grated cheese and four raw egg-yolks. Butter and line a mold or ring eight inches in diameter and an inch and a half in height; fill it with the preparation, dredge the top with fresh bread-crumbs, besprinkle with butter and cook in a moderate oven; when the paste is done slip the croustade on a round dish and serve with a separate tomato sauce (No. 549) mingled with meat glaze (No. 402) and velouté (No. 415). (2987). TIMBALE OF GNOCQUIS, à LA CHOISEUL (Timbale de Gnocquis à la Choiseul). Prepare a paste with a pint of milk boiled with a quarter of a pound of butter; remove it at the first boil and put in a half pound of sifted flour; prepare as a pâte-à-chou (No. 132); boil for a few moments on the fire, then incorporate fourteen eggs, salt and four ounces of grated parmesan. Turn this paste over on the table and finish with sufficient flour to have it firm and solid, then roll it out into thin strings a quarter of an inch in width, and divide these into quarter-inch lengths; roll each one to the shape of a ball and plunge them into boiling water to poach for three minutes, then drain and lay them in a saucepan with grated Swiss cheese and béchamel sauce (No. 409). Line a timbale mold with thin foundation paste (No. 135), pour in the gnoquis and wet the inside upper edge; cover the timbale with a flat of the same paste, attach the edges solidly together and cook for one hour in a medium oven, remove, unmold and serve at once, dressed on a dish, with a little buttered velouté sauce (No. 415) served separately. (2988). TIMBALE MILANESE OF MACARONI OR NOODLES (Timbale de Macaroni ou de Nouilles, Milanaise). Butter the interior of a timbale mold; decorate the sides with slightly sweeteened noodle paste (No. 142); moisten the decorations and line the whole with foundation paste (No. 135). Cut the bottom with a three-inch pastry cutter, but do not remove this round piece. Blanch some macaroni in water, drain and finish cooking in broth (No. 194a), drain once more, then cut it into three-inch lengths; season with a very little salt, pepper, grated parmesan and a liberal piece of butter. Fill the timbale with this macaroni, leaving a hollow in the center to be filled with a garnishing composed of truffles, foies-gras, game quenelles, unsmoked red beef tongue and mushrooms, all cut an eighth of an inch thick and three quarters of an inch long; these ingredients to be mingled with half-glaze (No. 409) made of essence of game (No. 389). Close the timbale with a cover of the same paste and cook in a moderate oven. A timbale containing two quarts will require an hour and a half to cook properly; invert it immediately on a dish, remove the round that was cut, replace it and serve. Instead of macaroni, noodles or lazagnettes may be substituted, proceeding precisely the same. Send at the same time with the timbale beef à-la-mode gravy, with tomato pulp, little meat glaze (No. 402) and brown sauce (No. 414). Fig. 571 A decorative plate of timbale. (2989). TIMBALE OF NOODLES à LA PEARSALL (Timbale de Nouilles à la Pearsall). Make some noodle paste the same as for No. 142; roll it out a sixteenth of an inch thick and leave it dry slightly, then cut into very thin fillets and cook these in salted water for one minute; drain and season with salt, pepper and nutmeg, add six egg-yolks, a quarter of a pound of butter and a quarter of a pound of parmesan cheese. Garnish a timbale mold measuring five by five inches with foundation paste (No. 135), line the bottom and side with buttered paper, fill with rice, place a round of buttered paper on top, moisten the upper edge, cover over with a lid of paste and cook in a moderate oven for an hour. Unmold when cold, bread-crumb and egg over twice, mark it on the top half an inch from the edge and fry in white frying fat; remove the cover and empty out the timbale. Fry in butter one ounce of finely chopped onions with half a pound of minced mushrooms, add salt, pepper, nutmeg, meat glaze (No. 402) and tomato sauce (No. 549). Arrange the noodles in the timbale in layers separated with the mushrooms and grated parmesan. Pour over some gravy (No. 404) reduced with espagnole sauce (No. 414) and the timbale is ready to serve. SWEET ENTREMETS. SWEET ENTREMENTS--HOT (Entrements de Doceur--Chaud). (2990). APPLES à LA GIUDICI (Pommes à la Giudici). Remove the cores from a dozen small pretty apples; peel them evenly and cook them in a light syrup of about twelve degrees. As soon as done, drain and place them in a vessel to cover with a hot vanilla syrup of thirty degrees. With a large vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) scoop out about thirty round balls from some large apples, blanch, drain and place them in another vessel containing a hot syrup colored with carmine. With the apple parings and a few more apples prepare some marmalade with vanilla; reduce till somewhat thick and with this fill a dozen small Savarin molds to the top, and let harden. Have a pastry cutter of the same diameter as the Savarin molds and with it cut out a dozen round pieces of cooked brioche a quarter of an inch thick; bestrew them with sugar and range on a baking sheet, then place them in the oven to glaze; mask this glazed side with currant jelly. Dress on each one the apple paste borders, having had them cooked in the Savarin molds, and fill up the hollow centers with vanilla frangipane (No. 44) mixed with a salpicon of pineapple cut in dice, and on top dress the apples that have been previously drained and covered with a layer of lightly tinted pink jelly. Dredge over with finely chopped pistachios, fill the empty spaces in the apples with vanilla frangipane and on top set a small round croquette made of chestnut purée ( No. 3017 ). Range these dressed apples in a circle on a dish, fill the middle with the small apple balls, mixed with a few whole pistachios, the whole mingled with some apple jelly ( No. 3668 ). Serve separately a sauce made of the apple juice thickened with a little apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and flavored with kirsch. (2991). APPLES à LA NELSON (Pommes à la Nelson). Prepare a semolina croquette preparation ( No. 3019 ), pour it into a flawn mold ( No. 3170 ) previously buttered and sugared; place this in a buttered sautoir and push it into a very slack oven to harden the preparation. Have eight fine apples, suppress the cores with a column tube, enlarge the orifices slightly and peel them very neatly; range them in a sautoir and cover with syrup, and then cook them in the oven; as soon as done drain on a grate and cover with strained peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Unmold the semolina on a dish and dress the apples around the edge in a circle; fill the holes in these with marmalade, and lay on each a small round semolina croquette with a piece of angelica to represent a stalk; decorate the edge of the semolina with a wreath composed of angelica to lozenges and candied cherries, and fill up the center with some of the same cherries (demi-sucre); push it into the oven for about fifteen minutes and serve with a vanilla syrup thickened with peach marmalade. A surtout is a plain round or oval base made of semolina, etc., about three-quarters to one inch high. (2992). APPLES BAKED (Pommes au Four). Use a five-eighth inch tin tube from the column box to core some good russet apples without peeling them; cut off a strip of the peel all around the middle and lay the apples beside each other on a dish fit for the oven, leaving half an inch space between each one. Fill up the hole in the center of each apple with white or brown sugar, and place a little melted butter on the top of them all; pour a little hot water into the bottom of the dish and push the apples into a slack oven for about half an hour. Should the oven be too hot, cover them over with paper. Serve in the same dish they were cooked in. (2993). APPLES, BARON DE BRISSE STYLE (Pommes à la Baron de Brisse). Peel twelve medium-sized apples, remove the cores with a tin tube, rub them over with lemon and cook in a light syrup, being careful to keep them slightly firm; drain on a cloth. Prepare a croquette of semolina preparation ( No. 3019 ); spread some of it on the bottom of a dish, having it half an inch thick, and pour the remainder in a pocket furnished with a channeled socket ( Fig. 179) and push this out in the shape of a plait to form a border around the inside edge of the dish; range the apples in the center; fill the cavity of the apples with cream rice preparation (No. 160) and on the top of each one place a small cream rice pear -shaped croquette, containing a shred of angelica to imitate a stalk. Decorate the border between each apple with angelica lozenges and preserved cherries (demi-sucre), and fill up the center with whole marrons cooked in light syrup with vanilla, and mixed with a few spoonfuls of Smyrna raisins washed in hot water, the whole to be stirred with a little apricot marmalade. Serve separately a chestnut syrup with vanilla taken from some preserved chestnuts ( No. 3689 ). (2994). APPLES BROWNED (Pommes Gratinées). Have about fifteen nice small apples; empty the centers with a half-inch in diameter column box tube; peel and pare them round, then blanch in acidulated water, keeping them whole. Drain and fill the hollow centers with frangipane cream (No. 44), finished with a whole egg. Range the apples in a baking dish, pour over some apricot and vanilla syrup, and put them for half an hour in a slack oven, basting over frequently to finish cooking and glaze. At the last moment spread on the bottom of a vegetable dish a thick layer of vanilla cream (No. 160), having it very soft; remove the apples one by one with a palette knife and dress them on the rice, pressing them down slightly; close the middle hole with a half-sugared cherry, or with a round piece of greengage half an inch in diameter. Bestrew over with finely chopped and sifted almonds mixed with sugar; brush the surface lightly with butter, then brown for a few moments under a salamander ( Fig. 123), or in a hot oven, until a fine color is attained, then serve at once. Fig. 572 A pot with fifteen apples, placed on top of a folded napkin and is served in a metal plate. (2995). APPLES IN SURPRISE (Pommes en Surprise). Roll out sufficient puff paste parings (No. 146) to the thickness of an eighth of an inch to make eight squares of five inches each. Peel and turn eight good medium-sized russet apples to have them two and a half inches in diameter; empty out the cores with a five-eighth of an inch column tube, and on each square of paste lay one apple; brush them over with butter, besprinkle with sugar, then fill the hollow in the apple with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); wet the edges of the paste, raise it up and enclose the apples well inside, attaching it firmly on top; moisten this and lay over it a round piece of paste cut out with a channeled pastry cutter ( Fig. 16). Range the apples on a baking sheet a short distance apart, egg over, and cook in a slow oven for three-quarters of an hour. Ten minutes before removing glaze them over with sugar, and lay them on a dish as soon as they are done. (2996). APPLES, NUBIAN--MERINGUED (Pommes Meringuées à la Nubienne). Cut in four eight fine apples; peel, core and round the angles, rub them over with lemon, and range them in a sautoir one beside the other; cover lightly with melted butter, and bestrew with vanilla sugar, then place a sheet of buttered paper over and cook in a slack oven. Butter and sugar a plain border mold ( Fig. 138), fill it to the top with cream rice flavored with vanilla (No. 160), and finished with a few egg-yolks; lay it on a baking tin with water to reach to half its height, and set in a slack oven to harden. Spread a layer of the same rice on the bottom of a dish, unmold the border on this, and mask the inside with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); on this range the cooked quartered apples in a pyramid, and glaze them over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); cover it with meringue (No. 140), shaping it like a dome over all; smooth it with a knife, and decorate the entire surface with rows of beads, having the largest at the base and decreasing at the top, made of the same, sticking a small piece of almond into each one. Dredge with sugar, and put the dish in a very slack oven to color the meringue slightly. (2997). APPLE "PAIN" WITH VANILLA (Pain de Pommes à la Vanille). Make a pint and a half of fine apple purée, and reduce it with half a pound of sugar. Put into a vessel six ounces of butter, beat it up to a cream, adding two egg-yolks and two whole eggs, one at a time, and then a pinch of salt; when this becomes very frothy, add to it a teaspoonful of fecula, six ounces of pulverized macaroons and the apple purée. Butter and flour a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150), fill it up with the preparation, and lay it in a sautoir, with water to half its height, then cook it in an oven. Just when ready to serve, unmold on a dish and send to the table with a bowlful of very fine apple purée diluted with vanilla syrup. (2998). APPLES, PORTUGUESE (Pommes à la Portugaise). Peel twelve medium-sized apples, remove the cores with a column tube, and cook them in a light syrup; as soon as done drain on to a cloth, wipe and brush over with a layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Cut some slices of savarin, half an inch thick, and from these cut a dozen rounds with a two and a quarter inch diameter pastry cutter; cut some grooves on one of the surfaces a quarter of an inch apart to form lozenges; strew this cut side with powdered sugar, and range the slices on a baking sheet, push into the oven to glaze, and when removed mask the glazed side with currant jelly, then dress in a circle on a dish; lay an apple on each, and fill the holes in them with currant jelly; set on each a small cream rice croquette ( No. 3018 ), made in the shape of a three-quarter inch ball. Fill the inside of the circle with stewed cherries mingled with currant and maraschino syrup, and serve separately a sauce -boat of currant sauce, made with currant jelly dissolved in a few spoonfuls of boiling syrup, and flavored with maraschino. (2999). APPLES WITH BUTTER (Pommes au Beurre). Cut four fine russet apples in quarters; peel and pare them, and range in a well-buttered sautoir; moisten with a few spoonfuls of twenty degree syrup, and the juice of a lemon; cover over with a well-buttered paper, and finish cooking in a slow oven. When done dress on a dish in a circle, and add to the sautoir a little apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) with some Madeira wine; boil up with the lid on; strain the sauce through a tammy, and pour it over the apples. (3000). APPLES WITH BURNT ALMONDS (Pommes au Pralin). Cut six fine apples across in two; remove the cores with a column tube, peel and round the angles; cook them in a light syrup acidulated with lemon juice, being careful to keep them slightly firm. As soon as done drain, wipe, and cover with a layer of burnt almonds (No. 1); bestrew with sugar, place them on a buttered baking sheet, and set into an oven to color. Cut half-inch thick slices of savarin, and from these stamp out a dozen round pieces the same diameter as the apples; cover them on one side with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and over this a layer of burnt almonds as used for the apples; dredge with sugar, range them on a baking sheet, and push into the oven. As soon as the crusts are browned lay them in a circle on a dish with an apple on top of each; fill the hollow of these with vanilla pastry cream (No. 46), and on top set a fine large preserved cherry (demi-sucre); fill the center of the circle with fresh strawberries, over which has been poured some sugar cooked to "small crack" (No. 171), and flavored with maraschino. (3001). APRICOTS à LA JEFFERSON (Abricots à la Jefferson). Infuse a vanilla bean in a quart of hot milk for half an hour, then take it out and set the milk on the fire; drop into it like rain six ounces of farina. Let this boil a few minutes, then remove from the hot fire to a slower one, so that it continues to cook without boiling. Then add to it six egg-yolks, two ounces of sugar, four tablespoonfuls of whipped cream, and two egg whites beaten to a stiff froth. Butter twelve timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137); put into the bottom of each a ring of apricot paste and fill the interior of this ring with a round piece of angelica. Fill the molds with the above preparation and keep them in a bain-marie for twenty-five minutes, then unmold and dress in a circle on a dish. Drain some fine compotes of halved apricots, wipe them well and dress them in a dome in the center of the circle. Cover them over with the apricot syrup reduced with sugar and maraschino. Decorate the intersections of the apricots with halved, freshly skinned almonds and cherries (demi-sucre). Lay on the edge of the dish between each timbale a brandied greengage and a brandied cherry. Place the dish after it has been decorated in the oven for fifteen to twenty minutes and serve with an apricot and kirsch sauce in a sauce -boat, made as follows: Put three gills of apricot pulp into a copper pan, with as much water and half a pound of sugar; let boil up once or twice, then strain the sauce through a fine sieve and add one gill of kirsch to it. (3002). BABA WITH MARSALA (Baba au Marsala). Fill a buttered baba mold to half its height with a baba paste (No. 129) without any raisins; set it to rise in a rather mild temperature until the mold is nearly full, then bake it in a moderate oven. As soon as done cut it off even with the top of the mold. Unmold, and pour over a rum syrup, flavored with vanilla and orange peel; drain it well and glaze it with lemon icing (No. 102). Dress it on a very hot dish and fill up the inside of the hollow space with fruits prepared as follows, serving the surplus of them in a sauce -boat: Preparation of Fruits. --Put in a saucepan a quarter of a pound of well-cleaned sultana raisins (No. 157), two ounces of candied orange peel, two ounces of candied green almonds and two ounces of candied pineapple, the whole to be cut in small three-sixteenths inch squares; two gills of Marsala wine, three gills of syrup at thirty-two degrees, the peel of half a lemon and the peel of half an orange; put the saucepan on the fire and take it off at the first boil. (3003). BANANAS, CHERRY SAUCE --FRIED (Bananes Frites, Sauce aux Cerises). Cut some bananas lengthwise in two, roll them in finely pulverized macaroons and then in flour, and fry in very hot oil until they acquire a good color; drain on a cloth, wipe and coat over with some apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), laid on with a brush. Dish them up pyramidically and dredge over freshly peeled and shredded pistachio nuts. Serve a currant sauce, with cherries apart, made by putting four heaping tablespoonfuls of currant jelly in a saucepan and diluting it with a pint of syrup at thirty degrees. Stand the saucepan on the fire, let boil a few times, then strain the syrup through a fine sieve; add to it one gill of kirsch and a good handful of preserved cherries previously washed in hot water. (3004). BISCUITS, FRASCATI ( Biscuits Frascati). Break twelve eggs, putting the yolks in one vessel and the whites in another; add to the yolks three-quarters of a pound of powdered sugar and a quarter of a pound of vanilla sugar and beat well with a whip to obtain a very light and frothy preparation. Then add to it six ounces of flour and six ounces of fecula sifted together, and afterward the stiffly beaten egg-whites; stir the preparation until perfect. Butter and flour a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150); fill it two-thirds full with the preparation and cook it in a slack oven. As soon as done unmold and let get cold. When cold, cut it up in transversal slices a quarter of an inch thick and cover each slice with a layer of fine vanilla cream (No. 42); dredge the surfaces with a finely chopped salpicon of pineapple and pistachios. Reconstruct the biscuit to its original shape, cover it with a layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and bestrew the sides with chopped pistachios. Now place it on a dish; decorate the top with a rosette of fine candied pink and white pears cut in four and intermingle them with lozenges of angelica; brush these fruits over with a very thick syrup and surround the base with a row of buttered apples, having small sticks of angelica placed between each. Fill the hollow center of the biscuit with cream rice flavored with vanilla (No. 160) and keep the biscuit warm for twenty minutes, serving it with a flavored English cream sauce. English Cream Sauce Flavored with Vanilla. --Place in a vessel eight egg-yolks, half a pound of sugar and one ounce of starch; beat up a moment to have the mixture smooth. Stand a quart of milk on the fire in a saucepan with a split vanilla bean added to it and let boil; as soon as this occurs pour it gently over the eggs and stir all well together. Pour it all back into the saucepan, place it again on the fire and thicken the sauce without permitting it to boil, stirring continuously with a spatula, then strain through a fine sieve. The vanilla can be replaced by liquors added at the last moment. (3005). BORDER OF RICE WITH BANANAS (Bordures de Ris aux Bananes). Make a consistent rice cream preparation (No. 160) flavored with vanilla, and finish it with a few egg-yolks. Divide this into two portions, and into one incorporate a salpicon of chestnuts cut up small and candied pineapple cut in quarter-inch dice. Butter and sugar a plain border or savarin mold (No. 139), and with the rice which has no fruit cover the sides, then fill the mold with the rice and fruit, smooth the top and set this border in a sautoir with hot water reaching halfway up, and push it into a slack oven for twenty-five minutes. Unmold the border on a dish, and ornament the top with a handsome circle of angelica lozenges and candied cherries, and surround the base with preserved plums. Peel some fine bananas, cut them up into transversal slices a quarter of an inch thick, plunge them into a thick maraschino syrup, let simmer for a few moments, then drain and range them in a pyramid in the center of the border. Brush the top over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and dredge finely chopped pistachios over all; heat the border in the oven for twenty minutes, and serve with a sauce -boat of sauce made with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ), diluted with a little syrup and flavored with maraschino. (3006). BRIOCHES ST. MARK (Brioches St. Marc). Butter twelve small timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137), fill them three-quarters high with brioche paste (No. 130), and leave to rise in a mild temperature, and when the molds are partly full bake them in a slow oven. After taking them out cut them off level with the tops of the molds and leave in till cold, then empty them partially and pour over the insides some syrup flavored with maraschino and almond milk (No. 4), filling them up with frangipane cream (No. 43). Cover the outsides with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and strew the sides with green pistachios and white almonds, both chopped up finely. Ornament the tops of each brioche with a rosette composed of halved pistachios and a split cherry laid in the center. Dress them in a circle on a dish, and arrange in the center some stewed halved peaches. Cover the ornamentation on the brioches with maraschino syrup thickened with a little apricot marmalade, and dress in the intersection of the peaches some freshly shelled white split almonds, and also some candied halved cherries, then serve. Have a sauce -boat of English vanilla cream sauce ( No. 3004 ) to accompany this entremets. (3007). CHARLOTTE à LA DESTREY (Charlotte à la Destrey). Butter a charlotte mold, either round or oval, this depending on the dish required for serving, and line it with fine foundation paste (No. 135), then let stand in the ice-box for half an hour. Cut eight apples in quarters, peel, core and lay them beside each other on a buttered baking sheet; besprinkle with sugar and cover with a sheet of buttered paper, then cook in the oven and when done remove and let cool off. Prepare a frangipane cream (No. 43); add to it a few spoonfuls of cream rice (No. 160) and a salpicon of fruit, such as green almonds, pears, apricots, a little orange peel cut in thin shreds and a few crushed macaroons. Fill up the charlotte in layers of cream and apples ( peaches or pears may be substituted), and smooth the surface; lay the mold on a baking pan, push it into the oven and let cook for about one hour; as soon as finished remove and let rest for ten minutes before unmolding it on a dish, then cover with well-reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and sprinkle highly with chopped roasted almonds; decorate the top with an angelica rosette and around the base of this with a circle of fine halved pistachios; fasten a nice cherry in the center of the rosette and all around a circle of preserved cherries (demi-sucre), cut in two and laid flat on the charlotte. Serve at the same time as this entremets a sauce -boat of English cream sauce, flavored with brandy and Madeira ( No. 3004 ). (3008). APPLE CHARLOTTE (Charlotte de Pommes). Cut a few russet apples in four, peel, core and mince them up rather coarsely, then put them into a sautoir with some melted butter; stir and toss incessantly over a good fire until the moisture is reduced, then sweeten. Butter a four-inch high by four and a half inches in diameter charlotte mold, cover the bottom with a flat rosette made of long triangles of bread, an eighth of an inch thick, pointed on one end and rounded on the other, carefully dipping them as needed in clarified butter. These slices should slightly overlap each other. Remove the center with a one-inch tube and replace with a round of bread of the same size dipped in butter. Cut some one-eighth inch thick slices of bread into inch-wide strips, having them somewhat higher than the mold; dip them in clarified butter and apply them upright to the inner side of the mold, one overlapping the other, cut flush with the mold; cover the bottom and sides of the mold with part of the apples, and in the center put three spoonfuls of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); finish filling with the remainder of the apples, and cover these with a round piece of bread the same size as the mold, then lay the mold on a small baking sheet, push it into a hot oven and leave for twenty-five to thirty minutes, so that the bread becomes a fine golden color. Should it brown too fast put a metal cover on top. Invert the charlotte on a hot dish and serve it at once with an apricot and maraschino sauce poured around (see Humboldt pudding, No. 3100 ). Fig. 573 An illustration of a baking pot with baking paper inside it. Fig. 574 Apple charlotte served on a metal dish. (3009). COMPIèGNE WITH SABAYON (Compiègne au Sabayon). Butter a dozen small timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137), and fill them three-quarters full with Compiègne paste ( No. 3236 ); let rise in a mild temperature, then set them on a baking sheet, and cook in a slack oven. When done, remove and cut them off exactly level with the molds; unmold and dip them at once into a light syrup flavored with Madeira wine and vanilla; drain on a grate, and then dish them up in a circle. Prepare some rings of apricot paste of the same diameter as the top of the timbales; put them on the top of each Compiègne, place a mirabel plum in the center of each, and stick a piece of angelica into each one. Cover the Compiègnes with a Madeira sabayon, as for cabinet pudding ( No. 3096 ), serving more of it separately. (3010). CREAM à LA MAINTENON--FRIED (Crème Frits à la Maintenon). Remove the outer shells from three-quarters of a pound of chestnuts; plunge them into boiling water and let boil up once or twice; then remove the saucepan from the fire, and quickly abstract the second skin; return them to a saucepan and cover with milk, adding a quarter of a vanilla stick; cook very slowly, and then press through a sieve. Put the purée into a bowl, pour over six ounces of sugar cooked to "small crack" (No. 171) and mix it into the pulp, beating it vigorously. Spread this on a sheet of buttered paper to a quarter of an inch in thickness. Prepare a pound of white and delicate apple pulp, put it in a saucepan with a pound of sugar, and reduce; then add a tablespoonful of fecula, and a gill of water; spread this over the chestnuts and smooth it to the same thickness, then let get cold. Cut it into lozenges, and cover each one with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); roll them carefully in pulverized macaroons; then dip them in beaten eggs, and afterward in bread-crumbs; smooth with the blade of a knife, and fry to a fine color in hot white frying fat; drain, wipe, and bestrew with vanilla sugar, then dress in a pyramid on a folded napkin, and serve with a separate English cream vanilla sauce ( No. 3004 ). (3011). CREAM of BISCUIT WITH KIRSCH (Crème de Biscuits au Kirsch). Put six whole eggs and four yolks into a vessel with a grain of salt and six ounces of sugar, a part of which is to be flavored with orange. (This flavored sugar is obtained by rubbing the entire surface of the fruit on a sugar loaf, and then grating the flavored part off, either with a knife or spoon.) Beat the preparation with a whip, and dilute it slowly with a quart of raw milk and four gills of raw cream. Soak four ounces of lady fingers in milk, then drain on a sieve, and put them in a bowl; dilute with the above preparation, and pass the whole through a sieve, then stir in one gill of kirsch. Butter a charlotte mold, and fill it with the preparation; set it in a saucepan containing hot water, and place it on the fire; let the water come to a boil, and keep it in this state for thirty minutes, either on the side of a slow fire or else in a slack oven. When the cream is firm to the touch in the center, take it off and and leave it for half an hour longer in the water so that it hardens, then unmold on a dish and pour over a kirsch syrup. (3012). CREAM of CHESTNUTS WITH CARAMEL SUGAR (Crème de Marrons au Caramel ). Cook a pound of skinned chestnuts in water with a quarter of a vanilla bean, then rub them through a sieve into a vessel, and add six whole beaten eggs and four yolks, also half a pound of sugar; dilute with a pint of raw milk, mix well, and pass the whole through a sieve. Pour into the bottom of a plain timbale mold one gill of sugar cooked to caramel; when cold butter the sides of the mold, and fill it up with the chestnut preparation; set the mold into a saucepan with hot water to half its height, leave it on the fire, and just when it reaches the boiling point cover and keep it cooking slowly, or else place it in a slack oven to maintain the liquid at the same temperature without boiling for fifty to sixty minutes, or until the preparation is firm to the touch in the center. Invert the cream on a dish, and cover it with the caramel sugar found on the bottom of the mold. (3013). CREAM PAMELA--FRIED (Crème Frite Paméla). Put four eggs, two yolks, four ounces of sugar and the peel of one lemon into a bowl, beat them up with a whip and dilute with a pint of milk, then run it through a sieve. Butter and sugar twelve six-sided molds, the size of timbale molds No. 2, Fig. 137, but only half as high; fill the bottoms with a layer of candied cherries cut in four, lay on these candied pineapple and angelica washed in hot water and cut in small quarter-inch squares; scatter broken macaroons over the fruit; pour on a little of the strained preparation to soak, and prevent floating to the top, then finish filling. Place these molds in a stewpan and pour in the bottom boiling water to reach to half their height; set this in a moderate oven to poach the cream, and as soon as done remove from the oven and let get cold in the water. When cold unmold them, roll in biscuit dust, dip in beaten eggs and finish by rolling in white bread-crumbs, smooth with the blade of a knife, then plunge them into hot frying fat and fry to a fine golden color, drain on a cloth and bestrew with vanilla sugar, then serve with a Bischoff sauce, made as follows: Bischoff Sauce. --Place half a pint of white wine and as much syrup into a saucepan; boil and thicken this liquid with a spoonful of fecula diluted in a little cold water; add the peel of a lemon and the same of an orange cut in Julienne and previously blanched, also two ounces of almonds and two ounces of shredded pistachios, two ounces each of seeded Malaga and Smyrna raisins and of currants, thoroughly washed in hot water; boil a few times, then serve. (3014). CREAM WITH APPLES (Crème aux Pommes). Mince six peeled russet apples, fry them for a few moments in butter in a thin sautoir to soften slightly without letting them melt; sweeten moderately. Make a pint of cream of biscuit preparation ( No. 3011 ), strain it through a fine sieve and place it in a saucepan, then heat it slightly while stirring over a slow fire. Mix the apples in with the cream and pour the whole into a deep china baking dish; cook for three-quarters of an hour in a slack oven and if deemed necessary cover over with paper. Besprinkle the surface with fine sugar a few moments before serving, then remove from the oven and serve in the same dish. (3015). CRESCENTS OF NOODLES WITH CHERRIES (Croissants de Nouilles aux Cerises). Cut up finely about a pound of noodles (No. 142), blanch, drain and put them into a saucepan with two gills of cream, two ounces of fresh butter, a pinch of salt, two ounces of sugar and three tablespoonfuls of brandy; set the saucepan on a slack fire and let cook slowly, being careful to stir the contents at frequent intervals until all the moisture is absorbed, then pour the preparation on two baking sheets covered with buttered paper, spreading to a layer three-eighths of an inch thick. Bake in a hot oven. Unmold as soon as done and cover one of these flats with a thick layer of reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); on top place the other flat, then cut into crescents, using a pastry cutter two and a half inches in diameter. Dress these crescents in a circle on a dish and fill the center with compoted cherries, serving a separate cherry and kirsch sauce ( No. 3003 ). (3016). CROQUETTES à LA TRIMALCION (Croquettes à la Trimalcion). Cut twelve apples in four, peel and core them, then cut into small dice; put them into a sautoir, pour over a few spoonfuls of butter and fry, and as soon as done remove from the fire and add a tablespoonful of sugar, a pinch of cinnamon, a handful of candied cherries cut in four and two spoonfuls of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); pour this on a baking sheet to cool off. Mold this preparation into inch and a quarter balls, shape them into cylindrical croquettes an inch in diameter, roll in cracker dust, dip in beaten eggs, then roll in bread-crumbs; smooth the breading with a knife and plunge the croquettes into hot frying fat; fry till they become a light golden color, then drain on a cloth; strew over powdered sugar and dress on a napkin. Serve with a sauce -tureen of cherry sauce prepared the same as for fried bananas with cherry sauce ( No. 3003 ). (3017). CROQUETTES OF CHESTNUTS (Croquettes de Marrons). Select four pounds of fine, sound chestnuts; slit them on one side and put them to roast in a large perforated pan; cover and toss at times until done. They may also be cooked by placing them on a baking sheet and then in a hot oven to roast without blackening. Skin them, removing both the skins, and picking out twenty of the finest, pound the others to a fine paste. Add, while continuing to pound, two ounces of vanilla sugar and a little raw cream. Pass this preparation through a sieve and put it into a saucepan, beating into it six egg-yolks, then dry over the fire while stirring. Pour this on a baking sheet and leave till cold, then divide it into parts and of each one make an inch and a quarter diameter ball; in the center of each insert one of the roasted chestnuts split in two; mold the croquettes to the shape of a chestnut, dip them in beaten eggs, roll in white bread-crumbs and fry in very hot clear frying fat; when done, drain and sponge, besprinkle with vanilla sugar and dress on a napkin. (3018). CROQUETTES OF RICE WITH ORANGE, RASPBERRY SAUCE (Croquettes de Riz à l' Orange, Sauce Framboise). Blanch half a pound of rice in plenty of water; drain and put it back into a saucepan with sufficient boiling milk to cover, then set it on the corner of the range to finish cooking while stirring it at times with a wooden spoon. As soon as the rice is consistent and dry, work into it eight egg-yolks, two ounces of butter, two ounces of orange sugar, a pinch of salt, two tablespoonfuls of whipped cream and two tablespoonfuls of candied orange peel shredded very fine. Spread this preparation on a buttered baking tin covered over with a sheet of paper and let it get cold. Divide it into balls each two inches in diameter, and draw them down on one end to give them the shape of a pear; dip in beaten eggs, then roll in white bread-crumbs and plunge them in plenty of hot fat to fry to a fine golden brown; drain, sponge, and stick a piece of angelica into the ends to imitate the stalk of a pear; besprinkle lightly with orange sugar, dress on a napkin and serve with a raspberry sauce made with a pint of raspberry juice mingled with as much boiling syrup, and Curaçao, straining the whole through a fine wire sieve. (3019). CROQUETTES OF SEMOLINA, PISTACHIO SAUCE (Croquettes de Semoule, Sauce aux Pistaches). Boil a quart of milk, add to it half a split vanilla stick and keep it warm in a covered saucepan; take out the vanilla and place the milk on a hot fire, and at the first boil drop into it like rain six ounces of semolina, stirring the preparation continuously with a whisk, and cover the saucepan; push it into a slack oven and take it out again fifteen minutes later. Mix in with the semolina four ounces of sugar, two ounces of butter, a little salt and eight egg-yolks; stir in well with a spoon two ounces of apricot, two ounces of cherries, an ounce of pineapple and an ounce of orange peel, all cut in quarter-inch dice. Spread this on a baking sheet covered over with paper and let it get cold. Then divide it into inch and a half diameter balls; roll these in powdered macaroons, dip in beaten egg, and finally roll in white bread-crumbs; fry to a fine color, drain on a cloth, wipe and bestrew with vanilla sugar. Dress the croquettes on a napkin and serve separately an English cream sauce ( No. 3004 ), into which has been added green pistachios shredded finely. (3020). CROUSTADES OF VENICE, MERINGUED (Croustades de Venise Meringuées). Line some small buttered fruit pie circles, three-quarters of an inch high and two and a quarter inches in diameter, with fine foundation paste (No. 135), or else puff paste parings (No. 146); raise an edge and pinch it; place them on a baking sheet and egg the edges of each pie over twice. Put into a vessel four spoonfuls of fecula or arrowroot, six ounces of vanilla sugar, a grain of salt, eight whole eggs and eight yolks; mix well with a whisk and dilute with a pint and a half of cream or rich milk; strain the preparation through a sieve and then pour it into a saucepan containing four ounces of fresh butter; stir on the fire until the butter is entirely melted, and with this preparation fill the small pies, then put them into a slack oven to cook without browning; when the cream has set and the paste is cooked, remove the croustades and leave them till nearly cold. Cover the tops with meringue, forming it into a dome; decorate this, leaving a hollow in the center and dredge vanilla sugar over the whole; return them to a slow oven to brown to a fine light golden color, then take them from their molds and finish decorating with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) pushed through a cornet and some angelica and preserved cherries (demi-sucre). For a Large Croustade. --Line a shallow hot pie mold with fine foundation paste (No. 135) or puff paste parings (No. 146); lay it on a baking sheet and fill it up with the same preparation as for the above; put it into a slack oven to cook for one hour. When the cream has set and the paste is cooked take out the croustade and let get partly cold before unmolding; cover it with meringue (No. 140), shaping it as a dome; decorate and finish the same as for the above. (3021). GOLDEN CRUSTS (Croûtes Dorées). Scrape off the crust from some table flutes and cut them in slices half an inch thick, then range them one beside the other on a dish; pour over a little sweetened raw cream mixed with a few egg-yolks. Let the crusts soak for ten to twelve minutes, basting them over with the cream, and then take them out and extract the moisture lightly; dip them into slightly sweetened beaten eggs, then drain and plunge them into hot frying fat a few at a time; drain as fast as they brown nicely, and bestrew the surfaces with sugar; serve with fruit preserves or else an English vanilla sauce ( No. 3004 ). (3022). CRUSTS OF PINEAPPLE, APRICOT SAUCE (Croûtes aux Ananas, Sauce d'Abricots). Cut from cooked savarin some slices three-eighths of an inch thick; from these remove some rounds three inches in diameter; divide these in two through the center and notch them on their convex side. Arrange these slices shaped like cocks'-combs on a baking sheet, dredge them over with sugar, and glaze in a brisk oven; cover them on the unglazed side with strawberry marmalade strained through a sieve, and lay on each one a fine slice of preserved pineapple; decorate the borders of the crusts reaching out beyond the pineapple with angelica lozenges and candied cherries cut in four, then dress them on a dish in a circle, one overlapping the other. Fill the hollow of the circle with candied fruits cut in dice, such as apricots, pears, greengages, green almonds, candied cherries, orange peel and angelica, the whole washed in warm water, and then mingled with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) flavored with kirsch; heat the dish after it is dressed in the oven for ten minutes. Serve an apricot kirsch sauce ( No. 3001 ) separately. (3023). CRUSTS WITH BANANAS à LA PANAMA (Croûtes aux Bananes à la Panama). Slice some brioche three-quarters of an inch thick, and from them remove a dozen rounds with a two and a quarter inch diameter pastry cutter; cut them all around a short distance from the edges and empty out the insides; lay them on a baking sheet, besprinkle with sugar and glaze in a quick oven; after they come from the oven cover the insides with guava jelly softened with a little maraschino. Peel six fine very ripe bananas, cut them across in slices an eighth of an inch thick, and plunge into a hot syrup of twenty-five degrees, flavored with maraschino, leaving them in for five minutes only, then drain and dress dome-shaped on the crusts, covering over with very hot apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); dredge with fresh finely chopped pistachios and dress in a circle on a dish; fill the inside of this with pineapple cut in quarter-inch squares, thrown into the syrup in which the bananas were cooked, then brought to a boil, and mingled with some guava jelly diluted with syrup and flavored with maraschino, serving separately a hot sauce made with apricot marmalade, grated pineapple and maraschino. (3024). CRUSTS WITH CHERRIES OR STRAWBERRIES à LA MICHELET (Croûtes aux Cerises ou aux Fraises à la Michelet). Cut some slices an inch thick from a very firm kitchen loaf, using only the crumb part; from them obtain six rounds with a two and a half inch diameter pastry cutter, and cut these rounds in two through their diameter so as to have twelve half-rounds. Cut partly through these half-rounds a short distance from the edge with a small kitchen knife, square the corners and plunge them into hot clarified butter to have them assume a fine golden color. Drain them at once on a cloth, wipe and empty out the centers. Cover the inside with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and fill them level to the top with rice and cream (No. 160) flavored with vanilla and finished with a few egg-yolks and then mask the tops with a heavy layer of strawberry jam, mixed with almonds and pistachios. Dress these crusts prepared in this manner in a circle on a dish and fill the center of it with stewed fresh cherries or candied cherries washed in boiling water and softened in a light syrup, then mingled with apricot marmalade and kirsch. Serve separately a sauce -boat of cherry syrup with a few spoonfuls of currant jelly added and flavored with kirsch. (3025). CRUSTS WITH FRUITS à LA MIRABEAU (Croûtes aux Fruits à la Mirabeau). This entremets, though simple, can be served at the most sumptuous dinners. Cut a well-pared fresh pineapple across in two; divide the largest end into two parts, and these into medium-sized slices; pare again to have them all of the same size and shape, put them into a vessel and moisten to their height with a cold syrup of twenty-eight degrees; cover with a round piece of paper, and keep them in a cool place. After six hours drain off the syrup, and adding to it a handful of powdered sugar pour it back on the fruit and operate thus twice, but should preserved pineapple be used it will require to be done four times. Bake some savarin paste (No. 148) in a large buttered savarin mold ( Fig. 139), or a large cradle mold, and leave stand for twelve hours. Cut this cake straight on top, then into transversal slices of equal thickness, and cover one side of them first with a thin layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then with a layer of Condé preparation (No. 2), range them at once on a baking sheet, bestrew with fine sugar, glaze in a slack oven, and detach from the baking sheet as soon as glazed. Fasten a round flat of Genoese cake on a dish and on it place a ring of the same or of meringue, having it much higher than the flat itself, but not too wide (this ring is intended to uphold the slices of pineapple ); brush it over with apricot marmalade, also the lower Genoese flat, and let dry in the air. Select some good, large, preserved cherries (demi-sucre), wash them in warm water, and place them in a copper vessel with some cold syrup of twenty-eight degrees. Now drain the slices of pineapple, and dress them upright in the center of the ring, one overlapping the other, and bent out slightly so they form the shape of a basket. Then fill the hollow in the inside with the well-drained cherries, dressing them in a pyramid; brush the pineapple over with some fine apricot marmalade, diluted with Madeira wine; surround the base with the slices of glazed savarin, forming them into a pretty crown, and mask the whole lightly with the marmalade. Serve with this entremets a sauce -boatful of the same marmalade diluted with syrup and Madeira wine mixed with a Julienne of candied fruits cut from orange or mandarin peel, pears and apricots, adding a spoonful of pistachios. To make this entremets more plentiful the crusts can be surrounded at their base with a row of candied greengages, cut in two, and the stones replaced by almond paste (No. 125) flavored with vanilla. Fig. 575 A plate fasten with a round Genoese cake and pieces of pineapple are placed in a ring form on top of it. A bowl of cherries is dressed in the center of the ring. (3026). CRUSTS WITH MADEIRA (Croûtes au Madère). Wash in tepid water four ounces of candied citron peel, two ounces of lemon peel and two ounces of orange peel, all cut in quarter-inch squares. Put these into a saucepan with two ounces of Smyrna raisins and two ounces of currants, well picked and scalded in boiling water, then drained, and cover over the whole with boiling Madeira syrup and keep the saucepan well closed in a bain-marie until ready to serve. Make a croustade from a close and stale kitchen loaf, having it four to six inches high, and shaped like a vase. Slit the top near the edge and pass a skewer through its depth to keep it straight while cooking, then fry to a fine light golden color, drain and sponge it, remove the skewer and the slit piece on top. Scoop out a little of the inside crumbs, then fasten it on the center of a dish with a paste made of flour and egg-white. Cut slices of kitchen bread five-sixteenths of an inch in thickness and from this stamp out ovals three by two inches; brown them on both sides in clarified butter, drain and cover with apricot marmalade ( No. 3665 ); dress them in a circle around the croustade or else substitute slices of cooked brioche, having them the same size; lay these flat on a baking sheet, besprinkle with sugar and brown in the oven. Moisten the crusts with the syrup and arrange the fruits all around. Fill the croustade with red stewed cherries ( No. 3688 ) and angelica and serve with a separate apricot sauce, diluted with Madeira wine. (See Humboldt pudding No. 3100 ). (3027). CRUSTS WITH PEACHES OR WITH PEARS (Croûtes aux Pêches ou aux Poires). Put into a sautoir a dozen compoted peaches cut in halves, all of equal size; pour over some thick syrup and keep them warm. Cut from a kitchen loaf half-inch thick slices and from them take two-inch in diameter rounds, having as many as there are peaches. Color them in clarified butter, turning them over when done on one side to color on the other, then drain and cover lightly with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Set a half peach on top of each and dress them on a dish; pour over some peach syrup mingled with a few spoonfuls of kirsch and serve more of this separately. For Pears. --Replace the peaches by compoted pears and finish exactly the same. (3028). CRUSTS WITH PEARS à LA DOUGLAS (Croûtes aux Poires à la Douglas). Cut some half-inch thick slices from a kitchen loaf and form them into rounds with a plain cutter two and a half inches in diameter; remove the center of these rounds with another cutter an inch in diameter so as to make them into rings. Put two egg-yolks into a basin and dilute with a pint of good cream, adding two ounces of sugar flavored with half a grated orange peel and pass the whole through a colander over the bread rings. After they have well soaked, drain and dip them in pulverized macaroons, then in beaten eggs and lastly roll in white bread-crumbs; fry to a fine color in clarified butter; drain and mask the surface with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); throw over a pinch of powdered burnt almonds and dress in a circle on a dish; fill the center with fine pears cooked in syrup, some Malaga raisins and candied orange peel cut in small shreds and combined with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ) and maraschino. Serve separately a sauce -boat of kirsch syrup thickened with a few spoonfuls of dissolved apple jelly and the pulp of two oranges free of their white skin and seeds. (3029). CUPOLA à LA MADISON (Coupole à la Madison). Butter a cupola-shaped mold and fill it three-quarters full with savarin paste (No. 148); let rise in a mild temperature, and as soon as it reaches the top of the mold push it into a slack oven to bake; when the cake is done unmold it on a grate, cool well, replace it in the mold and pare flush with the bottom; unmold again and cut an incision all around at three-quarters of its height, with a small kitchen knife, keeping its point toward the center; carefully lift off the lid and empty out the interior, leaving the sides half an inch thick; fill the empty cake with fine paper to prevent it from losing its shape; replace the lid and cover it with a very thin layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and ice it with fondant (No. 58) flavored with kirsch. After this icing is well drained slip the cupola on a dish and decorate the center of the lid with a handsome rosette of angelica and candied orange peel, cut to represent crescents, arranging them alternately; place in the center a large cherry and surround the crescents with a wreath formed of angelica lozenges and candied cherries laid between. Range around the base of the cupola a circle of fine brandied greengages. Prepare a compote of pears cut in four, drain and cut them up into thin slices, adding as many preserved cherries (demi-sucre) well washed in hot water, and mingle the whole with the same quantity of white apple marmalade, reduced and flavored with kirsch. Ten minutes before serving lift off the lid from the timbale, remove the paper and fill it up with the very hot preparation; replace the lid and keep the whole hot for a few minutes; serve with a sauce -boat of apricot kirsch sauce ( No. 3001 ). (3030). DAMPFNOODLES WITH CREAM (Dampfnouilles à la Crème). Put half a pound of flour into a basin and make a hollow in the center; lay in it a quarter of an ounce of compressed yeast and dissolve it slowly with two gills of warm milk, adding the flour so as to obtain a soft paste; cover it over with a cloth and leave it in a mild temperature to rise to double its volume; then incorporate into this sponge four egg-yolks, four spoonfuls of sugar and half a pound of flour added very slowly, and lastly two ounces of butter, mix well for one minute in order to give the paste a good body, then lay it in a vessel and let rise to double its volume. Work it on a flour ed table and roll into strings; divide each of these into pieces and shape them into balls an inch and a quarter in diameter, range these in a buttered sautoir, three-quarters of an inch apart, and leave them to rise again to double their volume. Now pour sufficient boiling vanilla -flavored milk over to have the balls swim to half their height; cover hermetically and put the sautoir in a hot oven for fifteen to eighteen minutes. Detach them from the pan, and dress in a pyramid on a dish; cover over with some English cream sauce ( No. 3004 ) and serve more of the same separately. (3031). STUFFED EGGS (Œufs Farcis). Choose seven or eight large, fresh and very white eggs; saw off the top of the shell on the roundest end so as to make an opening three-quarters of an inch wide; empty the eggs into a bowl, wash the shells and leave to drain well. Beat the eggs up lightly, add to them a few spoonfuls of rich raw cream, four spoonfuls of powdered lady fingers, six or seven spoonfuls of powdered sugar, some cinnamon and a grain of salt. Butter liberally the bottom of a flat saucepan, pour in the eggs and thicken while stirring over a slow fire, the same as for scrambled eggs. When the preparation is done to perfection, mix in two or three spoonfuls of lady fingers cut up in small dice, and with this fill the shells one by one; lay each one when done into a separate egg cup; cover the opening with a small pyramid of the same cake cut small, and dress the egg cups on a dish. (3032). EGGS WITH CREAM, MERINGUED (Œufs à la Crème Meringués). Have seven or eight eggs in a bowl, beat them well, then run them through a sieve; add six ounces of sugar partly flavored with vanilla and eight pulverized macaroons; dilute the whole with a pint of raw cream, and stir the preparation on the fire for a few moments to warm it, then pour it at once into a soufflé saucepan ( Fig. 182), or simply a buttered pie plate ( Fig. 183); let it poach in a bain-marie in a slack oven, and as soon as it becomes firm take it from the water and leave stand till cold; then cover the entire surface with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Cover over with a layer of Italian meringue (No. 140) flavored with kirsch, smooth nicely and dredge the top with pulverized macaroons; let stand for a few moments in a slack oven and glaze it with sugar. (3033). EGGS WITH COFFEE, CREAM MERINGUED (Œufs à la Crème au Café Meringués). Break seven or eight eggs in a vessel, beat and strain through a sieve; add a grain of salt, two spoonfuls of sugar, twelve pulverized lady fingers, four gills of raw cream and one gill of very strong coffee. Stir the preparation for two minutes on the fire, then pour it into a buttered tart dish; let it set in a bain-marie or slack oven and remove as soon as firm. When nearly cold cover over with a layer of Italian meringue (No. 140) flavored with cognac, smooth nicely and besprinkle with pulverized lady fingers; poach for a few moments in a slack oven, glazing over with sugar. (3034). FLAWN à LA MANHATTAN (Flan à la Manhattan). Line a flawn ring ( No. 3170 ) with sweet paste (No. 136), leaving the edges rather thick, and let it rest for half an hour in the ice-box. Then cover the paste with buttered paper and fill it up with dry rice; cook it in a hot oven and as soon as done empty it out and cover the outside border and the inside surfaces with hot and well-reduced peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ); slide the pie on a dish; dress against the edges a circle of halved peaches; arrange in a pyramid in the center of this crown some quartered apples cooked in butter and cover the whole with strained peach marmalade; sprinkle over the entire surface some finely chopped pistachios and decorate between the peaches on the border, also on the summit of the pie, with lozenges of angelica and candied cherries. Set it for one instant in the oven to warm, then serve with a bowlful of cream vanilla sauce ( No. 3004 ). (3035). FLAWN AU LION D'OR (Flan au Lion d'or). Divide some apples in eight pieces each; peel, core and cook them in butter, and when half done mingle in some apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and finish cooking. Line a flawn ring ( No. 3170 ) with fine short paste (No. 135), raise the edges, pinch them and let the flawn stand for twenty-five minutes in the ice-box or any other cool place. Then cover the bottom and sides of the paste with buttered paper, fill up with dry rice, and cook in the oven. As soon as the crust is done, empty it out and remove the plate, then brush the surface with egg-yolks and return the crust to the oven to color. When cold mask the inside with apricot marmalade, fill in alternate layers of white and well-reduced apple marmalade, flavored with vanilla and apples cooked in butter, finishing with a layer of the apples; dredge powdered macaroons over the top and then cover with apricot marmalade and on this pour a Condé preparation (No. 2); bestrew with sugar, and glaze under a salamander ( Fig. 123), then serve. Have a separate vanilla syrup mingled with apricot marmalade. (3036). ALLIANCE FRITTERS (Beignets Alliance). Cut six medium-sized apples in transversal slices three-eighths of an inch thick; remove the cores with a column tube, cut away the edges with a two inch in diameter vegetable cutter so as to have all the rounds of the same size; fry them in butter over a brisk fire, drain and wipe. Drain as many halves of stewed peaches as there are slices of apples, fill the hollow in the apples with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ). Prepare a fine paste with the same quantity of dry macaroons as apple paste, and pound well together with a few spoonfuls of maraschino, and with this paste fill the center of the halved peaches, and fasten these on to the rounds of apple; cover the other side of the apple with the macaroon paste to have the whole form a ball; roll them in cracker dust, and then dip in frying batter (No. 137) and plunge into hot frying fat. When the paste has become dry and well browned, drain the fritters on to a cloth, besprinkle with sugar, and lay them on a tart dish to place in the oven in order that they may glaze. Serve separately a pineapple syrup : Put half a pint of apple pulp that has been passed through a fine sieve into a saucepan, and dilute it with three gills of syrup, boil up for one minute, and then thicken this sauce with a spoonful of fecula diluted in a little cold water; remove it at once from the fire, flavor well with kirsch, and add half a pint of pineapple cut in three-sixteenths of an inch squares; keep the sauce hot until needed. (3037). APPLE FRITTERS AND MONTAGNARD FRITTERS--GLAZED AND UNGLAZED (Beignets de Pommes et Beignets Montagnard--Glacés et non Glacés). Core some apples with a column or tin tube five-eighths of an inch in diameter; peel them all around, and cut from them slices about a quarter of an inch thick; put to macerate in a little brandy and powdered sugar for one hour, tossing them about often so that they all get well covered. Dip each piece in frying batter (No. 137), and plunge into hot frying fat; when done and of a fine color, drain and dredge over with sugar, then dress on a napkin. For Glazed Fritters. --When done place them on a baking sheet, bestrew with sugar, and glaze in a hot oven, or under a salamander ( Fig. 123); serve dressed on a napkin. For Montagnard Fritters. --After they have been cooked and glazed as above, cover the tops with a layer of currant jelly placed on with a spoon, then dress on a napkin and serve. (3038). APPLE FRITTERS WITH PRUNELLE OR WITH KIRSCH (Beignets de Pommes à la Prunelle ou au Kirsch). Peel some fine apples; cut them across in three pieces, remove the cores with a five-eighths of an inch diameter tin tube, and cook them partly in a syrup, then drain on a sieve. Make an apple jelly ( No. 3668 ), and when done add to it as much peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ); range the apples on a baking sheet and mask them several times with the jelly, having sufficient of it to leave on a thick layer. When cold remove the slices of apple with a knife and roll them in powdered macaroons, then dip in frying batter (No. 137), and plunge them into hot frying fat. As the paste becomes crisp, drain them off, wipe and brush over with a brush dipped in a sugar frosting flavored with prunelles or kirsch. (3039). APRICOT OR PEACH FRITTERS WITH MARASCHINO (Beignets d'Abricots ou de Pêches au Marasquin). Split a dozen fine apricots or peaches in four; remove the stones and skin, then boil up in a light syrup, but keeping them firm; drain on a cloth, wipe and fill the hollow space left by the stone with a ball of macaroon paste pounded with a little maraschino; cover over with a light layer of peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ), roll them at once in pulverized macaroons and dip them in frying batter (No. 137), then plunge in hot frying fat and fry the fritters to a fine color; drain, wipe and dredge over with vanilla sugar and dress in a pyramid on a folded napkin. Serve separately a sauce made of purée of apricots if the fritters be of apricots, flavored with maraschino, or of peaches if the fritters are of peaches. Another way is to peel the apricots or peaches, cut them in four, then place the pieces in a vessel with sugar, maraschino and a little vanilla syrup; one hour later drain and roll them in powdered macaroons passed through a coarse sieve. Dip the pieces in frying batter (No. 137) and immerse in hot fat, then fry to a fine color. After the paste is well fried, drain, wipe and besprinkle with vanilla sugar, then dress on a napkin and serve with the same sauce as for the above. (3040). BRIOCHE AND CREAM FRITTERS WITH SABAYON (Beignets de Brioche à la Crème au Sabayon). Butter a tin mold forming a box four inches wide by three inches deep and eight inches long, with a hinged cover; fill it half full with brioche paste (No. 130); let it rise in a mild temperature until the box is full, close the cover and fasten the catch, then bake it in a moderate oven. As soon as done, unmold and lay it on a wicker stand and keep it in a cool place to use only twelve hours later. Now pare and cut it up into three-eighths of an inch thick slices; cut these straight through the center so as to obtain oblong pieces three inches long by one and a half inches wide. Dilute six egg-yolks with one quart of double cream and two ounces of vanilla -flavored sugar; run the whole through a sieve and dip into it the pieces of brioche so that they soak in well; drain them off and plunge into hot frying fat, then drain again and wipe; besprinkle with powdered vanilla sugar and dress in a pyramid. Serve a sabayon with Madeira wine separately. (See cabinet pudding with sabayon, No. 3096 .) (3041). CELERIAC, PEAR AND QUARTERED APPLE FRITTERS (Beignets de Céleris-Raves de Poires et de Quartiers de Pommes). Celeriac. --Cut some celery roots in four, pare neatly and blanch them in plenty of water, then drain and finish cooking in a twenty-two degree syrup with a gill of Madeira wine added; when done, drain, wipe dry and leave to get cold, then dip them in frying batter (No. 137), and plunge into hot fat. As soon as of a fine color and the paste is crisp, drain and wipe them off, bestrew over with sugar and serve. Pear Fritters are prepared the same, either with small pears or quartered larger ones, blanched and cooked in syrup and kirsch. Should the pears be very ripe they may be used raw and finished exactly the same as celery fritters. Quartered Apples. --Peel and core the apples, cook them firmly in a light syrup with maraschino, drain and fry the same as for the above; glaze with sugar, pour over some rum and serve. (3042). CHERRY FRITTERS--FRESH OR BRANDIED (Beignets de Cerises Fraiches ou à l'Eau-de-vie). Select some large and fine fresh cherries, remove the pits and lay the fruit in a bowl to sprinkle over with sugar, pour on a few spoonfuls of kirsch and let macerate for one hour. Then drain and thread eight of them on a silver skewer or a straw; roll these in lady finger dust and dip in frying batter (No. 137); plunge them into hot frying fat and when the paste is fried and well colored drain off the fritters on a cloth, sponge them and dredge over with vanilla sugar, then dress them in a pyramid on a folded napkin. Serve at the same time a cherry sauce made with cherry purée and flavored with kirsch. For Brandied Cherry Fritters. --Prepare as above, using brandied cherries; besprinkle with sugar when the pits have been removed and finish as above. For the sauce, crush four ounces of sour cherries, put this into a copper pan with a pint of red Bordeaux wine, four ounces of sugar, a small piece of cinnamon and the peel of one lemon; leave to cook for a few minutes, then strain the liquid through a sieve and return it to the pan; thicken with a little fecula diluted in a small quantity of cold water and strain this sauce once more through the sieve; now add to it a heavy handful of candied cherries washed in hot water and serve. (3043). CREAM of RICE FRITTERS (Beignets de Crème de Ris). Dissolve ten ounces of rice flour in a bowl with one quart of cold milk; pass this through a sieve into a saucepan, and add to it a grain of salt, three ounces of butter, two spoonfuls of sugar and the fourth part of a vanilla bean; stir over a slow fire until it comes to a boil, then continue to cook the preparation for twenty minutes on the side of the range, adding to it a little raw cream. Take out the vanilla, and pour into another saucepan, then reduce it for a few moments. When consistent take it from the fire and mix in with it three ounces of pulverized macaroons, a piece of fresh butter, and five or six well-beaten whole eggs. When the preparation has been thoroughly mingled prepare some wafer sheets, three and a half inches by two and a half; soften them between two damp napkins, and lay on the preparation run through a pocket in to sticks three-quarters of an inch in diameter, having them the whole length of the leaves; roll them into cylindricals and fasten the edges firmly, or else it may be poured directly on a baking sheet without wafers, dampened with cold water, to the thickness of three-quarters of an inch, and then set aside to cool for a few hours. Divide the preparation into pieces, three-quarters of an inch wide by three and a half inches long, or an inch and a half cubes, or else in rounds measuring one and five-eighths inches in diameter by three-quarters thick; roll the fritters in pulverized macaroons, then in beaten eggs and lastly in bread-crumbs; plunge them into hot frying fat, a few at a time, and when they have attained a fine color drain and wipe, bestrew with powdered vanilla -flavored sugar and dress on a folded napkin. (3044). MUNDANE FRITTERS (Beignets Mondains). Prepare a cream cake paste, the same as for soufflé fritters à la Médicis ( No. 3047 ). Cut some bands of paper three inches long by two inches wide, and butter them over. Pour the paste into a pocket furnished with a channeled socket and push through on to each paper band a string of paste to form a large S, both ends being rolled. Heat some fat made with beef kidney suet and lard in a large frying pan, and when this is hot plunge in sufficient of the fritters to cover the surface; lift off the papers as quickly as they detach from the paste and fry the fritters slowly while turning them over; when fried and of a fine color drain them on a sieve. After they become partly cold dip them one by one in a clear rum icing made with fine sugar and the liquor. Drain and place them at once on a pastry grate laid on top of a tin plate so that the icing drains off properly; when the fritters are dry dress and serve. (3045). ORANGE FRITTERS à LA TALLEYRAND (Beignets d' Oranges à la Talleyrand). For one-third. --Cut two oranges into six pieces, leaving on the rind, then peel them closely and remove the seeds; besprinkle with fine sugar and drain on a cloth; dip each separate piece in frying batter (No. 137), and plunge into hot fat, and when of a fine color and very crisp drain these six pieces on a baking sheet and glaze the surfaces under a salamander ( Fig. 123). For one-third. --Peel a medium-sized orange, divide it as for orange glacées with caramel and immerse them in frying batter (No. 137), plunge into very hot fat, and when they have attained a fine color drain and besprinkle with vanilla sugar. For one-third. --Peel three oranges to the pulp and pass a knife between the sections; take off all the skin and suppressing the seeds macerate in a little prunelle and sugar; wrap two pieces of orange in a rissole made of very thin brioche paste (No. 130), having it two and a quarter inches in diameter; fold the paste over and fasten the edges together, then put to rise in a mild temperature; fry to a fine color, drain well, dry and glaze with a light flavored icing (No. 102). Dress these three kinds of fritters on a napkin, all on the same dish, but in separate groups. (3046). SINGAPORE FRITTERS (Beignets Singapore). Dry two dozen macaroons; break them up and mash them with some rum in order to make a consistent paste. Peel neatly a medium-sized ripe pineapple; remove the core with a column tube five-eighths of an inch in diameter and split it lengthwise in two; cut from each half, even slices, having them one-eighth of an inch thick; put these slices in a vessel, bestrew with sugar, and pour over some brandy, then let macerate for two hours. Drain, wipe, and cover one side with the macaroon and rum paste; lay another slice on top and fasten the two together so as to enclose the macaroons, then roll them in powdered cracker, and dip them in frying batter (No. 137); plunge into hot frying fat, and when the paste becomes crisp and of a fine color drain off the fritters, wipe and dredge with sugar; set them on a baking sheet, push them into a hot oven to glaze, and dress in a pyramid on a folded napkin. Serve separately a sauce made with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) diluted with the pineapple infusion and a little rum, adding some square pieces of pineapple. (3047). SOUFFLéD FRITTERS à LA MéDICIS (Beignets Soufflés à la Médicis). Put a pint of water into a saucepan with two ounces of butter, one ounce of sugar, and a grain of salt; set the saucepan on the fire and at the first boil remove it on one side and mix in quickly half a pound of sifted flour; thicken the paste over the fire, dry for a few moments, working it continually, and then take it off to have it lose its greatest heat, but continuing to stir it steadily. Then add to it one tablespoonful of orange flower water and seven to eight eggs, breaking them in one by one. Take up a heaping teaspoonful of this paste, and push it with the finger in such a manner as to give it a round shape, then let it fall into hot frying fat; stir all the time until the fritters assume a fine golden color, then drain on to a cloth and besprinkle with vanilla -flavored sugar; glaze them in a brisk oven, and dress on a napkin. Serve separately a sauce -boatful of chocolate cream prepared as follows: Place in a saucepan three egg-yolks, two ounces of sugar, and half an ounce of fecula; beat well and dilute the preparation with half a pint of boiling milk into which has been added the fourth part of a vanilla bean; stir the whole on the fire, and as soon as it thickens pour it over an ounce of dissolved cocoa; mingle all well together, pass through a tammy and let get cold, afterward adding to it twice as much whipped cream; serve at the same time as the fritters. (3048). SOUFFLéD FRITTERS WITH LEMON PEEL OR WITH ROASTED HAZEL- NUTS (Beignets Soufflés aux Zestes de Citron ou aux Noisettes Grillées). With Lemon Peel. --Put into a small saucepan two gills of water, one ounce of butter, a pinch of sugar and a grain of salt. Stand the saucepan on the fire and remove it at the first boil, then incorporate four ounces of fine sifted flour, proceeding the same as for cream cake paste (No. 132). When the paste has become smooth beat it for a few moments on the fire to dry, then take it off and let cool partly. Then incorporate three whole eggs and two yolks, putting them in singly, also a little finely chopped lemon peel. The paste must be rather too hard than too soft. Have a deep pan; heat in it moderately some fine frying fat, half clarified butter and half lard; take it from the range to the side of the fire. Take up the paste in small quantities with a teaspoon and let it fall on a flour ed table; roll into balls and arrange each one as soon as done on a small smooth saucepan cover, then slip them into the hot fat, a few at a time. After the fritters are all in the fat bring the saucepan back to the hot fire so as to gradually increase the heat, being careful to toss the fritters continuously. When they are all of a fine color drain and roll each one in vanilla sugar and dress on a napkin. With Roasted Hazel- nuts. --A pint of milk, quarter of a pound of butter, five eggs and four ounces of roasted hazel- nuts, pounded in a mortar with a little kirsch. Finish the same as the above. (3049). STRAWBERRY FRITTERS WITH MACAROONS, GARNISHED WITH GLAZED STRAWBERRY FRITTERS (Beignets de Fraises au Macaroons, Garnis de Beignets de Fraises Glacés). Procure some large strawberries; cover them entirely with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and roll them in pulverized macaroons, then dip them one by one into a light frying batter (No. 137), and plunge them immediately into very hot frying fat. When the paste has fried, and is of a fine color, drain them off, and roll in vanilla -flavored sugar; dress on a folded napkin surrounded by the strawberry fritters. Strawberry Fritters. --These are large strawberries dipped in frying batter, and plunged into very hot frying fat, drained, wiped, and bestrewn with sugar, then glazed in the oven; dress them around the above strawberry fritters. (3050). ROMAN TRIUMVIRATE FRITTERS (Beignets Triumvirat Romain). This hot dessert is composed of three sorts of fritters: Stuffed greengages, stuffed pears and stuffed pineapple. The Stuffed Greengages are made by splitting some very ripe and sound gages through the middle; separate the two parts and remove the stone; apply on the cut side a macaroon paste made by pounding macaroons to a paste with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ) and kirsch. Give them the original shape, roll them in powdered macaroons and dip in frying batter (No. 137); plunge them into hot frying fat and when the paste is fried and of a fine color, drain and wipe; besprinkle with sugar and glaze either under a salamander ( Fig. 123) or in a hot oven. The Stuffed Pears are made by peeling some medium pears, leaving on the stalks and emptying them from the other end with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91), removing all the seeds. Cook them in a light syrup, drain and wipe and fill the empty space with candied apricots cut in three-sixteenths inch squares and mingled with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); cork up the opening with a round piece of pear or angelica, and dip them in a frying batter (No. 137), and then in plenty of hot fat to fry to a good golden brown; drain, wipe and bestrew with vanilla sugar. For Stuffed Pineapples. --Peel a pineapple neatly, and divide it into one-eighth of an inch slices, and each of these in four; lay them in a vessel, pour over some good brandy, and dredge with powdered sugar, leaving them to macerate for half an hour; drain, wipe, put together two by two with a layer of hazelnut paste with cooked sugar (No. 125); press down and dip in frying batter (No. 137), then in white frying fat. When the fritters are of a fine color, drain, wipe and lay them on a baking sheet, bestrew with sugar and glaze under a salamander ( Fig. 123). Dress in three distinct groups on a folded napkin and serve separately a sauce made of pineapple and prunelle as follows: Mix equal parts of grated pineapple and apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); put it in a saucepan on the fire and leave boil up once or twice; then dilute with as much syrup, and flavor nicely with prunelle liquor. (3051). FRUITS à LA CREOLE ( Fruits à la Créole). Cut lengthwise in two one large, well-pared pineapple, either fresh or preserved. Divide each half into slices of even length and thickness, not having them too thin, and lay them in a flat dish to cover with a cold syrup of twenty-eight degrees; let macerate for two or three hours. Beside these split in halves five or six fine peaches, not too ripe, suppress the stones, then lay a few at a time on a large skimmer and plunge into boiling water; remove to the side of the fire and leave them until the skins detach, then throw them at once into cold water. As soon as the skins are peeled off drain and macerate them for one hour in a cold syrup of twenty-eight degrees and covered with a round piece of white paper. In case no fresh peaches can be procured use canned ones cut in two; after removing them from the can they should be wiped on a cloth and then ranged in a china vessel and covered with a cold syrup of twenty-eight degrees, afterward with a round piece of white paper. Cook in milk three-quarters of a pound of blanched Carolina rice, keeping it consistent but tender; sweeten it well at the last moment, finishing with a little cream, fresh butter and a few egg-yolks. With this rice fill a buttered pyramidical tin mold shaped like a funnel; press down the rice and lay the mold in a narrow but deep bain-marie saucepan, and keep it hot for ten to twelve minutes. Just when prepared to serve drain the pineapples and peaches; unmold the rice on a cooked paste (No. 131) foundation, a little wider than the circumference of the mold, having it attached to the center of a dish; dress the slices of pineapple erect against the pyramid, lightly overlapping them, and dress the half peaches around the pineapple. Arrange in a crown-shape on top of the pyramid a few angelica leaves cut into points and fill the center with a cluster of fine large red candied cherries. Brush the fruits over with a thick vanilla syrup and serve with a sauce -boat of apricot and maraschino sauce ( No. 3001 ). FIG. 576 A plate with slices of pineapples arranged in a pyramid form in the center and with round peaches garnished around them. On top of the pyramid, candied cherries and angelica leaves are placed at the center. (3052). GRENADES WITH CHERRIES (Grenades aux Cerises). Divide a pound and a quarter of brioche paste (No. 130) into twelve even parts; roll each one into a separate ball and lay these in bottomless oval molds, three inches long, one and three-quarters inches wide and one and three-quarters inches high; let rise until they are almost full, then cook in a hot oven; as soon as done unmold the cakes on a grate and let cool off; then pare them with a knife to give them the appearance of an egg. Put ten egg-yolks and eight ounces of sugar in a bowl and dilute with a quart of cream flavored with vanilla, then strain through a tammy. Soak the brioches in this cream, drain and roll them in pulverized macaroons; dip them in beaten eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and plunge into hot frying fat to fry to a fine color; drain, wipe and dish them up in a circle; fill the interior space with a compote of cherries with prunelle and serve separately some of the syrup from the compote. (3053). MAZARINE WITH PINEAPPLE AND KIRSCH (Mazarine à l'Ananas et au Kirsch). Butter a timbale mold and fill it three-quarters full with savarin paste (No. 148); let rise in a mild temperature, and when this has reached nearly to the height of the top edges lay it on a tart plate and push into a brisk oven in order to bake the cake nicely. Unmold as soon as it is done and leave stand till cold. Now pare the cake evenly and cut it into transversal slices three-eighths of an inch thick; cover each of these with a layer of pineapple marmalade flavored with kirsch, and spread over some very finely chopped pistachios; reconstruct the cake as originally and mask the outside with hot apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); bestrew with a mixture of chopped pistachios and dried almonds, then slide it on a dish to keep warm. Wash at the same time in hot water four ounces of citron, two ounces of angelica, and four ounces of orange peel, all cut into thin inch-long fillets; put these in a saucepan with a quart of twenty-eight degree syrup, place it on the fire and let boil up once or twice, then withdraw the saucepan to one side, and incorporate a quarter of a pound of very fresh butter divided in small pats, stirring constantly so as to mingle the butter well with the sauce; flavor with a gill of kirsch, and serve this in a sauce -boat to accompany the mazarine. (3054). MIRLITONS OF PEARS à LA BIENVENUE (Mirlitons de Peires à la Bienvenue). Butter and line a dozen deep tartlet molds with fragments of puff paste (No. 146); range them on a baking sheet and keep in a cool place. Put into a basin four ounces of powdered sugar, four ounces of sifted flour and two tablespoonfuls of orange flower water; dilute with a pint and a half of cream and strain the whole through a fine sieve. Place a piece of butter the size of a half-inch ball in the bottom of each mold, and set the baking sheet at the mouth of the oven door, then fill the molds with the above preparation; dredge sugar over and push the sheet gently into a warm spot. In the meantime peel a dozen fine small Sickle pears; empty out the insides with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) and cook them in a light syrup; drain well and fill the insides with well-washed candied apricot cut in small squares. Lay one pear in each tartlet and cover with an apricot and kirsch sauce. Bestrew shredded pistachios over and dress in a circle on a round dish, filling up the center with compoted cherries; serve an apricot sauce with kirsch and brandy ( No. 3001 ) apart. (3055). MUNICH WITH PEACHES (Munich aux Pêches). Butter twelve timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137); fill them half full with savarin paste (No. 148), and let rise in a mild temperature, then bake in a moderate oven. As soon as done cut them off even with the edges, unmold and dip them at once in a lemon syrup flavored with Curaçao, maraschino and kirsch. Drain on a grate, glaze with a light orange icing (No. 102), and decorate the top of each cake with a rosette of halved pistachios, having a halved candied cherry in the center. Range them in a circle on a dish, and fill up the inside with compoted peaches; serve a marmalade of peaches ( No. 3675 ) passed through a sieve and flavored with noyau in a separate sauce -boat; see Cleveland peach pudding ( No. 3102 ). (3056). SMALL CéLESTINE OMELETS (Petites Omelettes Célestine). Make a dozen small omelets, and when done slip them on a baking sheet and cover four of them with cream frangipane (No. 44) and chopped or finely cut-up candied fruits, four with apple marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and almonds, and four with strawberry marmalade. Fold over flat or else roll them and cut off the ends; divide each one in two and arrange them in a pyramid form on a hot dish; pour over some apricot sauce with rum, and dredge over the surface pistachios and sweet almonds cut in dice and two spoonfuls of dry currants; serve at once. (3057). CéLESTINE OMELET WITH WHIPPED CREAM (Omelette Célestine à la Crème Fouettée). Break three eggs in a bowl and add to them a pinch of salt and a coffeespoonful of sugar; beat the whole well and run it through a sieve. Butter the bottom of a medium-sized frying pan with clarified butter, heat and pour it in the preparation, spreading it over the entire surface so as to obtain a mellow omelet. Put in a vessel two spoonfuls of currant jelly and dilute it with double its quantity of sweetened whipped cream, then incorporate into this two crushed macaroons; lay this cream in the center of the omelet, raise the edges to inclose it well, and invert it on a dish. Powder over with powdered sugar, and glaze with a red-hot iron. Dress on each side a spoonful of whipped cream mixed with currant jelly and crushed macaroons. (3058). FRANGIPANE OMELET (Omelette à la Frangipane). Prepare a frangipane cream with vanilla and almonds (No. 44). Beat up ten eggs in a vessel with a grain of salt, two tablespoonfuls of sugar and the same of melted butter; dilute the whole with a gill of cream. Make with this a dozen small omelets in a pancake pan buttered with clarified butter; after taking them from the pan, slip them on a baking tin and cover over one side with a layer of the prepared frangipane; fold them up flat and cut off the ends, bestrew with powdered sugar and glaze under a salamander ( Fig. 123), then dress in a pyramid. (3059). RUM OMELET (Omelette au Rhum). Beat up seven or eight eggs in a bowl and add to them a grain of salt, two spoonfuls of powdered sugar and a spoonful of good rum. Warm a little butter in a pan and pour in the beaten eggs, thickening them over a brisk fire stirring with a large fork. Fold over the omelet as fast as it detaches from the pan, and invert it with one stroke on a long dish; strew its entire surface with powdered sugar and glaze it with an omelet iron heated in the fire, decorating the top any desired fashion. Serve the omelet after pouring a few spoonfuls of rum with a little syrup into the bottom of the dish and setting it on fire. (3060). OMELET SOUFFLé, ANCIENT STYLE (Omelette Soufflée à l'Ancienne). Melt half a pound of good butter and have it clarified. Put into a glazed vessel fourteen egg-yolks and ten ounces of vanilla sugar; beat the preparation the same as for lady fingers, or until it becomes frothy and light, then add to it a grain of salt, seven or eight pulverized macaroons, and lastly sixteen stiffly beaten egg-whites. Pour the melted butter into two clean omelet pans, heat and putting half the preparation into each, toss slowly to warm them both at once, having them absorb all the butter, and keep them well rounded; transfer them immediately into two deep, buttered dishes, and push into a slack but well-regulated oven; remove two minutes later and split them down through their entire depth, then return them to the oven. Twelve to fifteen minutes suffice to cook the omelets. When done and light, besprinkle liberally with powdered vanilla sugar ( No. 3115 ), and two minutes later remove from the oven and serve immediately. (3061). OMELET SOUFFLé--LIGHT (Omelette Soufflée Légère). Put three spoonfuls of powdered sugar, four ounces of flour, a grain of salt and some lemon peel into a vessel, and dilute it first with ten egg-yolks, then with half a gill of raw cream, in order to obtain a paste the same consistency as a frying paste; incorporate into it six well-beaten whites and three-quarters of a pound of whipped cream. Have some melted butter in a large pan; when hot pour in the preparation and cook it the same as for an omelet soufflé with preserves ( No. 3065 ); when done to perfection slip it on a sheet of paper and strew over with sugar; roll it on itself, and dress on a dish; dredge more sugar over, and glaze in the oven or under a salamander ( Fig. 123). (3062). OMELET SOUFFLé WITH ALMONDS (Omelette Soufflée aux Amandes). For six persons. Beat up six egg-yolks, twelve shelled, skinned and crushed bitter almonds, and six teaspoonfuls of sugar in a bowl the same as for lady fingers; add the grated peel of a lemon and a grain of salt; as the preparation becomes light stir in delicately the beaten egg-whites, using a spoon, and cutting it with this. The mixture should now stand alone without any danger of sinking, then pour it into a long buttered plated dish, smooth the surface, shaping it like a large folded omelet, and push the dish into a well-heated but not too hot oven. As soon as the omelet begins to brown remove and split it lengthways through the center with a knife, being careful not to press too hard, then replace it in the oven and be careful to turn the dish around from time to time. Let cook for twenty-five minutes; cover with sugar before it is finished so that it can glaze, and when removed dredge over more sugar before serving. (3063). OMELET SOUFFLé WITH APPLES (Omelette Soufflée aux Pommes). Prepare an omelet soufflé preparation exactly the same as for a light omelet soufflá ( No. 3061 ). Cut four or five good apples in quarters, peel, core and mince, then put them into a pan with warm butter, and toss on a moderate fire; besprinkle with sugar, and cook without letting them melt; then remove the pan from the fire to thicken the contents with two or three spoonfuls of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Have four spoonfuls of clarified butter in a large frying-pan; when hot pour in the omelet preparation, heat it for two minutes, then push the pan into a slack oven to cook the omelet; when firm slip it on a large sheet of paper, then turn it over again into the pan after having buttered it once more. When done slip it on the paper again and fill it with the apples. Roll it on itself, dress on a dish, bestrew the surface with sugar, then glaze. (3064). OMELET SOUFFLé WITH MACAROONS (Omelette Soufflée aux Macarons). Stir in a bowl six egg-yolks with a grain of salt and seven ounces of powdered sugar. The whole should get quite frothy. Pound six macaroons, and shake them through a sieve; beat up six egg-whites and mix them gradually with the former preparation, also stir in the macaroon powder at the same time. Melt three ounces of butter in a pan, and when hot pour in the omelet and toss it very slowly over the fire to heat through, then double it over, and invert it on a long buttered plated dish, and finish cooking the omelet in a slack oven. A few seconds before taking it out besprinkle bountifully with powdered vanilla sugar ( No. 3115 ) to glaze. In order to have an omelet soufflé perfect, the guest should be kept waiting. (3065). OMELET SOUFFLé WITH PRESERVES (Omelette Soufflée aux Confitures). Place in a bowl five ounces of flour with four ounces of powdered sugar; dilute with two gills of milk, strain the liquid through a sieve into a saucepan and add to it a bit of lemon peel, a grain of salt and three ounces of melted butter; stir the preparation over a slow fire to thicken and boil for two minutes after work in six or seven egg-yolks, one at a time, without ceasing to beat; when cold stir in the beaten whites. Put into a large frying pan four or five spoonfuls of clarified butter; when hot pour in the preparation, spreading it over the entire surface, and two minutes after push it into a slack oven on a trivet; as soon as the top is firm turn the omelet over on the lid of a large saucepan covered with a sheet of paper, slide it back at once to the rebuttered pan and set it once more in the oven to finish cooking. It ought to be quite mellow. As soon as done, slip it on a sheet of paper again and fill the center with a row of preserves; fold it on itself, then invert it on a long dish with the assistance of the sheet of paper; shape it prettily, tightening the two ends, and besprinkle over with fine sugar; glaze under a salamander ( Fig. 123). (3066). OMELET SOUFFLé WITH VANILLA (Omelette Soufflée à la Vanilla ). Place six egg-yolks in a bowl with three ounces of powdered sugar and an ounce of vanilla sugar ( No. 3115 ); beat well with a whip until it becomes as light as for biscuits; also beat up twelve whites to a stiff froth and mix them in slowly with the others, then dress a part of this preparation in a pyramid form on a lightly buttered dish, leaving a hollow in the center; pour the remainder into a pocket furnished with a socket and decorate the surface of the omelet prettily; sugar it over and bake in a hot oven for eight or ten minutes, serving it as soon as it is done, or it may be dressed on a long dish and split lengthways through the center with the blade of a knife so as to make two pieces of it, then cook as above. (3067). OMELET STUFFED WITH PRESERVES--GLAZED (Omelette Fourrée aux Confitures et Glacée). Prepare a sweet omelet with seven or eight eggs; as soon as it becomes firm roll it over on itself in the pan to detach it, then bring it forward and fill it with currant jelly or apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); shape it nicely, rolling it on itself lengthwise, and invert it quickly on a small long dish. Give it a pretty appearance, turning the ends under, and dredge over with powdered sugar; glaze the surface with an iron heated in the fire. (3068). OMELET STUFFED WITH STRAWBERRIES (Omelette Forrée aux Fraises). Pick about forty large, ripe and very fresh strawberries; select twenty of the finest ones and cut them in four, then place them in a bowl with sugar, a piece of orange peel and two spoonfuls of rum; keep them in a cool place. Press the remainder of the strawberries through a fine sieve and put the pulp into a bowl to sweeten and also lay on ice. Break seven or eight eggs in a vessel, mix in two soup spoonfuls of sugar, two soup spoonfuls of good cream, a few small bits of butter and a grain of salt; beat up well. Heat some fresh butter in a pan, pour in the beaten eggs and stir with a fork until they thicken; when the omelet detaches from the pan bring it forward and fill it with the cut-up strawberries without any of the liquid and turn it over with one stroke on a long dish. Give it a pretty shape, besprinkle with powdered vanilla sugar ( No. 3115 ), glaze with a red hot iron three-sixteenths of an inch in diameter and surround with the purée, into which should be incorporated the liquid from the quartered strawberries. FIG. 577 An illustration of an omelet served in a long dish. (3069). OMELET WITH FRUITS, MERINGUED (Omelette aux Fruits Meringuée). Prepare an omelet with ten beaten eggs, a grain of salt, powdered sugar, butter and raw cream, the same as for frangipane omelet ( No. 3058 ). With this preparation and some clarified butter cook a dozen omelets in a small frying pan and when done spread them at once on a baking sheet; brush the surfaces on one side only with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), bestrew with a fine salpicon of assorted candied fruits and roll up the omelets, cut off the ends and divide each one in two; spread them over with more marmalade and dress in a pyramid on a dish; scatter over more of the same salpicon, then cover the entire pyramid with meringue prepared as for snow eggs ( No. 3163 ); smooth this neatly and decorate it through a cornet; dredge over powdered sugar and poach the whole in a slack oven, setting the dish on top of a thick baking tin. (3070). OMELET WITH PURéE OF SPINACH --SWEET (Omelette Sucreée à la Purée d'épinards). Blanch quickly in salt water in a copper basin a few handfuls of new spinach, having it very clean, tender and fresh--this is most important. When well drained and squeezed chop or pound and press it through a sieve. Cook some butter to hazel- nut (No. 567) in a saucepan, mix in with it three or four spoonfuls of the spinach and fry until the moisture is thoroughly evaporated, then add a handful of powdered lady fingers, a little sugar and a few spoonfuls of raw cream. Cook the whole from four to five minutes, remove and put in a bit of lemon peel and a piece of butter. Prepare a sweet omelet with seven or eight beaten eggs, and as soon as it thickens bring it to the front of the pan and fill it with the purée; fold over and invert it on a small, long dish; shape it prettily with the two ends finished in a point; bestrew with powdered sugar and glaze under a salamander ( Fig. 123) or with an iron three-sixteenths of an inch in diameter heated red hot in the fire. (3071). OMELET WITH RUSSET APPLES (Omelette aux Pommes de Reinette). Cut three russet apples into quarters; peel, mince coarsely and put into a pan with six tablespoonfuls of melted butter; heat well without letting them dissolve. Dilute two tablespoonfuls of flour with two whole eggs and eight tablespoonfuls of raw cream; add to this two spoonfuls of powdered sugar and a grain of salt; pour the preparation over the apples, spreading them on the entire surface of the pan, then as soon as it begins to thicken prick it with a fork to dry the top. Dredge some brown sugar over the omelet and laying an inverted plate over hold it down with the right hand and turn the pan quickly so as to receive the omelet on the plate. Melt more butter in the pan and slipping the omelet into it, heat it well, rolling the pan backward and forward to glaze the sugar without allowing the omelet to adhere, then sprinkle some more of the same sugar over the top and turn it again on the plate; slip it on a dish and serve. (3072). PANCAKES à LA DéJAZET (Crêpes à la Déjazet). Work nine ounces of flour with a pint of boiling milk in a saucepan until it becomes a smooth paste, then add to it at once four and a half ounces of butter, four ounces of sugar and a pinch of salt. Set the vessel on the fire and stir it with a spoon until it becomes thick and detaches from the sides, then remove it from the fire and let the preparation get cold, afterward adding to it twelve egg-yolks, four ounces of sugar, a finely chopped orange peel and ten egg-whites beaten to a stiff froth. Heat two small frying pans, the bottom of each measuring five inches across; wipe them well and butter over lightly with a brush; then pour into each one a very thin layer of the preparation and cook in a brisk oven, turning them over when half done. Drain them on to a cloth and continue until three-quarters of the preparation is used. Soak them with maraschino and cover with a layer of English coffee cream (No. 41) with vanilla added, then dress them one on top of the other, finishing with a pancake; cover the whole with the remainder of the preparation, pour over some butter and brown in a hot oven, placing another dish underneath the one they are dressed on; bestrew with sugar and glaze till they attain a fine color. Serve an apricot sauce with kirsch ( No. 3001 ) separately. (3073). PANCAKES à LA ROSSINI--MERINGUED (Pannequets Meringués à la Rossini). Place in a vessel half a pound of flour, one ounce of sugar, a pinch of salt, lemon peel and two tablespoonfuls of orange flower water; beat with a whip to mix well and dilute the preparation with five gills of cream, afterward adding three ounces of melted butter. Heat two small pancake pans, wipe them nicely and brush with clarified butter; pour into each one two spoonfuls of the preparation, spreading it over well and set it on a slow fire. As soon as the pancake begins to dry turn it over quickly and a few seconds later invert it on a baking sheet; finish cooking all the preparation the same way. Cover each pancake with a layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and roll them up on themselves. Spread a thick layer of pastry cream (No. 46) on the bottom of a dish, dress over the pancakes, forming them into a pyramid and cover with a layer of vanilla meringue with sugar (No. 140); decorate the summit with a rosette of the meringue pushed through a channeled socket pocket and the base with a circle of hollows; besprinkle lightly with sugar and push into a very slack oven to color the meringue, then fill the hollows with currant jelly ( No. 3670 ) and apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). A Madeira sabayon sauce (No. 3095) is to be served apart. (3074). GERMAN PANCAKES (Crêpes à l'Allemande). Put in a bowl six ounces of flour, eight egg-yolks, two tablespoonfuls of sugar and four tablespoonfuls of melted butter; stir the whole to obtain a smooth preparation. Dilute this with a gill and three-quarters of double cream, and add five beaten-up egg-whites and four tablespoonfuls of whipped cream. Butter lightly with clarified butter the bottom of two medium pans; heat and pour into each a thin layer of the batter, spreading it over the entire surface, and push them into a hot oven; when half done turn them over to have them cooked evenly on both sides. As soon as they are finished drain them on a cloth, bestrew with sugar and dress on a dish. (3075). PANCAKES OF PEACH MARMALADE MACéDOINE (Crêpes Marmelade de Pêches Macédoine). Have four ounces of sifted flour in a basin with one ounce of sugar, a pinchof salt, two whole eggs, one egg-yolk and the finely chopped peel of a quarter of an orange; add to the whole a gill and a quarter of milk. Stir well with a whip and pour in two and a half ounces of melted butter and with this preparation make some pancakes, six inches in diameter; from them cut with a pastry-cutter rounds in the center two and a half inches in diameter and around with another cutter six inches in diameter, so as to have them all of even size. Cover with a layer of peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and dress on a dish, superposing one on the other; bestrew with fine sugar and glaze under a salamander ( Fig. 123), then fill the center with a macédoine of fruits cut in five-sixteenth inch squares, having them mingled with peach marmalade and maraschino. Place around a garnishing of apples cut in inch-diameter balls and cooked in syrup, and on each one of these fasten a candied cherry with a piece of angelica. Serve an apricot kirsch sauce ( No. 3001 ) apart. (3076). PANCAKE STICKS, ROYEAUX (Pannequets Bâtons, Royeaux). Prepare six large pancakes as for pancakes à la Rossini ( No. 3073 ); cut them in two and each of these pieces into oblongs, four and a half inches long by three inches wide; lay on the center of each of these a spoonful of almond cream (No. 40); fold them laterally in three so as to enclose the cream and dip them in beaten eggs; roll in bread-crumbs and plunge into very hot frying fat to have them a fine golden color, then drain, bestrew with vanilla sugar ( No. 3115 ) and dress in a pyramid on a napkin. Serve separately an orgeat sauce thickened with a few spoonfuls of apricot marmalade. See Franklyn pudding ( No. 3098 ). (3077). PANCAKES WITH BROWN SUGAR --LIGHT (Crêpes Légères à la Cassonade). Put one pound of flour into a basin; make a hollow in the center and break in the eight egg-yolks; dilute with a glassful of milk, add three spoonfuls of sugar and a grain of salt. Work in the flour slowly so as to have a smooth and light paste, then add to it three-quarters of an ounce of yeast dissolved in a little warm milk and strained. Let the paste rise for two hours in a mild temperature, afterward mixing in with it five well-beaten egg-whites and one pint of whipped cream, then leave it stand for ten minutes longer. Put some clarified butter into a small saucepan and use it to brush over the bottom of a small frying-pan; pour in two or three spoonfuls of the pancake preparation, spreading it all over the pan, and cook in the oven. Before turning the pancake over cover the surface with the clarified butter; when done slip it on a baking tin, sweeten both sides with brown sugar, and when all are cooked dress and serve them very hot. (3078). PANCAKES WITH ORANGE FLOWER WATER --LARGE (Grandes Crêpes à l'Eau de Fleurs d'Oranger). Sift twelve ounces of flour into a basin; add to it a grain of salt, and mix in six to eight eggs, one by one, beating the paste each time for three or four minutes so as to have it smooth and light; put in two spoonfuls of powdered sugar, and four spoonfuls of good olive oil; when the mixture is finished add two or three spoonfuls of raw cream, and as much brandy; the paste should be flowing without being liquid; cover the basin with a cloth, and let it rest for a couple of hours. Heat two omelet pans, butter them liberally with a brush dipped in clarified butter, and cover the bottom with a rather thick layer of the paste; prick it with the prong of a fork to have the liquid parts fall to the bottom. As soon as the pancake attains consistency rotate the pan vigorously to detach it from the pan, and toss it over with one stroke; butter the bottom of the pan and the top of the pancake with melted butter without ceasing to toss the pan over a slow fire so that it finishes to cook. When the pancake is properly done slide it on a round dish, having the bottom bestrewn with brown sugar, and dredge more of the same over the top; then sprinkle with a few drops of orange flower water, and on this slip the second pancake; sweeten and sprinkle it the same. Send the dish at once to the table so that they can be eaten hot while the other two are being prepared. (3079). PANCAKES WITH PRESERVES--LIGHT (Pannequets Légers aux Confitures) . Dilute half a pound of flour with eight egg-yolks, one pint of milk, a gill of cream, and four ounces of melted clarified butter; add lemon or vanilla flavoring, a grain of salt, three grated bitter almonds, and the beaten egg-whites. Dip a brush in clarified butter, and grease over some small pancake pans; heat and pour into each one a spoonful of the preparation; spread it thinly over the entire surface of the pan, and as soon as the paste assumes a color underneath turn over on the other side. When done slip on a baking sheet, besprinkle with vanilla or lemon sugar, and dress on a dish, one on top of the other; serve with a separate plateful of preserves. (3080). PEACHES à LA COLBERT (Pêches à la Colbert). Plunge twelve fine peaches into boiling water for a few seconds in order to skin them easily, then split, pare and take out the kernels; put the peaches to macerate in a hot twelve-degree syrup flavored with maraschino. As soon as the fruit is tender drain on a cloth, wipe and stuff each half with rice and cream flavored with vanilla (No. 160) and finished with a few egg-yolks; place two half peaches together to resemble whole ones, then cover them with a light coating of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), roll in pulverized macaroons, dip in beaten eggs, then in white bread-crumbs and fry to a fine golden color. Cut some slices of savarin cake three-quarters of an inch thick and with a pastry cutter remove some rounds two and a half inches in diameter; slit these half an inch deep with another pastry cutter an inch and a half in diameter, inserting a small kitchen knife on the side at a quarter of an inch from the bottom and with the tip cut around to detach the center only. Lay the prepared crusts on a baking tin, besprinkle over with sugar and glaze in a hot oven. As soon as this is accomplished and they become cold fill the empty centers with a salpicon of fruits mingled with apricot marmalade; decorate the edges of each crust with twelve small sticks of angelica, each an inch long. Lay the crusts on a dish, dress the peaches on top and heat in the oven twenty minutes before serving. Have a separate apricot sauce, adding a few spoonfuls of almond milk and flavored with maraschino ( No. 3001 ). (3081). CONDE PEACHES (Pêches Condé). Blanch half a pound of rice; drain and replace it in the saucepan with a pint of cream and half of a vanilla stick; push the pan into a slack oven and allow it to cook for forty minutes. Remove the rice, suppress the vanilla and put in six egg-yolks, three ounces of fresh butter, three ounces of sugar and a little salt. Butter and sugar a mold one inch high by seven inches in diameter; fill it to the top with rice and place it in a bain-marie for twenty minutes. Split in two twelve fine peaches, remove the kernels, blanch and peel off the skins, pare nicely and lay them to macerate in a hot thirty-degree vanilla syrup; one hour later drain the peaches on a cloth and wipe them well. Unmold the rice on a dish and dress the peaches over dome-shaped, cover them with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), bestrew with shredded pistachios and decorate the cavities between the peaches, and also the border of the rice, with angelica lozenges and split candied cherries; surround the base with small pear -shaped rice croquettes. Set the dressed dish in the oven for twenty minutes to heat well, and serve with an apricot sauce and Madeira wine diluted with vanilla syrup. (See Humboldt pudding, No. 3100 .) (3082). MERINGUED PEACHES (Pêches Meringuées). Cook half a pound of rice in milk, proceeding the same as for rice with apples ( No. 3115 ); finish with cream and butter. Cut six peaches in four, remove the kernels and plunge them into boiling water until the skins peel off, then drain on a cloth and cut them up into small quarters; besprinkle over with sugar. With the cooked rice form with a spoon any style of border, leaving a hollow in the center; inside of this dress the quartered peaches in layers, brushing them over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and alternating with thin layers of the rice; the whole to be covered with the rice and this with a layer of meringue (No. 140); smooth the surface, decorate with meringue, dredge with fine sugar and dry in a very slow oven for twenty minutes. (3083). RICHELIEU PEACHES (Pêches à la Richelieu). Butter some half-inch high flawn rings, having them two and a half inches in diameter; line with fine paste (No. 135), and cut it off even with the edge, then raise it up to form a crest, which must be pinched all around. Leave them in a cool place for fifteen minutes; egg over twice and prick the bottoms in several places; line the inside with buttered paper, fill up with dry rice, then cook in a hot oven and remove as soon as done; empty out and brush over the exteriors with egg-yolks and return to the oven for an instant to color the egg. Dress on a round dish and line the inside with peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then fill up with frangipane cream (No. 44) into which has been mixed some crushed macaroons moistened with maraschino. Smooth the surfaces well and dress on top of each a well-drained preserved half peach the same size as the small flawns; cover over with apricot or peach marmalade and then decorate with candied cherries and fanciful cuts of angelica; fill the centers with a salpicon of pineapple, plums and pears cut in quarter-inch squares, the whole to be mixed with apricot marmalade. Keep them warm and serve separately a peach syrup with maraschino. (3084). STEVENS PEACHES (Pêches à la Stevens). Infuse a vanilla bean for one hour in a quart of boiling milk; take it out and return the milk to the fire; at the first boil drop into it like rain half a pound of tapioca; allow it to boil up once or twice, then finish cooking on the side of the range without allowing it to boil; add to it two ounces of sugar and four eggs, beating them in one by one. Butter some timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137), cover the bottoms with a ring of quince paste and fill the center of this ring with a round of greengage cut out with a cutter, then fill up the timbales with the prepared tapioca and poach in a bain-marie for thirty minutes. When firm unmold and dress in a circle on a round dish; fill the center of this circle with a compote of peaches, decorating the top with fruits. Reduce the syrup used for compoting the peaches and with it make a sauce, adding peach marmalade and maraschino. (3085). PEARS FERRIèRE (Poires Ferrière). Peel some pears; hollow them with a vegetable spoon and cook in a light syrup; drain on a sieve and stuff them with powdered macaroons moistened with a little Curaçoa; cover them with a coating of fine apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and bestrew with finely chopped pistachios. Butter and sugar a surtout mold and fill it to the top with rice and cream flavored with vanilla (No. 160) and finished with a few egg-yolks; set the mold in a sautoir with water reaching to half its height and put this into a slack oven to get firm; then unmold on a dish. Dress on the edge of the rice a circle of greengages alternated with small apple -shaped rice croquettes having their stalks made of pieces of angelica; range the pears inside of this circle dressed in a pyramid, and a moment before serving push the dish in the oven to heat well; serve separately the following sauce : Take very ripe pears; peel and cut in quarters, then cook them to a compote with some thirty-degree syrup; when the fruit is well cooked strain through a fine sieve to obtain a pulp; dilute this with the syrup in which they were boiled, adding also a few spoonfuls of kirsch. Sturtout molds are made of different sizes as follows: About three inches in diameter by half an inch high, or six inches in diameter by three-quarters of an inch high. (3086). LOMBARDE PEARS --STUFFED (Poires Farcies à la Lombarde). Peel one dozen medium-sized pears, leave on a part of the stalk and cut them across in two at two-thirds of their height; scoop them out with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) and cook in a light syrup. As soon as they are done drain, wipe and stuff them with a salpicon of fruits mingled with pear marmalade and flavored with kirsch, and put them together again into their original shape. Dress a layer of rice and cream with vanilla (No. 160), finished with a few egg-yolks, on the bottom of a dish; arrange the pears in a circle on the edges of this and fill the center with some stewed apples cut into balls with a vegetable spoon, some candied cherries washed in hot water and pineapple cut in dice, the whole to be diluted with a little vanilla syrup. Serve separately a sauce made of strawberry pulp diluted with as much syrup and flavored with maraschino. (3087). PIE, APPLE, PEACH OR RHUBARB (Tarte aux Pommes, aux Pêches ou à la Rhubarbe). Prepare a tart paste (No. 149). Cut into quarters six or eight very ripe apples or fine, tender peaches; range them in layers in a pie dish, besprinkle with sugar, and dress them in a dome form. Wet the edges of the dish and cover it with a band of the paste, half an inch wide by an eighth of an inch in thickness; wet this band also with a fine brush, and cover the fruits and this band with a rolled-out flat of the same paste; press it down on the base of the dome, and then on the band, so as to have the two adhere. Cut the paste even with the edge of the dish, and scallop it all around with a small knife, pressing the paste heavily with the left thumb, and cutting it at short intervals from the bottom to the top to raise the gash slightly, so that when cooking the paste will rise in relief. Brush over the top with water, and decorate with a few fanciful cuts of the same paste, then egg the surface with beaten eggs. Stand the pie on a small baking tin and push it into a slack oven to cook for forty-five minutes, then bestrew with sugar, and leave to glaze in a hot oven. Instead of egging the pie may be simply moistened with water and lightly covered with powdered sugar. Rhubarb Pie. --Select fine tender stalks of rhubarb. Remove the leaves, wash and peel the stalks, then cut them up transversely in pieces three-quarters of an inch long; arrange these in layers in a pie dish intermingled with sugar, and cover and finish the same as the above apple or peach pies. (3088). PIE, MARROW FRANGIPANE (Tourte Frangipane à la Moelle). Wet an eight-inch diameter tart plate and cover with a flat made of the parings of puff paste (No. 146) an eighth of an inch thick; moisten the edges with a brush, lay all around a band of puff paste a quarter of an inch thick by three-quarters of an inch wide, and press the band down on the flat to have the two adhere, and fasten the two ends together. Put in a vessel three ounces of flour and five ounces of sugar; dilute with four eggs, dropping in one at a time, to have the whole very smooth, but in case this fails then strain through a fine wire sieve; increase the proportions of this preparation with one pint of boiling milk, and pour the whole into a saucepan to thicken on the fire; when this is accomplished remove and add two ounces of melted marrow. Leave cool, and with this fill the pie up as far as the band; over these place devices of puff paste, egg over and push the pie into a hot oven to cook it. When done, take out, sprinkle the surface with fine sugar, and return to the oven for a few moments longer, in order to have this glaze. This pie is to be served hot, as soon as removed from the oven. (3089). MINCE PIE ("Mince Pie"). Take a tin pie plate and line it with foundation paste (No. 135); on the edge fasten a puff paste (No. 146) band three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness and three-quarters of an inch wide; fill the hollow in the plate with mincemeat (No. 117), wet the edge and cover over with a puff paste flat the same diameter, fastening it on firmly to the edges, egg the surface and trace on top some fanciful designs with the tip of a small knife; pinch all around and push in the oven to bake for an hour to an hour and a quarter. As soon as done remove to the oven door, bestrew with fine sugar and replace it in the oven for a few moments to glaze. (3090). PINEAPPLE, CAROLINA AND WITH RICE WITH CREAM (Ananas Caroline et Ananas au Riz à la Crème). Peel a pineapple neatly; remove the core with a column tube and split it lengthwise in two. Cut one of these halves into very small thin bands, each one being an inch and a quarter long by half an inch wide, and cut the other half into even slices an eighth of an inch thick. Put the sliced pineapple into a vessel and cover it with a cold twenty-five degree syrup, and three hours later drain off this syrup to add to it a little sugar melted in a small quantity of water, and cook it again to thirty-two degrees. Let it get cold, then flavor with a little maraschino; pour it once more over the pineapple. Two hours after drain the small bands on a cloth and wipe them carefully. Butter twelve small timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137), cover the bottoms with a ring cut from angelica and place a candied cherry in the center; decorate the sides with the pineapple bands overlapping each other, and fill the timbales as far as the top with rice and cream (No. 160), flavored with vanilla and finished with a few egg-yolks. Keep these timbales in a bain-marie for thirty-five minute. Place the even slices of pineapple to drain, wipe dry and cover with a light layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) flavored with kirsch. Dress the unmolded timbales in the center of a round dish and range the pineapple in slices around, one overlapping the other; bestrew with finely chopped pistachios and decorate with angelica lozenges and candied cherries. Set the dish in the oven for a few moments to heat the whole and serve with the syrup used to steep the pineapple, flavored with maraschino and then strained through a fine wire sieve into a sauce -boat. Pineapple with Rice with Cream. --Have some rice with cream (No. 160) flavored with orange, dress it in the center of a dish and garnish around it with slices of pineapple a quarter of an inch thick, four inches in diameter and cut in four, having prepared them as follows: Place them in a copper basin and throw over them a thirty degree syrup and allow to infuse for an hour; drain. Pound the parings and mix them with the syrup in which the pineapples were infused; pass through a sieve and serve as a sauce. FIG. 578 A dish with slices of pineapples dressed in a ring form in the center of the dish. Timbales are placed on the middle of the ring. (3091). POUPELIN (Poupelin). Pour one pint of water into a saucepan, adding a pinch of salt, an ounce of sugar and two ounces of butter; set the saucepan on the fire and at the first boil fill up the liquid with as much flour as it can possibly absorb; then dry it on the fire, proceeding the same as a cream cake paste (No. 132). Afterward incorporate six whole eggs, one at a time, and six yolks, working the paste thoroughly. Pour this preparation into a buttered charlotte mold; cook in a slack oven, and when done unmold and allow to cool on a grate; empty the inside only, leaving a crust a quarter of an inch in thickness, and fill the empty interior with frangipane cream (No. 44), alternating with a layer of salpicon of fruits. Return it to the oven for half an hour and just when prepared to serve remove and turn it over on a dish. Serve an apricot and kirsch sauce ( No. 3001 ) in a sauce tureen at the same time. (3092). PUDDING à LA BENVENUTO (Pouding à la Benvenuto). Cook five to six large pancakes and cut them up into inch-wide bands. Butter a dome-shaped cylindrical mold and line it with these bands, one overlapping the other. Put seven ounces of flour in a saucepan with one pint of boiling milk and thicken it on the fire to obtain a smooth paste; remove it at once and add to it two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt, four ounces of sugar, two ounces of grated cocoanut laid on a paper -covered baking sheet and slightly roasted in the oven, the peel of one lemon and eight raw egg-yolks; return it to the fire, stirring continuously, and as soon as the preparation attains consistency incorporate into it slowly the well-beaten whites of five eggs. With this fill up the mold, alternating it with layers of pancake parings, first covered with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ) and then rolled up. Set the mold into a saucepan with boiling water reaching to half its height and place it on the range; when the water boils, finish cooking in a slow oven for forty-five minutes. As soon as this is accomplished take out the pudding, let it stand for five minutes, then unmold it on a dish and serve at once with a sauce -boat of orange syrup thickened with arrowroot and flavored with maraschino. (3093). PUDDING à LA BRADLEY (Pouding à la Bradley). Soak one pound of bread-crumbs in hot milk; extract all the moisture and place it in a saucepan, pouring over it a few spoonfuls of raw cream. Stir briskly with a spoon and add twenty-four egg-yolks, ten ounces of sugar, ten ounces of butter, a little at a time, twelve tablespoonfuls of frangipane (No. 44), a grain of salt, a grated orange peel, a pound and a quarter of Smyrna raisins and eight ounces of candied pineapple cut up in small squares, and lastly fifteen well-beaten egg-whites. With this preparation fill three-quarters full some buttered and flour ed pudding molds; place them in a deep baking pan containing boiling water and poach for one hour in the bain-marie in a slack oven. Serve with a Sabayon with California wine ( No. 3096 ). This quantity is sufficient for twenty persons. (3094). MELLOW PUDDING, APRICOT SAUCE (Pouding Moelleux, Sauce aux Abricots.) Skin half a pound of suet and pass it twice through the machine ( Fig. 47); pound it with five ounces of beef marrow and pass it through a sieve; put it into a vessel with fourteen ounces of powdered sugar and beat up for ten minutes with a spoon, then add two whole eggs and from fifteen to eighteen yolks, little by little, five ounces of white bread-crumbs soaked in hot milk and well pressed, pounded and diluted with a little raw cream and then passed through a sieve, and lastly add four or five spoonfuls of brandy, salt, grated lemon peel and one pound of candied fruits cut in quarter-inch squares and ten ounces of Smyrna raisins. Put a little of this preparation in a small timbale mold and poach it in a bain-marie to judge whether its consistency be correct. Butter some plain or cylindrical molds, flour them over and fill them three-quarters full with the preparation; place these molds in a deep baking tin with hot water and poach for one hour in a slack oven. Let stand for ten minutes and then unmold on a dish and cover with apricot and rum sauce ( No. 3001 ). This quantity is sufficient for twenty persons. (3095). CABINET PUDDING à LA ROYALE (Pouding Cabinet à la Royale). Butter a square, hinged mold and fill it three-quarters full with Savarin paste (No. 148); leave it to rise in a mild temperature and when it reaches to a quarter of an inch from the top close the cover and bake in a slack oven. As soon as it is done unmold and leave set till the following day. Butter and sugar a cylindrical timbale mold. Cut up the stale Savarin cake in quarter-inch thick slices and cover one side with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); cut some of these into inch-wide bands the same height as the mold and fasten them on their uncovered side all around the inside of the mold, having them standing upright and overlapping each other; cut the remainder of the slices into dice and use them to fill up the mold in alternate layers with candied fruits also cut dice-shaped and macaroons. Put in a vessel twelve egg-yolks, two whole eggs, six ounces of sugar and two ounces of orange sugar; beat the whole together and dilute with a pint of milk and a pint of cream; pass it through a wire sieve. Pour this preparation slowly into the mold until well filled, then leave it to soak for several minutes; lay the mold in a saucepan with water reaching to half its height and cook it in a slack oven for an hour and a quarter; take it from the oven and let stand for a few moments, then unmold it on a dish and cover over with apricot marmalade. Serve with a sauce -boat of Sabayon with Marsala sauce ( No. 3096 ). (3096). CABINET PUDDING WITH SABAYON (Pouding Cabinet au Sabayon). Prepare a Genoese cake mixture the same as for No. 3239 ; pour and spread it on a baking sheet, covered with buttered paper, in a layer half an inch thick, and bake it in a slow oven; when done, remove and invert it on a grate, lift off the paper and let get cold. Wash three-quarters of a pound of candied fruits in hot water, such as pears, apricots, plums, orange peel and cherries; cut them up into quarter-inch dice, and lay them in a vessel; mix with a few crushed macaroons, and pour a few spoonfuls of rum over the whole. Butter and sugar a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150), place in its bottom thin slices of the Genoese cake, overlapping each other, and scatter on top a part of the fruits and macaroons; on these lay more slices of cake, then more fruit, proceeding the same as before, and continue the operation until the mold is full. Break ten egg-yolks into a vessel, beat in four ounces of sugar, and add the grated peel of one lemon; mix with a whisk, and dilute this preparation with a quart of cream, then run the whole through a fine sieve. Pour it over the pudding, filling it well, and let it soak thoroughly for several minutes, then place it in a bain-marie and when the water has reached boiling point push it into a slack oven to cook for one hour. Unmold the pudding on a dish, cover it with Madeira Sabayon sauce, and serve more of it separately. For the Sabayon, put half a pound of sugar and eight egg-yolks in a bain-marie, set it on the fire, and whip the preparation until it becomes frothy, then add half a pint of Madeira or other wine, and continue to whip until the sauce is very light and begins to thicken, then remove it at once from the bain-marie, and serve. (3097). COUNTESS PUDDING (Pouding à la Comtesse). Prepare a small biscuit preparation the same as for lady fingers ( No. 3377 ); spread it out on a sheet of buttered paper to the thickness of three-sixteenths of an inch, and cook in a slack oven, being careful to keep it soft. As soon as done remove from the oven, take off the paper and cut the cake into four-inch wide bands down its entire length; cover each one of these bands with a layer of strawberry marmalade passed through a sieve, and roll them up into cylindricals an inch and a half in diameter; wrap them at once in paper to tighten and keep firm, and let them rest for one hour, then cut them into slices a quarter of an inch thick. Butter a dome-shaped cylindrical mold, and with the rolled slices of cake cover the interior sides, then fill the empty hollow with a Saxony soufflé pudding preparation ( No. 3107 ); place it in a saucepan with boiling water to half its height and let come to a boil, then remove the saucepan from the fire, and push it into a slack oven. After forty minutes take it out and let cool off for a few moments, then unmold on a dish, and cover with hot apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Serve a sauceboat of Richelieu and liquor sauce made as follows: Heat a pint of thirty-degree syrup, and remove it from the fire, thicken with a little arrowroot dissolved in cold water, and add a few cherries (demi-sucre) and shredded pistachios; flavor with kirsch. (3098). FRANKLYN PUDDING (Pouding à la Franklyn). Put half a pound of butter into a vessel, beat it to a cream, and add to it seven egg-yolks, one at a time. When the preparation has become frothy put with it gradually six ounces of peeled and dried almonds that have been pounded and rubbed through a sieve, six ounces of sugar, six ounces of bread-crumbs, and eight ounces of candied fruits, such as candied cherries cut in two, pineapple and orange peel cut in dice, and finally six well-beaten egg-whites. Pour this preparation into a cylindrical timbale mold ( Fig. 150), and place this in a sautoir with water to half its height; set it on the fire to come to a boil, then push it into a slack oven. At the expiration of forty-five minutes remove the pudding from the oven, let it rest for a few moments, then unmold it on a dish; cover it with orgeat sauce, and serve with a bowlful of the same. The orgeat sauce is made by cooking four ounces of sugar to "small crack" (No. 171), then adding a gill of almond milk (No. 4), and boiling once. Thicken the sauce with a spoonful of fecula diluted with a little water and half a gill of rich cream. (3099). PUDDING à LA DE FREESE (Pouding à la de Freese). Chop up and pass through a sieve five ounces of beef marrow; place it in a vessel and beat it up to a cream with five ounces of sugar, adding singly eight egg-yolks and three whole eggs, and have the preparation very light. Then incorporate one pound of white meat taken from a chicken, pounded with two and a half gills of cream, six ounces of well-reduced apple marmalade, twelve ounces of Smyrna raisins thoroughly washed in hot water, and finally six stiffly whipped egg - whites. Pour this preparation into a dome-shaped cylindrical pudding mold, well buttered and sugared. Stand the mold in a saucepan with hot water to reach to half its height and bring to a boil, then put it into a slack oven. Take out the pudding at the end of forty-five minutes and let stand five or six minutes; then unmold it on a dish and cover with a sabayon sauce ( No. 3096 ), well flavored with Madeira, and serve more of this sauce in a sauce -boat. (3100). HUMBOLDT PUDDING (Pouding à la Humboldt). Cook five or six large pancakes; cover them on one side with a layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and cut them up into bands each an inch and a quarter wide and through their entire length. Butter a dome-shaped cylindrical mold and fasten the pancake bands on their uncovered side against the sides of the mold, overlapping each other. Cover the pancake parings with apricot marmalade and roll them into small rolls, then cut them in half-inch long bits. Beat eight ounces of butter to a cream, add to it, one by one, four whole eggs and two whites; when this becomes frothy, put in four ounces of sugar, then four ounces of flour and four ounces of peeled almonds dried and pounded with four ounces of sugar, afterward passed through a sieve. Mix the whole properly and lastly incorporate into it three well-beaten egg-whites. Pour this preparation into the pancake-lined mold, alternating it with layers of the small rolls previously prepared; when the mold is full set it in a bain-marie and allow the water to come to a boil on the fire, then cook it in a slack oven for forty-five minutes. As soon as the pudding is done take it out and let it stand for a few moments before unmolding it on a dish, brush it over with hot apricot marmalade and serve with a sauce -boat of apricot sauce. Place two gills of apricot marmalade in a saucepan, diluting it with two gills of syrup; set it on the fire to boil up once, then strain through a fine wire sieve and add two gills of good Madeira wine. (3101). ITALIAN PUDDING (Pouding à l'Italienne). Soften in boiling water half a pound of Smyrna raisins and half a pound of candied orange peel cut in small dice. Place them in a vessel with half a pound of candied cherries washed in hot water and pouring over a few spoonfuls of rum leave them to marinate for one hour. Prepare a small quantity of Genoese cake preparation ( No. 3239 ) finished with orange and spread it on a sheet of paper in a quarter of an inch thick layer, then bake it in a hot oven. As soon as done turn it over on a table, remove the paper and cover with a layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then cut it up into inch and a half in diameter round pieces. Butter and sugar a cylindrical timbale mold ( Fig. 150) and lay in the bottom a circle of these pieces, overlapping each other; scatter over the marinated fruits into which have been mingled a few crushed macaroons and on top dress another circle of the cake the same as the first, then more fruits and macaroons, and continue thus until the mold is full. Put into a vessel six egg-yolks, two whole eggs and four ounces of sugar, having a part of it flavored with orange; beat the whole well to mingle properly and dilute with a pint and a half of double cream and half a gill of rum; pass this through a wire sieve and pour it slowly into the mold until full, then cook the pudding in a bain-marie in a slack oven, and just when ready to serve unmold on a dish and pour over a frothy rum sauce ( No. 3103 ), serving more of it separately. (3102). PEACH PUDDING à LA CLEVELAND (Pouding de Pêches à la Cleveland). Cut twenty sound peaches in four pieces; lay them in a vessel, sprinkle over with a handful of powdered sugar and let macerate for half an hour, tossing them about at frequent intervals. Line a dome-shaped mold wider than its height with a very thin suet pudding paste ( No. 2322 ); fill the inside with the quartered peaches, placing them in FIG. 579 An illustration of a dome-shaped mold being wrap in a cloth and is tied with string. FIG. 580 An illustration of a dome-shaped pudding that is dressed on a dish. layers and bestrewing brown sugar between each one. Cover the fruits with a round flat of the paste and fasten it solidly to the sides. Close the mold with its own lid and wrap it up in a cloth, then plunge it into boiling water and let cook for an hour and a half, having it remain at a boiling degree during the whole time. Just when ready to serve remove the mold, unwrap and invert the pudding on a dish and cover it over with a Madeira sauce with peaches, serving some of it separately. For the sauce have six to eight very ripe peaches; remove the stones, crush the fruit and adding a few spoonfuls of sugar and two gills of water let cook for a few moments. Strain this sauce through a fine wire sieve and add to it a few tablespoonfuls of maraschino. (3103). PLUM PUDDING, ST. GEORGE ( Plum Pouding St. George). Place in a vessel one pound of beef kidney suet, very dry, free of fibers and chopped up very finely; one pound of seeded Malaga raisins; one pound of currants, cleaned and washed in plenty of water; one pound of bread-crumbs, sifted through a sieve; a quarter of a pound of candied lemon peel chopped up very fine; one pound of powdered sugar; four tablespoonfuls of flour; a quarter of an ounce of ground cinnamon; a quarter of an ounce of nutmeg and allspice; a pint of brandy and six eggs. Mix the whole well together. Dip a strong cloth, in cold water and wring it out to extract all its moisture; spread it open on a table and butter it liberally with butter softened to the consistency of cream; dredge over with sifted flour and shake the cloth to remove the excess of flour that has failed to adhere to the butter. Lay in the center of this cloth the above prepared mixture, form it in the shape of a ball, raise up the edges of the cloth bringing the four ends together and all around so as to enclose the preparation well, then tighten and tie firmly. Have on the fire a high saucepan filled to three-quarters of its height with water; when this boils plunge in the plum pudding and let cook for three hours, then remove it from the water. Have it stand for five minutes before cutting the string; undo the cloth carefully and invert the pudding on a hot dish; besprinkle it with sugar, pour over some brandy or rum and set it on the fire; serve immediately. Have a separate sauce -boat of frothy vanilla and rum sauce to be made as follows: FIG. 581 An illustration of a mixture being wrap in a cloth and is formed in the shape of a ball. FIG. 582 An illustration of a dome-shaped plum pudding that is dressed on a dish. Frothy Vanilla and Rum Sauce. --Chop up half a pound of beef marrow, melt it in a bain-marie, then strain through a napkin into a bowl and whip it until it begins to froth, then add four ounces of fresh butter broken in small parts, four ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) and lastly, half a gill of rum; serve. (3104). PLUMERY PUDDING (Pouding à la Plumery). Pound four ounces of raw beef marrow, pass it through a sieve and place it in a vessel; beat it up to a cream, adding five egg-yolks and two whole eggs, one at a time. When this preparation becomes creamy add to it four ounces of powdered almonds passed through a sieve, two ounces of cracker dust, three ounces of crushed macaroons, two ounces of bread-crumbs soaked in rum, two ounces of angelica and one ounce of orange peel, both washed in hot water and cut into quarter-inch squares. When all these ingredients have been properly mixed incorporate slowly into the whole four egg-whites beaten to a very stiff froth; pour this preparation into a cylindrical buttered and sugared mold and cook it in a bain-marie in a very slack oven. Just when prepared to serve unmold the pudding on a dish, cover it with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and serve with a sauce -boat of apricot sauce prepared with almond milk. Apricot Sauce with Almond Milk. --Have two gills of apricot pulp, four ounces of sugar and two gills of water placed in a saucepan; stand it on the fire and allow to cook for a few moments, then strain through a fine strainer and add one gill of almond milk (No. 4); return it to the saucepan and heat the sauce without boiling; just when prepared to serve add a tablespoonful of noyau liqueur. (3105). RICE PUDDING à LA BAGRATION (Pouding de Riz à la Bagration). Wash half a pound of rice; blanch it properly in plenty of water, drain and put it into a saucepan with one quart of milk and half a stick of vanilla; let it cook for forty minutes in the oven, then withdraw and suppress the vanilla; add to it three ounces of sugar, two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt, six yolks and one whole egg, mixing all well together. Stir in six ounces of candied fruits cut in quarter-inch dice, such as pears, greengages, pineapples, cherries, and lastly add three well-beaten egg-whites. Butter and sugar a dome-shaped cylindrical mold; fill it four-fifths full with the preparation and lay it in a saucepan with water to half its height; place it on the fire until the water boils, then in a slack oven to cook for fifty minutes. Remove the pudding from the fire, let it stand for five minutes, then unmold on a dish and cover with English cream vanilla sauce ( No. 3004 ), having more of it served separately. (3106). RICE PUDDING, FRUIT SAUCE (Pouding au Riz, Sauce aux Fruits ). Wash one pound of rice; blanch and cook in two quarts of milk and cream, half of each, proceeding the same as for rice pudding ( No. 3105 ); when done sweeten with six ounces of sugar, finish it with a grated orange peel, a handful of chopped almonds, and two ounces of butter; remove it from the fire, and when almost cold incorporate fifteen to eighteen egg-yolks, one by one, without ceasing to beat up the preparation; add also twenty ounces of candied fruits cut in quarter-inch squares, and lastly twelve to fourteen egg-whites beaten to a stiff froth. With this fill five buttered and flour ed molds; place them in a deep baking-pan with hot water, and poach the puddings for nearly one hour in a slack oven. At the last moment unmold on a dish, cover them liberally with apricot and kirsch sauce ( No. 3001 ), and serve separately a sauce -boatful of Bischoff sauce; for this see fried cream Pamela ( No. 3013 ). (3107). SAXONY PUDDING--SOUFFLéD (Pouding Soufflé à la Saxonne). Sift half a pound of flour into a saucepan and dissolve it with half a pint of boiling milk, into which has been infused half a vanilla bean; mix with this four ounces of butter and four ounces of sugar; set the saucepan on the fire and stir the mixture with a spatula until it detaches from the saucepan. Then remove it from the fire and beat in four ounces of butter and four ounces of vanilla sugar; continue to stir until it attains body, and let it lose its greatest heat, then add at once ten egg-yolks, four ounces of candied fruits cut in quarter-inch dice, and six stiffly beaten egg-whites; pour this preparation into a dome-shaped mold with a tube in the center, and cook it in a bain-marie in a slack oven for forty-five minutes. As soon as done unmold the pudding on a dish, cover it over with a little apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and serve with a separate apricot sauce with noyau ( No. 3100 ). (3108). SCOTCH PUDDING (Pouding à l'Ecossaise). Soften twelve ounces of beef marrow at the oven door, without letting it melt. Pass it through a strainer and lay it in a bowl to beat to a cream, adding to it one by one ten egg-yolks, two whole eggs, also a pinch of salt, then put in fourteen ounces of bread-crumbs soaked in milk, two ounces of candied cherries cut in two, four ounces of candied orange and lemon peel cut in small three-sixteenth inch squares and half a gill of rum; lastly mix in ten egg-whites, beaten to a very stiff froth. Transfer this preparation into a buttered and sugared dome-shaped mold with a tube in its center; set it into a saucepan with water reaching to half its height, and place the saucepan on the fire for the water to come to a boil, then finish cooking in the oven for forty minutes. As soon as the pudding is done unmold it on a dish and cover over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) diluted with a little Madeira wine; serve with a sauce -boatful of sauce or punch made as follows: Put in a saucepan a gill and a half of brandy, a gill and a half of rum, a gill of vanilla syrup, the peel of a lemon and of an orange and a small bit of cinnamon. Just when ready to serve heat without boiling and then set it on the fire for a few seconds to burn out the alcohol; cover the saucepan at once to extinguish the fire, and serve. (3109). SCHILLER PUDDING (Pouding à la Schiller). Prepare twelve to fifteen large pancakes and with some of them line a liberally buttered cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150). Cover half of the remaining pancakes with a layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and the other half with frangipane cream (No. 43); roll these pancakes up separately into rolls and cut them into three-quarter inch thick slices; range these in alternate layers inside the mold with a few candied cherries washed in hot water interspersed between. Put in a vessel twelve yolks and two whole eggs, also six ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ); beat up well and then stir in a quart of milk. Pass it through a fine wire strainer into the mold. Lay the mold in water reaching to half its height; set it on the fire and when it comes to a boil put it into a slack oven to cook for one hour; remove, let stand and unmold on a dish; brush the pudding over with apricot marmalade and serve with a sauce -boat of English cream and vanilla sauce ( No. 3004 ). (3110). SPANISH PUDDING (Pouding à l'Espagnole). Put four ounces of clarified butter into a saucepan and heat it well, then add to it eight ounces of white bread-crumbs and let it cook until it becomes a fine golden color, while stirring it from time to time with a spatula; withdraw the saucepan from the fire and dilute the preparation with a gill of milk and a gill of cream and dry it for a few moments over the fire. Add to it the peel of one lemon, a pinch of salt, a tablespoonful of rum, three ounces of sugar and six egg-yolks; stir well and lastly mix in the well-beaten whites of six eggs. Butter and sugar a dome-shaped cylindrical mold, fill it up with the preparation and place it in a saucepan with boiling water to half its height; set the saucepan on the fire to have the liquid come to a boil, then withdraw it at once and push it into a slack oven so that the pudding can cook for forty-five minutes. When this is accomplished take it out and let it stand from five to six minutes; unmold on a dish and cover with an English cream vanilla sauce ( No. 3004 ) with rum added; serve more of the sauce apart. (3111). TYROLEAN PUDDING (Pouding à la Tyrolienne). Soften five ounces of beef marrow, run it through a sieve into a vessel and beat it up to a cream, adding five egg-yolks and five whole eggs, one at a time. As this becomes frothy put into it six ounces of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), six ounces of grated chocolate, six ounces of lady finger crumbs soaked in a gill and three-quarters of double cream, three ounces of Smyrna raisins well cleansed and washed in hot water, and lastly beat in six very stiff egg-whites. Butter and sugar a dome-shaped mold with a cylindrical center, fill it with the preparation and place it in a bain-marie in a saucepan; bring the water to a boil, then push it into a slack oven to cook for forty to forty-five minutes; take it from the oven and let stand for a few moments before unmolding on a dish; cover over with chocolate sauce and serve more of the same separately. Chocolate Sauce. --Dilute two ounces of chocolate with two gills of water and a gill of vanilla syrup; let boil, then strain through a fine strainer and add one gill of rich cream. (3112). PUDDING WITH ALMONDS--LIGHT (Pouding Léger aux Amandes). Dissolve ten ounces of fine wheat and rice flour (half of each) in one and a half pints of almond milk (No. 4). Strain this liquid into a saucepan and add to it salt, half a pound of sugar and three ounces of butter. Cook the preparation, avoid all lumps and do not cease to stir until it detaches from the saucepan, then take it off and pour it into a vessel; incorporate with it slowly twelve egg-yolks, beating them in vigorously, and then add five ounces more butter, four ounces of finely pounded almonds, the peel of an orange, and finally nine well-beaten egg-whites. Butter some dome-shaped pudding molds, having them wider than their height, cover the interior sides with small flat round pieces of lady fingers cut out with a cutter and fill the hollow space three-quarters full with the preparation; poach the puddings for fifty minutes in a bain-marie with the vessel covered, and before removing push them into a slack oven to dry the tops. Take them out FIG. 583 A dome-shaped almond pudding fastened with a hatelet composed of candied pineapple on top of it. This entree is dressed on a metal plate. and unmold five minutes after on a hot dish; cover them lightly with an apricot sauce made with rum ( No. 3001 ), and in each pudding insert a small hatelet composed of three graduated rounds of candied pineapple. Serve separately an apricot sauce mingled with almond milk, the same as for Plumery pudding ( No. 3104 ). This quantity is sufficient for ten persons. (3113). PUDDING WITH BURNT ALMONDS--SOUFFLéD (Pouding Soufflé aux Pralines). Sift six ounces of rice flour in a saucepan; dissolve it with a pint of boiling milk and thicken the preparation over the fire, stirring vigorously with a wooden spoon; when it detaches from the side of the saucepan take it off and add to it one ounce of butter, four ounces of burnt almonds ground to a dust and passed through a sieve, a pinch of salt, six ounces of sugar, eight egg-yolks, two tablespoonfuls of whipped cream, and finally six very stiffly whipped egg-whites. Butter and sugar a dome-shaped cylindrical mold, fill it up in layers, alternating the preparation with slices of Savoy biscuit or lady fingers soaked in maraschino and quarters of candied apricots well washed in hot water. When the mold is full set it in a bain-marie and let the water come to a boil, then finish cooking for forty minutes in a slow oven. As soon as the pudding is unmolded on a dish cover it with apricot sauce made with almond milk (No. 4) and maraschino, serving more of it in a bowl. For this sauce see light pudding with almond milk ( No. 3104 ). (3114). PUDDING WITH HAZEL- NUTS --SOUFFLéD (Pouding Soufflé aux Noisettes). Dilute in a saucepan seven or eight spoonfuls of rice fecula with four to six gills of hazel- nut milk, prepared the same as almond milk (No. 4); add to it a grain of salt and a piece of butter; thicken the preparation over the fire, stirring it about with a spoon; after it attains the consistency of a soufflé preparation remove and add to it a quarter of a pound of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) and a quarter of a pound of butter, then ten egg-yolks, one whole egg, two spoonfuls of whipped cream and four egg-whites beaten to a stiff froth. Butter a timbale mold, fill it with the preparation laid in alternate layers with slices of biscuit cut very thin, cover over with some apricot marmalade ( No. 3675) , and when the mold is full set it in a saucepan containing hot water to reach to half its height, then poach for three-quarters of an hour in a bain-marie. At the last moment unmold it on a dish and cover with English cream with almonds and vanilla (No. 42), serving more of the sauce ( No. 3004 ) separately. (3115). RICE WITH APPLES (Riz aux Pommes). Prepare some minced apples, the same as for an apple charlotte ( No. 3008 ), not having them too sweet. Blanch eight ounces of picked and washed rice, drain on a sieve, refresh and put it in a saucepan with some milk; cook it slowly without stirring, keeping it slightly consistent, and lastly mix in four ounces of powdered lemon sugar, a few spoonfuls of cream and a piece of butter; remove to a much slower fire in order to allow the liquid to become entirely absorbed, then take up the rice with a spoon and place it in layers on a deep dish, alternating each one with a layer of the apples, giving the whole a dome shape, and finishing with the rice. Dredge the top with cinnamon or vanilla sugar and serve at once. Sugar Flavored with Vanilla. --Have four ounces of vanilla beans , split them in two, chop and pound them in a mortar with a pound and a half of loaf sugar until exceedingly fine, then pass through a fine hair sieve. Keep in a hermetically closed box in a dry place until needed for use. (3116). RISSOLES WITH PRESERVES AND WITH ALMOND CREAM (Rissoles à la Confiture et à la Crème d'Amandes). Roll out into a square layer, an eighth of an inch in thickness, one pound of fine short paste (No. 135) or puff paste parings (No. 146); cut the edges straight and range on the top at desired distances apart small balls of any kind of thick marmalade; wet the paste to form the rissoles (No. 161), and when they are cut out press down the borders of the paste with the fingers in order to diminish its thickness, then cut the rissoles again with the same pastry cutter, so as to have them all alike, and fasten the paste together. Dip them in beaten eggs, roll in bread-crumbs and plunge into hot fat. Cook them slowly, drain and roll in vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), then dress on a folded napkin. With Almond Cream. --Prepare the rissoles the same as for the above, replacing the preserves by small balls of almond cream (No. 40) placed an inch and a half from the edges and at the same distance from one another; finish them exactly the same. (3117). SAVARIN WITH APRICOTS (Savarin aux Abricots). Sift one pound of flour into a warm vessel, make a leaven with a quarter of the flour and half an ounce of yeast dissolved in tepid water; cover it over with a part of the flour and let rise in a mild heat. When it has risen to double its primitive volume remove from the warm place and break it up with the hand to make the sponge, giving the paste plenty of body. Mix into it gradually eight whole eggs and six separate yolks, and working in the flour knead it vigorously for ten minutes, then add slowly half a pound of melted butter, six ounces of sugar, a grain of salt, lemon peel and lastly four spoonfuls of raw cream. Take up the paste in small parts with the hands and fill one or several buttered Savarin molds three-quarters full; let rise as high as the edges in a mild temperature, then bake the cakes in a moderate oven. As soon as they are removed moisten them with syrup infused with lemon or orange peel and any desired liqueur, then drain on a dish, cover with Madeira apricot sauce, filling the hollows with hot stewed apricots. Serve an apricot sauce with Madeira apart, the same as for Humboldt pudding ( No. 3100 ). (3118). SOUFFLé OF CHESTNUTS WITH VANILLA (Soufflé de Marrons à la Vanille). Skin half a pound of raw chestnuts, then grate them; pound three ounces of almonds with four ounces of powdered vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ). Beat in a bowl four ounces of fresh butter, mixing into it six or seven egg-yolks, and when the preparation is frothy add the chestnuts, sugar and almonds, then five or six beaten whites. Pour all this into a buttered soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) and cook it for three-quarters of an hour in a slack oven; glaze over with sugar before removing and serve without delay. (3119). SOUFFLé OF CHOCOLATE (Soufflé au Chocolat). Melt in a saucepan at the oven door, in a little tepid water, four ounces of grated chocolate; remove and pour it into a bowl to smooth nicely; mix into it five or six spoonfuls of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), beating it in vigorously, then add four or five spoonfuls of the following preparation: Place in a tureen two tablespoonfuls of flour, a pinch of arrowroot, two tablespoonfuls of sugar and a little salt; dilute with half a gill of milk; strain into a saucepan and add two tablespoonfuls of melted butter and a little vanilla; stir on the fire until it boils and when smooth reduce till it is consistent and detaches from the pan; take out the vanilla and let partly cool. Add eight raw egg-yolks, two ounces of melted butter, four beaten whites and three spoonfuls of whipped cream. When all these ingredients are well incorporated pour the preparation into one or two soufflé pans ( Fig. 182) without filling them too high. Set the pan on a small baking sheet and bake the soufflés in a slack oven from twenty to twenty-five minutes. (3120). SOFFLéS IN CASES WITH VANILLA OR ORANGE --SMALL (Petits Soufflés en Caisses à la Vanille ou à l' Orange ). Put into a vessel four spoonfuls of flour, a pinch of fecula, four spoonfuls of sugar and a grain of salt; dilute with two and a half gills of milk, then strain it into a saucepan, adding a lump of butter the size of an egg and a piece of vanilla; stir on a slow fire until it comes to a boil and when smooth reduce until it detaches easily from the saucepan, then take out the vanilla, and let the preparation get almost cold before stirring in another piece of butter and five to six egg-yolks one after the other, while continuing to beat briskly; lastly add the beaten whites and three spoonfuls of whipped cream. With this mixture fill some soufflé cases ( Fig. 584) two-thirds full, range them on a small baking sheet and place in a slack oven to cook for twenty minutes. Serve just as quickly as they leave the oven. FIG. 584 An illustration of a rectangular paper case. FIG. 585 An illustration of a soffle in a paper case. With Orange. --Instead of vanilla, flavor the soufflés with two tablespoonfuls of orange sugar (No. 3165). (3121). SOUFFLé OF RICE WITH MARASCHINO (Soufflé de Riz au Marasquin). Boil six ounces of rice in plenty of water; drain and set it in a vessel and pour a little maraschino over. Prepare a vanilla soufflé preparation ( No. 3120 ) and after the egg-whites have been mixed in, dress it in layers in a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182), alternating each one with a small part of the well-drained rice. When the soufflé pan is three-quarters full place it on a baking sheet and push it into a well heated oven; three minutes later remove to split the shape of a cross on top and return it to the oven to let cook for twenty-five minutes more, glazing it over with fresh butter. Serve as soon as it is taken from the oven, as soufflés should never be left waiting to be served. (3122). SOUFFLé WITH RASPBERRIES (Soufflé aux Framboises). Place seven ounces of rather stiff raspberry jelly in a small basin and mix slowly in with it seven ounces of powdered sugar so as to obtain a consistent preparation, then incorporate one after the other four to five unbeaten egg-whites, stirring up the whole vigorously with a whisk for twenty minutes. When this is frothy and firm color it with a few drops of vegetable carmine (No. 37) and pour it into a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) to cook for forty minutes in a very slack oven. Five minutes before removing the soufflé from the oven glaze it with sugar, set it on a hot dish and cover with a large hot dish cover; serve it immediately. (3123). TIMBALE à LA FIGARO (Timbale à la Figaro). Cut one pound of short paste (No. 135) into four pieces; roll them on the table into long quarter-inch thick strings and dip these strings as fast as they are done in melted clarified butter; arrange them in a spiral around the inside of a timbale mold, being careful to fasten the ends securely with beaten eggs. Leave the timbale rest for half an hour in a cool place, then fill it up in alternate layers of apples cut in quarters, cooked in butter, and masked with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and frangipane (No. 44) with almonds. Cover over with a flat of short paste, egg the surface, and set it in the oven to cook for forty-five minutes. One moment before serving turn the timbale out on a dish, cover it with hot apricot marmalade, and strew over finely chopped pistachios and almonds, then decorate the top with rosette of angelica lozenges, having a greengage in the center; surround the base of the dome with brandied greengages. Heat the whole for ten minutes in the oven, and serve with an apricot kirsch sauce ( No. 3001 ). (3124). ZEPHYR OF RICE WITH PINEAPPLE (Zéphyr de Riz à l'Ananas). Cook half a pound of blanched rice in milk; when sweetened withdraw it to a slower fire to let attain more consistency, and then finish with a large piece of fresh butter divided in pats. Ten minutes later incorporate into it two or three spoonfuls of crushed chestnuts and six egg-yolks, one after the other, and lastly the half of five beaten whites mixed with three spoonfuls of whipped cream. Add to this preparation five to six spoonfuls of candied pineapple cut in small dice, and pour the whole into a timbale mold previously buttered and glazed with fine sugar and fecula. Lay the mold in a saucepan on a small trivet with hot water reaching to a third of its height, and boil the liquid; remove it to a much lower fire or else to a slack oven, and cook the zephyr for three-quarters of an hour. Finally unmold it on a dish and surround with small slices of preserved pineapple; cover these with vanilla syrup, and serve a sauce -boat of pineapple sauce as for Roman triumvirate fritters ( No. 3050 ). SWEET ENTREMETS--COLD (Entremets de Douceur--Froids). (3125). GLAZED APPLES (Pommes Glacées). Choose a few small, even-sized apples; empty the centers with a column tube five-eighths of an inch in diameter, peel and cook them in slightly sweetened acidulated water. In order to have them remain whole it is advisable to cook scarcely boiling, and to keep them covered. Drain and place them in a vessel, pouring a little syrup over; leave to cool. When cold drain and cover them several times with a brush dipped in lukewarm apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) so that it adheres to the apples, and cover them completely; decorate around the tops with a circle of small dots of angelica. Fill the hole in the center with candied cherries or fruit jelly, such as quince, currant or apple, or use all mingled together; arrange the apples in a pyramid on a dish. FIG. 586 An illustration of a plate of glazed apples arranged in a pyramid form, and is decorated with small dots of angelica around them. (3126). GLAZED MARMALADE of APPLES (Marmelade de Pommes Glacée). Cut a few good russet apples in four, peel and put them into a saucepan with a little water; dissolve on a slow fire while covered, then pass through a sieve; return the purée to the saucepan with two-thirds as much powdered sugar and a tied bunch of lemon peel. Set the saucepan on the fire and let the marmalade reduce while stirring unceasingly with a spoon. When perfect remove the lemon peel, and after it is nearly cold pour it into a dish, smooth it dome-shaped with a knife and sprinkle fine sugar over the top; glaze this with a skewer heated in the fire, cool off and surround the base with triangles of biscuit, placing a flat rosette of the same on the summit of the apples. (3127). FROTHY PURéE OF APPLES (Purée de Pommes Mousseuse). Peel six fine apples, cut them up small and cook in a covered saucepan, keeping them very white and adding four spoonfuls of water, a bit of lemon peel and two cloves. When melted press them through a fine sieve, then add seven or eight dissolved gelatine leaves, the juice of four or five lemons and eight or ten ounces of powdered sugar; beat the preparation well on ice with a whip until it whitens and becomes quite frothy, then add a salpicon of candied fruits, and pour this into a mold incrusted in chopped ice. One hour later dip the mold in hot water, unmold the contents on a cold dish and pour over a cold apple syrup flavored with lemon peel. Apple Syrup. --This syrup is made with the liquid in which apples have been cooked and half its weight of sugar added; flavor with lemon or orange peel, boil until it attains the consistency of light jelly, then strain and cool. It is now ready to be used. (3128). BUCKET OF WAFFLES WITH CREAM (Baquet de Gaufres à la Crème). Prepare a waffle preparation the same as for the timbale of wafers ( No. 3222 ); spread it in a layer on a waxed baking sheet, having it about one-sixteenth of an inch in thickness, and bake it partly, then remove from the oven and cut from it twenty-five uprights, each three-quarters of an inch wide and four inches long, and two others an inch and a half wide by five and a quarter inches long; bore a hole with a thin tube five-eighths of an inch in diameter through these two, and also cut a round bottom piece six inches in diameter. As soon as all these are cut return the sheet to the oven to finish baking the waffles; when of a fine color remove and leave to get thoroughly cold on a marble. Have a timbale mold six inches in diameter; lay the round piece on the bottom and arrange the high pieces against the sides, having the two longest and bored ones exactly opposite to each other, fastening them all on with cooked sugar. When cold unmold the bucket and encircle it with two bands of almond paste (No. 125) in imitation of hoops, having one slightly above the bottom and the other a short distance from the top; slip the bucket on a dish and when ready to serve fill it full of whipped cream flavored with vanilla. (3129). BASKET OF NOUGAT WITH CREAM (Corbeille en Nougat à la Crème). To prepare this dessert it requires a basket mold that opens in two or three parts; oil it over with a brush. Peel half a pound of almonds, wipe dry and mince them crossways; dry in a slack heater for twenty-four hours. Put a quarter of a pound of sugar in a copper pan with the juice of two lemons; stand it on a slow fire, stir with a wooden spoon till melted and of a nice yellow tint, then mix in the very hot almonds; take from the fire when the almonds and sugar form one mass. Put a part of this on an oiled baking sheet, roll it out thin with the blade of a knife, and then apply it to the inside surfaces of the basket mold; close and clip off all the nougat extending beyond the edges, and when very cold unmold and trim it with the nougat rings to serve as handles. Fill it with whipped cream flavored with vanilla, having fresh strawberries mingled in; stick here and there small pieces of angelica and dress the basket on a folded napkin. FIG. 587 A plate with a basket filled by nougat that is dressed on a folded napkin. (3130). BASKET OF ORANGES WITH JELLY (Paniers d' Oranges à la Gelée). Select twelve even-sized oranges, cut them into basket shapes, leaving a handle on the center; empty them with a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) and around them make a small border, scoring the peel with a knife or small punch made for this purpose (see Andalusian Sherbet, No. 2321 ); plunge these into boiling water for a minute; remove at once and throw them into cold water to refresh, then suppress all the inside white skin so that the jelly cannot acquire any of its bitterness. Stand them upright on a baking sheet covered with chopped ice and as soon as cold fill them with orange jelly ( No. 3187 ), but slightly thickened and colored with a little carmine; put the sheet and its contents into the ice-box so that the jelly stiffens thoroughly. Dress on a folded napkin or on a stand and trim the handles with variegated ribbons. (3131). CHOCOLATE BAVAROIS (Bavarois au Chocolat). Make an English cream with a pint of milk, four egg-yolks, four ounces of sugar, and half a vanilla bean, proceeding the same as for No. 3135 ; as soon as finished pour it slowly over two ounces of chocolate dissolved in a few spoonfuls of water, then add one ounce of gelatine melted in a little water. As soon as the chocolate and gelatine are both well dissolved strain the whole through a fine strainer into a tin basin and set it on the ice, stirring constantly until cold, and when it begins to thicken take it off and incorporate three pints of whipped cream, having it firm and well drained. Fill a jelly mold incrusted on ice with this preparation; let the bavarois harden for two hours, and when serving dip the mold quickly into hot water and invert on a cold dish. (3132). BAVAROIS IN SURPRISE (Bavarois en Surprise). Coat a jelly mold incrusted in pounded ice with maraschino jelly ( No. 3186 ), and decorate the bottom and sides with white split almonds, then coat the mold once more with a thick layer of chocolate bavarois preparation ( No. 3131 ); as soon as this is set fill the hollow center with a vanilla bavarois, into which has been mixed a few spoonfuls of freshly peeled and cut up pistachios. Lay a round of paper over and cover with a deep lid filled with chopped ice; leave the bavarois to get thoroughly cold for an hour and a half. Just when ready to serve dip it speedily into hot water and turn it over on a cold dish. Surround the base with small Genoese cakes ( No. 3307 ) iced with strawberry fondant ( No. 3652 ) flavored with kirsch, and decorate with a rosette of halved pistachios. (3133). BAVAROIS WITH MERINGUES (Bavarois aux Meringues). Prepare a vanilla bavarois, the same as for No. 3135 ; pour it into a dozen oval ballotine molds and set them in the ice-box to have their contents get quite hard. When ready to serve unmold the bavarois, and range them in a circle on a dish, keeping them a slight distance apart. On either side of each one place two small meringue shells (No. 116) well scooped out and very dry. (3134). RASPBERRY BAVAROIS (Bavarois aux Framboises). Put into a bowl one pint of raspberry pulp strained through a tammy, dilute it with three or four gills of cold, thick syrup flavored with lemon and an equal quantity of clarified isinglass. Add to this preparation the strained juice of two oranges. Put a small part on ice to judge of its solidity (it must be rather thick than otherwise), and when perfect pour it into a small untinned copper pan, and thicken it on ice while stirring. As soon as it has acquired the consistency of a thick, smooth sauce, take it off and add to it a pint and a half of firm and well-drained whipped cream. Use this preparation to fill either a jelly mold ( Fig. 149) or a plain cylindrical mold incrusted in chopped ice; cover with a piece of paper and lay on a deep cover, filling it with more chopped ice, then leave to harden for one hour. Unmold on a cold dish after dipping the mold in hot water. Various bavaroises of different fruit pulps can be prepared the same way, such as pineapple, mandarins, currants, almonds and fresh nuts. The mold may be coated on the inside with a light layer of oil of sweet almonds, thus avoiding the necessity of dipping it in hot water. (3135). VANILLA BAVAROIS (Bavarois à la Vanille). Boil one pint of milk with half a split vanilla bean. Whip four egg-yolks well in a basin with six ounces of sugar, dilute them with the boiling milk, and pour the whole into a saucepan to stir over a moderate fire without letting it boil. Remove the cream from the fire as soon as it thickens, take out the vanilla, and add two gelatine leaves (one ounce) previously softened in cold water. When this is melted pass the whole through a fine wire sieve into a tin basin and leave to cool on ice. As it begins to thicken mix in about three pints of cream, whipped and drained. Fill a jelly mold ( Fig. 149) incrusted on ice with this, put on it a round of paper, and then let the bavarois harden for two hours. At the last moment dip the mold in hot water, and invert it on a cold dish. (3136). BAVAROIS WITH CHESTNUTS (Bavarois aux Marrons). Suppress the shells from one pound of good, fresh chestnuts; put them with some water into a saucepan and let cook on a slow fire for two hours, being careful to replace the black liquid by c lean boiling water. After the chestnuts are tender, drain, skin and pound them in a mortar with half a pint of syrup at twenty-five degrees, to reduce them to a fine paste, and press this paste through a sieve into a tin basin. Put four egg-yolks into a bowl and beat them up with four ounces of sugar; dilute with a pint of boiling milk into which has been added half a vanilla bean; pour this into a saucepan and place it on the fire, beating it with a whip until it begins to thicken; then remove at once and add an ounce and a half of gelatine, softened in cold water; when this is dissolved, pass the preparation through a fine wire sieve and add it to the chestnuts in the basin, putting it on pounded ice and beating well till cold. As soon as it begins to thicken incorporate into it a quart and a half of firmly whipped and drained cream; then pour it into a channeled cylindrical mold ( Fig. 148) incrusted in ice. Let it harden for an hour and a half. Just when serving dip the mold quickly into hot water and invert the cream on a cold dish, surrounding the base with fine glazed chestnuts. (3137). CREAM BISCUIT --SMALL (Petits Biscuits à la Crème). Take some oval-shaped lady fingers and as many more shaped round like a bouchée; cover the edges with a thin layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); soak the oval ones lightly with maraschino and dress them in a circle on the outer edge of a deep dish; in the center of this place the round biscuits in intermingled layers after they have also been soaked in maraschino, and cover each one of these with a rather consistent English cream (No. 42) prepared with lemon peel and beaten for seven or eight minutes on ice, then mixed with a few spoonfuls of whipped cream. (3138). BLANC-MANGE à LA SMOLENSKA (Blanc-Manger à la Smolenska). Soften one ounce of gelatine in cold water and dissolve it in a gill of orange syrup; add to it a pint of filbert milk, made like almond milk (No. 4), substituting filberts for almonds, and strain into a tin basin. Let this preparation become cold on ice, and just as it begins to thicken incorporate about three pints of well- whipped cream. Pour this into a dome-shaped mold, cover with a sheet of paper, close hermetically with a lid, and chill in lightly salted ice. One hour will suffice for this operation. Unmold on a cold dish and serve. (3139). STRAWBERRY BLANC-MANGE (Blanc-Manger aux Fraises). Pound half a pound of freshly peeled almonds, a few at a time; dilute with a quart of cold milk and press the whole slowly through a napkin held by two persons, so as to extract all the liquid thoroughly; mix into this almond milk three-quarters of a pound of powdered sugar, some lemon peel or half a split vanilla bean, and a quarter of an hour later put into the liquid fifteen clarified gelatine leaves. Strain and try a little on ice to judge of its strength. Incrust a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) on ice, coat it with clear jelly mixed with strawberry FIG. 588 A blanc-mange placed in the middle of a dish and with timbales garnished around the base. Pieces of halves strawberries are decorated on top of the blanc-mange in a ring form. or orange juice and filtered through blotting paper. Stir on ice two-thirds of the blanc-mange to thicken it slightly, using a spoon, and as soon as perfect mix in a fine salpicon of candied pineapple; pour this into the coated mold and leave it stand for one hour. Thicken the remainder of the preparation on ice, and with it fill five small timbale molds (No. 2, Fig. 137), also incrusted on a thick bed of ice spread over the bottom of a deep sautoir. Three-quarters of an hour later empty out the centers of the small molds with a tin tube dipped in hot water; to remove these pieces it is only necessary to heat the bottom of the molds slightly; replace them on ice and fill the center with some of the same preparation mingled with strawberry juice ( No. 3673 ); let this get hard. Unmold the small timbales and cut each one across in three parts. Dip the large mold quickly into hot water; invert on a cold dish and surround the base with the rings, then fill up the hollow with Chantilly cream (No. 50), flavored with almonds, having it dome-shaped. Surround this dome with a few large strawberries, each one cut in two and dressed flat to resemble a rosette. Serve at the same time a bowlful of strawberry purée sweetened with syrup, having it very cold. (3140). CAROLINA BORDER WITH CHAMPAGNE (Bordure Caroline au Champagne). Make an apricot "pain" preparation ( No. 3194 ) a little thicker than usual, into which add the same quantity of rice cooked with cream and vanilla (No. 160), and a few spoonfuls of whipped cream (No. 50); pour it into a Savarin mold, incrusted in pounded ice. Beside this, prepare and mold a macédoine jelly with champagne the same as for No. 3179 , having it in a dome the same diameter at the bottom as the hollow in the Savarin mold; put this macédoine in the ice-box to stiffen. One moment before serving unmold the border on a cold dish and in the center place a pad of Genoese cake ( No. 3239 ), reaching three-quarters to the top; into this unmold the champagne macédone and surround the base with a circle of croûtons made of ribboned jelly ( No. 3184 ). (3141). CHâTEAU FRAMBOISé (Château Framboisé). Fasten a round layer of office paste (No. 143) on a dish and on it place a charlotte mold half an inch narrower than the paste. Prepare a cream cake paste (No. 132) with five ounces of butter, three gills of water, seven ounces of flour, a spoonful of sugar, lemon peel, a grain of salt and five eggs. Put this paste into a socket pocket ( Fig. 179), and put it on a baking sheet in the shape of thin even eclairs as long as the mold is high; then bake them in a slack oven until dry, then allow to cool. After the cakes are detached from the sheet, keep them warm for a few moments. When cold, open and fill them with raspberry jam ( No. 3678 ) pushed through a cornet, and glaze over with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171). As this becomes cold dip one end and one side into the same sugar so as to enable them to stand upright on the layer of office paste around the mold. When the sugar is cold lift out the mold and fill the inside of the case with a raspberry bavarois preparation, the same as for No. 3134 , thickened on ice, and lastly having a salpicon of candied pineapple added to it. (3142). CHARLOTTE BENGALIAN (Charlotte Bengalienne). Cook a flat of Genoese paste ( No. 3239 ), having it about three-eighths of an inch thick; invert it on a sheet of paper, pare off the upper crust and divide it into two bands, each to be two and three-quarters inches wide; cut one of these bands into short uprights slightly inclined toward the right, having them half an inch wide, and the other band the same width, only inclined toward the left. Put a round piece of paper in the bottom of a charlotte mold, against its sides range a row of these uprights, inclining them according to their cut and alternating those with crusts with those without them. On this first row range a second the same way, only inclining the uprights in the opposite direction. Fill the charlotte with a banana "pain" preparation ( No. 3195 ), and let harden in the ice-box for an hour and a half. Unmold the dessert on a dish, and just when ready to serve place a spun sugar ornament on top. (3143). CHARLOTTE OF CALVILLE APPLES (Charlotte de Pommes de Calville). Cut in four pieces eight or ten Calville apples; peel and cook them in a covered saucepan with a little water, very little sugar, a bit of lemon peel and half a vanilla bean. When done and all the moisture is evaporated, press them through a sieve. Cover the bottom of a charlotte mold with lady finger biscuits, or else butter biscuit for charlotte, cooked on a baking sheet covered with paper, three-eighths of an inch thick and cut up into long triangles, and form them into a rosette without any open space whatever between the pieces. From the same biscuits cut some even upright pieces three inches wide and the same height as the mold, which should be kept on ice. Pour the apple pulp into a round-bottomed pan and dilute with a gill of syrup mingled with a sheet and a half of gelatine that has been softened and dissolved. Stir the preparation on ice to thicken, and as soon as it begins to set pour in quickly two or three spoonfuls of good rum and then a quart of whipped cream. Two minutes after turn this into the charlotte mold and surround it with chopped ice, leaving it thus for one hour, and when needed unmold the charlotte on a folded napkin. (3144). CHARLOTTE à LA METTERNICH (Charlotte à la Metternich). Prepare a paste made by beating three whole eggs in a basin, and when creamy add half a pound of sugar, as much sifted flour, a pinch of fecula and some orange sugar ( No. 3165 ). The paste should be quite firm. Then force it through a pocket on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet, having the pieces resemble lady fingers all of the same size, and bake in a moderate oven. Detach them from the sheet and cut one end off of about forty and leave till cold leaning against a support, so as to have them slightly bent on the uncut ends. Dip the cut end of each biscuit into sugar cooked to "small crack" (No. 171), drain it off and fasten the cakes upright against the thickness of a round flat of office paste; fasten each piece with cooked sugar, overlapping them slightly so that they form a pretty basket spread out open on the top. When the sugar is quite cold dress the basket on a dish and fill it with chestnut purée sweetened with vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) and then mingled with whipped cream. Surround the base with candied chestnuts dipped in sugar cooked to "small crack." (3145). CHARLOTTE RUSSE (Charlotte Russe). Lay a round sheet of white paper at the bottom of a charlotte mold and line it all around with well-pared lady fingers ( No. 3377 ). Boil a pint of milk with half a split vanilla bean; beat up in a vessel six egg-yolks with six ounces of sugar and dilute the preparation with the boiling milk; pour it at once into the saucepan and thicken over a moderate fire without letting it come to a boil. Then take out the vanilla and add two leaves of gelatine softened in cold water then melted in a gill of boiling water. Run the whole through a fine Chinese strainer into a vessel and leave to cool until it begins to thicken slightly. Then mix with it the volume of three pints of whipped cream and pouring it at once into the charlotte mold cover with another round of paper and place the mold on ice for an hour and a half. When ready to use invert the charlotte on a cold dish covered with a napkin, remove the upper paper and place on top a cover, made with the same paste as the lady fingers, cut the same dimension as the charlotte, icing it with a white vanilla icing (No. 102) and decorate with a handsome design of preserved fruits or with royal icing. (3146). CHARLOTTE WITH STRAWBERRIES OR RASPBERRIES (Charlotte aux Fraises ou aux Framboises). Cut a few large lady fingers or charlotte biscuits ( No. 3377 ) into long triangles so as to be able to place them in the shape of a rosette in the bottom of a charlotte mold, pressing them down on their glazed side; cut out the center with a pastry cutter one and a quarter inches in diameter; replace this cut-out piece with a round of biscuit cut with the same cutter; then cut off the ends and sides of a few of the same biscuits so as to stand them upright against the sides of the mold, pressing them close to each other. Incrust the mold in ice. Strain first through a sieve and then through a tammy about two pounds of strawberries or raspberries; sweeten this pulp with some thick syrup flavored with orange peel and mixed with about two gelatine leaves or clear melted calf 's foot jelly (No. 104); stir the preparation on ice and as soon as it thickens incorporate into it slowly the volume of a pint and a half of very firm, well-drained and slightly sweetened whipped cream. Fill up the mold with this and let harden for one hour on ice. At the last moment dip the mold into tepid water and invert the charlotte on a napkin. (3147). CHESTNUTS WITH CREAM (Marrons à la Crème). Shell a few dozen sound chestnuts; scald them in order to remove the inner skin, then cook them very slowly in milk containing a piece of vanilla bean. When done all the liquid ought to be evaporated. Rub them through a sieve to make a purée. Put this purée into a saucepan with half its weight of sugar; work the paste on a slow fire until it becomes consistent and detaches from the saucepan; leave it till partly cold, then run a little of it at a time through a coarse sieve, pressing it down with a large spoon so that it falls like vermicelli; lift it up with a palette, dress it in a circle on the bottom of a dish and in the center build a pyramid of whipped cream, sweetened and flavored with vanilla. (3148). CORNETS OF ORANGE CREAM (Cornets, Oublies, Plaisirs de Crème à l' Orange ). Pound eight ounces of shelled and peeled almonds with eight ounces of sugar and four egg-whites to obtain a fine paste; add to it two ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), two ounces of flour and eight lightly beaten egg-whites. Dress this paste on a waxed baking sheet, laying it with a tablespoonful into thin round wafers four inches in diameter, and bake them in a hot oven. When of a fine golden color remove them from the oven and roll them around some tin cornet forms and leave till cold. Dress in a pyramid on a dish covered with a napkin and fill each one with whipped cream flavored with orange. (3149). CREAM BAIN-MARIE--MOLDED (Crème au Bain-Marie Moulée). Put into a bright copper pan two spoonfuls of powdered sugar, stir it on a slow fire until it becomes a fine yellow color, then pour it into the bottom of a low charlotte mold and let get cold. Break seven or eight eggs in a bowl with five or six yolks; beat them up for two minutes, then dilute with a quart of milk, adding ten ounces of powdered sugar and a little lemon peel. Ten minutes later strain it twice through a sieve. Butter the sides of the mold, pour the preparation in, place it in a saucepan on a small trivet and pour hot water around to reach up to half the height of the mold, then bring to a boil; remove the saucepan to a slower fire, and cover it over; place some hot cinders on the saucepan lid and let poach for one hour at least without allowing the water to boil. Remove the saucepan and let the cream get partly cold before taking it from the water, then unmold on a dish. (3150). MALAKOFF CREAM (Crème Malakoff). Have eighteen to twenty ounces of Genoese cake ( No. 3239 ) or biscuit ( No. 3231 ) cut into not too thick slices. Cut up some candied fruits, such as apricots, greengages and pineapple, in small dice, adding whole candied cherries. With seven or eight egg-yolks, a pint of milk and ten ounces of sugar prepare an English cream (No. 42); when thick and nearly cold mix with it four spoonfuls of dissolved gelatine, strain and stir on ice to reduce it to the correct consistency (it must be very light); then mix with it five or six spoonfuls of whipped cream. Incrust a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) on ice. Soak the sliced biscuit half with rum and the other half with kirsch or Curaçoa; spread them in layers in the pan and pour the cream over; bestrew with the candied fruits, and repeat until the pan is entirely full and forms a dome on top; keep it on ice for half an hour. Cover the dome with a thin coat of raspberry marmalade ( No. 3678 ), then cover with sweetened and flavored whipped cream; decorate with the same cream, and place the pan on a napkin to serve at once. (3151). CREAM of RICE WITH ANGELICA (Crème de Riz à l'Angélique). Pick and wash four ounces of good rice and cook it till tender (keeping the grains whole) with a pint and a half of milk into which has been added half a split vanilla bean; pour it at once into a basin. Put into another vessel six egg-yolks, stir in six ounces of powdered sugar, and dilute with half a pint of boiling milk; pour this into a saucepan to thicken over the fire, and then add two ounces of gelatine softened in cold water, and as soon as the gelatine is dissolved strain the whole over the rice and mix well without stirring the rice more than necessary. At the same time incorporate four ounces of angelica previously washed in hot water, cut in small three-sixteenths of an inch dice, and steeped in maraschino. Set the preparation on ice to get thoroughly cold, and as soon as it begins to thicken stir in as much whipped cream; pour the whole into a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150), and keep it on ice for two hours. Unmold on a cold dish, and garnish around with lady bouchées ( No. 3376 ). (3152). SPANISH CREAM (Crème à l'Espagnole). Have eight egg-yolks in a vessel and mix in with them eight ounces of sugar; dilute with a quart of boiling milk, thicken on the fire, and remove at once to add to it two ounces of gelatine softened in cold water; leave it to cool off partly; now strain it into a tin basin, adding about half a pint of fine apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), diluted with a gill of rum. Have this preparation thicken on ice, mixing in with it one pint of whipped cream, and then pour it immediately into a jelly mold incrusted on ice. Unmold the cream when ready, and surround the base with triangular cuts of sweet jelly (No. 106). (3153). TUTTI-FRUTTI CREAM (Crème Tutti-Frutti). Cut a fine salpicon of preserved fruits in three-sixteenths of an inch dice pieces, such as peaches, apricots, pears, almonds, a little angelica, and whole candied cherries (demi-sucre), if small (if large cut in two). Sprinkle a little maraschino over, and leave to marinate for one hour. Have the volume of two quarts of whipped cream, add to it a gill of strawberry pulp, into which has been mixed a little melted gelatine, place it on ice and as soon as it begins to thicken add the fruits; stir them in very slowly, and pour the whole into a cylindrical timbale mold; cover it hermetically, cement the joints well with paste, and set it on lightly salted ice, leaving it to freeze for an hour and a half. When ready dip the mold quickly into hot water, and invert the cream on a cold dish; surround the base with a circle of brandied greengages and lozenges of angelica. (3154). CREAM WITH CHERRIES (Crème aux Cerises). Drain on a sieve a quart of very firm whipped cream sweetened and flavored with lemon. Remove the stones from some large, black, sweet and sound cherries; stew them with powdered sugar, then leave till cold; drain their syrup into a pan and let reduce until it becomes thick. Cover the bottom of a china dish with a layer of soft macaroons broken in pieces, spread the cherries over, and mask these with another ounce of macaroons; on this dress the cream in a dome; smooth and decorate through with the cornet, and serve the syrup separately. (3155). CREAM WITH LEMON PEEL IN POTS (Pots de Crème aux Zestes de Citron ). Fill eight small cream pots, half with cream and half with raw milk. Beat up in a bowl eight whole eggs and six more yolks, add five ounces of powdered sugar, a bit of grated lemon peel and a grain of salt; dilute slowly with the cream and milk; strain the liquid twice through a sieve and with it fill a dozen cream pots; place them in a flat saucepan with hot water reaching to half their height, and heat the water until it reaches boiling point. Then immediately remove the saucepan to a very slow fire so that the water only simmers twenty-five to thirty minutes while covered. Leave them in this until the cream becomes nearly cold, having withdrawn it from the fire. Wipe off the pots and dress them on a dish. (3156). CROWN à LA CAMPER (Couronne à la Camper). Coat a border mold with maraschino jelly ( No. 3186 ); fill it with a preparation the same as for "pain" of chestnut à la Béotie ( No. 3196 ), and leave to get quite cold on ice. Unmold when very firm on an exceedingly cold dish; fill the center of the crown three-quarters full with Bar-le-due jelly and finish filling with whipped cream flavored with maraschino, having it slightly sweetened; arrange this in a dome and decorate it through the cornet with some of the same cream; place it in an ice-box for one hour, then serve. (3157). CROWN à LA CHOISEUL (Couronne à la Choiseul). Cook in a plain shallow and narrow border mold some almond biscuit, the same as for No. 3229 . Unmold it on a small baking sheet and let get cold. Then cover over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and decorate it all around with fancy cuts of candied fruits. Incrust in pounded ice another border mold more fanciful and slightly wider than the one used for the biscuit; decorate the bottom of it with candied fruits and cover this with a layer of orange jelly ( No. 3180 ). When hard slip the biscuit into this mold upside down, and fill the empty space between the mold and the biscuit with more of the cold jelly. One hour after dip the mold in hot water and wipe and invert the dessert on a cold dish; fill the center with a pyramid of quartered oranges pared to the pulp, the pith and seeds extracted and then macerated in sugar. Dress this pyramid in layers, pouring some thick orange peel syrup between each one. (3158). CROWN PRINTANIèRE (Couronne Printanière). Butter a large Savarin mold, line it with fine flawn paste (No. 135), and cut this off just level with the edge of the mold; cover over the inside with buttered paper and fill it up with cherry pips or dry rice to hold the paste in shape, and cook the crust to a fine color; empty it out as soon as done, unmold and brush over with beaten eggs, push it into a quick oven to attain a good golden color, then leave till cold. Make a fresh fruit macédoine composed of candied cherries (demi-sucre), strawberries and raspberries, quarters of well-pared oranges and a few red currants; besprinkle these fruits with powdered sugar, pour over some maraschino and let macerate for one hour. One moment before serving cover the inside of the croustade with apricot jam, and filling it level with the top with the fruits mask them with currant jelly ( No. 3670 ) and slip it on a dish. Pile the center high with whipped cream and arrange around the crown a circle of handsome greengages and candied cherries (demi-sucre), then serve. (3159). CUSTARD IN A DISH (Crème au Lait Dans un Plat). Break four whole eggs in a tinned basin; add six ounces of powdered sugar; flavor either with vanilla, lemon or orange peel or else orange flower water or coffee, according to taste; whip into this one pint of boiling milk, into which has been infused the vanilla, lemon or orange peel or else coffee beans ; strain all through a fine sieve, and with this preparation fill a china pie dish (Fig. 183); put it into a sautoir with a little boiling water on the bottom, and let cook in a slow oven from forty to fifty minutes; as soon as the custard is firmtake it from the sautoir and leave stand to cool. When serving, a bed of whipped cream may be placed on top, flavored the same as the custard, and decorate it through a cornet. (3160). CUSTARD OR BAIN-MARIE CREAM (Crème au Bain-Marie). Break five whole eggs in a vessel, add three yolks, six ounces of sugar (powdered), grated lemon and orange peel and a grain of salt. Dilute with two gills of milk and two gills of cream, beat up the preparation, strain it several times through a sieve, then pour it into a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) or simply into a china pie dish ( Fig. 183). Stand this vessel in a pan containing boiling water and push it in a slack oven to bake. Take it out after forty-five or fifty minutes. As soon as the cream is firm take it out and leave cool. Just when ready to serve unmold it on a cold dish, and dress over the top some whipped cream flavored with lemon. Another way. --Have one pint of milk and one pint of raw cream, six eggs and eight yolks, half a pound of powdered sugar, one grain of salt and either some orange-flower water, zests or vanilla. Dilute with the milk and cream and strain through a sieve; put this preparation into a buttered mold in a saucepan with boiling water reaching to half its height; push it into a slack oven and when the cream is firm to the touch unmold it on a dish. (3161). CUSTARD OR BAIN-MARIE CREAM WITH CARAMEL (Crème Bain-Marie au Caramel ). Melt half a pound of sugar in a pan with the juice of a lemon; as soon as of a light golden color pour a third part of it into the bottom of a plain timbale mold and leave to cool. Break six whole eggs in a basin, add eight yolks and beat together with half a pound of sugar; dilute with a quart of good milk and a quarter of a gill of orange flower water or vanilla and strain this preparation two or three times through a colander, and pour it into the timbale mold, then poach the cream in a bain-marie in a slack oven for an hour and a quarter; remove and cool off in the bain-marie. When ready detach it from the mold with the blade of a small knife and turn it over on a cold dish; cover with a caramel syrup made with the remainder of the caramel. (3162). BAIN-MARIE CREAM WITH VIRGIN COFFEE (Crème Bain-Marie au Café Vierge). Torrefy half a pound of coffee and when done throw it into a saucepan containing a quart of boiling milk; close hermetically and leave to infuse for half an hour. Then pass the milk through a fine sieve and add to it a gill of rich cream. Put eight yolks and six whole eggs into another vessel, beat them with half a pound of sugar and dilute with the infusion of coffee; strain this preparation two or three times through a wire sieve and then pour it into a lightly buttered and sugared timbale mold. Bake the cream for an hour and a quarter in a bain-marie in a slack oven and as soon as done remove and leave it to cool in the water of the bain-marie. When ready to serve detach it all around with the blade of a small knife, invert it on a cold dish and pour over an English cream (No. 42) prepared with coffee. (3163). SNOW EGGS OR FLOATING ISLANDS (Œufs à la Neige). Prepare an English cream (No. 42) with six egg-yolks, seven ounces of sugar, a quart of milk, lemon peel and a grain of salt; strain it several times, then let get cold. Beat up five or six egg-whites to a very stiff froth and incorporate into them very delicately seven ounces of fine lemon-flavored sugar ( No. 3165 ). Boil some water in a deep sautoir, remove it to one side, mold the beaten whites with a large spoon, as explained in No. 155, and let the preparation fall into the sautoir, retaining the shape of the spoon; turn them over carefully. As soon as these whites become hard remove them with a skimmer and drain on a cloth spread over a sieve; when cold take them up one by one to pare and dress in a pyramid on a cold dish; cover them lightly with some of the cold English cream, serving the remainder separately. These eggs can be poached in sweetened milk flavored with vanilla instead of water, using the milk to make the sauce by adding a few egg-yolks. (3164). SNOW EGGS MOLDED (Œufs à la Neige Moulés). Take a cylindrical mold having wide channels; butter it with clarified butter and glaze over with sugar. Beat up five or six egg-whites to a stiff snow with a grain of salt, adding slowly to it half a pound of powdered sugar, a part of it flavored with lemon peel. With this preparation fill the glazed mold and set in a saucepanful of boiling water to reach to half its height; poach in a slack oven until it becomes firm, and lastly unmold on a dish; cover the bottom of this with a little English cream flavored with lemon (No. 42) and serve more of it separately. (3165). TO FILTER FRUIT JUICES, TO FLAVOR SYRUPS WITH ZEST AND TO FLAVOR SUGAR WITH ZEST OR VANILLA (Pour Filtrer les Sucs de Fruits, Pour Parfumer le Sirops aux Zestes, Pour Parfumer le Sucre aux Zestes et à la Vanille). To Filter Fruit Juices. -- Orange and lemon juices are those most frequently filtered, either through a filtering paper and a glass funnel, or through unsized paper, mashed up, washed and converted into a pulp, then spread in layers on a clean sieve. To filter raspberry and currant juices in large quantities use the felt straining bag, as represented for filtering jellies ( Fig. 50). To Flavor Syrup with Zest. --Infusions are made of lemon, orange, mandarin or Seville orange peel. First peel the fruits with a small kitchen knife, being careful not to cut off any of the white part, as this is always bitter. To flavor a syrup with these peels they need only to be macerated for twenty-five minutes in a little tepid water; add this infusion with the zest to some cold syrup; after remaining in the syrup twenty-five minutes strain through a fine sieve. To Flavor Sugar with Zest. --To flavor sugar with fruit peels, rub the fruits on a piece of loaf sugar, and at once grate off the colored damp parts of the sugar with a knife; put this on sheets of paper, and set it in the air to dry, then crush with a rolling pin and pass through a fine sieve. To Flavor Sugar with Vanilla. --Cut the vanilla beans into small pieces, pound them with the loaf sugar, using one pound of sugar for two ounces of vanilla; sift the sugar through a fine sieve and put it away in closed glass jars. (3166). FLAMRI OF APPLES (Flamri aux Pommes). For this dessert employ ten ounces of sugar, one glassful of water, eight to ten apples and a small tied bunch of lemon peel. Dissolve the sugar in the water and cook it to large ball (No. 171); add half the apples peeled and minced, and boil the whole slowly for ten to twelve minutes, then put in the remainder of the peeled apples and the lemon peel. Stir around at frequent intervals, and when the sugar has again attained the same degree (the large ball), suppress the peel and pour the preparation into a dome-shaped mold dipped in cold water; keep this for twelve hours in a cool place. Unmold on a cold dish; stick on the top small fillets of almonds lightly roasted in the oven, and cover the bottom of the dish with either rum syrup or whipped cream. (3167). FLAMRI OF CREAM (Flamri à la Crème). Pour into a saucepan one quart of white wine and two glassfuls of water; add a bunch of aromatics and a grain of salt; let the liquid come to a boil, then incorporate into it eight ounces of good semolina; continue to cook for a quarter of an hour on the side of the range; when done sweeten with eight ounces of powdered sugar, add a piece of lemon peel and keep the preparation off the fire for ten minutes; let get cold, stirring from time to time. Incorporate slowly into this preparation about two glassfuls of good double cream, beating it vigorously on ice; pour it into a charlotte mold dipped in cold water and let get firm on ice for one hour. Unmold on a cold dish and serve with a sweetened purée of red fruits, either strawberries or raspberries. (3168). FLAMRI OF SEMOLINA (Flamri de Semoule). Boil two quarts of milk; incorporate slowly into it half a pound of semolina, so as to obtain a light preparation, then cook it while stirring for twelve to fifteen minutes; when creamy mix in a pound of sugar and a pinch of salt; cook again for ten minutes, then take from the fire and quickly add six to seven beaten whites with a little sugar stirred in; work the preparation with a whip so that it combines well, and put it back on the fire, while stirring steadily. Watch the preparation attentively so as to remove it at the first signs of a boil, then mix in an ounce of grated bitter almonds. Fill two or three molds to the top with this, having them simply dipped in cold water and still wet in the inside; let cool off for at least six hours in a very cold place, or in the ice-box, and unmold the contents on dishes; cover the bottoms with a sweetened raw raspberry pulp. (3169). APPLE FLAWN--LATTICED (Flan de Pommes Grillé). Prepare a flawn ring the same as for an apricot flawn ( No. 3170 ); fill it with well-reduced apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ) flavored with lemon peel. Roll out some parings of puff paste (No. 146) to a sixteenth of an inch in thickness; cut it into narrow strips or bands three-sixteenths of an inch wide. Dampen the edges of the flawn and lay over the strips, leaving a three-eighths of an inch space between each one; fasten well and cut away any surplus without stretching the paste. Moisten the first row of strips with a brush, arrange another row over slightly on the bias to form lozenges; fasten them also to the edge, having the whole form an uniform lattice work; egg twice and cook in a hot oven for one hour. After removing dust over with fine powdered sugar, and again put in the oven for a few minutes to glaze. (3170). APRICOT, PEACH, PLUM OR NECTARINE FLAWN (Flan d'Abricots, de Pêches, de Prunes ou de Brugnons). With some flawn paste (No. 135) line a flawn ring in the following manner: Butter the ring, roll out the paste to an eighth of an inch in thickness, and lay it in the ring so that it has the same thickness throughout, pressing it against the sides to equalize it well. Cut off the paste a little above the height of the ring, and with this surface form a ridge, pinching it all around on top and outside. Divide some apricots in two, peel and dress them in a circle, one overlapping the other, inside the flawn; place the cracked and peeled kernels here and there among the fruit, bestrew with fine sugar and cook in a moderate oven; remove, unmold and brush over with a consistent syrup flavored with kirsch, then serve. FIG. 589 An illustration of a flawn ring. FIG. 590 An illustration of a flawn baked in the ring. The apricots may be replaced by peaches, plums or nectarines, proceeding exactly the same. (3171). CHERRY FLAWN (Flan aux Cerises). After lining the flawn ring the same as the apricot flawn ( No. 3170 ), fill it with fine, ripe, sour cherries, first removing the pips and arranging them so that the holes caused by the removal of these pips lie underneath; dredge with sugar, bake in a moderate oven; when done cover with currant jelly ( No. 3670 ) diluted in a little syrup. Take the pie from the ring, leave to cool, and when serving pour over more of the currant jelly diluted as before. (3172). FRUIT FLAWN (Flan de Fruits ) . Have a flawn ring lined with flawn paste (No. 135); raise the edges to form a ridge, pinching this evenly; prick the bottom, egg the ridge twice and line the inside with buttered paper; fill with very dry rice and cook in a moderate oven. Empty and cover the bottom with fine apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ) reduced with apricot; on top lay some white halved apples cooked in syrup and properly drained, some white compoted halved pears, strawberries, cherries, grapes or any other kind of fine green and red fruits; pour vanilla syrup over, and cover with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ), having previously poured it in a very thin layer on a plate the same size as the flawn. To remove this jelly from the plate press a sheet of paper of larger dimensions than the plate over it, detach the jelly from the plate all around with the tip of a knife and lift the jelly by carefully raising one side of the paper. Invert this on the pie, wet the paper and lift it off without the jelly. (3173). GOOSEBERRY FLAWN (Flan aux Groseilles Vertes). Line some flawn rings the same as for apricot flawns ( No. 3170 ); cut off with the tip of a small knife all the stalks and stems of some gooseberries; arrange them inside the flawn, one beside the other, very close together; bestrew plentifully with powdered sugar and cook in a hot oven. As soon as it is done remove, cool and cover with a layer of apple jelly ( No. 3668 ) diluted in a little thick syrup. (3174). MERINGUE FLAWN (Flan Meringué). Line a flawn ring with flawn paste (No. 135); raise the edges and leave to repose for half an hour. Make a frangipane cream (No. 44), well flavored with vanilla; as soon as cold fill the pie with it as far as the top, then push it into a hot oven; remove when baked, cool and cover the top with a thin coating of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); cover it all with meringue (No. 140). Smooth this with a knife and decorate with some more of it pushed through a cornet; bestrew the entire surface lightly with icing sugar, set it in a slack oven to color the meringue, then decorate through a cornet with currant jelly ( No. 3670 ) or apple jelly ( No. 3668 ), placing it inside the decorations, representing round or oval rosettes. (3175). PEAR AND APPLE FLAWN (Flan aux Poires et aux Pommes). Line a flawn ring the same as for apricot flawn ( No. 3170 ); fill the bottom halfway up with fine well-reduced apple marmalade ( No. 3668 ); over lay peeled and cored pears or apples, cut either in four or in quarter-inch slices; range them the way they are cut into a rosette on the marmalade, bestrew with sugar and cook in a hot oven. When done thoroughly, remove, brush over with apple ( No. 3668 ) and currant jelly ( No. 3670 ), half and half, diluted with a little syrup. (3176). GARNISHINGS FOR COLD DESSERTS (Garnitures Pour Entremets Froids). These are composed of compoted fruit, small cakes or frequently of cold croûtons made with blanc mange, jelly or fruit "pain" preparation. These croûtons are sometimes plain and sometimes ribboned. To make them proceed as follows: Prepare some very clear jelly and pour it on a tin sheet in an even layer three-quarters of an inch thick; place this perfectly straight in the ice-box to have the jelly harden; when quite so, dip the sheet into very hot water, and turn the jelly over on a cloth. Triangle-shaped or cube-shaped croûtons can be made by first dividing the jelly into long bands, then cutting the croûtons into any desired form. Should they be needed round or in crescents, then cut them with a pastry cutter or tin tube. To have them ribboned, pour first a layer of clear or whipped jelly on the sheet, and when hard pour a second one over, either of colored jelly tinted with carmine or a shaded "pain" preparation; as soon as this is set turn it over on a cloth and cut the same as for the above. Pretty croûtons can also be made as follows: Have twelve No. 2 or 3 mousseline molds ( Fig. 138); fill six of them with carmine-tinted jelly, and leave till very cold, then invert them on a cloth and cut perpendicularly in two even parts; lay each of these in one of the twelve molds, and fill the empty space with blanc-mange preparation, and leave to harden. When this is very firm empty out the center of the timbale with a tin tube, and fill the hollow space with chocolate bavaroise ( No. 3131 ); after the timbales become quite cold unmold and cut them perpendicularly in two. When dressing put the rounded side of the timbale turned toward the entremets. (3177). GOOSEBERRIES WITH CREAM (Groseilles Vertes à la Crème). Pick a few handfuls of still green but firm gooseberries; put them into a copper pan with two spoonfuls of hot water and a handful of sugar; let dissolve while tossing, and then press through a sieve; return the purée to the pan, sweeten and reduce to the consistency of a light marmalade, then pour it into a tart dish and leave till cold. Cover it with sweetened whipped cream flavored with lemon, smooth nicely, and decorate the surface with cream pushed through a cornet. The cream can be mixed in with the purée if so desired. (3178). CALIFORNIAN PINEAPPLE JELLY (Gelée aux Ananas Californienne). Pare neatly a ripe, medium-sized pineapple; split it in two lengthwise; remove the core and cut it into thin crosswise slices; arrange these in a dish and cover with a quart of thirty-degree syrup and one gill of cognac; let macerate for two hours. Put into a tinned basin four ounces of gelatine with a quart of water, the juice of four lemons and six oranges, also the peel of half a lemon and the same of an orange; clarify with six egg-whites, adding, just before the filtering process, all of the syrup used for marinating the pineapple. As soon as the jelly is properly filtered pour it into a vessel, cool partly on ice, and let fall on the top three pure gold leaves; mix the jelly so that the gold separates and spreads. Incrust a jelly mold on pounded ice, pour into it a layer of the gold mixed jelly and let it get hard; on this dress a crown of the prepared pineapples, drained and well wiped, and over pour a second layer of the jelly; when this is also hard range another crown of pineapple, and continue until the mold is full. Set the jelly on ice for two hours to stiffen thoroughly; unmold it on a cold dish and surround the base with a circle of the slices of pineapple, one overlapping the other. (3179). MACéDOINE JELLY WITH CHAMPAGNE (Gelée Macédoine au Champagne). Prepare a macédoine of preserved or fresh fruits. They should be firm. Cut in three-eighths of an inch dice and steep in brandy. Besides this prepare two quarts of orange jelly ( No. 3180 ) and pour it into a small bowl packed in ice; stir it continuously until almost cold, then add to it half a bottleful of champagne and continue to work it in until it attains the consistency of a thick syrup. Now put in the well-drained and wiped fruits. Keep on turning until the jelly begins to solidify, then transfer it to a jelly mold that has been incrusted on pounded ice; lay more of it over and leave for an hour and a half to set thoroughly. Unmold as for No. 3182 . (3180). ORANGE JELLY IN CUPS (Gelée d' Orange en Tasses). Put four or five gills of sweet, clarified, liquid jelly (No. 106) into a bowl; when quite cold mix in with it the juice of three or four lemons filtered through filtering paper spread on a sieve; add two or three drops of liquid clarified carmine and incrust the vessel in chopped ice. Stir the jelly with a spoon until it is half set, then mix in with it two or three spoonfuls of candied orange peel cut in very small dice; stir again for two minutes, and with a spoon fill up some very cold small cups; keep these for twenty minutes on ice before serving. (3181). ROSE JELLY (Gelée à la Rose). Place a pan on the fire containing one pint of clear syrup at twenty-eight degrees; at the first boil mix in with it two handfuls of fresh, highly perfumed rose leaves, and remove from the fire to let infuse a quarter of an hour while covered. Strain the liquid through a fine sieve and mix in with it a sufficient quantity of gelatine or clarified isinglass, adding also two gills of filtered orange and lemon juice, and four or five spoonfuls of good brandy. Taste the jelly, test its consistency on ice, in a small mold, and when perfect pour it into a jelly mold and let harden for one hour on ice, then unmold on a cold dish. (3182). RUSSIAN JELLY (Gelée à la Russe). Make about a quart of unflavored jelly (No. 106); set it on ice to get thoroughly cold, add to it as much champagne, beating continuously until the preparation has the appearance of a cream; as soon as it begins to acquire consistency pour it at once into a jelly mold ( Fig. 154) previously incrusted in slightly salted ice; set the cover on top, then cover over with salted ice. Let it freeze for half an hour, and when ready to serve dip the mold quickly in hot water, wipe it off, and invert the jelly on a cold dish. (3183). STRAWBERRY OR RASPBERRY JELLY (Gelée aux Fraises ou aux Framboises). Boil one quart of syrup to thirty degrees, pour it still boiling on a pound of good picked strawberries or raspberries; two hours later strain this syrup through a jelly bag. Clarify and filter four ounces of gelatine in a quart of water with six beaten whites, let cool off partly, and add to it the strawberry or raspberry syrup, and a few drops of carmine. Incrust a jelly mold ( Fig. 154) on chopped ice, fill it with the jelly, and put the cover on top; cover this with ice and leave the jelly to set for two hours; when ready to use dip the mold into hot water and unmold the jelly on a cold dish. (3184). TUNISIAN JELLY, RIBBONED (Gelée Tunisienne Rubanée). Prepare about a quart of strawberry jelly, the same as for No. 3183 , also a quart of lemon jelly into which has been added a gill of kirsch; put this last into a tin basin and beat it on ice until it becomes white. Incrust a cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) on ice; pour into its bottom a half-inch thick layer of the white jelly and let get quite hard; then on it pour a layer of the strawberry jelly of the same thickness as the other, and leave it also to harden; on this pour another one of white jelly, and continue the same until the mold is completely full, and let the whole get thoroughly hard on ice. Unmold it at the last moment. (3185). VIOLET JELLY (Gelée aux Violettes). Put one pint of clear syrup into a newly tinned and clean saucepan; bring it to a boil, then remove and throw in a heaping handful of fresh violets, after suppressing their stalks; let infuse for half an hour with the cover on. Strain the liquid into a glazed vessel, and mix in with it three or four spoonfuls of clarified gelatine with some orange and lemon juice. Taste the jelly, to try its consistency, and then pour it into a mold incrusted in broken ice and let set for one hour and a half, and when ready to serve dress it on a cold dish. FIG. 591 An illustration of a pretty castle liked jelly dressed in the middle of a metal plate. (3186). WINE AND LIQUOR JELLY (Gelée aux Vins et aux Liqueurs). All wine and liquor jellies are made the same way. Prepare a sweet gelatine or fish isinglass jelly, the same as described in No. 106. As soon as this is clarified and filtered add the wine desired for flavoring the jelly, such as Madeira, Marsala, sherry, Malaga, port, etc., or any liquors such as kirsch, maraschino, noyau, Curaçoa, kümmel, etc., mixing the liquor well with the jelly, then pour into a mold previously incrusted on ice. Leave to harden on ice for an hour and a half to two hours. (3187). JELLY WITH FRUITS AND KIRSCH (Gelée aux Fruits et au Kirsch). Prepare about a quart of clarified gelatine with sugar, the filtered juice of four lemons, orange peels and the juice of two oranges. Try its consistency in a small mold on ice. Incrust an ornamental jelly mold ( Fig. 149) or else a plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) on ice. Prepare a macédoine of either fresh or candied fruits, having greengages, apricots, pineapples, cherries, small quartered and peeled oranges, small balls of white apples, cooked in white syrup, and small balls of pears cooked red and also some strawberries or raspberries, currants or grapes. Candied fruits should be washed in warm water, then carefully dried, while the fresh ones should remain in their natural state. Take as much of these fruits as are necessary to fill the mold, varying the different kinds; pour the jelly into a small tin basin, mix in with it a gill of kirsch and lay it on ice, stirring it around with a clean tinned spoon until it commences to set, then put in the selected fruits, either cut up or whole. Take up this preparation with a silver soup ladle and pour it into the mold until it reaches the top, then cover over with a round sheet of paper and close with a deep cover ( Fig. 146) filled with pounded ice; keep it this way for three-quarters of an hour. At the last moment dip the mold in hot water, wipe dry and invert on a cold dish. For a change, or should the jelly appear weak, the mold can be frozen with a little salted ice, but only ten or twelve minutes previous to serving. (3188). MACARONADE (Macaronade). Prepare a small vanilla frangipane cream (No. 44), neither too sweet nor too light; add to it an equal amount of sweet jelly (No. 106); when cold add to it a few spoonfuls of candied pineapple cut in small dice and stir on ice with a spoon until it becomes quite stiff. Cut two dozen soft macaroons in halves, dip the pieces one by one in maraschino and range them at once on a dish, leaving them until they have entirely absorbed all the liquor. Pour into the bottom of a deep dish a layer of the prepared cream; on this set a layer of the soaked macaroons; cover over with more cream and continue to alternate the cakes and cream until a high pyramid is formed, then smooth the surface and keep it for ten minutes on ice; cover the whole with a layer of well- whipped cream, drained thoroughly and flavored with vanilla, but only slightly sweetened; smooth the cream, decorate it through a cornet and serve at once. (3189). MARSHAL NEY (Maréchal Ney). Pound four ounces of peeled almonds with four ounces of powdered sugar and enough egg-white to have a fine paste; put this into a vessel and mix in two ounces of flour, two whole eggs and one stiffly beaten white. Push this preparation through a pocket provided with a three-eighths inch diameter socket on buttered sheets in two-inch lengths and bake them in a hot oven; remove and cool. Have four lightly oiled hexagonal tin rings ranging from five to eight inches in diameter and one and three-quarters inches high; cut the above marchpanes the same size as the sides of the hexagon; fasten these around the hexagonal rings with some sugar cooked to "small crack" (No. 171); unmold, stand one on top of the other, graduating the sizes, and fill the inside with alternate layers of vanilla bavarois ( No. 3135 ), intercalated with small meringue shells made with fifteen egg-whites to one pound of sugar. On the top set one large meringue filled with Bavarian cream and coated with sugar cooked to "crack;" sprinkle over the sugar while hot some finely sliced pistachios. (3190). MOSAIC WITH CREAM (Mosaique à la Crème). Incrust an ogive-shaped mold ( Fig. 151) in ice. In this place another mold half an inch less in diameter; fill the inside mold with chopped ice; pour some kirsch jelly between the two molds so as to fill the empty space entirely, and when this gets hard remove the ice from the inside mold, replacing it with warm water, so it can be removed. Cut some Genoese cake ( No. 3239 ) and candied fruits into large uniform squares, add a few candied cherries and with this salpicon fill the empty space in the jelly. Prepare an English vanilla cream (No. 42), cool it on ice and incorporate into it a pint and a half of whipped cream; pour this slowly over the salpicon in such a way that it falls through to the bottom, then set it away on ice for one hour; lastly, dip the mold quickly into hot water, wipe it dry and turn the jelly on a cold dish; serve it at once. (3191). MOSCOVITE OF STRAWBERRIES (Moscovite aux Fraises). Put one pint of clear gelatine jelly (No. 106) into a glazed vessel, having it only half as thick as usual but much sweeter. In another vessel have a pint of strawberry pulp; mixing with a grated slice of fresh pineapple, a small tied bunch of lemon or orange peel, a bit of vanilla, the juice of five or six oranges and half a pound of powdered sugar, let the whole macerate for a quarter of an hour, then strain and mix it in with the jelly. Pour this preparation into a large jelly mold furnished with a cover ( Fig. 144), and let freeze for at least two hours in a pail with salted ice and saltpetre. At the last moment remove the paste from the mold, also the cover, and dip briskly in warm water; wipe and turn the jelly out on a cold dish, and surround it with a garnishing of small cakes. (3192). MOSSAGANEM (Mossaganem). Prepare a little cream cake paste (No. 132). Cut some round pieces of white paper four inches in diameter, and butter the edges lightly; lay the paste in a socket pocket and push it to resemble crowns on the edges of these papers, then lay them on a baking sheet; egg over the paste and bake in a slack oven. After removing the crowns detach them from the papers and let cool off; open them all around at their base, and fill them with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) pushed through a cornet, then range them in the center of a cold dish on top of each other, alternating each layer with one of frangipane cream with vanilla (No. 44), to which pounded almonds and hazel- nut butter have been added. Cover the inside of the hollow formed by the crowns with a thin layer of whipped cream sweetened and flavored with vanilla. With this same cream cover the entire outside of the cake, smooth the surface and decorate with more of the cream pushed through a cornet. At the last moment decorate the hollow with strawberries, sprinkled over with a little thick syrup and maraschino. (3193). ORNAMENTS FOR COLD DESSERTS (Ornements d'Entremets Froids). Uprights are generally used for cylindrical molds; they are made with a wooden base-plate, having a hole bored in the center to insert a column therein; this column must be higher than the mold and of proportionate thickness to the opening in the cylinder. It answers the purpose of supporting the dessert and all the ornamental pieces laid on top. These wooden supports are covered with gum paste and surrounded by a gum- paste edge. Cold dessert ornaments consist of hatelets, voluptes, tufts and aigrettes. Hatelets are silver-plated skewers a quarter of an inch wide and eight inches long, pointed on one end, and fancifully decorated on the other; these hatelets are garnished with rounds of different colored fruits and finished as explained in No. 2526 , using sweet jelly (No. 106) instead of aspic jelly. They can be used to decorate cold entremets. When required for ornamenting large dessert cakes they are simply garnished with fine preserved fruits. Voluptes are scrolls of arabesque design made of cooked sugar poured in thin fillets on lightly oiled marble and then grouped together, standing upright in fours, sixes or eights, also cast in sugar. Tufts are made of spun sugar molded in the hand into the shape of a ball. These balls are at times laid directly on the dessert or else on voluptes of cooked sugar. Aigrettes are also made of spun sugar put together like a small sheaf; this is cut off straight at a certain height, then molded into the shape of a cone; clip it off short, invert and fasten it on the dessert, either on top of a tuft or in the center of a volupte. Spun sugar is also used for making sultanas. (3194). "PAIN" OF APRICOTS (Pain d'Abricots). Soften two ounces of gelatine in cold water and dissolve it in a gill of almond milk (No. 4) and a gill of syrup at thirty-two degrees; pass it at once through a fine colander into a tinned basin. Place in another vessel a pint and a half of fine apricot purée sweetened and flavored with a little kirsch; pour this purée in with the gelatine, and standing it on ice stir steadily until cold. As soon as it begins to thicken transfer it into a cylindrical jelly mold incrusted in chopped ice, keeping it thus for another hour and a half. When ready to serve unmold; surround the base with a circle of fine halved apricots covered with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) diluted with a little kirsch. (3195). "PAIN" OF BANANAS, HAVANESE (Pain de Bananes, Havanaise). Peel eight very ripe bananas; crush the pulps and rub them through a fine sieve into a basin; add the juice of two oranges and one ounce and a half of gelatine dissolved in a gill of water, then pass the whole through a fine sieve; let it get thoroughly cold on ice and as soon as it begins to set incorporate into it the same quantity of very firm whipped cream. Have prepared a quart of clear jelly (No. 106) flavored with rum, colored with carmine, and let cool to the consistency of a thick syrup. Incrust a cylindrical jelly mold ( Fig. 150) in ice, pour into the bottom a three-quarter of an inch thick layer of the banana preparation and leave it to harden; on this pour a layer of the same thickness of the rum jelly, leaving it also to harden, and over this pour another layer of the banana preparation, then another of the jelly, and so on until the mold is entirely filled, being careful that each layer is of equal thickness. Cover the top with a round piece of paper, then place on a lid with chopped ice over; leave stand for an hour and a half to two hours so that it is perfectly hard before unmolding. (3196). "PAIN" OF CHESTNUTS à LA BéOTIE (Pain de Marrons à la Béotie). Incrust in ice a flat, dome-shaped mold; decorate the inner sides with fanciful cuts of assorted candied fruits, dipping each piece in half-set jelly, then coating with a layer of rather firm blanc-mange ( No. 3139 ), having it a third of an inch thick. Cover the mold with a lid with ice on top. Put into a vessel four gills of sweet chestnut purée ( No. 3136 ), dilute it with four spoonfuls of maraschino and a few gills of thick vanilla syrup, beat the preparation on ice to thicken and as soon as this occurs incorporate into it about four or five gills of good whipped cream; two minutes later add a small salpicon of candied pineapple and then pour the whole into the hollow of the mold; replace the lid, covering it at once with more ice, and after the lapse of an hour dip the mold quickly into hot water, wipe and turn the cream on a cold dish. FIG. 592 A plate dressed with a dome-shaped "pain" in the center. Fanciful cuts of candied fruits are used to garnish around the dome. A hatelet is fastened on top of the dome. (3197). PAINS" OF STRAWBERRIES WITH CREAM--SMALL (Petits Pains de Fraises à la Crème). Decorate the sides and bottom of a dozen timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137) that have been on ice with fresh strawberries cut in two, being careful to dip each piece in half-set jelly before applying it; then coat them with jelly, leaving an empty space in the center and fill this with a purée of candied pineapple mingled with some jelly and two spoonfuls of kirsch. Incrust a dome-shaped or pyramidical mold on ice, fill it with a purée of strawberries, to which melted gelatine has been added; thicken on ice, and let it get quite hard. Fasten on a cold dish a bottom of Genoese cake ( No. 3239 ), slightly wider than the open part of the mold; scoop it out lightly so as to permit the strawberry "pain" to stand upright inside of it, then mask it over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). At the last moment unmold the pyramid on this and let it stand till quite cold, then cover quickly with a bavarois preparation ( No. 3135 ) flavored with lemon peel and vanilla and thickened on ice when needed. Unmold the small "pains" and dress them at once around the cream. FIG. 593 A dozen of cubes timbale are arranged in a ring form of a dish. Strawberries "pain" is placed in the middle of the ring. (3198). PEACHES à LA LOUVOISIENNE (Pêches à la Louvoisienne). Fill a border mold ( Fig. 139) with raspberry jelly ( No. 3183 ) tinted with a little carmine, having it rather firmer than usual. After the jelly is well set unmold the border on a cold dish and place a pad of biscuit three-quarters of an inch thick in the center. On this dress a dome of fine halved peaches and cover these with a layer of cold cream rice with vanilla (No. 160). Dress a circle of greengages around the rice and decorate the top with quartered peaches, some cherries (demi-sucre) and lozenges of angelica; surround the base with a row of croûtons made of blanc-mange ( No. 3138 ) and red jelly alternated, each being a quarter of an inch thick. (3199). APPLE PIE (Tarte aux Pommes). Butter a tin plate and lay on it a flat of short paste (No. 135) an eighth of an inch thick; dampen the edges lightly and lay all around a band of puff paste three-sixteenths of an inch thick and three-quarters of an inch wide. Cut four medium apples in four; peel, suppress the cores and pips and mince them up; put them in a vessel, adding two spoonfuls of apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ), three tablespoonfuls of sugar and a pinch of ground cinnamon; stir all together and pour them into the plate, dressing the apples in a dome form; wet the edges of the pie and cover over with a flat of puff paste (No. 146) an eighth of an inch thick and of the same diameter as the pie. Fasten both pastes together, cut away all the surplus and pinch the edges all around; egg over and trace a rosette on top with a small kitchen knife, then bake in a hot oven for three-quarters of an hour to one hour or even an hour and a quarter, according to the thickness of the apples and the heat of the oven. (3200). COCOANUT PIE (Tarte à la Noix de Coco). Take a deep tin pie plate and line it with foundation paste (No. 135); raise up the edges, pinch all around and leave stand for twenty minutes in a cool place. Put in a vessel four whole eggs, four ounces of sugar and the peel of one lemon; stir well together. Increase the quantity of this mixture with a pint of milk and strain through a fine strainer; spread on the bottom of the pie crust a layer of grated cocoanut and fill half full with the above preparation; push the pie cautiously into the oven, not to upset any of the liquid, keeping it very plumb, and when in the oven finish filling with more of the preparation, using a dipper for this purpose. Cook forty to fifty minutes. (3201). CREAM PIE (Tarte à la Crème). Line a tin pie plate with foundation paste (No. 135); raise up and pinch the edges; leave rest in a cool place, then cover the inside surface with buttered paper and fill with dry cherry pips or raw rice; partly cook the crust and empty out at once. Pour in a vessel four ounces of sugar, two and a half ounces of flour and three eggs; beat thoroughly, dilute with a pint of boiling milk, having a vanilla stick infused therein; transfer this preparation to a saucepan, thicken it over the fire and as soon as it begins to acquire consistency pour it into the crust and push into a slack oven to finish cooking. (3202). LEMON CUSTARD PIE, VENETIAN STYLE (Tarte de Venise à la Crèeme au Citron ). Line a deep tin pie plate with foundation paste (No. 135), operating the same as for cocoanut pie, and let it set. Put three whole eggs and three separate yolks into a vessel, stir in three ounces of powdered sugar and an ounce of lemon sugar; dilute with a pint of milk and strain the whole through a fine strainer. Fill the pie crust three-quarters full with this, push carefully into the oven and finish filling with a dipper. Cook from forty to fifty minutes. (3203). PUMPKIN PIE (Tarte aux Courges). Cut one pound of very ripe pumpkin into slices; suppress the seeds and peel; cut it up into dice and put these pieces in a saucepan with some water to cook over a brisk fire; then drain and press the pulp through a sieve. Pour this into a vessel, add to it four eggs, a pinch of ginger, a pinch of cinnamon, a small pinch of nutmeg, one ounce of melted butter and half a pint of milk; stir well. Use this preparation for filling three-quarters full a pie plate lined the same as for a cocoanut pie ( No. 3200 ); push it carefully into a hot oven and finish filling with a dipper. Cook forty to fifty minutes. (3204). RHUBARB PIE AND RHUBARB WITH CREAM (Tarte à la Rhubarbe et Rhubarbe à la Crème). Take very ripe rhubarb, suppress the leaves, peel and cut into pieces one inch long; arrange them in layers with sugar between each on a tin pie plate lined with short paste (No. 135), so as to form a dome. Moisten the edges of the paste on the plate and cover the whole with a flat of puff paste (No. 146) the same diameter as the plate, fastening it firmly to the moistened under edge, then pare off all the paste beyond the border, gash it all around with a small knife, egg the surface and trace a rosette on top with the tip of a knife. Bake in a hot oven for forty-five minutes. Rhubarb with Cream. --Select large, very green rhubarb stalks, cut off the leaves and the hard part near the root, peel and divide into pieces one inch long. Put into a sufficiently large copper pan the same weight of sugar as there is rhubarb; moisten with a little water and cook to "large ball" (No. 171). Just as the sugar reaches this degree add the rhubarb to it, with a bit of cinnamon and a thin slice of lemon; continue to cook until the rhubarb is well done, then thicken with a little fecula diluted in a small quantity of cold water. Take out the cinnamon and lemon, transfer the rhubarb to a vessel in order to allow it to cool. Serve cold in saucers, with sweet cream separately. (3205). BOISSY PUDDING (Pouding Boissy). Dilute four ounces of corn starch in a bowl with three gills of cold milk; on this pour a quart of boiling milk sweetened with six ounces of sugar; turn the whole into a saucepan and set it on the fire to stir until well thickened; take it off and incorporate into it quickly one gill of kirsch, the grated peel of a lemon, a salpicon of preserved fruits cut in dice, such as pears, pineapple, green almonds, and cherries cut in two, besides a few seeded Malaga raisins and six stiffly beaten fresh egg-whites. As soon as the preparation is sufficiently mixed pour it into a plain timbale mold oiled over with sweet almond oil, and leave it to harden in the ice-box for an hour and a half. When prepared to serve invert the pudding on a cold dish; cover with raspberry sauce ( No. 3217 ), serving more of it apart. (3206). CASTELLANE PUDDING (Pouding Castellane). Prepare a fine purée of chestnuts, the same as for bavarois with chestnuts ( No. 3136 ); also prepare an English vanilla cream (No. 42), with eight egg-yolks, a quart of milk, four ounces of sugar and half a split vanilla bean. As soon as the cream is done stir into it the purée of chestnuts, also two ounces of dissolved gelatine; pass the whole through a fine wire sieve into a vessel and place it on the ice to get cold, working it well until it begins to stiffen. Prepare a salpicon of chestnuts and candied pineapple cut in three-sixteenths inch dice, cherries (demi-sucre) cut in four, and macaroons also cut in four; pour a little maraschino over. Incrust a timbale mold on ice, pour into it a layer of the preparation, then the fruits and continue to alternate until the mold is full. Just when ready to serve dip the mold quickly into hot water and invert the pudding on a cold dish and pour over a syrup made of chestnuts with vanilla flavoring, into which has been added a few chestnuts cut in dice. Serve some of this syrup apart. (3207). HARRISON PUDDING (Pouding à la Harrison). Have some half-set sweet jelly (No. 106) and with a camel's hair brush wet the bottom and sides of a plain and very cold cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150); bestrew the inside with peeled and chopped pistachios, pressing them so that they form a compact layer, then turn the mold on ice for two or three minutes; incrust it upright. Put into a small basin about three-quarters of a pound of blanc-mange preparation ( No. 3138 ) of a proper consistency and flavored with orange peel; stir it on ice to harden, then incorporate slowly into it a pint and a half of whipped cream but slightly sweetened. Two minutes after fill up the cold mold with this in layers intermingled with macaroons soaked in kirsch; freeze the mold for one hour longer in unsalted ice, then dip it in hot water and unmold the contents on a very cold dish. (3208). LAFAYETTE PUDDING (Pouding Lafayette). Prepare a little meringue preparation (No. 140) with six egg-whites; divide it in two and flavor one of them with orange, having it slightly colored with a little carmine, and the other flavored with vanilla. Distribute these two preparations into small parts the size of a pigeon's egg, and poach them in milk the same as snow eggs ( No. 3163 ); drain them at once on a cloth. Have a cupola-shaped mold incrusted in ice, pour into the bottom an English cream (No. 42) flavored with rum and mixed with a little gelatine, adding to it a few spoonfuls of whipped cream; let it get hard, then dress on it a layer of the poached eggs, alternating the two colors, and strew over some shredded pistachios; pour another layer of cream on top, then more eggs and pistachios, and so on until the mold is entirely full. Let the pudding harden in the ice-box for two hours; serve with a bowl of sweetened strawberry pulp flavored with maraschino. (3209). MINISTERIAL PUDDING (Pouding Ministériel). Wash in hot water one pound of cherries (demi-sucre) and lay them to marinate for one hour in a light syrup well flavored with kirsch. Make a bavarois preparation with vanilla ( No. 3135 ), only using a little less whipped cream than usual; add to it a few tablespoonfuls of kirsch. Have a cylindrical timbale mold incrusted in ice; pour a layer of the preparation into the bottom, and on this scatter some of the cherries; when hard pour in another layer and more cherries, continuing the process until the mold is full. Then cover it with a round sheet of paper and a lid covered with ice, and leave till entirely hard. At the last moment unmold the pudding and surround the base with a circle of fine cherries (demi-sucre) previously marinated in kirsch. Serve a sauce -boat of whipped cream with vanilla and kirsch at the same time as the pudding. (3210). RENAISSANCE PUDDING (Pouding Renaissance). Put ten egg-yolks into a vessel, beat them well with half a pound of sugar, and dilute with a quart of boiling milk, into which a split vanilla bean has been infused; stir well, and thicken on the fire. As soon as the preparation is done remove from the range, suppress the vanilla, and add three gelatine leaves softened in cold water; beat it from time to time until the gelatine is entirely dissolved, and then pass the preparation through a fine strainer into a vessel and leave to cool slightly. Have prepared a preserved fruit macédoine cut in small dice, such as apricots, pears, plums, pineapple and cherries (demi-sucre), and pour some maraschino over. Also prepare a few chestnuts cut in quarters, and steep them in maraschino. Put a timbale mold on chopped ice, place in it a layer of the preparation and leave it to set. Then scatter the fruits and chestnuts on it; also some lady fingers soaked in maraschino; over these pour another layer of the preparation, and continue in this manner until the mold is full. Leave it on ice for an hour and a half, and just when ready to serve dip it hastily in hot water, and invert the pudding on a cold dish; pour a cold English vanilla cream sauce (No. 42) over, serving some of it separately. (3211). VALOIS PUDDING (Pouding à la Valois). Make a Neapolitan cake paste ( No. 3250 ), and roll it out with a rolling pin to the thickness of an eighth of an inch; cut from this sixty rounds, each an inch in diameter; lay them on a baking sheet and cook in a brisk oven. Also have prepared at the same time a salpicon of preserved fruits composed of greengages, dates and pineapple, the whole cut in dice, and some cherries (demi-sucre). Prepare also an English cream (No. 42) with twelve egg-yolks, twelve ounces of sugar, a pint of cream and a pint of milk. As soon as finished add to it three gelatine leaves previously softened in cold water and stir the preparation until the gelatine is thoroughly dissolved. Then add to it six ounces of roasted hazel- nuts pounded with a gill of milk; pass the whole through a fine sieve into a tinned basin, and leave it on ice to cool partly. Incrust a timbale mold in chopped ice, pour on the bottom a layer of the preparation, leave it to set, and on it scatter the fruits; over this pour another layer of the cream, then on top arrange a bed of the round cakes, afterward more cream, and then more fruits, continuing the process until the mold is entirely full. Leave the pudding on ice for an hour and a half. Serve with a cold English vanilla cream sauce (No. 42). (3212). PYRAMID OF MERINGUES (Buisson de Meringues). Meringues make a delicious dessert. They should be small but of even size and specially of a beautiful golden color; besides they must be exceedingly dry. Select about twenty of the prettiest cold shells; use a small spoon to fill them with good whipped cream (No. 50) sweetened with vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ); fasten these shells, two by two together, and keep them for two hours in a cool place before dressing them in a pyramid on a napkin. (3213). RICE MIRABEAU (Riz à la Mirabeau). Boil three-quarters of a pound of rice in water acidulated with the juice of a few lemons, keeping the grains whole, then drain and macerate in a maraschino syrup. Prepare a fine salpicon of preserved fruits cut in dice, having pineapple, apricot, pears and citron cut up very fine, cherries divided in two and shredded pistachios; on these pour four tablespoonfuls of maraschino, four of brandy, four of Curaçoa, and four of almond milk (No. 4); leave the whole to steep for one hour; throw over two ounces of gelatine that has been dissolved in a little water. As soon as this preparation begins to thicken stir the rice into it and transfer the whole to a plain timbale mold, and let harden in the ice-box for two hours. When ready to serve unmold on a cold dish, and cover with a raspberry sauce ( No. 3217 ). (3214). RICE WITH APRICOTS (Riz aux Abricots). Blanch half a pound of rice; cook it till tender in milk with vanilla and when cooked remove it from the fire, sweeten it, add raw cream and fresh butter and pour it into another saucepan to let get cold, stirring from time to time. Place the preparation on ice and incorporate slowly into it one pint of whipped cream. When well stirred in dress it in layers in a soufflé pan ( Fig. 182) incrusted in ice, covering each layer with one of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); smooth it dome-shaped and decorate the summit with candied pineapple cut in pieces. (3215). RICE WITH CREAM AND RASPBERRIES (Riz à la Crème Framboisé). Cook about a pound of rice with cream, not having it too sweet, and finish with two gills of almond milk (No. 4). When cold set it into a small thin tin vessel and incorporate slowly about two gills of syrup, flavored with lemon peel and mingled with half as much calf 's foot jelly, sweetened and clarified (No. 104). Incrust a dome-shaped mold wider than its height in lightly salted pounded ice and put in a one-inch layer of thick clear jelly with raspberry juice at the bottom, and let it settle; as soon as it is hard lay another tin mold of the same shape, but narrower, on top of it, filling it up with pounded ice; pour a little of the same warm jelly between the two molds to fill up the entire vacancy and let it harden. Then remove the ice from the smaller mold and replace it by warm water so that it can be easily removed. Fill the center of the mold at once with the rice cream preparation (No. 160) thickened on ice and mixed with two spoonfuls of whipped cream and a salpicon composed of shredded pistachios, candied pineapple and half-sweetened cherries; cover the preparation with a layer of jelly and close the mold with a deep cover, on which lay pounded ice. Keep it for forty minutes longer on ice and finally remove the mold, wash it quickly in warm water and invert its contents on a cold dish. Fasten on the summit an almond paste ornament fixed on by a hatelet garnished with fruits. FIG. 594 An illustration of a molded dome-shape rice with cream. A hatelet garnished by almond paste is fastened on top of the dome. (3216). RICE WITH STRAWBERRIES (Riz aux Fraises). Wash half a pound of Carolina rice; put it into a saucepan with two quarts of water and the juice of two lemons; cook till tender, keeping the grains whole, and when done drain on a sieve, pour it into a vessel and cover with a hot syrup of twenty-eight degrees, adding some orange and lemon peel; leave till cold. At the last moment lift up the rice with a skimmer and dress it in a deep dish in layers alternated with small fresh strawberries. Pour a thick syrup over the whole. (3217). SAUCES FOR COLD ENTREMETS (Sauces Pour Entremets Froids). The sauces for cold desserts are cold English cream (No. 42), flavored with vanilla, lemon or orange peel or with liquor. Sweetened whipped cream also flavored with vanilla, liquors or fresh fruit juices. Fine purées of fresh fruits sweetened with icing sugar; these can also be flavored with liquors. (3218). SUéDOISE OF APPLES AND PEARS (Suédoise de Pommes et de Poires). Peel as many large apples as pears and with a tin tube take from them small sticks an inch and a quarter long by five-sixteenths of an inch in diameter; cook the apple sticks in a clear syrup and the pear ones in a syrup colored with carmine, being careful to keep them all rather firm; leave to cool off in their syrup and then drain and wipe. Coat a plain timbale mold with jelly, incrust it well in ice, take up the pear and apple sticks one by one and dip them in half-set jelly, then arrange them against the sides of the mold; on the first row lay another and so on until the mold is completely lined. Then fill it with an apple "pain" preparation, made as explained in No. 3194 , substituting apples for apricots, and flavor with vanilla, incorporating into it a salpicon of preserved fruits cut in dice, selecting for this purpose, pineapples, apricots, pears and cherries cut in two; let the Suédoise harden on ice for an hour and a half. When ready to serve dip the mold hastily in hot water, unmold on a cold dish and surround the base with small ribboned jelly croûtons ( No. 3198 ). (3219). SURPRISE OF FRUITS, FROTHY SAUCE (Surprise aux Fruits, Sauce Mousseuse). Butter a charlotte mold and fill it three-quarters full with either baba paste (No. 129) or plain Savarin paste (No. 148); let it rise as high as the top in a mild temperature; bake the cake in a moderate oven and five minutes after it has been taken from the oven pare the top off straight, then turn it over on a pastry grate and soak it with a syrup flavored with lemon and maraschino. When the cake is thoroughly cold return it to the mold and slice off the bottom so as to be able to empty it out, leaving only a thickness of five-eighths of an inch at the top and sides; fill this hollow space with layers of small strawberries and pour over them a cooked Italian meringue (No. 140) flavored with cold burned punch. Close the opening on the cake with the removed slice and invert it on a cold dish, covering it over with a frothy sauce prepared as follows: Frothy Sauce. --Pour into a tin basin three gills of English cream flavored either with vanilla or lemon (No. 42), having it slightly consistent and cold; beat it up vigorously for a quarter of an hour on ice and when light and frothy add two or three spoonfuls of firm and well-drained whipped cream mixed in with a spoon. (3220). CONDé TART (Tarte à la Condé). Spread a thin flat of fine foundation paste (No. 135) or half puff paste (No. 146) on a baking sheet; cut it into a round and cover the surface within an inch and a quarter from the edge with a layer of vanilla frangipane (No. 44); wet the borders of the flat and cover entirely with another thin one of fine puff paste; press the edges with the fingers and scallop out with the tip of a small knife, then cover the surface with a Condé preparation (No. 2) made of chopped almonds, powdered sugar and egg-whites; besprinkle over with fine sugar and cook the tart in a slack oven for three-quarters of an hour. (3221). MASSILLON TIMBALES (Timbales à la Massillon). With some icing sugar, applied with a brush, coat over the inside of a charlotte mold, having it wider than its height; line it with marchpane paste (No. 139), not too thin, then dry this for a few hours in a mild temperature, and finally apricot over the insides. Take some almond biscuit ( No. 3229 ), some vanilla Savoy biscuit ( No. 3231 ) and some Genoese biscuit ( No. 3239 ) flavored with lemon and rum; cut them up in uniform dice pieces and put them in a vessel, mingling in half a pound of candied pineapple cut in small bits, and adding a few spoonfuls of light apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) in such a way that the whole becomes well mixed. Fill the empty lined mold with this and pour over a bavarois cream preparation ( No. 3133 ), mixed with a little gelatine, and keep it on ice for half an hour. Just when ready to serve unmold on a cold dish and pour slowly over the biscuit a vanilla ice cream preparation ( No. 3458 ), mixed with a few spoonfuls of whipped cream, then close the top with a layer of massepain ( No. 3392 ) fastening it well to the edges. Unmold the timbale on a cold dish, cover the outside with fine apricot marmalade applied with a brush, and decorate the sides and top with fanciful pieces of candied fruits prepared beforehand for this purpose. Cover the bottom of the dish with a layer of the same ice cream preparation and serve at once. (3222). TIMBALE OF WAFFLES (Timbale de Gaufres). Pound ten ounces of shelled and skinned almonds with one pound of sugar and sufficient egg-white to form it into a fine soft paste. Put this into a vessel and incorporate half a pound of flour; dilute with eight lightly beaten egg-yolks. With a part of this paste lay on a waxed baking sheet a band four and a half inches wide by sixteen inches long, and bake it to a fine color; as soon as done pare the edges straight and bend it around a timbale mold; fasten the two ends well with cooked sugar, and leave till cold. Add to the remainder of the paste a few spoonfuls of whipped cream, and with it arrange on waxed baking sheets about forty very thin and even waffles, each five inches in diameter, and cook them to a fine color in a brisk oven; as soon as done roll them on a small roller about a quarter of an inch in diameter. When all the waffles are cooked and rolled up dip one end of them one by one into royal icing (No. 101), then into finely chopped pistachios, and lay them on a grate and dry the icing in a heater. After this is accomplished fasten them all around the waffle timbale, close to each other, having the pistachio ends uppermost, and attach them in position with cooked sugar; set this timbale on a waffle paste foundation dredged over with pink sugar (No. 172). Decorate the base with small one-inch diameter meringues filled with bavarois cream ( No. 3133 ). When prepared to serve slip it on a dish and fill it with a light chocolate bavarois ( No. 3131 ). (3223). WAFFLES BRISSELETS WITH RASPBERRY CREAM (Gaufres Brisselets à la Crème Framboisée). Arrange one pound of sifted flour in a circle on the table; in the center place four ounces of butter, six ounces of sugar, a piece of hartshorn the size of a hazel- nut and powdered very fine. Dilute the whole with half milk and half cream to have it the consistency of a Milan paste, only slightly softer; roll out in the shape of strings and cut each one of these into small pieces, then mold them into balls three-quarters of an inch in diameter. Heat some flat round waffle irons, butter lightly with clarified butter and when hot open and place one of the balls in the center, close the irons and cook to a fine golden color on both sides; as soon as this is accomplished remove and roll them quickly around rolling pins three-quarters of an inch in diameter, and leave till cold. Just when ready to serve fill by means of a cornet with whipped cream flavored with raspberry and dress in a pyramid on a dish covered with a folded napkin. (3224). WAFERS WITH CURAçOA CREAM--ROLLED (Gaufres Roulées à la Crème au Curaçoa). Have in a vessel three-quarters of a pound of sugar, six ounces of flour, six ounces of corn starch, two ounces of melted butter, ten lightly beaten egg-whites and a pint of whipped cream; make with this a smooth paste, adding a little vanilla flavoring and a few tablespoonfuls of brandy. Heat on a slow fire some flat waffle-irons, butter them with a pad dipped in clarified butter, and when hot cover one side with a spoonful of the paste; close the irons and cook the waffles on both sides; after they are done roll them on three-quarter-inch in diameter rollers; remove from these and leave till cold. Serve dressed in a pyramid on a dish covered with a napkin and fill them all by means of a cornet with whipped cream flavored with a little Curaçoa. PASTRY {Pâtisserie). LARGE CAKES FOR ENTREMETS {Gros Gâteaux pour Entremets). An illustration of an insect house, with decorative stone beneath it. (3225). ALMOND CAKE (Gâteau d'Amandes). From some parings of puff paste roll out a round flat twelve inches in diameter and three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; lay it on a slightly dampened tart plate; cover this flat with an even layer of almond cream (No. 40) a quarter of an inch thick, placed half an inch inside the border; moisten the edge lightly and cover over with another layer of the paste of the same diameter and thickness as the lower one, only making it of puff paste prepared to six turns (No. 146); press the edges well to attach the two flats together, and scallop this border with a small knife; egg the top, decorate it by making incisions in the shape of a rosette with the tip of a kitchen knife, then push the cake into a brisk oven to bake. As soon as done remove to the oven door, bestrew lightly with powdered sugar and return it again to the the oven to have the top well glazed. (3226). ANGEL CAKE (Gâteau des Anges). Pour twenty egg-whites into a basin and whip them till quite firm; at once add ten ounces of sugar, part of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ), and continue whipping the whole until quite smooth, then add half a pound of flour into which has been mixed half a teaspoonful of cream of tartar and sifted several times through a sieve; mix all together lightly till smooth. With this preparation fill some angel cake molds, eight to nine inches in diameter, three-quarters full; these should be quite dry, without any buttering. Push the cakes into a very slack oven to cook for forty to fifty minutes, then take them out and keep them in their molds for two hours; now pass a small kitchen knife between the pan and the cake, knock the edges of the former gently on the table to detach the cake and turn it on a grate; pare the tops very straight, ice with royal icing (No. 102) and dress on a lace- paper -covered board or dish; after the icing is dry decorate with more of the royal icing. (3227). BABA SYRUPED OR ICED (Baba au Sirop ou Glacé). With some baba paste (No. 129) fill a well-buttered baba mold three-quarters full; stand this in a moderately heated place, cover and leave until the paste has reached to the upper edges of the mold, then set it on a pie plate in a slow oven to bake; this operation ought to take from an hour and a quarter to an hour and a half; as soon as baked cut away any surplus paste overreaching the top and invert the baba on a grate. Prepare a thirty-two degree hot syrup flavored with good rum; soak the baba with this, applying it with a brush, and let drain well. It can be served simply soaked with this syrup or else iced with a light layer of water icing (No. 102) or fondant (No. 58) well flavored with rum. After the icing has dried remove the baba carefully from the grate and lay it on a dish; should it be iced decorate the icing with angelica lozenges, halved cherries and cuts of orange peels, surrounding the base with a circle of marchpane in small cases; serve. (3228). BISCUIT à LA HERNANI ( Biscuit à la Hernani). Bake a Savoy biscuit in a dome-formed mold eight inches in diameter by four inches high. Turn it out and let stand till cold, then put it back again in the mold and pare it straight; cut around the top at about two inches from the bottom a cover by means of a small knife held on a slant, to have the cut form a bevel (this is to prevent the cover falling in the biscuit ), and empty it, leaving the outer crust only half an inch in thickness. Place it on a grate with its cover on and cover with reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and glaze with fondant (No. 58), to which melted chocolate is added. At serving time fill the empty biscuit with whipped cream, into which mix a few chocolate pastilles, some finely shredded pistachios and a few preserved cherries cut in two. Lay the biscuit on a frolle paste (No. 136) foundation, coated with egg whites, and dredged over with white granulated sugar; slide the whole on a cold dish and surround the base with a wreath of Africans ( No. 3364 ) glazed with chocolate. (3229). ALMOND BISCUIT ( Biscuit aux Amandes). Beat one pound of sugar in a basin with fifteen egg-yolks, obtaining a very light mixture; add five ounces of sweet and one of bitter almonds, pounded finely with two egg-whites; continue to whip together for a few minutes longer, then add five ounces of flour, five ounces of fecula, two ounces of melted fresh butter and lastly twelve stiffly whipped egg-whites. Pour this preparation into a pound cake or "manqué" mold lined with paper, and bake in a very slow oven. Turn out the cake as soon as done, transferring it to a grate to cool; mask the surface with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and ice with almond milk fondant (No. 58). After this icing is dry slip the cake on a round board covered with lace paper and decorate the top with royal icing. Surround the base with a circle of fine large preserved cherries and lozenges of angelica. (3230). MOUSSELINE BISCUIT ( Biscuit Mousseline). Mix and work eight egg-yolks and two whole eggs in a basin with one pound of sugar; when quite light add two ounces of orange sugar ( No. 3165 ) and continue to stir the preparation for a few moments longer; add four ounces of flour and four ounces of fecula and finally eight stiffly beaten egg-whites. Butter a cylindrical timbale mold, glaze it with icing sugar and fecula, half of each, then fill the mold three-quarters full with the above composition; set it in a very slack oven and let bake for an hour and a half. As soon as the biscuit is done unmold on a grate, leave to cool and afterward pare it very straight; ice over with strawberry icing (No. 102) and dress the cake on a dish. Put into a copper pan five spoonfuls of strawberry pulp and mix into it sufficient orange sugar to form a flowing paste. Heat and when quite hot pour it over five stiffly beaten egg-whites. Just when serving fill the hollow in the cylindrical mold with this preparation, dressing it in the shape of a dome; surround the base of this cream with a circle of preserved cherries and small lozenges of angelica. Arrange around the bottom of the cake some small Genoese cakes ( No. 3307 ) iced with strawberry and cut into rectangulars. (3231). SAVOY BISCUIT ( Biscuit de Savoie). Grease a high biscuit mold with melted prepared veal kidney suet; drain off any surplus fat by reversing the mold, then glaze with sugar icing and fecula, half of each. Pour into a vessel one pound of powdered sugar flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ) and a pinch of salt, add fourteen egg-yolks one at a time and beat the whole forcibly to have it get quite frothy; whip fourteen egg-whites to a stiff froth, and put a fourth part into the yolks, also six ounces of portato fecula and six ounces of flour, the two latter to be sifted together. As soon as the whole is thoroughly combined add the remainder of the beaten whites. With this fill the mold three-quarters full and stand it on a baking pan; fix it so that the mold will not fall; place it carefully in the mildest spot in the oven. In order to bake this biscuit properly it is essential that the oven be first thoroughly heated, then allowed to fall to a mild temperature; leave it in for two and a quarter to two and a half hours. When done to perfection unmold on a grate, cool, pare very straight and dress on a dish; surround the base with a circle of lady bouchées iced with vanilla ( No. 3376 ). (3232). BRETON CAKE (Gâteau Breton). Set in a basin one pound and a quarter of sugar, eighteen eggs and a small pinch of salt; beat continuously for twenty-five to thirty minutes so as to have it very light, then add six ounces of almonds, including an ounce of bitter ones, these to be pounded very finely with one egg. Continue the beating process for a few minutes longer and then mix in a pound and a half of sifted flour and finally ten ounces of melted butter. Distribute this preparation into a set of six Breton molds, having these buttered and flour ed; fill them up to the top and bake in a slack oven. Remove as fast as they are done, unmold on a grate, let cool and then pare very straight. Ice the smallest as well as the fourth one in size with white vanilla fondant (No. 58); the second and fifth with pink strawberry fondant and the third and sixth with chocolate fondant. Dry the icings well then dress the cakes on an office paste foundation in a pyramid, one on the other, alternating the colors and graduating the various sizes. Fill the hollow formed in the cake with Quillet cream (No. 48), and decorate with more of this pushed through a cornet. Keep the cake in a cool place until required for serving. (3233). CROWN OF BRIOCHE (Couronne de Brioche). Put two pounds of brioche paste (No. 130) that has been sufficiently raised and hardened on ice on a flour ed table, form it into a ball and lay it on a round baking sheet covered with paper; flatten it slightly with the hands and make a hole in the center, spreading out the paste so that it forms into a large ring; place it on a baking dish, equalize, egg and gash a round inside of the crown with the tip of a knife, raising the dough; push into a well-heated oven and bake for thirty-five minutes. These crowns can be made of a smaller size, two ounces each, to be served for breakfast. (3234). LARGE BRIOCHE WITH HEAD --(Grosse Brioche à Tête). Have a brioche paste prepared the same as described in No. 130; put this in a vessel in a cool place and let it rise to half its size again. Then work it once more and set it in the ice-box for two hours to have it harden. Butter a tin mold six and a half inches in diameter and eight inches deep; line it with paper and butter this over. Mold a four-pound round-shaped piece of the paste, put it in the mold, then mold another pound piece and roll it on the table on one side to give it a long pear -form appearance; with dampened fingers make a hole in the center of the first paste and in it insert the pointed end of the pear; leave the mold in a moderately heated place to have the paste rise to the level of the top, then egg it over twice and put in a slack oven to cook for two hours. Unmold as soon as done, allow to cool and dress on a folded napkin. In case there be no mold at hand use a cylinder of strong paper the same diameter as the mold. (3235). CHAMOUNIX CAKE (Gâteau Chamounix). Bake in a slack oven a small Genoese preparation ( No. 3239 ) placed in a border mold, it having a round-shaped bottom buttered and bestrewn with chopped almonds. After it is taken from the oven, cold and pared, brush the surface over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and lay it on a pastry grate, then cover entirely with kirsch icing (No. 102), and when this is dry dress on a dish. Suppress the shells from about a hundred chestnuts, without touching the skins; boil them slowly in plenty of water in a covered vessel, then drain off the water, leaving them covered with a hot cloth; now quickly remove the skins; pound and rub the chestnuts through a sieve into a saucepan with three-quarters of their weight of powdered sugar added, also a small bit of vanilla; stir this well over a moderate fire until it detaches from the bottom and leave it till nearly cold, then dilute with a little light syrup and kirsch; incorporate into the mixture a few spoonfuls of well-drained whipped cream, but without weakening it, keeping it quite consistent, then stir on ice for ten minutes to harden, adding a salpicon of vari-colored fruits after it is removed. With this preparation fill up the hollow of the cake and smooth it to a dome-shape, then decorate through a cornet with whipped cream slightly sweetened and flavored with vanilla. (3236). COMPIèGNE CAKE (Gâteau Compiègne). Dilute three-quarters of an ounce of compressed yeast in a vessel with one gill of warm milk; strain, return it to the vessel and incorporate five ounces of flour to make a soft leaven; put this on a flour ed table, mold and replace it in the vessel after cleaning it out well; cover over with a cloth and leave in a mild temperature to rise to double its size. In another vessel place three-quarters of a pound of flour, form a hole in the center and in it lay an ounce of sugar and a heavy pinch of salt (according to the saltiness of the butter ), two eggs, eight yolks and six ounces of butter. Mix all well together to form into a paste, working it forcibly for a few moments in order to give it body, then add slowly one gill of rich cream; continue to work the paste until it has plenty of body, then mix in the leaven very lightly, also one pint of well-drained whipped cream. Butter a large plain cylindrical mold ( Fig. 150) seven inches in diameter by seven inches high; fill it up three-quarters with the above paste and leave it in a mild temperature until quite full; stand it on a pie plate and push it carefully into a very slack oven. It should take an hour and a half to an hour and three-quarters to bake; take it out as soon as done, invert it on a grate and let cool off. Dress on a folded napkin to serve. (3237). FLEURY CAKE (Gâteau Fleury). Make a biscuit preparation with a pound of sugar, having two ounces of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ), eight ounces of flour and four ounces of fecula sifted together; three-quarters of a pound of roasted and pounded filberts, twenty-two egg-yolks, six beaten whites and a grain of salt. Bake in a slack oven on a baking sheet covered with paper, having it at least half an inch thick, and when done put aside to cool for twelve hours. With seven or eight egg-yolks, some sugar, six gills of milk and a piece of vanilla, prepare an English cream (No. 42); as soon as it thickens remove and mix in a quarter of a pound of roasted chopped filberts, and pour it at once into a glazed vessel, working till cold; then strain through a tammy and return it to the saucepan to heat on a slow fire for two minutes to have it lukewarm; remove once more and incorporate into it, without ceasing to stir, one-half pound of fresh butter divided in small pats; the cream should now be quite consistent and slightly frothy; divide it into two parts, and color one with carmine mixed with a little syrup so that it acquires a pinkish hue, leaving the other half white. Have a hexagon (six-sided) shaped cardboard pattern and with it cut three or four pieces from the prepared biscuit; split them through their thickness, mask them over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and reconstruct them as before; fasten these pieces on a thin Genoese bottom a third of an inch wider than the biscuit, and on this, with the remainder of the biscuit cut thin and also masked with apricot, raise an even pyramid, cut hexagonally; cover it as well as its base with a thin layer of the butter cream. Roast in the oven half a pound of filberts cut up small; when removed besprinkle with fine sugar, and when nearly cold apply them in smooth layers against the thickness of the base on which the pyramid stands, pressing them down with the blade of a knife to equalize the surface, leaving no open space whatever between. Introduce a part of the white cream into a small fancy socket pocket ( Fig. 179), and push on the surfaces of the pyramid small, plain, close flowers, strictly following the divisions of the hexagon; next to these push some pink flowers, alternating the shades, in the different compartments. When the pyramid is entirely covered push a large rose on top, having the two colors mixed, then with a smaller socket surround the base of the cake with small roses made of the two colors. Keep the cake for a quarter of an hour on ice to have the cream harden superficially, and on removing slip it carefully on a napkin, and serve at once, for the buttered cream must remain hard. FIG. 595 A cake covered fully by butter cream is placed on top of a folded napkin and served on a metal dish. (3238). FRUIT CAKE (Gâteau aux Fruits ). Proportions. --One pound and a half of butter, a pound and a half of sugar, a pound and a half of flour, twenty eggs, four pounds of seeded Malaga raisins, four pounds of Smyrna raisins, four pounds of citron, ten pounds of currants, two gills of rum, two gills of brandy, four gills of molasses, one ounce of cinnamon, half an ounce of allspice, a quarter of an ounce of mace and a quarter of an ounce of nutmeg. Beat the butter and sugar together in a tinned basin until creamy and white; adding the eggs one by one add the flour and mix perfectly, then put in the Malaga and Smyrna raisins, the currants, the finely cut-up citron and the spices; afterward the liquors and molasses; work until thoroughly mixed. For this quantity have two very strong tin molds twelve inches long at the bottom and five inches wide, with a quarter of an inch splay on each side, the depth to be six and a quarter inches. These molds must be furnished with covers closing on the outside. Butter and line them with buttered paper. Divide the preparation into two equal parts, one into each mold; cover the tops with buttered paper, put on the covers, then set both molds on a baking sheet and push into a slack oven. They take from six and a half to seven hours to bake. When partly done turn the molds upside down and finish cooking; remove from the oven, lift off the covers and arrange them one beside the other; lay blocks of wood on top, two and a quarter inches thick and of the same dimensions as the opening of the mold, or even slightly narrower, so they can enter the mold with facility. On each block lay a board and on this a sufficiently heavy weight to allow these blocks to enter entirely inside the mold, leaving it in this position for twelve hours in a cool place. Unmold the cakes carefully, wrap them in paper, and range in a hermetically closed tin box. These cakes require to be made two months beforehand, and be left for use remove from the boxes, take off the paper adhering to the cakes, and cut each one into even eight crosswise slices; divide all of these on the widest side into five equal-sized pieces, therefore obtaining forty pieces from each mold; wrap each one of these small pieces in a separate piece of waxed paper, then in tin foil, and after all are prepared put them into small cardboard boxes manufactured expressly for this purpose, they to be four and three-quarter inches long by an inch and a half wide and an inch and an eighth deep; these are the inside measurements; place on the covers, tie with a white ribbon once around their length and then around their width, forming it into a pretty bow, which must come exactly in the center of the top of the box. For the machine for cutting these cakes see Figs. 596-597. These machines greatly facilitate the cutting. To have them very regular, according to the above proportions, put the whole cake in machine No. 596, cut it in transversal slices one after the other, pressing the cake forward on the machine for each slice that is cut. Machine No. 597 is used for dividing the first slices and to cut them very even, passing the blade of the knife between the vertical guides of the machine. If instead of small cakes in bozes a large one be desired, then put the preparation into one large round mold sixteen inches in diameter at the bottom and eighteen inches at the top or opening; it must be five and a half inches deep and furnished with a tube in the center five and a half inches at the bottom and five at the top. Cover the insides with bands of buttered paper, overlapping each other, and cook the cake the same as the preceding ones in a slack oven, leaving it in from seven to seven and a half hours. Let it get perfectly cold by placing on top a board seventeen inches in diameter, having a hole in the center five and a half inches in diameter, then press down lightly. These cakes ought to be made two months before they are needed and kept in a cool place. When required for use unmold, remove the paper and ice over wi th several layers of royal icing (No. 101); slide on a board covered with lace paper, and after the icing is perfectly dry decorate with more royal icing. A fine gum- paste vase can be placed in the center, filled with flowers or other ornaments. FIG. 596 An illustration of a cake cutting machine. FIG. 597 A cake cutting machine. (3239). GENOESE CAKE (Gâteau Génoise). Butter a pound cake mold and line it with paper. Have one pound of sugar, part of it being flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ), in a basin with sixteen whole eggs; whip this till light, warming the preparation over a slow fire. To have this attain a proper degree of lightness it will be necessary to whip for at least forty minutes, then mix in one pound of sifted flour, and lastly half a pound of melted butter. Fill the mold three-quarters full with this, and bake in a slack oven for an hour and a quarter. Remove, unmold on a grate and cool thoroughly. Then pare it very straight and cover with a layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); ice with vanilla fondant (No. 58). After the icing has dried thoroughly slip the cake on a dish and decorate either with royal icing or fanciful cuts of fruits; surround with a circle of preserved plums and cherries. (3240). GUGELHOPFEN (Cougloff). Butter well the inside of a baba mold having fluted sides; decorate the interior with halved almonds and keep it cool. Form a hollow in the center of four ounces of sifted flour; in it lay half an ounce of yeast, diluting it little by little with a small quantity of tepid milk; mix both flour and liquid slowly together to obtain a soft paste; gather it all up, lay it on the table and form into a ball, cutting a cross on top; place in a basin, cover with a cloth and leave in a mild temperature to have it rise to double its volume. In another vessel work ten ounces of butter with a spatula to a light cream. Lay three-quarters of a pound of flour in a circle on the table; in the center put one ounce of sugar and a little salt; dissolve these with a little water, then add four whole eggs and four separate yolks; mix the whole well and knead the paste vigorously to have it smooth with plenty of body, proceeding the same as for a baba paste; add slowly a gill and a half of good cream; continue to knead the paste until it is quite glossy, then add the butter slowly, knead once more for a few moments, put in the leaven and mingle all well together, then add four ounces of seeded Malaga raisins. As soon as all the ingredients are perfectly combined lay the paste in the mold to reach to two-thirds of its height and set it in a mild temperature until it raises to the top. Place the mold on a baking pan and bake in a slack oven for two hours; unmold on a wire grate. (3241). HAZEL- NUT CAKE (Gâteau aux Noisettes). Prepare a fine paste with two eggs, four ounces of almonds and four ounces of hazel- nuts, both well pounded. Put into a basin a pound and a quarter of sugar with twenty egg-yolks, beat till quite frothy, then stir in the almond and nut paste, continuing to beat for a few moments longer; mix in lightly three-quarters of a pound of flour and twenty egg-whites whipped to a stiff froth. Divide this preparation in three rings eight inches in diameter lined with paper; bake the cakes in a slow oven; turn them out as soon as done and leave cool off entirely, then mask each with a thick layer of pastry cream (No. 46) highly flavored with vanilla, adding to it a few roasted hazel- nuts pounded with a little cream. Lay one round on top of the other to form into one large cake; pare it well rounded and very uniform with a knife and cover it entirely with reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); ice the cake with vanilla icing (No. 102). As soon as this is hard and dry slide the cake on a dish covered with lace paper and decorate the top with a fine display of royal icing ornamentation. Surround the bottom of the cake with small lady bouchées ( No. 3376 ) iced with white fondant (No. 58), laying each one in a small paper case. (3242). JAMAICA CAKE (Gâteau à la Jamaique). Beat up a pound of sugar with fourteen egg-yolks, so as to have it frothy, then add slowly twelve beaten-up whites and at the same time one pound of sifted rice flour, then a pound of melted butter, also pouring it in slowly with some grated lemon peel, a grain of salt, six ounces of candied orange peels cut in small pieces and six ounces of small raisins. Bake this preparation in a slack oven after placing it in a buttered and flour ed spiral mold; when the cake is unmolded and cold apricot the surface and glaze with rum icing (No. 102). Dress on a napkin and decorate with whipped cream. (3243). JELLY CAKE MERINGUED (Gâteau à la Gelée Meringué). Have eight egg-yolks in a vessel with half a pound of sugar and the peel of one lemon; beat with a spatula until it becomes light and creamy, then add half a pound of flour, four ounces of melted butter and lastly eight firmly whipped egg-whites. Take some jelly cake molds eight inches in diameter and half an inch deep; butter and flour their insides and fill them to the top with the mixture, then bake in a hot oven. As soon as done unmold on grates and leave stand to cool. Place three of these cakes one on top of the other with a layer of currant jelly ( No. 3670 ) spread between each, pare the cake round, decorate the surface with a handsome rosette of Italian meringue (No. 140) in the center, it having six to eight leaves, with an empty space in the middle; around the edges dress a continuous wreath of these rosettes, also hollow in the center. Stand the cake for two or three minutes in the oven to dry the meringue decorations, then take out and fill the cavities with apple, currant and quince jellies and apricot marmalade, alternating the different colors; set it on a lace- paper covered dish. Instead of covering the jelly cake with meringue, a piece of cardboard the same diameter as the cake, having a design of any kind cut out to form a stencil, may be used; lay it over the cake, sprinkle it entirely with finely powdered sugar, remove the cardboard carefully and the design will be found imprinted on the cake. (3244). LADY CAKE (Gâteau des Dames). Put fourteen ounces of butter and twenty ounces of sugar in a metal bowl and work together with the hands for fifteen or twenty minutes to have it quite frothy, then add four ounces of almonds, including a few bitter ones, pounded with a little water, and work again for a few moments. Now put in one gill of brandy or rum, twenty ounces of flour and finally twenty very stiffly whipped egg-whites. Butter a pound-cake mold, line it throughout with paper and fill it three-quarters full with the preparation; bake in a very slow oven. (Once the cake is in the oven it must not be touched until baked.) Take it out, unmold and leave to get thoroughly cold. Then ice with royal icing (No. 101) and stand it at once on a lace- paper covered board. After the icing has dried decorate the cake with more royal icing. (3245). MANDARIN CAKE (Gâteau Mandarin). Fasten on a dish a wooden bottom about an inch thick and cover it with white paper. Heat a medium-sized biscuit mold, grease it over with melted veal kidney suet mixed with melted butter, and turn it over to drain out all the fat, then glaze with sugar mixed with fecula. Beat up vigorously in a basin twelve egg-yolks with three-quarters of a pound of powdered sugar, having one-quarter of it grated on two mandarins, and add a grain of salt. When this preparation becomes creamy, incorporate into it ten or eleven beaten whites, and at the same time let fall into it through a sieve a pound of fine flour and fecula mixed together; carefully work without breaking, and with it fill the mold nearly to the top; surround the exterior of the top with a band of buttered paper, then lay it on a small baking sheet covered with a thick layer of hot cinders, and push it into a moderate oven to bake for one hour, carefully turning the baking sheet around at frequent intervals. On removing the biscuit from the oven detach it from the top, inserting a small knife around the edges, and unmold on a grate, and when perfectly cold cut the bottom off straight, then let it get stale for seven or eight hours. Should the surface of the biscuit not be smooth, or else too brown, stand it upright on the grate and brush over entirely with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then cover with raw vanilla icing (No. 102); when this is dry, cut a round piece from the cut side, about a quarter of an inch from the edge, remove this piece and empty out the biscuit as neatly as possible, not approaching the edges too closely. Cut across through the center about twelve small, fresh and sound mandarins; remove the insides neatly from the peel, keeping these as whole as possible, and lay them on one side; suppress the white pith and seeds from the fruit, and crush the pulp to rub it through a sieve; put this into a vessel and mix with it a few spoonfuls of champagne, some syrup, a small bunch of lemon peel and a few spoonfuls of calf 's foot jelly (No. 104), sweetened and clarified; let infuse together for fifteen minutes. With a vegetable spoon ( Fig. 91) scoop out all the white part from the halved mandarin peels, and incrust them in a thick layer of pounded, slightly salted ice, suppressing the lemon peel from the preparation; thicken it lightly FIG. 598. A mandarin cake placed on top of a foundation that is fastened on a dish. Slices of orange is used to garnish around the foundation and mandarins are arranged around the cake. while stirring on ice, and with it fill the empty peels; brush them over with jelly and keep on ice for a quarter of an hour. Open five or six oranges from the stalk end; with a tin tube empty them out entirely, suppressing all the white pith; incrust them in pounded, unsalted ice, and then fill them with clear jelly flavored with orange ( No. 3180 ), alternated with layers of blanc-mange ( No. 3138 ), also flavored with orange; harden both of these preparations on ice. Now fill the empty biscuit with well-drained and sweetened whipped cream flavored with Curaçoa and orange peel. Close the opening with the removed piece and dress on the center of the wooden bottom. Surround with the filled halved mandarins, and the base of the dish with the oranges cut in six, then cut off straight on one end so as to maintain them upright. (3246). MARLY CAKE (Gâteau Marly). Butter and glaze two dome-shaped pointed molds, seven inches high by six inches in diameter; fill them almost to the top with a lemon-flavored biscuit preparation, the same as for mandarin cakes ( No. 3245 ), and surround the opening with a band of buttered paper; stand them upright on a raised-edge baking sheet and bake the biscuits in a slow oven for one hour. Remove and unmold on a pastry grate, and when cold cut the bottoms off straight and let get stale for the next twelve hours. Now lay the cakes on a grate, placing them on the cut end and brush them over lightly with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then cover one of them entirely with pink icing (No. 102) and the other with white (No. 102). Two minutes after, without letting it get dry, divide each biscuit into eight pieces from top to bottom, pointed on the tops, and when the icing is thoroughly dry take up the pieces one by one and reconstruct them into one biscuit, only being careful to alternate the colors, having first a pink piece and then a white one; empty the inside of the biscuit as neatly as possible and fill the center with St. Honoré cream (No. 49), to which pounded almonds and a little kirsch have been added, dressing it in layers alternated with cut-up macaroons soaked in rum. Invert the biscuit on a cold dish covered over with a folded napkin. FIG. 599. A dish with a folded napkin placed in the center. A cake colored with two different stripe icings is put on top of the napkin. (3247). MILFOIL CAKE, POMPADOUR (Gâteau Mille-Feuilles, Pompadour). Prepare some rounds of puff paste (No. 146) the same way and size as the milfoil with preserves ( No. 3248 ); cover each of these with vanilla -flavored English cream (No. 42), dredging the top with a salpicon of candied fruits cut in one-eighth inch squares and macerated in kirsch. After the cake is formed, pare it round and cover with firmly beaten and well-drained whipped cream sweetened with fine vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ). Dress this in a dome-form on top, and decorate through a cornet with whipped cream tinted a pale pink; strew with thin green fillets of pistachios. Slip the cake on a flat two inches wider than itself and covered with strawberry icing (No. 102), sprinkled with red sugar (No. 172); surrround the base of the cake with small lady bouchées iced with strawberry ( No. 3376 ). (3248). MILFOIL WITH PRESERVES (Gâteau Mille-Feuilles aux Confitures). This requires some puff paste of twelve turns (No. 146); divide it into six-ounce pieces, roll them out to three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness and cut into rounds seven inches in diameter; lay these on baking sheets slightly moistened with cold water applied with a brush; from the center of each piece remove a two-inch diameter round and leave these to rest in a cold place for half an hour; bestrew lightly with sugar, prick and bake in a slack oven. After taking them out detach from the sheets and lay them at once on grates to get cold, then stand one on top of the other intercalated with a layer either of currant jelly ( No. 3670 ), apricot marmalade or peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ); pare the cake neatly into a perfect round and cover with Italian meringue (No. 140) on the edges. Sprinkle over it a mixture made of equal parts of Mocha sugar ( No. 3249 ), half of which is colored with carmine with a little syrup, chopped almonds, chopped pistachios and currants. Lay the cake on a tart dish and push into a moderate oven for a few moments to dry the meringue without coloring it, then place it on a round made of a three-eighths of an inch thickness of frolle paste (No. 136), and iced over with pink icing (No. 102), strewn with pink sugar (No. 172), it having a border of gum paste or English paste. Dress the milfoil either on a napkin or on a socle, and garnish around with small bouchées filled with currant jelly, these being called Wells of Love ( No. 3338 ). (3249). MOCHA CAKE (Gâteau Moka). Deposit in a vessel half a pound of sugar, six egg-yolks and one whole egg; beat for fifteen minutes to have it light, then add six ounces of flour and two ounces of fecula sifted together, also two tablespoonfuls of brandy, six ounces of melted butter, and lastly six well-whipped egg-whites. Bake this in a buttered and paper -lined pound-cake mold; as soon as done remove, unmold on a grate and leave it there until perfectly cold. Now pare the cake very straight and cut it across in two even parts; fill it with a three-eighths of an inch thick layer of Mocha cream (No. 45); cover the top and sides with the same and decorate the surface through a channeled socket pocket ( Fig. 179), using more of the cream; dredge with Mocha sugar. Leave the cake in a cool place until required for serving. Mocha Sugar is made by pounding loaf sugar in a mortar and passing it through a six-mesh sieve cloth (No. 94). (3250). NEAPOLITAN CAKE (Gâteau Napolitaine). Crush one pound and ten ounces of almonds with a pound and a quarter of sugar; reduce to a fine powder; pass this through a sieve. Sift on the table two pounds of flour, make a hollow in the center and in it lay the almond and sugar powder, a pound and a half of butter, a pinch of salt and four whole eggs; work the whole together just enough to form a smooth, firm paste, for if worked too much it is liable to crumble. Lay it in a vessel and leave in a cool place to rest; one hour later divide this paste into sixteen or twenty even parts and roll them to a quarter of an inch thick by six and a quarter inches in diameter; empty out the centers with a two-inch pastry cutter. Have two of the flats a little thicker and two inches wider in diameter than the others; bake on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet in a hot oven, and as soon as done take them out and leave to cool under the pressure of a weight; pare the large rounds eight inches in diameter and put them once more under a weight; when cold ice either with white or pink icing (No. 102); mask the small flats with well-strained and reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); now lay them one over the other; pare them evenly to have the cake six inches in diameter, and cover the whole with well-reduced and well-cooked apricot marmalade; place the cake on one of the large flats and over lay the second large one. Decorate around with fanciful cuts of almond gum paste and the top with a cupola of royal icing or gum paste. Ornament around the edge of the large flat with a double border of the same paste and arrange the cake on a richly decorated stand. This cake is intended for a sideboard. It can also be made with almond biscuit ( No. 3229 ). (3251). NOUGATINE CAKE (Gâteau Nougatine). Make a biscuit preparation with a pound of powdered sugar, a pound of flour, six whole eggs, eighteen yolks, six beaten whites, vanilla and a grain of salt. Bake this in a slack oven in three or four smooth fruit pie circles, six or seven inches in diameter by an inch to an inch and a half high. These circles should be buttered with clarified butter and glazed with fecula. After taking them from the oven remove from the circles and leave to get thoroughly cold for twelve hours. Prepare a buttered orange cream the same as for the Fleury cake ( No. 3237 ). Mince half a pound of sweet peeled almonds, previously dried on a sheet of paper then roasted in a pan to brown nicely. Cut the biscuits into transversal slices three-eighths of an inch thick, and taking up seven or eight of these, one by one, cover one side with a layer of the prepared cream, then put one on top of the other so as to form into a regular-shaped cake, and cover the top and sides at once with another layer of cream; now spread over the whole a layer of the roasted almonds, fastening them on with the blade of a knife, so as to equalize its thickness; besprinkle lightly with fine vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), and push the cake for one minute in a hot oven, simply to have the sugar adhere to the almonds, then take out at once and when cold dress on a napkin. (3252). PINEAPPLE CAKE (Gâteau Ananas). Prepare a Savoy biscuit composition in the following proportions: One pound of sugar, fourteen yolks, two whole eggs, three-quarters of a pound of fecula and flour, half of each, fourteen whipped whites, and some pineapple extract. Bake a part of this in a Savarin mold seven and a quarter inches in diameter, buttered and glazed with sugar and fecula, and the remainder in a charlotte mold six inches wide by seven high. As soon as both are cooked unmold the cakes and allow to cool. Cover the one baked in the Savarin mold with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and ice with pink fondant (No. 58) flavored with kirsch; as soon as this is dry slip it on a sweet paste (No. 136) foundation, sprinkled over with green granulated sugar; put a pad of biscuit in the center, and range it on a dish or board covered with lace paper. Pare the cake baked in the charlotte mold to the shape of a sugar loaf, then cut it into transversal slices three-eighths of an inch thick; cover all of these with a light layer of apricot marmalade, and reconstruct the cake as before; cover its entire surface with Italian meringue (No. 140) flavored with orange and slightly tinted with vegetable yellow; pour some of the same meringue in a pocket ( Fig. 179) with a channeled socket and push it through to imitate the rough skin of a pineapple, forming points on the entire surface of the cake; stand it on a tart plate and push it into a slack oven to barely dry the meringue; remove it at once and allow to cool thoroughly; place it on a grate and ice over with yellow orange icing (No. 102), and when this is dry detach the pineapple cautiously from the grate and place it on top of the biscuit. Over the points of the rough pineapple form the tips with chocolate icing pushed through a cornet. Decorate the top with stalks cut from angelica dipped in sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171) having the base of the pineapple surrounded by leaves of the same. (See pineapple, No. 3595 .) (3253). PLUM CAKE (Gâteau aux Raisins de Corinthe). Butter a charlotte mold five and a half inches in diameter by five inches high; at the bottom lay a round piece of paper and line the sides with a band of the same. This should reach three-quarters of an inch beyond the edge and should be serrated all around. Place three-quarters of a pound of butter in a vessel with the same weight of sugar and beat together to have it creamy, then add six whole eggs, one at a time, one gill of rum, six ounces of currants cleaned and softened in hot water, three ounces of preserved cherries cut in four, three ounces of citron cut up finely, a pinch of powdered carbonate of ammonia, and lastly fourteen ounces of sifted flour. Fill the mold three-quarters full with this, and stand it on a baking plate; push it into a slack oven to bake, and when done unmold on a grate to cool thoroughly without removing the paper, then place it on a dish covered with a folded napkin and serve. (3254). POUND CAKE ( Pound Cake ). Put twelve eggs and four ounces of sugar in a basin and whip until they become quite light, warming them slightly over the fire. In a large metal vessel lay one pound of butter and three-quarters of a pound of sugar; work with the hands until creamy and light, then add gradually the prepared eggs, beating continuously, and a gill of brandy or rum, and lastly one pound of sifted flour. Butter a pound cake mold, line it with paper and pour in the preparation, having it three-quarters full, then place it in a slow oven to bake for an hour and three-quarters to two hours. Remove from the oven, unmold, and leave stand till cold, then ice it with icing flavored with rum (No. 102). After this is dry slip the cake on a board or dish and decorate with royal icing. (3255). PUNCH CAKE, PUNCH BISCUIT, IMITATION OF BOAR'S HEAD, A BOOK OR A HAM (Gâteau Punch, Punch Biscuit, Imitation de Hure de Sanglier, d'un Livre ou d'un Jambon). Put eight ounces of fine white apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ) and eight ounces of sugar in a copper pan; stand this on the fire and cook for a few moments to reduce the marmalade, then remove and add a quarter of a gill of rum, a quarter of a gill of Curaçoa and eight well-beaten egg-whites. Bake a Savoy biscuit ( No. 3231 ) in a buttered timbale mold, glazed with sugar and fecula; as soon as done, unmold, cool and cut it straight, then empty it from the bottom, leaving an inch-thick crust all around. Fill the empty cake with the above apples, lay over a round of frolle paste (No. 136) the same dimensions as the cake and invert it on a grate; ice with orange fondant (No. 58) flavored with rum and Curaçoa. After the icing has dried slide the cake on a dish, decorate with fanciful cuts of candied fruits and surround the base with a circle of greengages. Punch Biscuit Paste --One pound of sugar, half a pound of flour, half a pound of fecula, nine ounces of melted butter, three whole eggs, eleven yolks, four whipped whites, a small glassful of rum, chopped lemon and orange peel and a grain of salt. Place the sugar in a vessel; add the yolks slowly, creaming together with a spoon, and when very light put in the butter, the rum, the whipped whites, the fecula, the sifted flour, and lastly the peels and salt. Boar's Head --Imitation (Hure de Sanglier). --Bake thoroughly a punch biscuit in an oval mold the same size as a natural boar's head, fourteen by nine inches on the top and six inches deep, the splay to be half an inch. The next day cut the biscuit the shape of a boar's head ( Fig. 537); hollow it out underneath and replace the biscuit that is removed by the same soaked in maraschino so as to make a paste, into which mix plenty of candied fruits. Lay the cake on an oval foundation the size of the head, and cover with well-cooked apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then coat the whole with cooked chocolate icing (No. 99). As soon as the icing is dry cut out the snout, leaving it partly opened, hollow out the cavities for the eyes, and on each side of the snout place two large fangs made of almond paste (No. 127) and dipped in clear dissolved gelatine. Imitate the eyes by two rounded balls of almond paste, placing a black spot in the center; mold these in a teaspoon with clarified gelatine; unmold and when cold fasten them in the cavities made to hold the eyes. Dress the cake on a foundation glazed with green fondant (No. 58). Decorate the head with fruits and transparent hatelets, ornamented with large fruits; the base should be surrounded with chopped jelly and jelly croûtons. A Book--Imitation (Un Livre). --To be prepared the same as the boar's head with punch biscuit, the two covers and the back of the binding made of almond paste (No. 127). Empty out the center, leaving the top cover stationary. Glaze the sides of the book with orange icing, the cover with coffee icing and decorate the whole with royal icing. Fill the inside with tutti-frutti ice cream ( No. 3586 ). This book can be laid on a socle or a cushion glazed with pink icing. Ham --Imitation (Jambon). --As for the boar's head, prepare a punch biscuit fourteen inches long, nine inches wide and four and a half inches thick; after being cooked and thoroughly cold, trim it to the shape of a ham, then cut it through its thickness; empty it out and fill the center with a Bengalian charlotte preparation ( No. 3142 ). Fasten the two parts together again with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and coat it over with the same. Glaze the handle end one-third of the length of the ham with chocolate icing to imitate the rind and the other two-thirds with white prunelle icing. Stand the ham on a foundation bottom made of frolle paste (No. 136), and on the chocolate end stick a piece of pointed wood three-quarters of an inch in diameter by five inches in length; trim the end of this with a large paper rosette. Decorate the white part of the ham with almond paste (No. 127) flavored with chocolate or pistachio. Leave it to cool perfectly, then coat with jelly. Lay the ham on a small low socle (for this see ham à la Gatti, Fig. 498), and decorate around with chopped jelly and croûtons. These cakes can also be made to imitate a salmon ( Fig. 521a), a swan ( Fig. 723), foies-gras patty ( Fig. 515), boned turkey ( Fig. 479) or any other design. (3256). QUEEN CAKE (Gâteau Reine). Beat up a pound of butter with twelve egg-yolks, adding a pound of sugar, a little at a time, half a pound of ground almonds, half a pound of fecula and then seven beaten whites, one quart in volume of drained whipped cream, vanilla or lemon flavored, a few candied orange flowers and a grain of salt, the cream to be added lastly. Bake in a slack oven in a spiral mold glazed with sugar. After the cake is unmolded and cold cover with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and ice with maraschino icing (No. 102). No good results can be expected unless good cream is used. (3257). ROEDERER CAKE (Gâteau Roederer). Pound six ounces of almonds and six ounces of pistachios with a little milk to make a fine, soft paste. Put one pound of sugar in a basin, slowly add sixteen whole eggs, and beat until very light, heating it slightly on hot embers or on a very slow fire; put in the almond paste and continue beating for a few moments longer, then mix in with a small skimmer three-quarters of a pound of rice flour and lastly half a pound of melted butter. Butter a pound cake mold, line it with paper and fill it three-quarters full with the preparation; push into a very slack oven to cook for an hour and a quarter. When done remove and invert it on a grate to cool, then detach the cake from the paper and cut it across in two; fill it with some Bavarian cream ( No. 3135 ), into which mix three ounces of pistachios pounded with a little vanilla syrup; cover the entire cake with hot apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); coat it with pistachio fondant (No. 58) and bestrew immediately with finely shredded green pistachios; let the fondant dry, then slide the cake on a lace- paper covered board or dish and surround the base with a row of small cream cakes ( No. 3295 ), glazed with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171) and sprinkled with shredded pistachios. (3258). SAND CAKE (Gâteau Sable). Mix twelve ounces of powdered sugar and four ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) in a basin with sixteen egg-yolks; beat until light, then add half a pound of flour and half a pound of fecula, sifted together, one pound of melted butter, and lastly the sixteen beaten whites; bake this in a slack oven in a pound cake or manqué mold, buttered and lined with paper, and when done to perfection take it out and invert on a grate to cool. Then cover the cake with well-reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and ice over with water icing flavored with rum (No. 102). Decorate with candied fruits and dress on a dish covered with lace paper. (3259). SAVARIN à LA VALENCE (Savarin à la Valence). Butter a medium-sized Savarin mold, dredge the bottom with cut-up almonds and fill it half full with Savarin paste (No. 148) into which has been incorporated candied orange peel cut in the shape of small dice. Let it rise in a mild temperature until it reaches the edges, then bake in a slack oven. As soon as it is done remove from the oven, pare it even and unmold on a grate; pour some orange syrup over, cover with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and glaze with fondant (No. 58), flavored with orange. When the icing is cold slip the Savarin on to a bottom made of office paste (No. 143) covered with green sugar (No. 172), and dress it on a dish. Decorate the top of the cake with a wreath of angelica lozenges and cherries (demi-sucre); fill the center with Chantilly cream (No. 50) flavored with orange sugar ( No. 3165 ) and place on top a light sugar sultana ( No. 3193 ), then serve. (3260). SPONGE CAKE ( Biscuit Léger). Set into a basin fourteen whole eggs, two separate yolks, one pound of sugar and the peel of a lemon; beat in such a way as to have a very light composition while heating it slightly; in order to obtain the desired lightness it will be necessary to beat for at least thirty to forty minutes, then carefully mix in one pound of flour. With this fill a pound cake or "manqué" mold three-quarters full, having it buttered and glazed with sugar and fecula, half of each; bake in a slack oven. Invert the cake as soon as done on a grate, let get thoroughly cold, then bestrew with icing sugar and dress on a dish. This cake may be served plain, without icing, simply bestrewing vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) over it. (3261). ST. HONORé AND ST. HONORé SULTANA (St. Honoré et St. Honoré Sultane). Roll out some very fine short paste (No. 135) to obtain a flat three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness and eight inches in diameter; lay it on a round baking pan dampened with water, prick it all over and with a pocket furnished with a half-inch diameter socket push flat on the edges of this a heavy string of cream cake paste (No. 132). Egg over twice and bake in a slack oven for ten to fifteen minutes. Dress on another tart plate sixteen small round cream cakes ( No. 3294 ), three-quarters of an inch in diameter; egg over and bake them in a moderate oven, then detach from the plate by slipping a knife underneath. Peel two oranges, divide them in sections, leaving on only the fine skin covering the pulp, being careful not to break it, and range them on a grate to dry, either in the air or in a heater. Wash in hot water some candied fruits, such as cherries, apricots, angelica and pears; wipe dry and cut the apricots in four, the angelica in lozenges, the pears in four and leave the cherries whole; have also some loose green grapes, eight pieces of each kind of fruit. Cook some sugar to "crack" (No. 171); first dip in the cream cakes and arrange them on an oiled baking tin, then drain; proceed the same with the oranges, grapes, apricots, angelica, cherries, pears, etc. On the band fasten the cream cakes with sugar cooked to "crack;" on top of these place a row of quartered oranges, on each quartered orange a glazed cherry, and between each one of the sections place an angelica lozenge or one of the grapes; slip on a dish covered with lace paper. Fill the St. Honoré with St. Honoré cream (No. 49), and serve. St. Honoré Sultana. --Replace the St. Honoré cream by a vanilla bavarois cream ( No. 3135 ) with plenty of whipped cream, and over the fruits place a spun sugar sultana the shape of an ogive ( No. 3193 ), and around quarters of apricots and pears, both glazed. (3262). STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKE (Gâteau aux Fraises). Place in a basin six ounces of butter with ten ounces of sugar; beat both well together until a creamy preparation is obtained, then add three eggs, one at a time, two gills of milk and vanilla flavoring. After the whole has been well mixed pour in a pound of sifted flour into which has been added a coffeespoonful of baking powder. Have some round flat molds seven and a half inches in diameter and the edges raised to three-eighths of an inch high; butter and flour these over, then fill them to the top with the mixture and bake in a brisk oven. Unmold on a grate as soon as they are done and leave stand till cold; cover each one of these layers of cake with a vanilla pastry cream (No. 46), and on it arrange very fine, ripe strawberries, one next to the other; bestrew with sugar and lay two of these garnished cakes one on top of the other; put on a dish and cover the cake with sweetened whipped cream (No. 50), flavored with vanilla and pushed through a pocket. (3263). FAVART CAKE (Gâteau Favart). Whip sixteen eggs in a basin with one pound of powdered sugar and two ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ); beat till very light while heating slightly, then stir in with a spoon one pound of sifted flour and later three-quarters of a pound of melted butter. Butter a hexagonal mold ( Fig. 139) with clarified butter, flour it over and fill it three-quarters full with the preparation. Bake in a slow oven; when done, unmold on a grate and when thoroughly cold cover with peach marmalade ( No. 3675 ), ice with kirsch icing (No. 102), dredging the top with chopped burnt almonds and some small one-eighth inch squares of angelica and citron. (3264). VACHERIN CAKE WITH CREAM (Gâteau Vacherin à la Crème). Cut three or four rounds of white paper seven inches in diameter; on the edges of these push through a socket pocket some meringue (No. 140), to form a ring an inch wide and of the same height; smooth the surfaces of the meringue on both top and sides with the blade of a knife, bestrew with fine sugar and stand each one on a board dampened with water; dry the meringue in a slack oven without letting attain color. After these rings have been removed invert them on baking sheets and replace them in the oven for ten minutes to dry the meringue that has remained soft, then stand for twenty-four hours in a warm closet. Arrange these rings on top of each other on a layer of frolle paste (No. 136) cut exactly the same dimensions, and cover each one with meringue made of cooked sugar (No. 140), to fasten them together; mask the entire inside with a thin layer of the same meringue; smooth it quickly and dry for two hours in a warm closet. After the meringue is quite cold cover it superficially with a brush dipped in reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), not having it too thick; dry this in the air, then decorate the upper ring with a chain of small rings a quarter of an inch thick made of lady finger paste ( No. 3377 ), also to be covered with the marmalade. Fill the center of these small rings with quince jelly ( No. 3672 ) or currant jelly ( No. 3670 ). Slip the cake on a folded napkin and at the last moment cover with whipped cream flavored with vanilla (No. 50). FIG. 600. A cake in ring-shaped filled with cream in the center and is garnished around it with small rings that is filled with jellies in the center. This cake is placed on top of a folded napkin and served in a metal decorative dish. (3265). VALENTINE CAKE WITH RUM (Gâteau Valentin au Rhum). Crush one pound of almonds with one pound of sugar and three eggs; make it into a very fine paste; put it into a basin and dilute gradually with thirteen eggs and one gill of rum; beat well until perfectly light. Line a mold with very thin sweet paste (No. 136); fill it three-quarters full with the preparation and strew over some finely cut-up almonds. Bake in a very slack oven for three-quarters of an hour, then turn the cake out on a grate and allow to cool; when cold glaze with a light frosting flavored with rum. This cake can be kept for several months if wrapped in tin-foil and left in a dry cool place. BREAKFAST CAKES (Gâteaux de Déjeuner). (3266). BISCUITS ( Biscuits ). Sift one pound of flour on a table, divide it into four parts, and take one of these to make the leaven by making a circle with the flour and diluting half an ounce of compressed yeast with a little tepid water, then mix to make a soft paste; shape this leaven into a ball and cut a cross on top; lay it in a deep vessel and cover, leaving it to rise to double its height. Make a hollow in the center of the remaining flour, lay in it two ounces of sugar, a pinch of salt, seven whole eggs and two yolks; mix well together to form a paste, working it well so that it obtains considerable body, and then incorporate three ounces of butter. As soon as the leaven is ready mix it well but lightly into the paste, then lay it in a vessel and cover to let it rise to double its volume. Afterward knead it and with it fill some tin or sheet-iron half cylindrical molds, three and a half inches in diameter by twelve inches long, and previously buttered. Leave them until the dough rises as high as the level of the edges, then set these molds in the oven so the biscuits bake all alike to a fine golden color. Unmold them as soon as they are done and cut them across in quarter-inch slices; range these on tins and push into a slack oven to brown slightly. (3267). CINNAMON BISCUITS ( Biscuits à la Canelle). The proportion for these is one pound of flour, half an ounce of compressed yeast, four ounces of sugar and one grain of salt, seven whole eggs and two yolks. With these ingredients prepare a dough the same as for biscuits ( No. 3266 ). As soon as it is risen properly lay it in a long, square-shaped mold four inches wide, four inches deep and twelve inches long; fill it three-quarters full and let the dough rise to the level of the edges, then bake in a moderate oven for forty minutes. As soon as done unmold and when cold cut it up into slices five-sixteenths of an inch thick by three inches long and one and a quarter inches wide. Range these on a baking tin; sprinkle the tops lightly with sugar to which has been added a little ground cinnamon; place in a slack oven and let glaze to a fine golden brown. (3268). FLUTES OF BRIOCHE (Flûtes en Brioche). Take some brioche paste (No. 130) hardened on ice; divide it into two-ounce pieces and roll each of these into a string on the table, having them six to seven inches long; range them at once on a baking sheet at short distances apart and egg them over twice, then cook in a hot oven, and when removed pass a knife under to detach them from the sheet. (3269). BRIOCHES FOR BREAKFAST (Brioches Pour le Déjeuner). Small brioches can be baked in small channeled molds or else simply laid on a baking pan. In both cases they must be rolled into balls. Have some raised brioche paste (No. 130) that has been hardened on the ice; invert it on a flour ed table and shape it into large rolls; cut these across into equal pieces and mold them into balls with the hands; lay them at some distance apart on tins or else each one in a separate mold; flatten down the center with a damp finger and introduce into this cavity a small piece of the same dough molded the shape of a comma; this is to form the head of the brioche. Let the dough rest for ten minutes, then egg over the brioches and bake them for twenty minutes in a brisk but not too fierce oven; after removing keep them for ten minutes at the entrance of the oven before serving. (3270). ENGLISH BUNS AND HOT CROSS BUNS ( Buns Anglaises et Cross Buns Chaudes). Buns. --Sift a pound of flour on the table and with a fourth part of it prepare a soft leaven by forming a hollow or hole in the center and pouring in three-quarters of an ounce of yeast dissolved in a little tepid water; shape it into a ball, score a cross on top, and lay it aside till it has risen to double its size. Make a hole in the center of the remainder of the flour, place in it three ounces of sugar, half an ounce of salt, three ounces of butter and four eggs; mix these ingredients well together, incorporating the flour gradually, and adding two and a half gills of milk; continue to stir, obtaining a soft and not very consistent paste; knead this well for a few moments to let acquire a body, then put with it four ounces of currants that have been cleansed and washed several times in warm water; also add the leaven, but knead it slightly only. As soon as finished lay the paste in a bowl, cover with a cloth and let rise in a mild temperature until it is a third larger than its original size, then turn it over on the flour ed table and refold it on itself two or three times; break it into pound pieces and roll these into strings three-quarters of an inch in diameter, to cut into lengths of an ounce each; mold them into balls, then roll them into oval shapes; lay them as fast as they are done on lightly buttered tins, and leave them in a mild temperature to rise; egg over and bake in a hot oven. Hot Cross Buns. --Prepare the dough exactly as for the English buns, adding when it is finished a pinch of cinnamon and grated nutmeg; shape them into rounds instead of ovals, and egg them over once. Just when ready to put in the oven make two opposite incisions on each bun with the tip of a knife to form a cross. Bake at once in a hot oven. (3271). BUCKWHEAT CAKES WITH BAKING POWDER (Galettes de Sarrasin à la Levure en Poudre). This paste should be made just when ready to use, in the same proportions and in the same manner as the buckwheat cakes with yeast ( No. 3272 ), only suppressing the yeast. When ready divide it into two parts, and incorporate into one of these two tablespoonfuls of baking powder; mix thoroughly and cook at once, proceeding exactly as for the others. As soon as the first part is exhausted put the same quantity of baking powder into the second part, and proceed precisely as for the first. FIG. 601. An illustration of a spatula. FIG. 602. An illustration of a rectangular baking pan. (3272). BUCKWHEAT CAKES WITH YEAST (Galettes de Sarrasin à la Levure). Put a pound of buckwheat flour in a bowl with four ounces of corn flour, two ounces of sugar and a coffeespoonful of salt; dilute all these ingredients with a quart of water, beat the mixture well to have it smooth, then add three-quarters of an ounce of yeast dissolved in a little tepid water; when all has been well stirred together cover the vessel with a cloth and keep it in a temperate place until the dough has risen to double its volume, which will take at least four hours or even more; stir with a spoon and work into it two tablespoonfuls of molasses; the paste is now ready. Heat a griddle ( Fig. 602), and as soon as it is sufficiently hot and smokes rub it over with a cloth and butter with clarified butter or lard; pour on enough preparation to form small cakes three and a half to four inches in diameter, and a quarter of an inch thick; in order to have them round and of equal thickness iron rings beveled on the outside are used. When the cakes are firm enough, which will take about two or three minutes, lift up the rings and turn the cakes over to finish cooking for two or three minutes longer. Dress them on a very hot covered dish and serve at once. (3273). FLANNEL CAKES (Galettes Légères). Place in a bowl four ounces of butter and two ounces of sugar; work well together to obtain a creamy preparation, then add four whole eggs one by one, and after the eggs are well incorporated put in eight ounces of flour and two gills of milk. Have the paste nice and smooth, and just when ready to use add a tablespoonful of baking powder mingled with an equal quantity of flour, then finish cooking and serve exactly the same as the buckwheat cakes ( No. 3272 ). (3274). INDIAN CAKES (Galettes Indienne). Have in a vessel six ounces of wheat flour and four ounces of corn flour sifted together; add one ounce of powdered sugar, a pinch of salt and one gill of milk. Mix well in order to obtain a smooth running paste, then pour in an ounce and a half of melted butter. Just when ready to cook the cakes add to the mixture a teaspoonful of baking powder, already mingled with a teaspoonful of flour, and finish exactly the same as for the buckwheat cakes ( No. 3272 ). When cooked dish and set a cover on top, serving them immediately. (3275). RICE CAKES (Galettes au Riz). Put in a pan four ounces of wheat flour and four ounces of rice flour sifted together; make a hollow in the center and lay in two ounces of sugar, a pinch of salt, four eggs and one gill of milk; work the flour into the liquid and knead it in such a way as to obtain a smooth dough, then add another gill of milk and continue to work it until the paste is well mixed, then finally pour in two ounces of melted butter and also add half a pint of rice, blanched and cooked till quite soft. Just when ready to use work it well with a teaspoonful of baking powder and a teaspoonful of flour, and when sufficiently kneaded and the paste is smooth it will be ready. Finish like buckwheat cakes ( No. 3272 ). (3276). WHEAT CAKES (Galettes au Froment). Mix in a bowl eight ounces of sifted flour, two ounces of sugar, two ounces of butter, a little salt, four eggs and two gills of milk; stir all well together to obtain a smooth paste. Beat one teaspoonful of flour with as much baking powder, add it to the other ingredients and when well mingled, cook and finish them the same as buckwheat cakes ( No. 3272 ), serving them very hot. (3277). COUQUES (Couques). Lay a pound of brioche paste (No. 130) in a vessel, place it in the ice-box, working it from time to time to give it plenty of body; when this is firm put it on a flour ed table and divide it in two parts; draw them lengthwise to form into strings and cut each of these into fifteen even pieces; form all of them into balls and shape them like rolls three and a half inches long; range on a baking sheet slightly apart, leave to rise in a mild temperature and when double their volume egg over and bake in a good oven. Just when serving open them on one side and insert a little good, slightly salted butter. Send to the table very hot. (3278). GRISSINIS WITH BUTTER (Grissinis au Beurre). Make a hollow in the center of a pound of flour sifted on the table and in it lay half an ounce of yeast; dilute with a gill of warm water, working in slowly a little flour in order to have a soft paste; cover this with the remainder of the flour, and let rise to double the original height, then add a pinch of salt and a gill of barely tepid water; mix thoroughly to obtain a rather consistent dough, and finally add two ounces of butter; cover this over with a cloth, and leave it to rise for twenty-five minutes, then set it on a flour ed table and break it up into small half-ounce bits; mold these into balls, and leave them to rise for ten minutes before rolling them into strings a quarter of an inch in diameter; place them at once on lightly buttered baking tins, and leave to rise once more for ten to twelve minutes. As soon as they are ready push into a slow oven to bake to a fine golden color. (3279). GRISSINIS WITH SUGAR (Grissinis au Sucre). Sift a pound of flour on the table, and with a fourth part of it, half an ounce of yeast and a little warm milk make a soft leaven; place this in a deep vessel, cover over and let rise to double its height. Form a ring with the remainder of the flour; in the center put one ounce of salt, two and a half ounces of sugar, two eggs, and one gill of milk; mix all well together, incorporating the flour slowly so as to obtain a rather consistent dough; knead this for a few moments to give it body, then add two ounces of butter, and continue to knead until the butter is thoroughly worked in, finally adding the prepared leaven. Lay this dough in a vessel to rise to double its height, and then place it on a flour ed table and break it into pieces, having twenty-four of them to the pound; lengthen each piece into even-sized strings nine inches long, place on baking sheets, allow to rise, egg over twice, and bake in a hot oven. (3280). OATMEAL; WHEAT EN GRITS; HOMINY, BOILED (Farine d'Avoine Broyée et Bouillie; Froment Broyé Bouilli; Mais Blanc en Semoule Bouilli). Boiled Oatmeal. --Put two quarts of water into a saucepan; add a coffeespoonful of salt and set it on the fire; at the first boil drop in three-quarters of a pound of oatmeal, letting it fall like rain, and being careful to stir continuously with a spatula, bearing it down on the bottom of the saucepan. Remove at the first boil to the side of the range, and let it continue to bubble for twenty-five minutes, stirring it at frequent intervals with the spatula. Serve with fresh sweet cream. Wheat en Grits, Boiled. -- Wheat en grits are cooked in the same manner and in the same proportions as the oatmeal. Serve with fresh sweet cream. Hominy. -- Hominy is prepared exactly the same, using the same proportions as the oatmeal, but it only requires twenty minutes' cooking. Serve fresh sweet cream at the same time. (3281). POLISH BLINIS (Blinis à la Polonaise). Sift into a pan half a pound of wheat flour, a quarter of a pound of rye flour and half a pound of rice flour; make a hollow in the center. Dissolve three-quarters of an ounce of yeast with half a pint of milk, run it through a sieve into the hollow and incorporate the flour slowly, also five or six eggs and half a pound of melted butter, so as to obtain a smooth paste of the same consistency as a frying batter. Cover the pan with a cloth and keep it in a mild temperature to raise the paste to double its original height, and when this is accomplished beat in four egg-whites previously beaten to a stiff froth and also the volume of a pint of whipped cream; let this rise once more for twenty minutes. Heat twelve small tartlet molds made of tinned sheet iron, two and a half to three inches in diameter and half an inch in depth; baste them with melted butter, using a brush, and fill them half full with the paste; set them in a very hot oven, and as soon as the paste is well seized, remove and baste again with butter, using a brush; turn them over quickly, butter them on the other side and return to the oven. When done dress on a hot plate and serve at once. These are to be accompanied either with a sauce -boat of sour cream or melted butter; they can also be laid on a folded napkin, serving the cream or butter separate. Buckwheat flour may be used alone instead of the three other kinds. (3282). éCHAUDéS (échaudés). Arrange one pound of sifted flour in a circle on the table; in the center lay two ounces of butter, two ounces of sugar, a well-crushed piece of carbonate of ammonia the size of a hazel- nut, a pinch of salt and eight whole eggs; mix all well together, obtaining a very smooth paste, but not too firm, working it so that it attains considerable body. Flatten this paste to an inch and a half in thickness with the rolling-pin, lay it on a flour ed tin sheet and leave to rest for two or three hours in a cool spot. Invert this paste on a lightly flour ed table and cut it into pieces; roll each of these to form a string an inch and a half in diameter, then divide into three-quarter-inch lengths. Lay these cakes on their cut end on a round flour ed pan cover; boil water in a vessel larger than this cover; at the first boil take the water from the fire, invert the cover over and pou boiling water on this to detach the pieces of paste; return the vessel to the fire without letting the water boil, and shake it about. As soon as the pieces of paste rise to the surface remove them with a skimmer and throw into a pan of fresh water, leaving them in for twelve hours, changing the water every four hours; then drain, range then at some distance apart in hermetically closed hinged baking sheets, and bake in a hot oven for twenty to twenty-five minutes. (3283). TOASTS, DRY, BUTTERED, DIPPED IN WATER, MILK OR CREAM (Tranches de Pain Grillées, Beurrées, Trempées Soit à l'Eau, au Lait ou à la Crème). Dry. --Slices of bread cut from square American loaves, about three and a half inches in size by three-eighths in thickness, laid on a double broiler and toasted over a low fire, then arranged on a hot plate. Buttered. --After the bread is toasted spread one side over with butter. Dipped in Water, Milk or Cream. -- Toast the bread, then lay the slices in a deep dish and moisten sufficiently to cover the bread with hot water, this being called dipped toast; or else with hot milk, making milk toast; or hot cream, this being called cream toast. (3284). WAFFLES (Gaufres). Put half a pound of butter into a vessel with four ounces of sugar and a pinch of salt; beat well with a wooden spoon to obtain a creamy mass, then break in eight whole eggs one by one, stirring unceasingly, now add a pound of flour and half a pint of milk. Put the waffle irons ( Fig. 608) on the fire, heat them to a proper degree and grease over with clarified butter, then take four tablespoonfuls of the paste and stir into it a small coffeespoonful of baking powder; pour it into the waffle irons, spreading it evenly; close and cook the waffles to a fine golden color, turning the iron from time to time. As soon as the waffles are done, pare the edges, take them out and dress on a covered dish, serving them very hot. (3285). WAFFLES WITH VANILLA --LIGHT (Gaufres Légères à la Vanille). Beat up in a vessel half a pound of partly melted butter, and when creamy mix in slowly seven or eight egg-yolks; after the preparation becomes frothy add half a pound of flour, a pinch of sugar, a grain of salt and half an ounce of compressed yeast dissolved in two gills of milk; cover the vessel and keep it in a mild temperature. When the dough is raised work and let get cold, then incorporate into it four or five beaten egg-whites. Heat a deep waffle iron, butter it over with a brush dipped in melted butter and putting a spoonful of the paste on one side of the iron only, close and cook the waffles over a low fire, turning the iron frequently; when dry and a fine golden color take it out of the form and sprinkle fine vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) over the top. SMALL CAKES FOR ENTREMETS (Petits Gâteaux d'Entremets). Cakes ten to a pound. (3286). APPLE CAKE (Gâteau aux Pommes). Prepare a frolle paste (No. 136); keep it in a cool place on ice for twenty minutes. Cut about fifteen good apples in four, peel, shred them small and cook partially, while tossing them over a brisk fire, in a pan with some butter, sugar and vanilla added, then set aside to cool. Roll out two-thirds of the paste, not too thin, four inches wide and about the length of the baking sheet on a flour ed table; roll it over the rolling-pin to unroll on a baking sheet and cut it away straight; surround the edges with a narrow raised rim, and put in a moderate oven to half bake and leave till quite cold. Then fill the center with the cooked apples and finish exactly the same as the gooseberry cakes ( No. 3309 ). (3287). APRICOTS WITH CREAM of ALMONDS (Abricots à la Crème d'Amandes). Line a few tartlet molds with fine foundation paste (No. 135); fill them level to the top with almond frangipane (No. 44), and lay a well-drained compoted half apricot ( No. 3682 ) over each; bake in a moderate oven, and when done and partly cold dress an imitation apricot made of Italian meringue (No. 140) on top of each one. Place them again in the oven to dry the meringue, and then let cool. When cold glaze over with a yellow rum icing (No. 102), fasten a stalk of angelica into each, and rub each one with a little carmine on cotton to color it. (3288). BABAS WITH RUM --SMALL (Petits Babas au Rhum). Cut two ounces of candied fruits into small dice, such as citron, orange peel, preserved pears and a few cherries; add to them as many currants and raisins well washed in hot water, picked and cleaned. Prepare a small baba paste as described in No. 129, and when ready to mold stir in the fruits. Butter some small baba molds, fill them half full with the paste, and leave to rise; when entirely full push into a hot oven to bake; unmold as soon as done, and dip them into a hot thirty-two degree syrup well flavored with vanilla and rum (No. 102). (3289). BISCUITS IN CASES WITH CREAM ( Biscuits en Caisses à la Crème). Choose eight fresh eggs; break the whites into a basin and the yolks into a bowl; into the latter mingle two ounces of powdered sugar flavored with grated lemon peel ( No. 3165 ), and beat it up with a spoon until it becomes white; add a grain of salt to the whites, beating them very stiff, and mix them slowly with the yolks, sifting four ounces of good flour over the whole; lastly add a gill of well-drained whipped cream, and with this preparation fill some oblong paper cases ( Fig. 548) three-quarters full; range them on a thin baking sheet, glaze the surfaces with fine sugar, and cook for twenty-five minutes in a slack oven. (3290). BANANA BOATS (Bateaux de Bananes). Line ten boat-shaped tartlet molds with sweet paste (No. 136), and cook them white. Peel ten small, ripe, short bananas, cut off both ends and plunge the fruit into a boiling twenty-five degree syrup; remove the pan at once from the fire, and let the bananas cool off in this syrup, then drain. Cover the insides of the unmolded boats with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and lay in each one half a banana, the rounded surface uppermost, brushing it over several times with vanilla apple syrup; garnish both sides with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ). (3291). BOATS, PRINTANIER (Bateaux Printaniers). Line a dozen boat-shaped tartlet molds with fine foundation paste (No. 135); cook them white, unmold and leave till cold, then cover the insides with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Strain through a fine sieve the pulp of four or five sound oranges, mix in with their juice two or three spoonfuls of strawberry pulp, and two or three gills of thick syrup flavored with orange peel ( No. 3165 ) and a little isinglass added. Stir the preparation on ice, work it well to a cream, and then mix in at once about half a pound of small, very fresh-picked strawberries; roll them well in with the above, then take some up with a spoon and fill the small boats, having them well-rounded on top; smooth this into a dome and cover with a layer of freshly made raspberry marmalade ( No. 3678 ); let this dry in the air for ten minutes, then decorate the summits quickly with a few spoonfuls of whipped cream pushed through a cornet, having it well drained and only slightly sweetened. (3292). CANNELONS à LA CéLESTINE (Cannelons à la Célestine). Roll out some puff paste parings (No. 146) one-eighth of an inch thick; cut this into five-eighths of an inch wide bands, each fourteen inches long; egg them over, and roll them spirally around some cornucopia-shaped molds an inch and a half in diameter and three inches long; as they are done set on a baking sheet, then place this in a hot oven. When partly cooked dredge with powdered sugar, and finish baking; when cooked unmold and leave to get cold. When serving fill each one with whipped cream into which mix some pastry cream with vanilla (No. 46), crushed macaroons and currant jelly ( No. 3670 ). (3293). CASINOS (Casinos). For these cakes take puff paste made at six turns (No. 146), having it an eighth of an inch thick; cut half of the rolled-out layer in two-inch in diameter rounds with a channeled pastry cutter ( Fig. 16), and range them on a slightly dampened baking sheet, then egg over. Divide the other half of the layer into the same number of rounds, but only an inch and a half in diameter; empty the centers of these with a pastry cutter an inch in diameter so as to form into rings, then lay them on top of the rounds; egg over lightly and decorate the surface of each one with a rosette of fine halved almonds burnt with egg-white and sugar, and then bake the cakes in a hot oven. When done fill the center holes with orange or quince jelly. (3294). CREAM CAKES ICED WITH CHOCOLATE, VANILLA OR COFFEE (Choux à la Crème Glacés au Chocolat, à la Vanille ou au Café). On a lightly buttered baking sheet lay some small round cream cakes made of cream cake paste (No. 132) pushed through a pocket ( Fig. 179); egg over and set into a medium oven to cook; detach them from the pan as soon as done, and when cold split through the sides and fill with vanilla pastry cream (No. 46) and ice over with chocolate, vanilla or coffee fondant (No. 58), the same as eclairs. (3295). CREAM CAKES WITH BURNT ALMONDS AND GLAZED CREAM CAKES (Choux Pralinés et Choux Glacées). Lay on a baking sheet about twelve small cream cakes ( No. 3296 ); egg over and lay on each a small pinch of shredded or chopped almonds, and cover these with a pinch of powdered sugar; cook the cakes in a slack oven and when they become cold open and fill them either with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), currant ( No. 3670 ), quince ( No. 3672 ) or apple jelly ( No. 3668 ), or else with Chantilly cream (No. 50) or St. Honoré cream (No. 49). FIG. 603. An illustration of a cream cake with almonds. FIG. 604. An illustration of a glazed cream cake. FIG. 605. An illustration of a baking pan with twelve cream cakes. To Glaze the Cream Cakes take them up one by one and dip the upper parts into sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171), then lay them at once on a wire grate to drain off the surplus sugar. These can also be filled with pastry cream (No. 46) flavored with vanilla, orange or orange flower water. (3296). CREAM CAKES WITH WHIPPED CREAM OR ST. HONORé CREAM (Choux à la Crème Fouettée ou à la Crème St. Honoré). With some cream cake paste (No. 132) pushed through a socket pocket dress on a lightly buttered baking sheet some small round cakes, an inch and a half in diameter; cover over with powdered sugar and leave stand for a few moments, then remove all the sugar that has failed to adhere to the paste; push into a very slack oven to cook. Detach them from the pan as soon as done and split open the side to fill with pastry cream (No. 46), or whipped cream flavored with vanilla (No. 50). They can also be filled through the top by making an opening and placing the cover on upside down. Push a small string of royal icing (No. 101) around the edge all around the opening. Dredge over some fine pink colored sugar (No. 172) and fill the insides with St. Honoré cream (No. 49) pushed in through a pocket. (3297). CONDé CAKES (Gâteaux Condé). Mix in a vessel four or five spoonfuls of chopped almonds with an equal quantity of powdered sugar; wet slowly with egg-whites so as to obtain a thin but not too flowing paste. Roll out some fragments of puff paste (No. 146) into long strips, three and a half inches wide; cover the tops with the almond preparation and cut the sides straight, then cut them across in one-inch wide pieces; take them up one at a time on the blade of a palette knife and range in straight rows on a baking sheet, slightly apart from each other. Besprinkle the cakes with fine sugar and cook in a slack oven; remove when nicely done by passing a knife under to detach from the pan. (3298). CRESCENTS WITH PRESERVES (Croissants aux Confitures). In order to make these crescents it is necessary to have two cutters: a round channeled pastry cutter ( Fig. 16) and a smooth unchanneled pastry cutter the shape of a crescent, but much smaller than the first one. Roll out some puff paste made to eight turns (No. 146) into eighth of an inch in thickness; from this cut some channeled rounds four inches in diameter and with the same pastry cutter cut the rounds into crescent-shaped pieces. Range half of these crescents slightly apart from each other on a moist baking sheet and wet the tops over with a brush; empty out those remaining with the small and smooth crescent-shaped pastry cutter and lay them on top of those already prepared so that they cover them exactly; egg over and cook in a brisk oven without glazing. When removed press the paste on the empty part and when these crescents are cold glaze them lightly with icing (No. 102), using a brush, and press them on chopped pistachios. Fill the empty place in the crescents with raspberry jelly ( No. 3678 ) or else apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). (3299). DARIOLES DUCHESS (Darioles à la Duchesse). Have in a vessel one ounce of flour, two whole eggs, six yolks and four ounces of sugar, diluting with one pint of cream; pass the whole through a sieve and add to it six crushed macaroons. Line a dozen buttered molds (No. 1, Fig. 137) with puff paste parings (No. 146); into the bottom of each place a little finely cut-up candied fruits, fill them with the preparation and on all lay a small piece of fresh butter; sift the tops with sugar and bake in a hot oven; when the paste is well cooked, unmold on wire grates to cool. (3300). DARIOLES WITH ORANGE FLOWER WATER (Darioles à l'eau de Fleur d'Oranger). Line twelve buttered molds (No. 1, Fig. 137) with puff paste parings (No. 146) rolled out thin. Put into a basin one gill of flour and two ounces of sugar, dilute with two whole eggs, two tablespoonfuls of orange flower water and three gills of milk; stir well and run the preparation through a fine colander; use it to fill the molds, putting a small piece of fresh butter on the top of each. Dredge over with sugar and bake in the oven, unmolding as soon as they are done. (3301). DARIOLES WITH VANILLA (Darioles à la Vanille). Break three eggs in a vessel, beat and add one gill of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), as much flour, the same proportion of dried almonds and a grain of salt, diluting with three gills of good milk. Butter twelve timbale molds (No. 1, Fig. 137) and line them with puff paste parings (No. 146) and place a small piece of butter on the bottom of each, then fill with the above preparation. Lay them on a baking sheet and cook in a slack oven for half an hour; five minutes before taking out bestrew the tops with vanilla sugar and allow them to cool off before unmolding. (3302). D'ARTOIS CAKE WITH APRICOT MARMALADE OR ALMOND CREAM (Gâteau D'Artois à la Marmelade d'Abricots ou à la Crème d'Amandes). Roll some puff paste parings (No. 146) into a layer three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness and cut this into two bands, each three inches wide. Lay one of these bands on a baking sheet and cover the center with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) or almond cream (No. 40); moisten the edges of the paste with a brush dipped in water, then cover with the second band; pare them straight, scallop the edges and mark the band across one and a quarter inches apart with a knife; within this space place leaves formed with the tip of the blade of a small knife. Bake in a quick oven and when the cake is nearly done dredge with sugar and finish cooking and glazing. Cut it through the divided sections with a large sharp knife. (3303). ECLAIRS, COFFEE AND CHOCOLATE CREAM (éclairs au Café ou au Chocolat). Put into a saucepan one pint of water, a pint of milk, half a pound of butter, two ounces of sugar and some salt; place it on the fire. When the liquid begins to boil remove the saucepan and incorporate into it a pound of sifted flour, mixing it in quickly with a spatula; return the saucepan to the fire and continue to work the paste vigorously for a few moments in order to dry and have it smooth, and when it detaches from the bottom of the saucepan take it off the fire and leave it for a second to fall below boiling heat, then incorporate into it slowly two whole eggs, stirring in well with the spatula. As these are well mixed add two more, and continue this operation until the paste has absorbed fourteen or sixteen eggs. With this paste fill three-quarters full a linen pocket furnished with a three-eighths of an inch diameter socket ( Fig. 179), and lay the eclairs through it three and a half inches long, at short distances from each other, on a lightly buttered baking sheet; egg over the tops and cook them in a slow oven. When done take them from the baking sheet and split them through the sides, either with a small knife or a pair of scissors, and fill them up with vanilla pastry cream (No. 46). Immediately dip them to half their depth into chocolate or coffee icing (No. 99) and lay them on a wire grate to drain and dry the icing. Place an instant at the oven door to gloss. FIG. 606. An illustration of an Eclair. (3304). ECLAIRS, VANILLA CHANTILLY (éclairs Chantilly à la Vanille). Boil two gills of water in a saucepan with a grain of salt, a teaspoonful of sugar and four ounces of butter; as soon as the butter rises remove the pan from the fire and incorporate into it five ounces of flour; beat the paste with a spoon until smooth, then stir it once more over a moderate fire until it detaches from the saucepan; this is called drying; take it off and let get partly cold. Then mix into it four or five egg-yolks, one after the other, continuing to stir vigorously, and lastly add two ounces more butter. Pour the paste into a pocket ( Fig. 179), having a three eighths of an inch socket, and push it on a baking sheet in regular rows of eclairs, each one three inches long and a short distance apart; egg over and cook until they become perfectly dry. After removing from the oven detach from the sheet with the blade of a thin knife. When the eclairs are cold split them through the bottom, open and fill with sweet whipped cream flavored well with vanilla (No. 50); cover the tops of the cakes with a little light apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) with vanilla icing (No. 102). As soon as the cakes are iced range them on a pastry grate, and place at the entrance of the oven for a few minutes to glaze. (3305). FRANCILLON CAKES (Gâteaux Francillon). These are prepared with one pound of peeled sweet almonds, fourteen ounces of clarified butter kneaded with twenty ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), also four and a half ounces of flour, two ounces of fecula, ten or twelve egg-yolks, seven or eight beaten whites, and a grain of salt. Pound the almonds with one egg-white, dilute with a glassful of good milk, and pass through a sieve; put the butter into a vessel, and with a spoon beat in the eggs, one at a time. When the whole is creamy mix in the sugar, the almonds, the beaten whites, and the sifted flour and fecula. Line a thin raised-edge baking sheet with sweet paste (No. 136), pour in the preparation, smooth nicely and bake in a slack oven; when unmolded and cold brush apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) over the top, and cut it into small cakes without separating the pieces; ice the surface with kirsch icing (No. 102), and detach from each other only when this becomes dry, then dress. (3306). GALETTES PUFFED AND HALF PUFFED (Galettes Feuilletées et Demi-Feuilletées). Arrange a pound of flour in a circle on a table; in the center put a pinch of salt, two ounces of butter, and sufficient water to form a smooth but not too consistent paste; leave it for some time, then roll it out to the thickness of three-quarters of an inch; on the middle of it place three-quarters of a pound of butter, wrap it in the paste, and roll it once more; give five and a half turns to this paste, mold it into small balls weighing three ounces, then to a perfect round three-eighths of an inch in thickness; lay them on a baking sheet, egg over, trace lines on top to form a lattice work, festoon all around with a small kitchen knife, and bake in a medium oven. Half puffed galettes are made with puff paste parings (No. 146). (3307). GENOESE CAKE-LIGHT (Génoise Légère). Put twelve whole eggs and eight yolks into a basin with one pound of sugar, a part of it being flavored with vanilla (No. 179); beat together vigorously for twenty minutes on a slow fire, barely heating the preparation, and when well beaten and very light mix in lightly one pound of sifted flour, using a small skimmer or spoon, then half a pound of melted fresh butter added a little at a time. Butter lightly a pan twelve inches long by seven and a half wide and two inches deep; glaze it with flour and sugar, half and half, well mixed together and sifted through a sieve. Fill the pan three-quarters full with the preparation, lay it in a baking pan and place it in a slack oven to bake for forty-five to fifty minutes. As soon as the cake is done, remove and unmold it on a wire grate to get cold; afterward cover it lightly with well-reduced peach or apricot jam ( No. 3675 ) and ice over with water icing flavored with vanilla (No. 102); place for an instant at the entrance of the oven to dry the icing; allow to cool; cut the Genoese cake into oblong pieces and serve. This cake can also be made in a round mold and iced exactly the same, decorating the top with candied fruits; dress on a round plate ornamented with lace paper. (3308). GENOESES WITH CREAM MERINGUED (Génoises à la Crème, Meringuées). Butter and flour some tartlet molds, fill them with Genoese preparation ( No. 3307 ) and cook in a slack oven; unmold as soon as done and when cold hollow out the centers. Fill the cakes with a St. Honoré cream preparation (No. 49) flavored with orange; color it lightly with a little green; cover this with meringue (No. 140) laid on in beads pushed through a pocket; spread fine sugar over this and place in the oven to color the meringue. (3309). GOOSEBERRY CAKES AND TARTS (Gâteaux et Tartes aux Groseilles Vertes). Prepare a tart paste (No. 149) with one pound of flour, three-quarters of a pound of butter, five ounces of powdered sugar, two whole eggs, three yolks, salt and lemon flavoring. Divide this paste into two parts and roll them out separately into oblong layers not too thin; roll one of these on the pin to unroll on a large baking sheet, cutting off the four sides evenly, and edge it with a small band of the paste laid on higher, forming a border of half an inch; prick the paste. Cook this flat till it is half done in a very slack oven, not allowing it to brown, then take it out and let get cold. Fill the hollow as high up as the border with blanched gooseberries without boiling, so that they remain whole; smooth them evenly and egg over the raised border. Roll the second flat on the rolling-pin and unroll it on top of the other; press down the edges, fastening them together, and egg the surface. Lay the baking sheet on top of another and push the two into a slack oven (the second one is to prevent the half-cooked paste from burning). When the top paste is well dried remove from the fire and glaze over with a thin layer of fondant flavored with lemon (No. 102); let get cold, then cut the cake into three and a half inch wide strips and these across in such a way as to obtain oblong pieces. Round tarts may be prepared in the same way. (3310). GORONFLOTS (Goronflots). Butter some small tin hexagonal-shaped molds with clarified butter; fill them about three-quarters full with Savarin paste (No. 148); stand them in a mild temperature to have the paste rise as high as the edge, then cook in a moderate oven. Remove and unmold as soon as done; leave to cool and afterward dip each one in a syrup of almond milk (No. 4) with kirsch. (3311). JEALOUSIES (Jalousies). Roll out some puff paste parings (No. 146) to an eighth of an inch in thickness; cut this into three-inch wide bands; lay half of them on a baking sheet and mask the whole length of the center with apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ); wet the edges and cover over with the remaining bands, scored as follows: Fold the bands in two, cut them from the folded side, this cut to be one inch long, the same as the bands for scored favors. Egg the tops, mark them across with the tip of a small knife, then bake in a hot oven. After the cakes are done bestrew with powdered sugar, return for a moment to the fire to have it melt, then divide the cakes. (3312). ROLLED JELLY BISCUIT ( Biscuit Roulé à la Gelée). To make this cake use lady finger preparation ( No. 3377 ), adding a little melted butter; as soon as this is mixed in pour the whole on a paper -covered baking sheet and spread it to a quarter of an inch thick layer, then bake in a hot oven; remove when done, detach from the paper and cover the surface of the cake with a layer of currant jelly ( No. 3670 ), then roll it over on itself to form a roll; wrap this up in paper and leave to cool. When thoroughly cold undo the paper and stand the cake on a wire grate; ice it over with vanilla icing (No. 102). After this becomes very dry cut the cake into crosswise slices, each one three-eighths of an inch thick. The rolled biscuit may also be covered with a layer of Condé almond preparation (No. 2), marking it in the places where the cake is to be sliced. Set the roll in the oven for an instant to color, then cut the cake in the marked places. (3313). LAFAYETTE WITH RUM (Lafayette au Rhum). Pound six ounces of almonds with six ounces of sugar to reduce to a powder, then sift it through a sieve; place this powder in a basin with six eggs and beat till light, then add one tablespoonful of rum, an ounce of flour and four ounces of melted butter. Pour the preparation into tartlet molds lined with puff paste parings (No. 146), strew the tops with sugar and bake in a hot oven. Cover the tops with a thin layer of icing flavored with rum (No. 102). (3314). MADELEINES AND GENOESE MADELEINES (Madeleines et Madeleines Génoises). Place in a vessel nine ounces of sugar, nine ounces of warm melted butter, seven ounces of flour, five whole eggs, four yolks, two spoonfuls of brandy, a grain of salt and some sugar flavored with lemon peel ( No. 3165 ). Stir the ingredients well with a spoon and heat the preparation for two minutes without ceasing to stir, then fill some buttered Madeleine molds two-thirds full; bake them in a slack oven. Genoese Madeleines are made with eighteen ounces of sugar, eighteen ounces of flour, eighteen ounces of melted butter, eight egg-yolks, eight beaten whites, some chopped lemon peel, four spoonfuls of rum and a grain of salt; fill buttered Madeleine molds, bake, finish and serve as above. (3315). COMMERCY MADELEINES (Madeleines de Commercy). Have in a bowl one pound of sugar, one pound of flour, ten egg-yolks and the peel of one lemon; mix well without beating and add a pound of melted butter and finally eight beaten egg-whites. Butter some long shell-shaped molds, flour over and fill three-quarters full with this preparation; strew sugar on top and bake in a medium oven. As soon as baked unmold on a wire grate and serve when cold. (3316). MADELEINES WITH RUM (Madeleines au Rhum). Beat half a pound of sugar with six eggs and a tablespoonful of orange flower water; when it is slightly frothy add half a pound of sifted flour and half a pound of melted butter. Butter and flour three dozen Madeleine molds and fill them three-quarters full with the preparation, strew sugar over and bake in a medium oven; unmold at once and ice with rum fondant (No. 58). (3317). MARILLAN CAKES (Gâteaux Marillan). Bake a baba in a flat mold having a cover, or else in a tin mold covered with another. Moisten the crust lightly with baba syrup ( No. 3227 ) and cut it two-thirds across without detaching it at the further end; empty the crumbs out partly and fill this double crust with flavored whipped cream or else with smooth cooked Italian cream (No. 140). The top and around the base of the cake should be covered with liquid apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) laid on with a brush. FIG. 607. An illustration of a cake with the center filled by whipped cream. (3318). MARS CAKE (Gâteaux Mars). Roll out some foundation paste (No. 135) to an eighth of an inch in thickness; cut this into three-inch wide bands and cover these with a layer of almond cream (No. 40) mixed with as much vanilla pastry cream (No. 46); bake in a slow oven, and when done and cold mask over with a layer of meringue (No. 140), having it three-quarters of an inch thick; smooth the sides and tops well. Slit these bands across one inch and a quarter apart with the tip of a small knife and decorate each section with halved almonds or thin slices of almonds cut lengthwise and laid on symmetrically in imitation of branches, having a dry currant between each one. Cut the cakes where they have been slit, place them on a baking sheet, dredge with sugar and set into a slack oven to color the meringue; the bands may be left whole and divided where they were slit while yet hot. (3319). NOUGAT OF APRICOTS (Nougat d'Abricots). Make a band of brioche paste (No. 130) an eighth of an inch thick and three inches wide; raise up the edges to form a border, fill this entirely with consistent apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and bake in a moderate oven; after it is done cover the top with a layer of shredded almonds mixed with white of egg and sugar and return it to the oven to color the almonds; as soon as finished take it out and cut the cake across in inch pieces, laying them aside on a wire grate to cool. (3320). PALMS (Palmiers). Have some puff paste made to four turns (No. 146); give it four more, dredging each one with sugar; at the very last one roll out the paste to obtain a six-inch wide band and fold this into four on its length, making it join on to the first two that were folded, the two lateral ends being in the center, and then another fold doubling up the band. Cut this into transversal slices a quarter of an inch thick and range them on a baking sheet an inch and a half apart, laying them down flat; sift powdered sugar over and bake in a medium oven; as soon as done detach from the sheet. (3321). PARISIAN CAKES (Gâteaux Parisiens). Lay a band of puff paste parings (No. 146) three and a half inches wide by twelve inches long on a baking sheet; on the edges place small narrow bands of the same or else twist the edge to form a border; fill it with vanilla pastry cream (No. 46); prick the bottom and push into a hot oven. As soon as done remove the band and allow to cool. Then cover with a preparation made of very lightly beaten royal icing (No. 101) into which shredded almonds have been mixed; dredge over with sugar; cut into crosswise slices an inch and a quarter in size; place these on a baking sheet, then in the oven to color; remove and stand on a wire grate to get perfectly cold. (3322). RICE CAKES (Gâteaux au Riz). Line a few oval-shaped timbale molds, the size of the mold shown in No. 1, Fig. 137, with puff paste parings (No. 146); cover the bottoms with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and fill up with a mellow rice cooked with cream (No. 160) and flavored with vanilla, finishing it with a few egg-yolks; on each place a little butter; push the cakes into the oven, and when done unmold and mask them over with a layer of apricot marmalade, or powder with icing- sugar. (3323). ROUEN MIRLITONS (Mirlitons de Rouen). Beat well together three eggs, two ounces of sugar, a gill of orange flower water and three gills of cream; strain the whole through a colander. Pour it into tartlet molds lined with puff paste parings (No. 146), dredge with sugar and push carefully into a hot oven to bake. (3324). SMALL SAVARINS (Petits Savarins). Butter some Savarin molds, dredge shredded almonds on the bottom and fill half full with Savarin paste (No. 148); let rise in a mild temperature until the molds are full, then place them in a brisk oven to bake; unmold as soon as removed and dip them in a syrup made as follows: Into five gills of thirty-two degree cold syrup, add one gill of kirsch, half a gill of maraschino, half a gill of noyau and half a gill of Curaçoa; warm this syrup and then dip in the cakes. When they are well soaked place on a wire grate to drain. (3325). CAKES STUFFED WITH APRICOT (Gâteaux Fourrés à l'Abricot). Roll out some puff paste parings (No. 146) to an eighth of an inch in thickness; cut it into rounds with a channeled pastry cutter ( Fig. 16) two and a quarter inches in diameter. Place half these rounds on a moistened baking sheet, fill the centers with well-reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), wet over the borders and cover with the remaining rounds, fastening them together; egg over twice, mark a rosette on top and push into a brisk oven to bake. When the cakes are almost done sift powdered sugar over and finish cooking, allowing the sugar to melt well. (3326). ALMONDINE TARTLETS (Tartelettes Amandines). Have some tart paste (No. 149) and with it line some tartlet molds; prick the paste and cover the bottoms with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Cut up finely four ounces of peeled almonds; dry them in the oven and then roast to a fine color; when cold pound with half a pound of powdered sugar, and pour this into a vessel to beat with a spoon, incorporating into it one egg-yolk and three whites, having the whole slightly creamy, then add four ounces of chopped candied peel. Fill the lined molds three-quarters full with this preparation, bestrew sugar over the tops and cook in a slack oven; glaze well with sugar before removing. (3327). APPLE TARTLETS (Tartelettes aux Pommes). Line two dozen hollow tartlet molds with fine short paste (No. 135); fill them to half their height with apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ) flavored with vanilla, and on each one lay a round piece of apple cut out with a plain cutter the same diameter as the tartlet. On each slice of apple put a pinch of sugar, then cook in a hot oven. Unmold and cover each one with a thin layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Sour Apple Tartlets. --Have some deep tartlet molds and line them with short paste (No. 135), then fill three-quarters full with sour apple marmalade. Wet the edges of the tartlets and cover with a layer of the same short paste. Egg the surface and lay on each two rounds of parings of puff paste cut out with a channeled cutter and of graduating sizes; egg again and bake in a hot oven. These tartlets can be used as a garnishing for saddles of venison, etc. Sour Apple Marmalade. --Peel and quarter some sour apples, put them in a basin, cover with water and cook on a good fire. As soon as done pour them on a sieve to drain well. Strain the pulp through a sieve into a basin, add the same weight of sugar and let reduce on the fire for a few moments. Pour into jars and leave to cool. (3328). BORDELAISE TARTLETS (Tartelettes Bordelaises). Pound six ounces of almonds with a pound of sugar; sift it through a sieve, then add to it a quarter of a gill of rum and seven egg-whites; beat well together; now put with it three-quarters of a pound of flour and three-quarters of a pound of melted butter and lastly fourteen very stiffly beaten egg-whites. Line scalloped tartlet molds with sweet paste (No. 136); fill them with the preparation, bestrew lightly with sugar and bake in a medium oven. Unmold as soon as done and leave till cold, then dress on top of each a rosette of Italian meringue (No. 140) flavored with vanilla; bestrew with sugar and return the cakes to the oven to color the meringue; garnish between the parts of the rosette with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), apple jelly ( No. 3668 ) or currant jelly ( No. 3670 ). (3329). CHERRY TARTLETS (Tartelettes aux Cerises). Pick the stalks and stones from a few handfuls of fine sour cherries; lay them in a basin, strew over sugar and leave to steep. Line two dozen hollow spindle-shaped tartlet molds with foundation paste (No. 135); fill with the cherries and bake in a brisk oven; unmold as soon as done and leave stand till cold, then cover with a thin layer of currant jelly ( No. 3670 ) dissolved in a little syrup. (3330). COLUMBIA TARTLETS (Tartelettes à la Columbia). Pound four ounces of almonds with five ounces of sugar, afterward adding a gill and a quarter of milk; grind the whole to obtain a fine paste, put it into a vessel, add four ounces of sifted flour and four very stiffly beaten egg-whites. Line some tartlet molds with parings of puff paste (No. 146); cover the bottoms with a little apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ), fill with the preparation and strew sugar over the tops; bake in a medium oven. (3331). DEMONET TARTLETS (Tartelettes à la Demonet). Line a sufficient number of tartlet molds with puff paste parings (No. 146). Put in a saucepan four ounces of sugar, four ounces of butter and half a pint of water; set it on the fire and at the first boil add half a pound of flour; dry the preparation for one second, then remove from the fire and beat in seven or eight eggs singly and a little powdered vanilla and finely chopped citron. Cover the bottom of the tartlet molds with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and fill them with the above paste pushed through a pocket; lay two small bands of paste on top, crossing them; in each triangle place a half cherry; bake in a medium oven. (3332). FANCHONNETTE TARTLETS MERINGUED (Tartelettes Fanchonnette Meringuées). Lay in a vessel three ounces of sugar and one ounce of sifted flour; beat up with five egg-yolks, and dilute with five gills of milk, adding a little vanilla. Pour this into tartlet molds lined with puff paste parings (No. 146), and bake in a medium oven. After they are done cover the tops with a flat layer of meringue preparation (No. 140) and on this form a rosette or any other decoration with more meringue; sprinkle with sugar, and push in the oven for an instant to color. When cold garnish the inside of the decoration with currant jelly ( No. 3670 ). (3333). HéRISSON TARTLETS (Tartelettes Hérisson). Line some oval tartlet molds with puff paste parings (No. 146); fill them with a fanchonnette preparation ( No. 3332 ), flavored with kirsch, and bake in a medium oven; as soon as done let get cold, then put some Italian meringue (No. 140) on top in a dome form, sticking it all over with long thin strips of almonds, sprinkling chopped almonds over all; push into a slack oven to color the almonds lightly. (3334). PEACH TARTLETS WITH RICE (Tartelettes de Pêches au Riz). Prepare a fine foundation paste (No. 135); line some tartlet molds, cover the bottoms with a little apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ), and fill the molds level to the top with rice with cream flavored with vanilla (No. 160), then bake them. As soon as done unmold and lay a compoted half peach on top ( No. 3691 ), placing a circle of meringue points all around; bestrew with sugar, and push in a slack oven in order to color the meringue lightly, and afterward cover the peaches with a light syrup. (3335). PèLERINE TARTLETS (Tartelettes Pèlerines). Butter some plain tartlet molds; line them with puff paste parings (No. 146), and fill with almond cream (No. 40), and pastry cream (No. 46), half of each; cover with a flat of the same paste; cook, unmold, turn them over, and spread with a thin layer of Condé preparation (No. 2); push into the oven, bake and serve. (3336). VALENCIA TARTLETS (Tartelettes de Valence). Crush six ounces of almonds with six ounces of sugar and a few spoonfuls of orange flower water to make it into a paste; add to this two ounces of very finely cut-up orange peel, and five stiffly beaten egg-whites; with this preparation fill some tartlet molds lined with puff paste parings (No. 146); dredge lightly with sugar, and bake in a medium oven. Unmold as soon as done, and when cold ice the tops with orange fondant (No. 58); decorate the surfaces with a rosette made of bits of orange peel, laying a preserved cherry in the center. (3337). VARIEGATED FRUIT TARTLETS (Tartelettes aux Fruits Variés). Have some molds lined with fine short paste (No. 135); prick and put into the bottom a layer of apple marmalade ( No. 3674 ), and over some halved apricots or peaches or a round slice of pear or any other cooked fruit, drained and wiped dry. Bake the tartlets in a hot oven, and after removing, unmold and leave till cold. Then cover with a thin layer of of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) diluted with a little syrup. (3338). WELLS OF LOVE (Puits d'Amour). Roll out some six-turn puff paste (No. 146) to the thickness of three-sixteenths of an inch; cut it out with a two-inch diameter channeled pastry cutter, and lay these rounds on a baking sheet, putting it aside in the ice-box for a few moments to set. Now egg over and mark a round in the center with a small plain cutter an inch in diameter, and bake in a hot oven. A moment before removing bestrew over with powdered sugar, and leave until this is entirely melted and glazed. Then empty them at once, and fill the hollow with currant jelly ( No. 3670 ); strew a few chopped pistachios over, and place a fine preserved greengage ( No. 3679 ) in the center. TEA CAKES (Gâteaux Pour le Thé). Forty to the Pound. (3339). BâLE LECKERLETS (Leckerlets de Bâle). Pour four pounds of honey into a saucepan and stand it on the range; as soon as it rises remove and leave the honey to cool. Arrange five pounds of flour in a circle on the table; in the center lay one pound of sugar, one pound of finely cut-up citron, two pounds of chopped almonds, one ounce of grated nutmeg, one ounce of ground cinnamon, half an ounce of ground cloves, two gills of kirsch, the chopped peel of two lemons, and one ounce of finely crushed carbonate of ammonia. On these ingredients pour the cold honey and mix all together, working the flour in slowly to form it into a smooth, firm paste; leave this in a cool spot to rest for two hours; then roll it with the rolling-pin into flats three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; spread these on slightly buttered baking sheets, and bake in a hot oven. As soon as done remove and allow to cool, then ice them over with cooked icing (No. 102) flavored with orange flower water, applying it with a brush; when the icing is dry cut the flats into small cakes two and a half inches long by three-quarters of an inch wide. (3340). BUTTER PATIENCES (Patiences au Beurre). Beat up with a spatula half a pound of butter and half a pound of sugar with a pinch of salt to make a not too light preparation; add eight eggs, one by one, the peel of a lemon, and lastly one pound of flour, and mix well. Put this paste into a pocket ( Fig. 179) furnished with a quarter-inch thick channeled socket and range it in small biscuits two and a half inches long and one inch apart on a buttered sheet, then bake in a hot oven. (3341). CATS' TONGUES WITH BUTTER (Langues de Chat au Beurre). Work ten ounces of butter to a cream with eight ounces of sugar and two ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ); add slowly eight egg-whites and finally eight ounces of flour. Range this paste on a slightly buttered baking sheet in the shape of three-inch length biscuits, keeping them at a short distance from each other; bake in a hot oven. (3342). CATS' TONGUES WITH CREAM (Langues de Chat à la Crème). Place in a vessel eight ounces of flour, eight ounces of powdered sugar and two ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ); dilute with three gills of rich cream and make a smooth paste, then add six partly whipped egg-whites. Dress this paste on a waxed baking sheet in the shape of small biscuits, each three inches long, pushing them through a quarter-inch diameter socket; bake slowly in the oven. (3343). COCOANUT CROWNS WITH CHERRIES (Couronnes de Noix de Coco aux Cerises). Mix together one pound of grated cocoanut, a quarter of a pound of butter, half a pound of sugar, three whole eggs and two ounces of flour; make this into a paste then leave it in the ice-box for one hour. Afterward mold this paste by hand into balls an inch in diameter, lay them on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet, flatten them a little, egg over, place in the center a preserved cherry and bake in a hot oven. (3344). CROQUETS (Croquets). Put one pound of flour on the table, make a hollow in the center and into it lay half a pound of butter, half a pound of sugar, half a pound of chopped almonds, the grated peel of a lemon, four eggs and two spoonfuls of rum; mix well to obtain a smooth paste; leave this in some cool place to rest for one hour. Then roll it into two-inch wide bands, having them three-eighths of an inch in thickness; lay them on a buttered and flour ed baking pan, egg over and leave rest again for half an hour in a cool place. Mark them with a fork in the shape of small lozenges. Bake them in a hot oven, brush them over with thick syrup, and after removing cut the bands across into small cakes, each one-half an inch wide. (3345). CRUMBLED PASTE CAKES (Gâteaux en Pâte Fondante). Mix slowly with the hands twelve ounces of butter and a pound of flour in such a way as to have it crumbling like semolina, then lay it on a table in the shape of a ring and in the center place twelve ounces of sugar, six egg-yolks, three eggs, some grated lemon peel and a grain of salt. Mingle the whole simply with the blade of a knife and incorporate this liquid into the crumbled flour; work together quickly and roll it into a ball; wrap up in a cloth and leave stand for two hours in a very cool place. Lay the paste on a flour ed table and divide it into small parts; roll out each of these pieces into strings four and one-half inches long; curl both extremities of each string in two spirals, bring these spirals together so as to form a sort of eye-glass imitation, arrange them gradually on a baking sheet and let them dry for two hours. Then bake in a slack oven. (3346). ESPAGNOLETTES (Espagnolettes). Break five eggs in a basin, add three-quarters of a pound of sugar and beat together on a slow fire to have the whole very light, then put in the grated peel of a lemon and three-quarters of a pound of very dry sifted flour. Pour this into a pocket and with it dress the preparation on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet in rounds one inch in diameter; dredge the tops with coarsely chopped almonds; turn the baking sheet over quickly to remove the surplus of almonds, bestrew with sugar and bake in a very slack oven. (3347). JAPANESE CAKES (Gâteaux Japonais). Pound half a pound of unpeeled almonds with half a pound of sugar; pass it through a sieve, add half a pound of flour and mix the whole together. Dress this flour in a crown shape and in the center place four ounces of kneaded butter (No. 579) and three or four egg-whites; work the whole to obtain a fine smooth paste, then leave it rest for one hour in a very cold place; roll it out to an eighth of an inch in thickness and cut this into three-inch wide bands; egg these over and strew with chopped-up almonds. Range the bands two by two, one on top of the other, pressing them down lightly so they adhere together, then cut them across in small sticks three-quarters of an inch wide; lay them on buttered and flour ed sheets and bake in a hot oven; after removing ice over with a brush wet with rum icing (No. 102). (3348). JUMBLES (Jumbles). Work to a cream one pound of butter with one pound of sugar, add a little grated nutmeg and five eggs, one at a time, then a pound and a quarter of flour. Place this preparation in a pocket furnished with a channeled socket five-sixteenths of an inch in diameter and dress on a buttered sheet in the shape of one and a half inch rounds, keeping them an inch and a quarter apart, then bake in a hot oven. As soon as done remove them from the oven and when cool detach at once from the sheet. (3349). LOZENGES (Losanges). Arrange one pound of flour on the table, lay in the center three-quarters of a pound of butter, ten ounces of sugar, a pinch of salt, two eggs and two spoonfuls of orange flower water; mix the whole to have a smooth paste. Push this through a syringe having a scalloped plate on the end into long ribbons one and a half inches wide, and divide these into three-inch long lozenges; lay them on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet and leave in a cool place for half an hour, then bake in a hot oven; when cooked brush over with light gum or with a little icing sugar dissolved in milk. (3350). MARQUIS' HATS (Chapeaux de Marquis). Make a paste with a pound of flour, six ounces of butter, eight ounces of sugar, two whole eggs, two yolks and the peel of a lemon; leave rest in a cool place; roll it out into a flat one-eighth of an inch thick and from this cut channeled rounds two inches in diameter; egg the edges of them all and in the center lay a three-quarter inch diameter ball made of almond paste (No. 125), incorporating into it as much crushed macaroons soaked in maraschino; lift up the edges on the three corners and fasten them together on top of the balls; egg over and leave for half an hour in a cool spot, then bake in a slack oven. (3351). MILANESE (Milanaises). Put four ounces of sugar in a vessel with two egg-yolks and two whole eggs; beat together for a moment to obtain a light preparation, then add two heaping spoonfuls of powdered almonds, four ounces of melted butter, four spoonfuls of finely cut-up citron and half a pound of flour, stirring together well to obtain a smooth paste; leave it in a cool place for half an hour. Roll it out with the rolling-pin to a quarter of an inch in thickness and cut this into bands, each one two and a half inches wide; brush each one with egg-yolks and trace lines on top with a fork; bestrew lightly with chopped almonds and cut them across in rectangles five-eighths of an inch thick; lay them on a buttered sheet and bake in a quick oven. (3352). NANTES (Nantes). Arrange a pound of flour in a circle on the table; in the center lay half a pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, three eggs and four ounces of candied orange peel and citron, chopped very finely; stir well to have a firm and smooth paste, roll it out with a rolling pin to a quarter of an inch in thickness and cut this into rounds an inch and a half in diameter; pinch the edges with a pastry pinch ( Fig. 178) and lay them at once on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet; garnish the centers with a preparation made with an equal quantity of chopped almonds and sugar combined with a little egg-white; let rest for an instant in a cool place, then bake in a medium oven. (3353). PALAIS DE DAMES WITH VANILLA (Palais de Dames Vanillés). Work four ounces of butter to a cream in a vessel; add to it four ounces of sugar partly flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ), then three whole eggs one by one and lastly four ounces of sifted flour. Dress this preparation by means of a pocket ( Fig. 179) on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet and cook in a hot oven. After removing glaze over with a brush dipped in vanilla icing (No. 102). (3354). PISTACHIO NOUGAT (Nougat de Pistaches). Roll out some sweet paste (No. 136) to three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; cut it into small one and a half inch diameter rounds and brush them around with egg-yolks; dredge all around on the brushed part a circle of chopped burnt almonds (No. 1), then lay them on a buttered baking sheet and leave rest for one hour in the ice-box. Bake them in a slack oven and when finished mask the centers with apricot jam ( No. 3675 ) and lay over a round piece of preserved apricot; glaze with rum and bestrew immediately with shredded pistachios. (3355). RIBBONS WITH ALMOND MILK (Rubans au Lait d'Amandes). Pound six ounces of almonds with a little milk. Arrange half a pound of sifted flour in a circle on the table and in the center lay the pounded almonds, half a pound of sugar, six ounces of butter and two egg-yolks; mix all together to have it smooth. Push this paste through a syringe on a lightly flour ed board and form it into long pointed-edge ribbons; cut these in two-inch lengths and range them at once on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet; bake in a hot oven. (3356). SCOTCH BREAD (Pain d'écosse). Roast four ounces of almonds and when cold pound them with half a pound of sugar to reduce to a powder and sift through a sieve. Arrange on the table in a circle half a pound of flour; in the center put the almond powder, four ounces of butter, one egg, one separate yolk and the peel of a lemon; mix well to obtain a smooth paste. Form this with the hands into small spindles two inches long; range them an inch and a half apart on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet, brush over twice with beaten egg-yolks and leave stand for a minute in a cool place; when ready to bake split them in two lengthwise and push into a brisk oven. (3357). SHAVINGS (Copeaux). Partly beat up ten egg-whites; add three-quarters of a pound of sugar, three tablespoonfuls of orange flower water, and three-quarters of a pound of flour; lay this paste through a pocket furnished with an eighth-inch diameter socket or else through a paper cornet, on a waxed baking sheet in the shape of ribbons, each four and a half inches long; bake in a brisk oven, and as soon as done detach from the sheet and roll them spirally around small rollers three-eighths of an inch in diameter, removing them as fast as they get the proper shape. (3358). SUGAR CAKES (Gâteaux au Sucre). Make a ring with two pounds of flour; in the center place one pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, two eggs, four yolks, three-quarters of an ounce of salaratus, a quarter of an ounce of dissolved carbonate of ammonia, the peel of a lemon and a little milk; mix all well together to have a smooth paste; lay this aside in a stone crock, and just when ready to use roll it out very thin and cut it into rounds with a two and a half inch diameter channeled pastry cutter ( Fig. 16), and from the center remove small pieces with a three-quarter of an inch diameter cutter. Range these rings on a butterd sheet, and bake in a hot oven. (3359). TROUVèRE CAKES (Gâteaux Trouvère). Lay a pound of flour in a circle on the table and in the center place half a pound of butter, half a pound of sugar, the peel of one orange and two eggs, also a half-inch ball of carbonate of ammonia, having it finely crushed; mix the whole carefully to obtain a smooth and fine paste, watching attentively that it does not crumble; let it rest for half an hour, then roll it to three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness; cut it into inch and a half diameter rounds with a channeled pastry cutter, range them on a baking sheet, egg over, and trace lines on top with a fork; prick the surfaces and bake in a hot oven. (3360). TUILES (Tuiles). Crush a pound of almonds with a pound and a quarter of sugar and six egg-whites to obtain a paste not too fine; put this into a bowl and beat well to give it body; then add eight beaten egg-whites and vanilla flavoring; mix well. Dress this preparation into flat oval macaroons on buttered and flour ed baking sheets; scatter shredded almonds over, bestrew lightly with powdered sugar and bake in a slack oven. As soon as done detach from the sheets, and bend each one around a wooden roller. (3361). PARISIAN TUILES (Tuiles Parisiennes). Beat four egg-whites to a stiff froth, add seven ounces of sugar, mixing together to form a meringue; then put in one ounce of flour and seven ounces of shredded almonds. Dress this preparation with a fork into small inch and a half diameter balls on a buttered and flour ed sheet; flatten them to three-eighths of an inch with a fork and bake in a slack oven. As soon as done detach and bend on a roller. (3362). CHOCOLATE WAFFLES AND CIGARETTE WAFFLES WITH VANILLA --THIN (Gaufres Minces au Chocolat et Gaufres Cigarettes à la Vanille). Lay six ounces of flour, four ounces of sugar, one ounce of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), and four ounces of powdered chocolate in a vessel; dilute with four egg-yolks, half a pint of double cream partly whipped and four egg-whites also partly whipped. Range this paste with a spoon on a waxed baking sheet into very thin round wafers two and a half inches in diameter and bake in a hot oven. As soon as done roll them on small wooden sticks half an inch in diameter. Cigarette Wafers with Vanilla. --Dilute gradually six ounces of flour, an ounce and a half of sugar and half an ounce of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), with two and a half gills of milk and one egg; stir to have a smooth and flowing paste, then add an ounce of melted butter. Cook this preparation in round, flat wafer irons ( Fig. 608), proceeding the same as for No. 3363 . When of a fine golden color roll them on a small roller three-eighths of an inch in diameter. (3363). WAFERS WITH ALMONDS OR HAZEL-NUTS AND WITH BRANDY--THIN (Gaufres Minces aux Amandes ou aux Noisettes et au Cognac). Grind eight ounces of peeled sweet almonds with four egg-whites; pound them to a pulp to obtain a very fine paste, then add twelve ounces of powdered sugar, part of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ) four ounces of flour and two egg-whites. Mix the whole well, and when the paste is quite smooth add to it four partly beaten egg-whites. Dress this paste in rounds two and a half inches in diameter with a spoon on waxed baking tins, and bake in a hot oven; when of a fine golden color remove from the tins and roll them on half-inch diameter cylinders. FIG. 608. An illustration of a wafer irons. For Hazel- nut Wafers. --Substitute the same quantity of roasted nuts for the almonds. Rolled Wafers with Brandy. --Lay twelve ounces of sifted powdered sugar in a bowl and wet it slowly with ten half-beaten egg-whites, then add six ounces of flour and six ounces of corn starch, two ounces of melted butter, and two tablespoonfuls of brandy. Mix thoroughly to a smooth paste; add a pint of milk and stir until a flowing paste is obtained. Heat two flat, round, wafer irons ( Fig. 608), cover one side with a thin layer of the paste, close the irons, and cook the wafers to a fine golden color. Pare the edges as soon as they are done, then roll each one upon a small inch-diameter roll. FANCY CAKES (Petits Fours). Sixty to the Pound. (3364). AFRICANS (Africains). Make a small lady finger preparation ( No. 3377 ); pour it in a linen bag furnished with a quarter of an inch socket, and lay the cakes on paper in the shape of small rounds an inch and a quarter in diameter; place this paper on a baking sheet, and bake the cakes in a slow oven. As soon as they are done remove them from the sheet and let get cold on the paper, then take the biscuits off, scoop them out on the flat side, and fill in the empty space with pastry cream (No. 46); fasten them together in pairs and dip them entirely in icing (No. 102) flavored with vanilla, rose, coffee or chocolate, removing them with a fork. Drain well on a wire grate, then set them at the oven door an instant to gloss. (3365). AMARETTES (Amarettes). Mix fifteen ounces of sweet almonds with one ounce of bitter almonds, a pound of sugar and four egg-whites, and crush to make a very fine paste; lay this in a vessel, add two more egg-whites and half a pound more sugar; stir well together until the paste is smooth. Mold it with the hands into olive shapes, and range them on a baking sheet covered with paper; leave to rest for four hours in the heater, then bake in a hot oven. After removing from the fire, and while yet hot, detach from the paper, gum over and roll them in finely chopped pistachios, then lay at once on a grate and return to the oven to dry the gum. (3366). BARCELONETTES (Barcelonettes). Pound eight ounces of almonds with a pound of sugar, four eggs and a gill of rum; make a very fine paste and put it in a vessel to add to it six egg-yolks, one at a time, beating them in until the whole becomes very light. Then sift in eight ounces of flour, mixing it in lightly, and lastly ten egg-whites whipped to a very stiff froth. Butter some small molds the shape of small channeled tartlets; glaze them over with icing sugar and fecula, half of each, and fill them three-quarters full with the preparation pushed in through a pocket; scatter chopped almonds over the tops, bestrew lightly with powdered sugar, and cook in a very slack oven; unmold as soon as done. (3367). BIRDS' NESTS (Nids d'Oiseaux). Put four egg-whites in a vessel and beat them up with six ounces of icing sugar to obtain a rather light icing, then add a pinch of cinnamon and a large handful of citron cut in small sticks, and some shredded almonds, having half of each. Mold this preparation with the hand into inch-diameter balls and range them on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet; press a small roller in the center of each to form a hollow in imitation of birds' nests; dry these for one hour in the heater and bake in a very slack oven. After removing fill the centers with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Cover this over with thick kirsch water icing (No. 102) pushed through a cornet, and scatter over the top small candies imitating eggs, and a little green sugar (No. 172). (3368). HAZEL- NUT BISCUITS ( Biscuits aux Noisettes). Crush twelve ounces of roasted hazel- nuts with a pound of sugar and three eggs to make a very fine paste; lay it in a basin and add half a gill of orange flower water and sixteen egg-yolks, one at a time, then beat vigorously until very creamy. Add ten ounces of flour and twelve firmly whipped egg-whites. Pour this preparation on a paper -covered baking sheet; spread it to a three-quarters of an inch thick layer and push in a slack oven to cook. Unmold the cake as soon as done on a grate and leave in a cool place for a few hours. Then pare it very straight and soak it lightly on the underside with Curaçoa; cover the top with reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then cut the cake into small lozenge-shapes two inches long and dip them at once in Curaçoa fondant (No. 58); bestrew with chopped and lightly roasted hazel- nuts. (3369). BISCUITS WITH ALMONDS--ICED ( Biscuits Glacés aux Amandes). Put a pound of sugar in a basin with eight eggs; beat until it is frothy, then add six ounces of almonds thoroughly pounded with two egg-yolks and half a gill of maraschino; continue to beat until the preparation is quite light, then add eight ounces of rice flour, mixing it in gently, and four ounces of melted butter. Pour the preparation on a baking sheet covered with paper, spreading it to a layer one inch in thickness, and place this in a slack oven. Turn the cake over on a grate and keep it in a cool place to rest until the following day. Then wet it over with a brush dipped in maraschino; cover the top with a layer of reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and glaze it with white fondant (No. 58) flavored with maraschino and at once scatter chopped burnt almonds over the entire surface. After the icing is firm cut the cake into small rectangulars an inch and a half long and three-quarters of an inch wide. (3370). CHOCOLATE CHESTNUTS (Marrons au Chocolat). Pound together a pound of almonds and half a pound of sugar to a fine powder and pass it through a sieve; put this strained powder back in the mortar and stirring into it twelve to fourteen egg-yolks continue to pound until a fine paste is obtained, then lay it on a marble slab and incorporate six ounces of softened chocolate; leave the paste in the ice-box for one hour. Roll into strings, cut into small pieces and form these into balls three-quarters of an inch in diameter and shape them to resemble chestnuts; lay them on a paper -covered baking sheet and leave in a cool place for twelve hours. Then cook in a very hot oven and gum them over as soon as removed. (3371). COCOANUT KISSES (Meringues Moelleuses aux Noix de Coco). Place eight egg-whites free from yolks in a basin, whip until they become a stiff froth, then add with a small spatula one pound of sifted sugar, having part of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ), and one pound of grated cocoanut. Wet a board thoroughly, cover it with a sheet of paper, dampen this lightly and on it range small balls of the preparation one inch in diameter, placing them slightly apart. As soon as finished bestrew with powdered sugar and push into a very slack oven to cook from eighteen to twenty minutes. After removing lift from the paper and fasten two by two together. (3372). EXQUISITES WITH CHESTNUTS (Exquis aux Marrons). Have ready a little firm lady finger paste ( No. 3377 ), and with a pocket furnished with a three-eighths of an inch diameter socket dress it into small crowns an inch and a half in diameter, laying them on a sheet of paper; bake in a slack oven. When finished detach from the paper and hollow out the interiors of these crowns slightly on the flat side, then fill them up with chestnut purée; fasten together two by two, cover one side with a little apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and ice with vanilla fondant (No. 58); bestrew lightly all over with very finely chopped pistachios and with a channeled socket placed in a pocket dress in the center of each crown a rosette of Mocha cream. (3373). FILBERT CAKES WITH RUM --SMALL (Petits Gâteaux d'Avelines au Rhum). Roast half a pound of filberts; clean them well by removing their outer reddish skins, then pound with three-quarters of a pound of sugar, two eggs and half a gill of rum, making it into quite a fine paste; lay this in a vessel and soften it gradually with eight egg-yolks, continuing to beat until it is frothy, then add two ounces of finely shredded citron, four ounces of portato fecula, four ounces of melted butter and lastly six firmly beaten egg-whites. Pour this paste on a buttered sheet covered with paper, spread it out to half an inch in thickness and cook in a slow oven. Turn the cake over on a grate when done and leave to cool and set until the following day. Pare and cut it either in lozenges, oblongs or other shapes; steep each one slightly in Jamaica rum and ice over, dipping them into Jamaica rum fondant (No. 58); bestrew the cakes with chopped-up roasted filberts. (3374). FANCY CAKES--SOFT (Petits Fours Moelleux). Crush one pound of almonds with a pound and a half of sugar and five egg-whites; let this paste be very fine; lay it on a table and add a tablespoonful of strawberry essence and three more whites, and beat until it is very smooth and has attained body. Put a part of it in a channeled socket pocket and push it on a paper -covered baking sheet into small cakes shaped like an S, commas, knobs, etc. Decorate each one with a fancifully cut candided fruit or very white almonds and leave to dry in a cool place for four or five hours. Then bake in a hot oven and gum as soon as removed. (3375). JAVANESE (Javanais). Cook a little Genoese preparation ( No. 3307 ) on a baking sheet, having it a quarter of an inch thick. Then divide it into two even parts; cover one of these with a layer of Quillet coffee cream (No. 48) a quarter of an inch thick and lay the other half on top, pressing it down lightly so it will adhere to the cream; cover over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and place the cake in the ice-box to harden the cream. Then cut it out with an oval pastry cutter two and a quarter inches long by one inch wide. Glaze these separate cakes with coffee fondant (No. 58) and in the center of each lay a pinch of lightly burnt chopped almonds. (3376). LADY'S BOUCHéES WITH STRAWBERRIES OR RASPBERRIES (Bouchées de Dames à la Fraise ou à la Framboise). Make a little very firm lady finger preparation ( No. 3377 ); lay it through a pocket on paper in small inch and a quarter rounds and bake them in a moderate oven. As soon as done and cold detach from the paper and hollow each one slightly; fill up this empty space with strawberry or raspberry marmalade ( No. 3678 ) and fasten two together; cover with a light layer of the marmalade and glaze with raspberry fondant (No. 58). (3377). LADY FINGERS ( Biscuits à la Cuiller). Separate the whites from twenty eggs and pour them into a basin; leave the yolks in another vessel; to these yolks add a pound of powdered sugar, part of it being flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ) and beat up to make a very light preparation; then put in one pound of sifted flour and the twenty whites beaten to a stiff froth, stirring the whole lightly together. Pour a part of this preparation into a pocket ( Fig. 179) furnished with a half-inch diameter socket and through it push biscuits four and a half inches in length, keeping them slightly apart and laying them on sheets of paper; bestrew with powdered sugar; put on a baking sheet and leave stand a moment until the sugar begins to dissolve, then push it into a moderate oven. As soon as they are of a light golden color and the crust begins to harden remove at once from the oven and from the baking sheet, then range them on a table till cold. Another Recipe is one pound of sugar, twelve eggs, half a pound of flour, a grain of salt, grated zest or a spoonful of orange flower water. FIG. 609. A baking pan lined up with lady fingers in four columns. (3378). LEMON CROWNS (Couronnes au Citron ). Prepare a very fine paste with ten ounces of almonds, three-quarters of a pound of sugar, a part of it flavored with lemon ( No. 3165 ) and five egg-whites; lay this paste on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet in small crowns an inch and three-quarters in diameter, pushing them through a pocket with a small three-eighths of an inch channeled socket; leave to dry in the heater for four to five hours, and when ready to cook fill the centers with frangipane cream with vanilla (No. 44); dredge over this cream with chopped almonds and cook in a hot oven. Gum over as soon as done, leave to cool and detach from the paper. (3379). MACAROONS (Macarons). Shell and skin one pound of almonds; pound them with two pounds of sugar, having part of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ) and ten egg-whites; make a smooth but not too fine paste; lay it in a vessel to beat with a spatula until it acquires a body. Have a pocket provided with a half-inch diameter socket and push through it macaroons an inch in size, laying them on a paper -covered baking sheet. Moisten the surface with a slightly dampened cloth and cook in a slow oven. (3380). ANGELICA MACAROONS (Macarons d'Angélique). Crush one pound of almonds with a pound and a quarter of sugar and seven egg-whites; make a smooth but not too fine paste; place it in a copper basin and heat while stirring continuously with a spatula; when warm enough remove it at once from the fire to stir in five ounces of finely chopped angelica. Range this paste on a paper -covered baking sheet in small macaroon shapes an inch and a quarter in diameter; dampen the surfaces with a slightly wet cloth, powder over with sugar and bake in a slack oven. (3381). BITTER MACAROONS (Macarons Amers). Pound twelve ounces of sweet and four ounces of bitter almonds with two pounds of sugar and ten to twelve egg-whites; make a paste not too fine but rather soft; work this well to have it attain body, then lay it through a pocket into small oval macaroons an inch and a half long on a paper -covered baking sheet; dampen with a wet cloth and bestrew with granulated sugar; cook in a slack oven. (3382). CHOCOLATE MACAROONS WITH NONPAREIL (Macarons au Chocolat à la Nonpareille). With one pound of pounded almonds, two and a quarter pounds of sugar and ten egg-whites make a smooth but not too fine paste; place it in a vessel, incorporating four ounces of cocoa softened in a mild oven; mix well, adding two or three egg-whites. Dress this paste on paper through a pocket furnished with a socket into small inch-diameter balls; dampen the surfaces with a wet cloth, then cover with white nonpareil, removing the surplus that has not adhered; put the sheet of paper on a baking sheet and cook these macaroons in a slack oven. (3383). CREAM MACAROONS IN CASES (Macarons en Caisess à la Crème). Form a paste with one pound of pounded almonds, two pounds of sugar, one gill of good rich cream, a quarter of a gill of rum, four egg-whites and two orange peels. Put this paste into a vessel and beat it thoroughly to give it body; then add five very stiffly whipped egg-whites, stirring them in gently. Have some small paper cases ready; range them one beside the other, slightly apart, on a paper -covered baking sheet; fill them three-quarters full with the preparation, letting it fall through a pocket; bestrew with powdered sugar and cook in a very slack oven. (3384). DUTCH MACAROONS (Macarons Hollandais). Peel one pound of almonds; pound them with two and a half pounds of icing sugar, part of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ) and add slowly ten egg-whites to obtain a very fine paste; put it into a vessel and work to give body. Push it through a pocket on a paper -covered baking sheet into small oval macaroons one inch in length, and keep them in the heater for twelve hours, then remove and split them in two with a small kitchen knife and cook in a very slack oven. (3385). FANCY MACAROONS (Macarons Fantaisie). These macaroons are made with ordinary macaroon paste, the proportions being one pound of almonds, two pounds of sugar and twelve to fourteen egg-whites, preparing the paste in the manner described in Elementary Methods (No. 138). They can be made in an infinite number of designs, and among others are the following: Angelica Macaroons. --Place the prepared paste in a pocket furnished with a socket ( Fig. 179) and push through four small macaroons five-eighths of an inch in diameter in a straight line, one next to the other, fastening them all together, and decorate the entire line with a stick of angelica, then bake. Gum over after they are done, and decorate the ends with two small beads of pink icing (No. 102) made with syrup. Clover Macaroons. --Dress three rounds the same way but place them in the form of a clover, instead of a straight line; decorate with three lozenges of angelica and then bake. Gum over as soon as they are taken from the oven and on each bead push a spot of green fondant (No. 58) through a cornet. Orange Macaroons. --Have the same paste dressed in small, long ovals; decorate each one with two strips of candied orange peel laid on the bias; cook and gum over. Apple Jelly Macaroons. --Make the macaroons an inch and a quarter in diameter, wet over and cook. After removing them from the oven form a hole in each with a small roller and fill this up with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ). On top dress a bead of white icing (No. 102) pushed through a cornet. Twin Macaroons. --Lay two small macaroons one beside the other in such a way that they adhere together. Wet over and cook. After taking them out of the oven make a hole in the center of each with a very small roller. Fill these holes with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and cover this with a bead of pistachio fondant (No. 58). Currant Jelly Macaroons. --Dress a small macaroon and around it form small beads of the same paste; wet and cook. Remove from the oven and make a hole in the center with a small roller and fill it up with currant jelly ( No. 3670 ), then cover with raspberry icing (No. 102). Decorate with small beads of royal icing. Network Macaroons. --Dress small oval-shaped macaroons, wet and cook. When done make an oval hole in the center of each and fill the hollow with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); cover this with orange fondant (No. 58) and decorate the fondant with a network of royal icing (No. 101). Lyre Macaroons. --Push through the socket in the form of small lyres; at the base of each one range three small beads; decorate to imitate the strings with small sticks of angelica; wet and cook; gum over after taking them out of the oven. (3386). HAZEL- NUT MACAROONS (Macarons de Noisettes). Lay some hazel- nuts on a raised-edge baking sheet and roast them in the oven; as soon as done pour them on a large sieve, rub well to remove their skins and leave to cool. Crush three-quarters of a pound of these nuts and a quarter of a pound of almonds with two pounds of sugar and eight or ten egg-whites; make a paste the same as for plain macaroons. Put this into a vessel and stir well to give it body; then push it through a pocket on paper, dampen with a cloth and bake in a warm oven. (3387). SOUFFLé MACAROONS (Macarons Soufflés). Crush one pound of almonds with two pounds of sugar and eight egg-whites; of this make a fine paste; lay it in a vessel and work, to give it body, then mix in lightly twelve very stiffly whipped egg-whites. Push the preparation through a pocket on paper in the shape of inch and a quarter long macaroons; bestrew lightly with powdered sugar and cook in a slack oven. When done detach from the paper by wetting and fasten the macaroons together two by two with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). (3388). STRAWBERRY MACAROONS (Macarons à la Fraise). Pound together one pound of almonds, two pounds of sugar, five egg-whites and half a gill of strawberry spirit; make of it a plain macaroon paste; put this in a vessel and add a few drops of carmine and four very stiffly beaten egg-whites. Lay the paste through a pocket into small oval-shaped macaroons an inch and three-quarters long on a sheet of paper; dampen with a wet cloth and cook them in a slack oven; remove the paper from the baking sheet and leave the macaroons to get cold. Detach them from the paper and stick them two by two with strawberry preserves. (3389). MADRILIANS (Madriliens). Line some small tartlet-shaped cake molds with sweet paste (No. 136); mask the insides with well-reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Pound four ounces of almonds with four ounces of sugar, two egg-yolks and a few spoonfuls of rich cream; make a soft, fine paste, add to it two ounces of orange peel cut in very small dice, and finally two whipped egg-whites. With this fill the small molds even with the top, strew crystallized sugar over and bake very slowly in a slack oven. (3390). MAGICIANS (Magiciennes). Prepare three pastes of different tints and flavors; have an almond paste with egg-yolks (No. 126), another paste made of pistachios the same as for pistachio lozenges ( No. 3395 ), only keeping it a little firmer, and the third of almond paste as for ordinary fancy cakes (No. 124); into this incorporate a little softened cocoa. Roll these pastes separately to three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness and on the chocolate one spread a thin layer of well-reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); on top of this place the pistachio flat, cover it with more of the same marmalade and lastly put the almond flat on top. Slide this on a grate and leave it stand in a cool place for one hour to set, afterward cooking it in a hot oven; as soon as done and partly cold ice the cake with vanilla icing and divide it into small lozenges. (3391). DEMIDOFF MARCHPANES (Massepains Demidoff). Chop one pound of almonds finely and pass through a fine sieve; also three ounces of candied orange peel. Beat one pound of sugar with ten or eleven egg-whites and make it very light while heating gently, then add four ounces of flour, the orange peel and chopped almonds. Lay this preparation in inch and a quarter diameter rounds on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet; bestrew with chopped almonds, then with powdered sugar and let rest, and then bake in a very slack oven. (3392). ORANGE MARCHPANES (Massepains à l' Orange ). Pound a pound of almonds with two and a half pounds of sugar; add twelve egg-whites, one by one; form into a smooth paste. Lay it in a vessel and continue to work until it acquires body; then add six ounces of finely chopped orange peel; mingle well and dress on buttered and flour ed baking sheets in the shape of oval macaroons one and a quarter inches long; bestrew with powdered sugar and cook in a slack oven; detach and fasten together two by two with apple jelly ( No. 3668 ) flavored with orange. (3393). SOFT MARCHPANES (Massepains Moelleux). Crush one pound of almonds with a pound and a half of sugar, having part of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ) and twelve to fourteen egg-yolks; make this into a fine paste. Run it through a syringe into channeled bands and decorate these at even distances with lozenges of angelica and a preserved half cherry in the center of each; leave to dry in a mild temperature until the following day, then cook in a very hot oven. Gum over when taken from the oven with gum arabic dissolved in water and cut them at once across between the decorations. (3394). ITALIAN COFFEE MERINGUES--SMALL (Petites Meringues Italiennes au Café). Break seven egg-whites in a basin and beat them on a slow fire with a pound of icing sugar to form into a very light and firm meringue, then add to it one good tablespoonful of coffee essence, mixing it in lightly. Lay this through a pocket on a paper -covered damp board into small meringue shapes and cook in a slack oven. As soon as done fasten them together two by two. (3395). PISTACHIO LOZENGES (Losanges aux Pistaches). Have two pastes ready; one made of almonds and the other of pistachio nuts, proceeding as explained herewith: Pound one pound of almonds with eighteen ounces of sugar and four or five egg-whites, obtaining a rather stiff paste; roll this out with the rolling-pin to a quarter of an inch in thickness. Besides this pound fourteen ounces of pistachio nuts with one pound of sugar and two ounces of chopped candied orange peel, using sufficient egg-whites to make a fine paste of the same consistency as a macaroon paste. Spread the pistachio layer on top of the almond one, slip it on a paper-covered baking sheet and push into a moderate oven to cook. As soon as the cake is done remove it from the fire and leave to cool partly, then spread over a coating of royal icing (No. 101), dredging the top with shredded pistachios. Cut at once into lozenges two inches long; range the cakes, one beside the other, on a baking sheet covered with paper and lay them for a few moments in the oven to dry the icing. (3396). PISTACHIO TOURONS (Tourons aux Pistaches). Obtain a fine firm paste with half a pound of pounded almonds, three-quarters of a pound of sugar and three or four egg-whites. Roll it out to a quarter of an inch in thickness, then cover with royal icing (No. 101), into which mix ten ounces of chopped pistachios and half a grated orange peel. Cut this paste into small sticks each two and a quarter inches long by five-eighths of an inch in width; range them on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet and cook in a slow oven. (3397). QUILLETS--SMALL (Petits Quillets). Line some small tartlet shape molds with parings of thin puff paste (No. 146), and let rest for some time. Mix three parts of cream cake paste (No. 132) with one part of pastry cream (No. 46) and with this fill the molds as far as the edges; bestrew the tops lightly with powdered sugar, then bake in a slack oven. As soon as done turn them out of the molds and leave to cool off; scoop out partially and refill with Quillet cream (No. 48). Ice the tops with vanilla fondant (No. 58). (3398). PIGNON ROCKS WITH WHITE AND PINK ALMONDS (Rochers aux Pignons aux Amandes Blanches et Roses). Whip eight egg-whites in a basin with a pound of icing sugar, a part to be flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ); beat over a very slow fire and as soon as it begins to feel light and slightly warm take the basin from the fire and continue the beating process until perfectly light, then add one pound of pignons, mixing them in gently, or shredded almonds mixed the same. Dress the preparation with a fork into balls about an inch in diameter, lay them on waxed baking sheets and bake in a very slack oven. For the pink rocks with almonds or pignons mix in the preparation before adding the nuts one tablespoonful of spirit of raspberry and a little carmine, then finish as above. (3399). ROCKS WITH ORANGEADE (Rochers à l'Orangeade). Incorporate some icing sugar with three egg-whites to have a rather light icing; add to it four ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) and half a pound of shredded almonds slightly roasted in the oven and a quarter of a pound of thinly sliced candied orange peel. Roll out some sweet paste (No. 136) to an eighth of an inch in thickness, divide it into small inch and a half diameter rounds and range these on a buttered baking sheet; on each one lay a ball of the above preparation an inch and a quarter in diameter and cook in a slack oven. (3400). CHERRY STICKS (Bâtons aux Cerises). Crush one pound of almonds with two pounds and three-quarters of icing sugar, having part of it flavored with vanilla ( No. 3165 ) and eight to ten egg-whites; obtain a very fine paste, then spread it out three-eighths of an inch in thickness and let rest in a cool place for an hour and a half to two hours; cover the flat with a layer of the same paste, softened with more egg-white. Divide it into bands, each two and a quarter inches wide, and cut these in crosswise sticks, three eighths of an inch in width; decorate each one with four halved cherries, the cut side down, and lay them on a baking sheet covered over with paper; bake in a medium oven. (3401). VANILLA STICKS (Bâtons à la Vanille). Beat one pound of almonds with two pounds and three-quarters of icing sugar and a quarter of a pound of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ), adding seven beaten egg-whites; obtain a very fine paste. Let it stand for a few hours in a cool place, then roll it out with the pin to three-eighths of an inch in thickness; cover the top with a layer of royal icing (No. 101). Cut this flat into bands two and a quarter inches wide, and these into sticks five-eighths of an inch long; lay them at once on a baking sheet covered with paper; cook in a very slack oven. (3402). APRICOT TARTLETS (Tartelettes d'Abricots). Pound one pound of almonds with three pounds of sugar, a quarter of a pound of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) and ten to twelve egg-whites; make a fine and firm paste. Roll this out with the rolling-pin to one-eighth of an inch in thickness, and with it line some small hollow tartlet molds; unmold on a baking sheet and let dry well in the heater. Fill the insides of the small tartlets with reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), and glaze with apricot fondant (No. 58). (3403). STRAWBERRY TARTLETS (Tartelettes de Fraises). Line some oval-shaped small cake molds with a thin coating of almond paste (No. 124). Crush eight ounces of pounded almonds with eight ounces of sugar, two ounces of strawberry marmalade ( No. 3678 ), a little maraschino and two egg-whites; make this into a smooth but not too fine paste, color it slightly with carmine and incorporate five well-beaten egg-whites into which has been mixed an ounce of sugar, continuing to beat all the time. Fill the molds to the tops with this, bestrew the surfaces with powdered sugar and cook in a slow oven; unmold when done, cool off and ice over with fondant (No. 58) flavored with strawberry. (3404). VENETIANS (Vénitiens). Chop up a pound of almonds with a quarter of a pound of peeled, dried pistachios, and press them through a sieve ( Fig. 96). Put sixteen egg-yolks into a basin with a pound and a quarter of sugar; beat till a light mixture is obtained, then add the powdered almonds, two ounces of fecula and six firmly beaten egg-whites. Turn this preparation on a baking sheet covered with paper in three-quarters of an inch thick layers and cook it in a slack oven; when done unmold on a grate, leaving it there until quite cold. Cover it with a thick layer of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and bestrew with shredded pistachios. As soon as the apricot is hard cut the cake into rectangulars two inches long by one inch wide. BAKERY (Boulangerie). An illustration of a bundle of wheat. (3405). BREAD MAKING. Although bread is considered a plain, simple food, yet it plays a very important part on the table and in the kitchen work. The preparation it requires in the kitchen, and the labor it demands, are almost innumerable, therefore I consider it necessary to give a few suggestions as to the manner of manipulating. These suggestions, of course, are only meant as a guide for the skilled practitioner, for to obtain perfect success in bread making requires both the experience and judgment of the workman, and he should always take in consideration, while performing his task, all that stands in relation to his work: The season, the weather, the temperature, the quality of the flour employed and its strength, the different kinds of flour entering into the mixture, the preparation of the dough, yeasts and ferment, the size of the bread, the quantity of either the first or second batch, the nature of the combustible for heating the oven and its capacity. All these are most useful points to study and to remember, but can only be learned by practice, from whence experience arises. Both the judgment and tact must be utilized if success in bread making be desired. (3406). NECESSARY UTENSILS FOR BREAD MAKING (Ustensiles Nécessaires à la Fabrication du Pain). The utensils needed for bread making are few, and generally of a simple kind. A range for cooking the potatoes for the ferment and heating the water. An enameled cast-iron pot to cook the potatoes . Two tubs , each twenty inches in diameter and thirty inches deep--one to prepare the yeast in, the other for the ferment. A pestle for crushing the potatoes used to prepare the ferment. A sieve ( Fig. 97) to strain the hop water for preparing stock yeast and common yeast. A sieve ( Fig. 96) for sifting the flour. A strainer for straining the ferment. A poker or long iron hook, when the oven is heated by wood, to remove the embers. This is not used in the modern ovens heated with coal. A tub or pail to be filled with water into which the mop used for cleaning the oven is plunged. A swab or long stick on the end of which a heavy cloth or mop is attached. A dipper or tin vessel with a handle, generally holding about two quarts; it is used for measuring the water, yeast and ferment. A scraper or polished iron plate, four inches long by five and a half inches wide, with a handle; this is used to remove the dough adhering to the sides of the kneading trough; it is also used for cutting the dough into pieces. Square wooden boxes, measuring thirty inches wide by thirty-two inches long and four and a half inches deep in the inside. It is in these boxes, either simply dredged over with flour or else covered with a layer of coarse linen, that the dough rests after being cut up in all the operations succeeding the molding. Long and narrow wooden crown boxes, measuring in the inside sixteen inches wide by four feet ten inches long and three and a quarter inches deep. It is in these boxes, after they are covered with a layer of coarse linen, that the crowns are placed and left until ready to put in the oven. Long strips of coarse linen in proportionate width to the boxes they are intended for. These strips are laid in the boxes, and on these the bread rests until ready to be baked. Two hard wood rolling-pins, one three feet long and an inch and three-quarters in diameter; the other two feet long and five-eighths of an inch in diameter. The longest one is used to split the crowns, and the shortest to split the rolls. Two small hard wood boards, four inches long by thirty inches wide and half an inch thick on one end, then sloping down to scarcely nothing on the other, on the long side of the board. Cover one of these with thin flannel, to be used to remove jockos from the piece of linen, to place them on the peel, when sufficiently raised to be put in the oven; the other one remains uncovered and is used for raising the rolls from the linen when ready to cook. A round board half an inch thick and fifteen inches in diameter, furnished with a handle; the crowns are inverted from the linen on this to transport to the peel, just when ready to place in the oven. Wooden and iron peels and a shovel, one five inches wide by forty-one inches long. It is used for putting the jockos into the oven. Another of the same length and twenty inches wide is used to put all the small rolls and crowns in the oven, also to take them out, as well as the jockos. A third iron peel, seven by ten inches in length, is used for putting in and removing the molded loaves and those on tins. A shovel for coal, to be wide and quite deep. Baking pans of Russian sheet-iron with high sides, sixteen inches long by eight inches wide and three and a half inches deep. These pans are used for American two-pound loaves. Others, measuring twenty-four by nineteen inches wide, are intended for sweet rolls and muffins. Sheet-iron molds with hinged covers of two different sizes, one containing seven pounds of dough as in Fig. 610, for loaves intended for sandwiches and crusts; the other containing twelve pounds of dough, these loaves to be used for large croustades, supports and bread-crumbs. Fig. 610 mold contains seven pounds, and is twenty inches long by five and a half wide, and five inches deep; at the bottom it is a quarter of an inch shorter and a quarter of an inch narrower than at the top. The other mold must be thirteen inches long by nine inches wide, and at the bottom a quarter of an inch shorter and a quarter of an inch narrower than at the top; that is, twelve and three-quarters by eight and three-quarters inches. The depth should be nine inches. A kneading trough, a large wooden case, generally thirty inches wide at the top and twenty-two inches at the bottom, twenty inches deep and eight feet long. FIG. 610. An illustration of a sheer-iron mold with hinged cover. (3407). TO MAKE BREAD (La Fabrication du Pain). Bread making is divided into the following operations: The preparation of the stock yeast, the yeast, the ferment, the leaven, the dough, the molding and the baking. (3408). STOCK YEAST (Fond de Levain). Boil five quarts of water. Put in a stone jar five ounces of flour; dilute it with a part of this boiling water, sufficient to obtain a very firm paste; put into the remainder of the water one ounce of hops; let boil for ten minutes, then remove the liquid from the fire and run it through a fine sieve into the stone jar and over the paste. Set this jar in a cool place until the liquid is only lukewarm. Then dissolve the paste with the water, and add to it four ounces of malt; cover the pot, and leave it in a rather warm temperature for forty-eight hours, where it cannot be disturbed; when this time has expired strain the liquid through a sieve into another stone jar. The stock yeast is now ready to be used. (3409). YEAST (Levure). All the utensils used for making yeast and leaven should be kept scrupulously clean, as also the tubs. Put fifteen quarts of water into a large pot; set it on the fire and remove it at the first boil. Lay two pounds of flour in the bottom of a tub, dilute it with a pint of boiling water and make a sufficiently hard paste. Put into the rest of the water in the pot three ounces of hops and let boil for ten minutes, then remove from the fire and strain the boiling liquid at once through a fine sieve into the tub and over the paste; set this tub in a cool place and leave it till the liquid is only lukewarm, then with the hands work the paste well into the water; add immediately one quart of barley malt and a quart of stock yeast, mixing all well together. Set the tub in a moderate temperature and leave without disturbing it while fermenting, which process will take place in eighteen to twenty hours. By attending to these elementary details with care a perfect baking will ensue. Strain the yeast through a fine sieve into another tub and set this in the ice-box or any cool place, to use as needed for the preparation of the ferment. This yeast will keep perfectly good for four days. (3410). FERMENT (Ferment). Wash seventeen quarts of small potatoes , put them into an enameled iron pot, pouring over sufficient cold water to cover; place the pot on the fire, and let them boil uninterruptedly until well done, then remove. Throw the potatoes into a large tub, add two and a half pounds of flour, mash well together with a pestle to reduce the whole to a smooth paste, then dilute this paste gradually with twenty-two quarts of water, either cold or barely lukewarm, according to the temperature and season; afterward add five quarts of yeast, and mix the whole well together. Cover the tub with a cloth, and set it in a moderately warm place where there is no danger of its being disturbed and leave it until fermentation takes place, which means until it rises to double its height and falls again to its normal state. The fermentation should take place in from seven to eight hours. With this quantity of ferment a barrel of flour can be used. (3411). LEAVEN (Levain). Sift a barrel of flour into one end of the kneading trough; into the other end strain thirty-one quarts of ferment through a colander, and work enough of the flour into it to form a dough, not too consistent; gather up this dough into a small space in the trough and keep it in position with a movable board which answers for a partition; dredge it over with flour, and cover with the lid of the trough, then leave it to rise for three hours; at the end of that time the sponge should be double its size and ready to fall again; it is then ready for the dough. (3412). THE DOUGH (La Pâte). Remove the supporting board and let the sponge cover a larger space in the trough; pour over it twenty-nine quarts of water and three pounds of salt dissolved in a part of the water, then mix the whole together until the sponge is well blended; then dredge over the half of the remaining flour and knead well together with the hands, giving them a vertical rotary movement, going and coming from one end to the other of the dough; it should now be rather soft and begin to acquire body. Pour the remainder of the flour in one layer over all the paste and knead it once more, but this time cutting it into small pieces with the hands and superposing these pieces at once, one on top of the other; as soon as all the flour is absorbed, then push all of the dough to one end of the trough. Cut from the whole of it a piece weighing twenty-five pounds; knead it strongly, blowing and beating it forcibly against the sides of the trough, which means to take the piece of dough by the two lateral ends, raise them to the height of the chest, stretching out the dough and bringing it down heavily against the sides of the trough in such a way as to imprison all the air possible, and give it consistency; repeat the same operation with the remainder of the paste. Superpose the pieces of dough as quickly as they are done, one on top of the other, at the other end of the trough; repeat this operation a second time, then a third and even a fourth time, until the dough has acquired the desired body, then gather it together into a small space in the trough, holding it up with the well- flour ed board wedged against it. Dredge over lightly with flour, cover and leave it to rise for one hour. The dough is then ready to mold. (3413). BREAD WITH BUTTER, VARSOVIAN (Pain au Beurre à la Varsovienne). Make a small leaven with four ounces of flour, half an ounce of yeast and sufficient warm milk to form it into a softish paste; mold it into a ball, lay in a vessel, dredge with flour, cover with a cloth and leave it in a mild temperature to raise the leaven to double its size. Sift three-quarters of a pound of flour on the table, form a hollow in the center and in it put a pinch of salt, five ounces of melted butter and half a gill of milk; make the dough of the same consistency as a brioche paste; incorporate the leaven, cutting it up to mix it well with the paste without kneading it. Lay this paste in a vessel, dredge with flour, cover with a cloth and leave it to rise in a mild temperature. Turn it over on the table when it attains twice its original size; cut it up and divide it into pieces; with each of these form a ball an inch and a half in diameter; range them on buttered baking sheets at a distance of an inch and a quarter apart and let rise to double their size; brush over with egg diluted with milk and bake in a moderate oven. (3414). CRESCENTS WITH BUTTER --FINE (Croissants Fins au Beurre). Make a rather firm leaven with half an ounce of yeast and six ounces of flour; let it rise in a mild temperature. Arrange twelve ounces of flour in a circle, lay a little salt in the center and moisten with a small quantity of milk, adding four ounces of butter; dilute the paste, keeping it rather firm, then add the leaven; when this is well mingled lay the paste in a vessel, cover over and leave to rise slowly, without any heat; after it is well risen cut it up on a flour ed table and divide it in parts the size of an inch and three-quarters diameter ball; mold each one in a round form and flatten with a roller; spread to a thin oval an eighth of an inch in thickness. With the left hand take hold of the nearest end and with the right roll the opposite end, then bring the two ends quickly together at the same time, being careful to draw the paste lightly with the left hand so as to keep the cake quite thin; this operation should be deftly and speedily performed. As soon as a band is rolled lay it on a baking sheet, ranging it in the shape of a crescent. Leave the paste to rise slowly once more, then wet with a brush dipped in water and push into a hot oven; after removing dampen the tops with fecula cooked in water to the consistency of a light syrup, applying it with a brush; this helps to give gloss to the cakes. (3415). CROWNS (Couronnes). For twelve crowns: Take thirty-six pounds of dough; divide it into twelve parts of three pounds each, and mold all the pieces into separate balls; flatten them to a third of their thickness. Lay these in lightly flour ed boxes and leave them to rise for half an hour; then remove them from the boxes and lay them on the table, one by one, to flatten out; roll over in four and finally stretch out to the shape of a roll twenty-six inches long. As soon as they are done return them to the boxes and leave them to rise for twenty-five to thirty minutes, then take one of them from its box and lay it on the table; with a wooden rolling-pin, as described in the bread -making utensils, split the dough through its whole length without separating it entirely, forming a depression along the center an eighth of an inch in thickness, separating the dough on each side, two and a half inches apart; then take up the furthest edge of the dough, and raising it, bring it forward toward yourself in such a manner as to partially envelop the other edge of the dough. Bring the two ends together and fasten so as to form a crown. Transfer this into another long box as explained in No. 3406 , covered inside with a piece of coarse linen, laying the split side underneath; continue to mold all the other balls in a like manner, then cover and leave for an hour and a half. As soon as they are suffieiently raised take the round board with a handle, as denoted in No. 3406 , in the right hand, and lay it on the right of one of the first molded crowns, slanting it slightly against the crown; at the same time with the left hand take hold of the piece of linen which extends beyond the crown on its left, and with a deft stroke turn the crown over on the board without injuring its shape; transfer this crown on the board and slip it on to the peel, then push it at once into the oven. Continue the same operation for all the other crowns until they are in the oven and leave them there for thirty to thirty-five minutes. (3416). JOCKOS--FRENCH LOAVES (Jockos). Lay on the table a part of the dough from the trough; divide it up into pound and a half pieces each and mold them into balls as soon as they are weighed; flatten them down to a third of their thickness, and range them two inches apart in boxes previously bestrewn with flour. When a box is full sprinkle the balls lightly with flour, cover them hermetically by laying another box of the same size on top; fill this one the same as the first, and cover in a similar manner, and continue this process until there are sufficient of them. Over the last box set an empty one and let raise for twenty to twenty-five minutes; take the first ones molded, and with the hands roll and pull them out in a way to give them a cylindrical shape, twenty-two inches long; lay these on a bed of Indian meal previously spread over one end of the table, and leave them there for a few moments--sufficient time to allow the meal to adhere to the dough. Range in a box a long piece of coarse linen, the right end extending up two inches against the side of the box; lay on this piece of linen, against this side, one of the rolls of dough, putting the side the meal is on at the bottom; raise the linen on the left side of the paste in such a manner as to form it into a fold parallel to the roll of dough, to serve as a support, so that the dough when rising does not flatten out, but stands up vertically, which helps to give the bread its round shape. Roll out another roll of dough to form a second roll, the same as the first; lay it in the meal, and then range it on the piece of linen, against the first roll; raise the linen to form a fourth fold to maintain the third roll of dough, and continue the same until the box is full. Cover it hermetically, laying another box on top, and fill it up the same way; when all the balls have been rolled out let them rest for one hour and a half to two hours, according to the temperature and season, or until they rise to a third of their original size. Now take the thin covered board, as explained in bread -making utensils, in the right hand and insert it sideways on the right of the first roll of molded dough, between the fold of linen and the dough; at the same time, with the left hand, take the end of linen on the left of the dough, and hold it so that the dough can be rolled over on this board; transport this roll of paste, and turn it over on the peel; score four slanting incisions at once on its back, using for this the tip of a small knife, and set it into the oven; continue the operation until all the jockos are in the oven, then close it up for fifteen minutes; at the expiration of this time the jockos should be baked. Begin taking out the first ones put in, and continue according to the order they were placed in the oven until all are removed. (3417). LOAVES IN BOXES AND PANS OF TWO, SEVEN AND TWELVE POUNDS EACH (Pains en Boîtes et en Plaques de Deux, Sept et Douze Livres Chaque). For sixteen pan loaves, two pounds each, lay on the table thirty-two pounds of dough; cut it into sixteen pieces of two pounds each, and mold them into balls; flatten and range them in lightly flour ed boxes to rise for one-half hour; flatten again and lift up the four corners, fold the dough in two, and again in such a way as to form a roll or stick, eight inches long by four inches in diameter; lay these as soon as done in pans sixteen by eight inches with raised edges ( No. 3406 ), previously greased over with lard; lay four in each, very close, one beside the other, and leave them one hour to rise, then push them into a moderate oven to bake for three-quarters of an hour; as soon as they are done remove and turn them out at once. For seven-pound loaves to cut up for sandwiches and croûtons, and for twelve-pound loaves for large croustades and bread-crumbs, roll them out, and prepare the same as the two-pound bread, putting seven or twelve pounds of dough into each, according to the size of the mold. Butter or grease the molds, close the lids, and let rise for one hour, then push them into the mildest spot in the oven. To bake a seven-pound loaf of bread it will take an hour and a quarter; a twelve-pound loaf takes about two hours; when done, remove from the oven and unmold. (3418). PASTE FOR FINGER ROLLS AND SMALL ROLLS (Pâte à Petits Pains). The ingredients are one pound of flour, two eggs, three-quarters of a gill of milk, salt, two ounces of butter, half an ounce each of sugar and yeast. Make a little leaven with a quarter of the flour and the yeast, diluting it with a little warm water; leave this in a vessel, cover and place in a temperate place so that it rises to double its height. Lay the balance of the flour on the table; make a hollow in the center and in this put a pinch of salt, the sugar and a little tepid milk, then the eggs and mix, drawing in the flour gradually and adding the rest of the tepid milk. When all is mixed bring the dough together and knead it well, striking it on the table for a few minutes (the object of this being to incorporate as much air as possible in the paste ); when the paste has plenty of body add half the butter to it and continue the kneading until the butter is well worked in, then add the rest of the butter and knead again, working the paste a few minutes longer. Now put in the leaven, mixing it lightly with the dough, set into a vessel, cover with a cloth, and let it rise in a moderate temperature. As soon as this dough is sufficiently raised divide it into pieces of a pound each; roll out these into ropes half an inch in diameter, and dividing these ropes into twenty equal-sized parts give each one a round shape by rolling them on the table with the palm of the hand; roll them out to the shape of small rolls two and three-quarters inches long, pointed at both ends, and lay them on a slightly buttered baking sheet, keeping them about one inch apart, then leave them to rise in a gentle temperature. As soon as they are sufficiently raised brush them over with beaten eggs twice, and bake in a warm oven. (3419). FINGER ROLLS (Flûtes Longues). Sift two pounds of flour on the table, divide it into four parts and in one of the quarters form a hollow; set into it an ounce and a half of yeast, diluting with a gill and a half of lukewarm water; work the flour into the liquid in such a way as to obtain a soft leaven; mold it round shape and indent a cross on top; lay it in a vessel into which a few spoonfuls of tepid water have been deposited; cover over and let rise to double its size for twelve to fifteen minutes. During this time range the balance of the flour in a circle, and lay in the center two ounces of sugar, half an ounce of salt, two whole eggs and two and a half gills of barely warm milk; mix the ingredients together, and then incorporate gradually all of the flour; the dough must now be consistent; knead it well and cut it up with the two hands, and beat it on the table for a few moments so that it acquires body; add two ounce of butter and continue kneading for a few minutes longer. As soon as the leaven is ready mix in thoroughly with the dough but without kneading again; lay this in a basin, sprinkle over lightly with flour, cover and let rise for one hour in a mild temperature. At the expiration of that time it should have doubled its original height; knead it once more and divide it into half-pound pieces; divide each into twelve small pieces, obtaining three-quarters of an ounce in each one, then mold these into small balls and set to rise for twenty minutes, afterward rolling them out with the hand into four and a half inch lengths; range them at once on a lightly buttered baking sheet; when it is full place it in a box and close hermetically; continue to prepare and mold the remainder of the dough, and when all are done examine the first ones that were molded, and should they be sufficiently raised, or increased to a third of their original size, brush them over with beaten eggs and bake in a hot oven. (3420). FLUTES AND SPLIT ROLLS (Flûtes et Petits Pains Fendus). Flutes and split rolls are made with a dough slightly stiffer than for the jockos; generally both of these kind of rolls are molded at the same time. Prepare a bread dough as explained before, working it exactly the same, the only difference being it must be kept a little stiffer; let it rise for one hour; knead it again to stop the fermentation and remove it from the trough to the table. Divide it up into two and a half ounce pieces and form them into balls; range these at short distances from each other in slightly flour ed boxes; set the boxes one on top of the other as fast as they are filled and leave them to rise for fifteen to twenty minutes; at the expiration of this time the balls are ready to be molded into any shape desired. For Flutes or French Rolls. --Lay on the table two of the balls of dough, beginning with those first molded; flatten them down with the palm of the hand, raise the ends of the dough and press these ends together; roll them out on the table with the hands to finish lengthening them, then lay at short distances from each other in boxes lightly dredged with white Indian meal. Continue thus until half of the balls are rolled out. Cover these boxes by setting one on top of the other and leave them to rise for twenty-five to thirty minutes. For Split Rolls. --During the time the flutes are rising split the remainder of the balls of dough. Take six of these balls and range them on the table in rows of two and two, then with a small rolling pin, as described in the article on utensils, split two of them through at the same time; take hold of the edge of the farthest side of each piece and bring it forward; wrap it over half of the front piece so that the molding is on top and the split side underneath, then take these split rolls, one in each hand, and range them against the right side of a box that is already lined with a strip of coarse linen, laying the split side underneath; raise up the linen on the left of the rolls to form a fold which answers for a support, so that while the rolls are rising they cannot fall again. Take six more balls of dough, range them on the table two by two, the same as the first ones; split and lay them on the linen against the others, and continue this operation until all the rolls are shaped. Cover the boxes as fast as they are filled, and leave them to rise for twenty-five to thirty minutes. As soon as all the rolls are split examine the flutes to see whether they are a third larger than when molded; if so they are ready to be placed in the oven; brush them over with beaten eggs diluted in a little water, using a feather brush; take them up delicately with the hands, one by one, and lay them on the peel; cut three slanting incisions on each with the tip of a small knife and place them in the oven. As soon as they are all in, close the oven door for ten to twelve minutes, according to the degree of heat therin; when a fine golden color take them out, beginning with those first put in. By this time the rolls ought to be ready to go in the oven; take them from the linen, six at a time, turning them over on to the board, as described in the bread -making utensils, having the split sides uppermost, removing them exactly the same as the jockos; slide them on the peel, and place them in an oven not too hot; as soon as they are all in close the door for a few minutes, and when done take them out, beginning with those first put in. (3421). SWEET ROLLS, CRESCENTS AND MUFFINS (Petits Pains au Lait et au Beurre, Croissants, Muffins). How to Prepare the Dough. --Sift eight pounds of flour into a large wooden bowl; make a hollow in the center and lay in it three ounces of yeast; diluting with three pints of barely lukewarm water, make a soft sponge, sprinkle it over with flour and leave it to rise in a mild temperature for three hours, more or less, according to the heat, and until the sponge doubles itself, then moisten with three pints of milk into which has been dissolved half a pound of sugar and three ounces of salt, incorporating at the same time a pound and a half of butter; knead well and divide it into small pieces. As soon as it is thoroughly mixed incorporate sufficient flour to make a consistent dough and knead it well to give it plenty of body. The dough being now finished cut it into three parts. Sweet Rolls. --Put one of these parts into a vessel, sprinkle it lightly with flour and leave it to rise for an hour and a half. Crescents. --Take the second piece of dough, put it into a basin and incorporate four ounces of butter; work well so that it is well mixed, then leave it to rise for one hour and a half. Muffins. --To the third and last piece add a little milk to soften and obtain a mellow dough, keeping it sufficiently firm to be able to mold with the hand on the table; take it out of the bowl, dredge the latter with flour and return the dough to it; besprinkle flour over the top, cover and leave it to rise, the same as the other two, for one hour and a half. At the expiration of this time the three pieces of dough should be raised to double their height. Knead them again to prevent fermentation; they are now ready to be divided and molded. Sweet Rolls. --Begin with the sweet rolls and operate as follows: Break it into two-ounce pieces; roll these into balls and place them as fast as they are done into lightly flour ed boxes at short distances from each other; dredge slightly with flour, cover and leave them to rise for half an hour, then roll them over again exactly the same as before, giving them a more perfect spherical shape; range these balls as quickly as they are formed into lightly buttered baking sheets with a slight space between each, and as soon as the sheets are filled put them into boxes and cover; let them now rise from one hour to an hour and a quarter; they should be one-third larger than their original size and are then ready to be put into the oven; brush the surfaces with a feather brush dipped in beaten eggs, diluted with a little milk; with a pair of scissors make four deep incisions so as to form a cross, then push them into a slack oven and let bake for eighteen or twenty minutes. Crescents. --Crescents are to be molded in the following manner: Lay on the table the buttered dough already prepared for these; divide it up into one ounce and a half pieces and roll them into balls; set them into the boxes as soon as done, dredge over with rye flour, cover and leave them to rise for thirty-five to forty minutes, then lay two of the first molded balls on the table one beside the other, a short distance apart, and with the roller used for rolls flatten down the two balls at once, to obtain two oval pieces, an eighth of an inch thick, leaving the two furthest sides a little thicker than the forward ones, then with the left hand hold the nearest or front one of these flats, and with the palm of the right hand roll it over on itself, beginning with the back or thick side, and bring it forward to give the shape of a shuttle, six inches long, seven-eighths of an inch in the center and one-fourth of an inch at the ends; lay them when finished on a lightly buttered baking sheet, giving them the shape of a crescent, and finish the other oval layer the same, continuing until all the balls are molded; as fast as each baking sheet is filled put them into the boxes, cover and leave for one hour to one hour and a quarter; brush over with beaten eggs diluted in a little milk and push them into a slow oven to bake for twelve to fifteen minutes. Muffins. --Lightly butter three dozen tin muffin rings three and a half inches across and one inch high; lay them on two lightly buttered baking sheets. Place the third piece of dough--the one softened with milk --on the table, cut it into an ounce and three-quarters pieces and roll them all into balls; flatten slightly in the middle and lay them at once into the rings; when all are filled cover over with two more lightly buttered baking sheets, set a weight on top of each and leave the dough rise for three-quarters of an hour; push them gently into the oven, sheets, weights and all, being careful not to disturb them whatever; they take from twenty to twenty-five minutes to bake; turn them out of the rings as soon as they leave the oven. (3422). CORN BREAD (Pain de Mais). Put four ounces of butter into a tin basin; work it to a cream with four ounces of sugar, add a pinch of salt and four eggs singly, also a gill of milk; now sift in one pound of corn flour and half a pound of ordinary flour into which has been previously added two coffeespoonfuls of baking-powder, and add another gill of milk to finish. Butter some corn-bread molds, fill them three-quarters full with the preparation, lay them on baking-sheets and set them in a hot oven to bake for twelve to fifteen minutes; unmold them as quickly as they are done and removed. (3423). RYE BREAD, BOSTON BROWN BREAD AND GRAHAM BREAD (Pain de Seigle, Pain Brun de Boston et Pain de Graham ). The dough for rye bread is made exactly as for ordinary bread (see the article on bread dough), the only difference being that half rye and half wheat flour are used; a few caraway seeds may be added to the dough, mixing them in when the kneading process begins. When the dough is finished and sufficiently raised, cut it into two-pound pieces, turn and roll them out long-shaped and lay them in the folds of linen exactly the same as the jockos. Just when ready to put into the oven, while still on the peel, dampen the tops with water, using a brush, and cut a few slanting incisions on each one with the tip of a small knife, then set them in the oven to bake for forty-five minutes. Boston Brown Bread. --Place in a basin two and three-quarter pounds of yellow corn meal, two pounds of white corn meal, one and three-quarter pounds of rye flour, one pound of Boston meal and an ounce of salt. Dilute these flour s with one pint of New Orleans molasses, one pint of Potter molasses, one quart of ferment ( No. 3410 ), and two quarts of water; mix all well together, making a very soft paste, then cover over and leave it in a mild temperature to raise for four hours. Then add three-quarters of an ounce of soda dissolved in a glassful of water and twelve ounces of stale bread sifted through a sieve; mingle all well together. With this paste fill three-quarters full some buttered timbale molds and leave the paste stand for one hour. Cover over and place in a very slow oven and let bake for six hours. Graham Bread. --Put into a large vessel one and a quarter pounds of wheat flour, one and a quarter pounds of Graham flour, a coffeespoonful of salt and half a gill of molasses. Onto these ingredients pour one and a quarter pints of leaven, and one and a quarter pints of water. Mix all well together forming a dough of the same consistence as for bread; cover and leave it to raise for two hours in a mild temperature. Divide the dough into pound and a quarter pieces, mold and place each one in buttered molds; let raise again for an hour and a half to two hours, then bake in a very slack oven. Graham flour is made of the wheat ground to flour and left unsifted, consequently it contains the bran and commoner qualities than other flour s. ICES (Glaces). An illustration showing that a God accompany by an angel stayed on top of the cloud and are watching little angels beneath them making ices. (3424). ICES (Glaces). Preliminary Remarks. --We call ice (in general) a solid body, formed naturally or artificially from a fluid substance, such as water, oil, etc., frozen to a certain degree. It can also be said to be a fluid compressed by the lowering of the temperature to zero. Therefore, ice is nothing but crystallized water, lighter than liquid water, as it floats on its surface. In alimentary language ices are compounded creams or liquors made to freeze. Many books have been written on the subject of ices, and many serious researches have been made, hence it is not our intention to enter into the various details, as they can more easily be learned by consulting these divers works. Still we have considered it our duty to recall in a few words the history of the manufacture of these perfect and delicious refreshments. By going back to the most ancient times we find, especially in southern countries, that they had learned of the benefits to be derived from cool drinks, so we suppose the use of ice was known to the Greeks and Romans, and we read that Hippocrates, the father of medicine, recognized the impropriety of its use, as well as that of snow. The Orientals partook of iced drinks, also the Persians and the Spaniards had vases called alcarazas (in French Gourgourlelles), an earthen vessel without handles, to contain and keep the water cold. Therefore, the progress made in the seventeenth century and productive of such vast improvement was but the realization of an idea discovered centuries before; this is plain, for in those days as in these, they understood the necessity of having within their reach refreshing drinks suitable for the hot seasons of the year. Doubtless they were far from possessing the resources we have at our disposal to-day as regards material, for it was only at the end of the sixteenth century that the use of ice-boxes was first invented; nevertheless, our forefathers learned how to utilize the natural means at their command. With the assistance of porous vases exposed to a brisk current of air, also to all the sunlight possible, and by wrapping them in wet cloths, a sufficient degree of cold was obtained to have the value of such a drink appreciated, while suffering from the heat of the climate. Later, the people were not satisfied by procuring a temporary cool liquid, but devised some other plan by which they could retain the cold they had thus obtained. The only way to accomplish this was to transform the liquid drinks into a solid mass--in one word freeze them. The idea was rational, but chemistry, a science so thoroughly restricted in those days, and only understood by a few privileged persons, was found to be of very little assistance. However, in one of Bacon's works (a celebrated physician and chemist of the sixteenth century), we find a sentence which reads as follows: "It is evident that salt when mixed with ice for artificial congealments increases the action of the cold." At the end of the sixteenth century, and at the beginning of the seventeenth century, all the physicians of those days devoted themselves to experimenting, and the result of their researches was as follows: "Ice and salt are the most active principles for congealing, observing at the same time that ammoniacal salt is the most effective, and will produce the quickest cooling result." Henceforth, the wonderful progress for making ices was rapid, and these wise men thought they had at last reached a degree of perfection. They froze liquors in tin and leaden boxes, by surrounding them with a powerful refrigerating mixture. These ices, called rare ices and served only in sumptuous repasts, were still very imperfect, being nothing else than blocks of solid ice, reminding one of the taste of the liquor used in their fabrication, but being so remarkably hard that the pleasure of partaking of them was overbalanced by the great difficulty in eating them. They therefore endeavored to obtain a result more satisfactory to epibures. Réamur was the first person, in the year 1734, to refer to this defect, and try to ameliorate its condition. It was observed that if any liquor or fruit juice and sugar be added to water in certain proportions and that this mixture be submitted to a sufficient degree of cold, the water would be the first to congeal, while the sugars and syrups were the last. This defect had to be overcome, therefore they found that by cooking a certain amount of sugar in water they produced a syrup which they could afterward weigh. To this syrup they could mix the juices of different fruits and freeze the preparation without any fear of the defective results they sought to obviate. This was taking a great stride toward a final success, and thereafter experience alone sufficed to teach these practitioners how to acquire the best results. Instead of leaving the mixture to refrigerate alone in order to congeal the compositions, they endeavored to find how to increase the action of the cold by giving a rotary motion, more or less rapid, to the receiver in which the operation takes place. This is why they began to employ round, elongated vessels, so much easier to manage, and to which they gave the name of sorbotières, to-day called sorbetières or freezers. The round freezer is evidently the best for working the ices, for not only does its shape facilitate the rotary movement employed, but this movement also connects with the liquid, and while keeping it continually well-mixed, it also keeps the interior sides of the freezer covered with all the particles of water, syrup or sugar, of which it is composed. These simple methods having been discovered it only remained to find the means of improving on them. It is not our intention to follow step by step all the contrivances invented for the making of ices. The most important fact was discovered that by careful manipulation a composition could be obtained not only agreeable to the taste, but easier to swallow and to relish. However, we do not intend concluding our preliminary remarks without giving some general advice on the manner of cooking sugar, on the precautions necessary to the manufacture of the frozen preparation, and also on the way to mold and unmold ice cream figures. (3425). COMPOSITIONS FROZEN BY MACHINE (Compositions Glacées à la Machine). Have a machine of basin or pear shape. The basin-shaped machine should be fifteen inches in diameter by fifteen inches in height and rounded at the bottom, to be provided with a tinned iron rod running through the freezer and fitting into a gear with a pivot below (see Fig. 611). Put the cover on the freezer and pack it in salted ice; remove the cover and pour into the freezer (which contains about thirty quarts), six quarts of preparation, or the fifth part of its capacity. Turn the freezer by hand or by steam and detach the composition as fast as it adheres to the sides. As soon as the cream is sufficiently consistent, transfer it to a long freezer packed in salted ice (see how to pack in ice, No. 3432 ). Several compositions can be frozen one after the other without washing out the freezer, by beginning to freeze the composition containing the least color, and being careful to remove any particles of cream remaining after the operation is finished. FIG 611. An illustration of a basin-shaped ice-making machine. FIG 612. An illustration of a long iron rod. FIG 613. An illustration of a short iron rod. (3426). HOW TO COOK THE CREAM FOR ICES (Manière de Cuire les Crèmes pour les Glaces). First boil the milk or cream. If with vanilla or white coffee infuse either of these into the milk or cream. Put the yolks or whites of eggs in a tinned basin of sufficient size not to have the mixture rise to over three-quarters of the height of the vessel; add sugar to the yolks or whites, beating it in well with a whisk; then add the boiling milk or cream. Set the basin on a slow fire or in a bain-marie; stir continuously with the spatula until the composition be of a sufficient thickness to cover this spatula, which will occur a few moments before it begins to boil; remove it from the fire or bain-marie and then strain through a Venice or plated copper wire sieve; stir occasionally while cooling and freeze when thoroughly cold. For cooked ice cream be careful to select only the freshest eggs and milk; the most important point to be observed in these creams is to have the eggs cooked, allowing them to proceed as far as possible without actually boiling, then pour quickly through a sieve and stir steadily until most of the heat is lost. (3427). HOW TO FREEZE BY HAND IN A LONG COVERED FREEZER (Manière de Glacer à la Main Dans une Sorbetière Longue et Couverte). Procure a tin freezer with a tinned copper bottom, in preference to all others, or else one of block tin; also a wooden pail deeper than the freezer; this pail, made expressly for freezing purposes, must be bored with two holes; one two inches above the bottom and another an inch and a half below the top of the freezer. Close these holes with well-fitting corks that can easily be removed. Put at the bottom of the pail a flat piece of ice about four inches thick--this is to facilitate the rotary movement of the freezer--lay the freezer exactly in the center and pack it around with ice, as described in No. 3432; now lift off the cover, pour in, to a third of its height, the prepared composition needed for freezing, turn the freezer rapidly by its handle to the right and then to the left, and as soon as the ice attaches to the sides detach it by sliding the spatula or palette along the sides of the freezer from the top as far down as the bottom. Cover the freezer, turn and detach again and repeat the same operation until the cream is found to be of FIG 614. A deep wooden pail. FIG 615. An illustration of a freezer. a sufficient consistency, then finish freezing and have it acquire body, while working vigorously with the spatula, giving the freezer a rotary movement at each turn with the spatula. If the cream cannot be finished without repacking the freezer, then let a little of the water run out and repack it once more. (3428). HOW TO FREEZE BY HAND IN A WIDE, UNCOVERED FREEZER (Manière de Glacer à la Main Dans une Sorbetière Large et Découverte). To accomplish this it will be necessary to have a wide and not very deep freezer; pack it in a pail of sufficient size to allow three inches of ice all around; add a little salted water to the ice so as to loosen the freezer before beginning the operation. The inside measurements of the pail should be sixteen inches deep and sixteen inches in diameter, so that when the freezer is packed it will be on a level with the pail. Pour two or three quarts of the composition into the freezer, put on the lid and turn it to the right and left until the movement becomes easy to perform. Lift off the cover; take hold of the edge of the freezer between the thumb and first finger and with the palm of the right hand give it a continuous rotary movement, detaching the ice as fast as it adheres to the sides, and continue the operation until the preparation has congealed sufficiently; then transfer it to another freezer packed beforehand in ice, putting only a little in at a time; in this way it is easier to work and the ices become much finer. FIG 616. An illustration of a short freezer. (3429). MACHINE WITH LONG FREEZER (Machine avec Sorbetière Longue). Have a machine with two or three pails and freezers of various sizes, according to requirements (for this see design, Fig. 617). Proportions for a machine containing eighteen quarts and for one containing twelve: Put the composition into the freezer packed in the pail, not having it reach above half the height of the freezer; in the center stand the detaching apparatus, intended for the purpose of detaching the cream from the sides--this turns one way and the freezer itself in the opposite direction; in this manner it detaches the cream from the sides, making it much lighter. Put the cover on the detaching apparatus and turn the freezer for ten minutes, either by steam or hand. After the cream is congealed take the spatula and detach any cream adhering to it. Should it have to remain in the same freezer, pack it once more in ice ( No. 3432 ). Proportions for an eighteen-quart freezer: The inside pail is twenty-four inches high; diameter across the opening thirteen and a half inches; diameter across the bottom twelve inches. Either size should be made of oak an inch thick. The freezer for this pail must be nineteen and a half inches high by eight inches in diameter. For the inside measurements of a twelve-quart freezer, have the height of the pail twenty-one inches by thirteen inches in diameter at the opening, the bottom to be eleven and a half inches. The freezer for this pail must measure eighteen and a half inches in height and seven and a half in diameter. FIG 617. A ice-making machine with pail and freezer attached to it. (3430). MANNER OF FREEZING, NEAPOLITAN STYLE (Manière de Glacer à la Napolitaine). Have a tin freezer (sorbetière) capable of holding sixteen quarts of preparation; imbed it in salted ice, and pour into it eight quarts of composition, then turn the freezer from right to left, and as soon as it becomes easy to turn seize the edges between the thumb and first finger of the right hand, and move it with a continuous motion. After a sufficient quantity of ice adheres, remove it with a copper spoon ( Fig. 618), to detach it from bottom to top. Another tin freezer must be imbedded beforehand. Put into this second freezer the ice taken from the first; another person must now work this ice until it becomes perfectly smooth, and then transfer it once more into a third freezer, packed in salted ice, to preserve it. Ices made this way are remarkably smooth, and can be molded at once. FIG 618. An illustration of a copper spoon. (3431). HOW TO MOLD, FREEZE AND UNMOLD SMALL ICES AND LARGE ONES REPRESENTING FIGURES, ETC. (Manière de Mouler, Frapper et Démouler les Petites Glaces et les Grosses Pièces Représentant des Sujets). To mold ices representing any object or subject whatsoever calls for the greatest amount of care, otherwise a defective result will ensue. When small ices or half ices are required for molding, such as those representing flowers, fruits, etc., lay the molds on unsalted ice so they become thoroughly cold. Cover the bottom of a pail with a layer of salted ice, having a sufficient quantity of it to form a bed three inches deep; then take the mold in the left hand and in the right a copper spoon ( Fig. 618, a Neapolitan spoon), this being used to take up the various ices meant for filling the molds. It should be kept continually in water so as to keep it clean, as it is used for different creams. Press down the composition without inclosing any air between the mold and the ice; in this way it can adhere to the various designs imprinted on the mold, leaving no empty space whatever between. Now, having the mold full, close it forcibly, bringing the cover down well on to it, and with the finger remove any surplus ice that may issue from the intersections of the mold. After it is pressed down stand it on a bed of prepared salted ice and over lay more of the same ice. Continue thus to mold and pack down until all the molds are finished, then cover the whole with ice and salt; leave to freeze for one hour or more, according to the composition used, the size of the mold, and also according to the humidity of the atmosphere. When it becomes a question of molding more important ices, such as figures, subjects, etc., after cooling the molds thoroughly lay them on a slightly raised bed of rice and salt, so that they can be filled cautiously and with facility, for it requires every possible precaution in order to form these figures properly. Close the mold furnished with pins. After filling it well, beginning from the bottom put on the lid and press it down forcibly, removing any surplus ice issuing from the joints, and pack the mold in plenty of salted ice ( No. 3432 ), leaving it in as long as judged proper, a two-quart mold requiring about two hours. To Unmold. --Take the mold out of the ice, remove any surplus ice on the outside, and the pins from the hinges, then plunge the mold thoroughly and hastily in hot water; lift off the cover and lay the fancy ice mold bottom downward on a napkin; detach all the parts quickly but cautiously from the mold so as not to deform the piece. Those of a larger size are usually dressed on colored natural ice socles; these ices may be painted over with small badger brushes dipped in vegetal colors into which a little syrup has been mixed. The base of the molds intended to stand on socles should be of ice cream and not too rich, as they support the weight of the whole piece. When packed in ice the base of the mold should always be at the bottom of the pail; cover this with a cloth, packing it down well between the ice and pail. (3432). TO PACK SORBETIèRES OR FREEZERS IN ICE (Pour Sangler les Sorbetières). Salt and saltpetre are the active agents used for freezing. The quantity employed is one pound of salt for four pounds of ice, this being a proportionately active mixture for freezing the very richest cream and water ices. The salt and ice can be ranged in alternate layers or else have the whole mixed well together in a pail; in either case place ice around the freezer and pack it down well with the palette. Repeat this operation every time more salted ice is to be packed. Always pay attention that sorbetières turned by hand are to be packed lower than the edge of the pail, so that when the ice is finished the cover of the freezer may be adjusted as well as the cover on the pail. In houses where ices are being constantly made they have boxes lined with galvanized sheet-iron cylinders, and the empty space between the box and the cylinder is filled either with charcoal dust, tow or sawdust, as well as the covers; each cylinder must be provided with a hole one inch in diameter and two inches from the bottom to allow the water to run out. In case the water should not be allowed to flow off, then it will be prudent to bore a hole half an inch in diameter, one inch lower than the height of the freezer. FIG 619. An illustration of ice-making machine. (3433). FOR FREEZING WATER BOTTLES (Pour Frapper les Carafes). Water bottles are easily frozen, only be careful to follow closely the ensuing instructions. If a handsome looking bottle is required, it must be of a spherical shape, slightly longer than its width and of ordinary thick glass; it must invariably be clean, and then filled slightly less than half full or a little lower than the circumference line of the sphere, with filtered water. Mix three-quarters of very finely chopped ice with one-quarter of rock salt; range the bottles in a box sufficiently large to hold twenty, leaving an inch space between each; cover the neck of the bottle with a tinned copper cup, having a round bottom, or else with a specially made rubber cork ( Fig. 620); cover entirely with salted ice, raising them all up so that the ice passes slightly underneath each bottle; neglect of this precaution will break all the bottles in the box. Pack the ice around, cover the box with a hermetically closed cover, and an hour later raise up the bottles, one by one, and give each a rotary movement to hasten the freezing; withdraw all the superfluous water above two-thirds of the height of the ball of the bottle, and leave in again for an hour and a half to finish freezing; remove the faucet that keeps the water in the box, let this run out, and besides remove the corks from the necks of the bottles; when ready to serve lift them out, wash in cold water and fill with filtered ice water. FIG 620. A bottle cover with rubber cork. (3434). PLAIN WATER SOCLES, COLORED (Socles en eau Naturelle, Colorée). Procure a box sufficiently wide and deep to contain all the molds needed for making the socles and sherbets; into it put a mixture of salt and ice equivalent to the quantity used for packing freezers; into this imbed the molds in such a way that they are not too close to one another, having all their sides well surrounded by the ice, so that when the water is poured into these molds their surfaces will be perfectly horizontal; for this examine the basket shown in Fig. 621. The mold for this basket is made in two pieces; imbed the bottom or foot in the salted ice; into it pour water colored green or blue and as the foot is to be of uniform tint fill it entirely, then leave to freeze. Now place the upper part of the mold in salted ice, pour in water to reach halfway, having mixed a little milk into it to render it opaque. Cover the box with a raised edge sheet of zinc and fill this with more salted ice and let freeze. As soon as the whitened water is frozen fill the remainder of the mold with red water. These colored waters should be used perfectly cold and the last ones poured in only after the first ones are congealed. The colors may be varied according to the taste of the one preparing the socles and glasses. It is most important to remember that no salted water whatever must penetrate into the molds, otherwise it will melt and eat away the ice already congealed and deteriorate the beauty of these socles and glasses. The unmolding is the same as for ices. Socles are to be dressed on folded napkins and glasses on lace papers. Ices can also be dressed on blocks of ice cut any desired size and shape. To keep these blocks together, iron rods can be procured, having on one end a sheet iron ring and on the other a nut screw to hold the whole together. These rods are to be inserted in a hole through the center of the socle formed with a tube foot in the center of the mold and held in place with butter, being careful to have it water -tight, so the liquid cannot penetrate. They can be decorated with grasses and flowers maintained by wires introduced into the water when it first begins to congeal. Blocks of all sizes can be made in square, oblong, round or oval molds, having a hollow formed in the middle; for these special molds must be procured. FIG 621. An illustration of a molded basket. (3435). ICED BISCUITS, DIPLOMATE AND HOW TO MAKE BISCUIT CASES ( Biscuits Glacés à la Diplomate et Manière de Faire les Boîtes à Biscuits ). To make these biscuits use a vanilla biscuit preparation ( No. 3438 ), or else vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) beaten in a metal bowl with as much whipped cream mixed with it. Cut candied fruits into three-sixteenths inch squares, lay them in a bowl, pour over a little kirsch and let soak while covered, adding a few crushed macaroons. Fill the cases half full with the preparation, lay a bed of the fruits and macaroons on top and then another layer of the cream, filling the cases to one-eighth of an inch below the edge of the box. Freeze the biscuits and cover with a layer of whipped cream tinted rose-pink, mixing in a pinch of ground cinnamon; return the biscuits to the freezing box and finish freezing. Biscuit Cases. --Boxes for biscuit glacés are made with sheets of very strong paper, generally a little longer than their width, being six and a half inches long and six inches wide. In order to make these boxes take one of these sheets of paper and fold it lengthwise on itself in three even parts; again refold the two lateral parts on themselves lengthwise on the outside, thus forming a long band open in the center. These last two folds form the double lateral edges of the box. Again fold this band transversely on the open side into three parts, but in such a way that the two extreme ends exactly meet at the center of the band. Open all the folds except the two forming the outside edges of the box, and when this is done there will be found traced on the paper the various lines representing the bottom, the center and the four sides, besides four small rectangular corners which are used for closing the box. Fold each of these four rectangulars all on the inside so as to trace on each one an almost diagonal line beginning at the bottom angle of the box. Now, by following the lines of these folds, raise the lateral sides of the box, also the ends, at a straight angle with the bottom; by folding the small rectangulars at the almost diagonally traced line the result will be the angles of the box by the junction of the prolonged lines traced on the bottom of the box; then bring the two wings of each end, which are exteriorly against and in the center of the small edges, or ends, of the box. Fold outward the corners of the two ends, exceeding the edges of the box so as to form two truncated triangles; fold over these triangles on the outside against the narrow ends of the box and seal them down. Another Way to Make Biscuit Cases. --Take a quarter of a sheet of strong white paper; cut it about twice as long as its width, so as to give it an oblong shape. Fold this paper lengthwise in three on its length, then refold the two sides on themselves on the outside so as to double them, and thus form a long, straight band, open on one side only; fold the double points of the angles inwardly again so as to have the band pointed on each end; now fold these two ends on the inner side, simply to form the fold, open the band, press the folds well and the box will be formed. The narrow sides of the band form the length of the case. (3436). EXCELSIOR BISCUIT ( Biscuit Excelsior). Have ready a vanilla biscuit preparation ( No. 3438 ), line a large biscuit case, the size being explained in the vanilla biscuit recipes; fill it half full with the preparation. Divide lady fingers lengthwise in two or three pieces the same length as the box; soak them in maraschino, then place in the cases over the first layer of preparation, filling with more of the same. Put them in a freezing box; freeze and ice over half their length with orange water ice ( No. 3605 ), the other half with raspberry ( No. 3607 ); in the center place a small size rose, molded in lemon ice ( No. 3604 ), and on each side on the length place a lozenge of pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ). FIG 622. An illustration of a four layers rack on the left and a freezing box on the right. FIG 623. An illustration of a biscuit case. (3437). ICED BISCUITS à LA D'ORLéANS ( Biscuits Glacés à la d'Orléans). Procure a tin box with a cover closing on the outside. The interior should measure eight inches in length, five and three-quarters in width and one and three-quarters deep. Fit the bottom of this with twelve small cardboard cases, all together being the exact size of the bottom of the box and each half an inch high. Pour in sufficient vanilla biscuit preparation ( No. 3438 ) to fill up the tin box to a quarter of an inch below the top, put on the cover and close the joints with butter, then pack the box in salted ice; leave it for at least an hour and a half, being careful that the water does not rise higher than the bottom of the box; take out the box, wipe, remove the cover and finish filling to the top with strawberry water FIG 624. An illustration of a small biscuit case. FIG 625. A rectangular box filled with twelve small cardboard cases at the bottom. ce ( No. 3607 ); smooth with the blade of a knife, replace the cover and fasten it once more with butter; freeze for one hour longer. Then remove both box and cover, wipe well and pass a thin knife all around the inside. Dip the bottom into hot water, unmold so that it turns over in a single block, then reverse it to have the strawberry ice on top. Divide the biscuit into twelve equal-sized parts, the exact size of the cases, and dress each one on a round piece of fancy lace paper. (3438). ICED BISCUITS WITH VANILLA AND STRAWBERRY, MELON SHAPED ( Biscuits Glacés à la Vanille et aux Fraises, et en Forme de Melon ). Put eight egg yolks in a small tinned basin with three gills of thirty-five degree syrup, four gills of rich cream and a vanilla bean split lengthwise in two; beat the whole together and when well mingled set the basin on the fire and stir constantly with a spatula until it covers it thoroughly with a thick layer, then remove from the fire and strain the preparation through a Venice sieve. Wash the basin thoroughly and return the cream to it; lay the basin on ice, beat and when the composition is very firm incorporate therein a quart of whipped cream. * With this mixture fill some cases ( Fig. 623) three-quarters full and freeze them in a freezing box (a square box furnished with movable tin shelves on the inside, they being perforated with large holes). When frozen finish filling with strawberry or any other water ice; smooth with a knife and return to the freezing box to finish freezing. The inside dimensions of large cases are four and a half inches long, two and a half wide and one and one-sixteenth deep; the medium cases measure three and a half inches long, one and seven-eighths wide and one inch deep. FIG 626. The following note appears on the bottom of page 984 in the original text. *In all cases where reference is made to a given quantity of whipped cream the quantity stated should be understood as meaning when the cream is whipped and not in its liquid state. Iced biscuits can also be ranged in melon-shaped molds; coat these over with strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ), into which mix twice as much whipped cream (No. 50), and finish filling with the above vanilla biscuit preparation; freeze and unmold on a folded napkin. (3439). BOMB à LA CONSTANTINE (Bombe à la Constantine). Take a special hinged mold, the same as for Fig. 627; it must have a hollow on the top, into which place a double mold filled with cotton and alcohol and set on fire when serving. The inside of the mold must be coated with chocolate ice cream, into which mix half as much whipped cream. Fill the hollow space in the inside with a preparation made as follows: Melt five ounces of sweet chocolate and five ounces of sugar in a quart of hot water; after the chocolate is all dissolved pass the whole through a fine sieve and leave to cool; pour the top off gently an hour later and reduce it to three gills. Break sixteen egg-yolks in a basin, beat with three gills of thirty-two degree syrup and three and a half gills of water and the chocolate; set this on a slow fire and stir steadily until the composition covers the spatula well, then strain through a sieve, return it to the basin, lay on ice and beat, adding half as much well-drained whipped cream (No. 50). Fill the mold quite full with this, close tightly and freeze. A two quart bomb will require two hours' freezing. Unmold and dress on a ring of white chocolate ice cream, the proportions for making it being three and a half gills of clarified sugar at thirty-two degrees, three and a half gills of water, sixteen egg-yolks, and eight ounces of cocoa infused in the syrup with a vanilla bean split lengthwise in two. Decorate around with Africans ( No. 3364 ) and pistachio lady bouchées ( No. 3376 ). FIG 627. An illustration of a special hinged mold. (3440). BOMB à LA TROBRIAND AND FIFTH AVENUE (Bombe à la Trobriand et à la Cinquième Avenue). Imbed a bomb-shaped mold ( Fig. 627) in ice; remove its lid and coat it perpendicularly, half with strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) and half with pistachio ( No. 3454 ). Fill the inside with the following preparation: Pound seven ounces of filberts or sweet almonds; moisten little at a time with a pint of water and three gills of thirty-five degree syrup. Break eighteen egg-yolks in a saucepan or tinned copper basin, add the almond milk and a pint of boiling milk; set it on a slow fire and stir steadily until sufficiently cooked so that it covers the spatula; strain through a sieve, return it to the well-cleaned basin, and add the same quantity of thoroughly drained whipped cream. Fill up the coated mold, cover with paper, put on its lid, imbed in salted ice, and if the mold contains two quarts freeze it for one hour and a half. For Fifth Avenue Bomb .--Have the same preparation; coat the mold with strawberry ice cream only when it is frozen; dip in hot water, unmold on a napkin, and decorate with small cakes. (3441). PRINTANIER FRUIT BOMB (Bombe aux Fruits Printanière). Pack a bomb mold ( Fig. 627) in salted ice and cover the bottom and sides with a layer of strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ), having it a quarter of an inch thick; fill in the hollow with a preparation made as follows: In a tin basin have fourteen egg-yolks, six gills of twenty-degree syrup, and a vanilla bean split lengthwise in two; mingle well, and set the basin on a slow fire; cook until the composition covers the spoon or spatula, then remove, strain, return it to the clean basin and set it on ice; beat thoroughly to have it light, adding one quart of firm whipped cream, drained for two hours on a sieve; mix well together and pour this preparation into the mold, filling it entirely; place over a sheet of paper and the cover; pack in salted ice, and allow one hour's freezing for each quart of cream. After the bomb is properly frozen unmold on an ice-cold dish and garnish around with a macédoine of fruits steeped in maraschino. (3442). ROMAN BOMB (Bombe à la Romaine ). Add twelve ounces of sugar to one quart of cream; strain it through a sieve, freeze and work it briskly, adding gradually two gills of rum stirred with two ounces of sugar; incorporate two Italian meringue egg-whites (No. 140). Coat a two quart bomb-shaped mold ( Fig. 627) with pineapple ice cream ( No. 3451 ), fill it with the above, then cover, and pack it for two hours in salted ice. Take the mold from the salted ice, remove all drippings, and unmold on a folded napkin, garnishing around with strawberry lady bouchées ( No. 3376 ). (3443). BOMB WITH LIQUORS (Bombe aux Liqueurs). Have twelve raw egg-yolks well beaten in a saucepan, or tinned copper basin, with four gills of thirty-two degree syrup, four gills of water and one gill of either aniseed, Curaçoa, kirsch, maraschino or mint liquors. Cook the preparation over a very slow fire; stir continuously until it covers the spatula well, then remove and pass it through a fine sieve. Wash the basin, put back the preparation and whip until firm and light, then add the same quantity of very solid whipped cream (No. 50) drained well for two hours on a hair sieve; mix together. Imbed the mold in ice, fill the inside with orange water ice if for aniseed, strawberry water ice for Curaçoa, vanilla for kirsch, pistachio for maraschino, and lemon water ice for mint. When the mold is overflowing lay on a sheet of waxed paper twice the diameter of the mold. Put on the lid, fastening it down firmly, and cover with a thick bed of salted ice; freeze for one hour and a half for two quarts. Take out the mold, dip it quickly in hot water and invert on a folded napkin; surround with a garnishing either of macaroons, small biscuit cases, small flat waffles, small cream cakes or slices of Savoy biscuit iced with prunelle. (3444). BOMB STREAKED WITH WHITE AND BLACK COFFEE (Bombe Panachée au Café Blanc et Noir). White Coffee .---Set into a high saucepan three gills of thirty-two degree syrup and three and a half gills of water, adding six ounces of freshly roasted coffee; cover the saucepan tightly and leave the coffee infuse in the syrup for three hours in a bain-marie. Place fourteen egg-yolks in a basin, whip them gradually with the coffee infusion and cook on a slow fire; strain the preparation when done and beat it well on ice, mixing in half as much well-drained whipped cream. Black Coffee .---Put fourteen egg-yolks in a tinned copper basin, dilute with three gills of thirty-two degree syrup and three gills of very strong coffee, made with two ounces of ground Java, Maracaibo and Mocha; finish it exactly the same as the white coffee. Divide a bomb mold with a tin partition to separate it perpendicularly into two compartments; put the white coffee preparation in one, remove the tin and replace it with a waffle of the same size; finish filling the mold with the black coffee preparation, having the mold quite full. Cover with paper then with the lid and pack well in ice; leave it to freeze, allowing an hour and a half for two quarts; remove from the ice, turn it out on a folded napkin and surround with small coffee lady bouchées ( No. 3376 ), then serve. (3445). ICE CREAM à LA CIALDINI (Crème à la Cialdini). Put ten egg-yolks and eight ounces of sugar in a tinned copper basin; beat up well and add a pint of boiling milk into which has been infused, for half an hour, half a vanilla bean and two ounces of ground almonds. Cook the preparation on a slow fire until it covers the spatula, adding half a pound of dissolved chocolate, a piece of Ceylon cinnamon and a tablespoonful of ground coriander seeds; let cool, then pour in one pint of cream; pass the whole through a fine sieve, freeze and incorporate a quarter as much whipped cream (No. 50), half a pound of almonds and half a pound of quartered pistachios; pack the cream in ice and salt, and it is ready to use when needed. (3446). ANDALUSIAN ICE CREAM--WITHOUT COOKING (Crème à l'Andalouse--Sans Cuisson). Pour in a vessel one pint of cream, one pint of orange juice, twelve ounces of sugar and half an orange peel; infuse this for one hour, then strain through a silk sieve and freeze, mixing in a little orange flower water added to a little syrup; work the ice well, pack in cracked ice and salt, and use when needed. (3447). CARAMEL ICE CREAM (Crème au Caramel ). Put ten ounces of sugar in a copper basin with very little water, cook to caramel, then pour it on a marble to get cold; pound and return it to the basin with six egg-yolks, a quarter of a vanilla stick and a pint of boiling milk. Cook this preparation on a slow fire without boiling, remove it from the range when it covers the spatula, and when cold add a pint of cream; strain through a sieve and freeze. (3448). COLUMBIA ICE CREAM (Crème à la Columbia). To make this ice cream it will require two preparations: One composed of a pint of fresh cream, half a gill of maraschino and four ounces of sugar; strain through a sieve, freeze, then add another half gill of maraschino, a little at a time, one Italian meringue egg-white (No. 140), half an ounce of cherries cut in four, half an ounce of candied citron and orange peel chopped into thin shreds. The other preparation is made as follows: Grind one pound of freshly peeled pistachios with a quarter of a pound of sugar, diluting with a quart of cream. Put into a vessel twelve egg-yolks and eight ounces of sugar; mix well together, add the pistachios and a coloring of spinach green to give it a pale green hue. Set the basin on a slow fire and cook the cream without boiling, stirring continuously, and when it covers the spatula cool and put in three-quarters of a gill of orange flower water. Strain through a sieve, freeze, then mix in as much whipped cream (No. 50), two ounces of candied pineapple cut in quarter-inch squares and two ounces of angelica cut the same. Fill a Madeleine mold ( Fig. 694) quite full of the two preparations divided in halves; fasten the lid on tightly, pack in salted ice and an hour after unmold on a very cold dish and bestrew with finely minced green pistachios. (3449). CHOCOLATE AND COCOA ICE CREAM (Crème au Chocolat et au Cacao). Dissolve in a very slack oven four ounces of unsweetened chocolate in two gills of hot water. Beat twelve egg-yolks in a tinned basin with one pound of powdered sugar and dilute the preparation with a pint and a half of boiling milk, adding the fourth part of a vanilla stick. Stir the cream on a moderate fire till nearly thick, then mix in the chocolate thoroughly dissolved with three gills of hot cream; stir well for a few moments, remove and strain twice through a sieve into a metal vessel; when cold transfer to a sorbetière to freeze. Chocolate -- Another Way .--Two pounds of fine sweet chocolate, two quarts of milk, half a vanilla bean, two pounds of sugar and twenty-four yolks; cook, let get cold and then add two quarts of fresh cream and freeze. With Cocoa .--Boil a pint and a half of milk, add ten ounces of torrefied cocoa, and a quarter of a vanilla stick; leave to infuse for two hours. Mix five egg-yolks, ten ounces of sugar and the infusion in a tinned basin; cook over a slow fire, stirring incessantly until the preparation covers the spoon; remove, cool partly and add one pint of raw fresh cream; strain, freeze and serve, mixing in a few chocolate pastilles. (3450). CINNAMON, GINGER OR PUMPERNICKEL RYE BREAD ICE CREAM (Glace Crème à la Canelle, au Gingembre ou au Pumpernickel Pain de Seigle). With Cinnamon .--Infuse one ounce of cinnamon in a quart of boiling milk. Place twelve ounces of sugar in a basin with eight egg yolks; beat and add the infusion; mix so that the sugar dissolves, cook without boiling, then cool and pass through a fine sieve; freeze and mix in a few vanilla chocolate pastilles, each half an inch in diameter. Ginger .--Substitute ginger for the cinnamon and finish the same. Pumpernickel Rye Bread .--Grate half a pound of rye bread and pass it through a coarse sieve or colander; pour into a vessel and throw over a pint of thirty-degree syrup. Break twelve egg-yolks in a tin basin, add eight ounces of sugar, mix well with a pint of boiling milk; cook this on a slow fire without boiling, remove and when cold strain through a sieve, freeze, adding the rye bread when nearly frozen and two quarts of whipped cream (No. 50). (3451). FRESH FRUIT ICE CREAMS--WITHOUT EGGS OR COOKING (Crème de Fruits Frais--Sans Œufs ni Cuisson). For Strawberries, Cherries, Currants and Raspberries .--Add three pints of cream and a pint of milk to a quart of strawberry, cherry, currant or raspberry juice and two pounds of powdered sugar. Melt the sugar, strain the whole through a silk sieve and freeze. Apricots, Peaches and Nectarines .--To be made with one pint of cream, a pint of the pulp of any of these fruits, taking those thoroughly ripe; break the kernels, peel the nuts, split them in two and infuse in a gill of syrup with the fourth part of a vanilla bean. To the cream and the fruits add ten ounces of powdered sugar and the infusion. Strain through a very fine sieve and freeze. Pineapple .--Mix a pint of milk and twelve ounces of sugar, also a pint of pineapple juice; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. Instead of using the juice, thin slices may be cut from the pineapple, laid in a vessel and covered with a boiling syrup of thirty-two degrees; strain, cool off and freeze. (3452). NOUGAT ICE CREAM; NOUGAT NEAPOLITAN CREAM (Crème Nougat; Crème Nougat à la Napolitaine). Set half a pound of powdered sugar in a tinned copper pan with the juice of one lemon; place it on a slow fire, stir continuously and when melted and colored to a fine red add half a pound of unpeeled almonds and a pinch of coriander seeds; mix well. Pour this nougat on a marble and as soon as cold pound it in a mortar, moistening slowly with a pint of cream. Have ten egg-yolks in a basin with four ounces of sugar, beat well together and then add a pint of boiling milk and the crushed nougat; cook on a slow fire, stirring steadily; remove when it covers the spatula and leave till cold; into this mix a pint of cream; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. Nougat Neapolitan Cream .--To be made with a quart of cream, fourteen ounces of sugar, twelve egg-yolks, half a pound of peeled almonds roasted to a golden brown and half an ounce of coriander seeds. Pound the almonds and corianders, wetting with two gills of cream; color with a little carmine and cook without boiling; when cold add a pint more of cream, strain and freeze. (3453). PEACH ICE CREAM à LA HERBSTER (Crème aux Pêches à la Herbster). Prepare a peach ice cream with two-thirds of cream and one-third of fruit pulp, adding three drops of extract of almonds; color slightly to a very pale pink and with this cream when frozen coat a pudding mold. Have some ripe peaches already peeled, stoned and cut in quarters; mince them finely and macerate in a little kirsch. Mix into the remainder of the peach ice cream half as much whipped cream (No. 50) and an equal quantity of the minced peaches; fill the mold quickly, freeze and unmold one hour later. (3454). PISTACHIO ICE CREAM (Crème aux Pistaches). Pound half a pound of freshly peeled pistachio nuts with two gills of cream and an ounce of candied citron peel cut up very finely. Break twelve raw egg-yolks in a tinned basin, beat with ten ounces of sugar, and moisten with a pint of boiling milk; cook on a slow fire, stirring all the time with a spatula, and when the composition is cooked add the pistachios; take from the fire, and when cold put in a pint of cream, some spinach green or vegetal green, and a little orange flower water; strain through a fine sieve and then freeze. Pistachio Ice Cream made with Almonds .--One quart of milk, six whole eggs, a pound and a quarter of sugar, half a pound of almonds, half a gill of orange flower water, one quart of cream and vegetal coloring. (3455). BURNT ALMOND ICE CREAM AND WITH ANGELICA (Crème Pralinèe et à l'Angélique). Crush half a pound of burnt almonds with two gills of cream; put ten egg-yolks in a basin with ten ounces of sugar, mix well together, adding the burnt almonds and a pint of boiling milk. Set the basin on a slow fire, stir constantly with a spatula until of sufficient thickness to cover the same, then put aside to cool while stirring at times to prevent a skin from forming on top; add one pint of cream, strain through a fine sieve, and freeze. With Angelica .--After the cream is frozen add to it half as much whipped cream (No. 50) and half a pound of finely shredded angelica. (3456). RICE ICE CREAM, PARADISE (Crème de Riz, Paradis). Wash and blanch twelve ounces of Carolina rice; drain. Take four ounces of it and cook it thoroughly in four quarts of milk; strain through a sieve. Put thirty-two egg-yolks in a tinned basin, add two pounds and a quarter of sugar, and beat both together, then put in the rice pulp; set it on the fire and beat steadily until the preparation covers the spatula; leave stand till cold; run it through a sieve, and replace it in the basin after it has been well cleaned; lay it on ice; whip to have the mixture light, and stir in as much whipped cream. Cook the remainder of the rice in a vanilla syrup at twenty degrees; cool off, drain, add it to the composition, and freeze. (3457). RICE ICE CREAM WITH CITRON, GARNISHED WITH TRUFFLES (Crème de Riz et au Cédrat, Garnie de Truffes). Place eight egg-whites in a tinned basin with twelve ounces of sugar and four tablespoonfuls of rice flour; stir well together, adding a quart of boiling milk; cook without boiling on a slow fire, remove and when cold put in a pint of cream; pass through a sieve, freeze and then add half a pound of very finely shredded citron peel and half a pint of blanched rice cooked in syrup. Have it molded in a low Madeleine mold, and garnish around with imitation truffles prepared as follows: Truffle Ice Cream .--This cream can only be made with fresh truffles. Brush over half a pound of fresh, fragrant truffles; peel, slice and infuse in a pint of boiling cream for thirty minutes. Drop twelve egg-yolks in a tinned basin with ten ounces of sugar; mix well together and then add one quart of cream, including that in which the truffles are being infused; cook the preparation without boiling, and add the truffles after pounding and passing them through a sieve. Freeze and mold in molds imitating whole truffles coated with chocolate; pack in ice. Chop up the truffle peelings very finely, mixing in a few vanilla seeds; dry in the open air, pass through a sieve and roll the unmolded imitation truffles in this powder. Use these truffles to decorate the above ice cream. (3458). VANILLA ICE CREAMS--ITALIAN MERINGUE (Crèmes Vanille--Meringue Italienne). Vanilla ( No . 1).--Boil two quarts of milk; remove and add a large vanilla bean split in two through its length; cover the saucepan and leave infuse for fifteen minutes. Beat twelve raw egg-yolks in a vessel with one pound of powdered sugar, diluting gradually with the hot milk; strain into a tinned basin; place over a moderate fire, stirring continually until it thickens, without boiling, and pass it at once through a sieve into a glazed vessel; stir several times while cooling. Pour this composition into a spherical freezer packed in salted ice; turn the freezer around and with the spatula remove any particles of cream that may adhere against the sides. Fifteen to twenty minutes will suffice to congeal and thicken the preparation, then take it up with a spoon and lay it in a small long freezer buried in salted ice. Work it vigorously with the spatula, turning the box around on itself. Fine ices require to be well worked. Various vanilla ice creams may be prepared the same, only changing their proportions. Vanilla Ice Cream with Milk and Cream ( No . 2.)--Boil a pint of milk in which is infused half a vanilla stick. Beat in a vessel ten egg-yolks with ten ounces of sugar; finish the same as in No. 1 ; when the preparation is cold add one pint of fresh cream, then freeze. Vanilla Ice Cream with Cream ( No . 3).--Have a quart of boiling cream with half a vanilla bean infused therein. Whip eight egg-yolks with six ounces of sugar; pour over the cream, cook and finish as in No. 1 . Vanilla Ice Cream without Cream or Milk (No. 4).-- Infuse a vanilla bean in eight gills of syrup at twenty degrees. Break eighteen raw egg-yolks in a tin basin, dilute with the syrup and cook while stirring steadily over a slow fire until the mixture covers the spatula, then pass it through a sieve, leave till cold and freeze. Cook a quarter of a pound of sugar to "large ball" (No. 171), mix it slowly with two stiffly beaten egg-whites, leave stand till cold, then incorporate this meringue gradually into the ice cream. Vanilla Snow Ice Cream, Italian Meringue and Whipped Cream (No. 5).--Beat five egg-yolks to a stiff froth; mix in slowly one pound of sugar cooked to "small ball" (No. 171) and a vanilla bean split lengthwise in two; let cool. Whip a quart of cream; when very firm drain on a sieve and mix it in lightly with the Italian meringue. Roman Vanilla Ice Cream, Syrup and Cream (No. 6). --Put sixteen raw egg-yolks in a tinned basin; pour over eight gills of syrup at twenty degrees into which has been infused a split vanilla bean; beat well with a small whip, place it on a slow fire and continue stirring with the spatula until cooked and of a sufficient thickness to cover the spatula; remove, cool and add a quart of fresh cream before freezing. Light Vanilla Ice Cream, Milk and Whipped Cream (No. 7).--Beat up a quart of cream; drain it on a hair sieve; add ten ounces of powdered sugar to twelve raw egg-yolks in a basin; beat and moisten with a pint of boiling milk into which has been infused a vanilla bean split down in two; set the basin on a slow fire and stir continuously until the mixture covers the spatula; then remove, strain and leave till cold. Freeze as usual and after the cream has congealed mix into it the same quantity of the whipped cream. Vanilla Ice Cream (No. 8).--Two quarts of milk, two vanilla sticks, two and a half pounds of sugar, twenty-four egg-yolks. Cook, cool and add two quarts of cream; strain, then freeze. (3459). VIRGIN CREAM WITH ORANGE FLOWER WATER AND NOYAU, ETC. (Crème Vierge à la Fleur d' Orange au Noyau, etc.). Virgin creams are composed of cream, sugar and egg-whites; they are cooked the same as the egg-yolk creams and are always to be left white, either finished with orange flower water, noyau, maraschino, almond milk, lemon or hazel-nuts. Orange Flower and Noyau. --Put twelve egg-whites in a tinned basin, add one pound of sugar, and mix thoroughly with a quart of fresh cream. Cook this preparation while stirring, being careful it does not come to a boil, then remove and beat it occasionally until cold; strain through a very fine sieve, adding half a gill of noyau liquor and a gill of orange flower water, also another gill of noyau after the ice has congealed. A quarter of its quantity of Italian meringue may be incorporated into this cream when frozen. With Maraschino. --Substitute two gills of maraschino for the orange flower water. With Almond Milk. --Six ounces of almonds, including a few bitter ones, pounded with two gills and a half of cream; stir this in when the cream is cooked and partly cold. With Lemon. --Infuse the peels of two lemons after the cream is cooked. With Hazel- nuts. --Half a pound of roasted, peeled and crushed hazel- nuts mingled with sugar and added to the cream before cooking. (3460). WHITE COFFEE ICE CREAM (Crème au Café Blanc). Roast very slowly, either in a roaster or in a frying pan, half a pound of good coffee beans , not having them too dark. Boil a pint of milk and pour it over the roasted coffee laid in a saucepan, cover tightly and keep it on the side of the range for half an hour. Put twenty egg-yolks in a saucepan or a tinned copper basin with twelve ounces of powdered sugar and a quarter of a vanilla stick; beat well together and dilute with three pints of milk and the infused coffee; stir this cream on a slow fire to thicken without boiling, and as soon as the preparation has attained the correct consistency transfer it to a well tinned metal vessel and stir occasionally while cooling; strain it twice, the last time through an exceedingly fine sieve. Try a small part in a freezer packed in ice to discover its consistency, and if too thin add some thirty-two degree syrup, and raw cream if too thick. Freeze by working it until firm and smooth. Virgin Coffee Cream is prepared with egg-whites instead of yolks, exactly the same way, the proportions being, half a pound of coffee, one quart of milk, sixteen egg-whites instead of the yolks, ten ounces of sugar, a quart of cream and a quarter of a vanilla stick. (3461). ICE CREAM WITH ALMONDS, FRESH OR DRIED NUTS (Crème d'Amandes ou de Noix Fraîches ou Sèches). If there be any almonds or fresh nuts on hand peel to remove the skin, but should dried ones be used soak them in cold water for twelve hours, lift out and peel off their skins. Take half a pound of either fresh nuts or almonds and pound them with a pint of milk. Mix in a tinned basin ten raw egg-yolks with ten ounces of sugar, beat well together and add a pint and a half of very rich milk or fresh cream and a sixth part of a vanilla stick; stir on the fire to thicken without boiling. As soon as done remove the cream from the fire, mix in the pounded nuts, then pour into a glazed bowl to cool off while stirring occasionally; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. For almond ice cream a few bitter almonds and a little kirsch may be added, and a little maraschino for those made of fresh nuts. (3462). ICE CREAM WITH MARASCHINO, PRUNELLE, KIRSCH, TEA OR ALL-FLOWER (Crème au Marasquin, Prunelle, Kirsch, Thé ou Mille-Fleurs). Place in a tinned basin twelve ounces of sugar, ten egg-yolks, the peel of one lemon and dilute with three pints of boiling milk; thicken the preparation on the fire while stirring, and as soon as done strain through a sieve into a vessel and stir occasionally till cold; freeze the same as explained in No. 3427 ; transfer the ice to a small long freezer to finish and when smooth and firm incorporate slowly into it a gill and a half of maraschino or one gill of kirsch or prunelle or else a gill of infused tea or highly concentrated all-flower, either of the two last named requiring the addition of a little rum. Both liqueurs and infusions should be mixed in the ice cream slowly. (3463). ICE CREAM WITH EGGS AND BLACK COFFEE, WITHOUT EGGS, LIGHT WITH BLACK COFFEE (Crème aux Œufs et au Café Noir, Crème Sans Œufs Légère au Café Noir). With Eggs and Black Coffee. --Prepare half a pint of very strong coffee, using Mocha, Java and Maracaibo, a pound in all, ground very finely and put into a filter ( Fig. 774); moisten with a quart of boiling water and strain it entirely two or three times. Have in a tinned basin ten raw egg-yolks and eight ounces of sugar; add half a pint of boiling milk, a quarter of a vanilla bean and the infused coffee. Set the basin on a slow fire and stir until consistent enough to cover the spatula; let get cold, then add one pint of cream; pass through a fine sieve and freeze. Without Eggs, Light with Black Coffee. --Dissolve half a pound of sugar in a quart of good cold milk; add half a pint of very strong coffee prepared the same as the above, infusing in it the fourth part of a vanilla stick; pass through a sieve and freeze. After it has been properly worked mix in as much well-drained whipped cream and at the same time half a pound of powdered sugar; stir well and pack in ice to use when needed. All light creams should be served the same day as prepared. (3464). ICE CREAM WITH PIGNONS, BRAZILIAN NUTS, WALNUTS OR HAZEL-NUTS (Crème Glace aux Pignons, aux Noix de Brésil, aux Grosses Noix ou Noisettes). Cook one pound of sugar slightly wetted to three hundred and thirty-eight degrees Fahrenheit or "crack" (No. 171); add half a pound of pignons or Brazilian nuts or even common walnuts or hazel-nuts; the nuts selected must be first roasted; boil once or twice in the sugar, then pour on a marble to leave till cold, when pound with a pint of cream. Break ten egg-yolks in a tinned basin, dilute with a pint of boiled milk, having already had infused in it a quarter of a vanilla stick; cook without boiling and when the preparation covers the spatula remove it from the fire, add to it the pounded nuts and cream and leave stand till cold; strain through a fine sieve and freeze as an ordinary ice cream ( No. 3427 ). (3465). ICE CREAM WITH ROASTED OR BOILED CHESTNUTS (Crème aux Marrons Rôtis ou Bouillis). With Roasted Chestnuts. --Split the chestnuts on their sides, roast and skin; put them with a pound of sugar into a copper pan, adding three gills of water; cook the sugar to three hundred and thirty-eight degrees Fahrenheit, or a little above the "crack;" pour it on a marble and as soon as cold pound with a small quantity of cream; place it in a tinned basin with fifteen egg-yolks, a quart of cream and the quarter of a vanilla bean. Set the basin on a slow fire to cook the mixture without boiling and as soon as it covers the spoon remove from the fire, cool, strain and freeze. With Boiled Chestnuts. --Suppress the hard outer shell and red inside skin from a pound of chestnuts; boil them in milk with a little vanilla, and when tender rub through a sieve. Pour this purée into a vessel and dilute with a gill of vanilla cream No. 1 ( No. 3458 ); strain, cool and freeze, working it vigorously, and when smooth and firm mix in half as much very firm and slightly sweetened whipped cream and half a gill of maraschino. (3466). ICE CREAM WITHOUT COOKING (Glaces sans Cuisson). Vanilla. --Mix well together one quart of good cream, half a pound of sugar and half a stick of vanilla infused in a little milk; when the sugar has melted pass the whole through a fine silver wired sieve, and freeze either by machine or in a freezer, turning and detaching the cream with a spatula as fast as it adheres to the sides; after it has solidified finish by working with the spatula, turning the freezer by a rotary movement with this spatula. Instead of vanilla infusion extract of vanilla may be used. Chocolate. --Boil a quart and a half of cream and with it dissolve half a pound of chocolate melted in a slack oven; add three pounds of sugar, mix well and stir in three quarts of raw cream and a little vanilla extract; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. Orange Flower Water. --Boil one quart of milk with a quarter of a pound of sugar; dissolve two tablespoonfuls of corn starch, and stir it into the boiling milk, beating it with a whip; color to a fine green, strain through a sieve, and allow to cool. Beat one quart of cream, add six ounces of sugar and a little orange flower water; freeze and incorporate it into the above. Use this cream either for molding or dressing with a spoon. Lemon. --One quart of cream which has had the peel of a lemon infused therein for one hour; add half a pound of sugar, strain and freeze the same as vanilla. Coffee. --Prepare one pint of coffee, composed of four ounces of cold Mocha mixed with a pint of cream and twelve ounces of sugar; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. Light Chocolate. --Have two ounces of chocolate melted in a pint of milk; pass through a sieve, and cool off. Mix one quart of firm whipped cream and three-quarters of a pound of sugar; freeze and add the chocolate very slowly. (3467). FIORI DI LATTE à LA BELLINI (Fiori di Latte à la Bellini). The fiori di latte is a light preparation composed of Italian meringue with hot syrup cooked to thirty-five degrees; add flavorings, also as much whipped, well-drained cream, sweetened when drained with a quarter of a pound of sugar for each quart of cream. The meringue and cream are to be well but lightly combined. This cream is used for filling molds the same shape as shown in Fig. 628. Fiori di Latte à la Bellini. -- Whip firmly one pint of cream and pour it on a wire sieve to drain for two hours. Cut in quarter-inch squares eight ounces of fruits, such as pineapple, cherries, orange and lemon peel, also a few shredded pistachios; lay these in a vessel, pour maraschino over and let macerate for one hour, then drain. Prepare an Italian meringue with four egg-whites beaten to a stiff froth, and a pint of hot thirty-five degree syrup; allow to cool, then mix it in with the whipped cream and well-drained fruits. Pack a two-quart mold in salted ice; cover the insides with a quarter-inch thick coating of uncooked strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ); place the preparation into the empty space, letting the mold be quite full; press the cover on forcibly, imbed and freeze for one hour. Unmold by dipping it into warm water, the same as for all other ices, and invert it on a folded napkin, as shown in the drawing. (3468). FIORI DI LATTE à LA ORLANDINI (Fiori di Latte à la Orlandini). Whip a pint of cream, then drain on a sieve; grate the peel of a good orange on lump sugar, and scrape off the part impregnated with the peel. Make an Italian meringue preparation with five eggs ( No. 3442 ), add the sugar flavored with the peel to the sugar used for making the meringue; leave stand till cold, then incorporate gently the whipped cream without beating, and add candied citron peel cut up finely, and a little powdered vanilla. Fill a fiori di latte mold ( Fig. 628), with a coating of chocolate a quarter of an inch thick, pour in the preparation, and finish the same as à la Bellini ( No. 3467 ). (3469). FIORI DI LATTE WITH VANILLA OR OTHER FLAVORINGS (Fiori di Latte à la Vanille ou Autres Parfums). Beat up a pint of whipped cream; drain on a sieve. Whip five egg-whites quite stiff; cook eight ounces of sugar with half a vanilla bean to thirty-five degrees; suppress the vanilla and mix the sugar with the egg-whites, a little at a time, while stirring the meringue constantly; leave to cool on ice. Coat a fiori di latte mold with pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ); pack in ice (have the coating only a quarter-inch thick); fill the center of this shell quite full, pressing down the preparation with the cover and imbed in ice, allowing one hour's freezing for each quart. Unmold on a folded napkin and serve. This ice may be prepared and finished the same way, only putting in the eighth part of a vanilla stick instead of half a one, and after the preparation is quite firm adding either maraschino, kirsch, prunelle, Curaçoa, almond milk, or concentrated orange flower water, just enough to have the preparation nicely flavored. (3470). FIORI DI LATTE WITH VIOLETS, BURNT ALMONDS AND PISTACHIOS (Fiori di Latte à la Fleur de Violette, aux Pralines et aux Pistaches). Cook two ounces of violet leaves in two ounces of sugar, and when this has reached "crack" (No. 171), pour it on a marble to cool, then pound and run it through a sieve. Whip a pint of cream till very firm, and drain it on a sieve. Beat five egg-whites to a stiff froth, mix into them three gills of hot thirty-five degree syrup, and cool this meringue by standing the basin on ice; mix together lightly the whipped cream, Italian meringue and violet sugar. Pack a fiori di latte mold ( Fig. 628) in salted ice and line it with a coating of virgin maraschino ice cream, finishing as the Bellini ( No. 3467 ). FIG 628. A fiori di latte mold in salted ice and virgin maraschino ice cream are placed in the middle of a ice-cream dish. Burnt Almonds and Pistachios . --The same preparation as the above; after mixing the whipped cream with the Italian meringue add two ounces of crushed burnt almonds and two ounces of shredded pistachios, also two tablespoonfuls of orange flower water. Mix well together and with this fill a mold coated with virgin orange ice cream ( No. 3459 ). Fiori di latte can also be flavored with either chocolate, coffee, cinnamon, lemon, orange or Seville orange. Peel the three latter very finely, cut the skins up very thin or else chop them, or fruits with well-flavored juices may be substituted, etc. (3471). MOUSSE à LA SEMIRAMIS (Mousse à la Sémiramis). Lay a quart of well- whipped cream on a sieve to have it drain well. Pound four ounces of freshly shelled sweet almonds with half an ounce of coriander seeds and three gills of water; put this in a basin with twelve ounces of sugar; color to a pretty light red shade; add slowly and lightly the whipped cream. Imbed a high dome-shaped mold ( Fig. 629) in ice, and fill with the preparation, into which add a salpicon of fruits cut in quarter-inch squares, soaked in maraschino and drained. Pack in ice, freeze for one hour for each quart of preparation, unmold over a napkin and surround with cakes iced with kirsch or rum. FIG 629. A dome-shaped ice cream surrounded with cakes are placed on a folded napkin and served in a plate. (3472). MOUSSE à LA SIRAUDIN (Mousse à la Siraudin). Whip a quart of cream till quite firm, lay it on a sieve and when well drained mix into it eight ounces of icing sugar and a salpicon of fruits cut in squares and marinated in kirsch. Fill a high dome-shaped mold with this preparation, pack in ice, freeze an hour for each quart, and unmold on a very cold dish; cover the top with Italian cream, decorating it with fruits; freeze once more and serve. (3473). COFFEE OR CHOCOLATE MOUSSE (Mousse au Café ou au Chocolat). In former days they mingled milk, sugar and flavoring together, and when the preparation was beaten to a stiff froth it was lifted up with a skimmer, drained on a sieve and glasses were filled with it which were then frozen in ice-packed boxes. Now the process is different. A mousse preparation is simply cream beaten till very light, sweetened properly and flavored with natural flavors, liquors or essences. With Coffee. --Beat a quart of cream till very light, drain it on a sieve and when thoroughly drained put it into a tin basin and mix in twelve ounces of sugar, a gill of coffee and some vanilla essence. Imbed a high-dome mold in ice, fill it with the preparation, fasten on the cover, imbed it well and freeze. It will take about one hour for each quart. Unmold the mousse on a napkin and surround with small cakes. With Chocolate. --Dissolve two ounces of cocoa at the oven door, dilute it with two gills of twenty-six degree syrup, strain through a sieve and mix in gradually three beaten egg-whites, six ounces of sugar and a quart of well-whipped, drained cream. Pack a tall-dome mold in salted ice, fill it with the preparation, then freeze. A quart of cream takes about one hour to freeze. (3474). FRUIT MOUSSES WITH PINEAPPLE OR OTHER FRUITS (Mousses à l'Ananas ou Autres Fruits ). Strawberries, raspberries, apricots, peaches, pineapple, etc., to be used. A quart of cream must be whipped till very light; drain it on a sieve and then transfer it to a bowl; add a pound of pineapple purée and one pound of sugar, mixing both together with a little vanilla and a gill of kirsch; whip the preparation in a tin basin on ice for ten minutes to have the cream and pulp assimilate well together. Coat the inside of a high-dome mold with virgin strawberry cream ( No. 3451 ), fill the center quite full with the preparation, and close the mold. Pack it in ice for one hour for each quart, unmold on a napkin and surround with small iced cakes. Strawberries, raspberries, apricots, peaches or other fruits may be substituted for the pineapple. (3475). ITALIAN MOUSSE (Mousse à l'Italienne). This mousse will require three separate preparations: One of strawberry, one of vanilla and one of pistachios; mold it in a two-quart high-dome mold ( Fig. 629). Incrust the mold in salted ice, cover and leave till perfectly cold. Make the three preparations as follows: The Strawberry. --Mix one pint of strawberry pulp with a quarter of a pound of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ); beat on ice for ten minutes, and lightly add one pint of well-whipped and thoroughly drained cream. The Vanilla. --Half a pint of whipped cream and three ounces of pounded sugar; add a little vanilla pounded and passed through a silk sieve; mix it in lightly with the mousse. The Pistachio. --Have half a pint of very light whipped cream, three ounces of sugar, half a gill of almond milk, a little orange flower water and a small quantity of spinach green; beat the whole lightly. Fill the bottom of the mold one-third of its height and very even with the strawberry cream; on this lay exactly in the center some macaroons soaked in maraschino; freeze this for twenty minutes, then put into it another layer of the vanilla, finishing the center with soaked macaroons; the mold should now be two-thirds filled. Freeze for twenty minutes and finish with the pistachio cream. Close the mold hermetically and pack in ice for one hour and a half. Unmold on a folded napkin. (3476). MOUSSE WITH LIQUORS (Mousse aux Liqueurs). Whip a quart of cream until very firm, drain on a sieve and when finished return it to a basin to mix in ten ounces of sugar, and half a gill of either Curaçoa, maraschino, noyau, kirsch, aniseed, chartreuse, etc., flavoring but slightly with vanilla. Fill a dome-form mold with this, previously coated with any kind of water ice laid on in stripes. (3477). MOUSSE WITH MACAROONS OR CHESTNUTS (Mousse aux Macarons ou Marrons). With Macaroons. --Beat a quart of cream till very light, drain on a sieve and mix into it ten ounces of sugar; coat a high-dome mold with virgin maraschino cream and fill it in three distinct layers, alternating each one with broken macaroons soaked in kirsch; imbed in ice and freeze one hour for each quart; unmold on a napkin and surround with lady bouchées with maraschino. With Chestnuts. -- Whip one quart of cream and drain on a sieve. Prepare half a pound of chestnuts boiled in milk with a little vanilla pounded and pressed through a sieve; dilute with a pint of thirty-degree syrup and half a gill of maraschino; incorporate the whipped cream lightly into this purée; pack a mousse mold in ice, line it with a coating of ice cream made without eggs and flavored with prunelle, and fill it in three separate layers with the preparation, the same as the mousse with macaroons, only using crushed chestnuts soaked in maraschino; freeze the molds; unmold and dress on a napkin; decorate around with cream cakes garnished with apricot maramalade ( No. 3675 ). (3478). PARFAIT WITH NOUGAT AND WITH ALMONDS (Parfait au Nougat et aux Amandes). Boil four gills of syrup to twenty degrees with half a vanilla bean; pour this slowly over ten egg-yolks beaten in a vessel, after removing the vanilla; whip the preparation well over the fire until it is as thick as a cream, but avoid having it boil, then remove and stir continuously until frothy and cold; now beat it again on ice to give consistency, and incorporate two quarts of well-drained whipped cream, also half a pound of almond nougat ( No. 3621 ) crushed finely with a rolling-pin. Place the preparation in a three-quart bomb or parfait mold (Fig. 630) lined with paper, incrust in salted ice, and put on the lid, cementing the joints with butter; cover this with a thick layer of salted ice, then freeze for two hours and a half; lastly remove the mold, wash it quickly in cold water, wipe and unmold the parfait on a folded napkin; remove the paper and serve surrounded by small cakes. FIG 630. An illustration of a parfait mold. With Almonds. --Have the same preparation as for the parfait with nougat. Pound half a pound of new, freshly shelled almonds with a little water, vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ) and noyau; when pounded to a pulp use them instead of the nougat and finish exactly the same as for the above. If the two ices are to be served in the same mold have a waffle partition the same size as the center of the mold; fill one side of it with parfait with nougat, and the other side with parfait with almonds. (3479). EXCELLENT WITH COFFEE AND PARFAIT WITH COFFEE (Excellent au Café et Parfait au Café). Excellent with Coffee.-- Boil three pints of cream, mix in three-quarters of a pound of good freshly roasted coffee, not having it too dark; leave infuse for half an hour, being careful to keep the saucepan covered. Place sixteen egg-yolks in a tinned basin, add half a pound of sugar, stir together and cook on a slow fire, beating continuously until such a consistency is obtained that it will cover the spatula; remove the basin from the fire, leave till cold, then strain through a fine sieve; freeze in a spherical freezer and when the composition begins to congeal add half a gill of thirty-two degree vanilla syrup ( No. 3165 ); when almost hard put in another gill of the same syrup and as much whipped and slightly sweetened cream as there is preparation. Fill some boxes, the same as illustrated in Fig. 631, and lay them on top of socles made of colored water ( No. 3434 ). Place a spun sugar ornament on the summit. FIG 631. An illustration of a box with pretty decorated handle. Parfait with Coffee. --Infuse for half an hour six ounces of freshly roasted coffee and the fourth part of a vanilla bean in one pint of boiling cream; into a basin lay eight egg-yolks and a quarter of a pound of sugar, diluting with the infusion; set the basin on a slow fire, stir steadily until the mixture covers the spatula and leave till cold; pass it through a fine sieve. Clean the basin, return the preparation to it and whip on ice until quite light, adding as much whipped cream. Fill a bomb-shaped mold ( Fig. 630) with this, lay a paper over, then the cover and imbed in salted ice; freeze for one hour for one quart, two quarts requiring an hour and a half; the larger the mold the longer it will take. (3480). PLOMBIèRE à LA MONTESQUIEU (Plombière à la Montesquieu). Cook half a pound of rice in plenty of water with the juice of four lemons; drain and place it in a vessel to cover with a hot thirty-two degree syrup, draining this off an hour later. Put sixteen egg-yolks in a basin with half a pound of sugar, beat both together and mix in a pint of boiling milk; cook this, without allowing it to boil, until the preparation covers the spoon, then take it from the fire, let cool and pour in a pint of cream; pass the whole through a fine sieve and freeze; stir in the rice and a quart of well-drained whipped cream. Cut some preserved pineapple and melon in three-eighths inch squares and macerate in kirsch for two hours. Coat a plombière mold with uncooked lemon ice cream; fill the center with the rice cream, put on the cover and freeze for one hour for each quart. Unmold on a napkin and garnish around with small lady's bouchées ( No. 3376 ) iced with coffee icing; on top and in the middle place the macerated fruits and send to the table with a sauce -boatful of prunelle sauce, made with vanilla and whipped cream, to which some prunelle has been added. FIG 632. An unmolded plombiere filled with rice cream and fruits in the center and garnished with lady's bouchetes around it. This entree is placed on top of a folder napkin and served on a metal plate. (3481). PLOMBIèRE à LA RICHMOND (Plombière à la Richmond). Make a Genoese biscuit preparation as herewith described: Mix in a basin one pound of powdered sugar, twelve whole eggs and a grain of salt; beat this over a slow fire, and remove to incorporate slowly one pound of sifted flour and one pound of warm melted butter, also the well-chopped peel of an orange. Take a round mold seven inches in diameter by one and a half in depth; butter and flour the interior, then fill it three-quarters full with the preparation, and bake in a slack oven; spread the remainder of the paste on a sheet of paper to a quarter of an inch in thickness, and bake this also in a hot oven. After removing the thin biscuit from the fire cut it into half rounds two inches in diameter with a channeled pastry cutter ( Fig. 16); leave them to cool, coat over with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ), then cover with a layer of orange sugar icing (No. 102). When the round Genoese is cooked and cold, apricot it over, and in the center, on the apricot, place a round piece of strong paper six inches in diameter, and ice the whole with rum icing (No. 102). Lay it on a grate and make an incision around the biscuit at half an inch from the edge; remove the icing and paper from the center; scoop out the cake; set it on a dish, and put it on ice until ready to serve. Imbed a plombière mold ( Fig. 632) on ice; fill the bottom and sides with a coating of maraschino ice cream ( No. 3462 ), and fill the inside with a preparation made with three-quarters of a pound of pounded roasted hazel- nuts, adding slowly a quart of cream to them; put this into a vessel with an orange peel, infuse for one hour, and strain forcibly through a fine sieve; add a gill of vanilla syrup ( No. 3165 ) and eight ounces of sugar, freeze, then put in as much whipped cream. Mold it in layers, alternating each one with hazel- nut macaroons ( No. 3386 ). Then unmold the plombière into the cavity of the cake, surround the base of the plombière with the above half-rounds of Genoese, and serve separately a sauce made with well-drained whipped cream flavored with kirsch, to which has been added candied apricots cut in small squares of a quarter of an inch, previously macerated in kirsch. (3482). PLOMBIèRE à LA ROCHAMBEAU (Plombière à la Rochambeau). Pound half a pound of peeled almonds, but a few at a time, soaked for several hours in cold water, adding a little water at frequent intervals, then transfer from the mortar to a glazed vessel. Prepare an English cream (No. 42) with a quart of milk, half a pound of sugar, eight to ten egg-yolks yolks and a stick of vanilla split in two; as this becomes thick pour it over the almonds and stir occasionally while cooling, then strain forcibly through a tammy and leave till thoroughly cold. Pour this cream into a deep freezer imbedded in salted ice, work it vigorously until smooth and firm--this will take forty minutes--then incorporate two or three spoonfuls of kirsch mixed with a little orange syrup. Five to six minutes later stir in a pint of sweetened whipped cream, after adding to it a few spoonfuls of the almond preparation to prevent it from granulating; work again for ten to twelve minutes. Freeze a plombière mold; coat it with nougat ice-cream ( No. 3452 ) and at the bottom range some lady fingers soaked in prunelle; cover these with the above ice and on top of this place some preserved greengages, macerated for a quarter of an hour in kirsch and thick syrup, then drained. After the mold is full close the lid forcibly, pack it in salted ice and freeze for one hour for each quart. Unmold the plombière on a folded napkin and surround the base with small iced Genoese cakes; fill the hollow center of the plombière with some of the greengages infused in kirsch and serve separately, in a sauce tureen, whipped cream with a little kirsch added, mixing it well. (3483). PLOMBIèRE D'ALENçON (Plombière d'Alençon). Fill a plombière mold with Chantilly cream ( whipped cream made with a quart of cream and a quarter of a pound of powdered sugar, both firmly whipped together); place on the cover forcibly and pack it in ice, leaving it in a quarter of an hour for each quart; remove the cover and take out the contents, leaving only a thin three-eighths of an inch coating, then fill up the inside with alternate layers of No. 1 vanilla ice-cream ( No. 3458 ), having half as much whipped cream added to it, intermingling it with macaroons soaked in maraschino or kirsch; fill it quite full, put back the cover neatly and pack in ice, freezing one hour and a half for two quarts; unmold and garnish the hollow on top of the plombière with preserved peaches ( No. 3682 ) and cherries, the former cut into pieces and softened in a light syrup with maraschino; place here and there a few lozenges of angelica; garnish around with various small cakes. Sauce of whipped cream flavored with noyau should be served apart. (3484). PLOMBIèRE, HAVANESE STYLE (Plombière à la Havanaise). Put ten egg-yolks in a tinned basin with eight ounces of sugar; beat both well together with a whip and dilute with a pint of boiling milk; cook without boiling and when the preparation covers the spoon remove from the fire and allow to cool. Now add one pint of cream and the pulp of twelve very ripe bananas. Pass all of this through a fine sieve and freeze. Then incorporate the same quantity of whipped cream, and a gill and a half of maraschino. Coat a plombière mold with Andalusian ice cream ( No. 3446 ); fill it quite full with the banana cream, fasten the cover on tight, pack in ice and freeze one hour for each quart; unmold and fill the hollow center in the mold with slices of raw pineapple, quartered, pared to the pulp, then macerated in maraschino. The sauce required for this is composed of apricots and maraschino. (3485). PLOMBIèRE WITH CHERRIES (Plombière aux Cerises). Suppress the stalks and pips from one pound of cherries; pound and press through a sieve; into this pulp mix five gills of cold thirty-degree syrup, a few bits of lemon peel and some lemon juice; pass the preparation once more, then stir in an infusion made with a part of the crushed cherry pips and some light syrup. Bring it to twenty-two degree syrup, then freeze the whole, the same as an ordinary ice. After it becomes firm and smooth incorporate a few spoonfuls of kirsch; ten minutes later transfer three or four spoonfuls to a vessel and mix in with it six or seven gills of well-whipped rich cream, properly drained and sweetened; stir this at once into the principal preparation, but only a little at a time, to have the mixture more perfect. Beat the whole well for a few moments longer so that it attains body. Coat a plombière mold with kirsch ice cream ( No. 3462 ), fill it full with the above, close properly and freeze. Unmold on a napkin and decorate the summit of the cupola with candied cherries that have been softened in light syrup and macerated in kirsch for one hour previously, and then well drained. (3486). PLOMBIèRE WITH CHESTNUTS (Plombière aux Marrons). Pack a plombière mold in salted ice; line the bottom and sides with a thin layer of vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) and the center with chestnut cream ( No. 3465 ), having the mold pefectly full; fasten on the cover forcibly, then freeze, allowing one hour for each quart of the plombière; unmold and range it on a folded napkin; fill the hollow in the mold with chestnuts in juice flavored with maraschino. Stick between the chestnuts lozenge shaped pieces of angelica. (3487). BANANA PUDDING (Pouding aux Bananes). The composition for this is one pint of banana pulp, one pint of thirty-five degree syrup and a gill of lemon juice; bring this to twenty-two degrees test, then pass it through a sieve and freeze, incorporating two Italian meringue egg-whites ( No. 3442 ). Coat a two-quart pudding mold with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ); on the bottom place a layer of the banana ice, on this some slices of banana macerated for one hour in maraschino, and bestrewn with finely powdered sugar, also some biscuits soaked in Curaçoa, then another layer of banana ice, more sliced bananas and more biscuits, proceeding until the mold is thoroughly filled; freeze in salted ice for one hour and a half. Invert the pudding on a folded napkin and serve at the same time a sauce composed of whipped cream, vanilla ice cream and kirsch, the whole well mixed. FIG 633. A banana pudding placed on top of a folded napkin and served on a metal dish. (3488). BISCUIT PUDDING (Pouding aux Biscuits ). Crumble one pound of very dry Savoy biscuit ( No. 3231 ). Put twelve egg-yolks in a basin with six ounces of sugar; beat, add the crumbled biscuit and a quart of boiling milk; cook this on a slow fire without boiling, and when the preparation covers the spoon remove the basin from the fire, allow to cool, then strain through a sieve and freeze. Pack a two-quart pudding mold in salted ice; coat the inside with pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ) and fill the center in alternate layers of the above ice, slices of biscuit soaked in maraschino, and a salpicon of fruits; continue until the mold is full, finishing the top with ice cream, then freeze for one hour for each quart. Unmold on a folded napkin and serve with a separate sauce made of vanilla ice cream beaten in a metal bowl, mixing in some rum and whipped cream. (3489). CAVOUR PUDDING (Pouding à la Cavour). Pick, wash and cook in an abundance of water half a pound of Piedmontese rice, leaving it boil for twenty minutes; then drain it off and place it in a vessel to macerate for two hours in a hot twenty-two degree vanilla syrup; afterward drain. Break ten raw egg-yolks in a tinned copper basin; add eight ounces of sugar and mix well, stirring in a pint of boiling milk; cook this preparation on a slow fire without boiling and without ceasing to stir until it covers the spatula, then remove; allow to cool and add to it one pint of cream and a quarter of a pound of almonds pounded with two gills of water; strain this forcibly through a sieve and freeze. Coat a two-quart pudding mold with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), fill up the inside in distinct layers of the prepared ice cream, well-drained rice, and preserved pineapple cut in three-eighths of an inch squares. Freeze for one hour and a half in salted ice for each quart of pudding, then turn it out on a napkin and serve. Serve separately a sauce made of vanilla ice cream mingled with rum and whipped cream. (3490). CONSTANCE PUDDING (Pouding à la Constance). Pour a quart of cream into a vessel to stir with ten ounces of vanilla sugar ( No. 3165 ); strain through a sieve and freeze. Prepare a salpicon of fruits, such as apricots, cherries, plums and pineapple, also have some macaroons stuffed with apricot and macerated in maraschino. Imbed a two-quart pudding mold ( Fig. 633) in salted ice; coat it with a thin layer of uncooked strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) and fill it in layers composed of the above vanilla ice cream, the fruits, more vanilla ice cream and then the macaroons, continuing until perfectly full, having the last layer of ice cream; force on the cover and freeze for one hour and a half. Invert and dress on a napkin, serving separately a sauce made with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) finished with maraschino. (3491). DIPLOMAT PUDDING (Pouding à la Diplomate). Prepare a salpicon of candied fruits cut in quarter-inch squares, selecting pineapple, cherries, almonds, apricots, orange peel and Smyrna raisins; pour over some hot twenty-degree syrup flavored with rum, and let all macerate for half an hour. Put in a tinned copper basin, ten egg-yolks and six ounces of sugar; beat well together and dilute with a pint of boiling milk; cook without allowing it to come to a boil, then cool off and add one pint of cream; strain through a sieve, freeze, flavor with maraschino, and mix in half as much very firm and well-drained whipped cream. Cut up some slices of Savoy biscuit ( No. 3231 ). Take a two-quart pudding mold, incrust it in ice, line it with a layer of uncooked Andalusian ice cream ( No. 3446 ), and on the bottom have the sliced biscuit previously soaked in rum; scatter a part of the fruit salpicon over, then place a layer of the ice cream, and continue in this way to fill the mold, finishing the top with the ice cream; set the cover on tight, pack it well in salted ice, and freeze for one hour and a half, then unmold on a napkin and serve with a sauce made of vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) flavored with rum, mixing into it half as much whipped cream (No. 50). (3492). DUCHESS PUDDING (Pouding à la Duchesse). Cook six very ripe peeled pears in a twelve-degree syrup; drain and rub them through a sieve; put this pulp in a vessel with two gills of syrup at thirty-five degrees, and one gill of lemon juice; strain the whole, bring it to twenty-two degrees and freeze. Cut some candied pineapple and candied cherries (half a pound of each) in quarter-inch pieces, boil them in a little thirty-degree syrup, leave to cool and drain. To the ice add two egg-whites of Italian meringue, and the well-drained fruits. Imbed a two-quart pudding mold in ice; coat the inside with a quarter of an inch layer of maraschino ice cream ( No. 3462 ), and put in the pear ice; place the cover on, pack it well in salted ice, freeze, allowing one hour for each quart, then unmold and dress on a napkin. Accompany this pudding by a sauce prepared as follows: Put one Italian meringue egg-white in a metal bowl; stir it well with the juice of an orange and a few drops of extract of pears and a little champagne. (3493). FLEURY PUDDING (Pouding à la Fleury). Mix in a vessel one quart of apricot pulp, ten ounces of sugar, one gill of almond milk (No. 4) and half a gill of kirsch; bring it to twenty-two degrees of the saccharometer, then strain through a sieve and freeze; mix in half as much whipped cream. Have a two-quart pudding mold packed in ice; coat the inside with strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ), and fill it in layers composed of the above prepared cream; between each layer arrange a macédoine of fresh fruits macerated in kirsch and some biscuits soaked in maraschino; let the last layer be ice cream; pack and freeze for one hour and a half; unmold and serve with a separate sauce made of strawberry ice cream, mixing into it a little kirsch and whipped cream. (3494). IMPERIAL RICE PUDDING (Pouding de Riz à l'Impériale). Coat a two-quart pudding mold with almond ice cream ( No. 3461 ). Have some vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) and mix into it half as much well-drained whipped cream. In the bottom of the mold inside the coating range a layer of this vanilla cream and on it one of paradise rice ( No. 3456 ); place over this some biscuits and macaroons steeped in maraschino, and cover with more vanilla cream, then more rice and a salpicon of fruits, finishing with vanilla cream, so that the mold be entirely full and the cover packed on tight. Imbed and freeze one hour and a half; unmold and dress on a napkin, and serve with a sauce made of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) dissolved in maraschino, stirring in some thoroughly drained whipped cream (No. 50). (3495). NESSELRODE PUDDING WITH CANDIED CHESTNUTS (Pouding à la Nesselrode aux Marrons Confits). Have ready a chestnut ice cream ( No. 3465 ); mix into it a quarter as much Italian meringue ( No. 3442 ), and flavor with maraschino. Coat a two-quart pudding mold with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ); at the bottom lay a bed of the chestnut ice cream, placing a few broken candied chestnuts here and there, then another layer of chestnut cream, and continue until the mold is perfectly full, finishing with the cream; force on the cover, and freeze for an hour and a half. Unmold and dress on a napkin. Serve separately a sauce made with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), into which mix whipped cream and maraschino. (3496). PLUM PUDDING ( Plum Pouding). Melt half a pound of chocolate in a quart of water, add three-quarters of a pound of sugar, a little vanilla, and one quart of cold syrup at thirty degrees; strain through a sieve and freeze; now add two Italian meringue egg-whites (No. 140), some seeded Malaga and Smyrna raisins, currants, orange, lemon and citron peel cut in three-sixteenth of an inch squares, all of these previously boiled in a little twenty-two degree syrup, then drained and macerated for one hour in kirsch; drain and mix them well into the ice. Coat a two-quart pudding mold with chocolate ice cream ( No. 3449 ); fill it with the preparation, freeze as usual and unmold an hour and a half later, on a dish without a napkin. Make the sauce of vanilla ( No. 3458 ), whipped cream (No. 50) and rum; pour a third of the sauce on the pudding and serve the other two-thirds apart. FIG 634. An illustration of a plum pudding. (3497). ROMANO FF PUDDING (Pouding à la Romano ff). Make a chestnut cream the same as described for chestnut ice cream ( No. 3465 ), having the chestnuts cooked with sugar. After this is frozen incorporate half the same quantity of whipped cream (No. 50). Have a two-quart pudding mold ( Fig. 633) packed in salted ice, coat the interior with uncooked orange ice cream and fill the center in separate layers; first the chestnut ice cream, then lady fingers soaked in kümmel and walnuts well drained from their juice and cut lengthwise in four; have the top layer of the ice cream; cover the mold. Freeze one hour and a half, and turn it out on a napkin. Serve a separate sauce of vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) flavored with kirsch, beating it well with whipped cream. (3498). SERANO PUDDING (Pouding à la Serano). Boil one quart of raspberry pulp, one pound of syrup at thirty-two degrees, one gill of lemon juice and vanilla, bringing the whole to a twenty-two degree heat, then strain through a sieve and freeze, incorporating into the ice one Italian meringue egg-white (No. 140). Have a pudding mold well packed in salted ice; coat the inside with pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ). Fill up the mold in alternate layers, having a light strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) on the bottom, then some biscuits intercalated with fruits, and over the prepared raspberry ice; continue to fill in the same order: raspberry ice, biscuits and fruits cut in small squares. Have the mold well filled, fasten the cover on tight, pack in ice and freeze for one hour for each quart; invert it on a napkin and serve with a sauce -boat of strawberry sauce mingled with maraschino and whipped cream. FIG 635. A pudding dressed on the middle of a dish and is surrounded by pretty folded napkins. (3499). SICILIAN PUDDING (Pouding à la Sicilienne). Cut six ounces of slightly roasted almonds lengthwise in four, and six ounces of citron and four ounces of orange peel cut the same size. Coat a two-quart pudding mold with pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ); mix the almonds and fruits with chocolate ice cream (No. 3449), adding a little cinnamon and one Italian meringue egg-white (No. 140); fill with this, laying in the center a little orange jelly ( No. 3672 ). Pack in salted ice, unmolding on a napkin an hour and a half later. The sauce should be made of whipped cream (No. 50), with chocolate ice cream and brandy stirred in; serve it apart. (3500). WADDINGTON PUDDING (Pouding à la Waddington). Have half a pound of Smyrna raisins, a quarter of a pound of apricot paste and a quarter of a pound of orange peel; macerate these in two gills of kirsch. Have also some hazel- nut maccaroons ( No. 3386 ) garnished with orange jelly ( No. 3672 ) and some nougat ice cream ( No. 3452 ). Coat a two and a half quart pudding mold with strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ); on the bottom lay a bed of the nougat ice cream, over this the fruits macerated in maraschino and the marchpane, then more nougat cream and more fruits and marchpane, and nougat ice cream to finish. Close the mold, freeze and unmold two hours later. Prepare a whipped cream sauce, adding kirsch, maraschino and vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ). (3501). PUNCH AND SHERBET (Punch et Sorbet). Punch or sherbet is served between the last entrée and the roast. Either one should be placed on the bill of fare without a separate heading, merely reading: Sherbet or punch, à la ---. The difference between sherbet and punch is that the former is a water ice into which some liquor is mixed, while punch is an ice either of water or cream mingled with a quarter as much Italian meringue and liquors; for this see Italian meringue (No. 140). Punches and sherbets are served either in medium glasses, the size usually used for Bordeaux, without any foot, but provided with a handle, or else in fancy cups, either of gum paste or of water tinted to various colors, or in many kinds made of cardboard of a basket or other shape, or in the peels of fresh fruits. Italian meringue is mixed both in white or colored ices. The size for sherbets and punches is eight or ten from each quart. (3502). BEATRICE PUNCH (Punch à la Béatrice). For twelve persons take about one quart of lemon water ice ( No. 3604 ) and add to it two drops of extract of citron. To two well-beaten egg-whites put one gill of boiling syrup at thirty-five degrees; lay aside to cool and when very cold incorporate in the ice a little good rum, a quarter of a bottleful of good champagne and four soupspoonfuls of Italian meringue (No. 140); fill with this some swans made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ), having the top parts hollow. FIG 636. An illustration of a swan made of gum paste. (3503). BOUQUETIèRE PUNCH (Punch à la Bouquetière). For ten sherbets have one pint of orange water ice ( No. 3605 ) and as much strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ); mix both together in a freezer with a quarter as much Italian meringue (No. 140); add one gill of maraschino and a quarter of a bottleful of champagne. Procure molds the shape of Fig. 637 and Fig. 639. The latter mold is furnished with a socket three-sixteenths of an inch in diameter in its center, a little higher than the mold. Incrust them well in salted ice and fill Fig. 637 with water whitened with milk, and Fig. 639 with reddened water; after the ice has formed on the sides to an eighth of an inch in thickness empty out the surplus water, dip the mold in hot water and unmold quickly. Place the contents of the mold ( Fig. 637) in small blue cardboard boxes and fill them up with the sherbet. Unmold Fig. 639, lay on top of Fig. 637 so that the rounded part be uppermost, fasten a small bunch of natural flowers in the center and then stand them in silver-plated rings and these on silver saucers. FIG 637. An illustration of a vase-shaped mold. FIG 638. An unmolded vase-shaped iced punch, fastened with a small bunch of natural flowers in the center. FIG 639. An illustration of a bowl-shaped mold. (3504). CHAMPAGNE PUNCH (Punch au Champagne). Procure some imitation silver champagne pails made of cardboard of gum paste ( No. 3624 ). Have tin molds to fit into these and incrust them in ice, filling to the top with water. As soon as this becomes frozen sufficiently thick to cover the sides to one-eighth of an inch empty out the liquid and unmold, lay these ice pails inside the cardboard ones and imitate the bottle in gum paste ( No. 3624 ), having the surrounding ice of white rock candy; these should be laid on the cover. Pour into a small freezer one quart of pineapple water ice ( No. 3606 ), half a gill of fine brandy, half a gill of kirsch and two gills of champagne; mix the whole and add as much Italian meringue ( No. 3442 ). When frozen fill the pails, lay on the covers and serve. FIG 640. A silver champagne pails made of cardboard of gum paste. (3505). COFFEE PUNCH; GRANITE PUNCH WITH COFFEE (Punch au Café Punch Granit au Café). For ten persons put one quart of vanilla ice cream into a freezer and mix in with it three Italian meringue egg-whites (made with three beaten egg-whites and two gills of forty-degree syrup properly liquefied with coffee made with water ). To make this coffee requires one quart of water to six ounces of coffee; add it to the cream when nearly firm so that it does not grain the punch, then put in a little brandy or kirsch. Another way to make granite punch with coffee is to have four quarts of black coffee, one quart of cream, ten ounces of sugar, four gills of brandy and one quart of whipped cream or Italian meringue. Freeze as the above. (3506). DOLGOROUSKI PUNCH (Punch à la Dolgorouski). For ten persons allow one quart of peach water ice ( No. 3602 ); beat it up well and incorporate in a third as much Italian meringue ( No. 3442 ), then mix in slowly a gill and a half of kirsch, and two gills of Cliquot champagne; with this preparation fill some natural water glasses, having the bottom of the glass red and the upper part white, made and frozen the same as American sherbet. FIG 641. An illustration of a seperated glass with it's bottom part. FIG 642. An illustration of a glass fastened with the bottom part. (3507). ELIZABETH PUNCH (Punch Elisabeth). Have in a freezer one quart of strawberry ( No. 3451 ) or currant ice cream ( No. 3451 ), moisten it with kirsch, brandy and champagne, two gills and a half in all; whip in a quarter as much Italian meringue ( No. 3442 ) and serve this punch in imitation flower pots ( Fig. 643), made in three parts, the saucer, the pot and a top. Stick two wires into the top to fasten on a small bunch of natural flowers or else a single one. FIG 643. An imitated flower pots filled with punch and is fastened with a small bunch of flowers. (3508). FAVORITE PUNCH (Punch à la Favorite). Arrange in a freezer one quart of strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ); work it well and mix in two gills of rum, one gill of brandy and a quarter as much Italian meringue ( No. 3442 ). Prepare and pack some goblet-shaped molds in salted ice, filling them three-quarters full of water slightly whitened with milk; when frozen to one-eighth of an inch in thickness empty out, then fill the mold entirely with water tinted red; when frozen to an eighth of an inch in thickness empty and range them in small fancy blue boxes; place in a freezing box and when ready to serve fill with the strawberry punch. FIG 644. An illustration of a pretty glass. (3509). IMPERIAL PUNCH (Punch à l'Impérial). Put three gills of pineapple juice in a vessel with the juice of two lemons and the peel of one orange, also half an ounce of tea infused in a pint of water, three gills of rum, two gills of brandy, one gill of kirsch and one gill of maraschino; bring this composition to sixteen degrees, then freeze. When frozen to an ice add half as much Italian meringue (No. 140), fill the inside of the crowns and serve. These crowns are made of gum paste, ( No. 3624 ) having cardboard boxes fitted into the center. FIG 645. An illustration of a crown made of gum paste. (3510). CORDIAL PUNCH--ICED (Punch Glacé aux Liqueurs). Pour eight gills of cold twenty-eight degree syrup into a glazed vessel; mix with it a quarter of a vanilla bean, a few bits of lemon peel, a gill of lemon juice, the peel of half an orange and the juice of four oranges; let infuse for half an hour then strain; boil till it attains twenty degrees; rectify if necessary. Freeze the preparation in a freezer packed in salted ice after the usual manner, and when smooth and consistent incorporate four Italian meringue egg-whites (No. 140); beat again slowly and add two gills of liqueur or cordial, such as rum, kirsch, prunelle, maraschino, kimmel, etc. Let become consistent once more and serve. (3511). MILK PUNCH--ICED (Punch Glacé au Lait). This punch is not to be served the same as a liqueur punch, for it must be thoroughly frozen. Make a preparation with two quarts of milk and four ounces of sugar, strain and freeze. When three-quarters frozen mix in as much whipped cream, then add slowly one gill of rum and one gill of brandy. Use this preparation to fill some glasses, smooth the tops neatly and grate a little nutmeg over; lay them in a lightly imbedded freezing box. This milk punch can be transported quite a distance, for the ice will keep a length of time by putting the glasses in covered cardboard boxes that close hermetically. FIG 646. An illustration of a covered cardboard box. (3512). MONTMORENCY PUNCH (Punch à la Montmorency). Place two quarts of cherry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) in a freezer; mix in a gill of kirsch, half a gill of noyau, half a pint of good Sauterne and a quarter as much Italian meringue (No. 140). With this punch fill some cups made of natural ice slightly reddened. FIG 647. A cup made of natural ice. (3513). NENUPHAR PUNCH--LILIES (Punch Nénuphar). Place in a vessel the peel of one lemon, the peel of half an orange, half an ounce of coriander seeds and a small piece of Ceylon cinnamon, also four drops of extract of citron; set it in a heater or expose to the sun for four hours in a hermetically closed earthen vessel; afterward pass it through a filter and add a quart of syrup at thirty-two degrees. Mix the whole well and bring the composition to sixteen degrees, coloring to a light pink; strain through a very fine sieve and freeze. When the ice begins to congeal pour in three gills of kirsch and maraschino and half its volume of Italian meringue (No. 140). Use this ice for filling some gum paste Nenuphar lilies and serve at once. FIG 648. A Nenuphar lily made of gum paste. (3514). PARGNY PUNCH (Punch Pargny). Soak two gelatine leaves in cold water for half an hour, drain and dissolve in a quart of hot milk, afterward adding one quart of cream, half a pound of sugar, half a pint of good sherry and two gills of rum. Whip the whole well together and strain through a sieve; put it into a freezer and freeze with half as much salt as is required for ordinary ices. Add some Italian meringue (No. 140). This punch should be mellow and not hard; dress in fancy glass cups. (3515). ROMAN PUNCH (Punch à la Romaine ). This is made with one quart of lemon water ice ( No. 3604 ) well worked in a freezer packed in ice; add to it a little citron peel or extract; the composition should be put in a rather large freezer to allow two Italian meringue egg-whites (No. 140) to be incorporated; it should first be added slowly in small quantities, working it well with the spatula to have it acquire much lightness, then add two gills of rum and a quarter of a bottleful of champagne; work it well and detach from the sides of the freezer. The rum should be poured in gradually, as well as any kind of spirits in different punches; continue until sufficient be added to suit the taste. It is almost impossible to designate the exact quantity, that depending entirely on the quality of the ingredients composing the punch; generally the liquors are only put in just when serving. The punch should be sufficiently liquid to be drank without using spoons and as soon as served. Serve the punch in upright glasses provided with handles. This is sufficient for twelve persons. (3516). SIBERIAN PUNCH--LALLA ROOKH (Punch à la Sibérienne--Lalla Rookh). Siberian or Lalla Rookh punch is merely vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) worked in a freezer, mixing in with it a quarter as much Italian meringue (No. 140) and about two gills of good rum for each quart of the ice cream; with this fill plain punch glasses with handles, or cups. (3517). SUNFLOWER PUNCH (Punch Tournesol). Put two quarts of pineapple water ice ( No. 3606 ) in a freezer; work it well, adding half as much Italian meringue (No. 140), two gills of kirsch and a quarter of a bottleful of champagne; fill some sunflowers ( Fig. 649) made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ) or pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ) with the mixture and serve without delay. FIG 649. An illustration of a sunflower made of gum paste. (3518). STANLEY PUNCH (Punch à la Stanley). If for twelve guests have one quart of syrup at thirty-two degrees, the juice of four lemons, a quart of boiling water having a pound of freshly roasted coffee infused therein and half a vanilla bean; pour the infusion into the preparation, let steep together for two hours, keeping it well closed. Bring the composition to twenty-two degrees and strain through a sieve; freeze while incorporating two Italian meringue egg-whites (No. 140), one gill of kirsch and a gill of maraschino. Arrange the punch inside of a goblet beside which is a heron made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ) surrounded by grasses. FIG 650. An illustration of a heron with a goblet beside it, which are made of gum paste. (3519). TOSCA PUNCH (Punch à la Tosca). Put in a freezer packed in ice one pint of Andalusian ice cream ( No. 3446 ) and as much almond ice cream ( No. 3461 ); work well, adding two gills of noyau and an eighth of a bottle of champagne, also a third as much Italian meringue (No. 140). Color a delicate pink and with the preparation fill some goblets made of colorless natural water frozen to a sufficient thickness, then unmold and set in thick blue cardboard boxes the same shape as the glasses. The quantity here given is sufficient to serve twelve persons. FIG 651. A goblet made of frozen water and is set in a thick blue cardboard box. (3520). TREMIèRE PUNCH (Punch à la Tremière). Mix in a freezer one quart of pineapple water ice ( No. 3606 ), one pint of orange ice ( No. 3605 ) and one pint of strawberry ice ( No. 3607 ). When thoroughly mixed incorporate a third of its volume of Italian meringue (No. 140), three gills of kirsch and a quarter of a bottle of champagne; with this preparation fill some Tremière roses ( Fig. 652) made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ), or else they can be made of pulled sugar, and served at once. FIG 652. A Trenuere rose made of gum paste. (3521). AMERICAN SHERBET (Sorbet à l'Américaine). Prepare some glasses of ice, using molds as shown herewith ( Fig. 653), they being made in two pieces which, when unmolded, are joined together. Fill them just when ready to serve with this preparation. Have ready a water ice of one quart of water, one pound of sugar, the peel of two oranges and of one lemon, the juice of eight oranges and of six lemons; boil to attain sixteen degrees, pass through a fine sieve, then freeze, incorporating into the ice when about serving a quarter of a bottleful of American champagne mixed with two gills of kirsch and one of prunelle. FIG 653. An illustration of a two pieces iced glass. (3522). ANDALUSIAN SHERBET (Sorbet Andalouse). Trim some fine orange peel to represent baskets ( Fig. 656); scallop their borders with the punch shown in Fig. 654; decorate with narrow ribbons and freeze for one hour in a freezing box. Squeeze out the juice of four oranges and two lemons; place this in a vessel, add the peel of half an orange, two drops of extract of bitter orange and two drops of the extract of lemon; bring the composition to twenty-two degrees; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. When frozen mix in one gill of Curaçoa and as much kirsch; fill the orange peel baskets and serve at once. FIG 654. An illustration of a punch. FIG 655. Three different punch patterns. FIG 656. An illustration of an orange peel being made into a basket with different pattern on it's border and decorated with ribbons. (3523). CALIFORNIAN SHERBET (Sorbet Californienne). In a vessel place four gills of syrup at thirty-five degrees, one gill of brandy, one gill of maraschino, half a bottleful of California champagne, the peel of one and the juice of three oranges, four gills of pineapple juice and the juice of twelve lemons. Reduce until it registers sixteen degrees with the saccharometer; strain through a fine wire sieve and freeze. Imbed in ice some molds as shown in Fig. 657; decorate with sprigs of fresh mint and fill with plain, colorless water; when the ice is sufficiently frozen unmold and keep them on ice until required for serving the sherbet, filling and serving them without any delay. FIG 657. An illustration of a molded ice. FIG 658. An illustration of an ice decorated with fresh mint. (3524). MEPHISTO SHERBET (Sorbet à la Méphisto). Infuse for three hours in one quart of boiling syrup ten ounces of torrefied fresh cocoa and half a stick of vanilla; add the juice of four lemons and one bottleful of good white wine; bring to twenty-two degrees, then freeze; incorporate, just when ready to serve, two gills of brandy and a gill of rum; with this preparation fill a dice box and serve at once. The box and dice should be of gum paste ( No. 3624 ) or pasteboard. FIG 659. A box and three dies made of gum paste. (3525). PARADISE SHERBET (Sorbet Paradis). Prepare an orange water ice ( No. 3605 ), into which incorporate a little carmine, kirsch and orange flower water. This is dressed in a nest with a small bird perched on its edge. The bird, the interior and the bottom should be made of gum paste (No. 3624); imitate the outside of the nest with spun sugar and the grass with fillets of angelica. Serve at once. (3526). PARFAIT AMOUR SHERBET (Sorbet Parfait Amour). Pour into a freezer one pint of raspberry water ice ( No. 3607 ), one pint of orange water ice ( No. 3605 ) and a pint of cherry water ice ( No. 3602 ); mix thoroughly and add to them half a gill of Curaçoa, half a gill of maraschino, one gill of kirsch or one gill parfait amour cordial and half a pint of champagne just when ready to serve. Dress in tulips made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ) or pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ). FIG 660. A tulip made of gum paste. (3527). PâQUERETTE SHERBET (Sorbet Pâquerette). A light apricot ice cream ( No. 3451 ), having one quart for ten persons; put it into an imbedded freezer and incorporate one gill of Madeira and one gill of brandy and noyau. With this sherbet fill the inside case found in the handled basket, having this trimmed with a ribbon bow. A small bunch of flowers may be fastened to it also. When prepared to serve put the case filled with the sherbet inside the basket. FIG 661. An illustration of a handled basket decorated with ribbon bows. (3528). REBECCA SHERBET (Sorbet Rébecca). Place in a freezer one quart of orange water ice ( No. 3605 ) and one of lemon water ice ( No. 3604 ); work both together thoroughly, mixing in a gill of kirsch and half a bottleful of champagne. This sherbet is served in small cases representing baskets, and decorated with a rich ribbon bow, or in a little well made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ). FIG 662. A small case serve as basket, is decorated with ribbon bow. (3529). VENETIAN SHERBET (Sorbet à la Vénitienne). Place in a vessel one pound of grated pineapple with a quart of twenty-degree boiling hot syrup, also half a vanilla stick. Two hours later strain forcibly through a sieve and add one gill of kirsch, one gill of brandy and a quarter of a bottleful of champagne. Serve in small gondolas ( Fig. 663), made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ). FIG 663. An illustration of a gondola made of gum paste. (3530). YOUNG AMERICA SHERBET (Sorbet Jeune Amérique). Imitate a boat in gum paste ( No. 3624 ), standing it on a thin board; fasten an American flag at the stern and fill the empty boat with the following sherbet: Place in a vessel one quart of thirty-two degree syrup, one quart of syrup of pears and currants and one gill of lemon juice, the juice of four oranges, half an orange peel and a little vanilla. Infuse for one hour, then bring it to thirty-two degrees; pass through a fine sieve and freeze. Just when prepared to serve incorporate one gill of kirsch, one gill of rum and a quarter of a bottle of champagne. FIG 664. An illustration of a boat made of gum paste and is fastened with American flag on one end. (3531). SABAYON à LA CANETTI (Sabayon à la Canetti). Break twelve raw egg-yolks in a deep saucepan with five ounces of sugar; whip the yolks and sugar together with a wooden beater or small wire whisk, rotating either one or the other between both hands; add slowly four gills of good white wine, then a stick of vanilla, the peel of half a lemon and a little cinnamon. Place the saucepan either on a very slow fire or in a bain-marie until the preparation becomes quite frothy and firm; remove it from the fire, lay it on ice and continue the beating process. When very cold suppress the peel and vanilla and stir in one quart of whipped cream (No. 50) and half a gill of kirsch. Serve this preparation in high glasses, paper cases, or else silver souffle casseroles. (3532). SABAYON à LA DENARI (Sabayon à la Denari). Prepare a sabayon with Lunel wine, putting twelve egg-yolks in a deep saucepan with five ounces of sugar; beat well with the whip or whisk and slowly add four gills of Lunel wine and a stick of vanilla. Beat the preparation in a bain-marie or else over a slow fire until thoroughly frothy and firm, then remove from the fire and lay it on ice, continuing to beat until quite firm; mix in the same volume of whipped cream (No. 50) and with this preparation fill up some glasses in alternate layers of the sabayon and lady fingers soaked in maraschino, adding a few raspberries placed here and there. Cover the top with whipped cream and freeze in a freezing box, serving when well frozen. (3533). ALCAZAR SOUFFLéS--ICED (Soufflés Glacés à l'Alcazar). Fill some paper cases with the following: Pour some vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) into a metal vessel; lay it on salted ice, stirring well with a spoon, mixing in as much whipped cream, finishing with macaroons and broken chestnuts infused in maraschino; with this preparation imitate the shape of some soufflés just taken from the oven. Have some pulverized macaroons sifted through a fine sieve and bestrew the soufflés with this powder; cut a gash on the side, then cover with fine powdered sugar. Color quickly in a brisk oven and then put into the freezing box; pack it on ice to freeze for one hour; serve on folded napkins. FIG 665. A souffle in paper case. (3534). FAVART SOUFFLéS (Soufflés Glacés à la Favart). Have ready a burnt almond ice cream preparation ( No. 3455 ); when frozen mix into it as much whipped cream and with this partly fill some crimped paper cases; on top lay slices of hazel- nut biscuit ( No. 3241 ) soaked in maraschino, and strawberries in their juice macerated in kirsch; cover and shape to resemble baked soufflés; besprinkle with powdered macaroons and icing sugar; color briskly in a quick oven, then stand them on the shelves of a tin freezing box; freeze for one hour and serve. (3535). PALMYRA SOUFFLé (Soufflé Glacé Palmyre). Cook in a slack oven a few good, whole, unpeeled russet apples placed in an earthen dish; when done, remove all the pulp and rub it through a sieve. Put four gills of this into a vessel with half a pound of fine sugar flavored with vanilla, and beat on ice to give it body, then mix in a pint of whipped cream flavored with maraschino. Dress this preparation in separate layers in a soufflé dish ( Fig. 182), alternating each one with a layer of almond biscuit soaked in maraschino and well-drained brandied figs; shape it like a dome, then freeze it for forty minutes in salted ice in a freezing box. After taking it out decorate the dome with sweetened and vanilla -flavored whipped cream, also candied fruits; return it to the freezing box and serve half an hour later. (3536). SPONGADE à LA MéDICIS (Spongade à la Médicis). Cut up finely the peel of a citron and an orange; have also some pistachios and cherries divided in four, and pour kirsch over. Take four gills of cold syrup at thirty-five degrees, the juice of five oranges, the peel of two, the same of one lemon, one gill of vanilla syrup and two gills of egg-whites. Infuse together for half an hour, and bring the preparation to twenty-two degrees; pass it through a fine sieve. Freeze the composition by working it with a spatula to incorporate as much air as possible so as to obtain a very light ice, and then mix in the above fruits. Coat a two-quart spongade mold with raspberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) or water ice; fill with the preparation, press down the cover and freeze for one hour; unmold, dress on a folded napkin and surround the spongade with small cakes. FIG 666. A dish with spongade in the center and is surrounded with small cakes. (3537). CREAM SPONGADE à LA PARéPA (Spongade Crème à la Parépa). Cream spongades are made by putting into a vessel four gills of fresh cream and almond milk made with five ounces of sweet and one ounce of bitter almonds; also eight egg-whites, mixing in three-quarters of a pound of sugar; beat well together, strain and freeze in medium-sized freezers; one to congeal the mixture and the other to work it. When the composition is in the first freezer, turn the latter quickly with the right hand, and as soon as the preparation adheres to the sides remove it to the second or smaller one, then work to give it body, and to incorporate plenty of air into the ice. Then add a salpicon of fruits cut in quarter-inch squares. Mold the ice in a spongade-shaped mold ( Fig. 666), coated inside with pistachio cream. (3538). ALASKA, FLORIDA (Alaska, Florida). Prepare a very fine vanilla -flavored Savoy biscuit paste ( No. 3231 ). Butter some plain molds two and three-quarters inches in diameter by one and a half inches in depth; dip them in fecula or flour, and fill two-thirds full with the paste. Cook, turn them out and make an incision all around the bottom; hollow out the cakes, and mask the empty space with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ). Have some ice cream molds shaped as show in Fig. 667, fill them half with uncooked banana ice cream ( No. 3541 ), and half with uncooked vanilla ice cream ( No. 3466 ) ; freeze, unmold and lay them in the hollow of the prepared biscuits; keep in a freezing box or cave. Prepare also a meringue with twelve egg-whites and one pound of sugar. A few moments before serving place each biscuit with its ice on a small lace paper, and cover one after the other with the meringue pushed through a pocket furnished with a channeled socket, beginning at the bottom and diminishing the thickness until the top is reached; color this meringue for two minutes in a hot oven, and when a light golden brown remove and serve at once. FIG 667. An illustration of a con-shaped ice cream mold. FIG 668. An unmolded ice cream placed in the middle of a dish. (3539). ALEXANDRIA (Alexandria). Have in a tin basin ten raw egg-yolks and twelve ounces of sugar; beat both well together, diluting with a quart of boiling milk, adding the peel of one orange. Set this on a slow fire, stir and cook until the preparation covers the spatula, then leave to cool off. Add the pulp of four bananas, one pint of cream and two gills of vanilla syrup at thirty-two degrees; strain through a sieve, freeze and mix into this ice one gill of Curaçoa and half as much whipped cream. With this frozen preparation fill some crescent-shaped molds, pack in ice and freeze for half an hour. Unmold and decorate each side with lozenges of angelica and candied cherries, and stand them on whipped cream having had crushed macaroons soaked in maraschino mingled in. FIG 669. An ice decorated with angelica and candied cherries on each side and is served on a plate. (3540). ASPARAGUS (Asperges). Cook one pound of asparagus tops in plenty of un salted water; drain and lay them in a tinned basin with ten egg-yolks and twelve ounces of sugar; mix thoroughly, incorporating a pint of boiling milk; cook this preparation without allowing to boil, and put aside to cool, then add a pint of cream; color a third part to a pale green; strain through a sieve, and freeze the parts separately. With this ice fill some asparagus -shaped molds , the stalks or third part to be of the green ice, and the remainder white. Freeze the molds for half an hour, unmold, tie in bunches of three with a pink ribbon, and dress on napkins. Serve separately a sauce made of vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), whipped cream (No. 50) and maraschino. Asparagus can also be imitated by filling the molds with pistachio ( No. 3454 ) and vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), and serving the same as the above. FIG 670. An illustration of three asparagus tied with a ribbon. (3541). BANANAS IN SURPRISE (Bananes en Surprise). The proportions for eight large bananas is one quart of cream, the pulp of four bananas and one pound of sugar; press through a fine sieve and freeze. Pare and cleanse the peels nicely; freeze them in a freezer for one hour and fill with the above cream, putting inside of them a salpicon of candied fruits macerated in maraschino. Put the bananas into a freezing box well packed in ice and leave to harden for several hours. Dress on a folded napkin and serve. FIG 671. An illustration of a banana. (3542). BLIDAH (Blidah). Fill a lozenge-shaped mold with cherry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) or currant water ice ( No. 3602 ) ; unmold and put it in the bottom of a Montelimar mold packed in ice; finish filling the lozenged part of the mold with mandarin water ice and the rest with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), into which mix the pulp of two oranges macerated for an hour in maraschino. Fill the molds well, force on the cover, pack and freeze for one hour; unmold and cutting in half-inch slices dress each slice on lace paper and serve. The length of the mold is eight inches long inside, the height is three and three-quarters inches and the width at its base is three and a quarter inches. The lozenge is the same length as the larger mold and its height is two inches. FIG 672. An illustration of a house-shaped ice made of lozenge-shaped molds. (3543). CARAMEL BOUCHéES (Bouchées au Caramel ). Lay on a sheet of paper some half-spherical rounds of lady finger paste ( No. 3377 ), each two and a half inches in diameter; when cooked empty out the centers. Put a quarter of a pound of strawberry juice in a vessel with a pint of thirty-two degree syrup and a little vanilla; strain through a fine sieve, freeze and then mix in two Italian meringue egg-whites (No. 140) and half a pound of preserved pineapple cut in three-sixteenths inch squares and macerated in kirsch. With this ice fill the interior of the biscuits, range one on top of the other, fastening them well together; lay them in a freezing box for one hour to congeal the ice and then dip them in sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171). Dress these balls on rounds of waffles three inches in diameter; serve them plain or scatter over finely shredded green pistachios. FIG 673. A plate with a round waffle with filling inside it. (3544). CAULIFLOWER WITH MARCHIONESS RICE (Choux-fleurs au Riz Marquise). Blanch half a pound of rice; cook it in milk for half an hour, pass through a fine sieve and mix with it double as much hazel- nut ice cream ( No. 3464 ). Fill a cauliflower -form mold with three pints of this preparation, keeping a cavity in the center, and fill this with the well-cooked boiled rice marinated in vanilla syrup and having added to it a salpicon of fresh fruits, macaroons and lady fingers steeped in maraschino. Close the mold after it is quite full, pack in salted ice and freeze for one hour, then unmold on a folded napkin and serve with a separate sauce -boatful of sauce prepared with vanilla ice ( No. 3458 ) and maraschino mixed together, to which add an equal volume of whipped cream (No. 50). (3545). CEYLON WITH COFFEE (Ceylan au Café). Put ten egg-yolks in a tinned basin; whip in three gills of very strong coffee and bring the preparation to twenty-two degrees with a syrup gauge; set the basin on a slow fire, stir and remove when it covers the spoon, then strain through a fine sieve; return it to the cleaned basin, beat again on ice till it attains a light consistency. Coat a mold ( Fig. 674) with uncooked cinnamon ice cream ( No. 3450 ), fill the center with the coffee composition, close forcibly, pack and freeze for one hour. Unmold and dress on a folded napkin and surround with vanilla lady bouchées ( No. 3376 ). FIG 674. An illustration of an ice cream mold. (3546). CHARLOTTE CORDAY (Charlotte Corday). Obtain some round crimped paper cases; cover the bottoms and sides with uncooked Andalusian ice cream ( No. 3446 ) and fill the centers with biscuit glacé preparation with vanilla ( No. 3438 ), adding a little maraschino to it; also put in some candied orange peel cut in exceedingly thin fillets; powder the tops with pulverized macaroons and cover this with Andalusian ice cream and candied fruits. Lay them in a freezing box for an hour to finish freezing. FIG 675. An illustration of a freezing box. (3547). CORN (Mais). Fill tin molds, representing a medium-sized ear of corn, partly with hazel- nut ice cream( No. 3464 ) and partly with lemon water ice ( No. 3604 ) ; in the center of each ear of corn lay pieces of lady fingers soaked in prunelle. Close the molds forcibly, pack and freeze; three-quarters of an hour after, unmold, dress on a napkin and serve with a bowlful of vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) and whipped cream (No. 50), half of each, well beaten together, adding a little kirsch. FIG 676. An illustration of a corn. (3548). COUNTESS LEDA ICE CREAM (Glace à la Comtesse Léda). Coat with strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) the inside of a mold the shape of the annexed cut ( Fig. 677), able to contain one quart and a half to two quarts of preparation, having previously packed it well in salted ice; fill the center with uncooked vanilla ice cream ( No. 3466 ), into which have mixed fresh peaches cut in four and infused in maraschino, and freeze for one hour and a half. At the same time mold a swan with almond ice cream ( No. 3461 ). At the moment of serving unmold the large form on a napkin. Surround the base with lady bouchées frosted with vanilla and strawberry frosting ( No. 3376 ), and on the top dress the swan. Serve separately a kirsch sauce, made with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) and whipped cream (No. 50), beaten together with a little kirsch. FIG 677. An unmolded annexed cut ice cream with a gum paste swan placed on top of it. (3549). DICE, DOMINOES AND CARDS (Dés, Dominos et Cartes). Dice. --Fill some cube-shaped tin molds two inches in diameter with hazel- nut ice cream ( No. 3464 ); in the center lay some macaroons soaked in maraschino; pack in salted ice, freeze and unmold half an hour later. Imitate the black dots of the dice with small chocolate pastilles three-sixteenths of an inch in diameter, pressing them down into the ice; put them in a freezing box to freeze until the ice has become firm, then stand on a lace paper and cover each dice with a box of wafers cut square, being two and three-quarters inches on each side, held together with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171); fasten on top a quarter-inch ball of almond paste (No. 125) of four distinct colors, iced with caramel, or else a walnut emptied and filled with small candies; fasten together to enclose the candies. FIG 678. An unmolded dice-shaped ice cream with small chocolate pastilles as imitated black dots on the dice. FIG 679. An illustration of an open dice, made of ice cream. FIG 680. An imitated dominoes made of ice cream. FIG 681. Imitated cards made of ice cream. Dominoes. --Have hinged tin molds two and three-eighths inches long by one and three-eighths wide and half an inch high, opening through their thickness; fill them half full with virgin maraschino cream and the other half with chocolate ( No. 3449 ); pack in ice for half an hour, unmold, and in the center of the white side, and across from side to side, lay a strip of angelica, and on both sides of this range small dots of chocolate to imitate dominoes; form a small easel of wafers with a ledge at the base; on each side place two dominoes, making four for each guest, and over the whole stand a cover as explained for the dice. Cards. --Procure square boxes made of pasteboard, each panel having a playing card on it. These boxes should have double boxes filling in the interior; fill this inside box with ice cream, then serve. (3550). EGGS à LA TREMONTAINE, RED WINE SAUCE (Œufs à la Tremontaine, Sauce au Vin Rouge). Mix some fruits previously cut dice shaped with whipped cream (No. 50); fill spherical molds of one and one-eighth inches in diameter, freeze and unmold. Coat some hinged tinned molds, the shape of an egg, containing a gill each, with pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ); in the center place the spherically molded whipped cream, close and clean off the surplus, freeze, unmold and serve on a folded napkin. Serve separately a red wine sauce prepared as follows: Infuse some cinnamon and a slice of lemon in good red wine; sweeten and stand the saucepan on the fire. As soon as the wine begins to whiten thicken with fecula diluted in cold water, strain, leave stand till very cold, then serve. FIG. 682. An illustration of an imitated half-cut eggs. (3551). ESMERALDA ICE CREAM (Glace à l'Esméralda). Mix one pint of strawberry pulp, three pints of cream, three quarters of a one pound of sugar; strain through a fine sieve, freeze and stir in as much whipped cream (No. 50). Pound four ounces of burnt almonds with a quarter of a vanilla bean and half a gill of cream; put into a basin six egg-yolks and five ounces of sugar; dilute with half a pint of boiling milk and cook on a slow fire without boiling; cool and add a pint of cream and a little orange flower water; freeze. Stir in an ounce and a half of the finely pounded burnt almonds and an ounce and a half of shredded pistachios. Fill a pyramid-shaped mold made in two separate longitudinal divisions, half with the strawberry and the other half with the burnt almond preparation ; freeze for half an hour, unmold and on top place an apricot steeped in prunelle cherries. FIG. 683. An unmolded pyramid-shaped ice cream, decorated with a cherry placed on top of it and is served in a flat round plate. (3552). FRASCATI ICE CREAM (Glace Frascati). Fill a round shallow tin mold, having flaring sides with a depression in the center, the dimensions being three inches in diameter and one inch deep, with light vanilla ice cream preparation ( No. 3458 ); pack in ice and freeze for half an hour, unmold and put in the center some fiori di latte with kirsch ( No. 3469 ); lay them in the freezing box to freeze, then on top of each set a macaroon soaked in maraschino; push through a pocket some very firm iced biscuit preparation, turning it around to form into a pyramid; decorate the top with candied fruits; freeze for three-quarters of an hour before serving. (3553). FROMAGE GLACé (Fromage Glacé). Have an iced mold (see Fig. 684); divide it in three parts with partitions made of tin and pack it well in salted ice. Put into a vessel three-quarters of a pound of apricot pulp, a gill and a half of raspberry juice, the juice of two oranges, three-quarters of a pound of powdered sugar and one pint of cream; strain this through a sieve and freeze, adding to it the same quantity of whipped cream (No. 50). Arrange this preparation in one of the compartments, in the other strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ), and in the third hazel- nut ice cream ( No. 3461 ), adding apricots macerated in maraschino. Take the partitions out, fill up, coat well, pack the mold in salted ice, freeze for one hour, then unmold on a napkin. This preparation is rarely used nowadays. FIG. 684. An illustration of an pyramid-star-shaped iced mold. (3554). HARLEQUIN ICE CREAM (Glace Arlequin). This ice is molded in four triangular-shaped molds; fill one with coffee ice cream ( No. 3463 ), another with vanilla ( No. 3458 ), another with pistachio ( No. 3454 ) and the fourth with strawberry ice ( No. 3607 ). Imbed and freeze for half an hour, then unmold. Put them in a brick-shaped mold three inches square. The triangles should be two inches on one side by an inch and a half in height. The mold should be eight inches long. Place the triangles in the mold, as shown in Fig. 686, having the vanilla at the bottom, one side the strawberry, the other the pistachio and keeping the coffee on the top. Press the cover down well so no empty space remains and freeze for half an hour. Now mold some chocolate ice cream in spherical molds an inch and a quarter in diameter, freeze for half an hour and unmold the whole. Cut the brick up in slices with a special knife ( Fig. 700) dipped in hot water, and place each one on a four-inch square sheet of lace paper; fasten the chocolate drops exactly on the center and put them into a freezing box for half an hour before serving. All creams that are to be cut should be laid on a small board so as to facilitate cutting and removing them, and to keep them in good shape. FIG. 685. A long triangular-shaped mold. FIG. 686. A combination of four long triangular-shaped molds that made up cube. (3555). JARDINIèRE CUTLETS (Côtelettes Jardinière). Blanch half a pound of rice, refresh and return it to the saucepan with a pint and a half of boiling cream, half a pound of sugar and the peel of half a lemon. Boil up once, push it into the oven for an hour, then remove and whip it well, adding a quart of cream; freeze and as the preparation takes body mix into it as much sweetened whipped cream as there is ice. Mold in cutlet -shaped molds and when thoroughly frozen turn them out and dip each one in macaroon dust sifted through a fine sieve. Dress on a salpicon of fruit macerated in maraschino and thickened with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) prepared with maraschino; trim the handles with frills (No. 10) and serve at once. FIG. 687. A plate of imitated cutlets decorated with hatelets placed in between them. (3556). LA GRANDINA (La Grandina). Coat some oval-shaped plaited paper cases with a part of the following ice: Whip together one pint of raspberries, the peel of one orange and the juice of three, also the juice of six lemons; tint this a beautiful pale red and boil, adding enough sugar to make a twenty-two degree syrup; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. When consistent and smooth add to it half as much whipped cream and two ounces of finely cut-up citron peel; partly fill the inside of the cases with iced chocolate biscuit preparation flavored with vanilla, into which mix pounded macaroons and a few roasted and pulverized hazel- nuts; freeze for one hour, putting the cases in a freezing box and finish filling with the raspberry ice, having it slightly bomb-shaped on top; decorate with whole cherries placed directly in the center; dredge the top with finely shredded pistachios; return to the freezing box and freeze for one hour. FIG. 688. A muffin-liked ice cream in an oval-shaped paper case is decorated with pistachios right at the center of the dome. (3557). LEMONS IN SURPRISE ( Citrons en Surprise). Pour a quart of fresh cream into a vessel, pound two ounces of sweet almonds and a few bitter almonds with twelve ounces of sugar; sift through a sieve and put it with the cream, adding two gills of maraschino and four ounces of candied fruits cut in quarter-inch squares; tint it to a soft pink, then freeze. With this cream fill some large lemons that have been emptied. Tie around with ribbons the same as shown in Fig. 689. FIG. 689. An illustration of a vessel with ribbons tie around it. (3558). LEONA ICE CREAM (Glace Léona). First prepare some natural ice glasses the shape of Fig. 690. (For preparing these glasses see No. 3434 .) When they are all ready put them into a freezing box until serving time. Prepare some whipped cream (No. 50) flavored with maraschino and drain it on a sieve. Make an ice with half a pound of almonds, ground a few at a time, with half a pound of sugar and a pint of water, adding two gelatine leaves dissolved in two gills of water, and a gill of vanilla syrup; strain this through a fine tammy and freeze in slightly salted ice; work well with the spatula, incorporating as much whipped cream and a salpicon of assorted fruits cut in quarter-inch squares, macerated in kirsch and drained. With this ice fill some spiral-shaped molds and pack in ice. Half an hour later, just when prepared to serve, fill the glasses with the whipped cream. Unmold the ices, lay them over the cream and on top of each place a brandied cherry or one made of almond paste (No. 125); serve at once. FIG. 690. A spiral-shaped ice cream served in an natural iced glass. (3559). MACéDOINE CROQUETTES (Croquettes Macédoine) Mold in tins the size and shape of a medium croquette some burnt almond cream ( No. 3455 ), ranging exactly in the center some biscuits soaked in maraschino; freeze for half an hour, then unmold and roll in pulverized macaroons sifted through a sieve. Have in an ice cream freezer all sorts of fresh or preserved fruits cut in quarter-inch squares; to them add lemon juice, maraschino and champagne; freeze with very little ice and when extremely cold drain properly and mix in whipped cream (No. 50); dress on saucers, laying the croquettes over, one or two on each saucer. (3560). MACéDOINE OF FRUITS AND ST. JACQUES CUPS (Macédoine de Fruits et Coupes St. Jacques). Macédoine. --Lay in a vessel one peeled banana cut in half-inch squares, one well-peeled orange having the meats lying between the intersections removed with a knife and all the seeds suppressed, a slice of pineapple half an inch thick cut in dice, four ounces of grapes, two ounces of strawberries or raspberries, four ounces of cherries, pears or peaches, half a gill of kirsch or maraschino and a little powdered sugar; mingle all together and keep it cold in a freezer with ice packed around; serve in a compote dish. St. Jacques Cup. --With this macédoine fill some wide champagne cups; cover the macédoine with kirsch or maraschino sherbert and serve (see Fig. 691). FIG. 691. A champagne cup filled with macedoine and cover by kirsch. (3561). MADELEINE ICE CREAM (Glace Madeleine). Decorate a Madeleine mold ( Fig. 692) with candied fruits; coat the inside with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) and fill with hazel- nut ice cream ( No. 3461 ) into which have mingled a salpicon of fruits and whipped cream. In the very center lay a little apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); pack this mold in ice and freeze for two hours; unmold on a napkin and surround with fancy cakes; serve at the same time a sauce made of whipped cream, vanilla ice cream and Curaçoa. FIG. 692. An illustration of a Madeleine mold. (3562). MADRILIAN (Madrilène). Place in a vessel twelve raw egg-yolks and half a pound of sugar, diluting slowly with a pint of boiling milk that has just had a quarter of a vanilla stick infused therein for fifteen minutes; strain through a fine sieve. Butter some timbale molds (No. 3, Fig. 137) and fill them with the preparation; stand them in a sautoir with boiling water to reach to half their height and poach; when they are firm to the touch leave stand till cold, then unmold. Pound a quarter of a pound of sweet almonds and a few bitter ones, all freshly peeled; moisten slowly with a quart of milk and strain forcibly through a napkin; add ten ounces of sugar and a gill of kirsch, also a little vanilla syrup ( No. 3165 ); strain, freeze, and when the ice has congealed mix in one Italian meringue egg-white (No. 140). Mold in cylindrical molds two and a half inches in diameter by two inches in height, placing the small timbale directly in the center; freeze for half an hour, then unmold and lay on lace paper; on top have a handsome brandied plum, and around this and the base set an even row of cherries cut in two. (3563). MARVELOUS (Merveilleuse). Break six egg-yolks in a tinned basin with twelve ounces of sugar, a quart of boiling milk, and half a pound of freshly roasted, coarsely ground coffee; set the basin on a moderate fire and stir continuously, without permitting it to boil, until the preparation will cover the spatula; strain through a fine sieve, leave till cold and freeze, adding the same quantity of sweetened whipped cream, half a pound of chopped burnt almonds, and as much candied chestnuts broken in small pieces. Put one pint of orange water ice ( No. 3605 ) in a freezer with the same amount of burnt hazel- nut ice cream ( No. 3461 ) and as much whipped cream. With this preparation coat some small paper cases, fill the inside with the first preparation and surround with orange flowers. FIG. 693. An illustration of orange flowers with small paper case placed in the middle of them. (3564). MIGNON ICE CREAM (Glace à la Mignonne). Boil a quarter of a pound of rice in water with the juice of a lemon; put it into a vessel and pour over some vanilla syrup ( No. 3165 ) at thirty-two degrees. Place in a freezer one pint of No. 1 vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), and the well-drained rice. With this cream fill some shell-shaped tin molds; freeze and unmold after one hour, lay in the center some fresh fruits and soaked macaroons, and cover the whole with a layer of very smooth whipped cream; decorate the top with whipped cream pushed through a cornet; freeze and serve with a sauce made of apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and kirsch. FIG. 694. An shell-shaped ice cream served on a metal dish. (3565). MOKABELLE (Mokabelle). Put into a coffee filter a quarter of a pound of ground coffee and half a vanilla stick; moisten with a pint of water to obtain a very highly concentrated extract of coffee, then add to it sufficient syrup to bring the composition to twenty-two degrees, strain through a tammy, freeze and when well congealed pour in as much whipped cream (No. 50). With this ice fill some cups, either of sugar, china or fancy pasteboard ones; return to the freezing box and freeze once more. If desired the tops can be covered with whipped cream flavored with extract of coffee and kirsch mixed together. (3566). MONTéLIMAR WITH HAZEL- NUT CREAM (Montélimar à la Crème aux Noisettes). Hazel- nut Cream. --Roast a quarter of a pound of hazel- nuts; carefully remove their outer skins and pound with two gills of cream. Put in a tinned basin twelve egg-whites and ten ounces of sugar; stir to mix thoroughly, then moisten with a pint of boiling milk; set the basin on a slow fire, stir continuously, then remove from the fire when the preparation covers the spatula, add the nuts and leave stand till cool. Pour in a pint of rich sweet cream; strain through a sieve and freeze. FIG. 695. An illustration of Montelimar mold in iced. Montélimar. --Pound in a mortar three ounces of peeled sweet almonds with a gill of kirsch; cook ten ounces of sugar to three hundred and two degrees Fahrenheit or "small crack;" mix it slowly in a mortar with the almonds, leave till cold, then divide it into three parts; one of these color red with vegetal carmine flavored with Curaçoa, the other color green with spinach green or vegetal green flavored with orange flower water, and keep the third part white; roll them each into three-eighths of an inch thick strings. Cut some lady fingers ( No. 3377 ) to the same size, and baste over with maraschino; pack a Montélimar mold ( Fig. 695) in ice; coat it with a thin layer of the nut ice cream ( No. 3461 ), fill it perfectly full, intermingling the various colors of almond paste and the biscuits, and close it forcibly. Two hours after unmold and cut in slices to serve. (3567). MUFFS à LA DéJAZET, VENUS CREAM (Manchons à la Déjazet, Crème Vénus). Prepare the muffs according to the following description: Sift through a sieve one-quarter of a pound of sugar, place it in a vessel with four whole eggs, a quarter of a pound of flour and a little powdered vanilla; spread this on a buttered and flour ed baking sheet to the thickness of about one-sixteenth of an inch, and bake in a brisk oven; divide this cake into bands each six and a quarter inches long by two and a half wide, roll them on a piece of rounded wood two inches in diameter, cover them with a light layer of meringue (No. 140), and over this scatter in profusion some pistachios and almonds, chopped in eighth of an inch pieces, mixing them with dried currants. FIG. 696. A rounded wood rolled with cake and a layer of meringue. Pistachios and almonds are scattered around the cake. Venus Cream. --Put into a vessel one vanilla bean, as much Ceylon cinnamon broken small, a little mace and the peel of an orange; boil a quart of very fresh cream, pour it over the spices, cover and leave infuse for three hours. Break ten egg-yolks in a basin, work well with half a pound of sugar and the boiled cream, coloring it to a soft pink. Cook this preparation, let stand till cold, then strain through a fine sieve; freeze and add to this ice one quart of whipped cream. Dress each muff on a separate sheet of paper; fill the bottom with a quarter of an inch thick layer of pistachio cream ( No. 3454 ), over this the Venus cream, and on top another one of pistachio to close the orifice. Keep in the freezing box for half an hour. When serving fasten in the center of both ends a stick of angelica. (3568). MUSHROOMS (Champignons). For these have some molds representing mushrooms of various sizes; fill them with maraschino ice cream ( No. 3462 ) , freeze, unmold and dip the ends or stalks in grated chocolate to imitate the roots. Dress piled high on a folded napkin. FIG. 697. An illustration of an imitated mushrooms ice cream. (3569). NEAPOLITAN ICE CREAM (Glace Napolitaine). Pack in a freezer a Neapolitan mold as represented in Fig. 698; it must be made in three divisions; fill one of the round parts with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), the other with pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ), and the flat or center part with strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ), having the mold quite full so that when forcibly closed the surplus cream runs out all around, thus preventing the ice from becoming salty; pack it well in ice and let freeze for one hour; unmold on a small board and cut it into five-eighths of an inch slices with a special tinned copper or silver-plated knife so as not to blacken the ice ( Fig. 700); this knife should be dipped into warm water every time a slice is cut. Dress these slices on small lace papers. FIG. 698. An illustration of a opened Neapolitan mold. FIG. 699. An illustration of a complete Neapolitian mold. FIG. 700. An illustration of a silver-plated knife. (3570). BASKET FILLED WITH ORANGES (Panier Garni d' Oranges ). The basket is of wicker furnished with an inside case; one of the handles must be trimmed with a ribbon. Fill the inside case with Andalusian ice cream ( No. 3446 ) into which incorporate as much whipped cream (No. 50). Pare some oranges to the pulp, remove the white skin adhering to each section and marinate them in a little maraschino, sugar and kirsch; with these pieces of orange decorate the top of the cream and serve. FIG. 701. An illustration of a basket with it's handles trimmed with ribbon. (3571). POSILIPO ORANGES ( Oranges Posilipo). Cut some three-inch in diameter oranges straight through the center; empty the insides entirely, scallop the edge of the peel with a machine ( Fig. 654) and cut some uniform slits half an inch below this edge: run a ribbon through, tying it in a bow on one side. Have a spherical mold two and three-quarters inches in diameter and divided in three even hinged parts; fill one of these parts with strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ), the other with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) and the third with pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ); equalize all these parts so that when the mold is closed there will be no more than just sufficient to fill them. Pack in ice and freeze for one hour; unmold and lay the pistachio side in the half orange; stick a piece of angelica in the top, it being run through a preserved cherry. FIG. 702. Ice cream placed in a halve orange peel with ribbon run through the edge. A piece of angelica is sticked on top of the ice cream. (3572). SEVILLE ORANGES, AND ORANGE MACEDOINE BASKETS ( Oranges à la Séville et Paniers d' Oranges Macédoine). Prepare some Seville oranges or mandarins the same as for orange Russian punch ( No. 3613 ); after they have been emptied and are well wiped inwardly, freeze, then fill with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) into which has been added some candied orange and citron peel cut in very thin shreds and macerated in a little maraschino, Curaçoa and kirsch. Serve, surrounding each one with green smilax. The baskets are prepared the same as the Andalusian ( No. 3522 ), filling them with a cooked almond or hazel-nut cream ( No. 3461 ), into which mix a macédoine of fruits; here and there on top scatter some halved pistachios and cherries. (3573). PARISIAN ICE CREAM (Glace à la Parisienne). Have some conical molds rounded on one end and pointed on the other ( Fig. 703); fill them half with strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) and half with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ). The idea of using these molds is to avoid the necessity of using a spoon to mold the ice. On the round end lay a small macaroon soaked in maraschino; close the mold and remove any surplus ice issuing from the joints; pack in ice and freeze for an hour. On removing dress them in specially made glasses as shown in Fig. 703, and serve. FIG. 703. A glass filled with a pyramid-shaped ice cream. (3574). PEARS OR APPLES IN SURPRISE (Poires ou Pommes en Surprise). Empty out the insides of the fruit, either apples, pears, oranges or others, lay them in a freezer imbedded in ice for one hour and fill with various ices, either of cream or water. Pack in salted ice to freeze for two hours, then dress on a socle or dish with smilax. FIG. 704. An illustration of a pear. FIG. 705. An illustration of an apple. (3575). POTATOES (Pommes de Terre). Procure lead molds resembling medium-sized potatoes ; fill them with chestnut ice cream ( No. 3465 ) and stuff the centers with biscuits soaked in maraschino, also a salpicon of fruits . Freeze for half an hour, then unmold. Roll them in grated sweet chocolate and imitate the eyes by sticking in sticks of almonds; dress on a napkin and serve separately a sauce made of whipped cream and a little maraschino. FIG. 706. An illustration of a mold resemble a medium-sized potato. (3576). RIBAMBELLE (Ribambelle). Boxes imitating the fancy boxes of the itinerant dealers of Paris. Coat the bottom and sides with nougat cream ( No. 3452 ); fill the center with uncooked maraschino cream ( No. 3462 ) into which incorporate half as much whipped cream (No. 50) and one ounce of small vanilla chocolate pastilles for each quart of preparation. Pack these boxes in a freezing box or cave and serve accompanied by small wafer cakes or very thin waffle cornets. (3577). RICE à LA RISTORI (Riz à la Ristori). Coat a dome-shaped mold with vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), range on the bottom a layer of crushed candied chestnuts, over these a bed of chocolate mousse ( No. 3473 ), then another layer of chestnuts and apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ); finish filling with a light burnt almond cream ( No. 3455 ). Have the mold quite full, forcing the cover on tightly, pack in salted ice and freeze for three-quarters of an hour. Unmold on a garnishing of thoroughly boiled rice macerated in an eighteen-degree vanilla syrup; serve a sauce -boatful of apricot maraschino sauce at the same time. (3578). RICE WITH MARASCHINO (Riz au Marasquin). Boil half a pound of rice in milk; when dry and soft sweeten it and two minutes after remove and put away to cool. Dilute it with a few spoonfuls of vanilla syrup ( No. 3165 ) and three tablespoonfuls of maraschino and keep it on one side. Freeze a dome mold in pounded ice and salt for a quarter of an hour before opening it; when cold range the ice inside of it in layers, bestrewing each one with candied fruits cut in large dice. After the mold is full first close the opening with a round piece of paper larger than itself, then with its own cover, closing the joints with butter so that the salted water cannot penetrate inside; cover also with salted ice and one hour later wash the mold quickly in warm water, dry and invert the rice on a cold dish. (3579). SICILIAN (Sicilienne). Whip twelve raw egg-yolks in a tinned copper basin with twelve ounces of sugar and a quart of boiling milk; add three ounces of roasted coriander seeds, a piece of cinnamon and half a pound of chocolate; cook on a slow fire, allow to cool, then add a pint of cream; pass this through a sieve; freeze, and add six ounces of almonds, each one to be cut lengthwise in four, and three ounces of candied orange or lemon peel cut up very finely. Have one quart of chocolate ice cream ( No. 3449 ) into which mix half as much whipped cream (No. 50). Line a square one-quart mold with bands of biscuit a quarter of an inch thick. At the bottom place a layer of the chocolate ice cream, over this slices of guava jelly and citron marmalade and the chocolate cream, repeating the operation until the mold is completely full. Pack in salted ice, freeze for one hour, unmold and dress. (3580). ALGERIAN TIMBALES (Timbales à l'Algérienne). Lay in a vessel twelve ounces of sugar, six ounces of sifted flour and six ounces of finely ground almonds and two egg-whites; mix thoroughly, then incorporate ten partly beaten egg-whites; this paste should be flowing and smooth; add four tablespoonfuls of whipped cream (No. 50). Spread this paste on a waxed baking sheet in a band nineteen inches in length by six and a half inches in width; push it into a moderate oven and when partly baked pare the edges off with a knife and finish baking; when of a fine golden color remove from the oven and range it against the interior sides of a ring six inches in diameter by six inches in height. From the same paste cut out three rounds, one eight inches in diameter and two of six and a half inches; of one of these two rounds cut out the center so as to form a ring which will serve as a cover for the timbale, the other for the bottom, and the seven-inch one is to be cut into six parts; these are intended for lining the dome-shaped mold; clip off the surplus wafer and fasten the pieces to the inside with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171); cover over with well-reduced apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and decorate with a green lime (chinois) on the center; around fasten on some halved cherries, dredge the whole with shredded or chopped pistachios and surround the base of the timbale with a row of nice red candied cherries. Salpicon. --Prepare a salpicon of pineapple, cherries and almonds; macerate in a little kirsch and maraschino for one hour. Racahout Cream. --Put six egg-yolks into a basin with two heaping tablespoonfuls of racahout and ten ounces of sugar; beat well with a whip, adding one quart of boiling milk; cook this cream until it almost boils, without allowing it to do so, then strain, cool and freeze, mixing in half as much whipped cream (No. 50). Pack two molds in ice, having covers to fasten on the outside; one cylindrical, five and a half inches in diameter and six inches high, and the other dome-shaped, four and a half inches in diameter at its base. Pour some maraschino over macaroons; place them in layers in the cylindrical mold, then racahout cream to cover, on this the fruits and more of the cream and then macaroons ( No. 3379 ), continuing until the mold is entirely full, finishing with the cream; fit on the cover, freeze for one hour, then unmold it into the above wafer timbale; lay this timbale on a folded napkin, put on to it first the wafer ring and then the dome cover and serve. (3581). CHATEAUBRIAND TIMBALE (Timbale Chateaubriand). Pound finely half a pound of almonds and mix in four ounces of butter, the chopped peel of a lemon, six ounces of sifted flour, salt and three eggs; make a firm, but not too hard paste and leave it set for one hour; roll it out to three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness, and from this flat cut six pieces each six inches long by three and a half wide; lay them very straight on a baking sheet. Cut also two pieces a quarter of an inch thick, one having a diameter of seven and a quarter inches and the other nine inches; cook all these in a moderate oven and cool under weights. When very cold pare them on all sides to obtain panels six inches long and three and a quarter wide; bevel the edges on the inner long sides; cover them lightly with apricot marmalade ( No. 3675 ) and glaze with royal icing (No. 102), white, red and chocolate. Decorate with royal icing, then fasten the panels together without attaching them to the baking sheet; decorate the joints of each panel with a small royal ice beading. Prepare the bottom piece six cornered, eight inches from end to end, and the top seven and a half inches; ice the bottom, one in white and the top one pale green; on this one stand a dome made of meringue or royal icing, and on this dome a lyre, either or royal icing or gum paste ( No. 3624 ); decorate around the bottom with a border of pink gum paste. FIG. 707. A imitated box made of timbales with it's dome cover made of meringue. A lyre made of royal icing is fastened on top of the cover and pink gum paste is garnished around the bottom. Chateaubriand Cream. --Pound four ounces of almonds with half an ounce of bitter ones and two gills of cream. Put ten egg-yolks in a basin with twelve ounces of sugar, half a vanilla bean, a pint of milk and the pounded almonds; cook the preparation on a slow fire without boiling till it covers the spatula, then allow to cool; pour in a pint of fresh cream. Strain this composition through a sieve, freeze and add half as much whipped cream and four ounces of shredded pistachios as well as a salpicon of candied fruits, seedless Malaga and Smyrna raisins, having all of these macerated for one hour in kirsch. Fill a six-sided mold of the same form and size as the Chateaubriand, only half an inch smaller in diameter; pack well in ice and freeze for two hours. Unmold the ice on the largest round, place on a dish with the timbale over, then set the small round on top; decorate with the cupola or lyre; serve. (3582). STUFFED TOMATOES (Tomates Farcies). Mask the sides of a mold imitating a tomato with strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ) and in the center burnt almond ice cream ( No. 3455 ) and a salpicon of fruits and macaroons soaked in maraschino; finish filling, close forcibly, imbed in ice and freeze for half an hour; unmold, dress in a pyramid on a napkin and serve with a bowlful of sauce made of vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ), whipped cream (No. 50) and prunelle, well mixed together. FIG. 708. An illustration of a tomato. (3583) TORONCHINO PROCOPE (Toronchino Procope). Put ten raw egg-yolks into a tin basin containing three-quarters of a pound of sugar, and half a pound of burnt almonds crushed with about a gill of cream. Set on a slow fire, stir steadily until the preparation covers the spatula, then take from the fire and let stand till cold. Now add a pint of cream and a little orange flower water, strain the whole through a sieve, freeze and use the cream to fill some plaited paper cases, scattering shredded pistachios over the tops. (3584). TORTONI CUPS (Coupes Tortoni). This ice requires the use of lead molds representing plain, shallow, round baskets; line them with rather thin strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) and freeze for one hour; unmold and lay over sheets of paper placed on a tin; fill quite full and rounded on top with iced biscuit preparation ( No. 3435 ) and put them into the freezing box. When the iced biscuit is sufficiently congealed decorate each ice cream with roses of medium size molded in raspberry, orange, lemon and pineapple water ices, one quart being sufficient for twelve flowers; fill some of the rose molds with lemon and orange, others with raspberry and pineapple. Pack in ice, freeze and unmold; lay each one on the above biscuit preparation, it being sufficiently hard to have the rose set firmly on top of the roundest part; put them in a freezing box ( Fig. 622) for half an hour and serve. FIG. 709. An unmolded half-rounded ice cream decorated with rose. (3585). TUTTI-FRUTTI BISCUITS ( Biscuits Tutti-Frutti). Prepare a lady finger paste ( No. 3377 ), adding a little butter; spread it in thin eighth of an inch layers on sheets of paper and bake in a brisk oven; after it has been removed punch out round pieces with a pastry cutter two and a quarter inches in diameter, also some bands seven and a half inches long by one and a half wide. Place one of the rounds at the bottom of a tin ring measuring two and three-quarters inches in diameter by an inch and a half in height; on top of this round range the band in a circle. Fill the center with two kinds of ice, one lemon water ice ( No. 3604 ) and the other nut cream ( No. 3461 ), both having a salpicon of fruits macerated in kirsch added to them, and freeze for one hour; unmold and range each tutti-frutti biscuit on a lace paper of the same size. Cover entirely with a smooth coating of whipped cream and decorate with lozenges of angelica and halved cherries, placing a whole one in the center; freeze once more for half an hour and serve. FIG. 710. A tutti-frutti biscuit on a lace paper, decorated with lozenges of angelica and halved cherries. (3586). TUTTI-FRUTTI (Tutti-Frutti). Have some very cold tutti-frutti molds ( Fig. 711). Incorporate a salpicon of candied fruits, cut in three-sixteenths inch squares and marinated in kirsch, in vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ). Fill the molds half full with this and the other half with orange water ice ( No. 3605 ). Close forcibly, remove the surplus ice and freeze for half an hour. Unmold and dress on lace paper, the same diameter as the tutti-frutti, and serve. FIG. 711. An illustration of a tutti-frutti mold. (3587). VALENCE CUP WITH PEACHES (Coupe de Valence aux Pêches). Prepare some Andalusian ice cream ( No. 3446 ); mold it in a cup mold that has been imbedded in ice; freeze in ice and salt for one hour; unmold and decorate with peeled peaches cut in four, soaked in champagne, sugar and maraschino, adding to them well-pared oranges cut in sections, having withdrawn the seeds. FIG. 712. An oval-shaped cup filled with ice cream and cut peaches. (3588). VERMEIL GLOBULES à LA DAMSEAUX (Globules Vermeilles à la Damseaux). To dress these imitated strawberries made of ice cream, it requires shells ( Fig. 714), made of either nougat ( No. 3621 ), pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ) or clear sugar. The ends of the shells must be decorated with small flowers made of cooked sugar or gum paste. Mold half of these ices in strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ) and the other half in strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ); after all are molded pack FIG. 713. An illustration of two imitated strawberries made of ice cream. FIG. 714. Imitated strawberries served in shells and decorated with small flowers made of gum paste. in ice and freeze for half an hour, then unmold them; fasten an artificial stalk, surmounted with small leaves, into each one. Place them in the shells and serve at once. (3589). WATERMELON (Pastèque). Take a pound of the red pulp of a watermelon, the juice of four oranges and of three lemons, an orange and a lemon peel, also some syrup at twenty degrees. Bring the composition to eighteen-degree heat, strain through a sieve and freeze, adding half a gill of brandy and one quart of whipped cream (No. 50). Coat a watermelon -shaped mold with pistachio cream ( No. 3454 ); on this place the above preparation, with strawberry water ice ( No. 3607 ) laid in the center; pack and freeze for two hours; unmold and cut it up in four or else in two; on the red part insert imitation watermelon seeds made of chocolate. These halves of quarters can be cut in slices. LARGE PIECES. (3590). BACCHUS (Bacchus). Bacchus represents wine and is the companion piece to the well, representing water. Molds can be purchased already made for these ices. Bacchus' barrel is of chocolate ice cream ( No. 3449 ) and Bacchus is of virgin orange cream ( No. 3459 ); the foot on which the barrel rests is of pistachio ice cream ( No. 3454 ). Mold quite full, close forcibly, having it completely filled, and freeze for an hour and a half; unmold on a water socle as represented in Fig. 715, being careful to have this piece to correspond with the other as regards its proportions. FIG. 715. A imitated bacchus, sitting on top of a imitated barrel that is placed on top of a well. This entree is served on a metal plate. (3591). CANTALOUP IN SURPRISE AND CANTALOUP MOLDED (Cantaloup en Surprise et Cantaloup Moulé). In Surprise. --Take a handsome, fresh and very ripe cantaloup melon, make an opening on the top two and a half inches below the stalk, and on the bias, directing the tip of the knife toward the center; suppress all the ripe pulp from the inside, put back the cover and imbed this rind in salted ice. With the removed pulp make a melon water ice ( No. 3603 ), color with a little red and yellow carmine to imitate the orange color of a cantaloup melon; with this fill the rind to represent the original melon, return it to the ice and freeze for two hours. When well congealed it can be cut in slices; make the seeds of almond paste ( No. 3623 ). A macédoine of fresh fruits with champagne and lemon water ice can also be substituted for the melon ice. Molded. -- Melons may be molded in lead molds, having the shape of a melon, making the rind either of vanilla ( No. 3458 ) or pistachio ( No. 3454 ) and the center of orange water ice ( No. 3605 ) or pineapple water ice ( No. 3606 ); pack in ice and freeze for two hours. Unmold and dress either on a water socle or folded napkin and on top of the melon range and artificial stalk and leaves. FIG. 716. An illustration of a cantaloup placed in the middle of a dish. (3592). DELICIOUS WITH HAZEL- NUTS (Délicieux aux Noisettes). Lay half a pound of hazel- nuts taken from their shells on a baking sheet, roast in the oven, peel to suppress the red skins, then pound with two gills of cream ; set this in a basin with twelve raw egg-yolks and twelve ounces of sugar; whip all together and dilute with a pint of milk which has had a quarter of a vanilla stick infused in it. Cook the preparation without boiling till it covers the spatula well, leave stand until cold, then add a pint of fresh cream; freeze. When the cream has a proper consistency mix in two quarts of well-drained whipped cream (No. 50). Pack a two-quart mold on ice, fill it with the composition and freeze for two hours; unmold on a folded napkin, on top set a spun sugar ornament and surround with scooped-out oranges refilled with two differently tinted jellies, white and red, laid in streaks, cooled and then cut in six or eight separate parts; surround the base with small strawberries having fresh leaves attached. FIG. 717. An unmolded tower-liked ice cream with a spun sugar placed on top of it and garnished with strawberries around the bottom of the tower. (3593). FRUIT BASKET WITH DOVES (Corbeille Jardinière aux Colombes). Make the stand representing a basket in two parts of colored water, with a hole in the center of each; when this stand has been frozen place it on the middle of an oval board thirteen inches long by nine and a half inches wide, having a half-inch diameter hole bored through the center; keep the whole firmly together and very straight with a nut -screw five to six inches long, screwing it in very tight. Have two cylindrical molds with bottoms, fill them with water and freeze; unmold and place them on the center line at one-third of the length of the stand; on each of these columns set a dove, imitating the eyes with a dry currant, and fasten a cherry -colored ribbon around his neck; decorate all around with fruits molded in various ices and dipped in hot water to unmold; put them in the freezing box or cave and freeze; afterward color them lightly and stick into them stalks with their respective leaves. All these ice cream pieces should be dressed at the last moment and then served at a dinner table or sideboard supper. FIG. 718. An imitated iced basket filled with unmolded fruits and two imitated doves are fastened on top of the fruits. (3594). HEN WITH CHICKS; NEST WITH EGGS (Poule Avec Poussins; Nid Garni d'Œufs). Prepare a sponge cake stand ( No. 3260 ) or one of wood or foundation paste (No. 143), eleven and a quarter inches long by eight and a quarter inches wide; cover it with coffee or chocolate icing. Make a nest of spun sugar, on which place here and there small bits of angelica; in the center set the stand. Mold the hen in burnt almond ice cream ( No. 3455 ), spotted over with coffee, chocolate, vanilla, etc., to imitate the different shadings of the bird. Pack it in ice and freeze for one hour; unmold and dress it on the stand, surrounded with small chicks, made also of ice cream, the same as the larger one. FIG. 719. An illustration of a hen with chicks in a nest. FIG. 720. An illustration of a nest filled with eggs. For the nest ( Fig. 720), prepare a round nest, the same as Fig. 719, only smaller; fill with small eggs made of assorted ice cream. (3595). PINEAPPLE IN SURPRISE AND PINEAPPLE MOLDED (Ananas en Surprise et Ananas Moulé). In Surprise. --Supress the stalk from a fine pineapple; empty it out entirely and pack it in ice for one hour. With the inside of the fruit make a pineapple water ice ( No. 3606 ), mixing into it a salpicon of fresh fruits; fill the pineapple and freeze it once more; dress on a napkin and surround with small molded peaches decorated with a stalk and slightly colored over. FIG. 721. An illustration of an unmolded pineapple dress on top of a water socle. Molded. --They can also be molded in a pineapple -shaped mold, the top or stalk to be made of pistachio cream ( No. 3454 ) and the pineapple in Andalusian ice cream ( No. 3446 ), colored a reddish yellow. Cut the best pieces from a small pineapple into quarter-inch squares; steep them in kirsch and maraschino for one hour, add pieces of biscuit and macaroons, drain and with this preparation fill the inside of the pineapple. Imbed in ice and freeze for an hour and a half, unmold and dress on a water socle, serving at once. (3596). RABBIT IN SURPRISE (Lapin en Surprise). Rabbit or any other animal in surprise, made of spun sugar and serving for covering ices ( Fig. 722). For the rabbit or hare make the ice in a half melon -shaped mold; the bear and rabbit in an iced biscuit mold ( Fig. 626). These molds can be filled with puddings, parfaits, etc., either with flavors or with fruits; pack in ice, freeze for one hour for each quart, unmold and dress; lay on top either a rabbit, hare or bear of spun sugar and serve. FIG. 722. An illustration of an imitated rabbit made of spun sugar and is served on a metal dish. (3597). SWAN WITH REEDS AND RUSHES (Le Cygne aux Roseaux). Have an oval bottom made of office paste (No. 143) or wood, half an inch thick, fifteen inches long and eleven wide; glaze it with royal icing (No. 101) of a soft green color and place around an inch and a half from the border a band of pistachio nougat ( No. 3622 ) two and a half inches high, on top of this a platform of sugar cooked white to "crack" (No. 171), and the same size as the band; garnished around the stand with reeds, rushes, etc., made of pulled sugar. Mold a swan with out-stretched wings and neck in lemon virgin cream ( No. 3459 ), the under part of the wings in coffee ( No. 3460 ) and the body in vanilla ( No. 3458 ) ; pack it in ice and freeze for two hours. Unmold and lay this swan in the center of the platform, imitating the eyes with small dry currants. This dish can be garnished all around with flowers made of ice cream placed in small paper cases. FIG. 723. An imitated swan made of cream is swimming in a pond that is covered by flowers and grasses that are made of paste and ice cream. (3598). THE HELMET (Le Casque). The helmet shown in Fig. 724, is made in a two-quart tin mold filled with a pudding. When unmolded decorate it with halved pistachios and cover these with a thin layer of strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ). The crest of the helmet is of vanilla, the edge resting on the socle of chocolate and the whole is dressed on a natural water socle. The feather should be made of spun sugar. FIG. 724. An illustration of a helmet made of pudding. (3599). THE WELL (Le Puits). Have a lead mold the shape of a well and fill it with light vanilla ice cream ( No. 3458 ) ; this mold should have an inside one to form the hollow of the well; freeze for an hour, unmold it on a water socle dressed on a napkin and fill the inside with half a pound of rice, blanched and cooked in a light twelve-degree vanilla syrup ( No. 3165 ); drain and add a salpicon of apricots cut in small sticks and shredded pistachios; mix the whole into strawberry ice cream ( No. 3451 ), having mixed into it the same quantity of whipped cream (No. 50) flavored with a little maraschino; the ornament on top should be made of spun sugar, fastened on to the well just when serving (see Fig. 725). FIG. 725. An illustration of a well that is made of ice cream. (3600). TURBAN WITH PINEAPPLE OR STRAWBERRY OR SULTANA (Turban aux Ananas ou Fraises ou Sultane). Put one pint of apricot pulp in a vessel with two gills of almond milk (No. 4) and one gill of maraschino; add some syrup to bring the preparation to twenty-two degrees, then strain, freeze and mix with it the same quantity of whipped cream (No. 50). Place this preparation in a turban-shaped mold, pack in ice to freeze for one hour, then unmold and decorate around the center with some FIG. 726. A turban made of cream and fruits is served on a decorative plate. well-pared, ripe pineapple cut in four, and the hard center core suppressed; then cut up the remainder in slices, lay them it in a vessel and bestrew with sugar, pouring over some rum so that they macerate for half an hour. Vanilla Strawberry Turban can be made by mixing in the same quantity of whipped cream (No. 50) after it is frozen; unmold and garnish the center with fresh strawberries macerated in kirsch, maraschino and a little powdered sugar. The turban can also be served plain or else trimmed with a sultana of spun sugar. (3601). WATER ICES--HOW TO PREPARE AND FINISH THEM (Glaces à l'Eau--Manière de les Préparer et de les Finir). The base of all water ices is the pulp or juice of fruits, with sugar syrup prepared beforehand at thirty-two degrees, or else substitute a pound and a half of sugar for each quart of water. The syrup gauge ( Fig. 167) is the only arbiter for ascertaining the proper degree; they can be prepared from fourteen to twenty-four degrees. At eighteen degrees a thin ice is obtained called granite. Eighteen to nineteen degrees is an excellent degree for water ices prepared for the taste of this country, although in some climates they are made as high as twenty-four degrees. At this degree very fine and consistent ices are formed, but they are objectionably sweet and therefore not generally liked, so that water ices at eighteen to twenty degrees are considered the best--eighteen degrees with fruit pulps and twenty degrees for fruit juices, or sometimes twenty-two, according to the acidity of the fruit. The juice of three lemons make about a gill; for this quantity use two pounds and a quarter of sugar and one pint of water, obtaining a quart of syrup at thirty-degrees. To freeze the fruit preparation it requires two freezers, one of a high shape and the other semi-spherical. Before freezing the mixture in the semi-spherical freezer it must be packed in salted ice and the inside wiped out neatly, then pour in about a gill of the preparation to try its consistency, working it with a small spatula, and if found to be sufficiently congealed pour in about two quarts to freeze, setting the semi-spherical freezer in motion and detaching at times with the spatula any particles that may adhere to the sides. As soon as the ice attains a proper consistency remove and lay it in a small, long sorbetière (freezer) also imbedded in salted ice. The ice should be worked vigorously with the spatula to have it acquire body, then imbed it once more, letting all the superfluous water run out of the hole at the bottom of the pail, adding more salted ice, packing it down with a stick; cover the pail with a lid or a cloth to prevent any air from entering and keep it thus until ready for use. (3602). FRESH FRUIT WATER ICES (Glaces à l'Eau aux Fruits Frais). For Peaches, Apricots, Nectarines. --Select good fresh plucked fruits, yet not too ripe; split open, suppress the stalks, pith and skins; cut up finely and bestrew with vanilla sugar to hinder from blackening, then strain through a fine sieve. Put the pulp in a vessel and mix in a pint of thirty-two degree syrup for each quart, the juice of two oranges and four lemons and a bit of orange peel. Strain this preparation through a silk sieve and freeze it. As soon as the ice congeals remove with a spoon and place in a small, long freezer packed in ice; work it vigorously for ten minutes, incorporating slowly a pint of Italian meringue (No. 140) for each quart of syrup, and half a gill of kirsch or noyau; work it again ten minutes to have it smooth. For Cheries, Pomegranates, Currants and Barberries. --A pint of fruit pulp for one quart of syrup and one gill or the juice of three lemons. If with cherries, crack the pips to extract and crush the meat and make the syrup of twenty degrees strength. For currants use the juice of two lemons; color with vegetal red, strain through a silk sieve and freeze. (3603). GUANABANA, MELON, MEDLAR, PEAR OR PLUM WATER ICE (Glace à l'Eau à la Guanabane, au Melon, aux Nèfles, Poires ou Prunes ). Select fruits that are ripe, having them in preference a little too hard than too soft; they must be fragrant and freshly plucked. Suppress the skins or peels with a knife; press first through a sieve, then through a tammy; put the purée in a vessel, allowing for each quart one pint of cold syrup, the juice of two oranges and four lemons and the peel of half an orange infused in a gill of syrup. Stir all the ingredients well together and bring it to a twenty to twenty-two degree syrup; strain through a very fine Venice or silk sieve and pour into a semi-spherical freezer; allow it to congeal without ceasing to detach with a large spatula every particle adhering to the sides of the freezer. As soon as the ice is all congealed remove it with a spoon and transfer to a small, long freezer imbedded in salted ice to have it acquire plenty of body, and smooth while still stirring; lastly incorporate three tablespoonfuls of good rum, kirsch or prunelle, mixed with a little of the syrup and frozen preparation, being careful to incorporate it little by little; work again for a few moments, freeze once more and serve. (3604). LEMON WATER ICE AND GRAPE FRUIT ICE (Glace à l'Eau au Citron et Glace au Poncires). Pour into a vessel some syrup made with two and a quarter pounds of sugar and a pint of water cooked to thirty-two degrees; cool off, then add two gills or the juice of six lemons and the peel of four of the finest among them well washed and wiped; let the preparation attain twenty degrees according to the syrup gauge and infuse therein the peels, leaving them for two hours; strain through a silk sieve and freeze. Another Way. --Proportions: Four pounds of sugar, three gills of water, the peel of fifteen lemons and the juice of twenty-five; cook to twenty degrees of the syrup gauge; infuse the peels in this for two hours; strain the whole through a silk sieve and freeze. This quantity will produce a little more than six quarts. Grape Fruit. --Prepare this ice the same as lemon water ice, substituting grape fruit for lemons. (3605). ORANGE WATER ICE OR WITH GELATINE (Glace à l'Eau à l' Orange et à la Gelatine ). Take one quart of syrup at thirty-two degrees, five gills of orange juice, the peel of a large orange and one gill of lemon juice. Infuse for two hours, bring it to eighteen or twenty degrees of the syrup gauge, and color with a little carmine; strain through a silk sieve and freeze. Another Way. --Six pounds of sugar, four quarts of water, thirty oranges, using the peel of sixteen, and the juice of twelve lemons. Infuse for two hours, bring to twenty degrees, strain through a silk sieve and freeze. This will make about eight quarts. With Gelatine. --Have one quart of water, one pound of sugar, the peel and juice of two oranges, the juice of four lemons, a sheet of gelatine weighing a quarter of an ounce, previously dissolved in a little water, then strained through a fine sieve. The ice may be flavored with extract of orange and the lemon replaced by citric acid. (3606). PINEAPPLE WATER ICE (Glace à l'Eau à l'Ananas). Pineapple can be prepared in two ways, either grated or pounded in a mortar or infused in a syrup. Infused in Syrup. --Boil a quart of thirty-two degree syrup, add to it one pound of peeled pineapple cut in thin slices, also the peel of one orange; remove from the fire, cover the saucepan, and leave to cool in the syrup, adding one gill or the juice of three lemons; strain forcibly, either through a Venice sieve or a silken one; boil the mixture until it reaches twenty degrees of the syrup gauge and freeze. Another Way. is to place a pound of sugar in a vessel with two quarts of water and one quart of grated or crushed pineapple; let infuse for two hours; add a leaf and a half of isinglass dissolved in half a pint of water acidulated with the juice of eight lemons or else melted citric acid; strain through a fine sieve and freeze. Another Way. --One quart of grated pineapple, two pounds of sugar, two quarts of water, the juice of sixteen lemons or five gills. Finish the same as water ice ( No. 3601 ). (3607) STRAWBERRY OR RASPBERRY WATER ICE (Glace à l'Eau aux Fraises ou aux Framboises). Small ripe wild berries are preferable to cultivated ones for these ices. Put one quart of strawberry or raspberry pulp in a basin, and dilute with a pint and a half of cold syrup at thirty degrees; add a little vanilla, the peel of an orange, the juice of two oranges and of four lemons; strain through a silk sieve. The syrup should be from twenty to twenty-two degrees. Another Way. --Take eight pounds of powdered sugar, two quarts of fruit pulp, the juice of twenty lemons and six quarts of water; color to a light red with vegetal carmine. Bring it to twenty degrees of the syrup gauge, strain through a silk sieve and freeze. ICED DRINKS. (3608). ICED CHOCOLATE (Chocolat Glacé). Dissolve a pound of sweet chocolate in a quart of water with half a bean of vanilla; when cold stir in a quart of cream, then strain through a fine sieve. Another way is to take a pound of sweet chocolate, half a pint of water and half a vanilla bean; when the chocolate is all dissolved and cold mix into it three pints of cream and a gill of thirty-two degree syrup; strain through a sieve and put it into a freezer with lightly salted ice around, and serve in glasses. (3609). ICED COFFEE (Café Glacé). Black Coffee. --Iced coffee, as it is called in New York, is simply black coffee cooled in a china freezer, having lightly salted ice placed around. Mixed Coffee. --Mixed coffee is prepared the same, only mixing the whole of the following ingredients together: One pint of milk, one gill of cream, one quart of black coffee and one gill of syrup at thirty-two degrees. Put the mixture into a china or enameled freezer with lightly salted ice around, and serve when the coffee is exceedingly cold. Brandy Coffee. --One quart of black coffee, six ounces of sugar, one gill of brandy; to be mixed and cooled the same as the black coffee. Iced Coffee in Sherbet. --Have one quart of black coffee mixed with one quart of cream and twelve ounces of sugar; place it in a freezer with salted ice around, detach from the sides as fast as the ice adheres, and when sufficiently cold and firm serve in glasses. (3610). GRAMOLATES OR GRANITE WITH ORANGE (Gramolates ou Granit à l' Orange ). Put in a vessel one quart of fifteen-degree syrup, the juice and peels of three oranges; cover over and leave infuse for one hour; add the juice of four lemons and a little orange vegetal carmine; strain through a silk sieve and freeze. Peel three oranges to the pulp, remove the pulp by passing the knife near each section and lay the pieces in a bowl with a very little sugar and kirsch; steep for half an hour then add it to the ice and serve in glasses. (3611) GRANITE IN WATER BOTTLES WITH CURRANTS, CHERRIES, POMEGRANATES, ETC (Granits en Carafes à la Groseille, aux Cerises, Grenades, etc). Granites are made the same as water ices, flavored with any desired fruits, the sole difference being that they must not be worked and must only attain fourteen degrees of the saccharometer; when the composition is ready pour it in water bottles having very wide necks; pack these in ice with half as much salt as for ordinary ices. Detach from the sides with a small boxwood spatula. Serve in the same decanters or else in glasses. (3612). GRAPE FRUITS à LA MADISON (Poncires à la Madison). The grape fruit is a species of large yellow orange, resembling the Florida orange; it is slightly bitter. Select those that are not too large, cut them across in two, empty the insides, keeping it all in a vessel, and notch the edges of the peel in points; remove the small rounds from the center and then place them to cool in a freezing-box. Prepare a mixture the same as orange punch, Russian style ( No. 3613 ), the only difference to observe being that all the fruit juice must be used; bring to twelve degrees and let cool to a granite ( No. 3611 ), then serve in the prepared peels. (3613) ORANGE PUNCH, RUSSIAN STYLE--UNFROZEN GOLD DRINK (Punch Orange à la Russe--Boisson Froide non Gelée). Slit open with a tin tube an inch and a half in diameter the top of eight oranges on the side opposite to the stalk, empty them out entirely, wipe neatly and set them in low paper cases to keep them level. On the round piece removed from the orange fasten two long straws, tying them together with a ribbon passed through two holes. Put these oranges for at least two hours beforehand in a box and pack with ice and very little salt, not to freeze the rinds. Place in a freezer one pint of orange juice obtained from the pulp of the emptied oranges and strained through a fine strainer, add to it two gills of water, six ounces of sugar, a gill of rum, half a gill of kirsch, the peel of two oranges and the juice of four lemons; flavor it properly, either by adding or removing any of the ingredients; strain the whole through a very fine silk sieve and freeze with ice and a little salt. Just when ready to serve fill the oranges and serve them at once. The straws are used for drinking the contents of the orange. FIG. 727. An illustration of an orange fasten with two long straws and is tied with ribbon in the middle. CONFECTIONERY (Confiserie). (3614). CENTER PIECES--PYRAMIDS (Pièces Montées). Table ornaments called pyramids are used for replacing the cold pieces in the third service for French dinners. They are placed on the table at the beginning and at the dessert for a Russian dinner. The principal object is to flatter the eye of the guests by their regularity, their smoothness and their finish. To attain this end it is necessary that the subjects be chosen according to the circumstances in which the dinner is offered. Special care must be taken that they be faultlessly executed. The pieces can be selected from a number of designs, such as: Swiss cottages, temples, pavilions, towers, pagodas, mosques, fortresses, hermitages, belvederes, cabins, cascades, houses, fountains, ruins, rotundas or tents; then there are lyres, harps, helmets, boats, cornucopias, vases, baskets, hampers, beehives, trophies both military and musical, fine arts, agriculture, navigation, commerce, science, etc. A very prolific branch almost entirely overlooked is a figure representing some well-known character. Then come animals, trees and flowers, which offer an infinite number of beautiful subjects. Few workmen are capable of making these different styles of pieces, their talent being limited, for their use is confined to a very small number of houses. Therefore it would be most useful if the workman engaged in making these pieces confine himself solely to figures, as this art is certain to become fashionable in the near future. Authors of the best works on cooking and pastry only casually mention these ornamental pieces. The workman while executing them must give his entire attention and talent, for the persons before whom they are generally placed are accustomed to works of art. In case he finds it impossible to produce a perfect figure, then he had better devote himself to other kinds of work in which perfection need not be so scrupulously followed; for, after all, these pieces only serve to decorate one dinner, and consequently are very rarely preserved. Still, whatever style of work he may see fit to undertake, let him endeavor to excel and attain the pinnacle of perfection. A well-executed idea has more merit than a well-finished, but badly conceived one. The quantity of figures and subjects to select from are numerous. First, we have mythology; what a fertile theme--here a Cupid on a shell drawn by swans; Neptune among the tritons and Naïads; Bacchus; the Centaurs; the Muses; scenes from Iliad and Odyssey! How delightfully ingenuous would be a group representing Venus teaching Cupid the art of dancing; the young one in the act and the mother directing his steps; Apollo playing the flute and Jupiter benignly watching the scene, surrounded by other gods and goddesses. Then we have the history of the flood: Noah standing at the door of the Ark contemplating the ingress of all the animals into it. We can choose from the customs of different ancient and modern nations: The Normandy peasants dancing opposite to each other; a Tyrolian descending a rock carrying on his back the carcass of a chamois; an American Indian dressed in war garb burying the tomahawk; or a Tartar on horseback. Then there are scenes in ordinary life. We can also choose from animated nature; birds, animals, the fox ready to attack an innocent rabbit, fish, swans on a lake surrounded by their families, birds pecking their young, and many other interesting subjects too numerous to mention. (3615). CENTER PIECES; EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS FIGURES (Pièces Montées; Explication des Différents Sujets). These figures as far as the letter I can be used for all pyramids, either of cooked, poured or spun sugar or of gum paste; adjust four to six pieces equally distant, and fasten them together; fill the intersections with arabesques, as in G and H, and surmount the whole with an ornament or bunch of flowers made of web sugar, the same as shown on piece K. On the projections of piece K, LLL rings of poured sugar can be placed, filling the centers with iced fruits; in the empty spaces can also be ranged sticks of poured sugar covered with fruits or small cakes, bonbons, almond paste, etc. The figures F and A show the effect that can be produced by using simpler methods. A is merely decorated with small arabesques, shown in I, in half their natural size; FIG. 728 An illustration of frog and rushes made of nougat. FIG. 729 I, F. Two different design of pieces made of gum paste. FIG. 729 H, G. Two leaves-liked pieces made of spun sugar is filled with arabesques in the intersetions and surmounted with flowers made of web sugar. FIG. 729 B, C, K, A, D, E, M. Seven different flower-liked pieces made of gum paste where A is decorated with small arabesques, and K is decorated with flower made of web sugar. FIG. 729 J. J is made of three pieces with different pattern that can be used independently. FIG. 730 An illustration of a cactus in flower pot that is made of nougat and is placed on two-shelved socle. FIG. 731 An illustration of a lighthouse with boat and small house besides it. These are all made of gum paste. on F small sticks are fastened one to the other. Fig. 728 is made of nougat; the frog to be of green pistachio nougat molded in a varnished and oiled plaster mold; the rushes are green and brown. Fig. 730 represents a cactus on a two-shelved socle made of Parisian nougat; the flower pot is of nougat containing chopped almonds and chocolate; the plant is of green pistachio nougat to imitate the cactus. The lighthouse ( Fig. 731) is of gum paste; the chimney on top of the house, from whence arises the smoke, is imitated in wadding; the branches of the tree of very fine wire covered with finely cut paper to represent the leaves, and the trunk to be of gum paste or fine wire covered with silk. The staircase and the boat are of gum paste; the boat lies on a piece of looking glass. The J and M are meant for forming socles for raising the low pieces, such as the frog, etc. J is made in three pieces that can be used independently, so as to make the socle either higher or lower. (3616). CENTER PIECES OF COOKED SUGAR (Pièces Montées en Sucre Cuit). For cooked sugar see Elementary Methods (No. 171). It is always necessary to have sugar cooked in advance so that each time some is wanted it will not have to be prepared, especially when only a little is to be used at a time. Have some sugar cooked to "large crack" (No. 171); when it reaches three hundred and thirty degrees add to it the juice of a quarter of a lemon and leave cook to three hundred and fifty degrees, then pour it hastily on a thick marble sufficiently large to allow it to cool, then detach and set it away in hermetically closed tin boxes. To make web or spun sugar, first melt it slowly in a small copper pan, a little at a time, being careful it does not change color. This sugar is used for spinning sultanas, for making ornaments in spun sugar, or it can be used for Parisian nougat and even for candying fruits, reducing its degree by introducing a little syrup at thirty-two degrees or else some glucose. For spun sugar pieces lightly trace with a pencil on an unpolished and very lightly oiled marble the outlines of the design needed for reproduction; cover this tracing with a thread of firm royal icing, either large or small according to the size of the piece. Fill in between these threads of icing with melted sugar, white or colored; detach the piece from the marble before it is thoroughly cold, as then they are apt to break easily. Instead of using royal icing the tracing can be outlined with a thread of spinning sugar of a different color from that used in the inside; put all the pieces together, attaching them in four, six, or eight, and ornament them here and there, when fastened, according to taste, with candied fruits, bonbons, or else small cakes, almond paste, etc; decorate with flowers or leaves made of sugar molded in oiled tin molds, dipped in sugar cooked to "crack," lightly cooled in its pan, then hung by a wire to hooks slightly apart so they cannot touch one another. Unmold as soon as they begin to cool and place on grates until ready for use. Sheaves can also be made (an imitation of sheaves of rye or wheat ) in very finely drawn sugar, fastened with an imitation band prepared with the same sugar. These sheaves may be colored or white, according to the taste; the sugar should be cooked to three hundred and thirty-five degrees. Pieces may also be decorated with pulled sugar flowers. Fig. 732 An illustration of a small copper pan. Fig. 733 A pretty design piece made of spun sugar. Fig. 734 An illustration of a vase decorated with pulled sugar flowers. (3617) TO KEEP SUBJECTS OR PIECES (Pour Conserver les Sujets ou Pièces Montées). Pyramids made of spun sugar or nougat can be kept in a perfect state of preservation by standing them under a plain glass globe to protect them from the action of the air. But should it be necessary to keep them for several days, then they must certainly be placed under a glass globe fitting on to a hollow wooden stand opening on the top, having its surface bored with holes and the empty space filled in with bits of quicklime. The lime has the faculty of absorbing all the humidity of the atmosphere; in this way sugar can be kept intact for an indefinite period, especially in winter time and damp weather. Pieces made of royal icing or gum paste can also be kept for a long while if the above method be followed. (3618). FLOWERS OF PULLED SUGAR (Fleurs en Sucre Tiré). Among the various objects that can be made of pulled sugar must be mentioned flowers and all kinds of leaves, which with a little taste and skill can be beautifully imitated, and if this branch of decoration is studied it can become one of artistic merit. At the beginning learners should not undertake the task of making difficult flowers, such as roses, dahlias, or other flowers having numerous petals, but must be satisfied with more simple ones, such as apple blossoms, wild roses, poppies, pansies, etc. Fig. 735 Five petals made of sugar. Fig. 736 An illustration of a flower made of five petals. Fig. 737 An illustration of a complete flower. Cook the sugar to "large crack" (No. 171), or 335 degrees Fahrenheit, being careful to have it very clear, transparent and grainless. Let it get cold on a marble slab. Melt a pound of this sugar in a copper pan, keeping it as white as possible. Pour a tablespoonful of the syrup on the marble, and add to it the coloring matter for the intended flowers; pound the color should it be dry; then pour over the melted sugar, and work the whole together with a spatula, and afterward with the hand until it becomes smooth and tractable. Put this pulled sugar into a mold, or on a lightly oiled dish, and then in a heater which should register 170 degrees Fahrenheit. Fig. 738 An illustration showing the process of making voilet. Fig. 739 A complete voilet with buds and leaves. It will be enough for us to explain the making of just a few kinds of flowers, in order that the work for all others may be understood. For instance, we will begin with a cluster of apple blossoms: Take from the heater a small quantity of very white pulled sugar, and dipping the finger in corn starch to prevent them sticking to the sugar make some petals as shown in Fig. 735, pressing it down between the thumb and first finger as thinly as possible, and detaching it with a pair of scissors as fast and as soon as it is pressed into shape, varying the shapes so that when finished they are not all alike. Use the flame of a small gas stove to keep the sugar soft; now heat the bottom of each petal over this gas flame, and adjust five of them together to form each separate flower ( Fig. 736). Make also buds and partly opened flowers. Color a little gum paste a bright yellow with a small wooden or bone tool, and form the inside. Paint the edges of the petals a pale pink, Fig. 740 An illustration of a branch and leave. Fig. 741 An illustration of a branch with flowers and leaves on it. also the buds, being careful to use the coloring matter as dry as possible. Now color a little of the pulled sugar green and form the leaves the same way as the flowers, afterward pressing them on a lightly oiled plaster mold to mark the veins ( Fig. 740, No. 3). Melt all the fragments of the various colored pulled sugars, and add to it some cocoa, and with it coat various lengths of wire; twist them to resemble branches of trees, and stick them together ( Fig. 740, No. 4), and on it mount the flowers and buds ( Fig. 741). Proceed exactly the same for all petal flowers, such as leaves, roses, violets, tulips, poppies and pansies (see Fig. 737, No. 7, for the pansies). The bunch of apple blossoms, if well made, is most natural. For calla lilies the operation is entirely different. Leave the pulled sugar very white in the heater until it runs slightly. The principal object is to work it quickly. Take a small piece from the heater, the size of a walnut, and roll it with the rolling-pin on marble as thinly as possible, always using corn starch for the roller and fingers. Cut the sugar rapidly with the scissors into pieces the shape of leaves, having the bottom part pulled out lengthways; heating these over the gas, should the sugar get too cold edges outward ( Fig. 738, No. 10). Color a little sugar a bright yellow, and make the inside of the flower. Coat it lightly with gum arabic, and roll it in powdered sugar that has already been tinted to a fine yellow. Leaves are made the same way; roll them out with the roller, cut them into long shapes, and press on a plaster mold to mark the veins. Mount the flowers and leaves on stalks of wire covered with green sugar ( Fig. 739). The principal thing to be observed when making any object, either of sugar or nougat, is to perform the work as speedily as possible, for the less the pulled sugar is heated at the gas flame the more beautiful and brilliant it will remain, and its glossy luster will not be marred. Satinated Pulled Sugar. --Place three and a half pounds of lump sugar in an untinned copper pan and moistening with one quart of lukewarm water, leave soak for a few moments. Cook it on a brisk fire, skim and wash the same as for caramel and after a few boils add a heaping coffee-spoonful of cream of tartar. Let the sugar attain three hundred degrees, then pour it on to a very cold, slightly oiled marble. When sufficiently cold to allow it to be handled mass it all together and pull it slowly, then mass again with the palm of the hand; pull it again a little, just sufficient to give it a clouded appearance. Put it in the heater and use small quantities, according to the work to be done, pulling and massing to give it a brilliant surface. Never use this sugar when too hot, on the contrary work it as cold as possible so that it will not lose its brilliancy. Flowers, leaves, baskets, etc., can be made with satinated sugar. (3619). MATERIALS FOR MAKING EASY PIECES (Matières Pour Faire les Pièces Faciles). Macaroons, candied fruits, small cakes, bonbons, meringues or marchpanes fastened together and applied on conical-shaped molds, having their base measuring eight to ten inches in diameter, and ending in a point one inch in diameter; this style of piece is not much used nowadays except in ordinary balls or banquets. It is gum paste, nougat, royal icing and cooked sugar that the prettiest pieces are made of, and in these the true artist can be readily distinguished. (3620). IMITATION OF NATURAL GREEN ALMONDS (Imitation d'Amandes Vertes Naturelles). Prepare a cooked almond paste the same as explained in the Elementary Methods (No. 125) flavor it with orange flower water and tinge it to a light green color. Mold this paste into medium-sized olive shapes, split them lengthwise through the center and in the crack lay a fine white almond; mold and work the paste to have it assume the form of a natural green almond, then lay them as fast as done on a wire sieve and place in the heater to dry. When finished leave to get cold and glaze over with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171). (3621). BROWN NOUGAT FOR CENTER PIECES (Nougat Brun Pour Pièces Montées). Put into a copper pan one pound of powdered sugar and the juice of a quarter of a lemon; melt the sugar on a moderate fire, and when entirely dissolved stir in one pound of almonds, either chopped or slightly shredded; these are to be heated at the oven door, but great care must be paid that the almonds be not too hot, for should the sugar be slightly colored then the nougat would become too brown; should the almonds be too hot then have the sugar simply melted, and again if the sugar be very hot, it is unnecessary to heat them only slightly. The best nougat for eating is made with melted sugar, but for elaborate panel pieces requiring much cutting it is better to use cooked sugar, the same as used for spinning work, without diluting with syrup. Almonds are used in the proportion of six to eight ounces for every pound of sugar. This nougat is certainly not so good for eating as the preceding, but it is much easier to work, for it cools with less rapidity and bends with more facility. It can be molded in arabesque molds made of plaster, or else pressed on to tin leaves to form moldings around different sized rings, or else around sticks to form columns. The nougat is cut out when in a flat three-sixteenths of an inch thick, or even thinner, with cardboard designs applied on, then cut away all around; these cardboards should be cut out beforehand into any shapes, such as rounds, ovals, squares, oblongs, triangles, etc. (3622). PARISIAN, WHITE AND PISTACHIO NOUGAT (Nougat Parisien, Blanc et aux Pistaches). Parisian. --This nougat is made of hulled almonds split lengthwise and dried in a hot closet. After dipping them in melted cooked sugar apply them in a large biscuit mold slightly oiled, the flat side of the almond lying against the inside of the mold. If a cylinder mold is used, eight inches high by six in diameter, dip the almonds in the melted sugar and then take them up one by one with a larding needle and range them on their flat side in a double reversed wreath. White Nougat. -- White nougat is made of almonds split in two through their thickness and warmed in a heater. Melt in an untinned copper pan one pound of powdered sugar with a tablespoonful of lemon juice; melt this sugar without coloring and when well dissolved mix in the halved almonds. Mold in a plain cylindrical mold, cut off even with the top, and when cold unmold on a baking sheet and decorate either with candied fruits or spun sugar. Pistachio Nougat. --Have a pound of peeled and very dry pistachio nuts, leave them whole and warm in a heater. Melt a pound of powdered sugar on a slow fire with a tablespoonful of lemon juice; finish the same as the white. Roll both the white and pistachio nougat to a quarter of an inch thick and cut into inch and a quarter bands. This nougat is to be molded in plain and almost straight timbale molds, having just sufficient flare to allow the nougat to be unmolded; garnish the bottom of the mold with a round of pink nougat, ( white nougat slightly colored with carmine); adjust the bands on the bias, alternating the white, and fasten them on the inside with bits of nougat dipped in sugar. These nougats are ornamented with fanciful designs of spun sugar. On top place a cupola of spun sugar and over an aigrette of web sugar, or any other tasteful decoration. Nougat is also made of hazel- nuts, common nuts, peanuts, Brazil nuts or butter-nuts; in fact with all kinds of almonds, and finished as explained for the others. (3623). ALMOND PASTE CANDIED (Pâte d'Amandes au Candi). Shell and peel fourteen ounces of sweet almonds; leave to soak in fresh water for three hours, then pound to a pulp with a little water and kirsch, half of each, just sufficient to moisten the almonds so they do not oil. Cook a pound of sugar to "crack" (No. 171), in a round bottom sugar pan, mix the almonds in with the sugar and dry them for a few moments over a slow fire. If for chocolate almond paste add a little grated chocolate or else partly dissolved chocolate. White almond paste is colored with vegetable colorings (No. 172). Roll this paste to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and cut it up in small fanciful patterns; dry them in the heater and when sufficiently dry put them to candy ( No. 3622 ); they can be flavored with vanilla or any other flavoring. (3624). GUM PASTE (Pastillage.) This is the manner of preparing gum paste used for various purposes: Have half a pound of very white Turkey gum tragacanth either in a glass vessel or a glazed one; wet the gum just sufficiently to have it covered, then close the vessel and leave it at least twelve hours or more. When the gum is quite soft and every hard particle disappears under the pressure of the finger put the gum in a heavy new towel; roll the two ends of this around two strong sticks and then twist each forcibly in a contrary direction until all the gum has passed through; lay it on a clean marble and work with the hand, incorporating half a pound of icing sugar sifted through a fine sieve, using more if the gum can absorb a larger quantity. Should the gum paste have too much consistence and recede while working, add a little water and sugar. (It is always preferable to have gum paste prepared the day before.) When it is required for making subjects, figures, dressing, draping, etc., or any other object that requires much manipulation, put a third less sugar to the above and replace it by corn starch. Should the gum paste now split it will be the result of too much body, therefore add a little water, sugar, corn starch, etc. If hard lumps be found in the gum tragacanth this is caused from it not being sufficiently or quickly worked with the sugar. For gum paste ornaments and architectural designs ordinary gum paste must be used--all sugar and no starch (only gum, icing sugar and water ). Put in as much icing sugar as the gum can absorb without having too much, otherwise it will be impossible to work the paste. Should the edges of the pieces that have been cut out rise up, it is because the paste has too much body, therefore add to it a little ordinary gum paste, icing sugar and water. There must be no contraction whatever; the pieces once cut must remain as they are; dry them in the air, being careful that no dust settles on them and avoid any strong draught. With these cut-out pieces of gum paste pyramids are prepared, using cardboard models prepared in advance. They can be kept when very dry, wrapping them up carefully and placing them on edge between sheets of tissue paper and putting the pieces for each pyramid in a box to be kept in a dry place. When required for use fasten all the pieces of gum paste together with gum paste dissolved in water, having it liquid enough to force through a cornet, or else use royal icing. The paste can be colored with vegetal colorings, or gold, bronze or silver impalpable powders, after exposing the objects a few moments to steam. The gum paste may also be varnished with a varnish prepared as follows: Put a coffeespoonful of cream of tartar into a pint of milk; set it in a hot place and when the milk has soured filter and add four ounces of pulverized gum arabic, four ounces of spirits of wine and one small dissolved gelatine leaf; pour the whole into a bottle and stand it in a hot place for a few hours, then strain through a fine sieve and keep well corked in a cool spot. (3625). MALAGA RAISINS STUFFED AND GLAZED ( Raisins de Malaga Farcis et Glacés). Split some fine Malaga raisins in two without separating the parts; remove the seeds and stuff one-third with a half-inch ball of almond paste (No. 125) colored white, another third with the same paste colored pink and the remaining third of almond paste with pistachios (No. 128); all these pastes to be prepared with cooked sugar ( No. 3616 ); roll them into olive shapes, leaving the almond or pistachio paste show through the opening, and lay them at once on a wire sieve, then place in the heater to let get dry and glaze with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171). (3626). TO SPIN SUGAR BY THROWING (Pour Filer le Sucre à la Jetée). First have a spinner constructed as follows: On the entire surface of a round of sheet iron five inches in diameter and an eighth of an inch thick are to be riveted wire pegs an eighth of an inch in diameter and three and a half inches long, and at three-quarters of an inch apart from each other. A solid handle is fastened to the spinner. Cook in a copper pan two or three pounds of sugar to "large crack" (No. 171) or three hundred degrees Fahrenheit. As soon as done remove from the fire. Place several clean and oiled baking sheets on the floor. With the left hand take a small stick and hold it horizontally to the height of the chest or else lay it projecting over the edge of a table; with the right hand plunge the spinner into the sugar, take it out and drain off all the superfluous sugar; then, moving the instrument vigorously backward and forward over the small stick until all the sugar has run off in threads, redip the spinner into the sugar and begin the same movement again, continuing until all the sugar is spun. In case there be no spinner handy, a spoon can be used, dipping it into the cooked sugar, lifting it out and leaving all the surplus sugar drain off by moving it backward and forward the same as the spinner. (3627). SUGAR FOR CASTING IN MOLDS (Sucre a Couier dans les Moules). Place some lumps of sugar in a copper pan; pour over sufficient water to soak and leave till dissolved. As soon as this takes place mix in a few drops of acetic acid and cook; then remove from the fire, color a light blue with ultramarine blue and rub it against the sides of the pan with a wooden spoon to grain it. Pour it at once into molds; plaster ones are generally used for this purpose, having them properly dipped in cold water, then well drained and tied around firmly with a string so that the sugar cannot escape from the joints of the mold. After the mold is full wait until the sugar congeals on top, then break this thin crust and turn the mold upside down to empty out all the liquid sugar in order to have the subject hollow in the center. Unmold carefully, removing each piece one by one; pare them neatly and leave to cool in a dry, but not a hot place. LARGE PIECES (Grandes Pieces). (3628). BASKETS FILLED WITH CANDIED FRUITS, OR ICE CREAM FRUITS (Corbeilles Garnies de Fruits, ou de Fruits en Glace). Take some ordinary nougat ( No. 3621 ) and roll it out to a quarter of an inch in thickness; from it cut a round ten inches in diameter. Prepare twenty-one wires, each five inches long, coat them with a layer of colored pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ) three-sixteenths of an inch thick and fasten them to the round of nougat at half an inch from the edge, leaving an inch space between each one. Have some pulled sugar, either white or colored; imitate a rope and arrange it around the base of the basket; pull some more sugar and roll it into strings a quarter of an inch thick and three feet long; make a braid of this sugar the same as a wicker basket going in and out of the wires, continuing as far as the top, finishing the whole with another rope the same as the bottom. Make the handles two and a half inches in diameter with the same sugar and pass them through rings fastened with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171). Inside the upper part of the basket arrange a nougat foundation and cover it either with candied fruits, fresh fruits or else those made of ice cream or water ice. Fig. 742 A basket filled with candied fruits is served in a metal dish. Fig. 743 A basket with three roses fastened on the left and is filled with candied fruits. Fig. 744 A basket filled with candied fruits and decorated with few branches of small flowers. The flowers are tied together with a napkin on the right handle. (3629). PERRETTE'S BASKET (Le Panier de Perrette). Have some nougat made of chopped almonds ( No. 3621 ); roll it out to a quarter of an inch in thickness and cut it into an oval nine by five inches. Have sixteen pieces of wire, each six inches long; cover all of them with a three-sixteenths of an inch layer of pulled and colored sugar ( No. 3618 ); bend each one separately while the sugar is still hot, then fasten them around the nougat oval, an inch from the border; spread the wires outward on top. Make a rope of pulled white sugar, place it around the bottom of the basket; roll some more pulled sugar into quarter-inch diameter strings and braid it around the wires, finishing the top with another braid of pulled sugar. In the center fasten a sufficiently large handle, cover it with flowers and leaves made of pulled sugar and at one end tie a pretty satin ribbon bow three inches in width and of a color harmonizing with the basket. Put a nougat bottom inside the basket at two-thirds of its height, then fill up with chestnuts made of chestnut paste iced over with chocolate, or else ice cream in imitation of mushrooms, strawberries, etc. Fig. 745 A pretty basket with the handle made of imitated flowers and leaves and decorated with a ribbon on the right, is filled with nougat and is served on a decorative dish. (3630). BASKET WITH CHERRIES (Panier de Cerises). To begin this basket first have an oval board ten and a half inches long by six inches wide; all around this oval bore holes a quarter of an inch in diameter and one inch apart from each other. Cut as many pieces of wire four and a half inches long as there are holes perforated in the board; straighten and envelop them in cooked sugar to form into sticks three-sixteenths of an inch thick. After these sticks are cold dip the ends of each one separately in melted sugar and fasten them in the holes in the board. Now prepare some pulled sugar as described in No. 3618 ; take a little of this at a time and pull it into strings a quarter of an inch thick, and with these braid the basket as high as the top of the sticks. Pull two sticks with the same sugar, only slightly thicker than those used for braiding the basket and a little longer than half the circumference Fig. 746 A pretty basket made of sugar is filled with imitated cherries made of almond paste and leaves made of pulled sugar. of the basket; fasten these two sticks together and twist them so as to imitate a thick rope; flatten this partly and fasten it at once on half of the edge of the basket, then pull two more sticks the same as the others, twist them the same way to obtain another thick rope, flatten it also and fasten it to the other half of the basket's edge. To make the handle pull three strings of sugar the same thickness and twenty inches long, braid them together and as soon as this is done bend the plait so as to shape the handle and when it is cold attach it to the basket. The two covers are made as follows: Pull two strings of sugar five-sixteenths of an inch thick, and bend each one so as to form a frame the shape and size of the opening of the basket, then pull more strings and while they are still hot fasten them diagonally on to these frames, and on top of these fasten others, crossing them in such a way that they form a lattice work. When these covers are finished attach them solidly against the handle of the basket. Trim around the base of the basket with a wreath of leaves, either gilded or silvered, arranging them symmetrically. Fill the basket tastefully with cherries made of almond paste (No. 125) and leaves of pulled sugar. (3631). "BON VOYAGE" BOAT SERVED AT A FAREWELL DINNER (Bateau "Bon Voyage," Servi à l'Occasion d'un Départ). The shell of the boat is made of brown nougat ( No. 3621 ), molded in a plaster mold, oiled and varnished with shellac, first well dried, then oiled; the masts are made of wire covered with pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ) of a yellowish hue; the cordage of silk, and the sails of pulled sugar exceedingly white, remelted on a slow fire, and rolled out speedily with a roller, then cut with cardboard patterns into the shape of the various sails, afterward laid on sheets of tin bent to the needed form. The waves are imitated in pulled sugar of a greenish color, and the letters on the standard are painted with gold paint. The entire boat can be made of white or colored gum paste ( No. 3624 ), and the water imitated with green royal icing (No. 101). This piece may be filled either with fresh or candied fruits, such as Malaga grapes stuffed with almond paste (No. 125); candied cherries or strawberries and angelica, or else instead of these have imitation flowers made of ice cream and angelica lozenges. Fig. 747 A boat made of pulled sugar and nougat is filled with fresh fruits and is served on a dish. (3632). CHARIOT FILLED WITH LADY APPLES (Chariot Garni de Pommes d'Api). To make the chariot the wheels must first be constructed. The hoops of the wheels are made with thick bands of nougat ( No. 3621 ), three-quarters of an inch broad; bend these around a cylindrical mold four inches in diameter and stick the parts together with cooked sugar ( No. 3616 ). To make the spokes of these wheels, roll out some nougat to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and then divide it into small sticks half the length of the diameter of the hoops of the wheels; when these are all cold fasten the small sticks inside the wheel with cooked sugar, having them laid at even distances apart, and fasten a small round piece of nougat in the center to imitate the naves of the wheel; now make the axles with two pieces of strong wire, each six and a half inches in length; envelop these in cooked sugar and when cold attach them firmly on the wheels. Make the bottom of the chariot with a layer of nougat twelve inches long by six wide and when this is very cold fasten it solidly on the axles. Next make the two ladders as hereby described: Roll out a band of nougat to five-sixteenths of an inch in thickness, pare it straight and even on both ends, having it twelve inches long; divide it lengthwise into four very straight sticks five-sixteenths of an inch wide; roll out some more nougat to a quarter of an inch in thickness and cut this into even sticks three and a quarter inches long; take up two of the long sticks, lay them down parallel at three and a quarter inches distance apart and between these attach diagonally a row of the small sticks slightly apart from one another, and again on these a second row also laid diagonally, but in an opposite direction, so that one row crosses the other. Having finished the first ladder, proceed to make the second. Fasten these two ladders solidly on the bottom of the chariot and against the wheels. Make the shafts with two very thin wires enveloped in cooked sugar and when cold attach them to the front of the chariot. The socle is now to be made: Have two flats of nougat three-sixteenths of an inch thick, one for the upper part to be seventeen inches long by eleven and a half wide, and the second one for the bottom nineteen inches long by thirteen and a half inches wide; also make four nougat bands for the framework and fasten them firmly with cooked sugar; on this framework lay the second flat and fasten it also to form the socle or stand; fasten around the bottom of this socle a triple row of nougat points cut very evenly and placed symmetrically; decorate the border of the second flat with oak leaves and acorns made of sugar, and lastly construct the fence with sticks of nougat cut a quarter of an inch in thickness. Lay the chariot on this stand and fill it with small lady apples formed of gum paste ( No. 3624 ) or grained sugar, and fasten here and there some apple leaves made of cooked sugar. Fig. 748 A chariot made of sugar and nougat is filled with small lady apples made of gum paste. A framework made of nougat is placed beneath the chariot and oak leaves and acorns made of sugar is garnished around the framework. (3633). CHARIOT OF DOVES (Le Chariot des Colombes). The body of the chariot is made and molded of white nougat ( No. 3622 ) in a plaster mold, divided in two, well garnished with shellac and oiled; the border of the shell is made of almond paste (No. 125) and gum tragacanth cut out in a design; the wheels are of nougat or pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ), the spokes, the ring and the axle cut out separately and fastened together with cooked sugar; the nails are imitated with royal icing (No. 101); the shafts are made of wire covered with nougat or pulled sugar. Stand the chariot on an oval stand of pistachio nougat ( No. 3622 ) the size of the bottom of the dish intended for serving. Place a false nougat bottom inside the chariot, then fill it up with candied fruits iced over with caramel and angelica. This chariot can also be made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ) and filled with candied fruits or fruits and flowers of all descriptions made in ice cream or water ice. Fig. 749 A dish with a chariot made of nougat and is fastened on an imitated dove. Candied fruits and flowers are served on the chariot. (3634). CHARIOT OF SWANS (Le Char des Cygnes). This piece is made entirely of gum paste ( No. 3624 ), the swan is molded in a two-piece plaster mold, the two halves of the swan are fastened together, the crevices filled with softened gum paste, then thoroughly dried. Wash off with a sponge and imitate the eyes and beaks with a brush. The shell is also molded in a dry plaster mold and is decorated on the outspread parts with designs of gum paste bronzed or gilded. On the thin end of the shell stand a Cupid made of gum paste; the ring encircling the swan is of gum paste, the reins of silk and the harness of satin ribbon; the whole is made to stand on an oval bottom cut the size of the dish it is served on. The waves are made of royal icing (No. 101) tinted a pale green. Fill the chariot with iced candied fruits, candies, or else ice cream or water ices. Fig. 750 Gum paste made chariot is fastened with a swan and is controlled by an cupid stand infront of the chariot. The chariot is filled with iced candied fruits and candies and is served on a decorative plate. (3635). CORNUCOPIA, HORN OF PLENTY (Corne d'Abondance). This cornucopia is molded in a mold the shape of Fig. 751. It is made of pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ), remelted and rolled out with a roller--this must be done very quickly--or else it can be made of white nougat ( No. 3622 ) decorated with royal icing (No. 101) or of gum paste ( No. 3624 ). Fasten it on the opening side on a nougat surtout, and support the body of the cornucopia by fastening two rests molded in gum paste in a two-piece mold, and place a wire in the center of each; attach the two pieces together and let get very dry. The cornucopia is surmounted by a gum paste Cupid; the inside border of the opening of the dish is made of pulled sugar and is composed of rings, with smaller ones of a darker color placed inside of one another; bend them lightly to spread open on sheets of tin, then fasten them to the inside border of the dish with cooked sugar; between each one arrange a lozenge of glazed angelica. The opening of the cornucopia is filled with candied fruits, or else others made of chestnut or almond paste (No. 125), and glazed with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171). This piece may be made of white gum paste ( No. 3624 ) and decorated with gold reliefs, or it may be utilized by replacing the fruits with fruits imitated in cream or water ices. Fig. 751 A cupid made of gum paste is fastened on top of a cornucopia that is made of pulled sugar. The opening of cornucopia is filled with candied fruits and this whole entree is served on a metal plate. (3636). THE DOSSER à LA DENIVELLE (La Hotte à la Denivelle). Roll out some nougat ( No. 3621 ) to a quarter of an inch in thickness, and from it cut with either a tin or oiled cardboard pattern a piece fifteen inches long by six on one end and four on the other in width, rounding the six-inch end which is for the upper part of the dosser; also cut another piece of a semicircular shape four inches in diameter by two and a half inches in radius. Prepare eleven wires, two eight inches long, two of seven and three-quarters, two of seven and a half, two of seven and a quarter, two of seven and one of six and three-quarters inches; coat them all with Fig. 752 An imitated dosser made of nougat and sugar is filled with mushrooms made of almond paste. The dosser is decorated with flowers and leaves that are made of pulled sugar. colored sugar. Fasten the semi-circular bottom on the large piece on its narrowest end, four inches from the edge; on this bottom arrange the wires, beginning with the eight-inch ones on each side beside the back of the dosser, and continuing with the others according to their various lengths, at the same time spreading them open toward the top. Coat with green sugar two more wires each nine inches long, and leave to cool. Cut out a round bottom twelve inches in diameter, then fasten the dosser on the center of it, pressing it against the two long wires to be used for a support; decorate the whole profusely with leaves and flowers made of satinated pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ), and fill the dosser with mushrooms or strawberries made of almond paste (No. 125), also some angelica. Ice the whole with sugar cooked to "crack" (No. 171). The dosser may be filled with small ices imitating flowers. (3637). VASES OF PULLED AND DRAWN SUGAR (Vases en Sucre Filé et Tiré). All pieces that are made of pulled sugar and spun sugar are exceedingly useful for many reasons, as large-sized pieces can be executed at a comparatively low cost and yet be most elegant, graceful and light; besides the rapidity of the execution, they can be made to assume a great variety of shapes, and all this with very few or even no molds. The designs shown in Figs. 753 and 754, will demonstrate the many uses to be made of pulled and spun sugar, and although they demand much skill and attention, yet they do not offer the same difficulties as gum paste. The socles or stands for these pieces may be of white nougat ( No. 3622 ), molded and cut out, and the embellishments around the base of the vases may also be of almond paste (No. 125) glazed with caramel. The three swans seen on one of the socles are made of very white cooked sugar (320 degrees Fahrenheit), poured into slightly oiled tin molds; leave till cold, then unmold. The whole work must be mounted symmetrically, being careful that each part is firmly attached and the piece perfectly secure. For vases of white or colored pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ) trace outlines of the designs on marble (see Fig. 733), having sixteen, twenty-four or even thirty-two pieces for each vase. Take a stick six to eight inches higher than the intended vase and coat it with cooked sugar; roll it on the marble until it becomes exceedingly smooth, leave it until cold, then fasten it vertically on to the center of the socle; adapt the traced pieces perpendicularly around this stick at equal Fig. 753 An imitated vase filled with leaves is placed on top of a stand made of nougat. Flowers made of pulled sugar is garnished around the stand. Fig. 754 A vase made of almond paste is placed on top of nougat made socle and is filled with violets and leaves made of pulled sugar in the vase. Beneath the socle, small flowers made of pulled sugar are decorated around it. distances apart. Prepare the flowers and leaves of pulled sugar ( Figs. 735 to 741); mount them on wire stalks covered with sugar, and attach them solidly against the stick inside the top of the vase, spreading them open slightly to enlarge and to give a graceful effect to the blossoms. Decorate the base of the socle with flowers and leaves of pulled sugar. Should the pieces be very large, then it will be found advisable to mount the bouquet separately and place it in the vase when in position on the dinner table; in this case instead of having the stick higher than the vase it must be at least six inches lower, to leave room for a receptacle intended to receive the flowers, the latter to be the same shape and size as the upper portion of the vase, and to be made of nougat ( No. 3622 ), stand this inside the vase and place the flowers tastefully within. (3638). WHEELBARROW FILLED WITH FLOWERS ON A SOCLE (Brouette Garnie de Fleurs sur Socle). Have ready an oval socle made of brown nougat, the same as shown in Fig. 756; decorate it with agricultural implements and leaves of pulled sugar made by hand; the rope around the base of the socle is made with two strings twisted quickly and fastened to the border and around the under base; the top tray is made of green pistachio nougat ( No. 3622 ). On top of the entire socle arrange a wheelbarrow made in four pieces of pink or any other color of pulled sugar, rolled out to three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness, then cut out with patterns made beforehand and after the drawing; the shafts and rests are made of wire covered with pulled sugar and bent to the desired shape. The wheel is of pulled sugar; first make a ring and place a round in the center; join the two together by small sticks of pulled sugar; between the shafts and the wheel pass a wire; fasten it on at each side with cooked sugar. The wheelbarrow is upheld and fastened with sugar cooked to "crack;" the flowers that fill the barrow and the border on top are made of pulled sugar to which a little chocolate has been added. Fig. 756 A weelbarrow made of pulled sugar is filled with imitated flowers and leaves and is placed on top of a socle made of nougat. This entree is served on a metal plate. This piece of confectionery may be made of gum paste ( No. 3624 ), either white or any light color; the wheelbarrow can be filled, as well as the one above, with glazed fruits or fancy ices, such as potatoes , tomatoes, mushrooms, etc., and the bottom of the socle garnished around with fruits, or fruits in cases glazed with caramel, or with small light waffles dressed in a circle, one overlapping the other. (3639). WINDMILL (Moulin à Vent). This pyramid, though quite an old idea, is always sure to be well received. The great variety of its details, and the figures which can be added to it, representing scenes of country life, give it an attractive appearance which can hardly be obtained in architectural pyramids. Although its execution offers no great difficulties, yet great care and exactitude must be taken in the cutting out of the different pieces of which it is composed, for there is the essential point for its successful completion. The cut is a reduction of the original, and can thus serve as a basis for its execution, either in multiplying or diminishing its dimensions, according to the desired size of the pyramid. Cut out with great precision patterns of strong cardboard, and, if to be used for nougat, oil them well. The part of the pyramid representing the walls is made of white nougat ( No. 3622 ) with chopped almonds, rolled on the marble to about one-quarter of an inch thick, and with the help of oiled patterns cut out rapidly the windows and the doors. The roof is of nougat covered with imitation of tiles made of almond paste (No. 125) colored a light chocolate or a light brick red, rolled to a sheet one-sixteenth of an inch thick. Cut out with a tin circular cutter and then put on, beginning with the bottom layer, each layer successively overlapping the other. The large platform and the doors are of ordinary brown nougat ( No. 3621 ), the railing of lightly colored chocolate sugar, and composed of pieces cut with a knife and stuck together with melted sugar. The windows are made of sugar boiled to three hundred and thirty degrees, very clear, rolled thin and placed in the interior. The rustic beams are made of chocolate pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ), the stairways of brown nougat and the wings of the mill are composed of four pieces of wire, covered and rolled in brown cooked sugar, and of white pulled sugar melted and rolled thin, and cut out with scissors. The little sticks across the wings are made of lightly colored chocolate sugar and put on about one-eighth of an inch apart. The rock or base is twelve inches high, and is composed of two wood platforms, supported by a wood framework, around which bunches of crumpled paper are put on, which is then covered with green nougat, rolled thin and garnished with herbs and plants imitated with green pulled sugar. This whole pyramid can also be made of clear sugar exclusively, boiled to three hundred and thirty-five degrees, very transparent, melted over and poured on a tracing of patterns on marble and filled in as described. Or, further yet, of gum paste ( No. 3624 ) exclusively, in natural colors or white, taking great care, however, not to set up the pieces until each one is perfectly dry. The windows Fig. 757 An illustration of an imitated windwill. could then be imitated by thin sheets of mica or gelatine, and the base of gum paste covered with royal icing (No. 101). Or, the ambitious workman can imitate with gum paste, a miller, a bag on his shoulder, going up the stairway, or two peasants eating and drinking, or a peasant woman with children around her, and many other subjects of country life and customs. (3639a). THE PROLIFIC TREE (L'Arbre Prodigieux). In order to make a tree two feet in height cut the wires varying from four to fourteen inches in length. Prepare some nougat with chopped almonds ( No. 3621 ), incorporating sufficient cocoa to color it brown; roll out enough of this to be able to cut out a piece a quarter of an inch thick, sixteen inches long and seven inches wide in the part intended for the base and slightly narrower for the top. Wrap this piece of nougat around a wooden support in imitation of the trunk of a tree and leave to cool; coat the wires with nougat proportionately thick according to their length, and thicker on the ends that are to be attached to the trunk; bend them as soon as covered to shape them into knotty and irregular boughs, and leave to cool. Color some white nougat ( No. 3622 ) a pistachio green, roll it out on a marble to a quarter of an inch in thickness, and from it cut a round bottom sixteen inches in diameter, then attach it to a board of the same size. At two inches from the edge fasten the trunk of the tree on solidly and decorate it with the boughs, having the heaviest attached to the trunk, and the lighter ones attached to these. Melt some cooked sugar, mix in a little cocoa and chopped almonds, and with a knife coat over the trunk and the branches to imitate the bark and the roots at the foot of the tree. Pull some dark green-colored sugar, a very little at a time, and with it form leaves as described in No. 3618 ; trim the branches with these, and also with cherries made of almond paste (No. 125) and glazed, or else substitute pears or little apples, or better still green almonds, but any imitated fruit can be used. Place a ladder against the tree, made of wire covered with chocolate -colored sugar, and on this stand a small image to represent a cupid stealing Fig. 758 An imitated ladder laid on a tree made of nougat and sugar. Cupids made of gum paste where one is climbing on the ladder to steal fruits and the other is receiving the fruit at below. the fruit, and at one side another cupid receiving the picked fruit. Make these figures of gum paste ( No. 3624 ). Make the boughs and bushes around the foot of the tree of pulled sugar ( No. 3618 ), also the rope that surrounds it. These trees can be varied as regards both size and subject. One or more trees can be arranged on a single board without any figures or subjects. (3640). CANDYING, COLD AND HOT (Candi à Froid et à Chaud). Cold. --This manner of candying is specially adapted for bonbons. Put some lump sugar in a copper pan, pour over sufficient water to dissolve it, and as soon as this takes place set it on the fire to cook to thirty-five degrees; when the sugar has attained this degree take the pan from the fire and stand it in a basin or any other receptacle filled with cold water; cover the sugar with a round paper, and leave stand till cold. Now pour it into the candy pans containing the pieces to be candied; put in a dry place in a moderate temperature and leave for twelve to eighteen hours; drain off the syrup and place the candied pieces on a grate to dry. Hot. --This manner of candying is used specially for candying preserved fruits. Cook some syrup to thirty-six degrees; leave rest for one instant, then pour it into the candy pans, having the fruits already arranged therein; place the pan in a heater, having it moderately hot, and remove only after six or seven hours, or when the fruits are all coated. (3641). TO CAST IN STARCH (Pour Couler à l'Amidon). To cast in starch wooden boxes are required twenty inches long, fourteen inches wide and three inches deep. Fill these boxes with very dry starch to a quarter of an inch from the top; stir about with a small whip to have it light, then smooth neatly with a ruler; now imprint into it with small plaster molds fastened on to a second ruler at some distance apart, burying them in the starch until the ruler touches the edges of the box. Should these small molds have a channeled surface or deeply imprinted designs, then before lifting them out of the starch rap the ruler lightly on top to have any of the starch that may adhere fall away. Care must be taken to sift the starch from time to time to rid it of any lumps or grains of sugar that may have formed therein. To cast the sugar use a funnel in the center of which is a rod terminating in a ball that fits the outlet of the funnel accurately. This rod is moved up and down by means of a horizontal lever and a spring which are fastened to the handle of the funnel. Fig. 759 An illustration of a funnel. CANDIES (Bonbons). (3642). BURNT ALMONDS (Pralines). Put a pound and a half of sugar and half of a vanilla bean in a pan, dissolve it with a little water and stand it on the fire to cook to thirty-four degrees ( syrup gauge), then add one pound of fine almonds; mix all together with a wooden spoon and continue to cook until the sugar reaches "crack" (No. 171), stirring the almonds steadily till the sugar granulates. Take the pan from the fire and pour both sugar and almonds into a coarse sieve to separate the almonds from the granulated sugar, return the almonds to the pan, stand it on the fire and stir constantly until the sugar covering the almonds melts away, adding from time to time a small handful of the granulated sugar. As soon as all the sugar is added and that surrounding the almonds is well dissolved, pour it immediately on to a slab, separating them from each other, and leave to cool. Put a heaping tablespoonful of dissolved gum arabic in a basin, dilute it with a little water and let it come to a boil; then add the burnt almonds and toss until entirely covered; pour at once on to a sieve and place in the heater to dry. (3643). CHOCOLATE CREAM CARAMELS (Caramels à la Crème au Chocolat). Melt twelve ounces of chocolate in a copper pan with a pint and a half of good cream and half a pint of fruit syrup well flavored with vanilla, then add a pound and a half of sugar. Stand the pan on a hot fire and when the liquid begins to boil stir it vigorously with a spatula until it reaches "large ball" (No. 171), then pour it on a slightly oiled marble to half an inch in thickness, securing the caramel within lightly oiled square iron rods laid in the shape of a square. This caramel takes a long while to cool; when cold remove the rulers, detach from the marble and cut it first into long bands half an inch wide, and these across in half-inch squares. As fast as the caramels are cut wrap each one in a piece of waxed paper. (3644). VANILLA CREAM CARAMELS, OR WITH TEA OR COFFEE (Caramels à la Crème Vanillée au Thé ou au Café). Set a pound of sugar in a copper pan to melt with three-quarters of a pint of cream, adding a split vanilla bean; stand the pan on a brisk fire and stir steadily until cooked to "large ball" (No. 171), then pour it in a square formed on the marble with slightly oiled square iron rods, having it the same thickness as the chocolate caramels. When cold cut out and wrap in waxed papers, finishing them exactly the same as the chocolates. These caramels can be flavored with tea or coffee, proceeding as for the above, only using one pound of sugar, two gills of cream and a gill and a half of infused tea or coffee. (3645). CORDIAL CANDIES (Bonbons aux Liqueurs). These candies are cast in starch. First prepare the boxes of starch, impressed as explained in No. 3641 ; put two pounds of sugar in a copper basin, dissolve with three gills of water and stand it on the fire to cook the sugar to thirty-six degrees ( syrup gauge); when the sugar attains this degree add a small cordial glassful of kirsch, maraschino or any other desired cordial, to bring the syrup back to thirty-two degrees, stirring it well. Now pour this syrup into a spring funnel ( Fig. 759) and cast the candies in the starch impressions; put the filled box in the heater at a moderate temperature and leave for twelve hours. They should now have formed a sufficiently thick crust to allow them to be worked; remove carefully from the starch, brush one at a time with a very soft hair brush, and lay them at once on a grate to cool, then stand this grate on a candy pan and cover the candies with a cold thirty-two degree syrup; lay a piece of paper on top to keep the candies submerged. Put this candy pan in a mild temperature and leave for six hours. Then drain off the syrup, take out the candies to arrange them on a second grate and leave to dry. Instead of crystallizing these candies they can be iced with fondant (No. 58) flavored with cordial. (3646). DROPS (Pastilles). These are made by mixing powdered sugar from which the icing sugar has been removed by sifting through a very fine sieve, flavored either with aromatics or fruit juices, to the consistency of a paste. They are all prepared exactly alike; those composed of fruit should be a little more liquid and a little less heated than those with aromatically flavored waters. They should all be dropped on to bright tin plates. (3647). PEPPERMINT DROPS (Pastilles de Menthe). Mix seven ounces of the same sugar as above with about two ounces of water, flavored with a few drops of peppermint essence, to form into a paste; heat it the same as for the strawberry drops, only warming it rather more, and finish exactly the same. (3648). STRAWBERRY DROPS (Pastilles aux Fraises). Place seven ounces of powdered sugar, prepared as ( No. 3646 ), in a small copper pan having a spout, and reduce it to the consistency of a paste with about an ounce of filtered strawberry juice; color lightly with liquid carmine to give it a pink hue. Stand the pan on the fire and heat until the paste flows, stirring continuously with a small spatula; however, it must be of a consistency not to spread when dropped on the trays. To dress, hold the pan in the left hand, inclining the spout toward the tray, and in the right hand hold a small wire; with this cut the paste away from the spout as fast as it runs out, thus leaving it fall in small pieces to form into drops three-eighths of an inch in diameter and slightly apart from each other. Half an hour after they can be detached from the tray by bending it slightly and then shaking them; throw on a sieve to finish drying. (3649). FILBERT CANDIES, PRESERVED (Bonbons d'Avelines en Conserve). Procure small plaster molds imitating hazel- nuts and fasten them to a ruler, then imprint them in starch. Peel six ounces of filberts and crush to form a very fine paste with a gill and a half of water. Cook a pound of sugar to "small crack" (No. 171), add the pounded nuts, stir well and cast it at once into the starch impressions; when these candies have sufficiently hardened in the starch to be able to be handled take them out, one by one, brush carefully and stand on a sieve to cool; they can afterward be dipped in cold crystallized syrup until completely coated with candy. (3650). CHOCOLATE FONDANTS (Bonbons au Fondant au Chocolat). Dissolve four ounces of chocolate with two gills of water; add half a stick of vanilla and a pound and a half of sugar; continue to cook until it reaches "small ball" (No. 171), then pour it on a marble slab and leave to cool; work to obtain a fondant, proceeding the same as for No. 58. Put a part of this in a copper pan to melt, adding a spoonful of vanilla syrup, then cast this in the starch. As soon as the candies are firm and cold take them out and brush over; melt the remainder of the fondant, softening it with vanilla syrup, and dip the candies in this. (3651). VANILLA FONDANTS (Bonbons au Fondant à la Vanille). Have some conical-shaped molds, with rounded tops, a quarter of an inch in diameter at their base and a quarter of an inch high; impress them into the starch. Put one pound of fondant (No. 58) in a sugar pan, add two tablespoonfuls of thirty-four degree syrup strongly flavored with vanilla and stand it on the fire to heat until the finger can yet be held in, then pour it into a spring funnel ( Fig. 759) and run it through into the impressions in the starch; when the candies are cold and firm take them carefully from the starch, brush gently with a brush and stand them on a grate, then put away in a cold place. These can be dipped in fondant well flavored with vanilla. (3652). FONDANTS DIPPED IN STRAWBERRY OR RASPBERRY (Bonbons au Fondant Trempés à la Fraise ou à la Framboise). Put some fondant into a copper pan and heat well, dissolving it with a few spoonfuls of strawberry or raspberry juice. As soon as hot cast it through a funnel into the starch, proceeding the same as for vanilla fondant ( No. 3651 ). When firm and cold take them carefully from the starch and dip each one in a strawberry or raspberry fondant lightly tinted with a little carmine. (3653). CANDIES FOR MOTTOES (Bonbons pour Papillotes). Have some small conical-shaped plaster molds, the bottoms being detruncated and rounded; they should be an inch in diameter at the bottom and one inch high. Fasten these molds on a ruler slightly apart from each other, then with this ruler imprint the molds into the starch. Put two pounds of sugar in a copper sugar basin and dissolve it with a pint and a half of water; stand this on the fire to cook to "large ball" (No. 171), being careful to remove all the scum and keep the sides of the pan clean. When the sugar has reached the proper degree let it fall to "small ball" by adding a few spoonfuls of orange flower water, then remove the pan from the fire and with a wooden spoon rub the sugar against the sides to mass it. As soon as it begins to whiten stir it well and cast it into the starch impressions, using a spring funnel ( Fig. 759) for this purpose; when the box is full bestrew the candies lightly with a handful of starch and put the box in a heater for two or three hours. After the candies are hard remove them from the starch and range them on grates or on a sieve to cool thoroughly, then brush over with a camel's hair or feather brush. To wrap up these candies spread open some variegated colored motto papers, in the center of each lay a printed motto folded in four and on this one of the candies, then fold the paper all around toward the center and use a string attached to the table to enclose the candy (this is done by giving the string a turn around the motto and pulling on it, then the motto is released and will be found firmly twisted) and form a bouquet with the fringed ends of the paper. (3654). NORTHERN JELLY CANDIES (Bonbons du Nord à la Gelée). Fasten some plaster half-spherical or convex molds on a ruler and with it make the impressions in the starch. Prepare a pint of apple jelly the same as in No. 3668 , only cooking it a little more; bring this to the ordinary degree of cooking, adding either rum, kirsch or other liquor, then cast it in the starch impressions through a spring funnel ( Fig. 759). Put the boxes in a heater and leave for eight or ten hours. By this time the jelly will have formed into thin crusts sufficiently hardened to be taken out carefully and laid on a wire sieve. When cold, brush each one separately with a fine hair brush and then dip into a liquor-flavored fondant (No. 58). Instead of dipping them in the fondant they can be candied by laying them in a cold syrup, the same as for No. 3659 . (3655). NOUGAT, SOFT AND HARD (Nougat Mou et Dur). Soft White Nougat. --Heat three pounds of white honey, cook separately three pounds of sugar to "ball" (two hundred and thirty-six degrees Fahrenheit). Whip eight egg-whites in a copper basin to a stiff froth, add the honey and the cooked sugar and continue beating the whites on a slow fire until the preparation is at "small crack" (two hundred and ninety degrees Fahrenheit). This degree of heat will be recognized by taking up a small part with the tip of a knife, dipping it in cold water, and when crumbled it should fall into a powder. During this time cook three pounds of sugar to "crack" (three hundred and ten degrees Fahrenheit); mix it with the whites, adding five pounds of whole almonds and a quarter of a pound of hulled and dried pistachios. Fill some oblong tin cases with this, having them previously lined with white wafers. Pour the nougat in the case, leave to cool, then cut in slices. Another Proportion is a pound and three-quarters of almonds, one pound of sugar, one pound of white honey, five egg-whites, a quarter of a pound of pistachios, two ounces of burnt almonds, and vanilla; finish the same as the above. Hard White Nougat. --Four pounds of heated honey, two pounds of sugar cooked to "ball" (three hundred and twenty-six degrees Fahrenheit), two pounds cooked to "small crack" (two hundred and ninety degrees Fahrenheit), five pounds of almonds, a quarter of a pound of pistachios and five beaten egg-whites. Cut in slices when nearly cold. The same preparation as for the soft white nougat. (3656). TORTILLONS (Tortillons). Place one pound of loaf sugar in a copper sugar basin with sufficient water to melt, then stand it on the fire to cook to three hundred and twenty-five degrees Fahrenheit, being careful to keep the sides clean, and proceed as explained for cooking sugar (No. 171). When ready to pour it on a lightly oiled marble, add at once a few drops of peppermint essence and begin to raise up the edges, bringing them toward the center until the sugar can be handled with the hands, then begin to pull till it attains a very glossy, silvery appearance; pull again to a quarter of an inch in diameter string, and cut this quickly into small pieces an inch and a half long, bending each one immediately into the shape of a ring. The pulling, cutting and bending should be performed with despatch, before the sugar has time to cool, when it will fail to bend. The sugar may be colored either light pink or pale green just when flavoring. (3657). TROCADEROS WITH RASPBERRY (Trocadéros à la Framboise). Proceed the same as for Trocaderos with rum ( No. 3658 ), using a pound and a half of sugar and a gill and a half of raspberry pulp strained through a very fine sieve and two and a half gills of rich cream. After removing from the starch and well brushed, dip in a thin royal icing (No. 101) slightly tinted with carmine and flavored with a little raspberry juice. (3658). TROCADEROS WITH RUM (Trocadéros au Rhum). Cook a pound and a half of sugar to "small crack" (No. 171), adding three gills of cream, and let it boil up once only; put in half a gill of rum and cast it at once in starch imprinted with small lozenge-shaped molds; set the box away in the heater for twelve hours. Now remove the candies one by one from the starch, brush carefully and range them on a grate; dip the candies in a light royal icing (No. 101) well flavored with rum. (3659). CANDIED VIOLETS (Violettes Pralinées). Select a pound of full-bloom violets; suppress the stalks and throw into cold water to refresh, then spread them on a towel to drain. Cook a pound and a quarter of sugar to "small ball" (No. 171), throw in the violets, remove the pan from the fire at once and stir gently to submerge them. Boil this up once and then transfer immediately to a vessel. The following day drain them on a sieve, pour the syrup back into a copper pan, add a little more sugar, and cook again to "small ball;" put in the flowers and transfer once more to the vessel to leave for another twelve hours; after this drain off again, pour this syrup back into the pan, boil it once or twice and add the violets, removing the pan at once from the fire. Stir the violets lightly in this syrup until it begins to grain, then pour the whole on sheets of paper; shake and separate the flowers carefully with the hands, and when dry pick them from the granulated sugar, arrange on a grate and leave to get cold. PRESERVES (Conserves). (3660). BRANDY CHERRIES (Cerises à l'Eau de Vie). Cook two and a half pounds of sugar to "small crack" (No. 171); as soon as it reaches this degree take the pan from the fire and add slowly to it one gallon of brandy and a fourth part of a vanilla bean; leave this till cold. Cut off half of the cherry stalks, range the fruit in glass bottles and cover with the above liquid. Cork the bottles hermetically when the cherries are cold and put away in a cool place. (3661). BRANDY FIGS (Figues à l'Eau de Vie). Have some white even-sized figs; prick and leave them to soak for twelve hours in salted water. Parboil them properly, keeping them firm, then drain and refresh by throwing them into a plentiful supply of cold salted water and leave them to steep for two or three days; now put them in a copper pan and cover with a hot twenty-two degree syrup so that they macerate for six hours; afterward drain off this syrup, add to it more sugar and let cook to twenty-five degrees; when this is cold pour it over the figs; repeat this operation until the sugar attains thirty degrees. Drain the figs well, put them into glass jars and cover with brandy; let macerate for six weeks, then add for every quart of brandy two gills of thirty-degree syrup. (3662). BRANDY GREENGAGES (Reines Claudes à l'Eau de Vie). Take fine sound greengages; prick over and blanch; have them resume their former green color the same as for preserved greengages ( No. 3679 ), and when well refreshed drain again and arrange them in glass jars, each one to contain a vanilla bean; cover with good white brandy and cork the jars hermetically; leave them thus for fifteen days. After this lapse of time drain off the brandy and add some sugar to it, allowing three pounds for each gallon of liquid; stir well together; when the sugar is dissolved pour it over the fruits; close the jars hermetically and leave them in a cool place. (3663). BRANDY PEACHES (Pêches à l'Eau de Vie). Let the peaches be white and sound; rub with a cloth to remove their down, prick the surfaces and lay them in cold water; drain this off and place them in a basin, covering with fresh cold water into which has been added a small piece of alum; set the basin on the fire and as soon as the liquid begins to heat stir the fruits about from time to time, and when they float on top of the liquid remove and throw them again into cold water. Drain and arrange them in one-quart glass jars, having a quarter of a vanilla stick in each, and cover with good white brandy. Close the bottles hermetically and stand them in a cool place to leave for fifteen days, and then drain off the brandy into a basin, add sugar to it, allowing three pounds for each gallon; stir well to melt the sugar, then pour this liquor over the peaches; cork the jars so no air whatever can enter and lay aside in a cool place. (3664). CANNED CHERRIES (Cerises en Boîtes). Suppress the stalks and pips from some fine, very ripe but sound cherries; range them at once in tin cans of a quart capacity and cover with a twenty-five degree cold syrup; put on the lids and solder tightly. Stand these cans in a large saucepanful of cold water, set it covered on the fire and boil the water for seven minutes, then remove at once from the fire and allow the cans to cool off in the liquid. (3665). CANNED PEARS (Poires en Boîtes). Select pears that are ripe yet firm (Sickle pears in preference); peel, turning them round, and empty with a vegetable scoop to remove all the pips, blanch and refresh. Drain as soon as they are properly cooled off and range them in tin cans each of a quart capacity; fill the can nine-tenths full with a fifteen-degree cold syrup; cover and solder. Range these cans in a large sauce -pan, immerse them in cold water, place on the fire and boil for ten minutes; remove the cans, tap a small hole in the center to allow the air to escape, solder it up immediately and boil for five minutes longer. (3666). CANNED PINEAPPLE (Ananas en Boîtes). Pare neatly some fine ripe pineapples; remove the hard centers with a tin tube, then split them lengthwise in two; cut across in quarter-inch thick slices and range these in tin cans of one quart capacity each. Fill the cans nine-tenths full with cold twelve-degree syrup; cover and solder, then place them in a large saucepanful of cold water so they are entirely submerged, and covering the pan stand on the fire and allow the liquid to boil for fifteen minutes. Remove the cans, punch a small hole on top to allow the air to escape and solder immediately; replace the saucepan and allow to boil five minutes more. If whole pineapples, merely cored, are used instead of slices they will require forty minutes boiling, and if not cored one hour will be found a correct time. (3667). CELERY HEARTS, CRYSTALLIZED (Cœurs de Céleri Cristallisés). Peel the hearts of some small celery stalks; parboil them well in acidulated water, and when very tender drain and wipe on a cloth; range them in a flat dish and cover with a cold twenty-five degree syrup. Six hours after drain off this syrup and mix in with it some sugar steeped in water and cooked to thirty degrees, adding the juice of one lemon; pour this again over the celery hearts and six hours later recommence the operation. When cold dress into a preserve dish with the syrup poured over. (3668). APPLE AND ORANGE JELLY (Gelée de Pommes et Gelée d' Oranges ). Cut two dozen russet apples in slices, lay them in a basin with water to cover; cook tender, then pour them on a sieve to drain off the juice, collecting it in a bowl; filter this through a flannel bag and put it into the basin again with the same weight of sugar; dissolve thoroughly, mixing together with a skimmer, then set the basin on the fire and cook until the syrup coats the spatula and falls down in beads; stir continuously with the skimmer. As soon as the liquid reaches the proper degree pour it at once into stone pots or glasses previously heated; leave to cool thoroughly. Lay on the jelly a round of paper soaked in brandy, and afterward cover the glasses with strong paper or parchment. Orange Jelly. --Remove the peel from a few nice oranges, cut it in very thin shreds, blanch them well and then drain. Pare the oranges to the pulp. Prepare some apple jelly, as explained above, and when it is nearly cooked add to it the blanched peel and the pared oranges; mix well add when cooked pour into small jars or glasses previously heated in boiling water. (3669). CHERRY JELLY WITH KIRSCH (Gelée de Cerises au Kirsch). Stone three pounds of cherries, pound six ounces of the kernels with one pound of currants and strain it through a sieve. Put the cherries in a copper pan on a slow fire and reduce to half, then add three pounds of sugar and one pound of the strained currant and kernel juice, and continue to cook until a drop of it placed on a flat surface will not spread; now put in half a gill of kirsch and pour at once into jars to leave in a cool place until thoroughly cold; cover with a round of paper dipped in brandy, and close the pots hermetically with their respective covers. (3670). CURRANT JELLY AND PLAIN CURRANT JELLY; CRANBERRY JELLY (Gelée de Groseille et Gelée de Groseille Simple; Gelée de Canneberges). Have one pound of currants free of stalks and one pound of powdered sugar; mix both together in a vessel without crusting the currants; when the sugar is dissolved pour the whole into a copper pan and stand it on the fire; after it has been boiling for five or six minutes the syrup will have cooked to the proper degree, that is, until it coats the skimmer and drops from it in beads. Now pour the fruit and syrup on to a sieve laid over a vessel fit to receive the liquid, and use this to fill jelly glasses; keep slightly warm for two hours, then leave to cool before covering the glasses with paper. Another way is to select the currants when not too ripe; pick off all the stalks and put the fruit in a copper pan with three-quarters of their weight of powdered sugar; when this is partly melted stand the pan on a slow fire to bring the liquid to a boil while skimming; boil it once or twice only; skim well, strain through a napkin and pour into jelly glasses. Plain. --Slightly cook ten pounds of currants with their stalks in a copper pan; pass them through a sieve having sufficiently fine meshes to prevent the seeds from passing; mix an equal weight of sugar to this juice; cook until it coats the skimmer and drops from it in beads, being careful to skim during the whole process of cooking. Fill some heated glasses or jars, and when cold cover with a round of paper soaked in brandy, then cover the top of the vessel with strong paper. Cranberry Jelly. --Crush about two pounds of very ripe cranberries, dilute with a little water and strain the juice through a jelly bag. Pour this juice into an untinned copper pan and add a pound of sugar to each pint of liquid; let it cook on a good fire to the consistency of a jelly, following the directions found in No. 3668 . As soon as it is finished pour it into small pots or glasses and leave to cool off. When the jelly is perfectly cold cover with round pieces of paper dipped in brandy, and cork up the pots or glasses to close them hermetically. (3671). CURRANT JELLY AND CURRANT JELLY WITH APPLES (Gelée de Groseille et Gelée de Groseille aux Pommes). Pick some not too ripe red currants from their stalks; lay them in a copper preserving pan and set this on the fire; as soon as the fruits have dissolved strain the juice forcibly through a cloth into a vessel; pour this back into the pan and add one and a half pounds of sugar for each quart of juice. When the sugar has all melted place the pan on a hot fire and cook it until the preparation dropped from the skimmer forms into a jelly, or else if a drop be placed on a flat surface it will retain the shape of a bead and not spread, being careful to stir the liquid continuously with a skimmer. As soon as the jelly is cooked pour it into stone pots or heated glasses. In order to have it fine and clear no more than two gallons should be cooked at once. Currant Jelly with Apples. --Prepare the currant juice as above and add an equal quantity of liquid in which apples have been cooked, then finish as for the above, when a currant and apple jelly will be obtained. (3672). QUINCE JELLY (Gelée de Coings). Choose well-ripened, good, sound quinces; peel, cut in four, and immerse them in a basin of water. Cover the basin, place it on the fire, and cook the quinces thoroughly, then pour them on a sieve to drain off the juice, collecting it in a bowl. Filter this juice through a flannel bag, return it to the bowl, add the same weight of sugar, cook and finish the same as apple jelly. (3673). CLEAR GRAPE JUICE AND STRAWBERRY JUICE (Jus de Raisin Clair et Jus de Fraises). Gather the grapes when quite ripe, place them in a vessel and pound without mashing them too much, to extricate as little coloring matter as possible. Pour the whole into a thick flannel bag to filter the juice, letting it fall into a porcelain or glass receptacle. Commence the operation again, and continue to filter the juice through the bag until it flows out quite clear. After all the juice has been filtered pour it into small strong bottles (small champagne bottles), and cork with sound corks, driving them in with a mallet; tie the corks down with strings attached to the necks of the bottles, then stand them upright, slightly apart, in a deep saucepan or soup pot, and cover to the height of the bottles with cold water. Place the pot on a moderate fire, boil for ten to twleve minutes, remove and leave the bottles with cold water. Place the pot on a moderate fire, boil for ten to twelve minutes, remove and leave the bottles to cool in the water, only taking them out when thoroughly cold. Cut the strings and lay the bottles down flat, keeping them in a very cool place. Crush some very ripe strawberries and press them on a wire sieve sufficiently fine not to permit the seeds to pass through. With this juice fill some one-quart bottles, close well, tying the corks on with a string. Range these bottles in a saucepan, cover with cold water and stand it on the range. Watch the time when the water begins to boil and leave them in for only half an hour, then take the saucepan at once from the fire and leave the bottles cool off thoroughly in the liquid. When cold lift them out, wipe dry, cut the strings and lay them down, piling one on top of the other in a cool, dry place, inclining the bottles a little forward so that the juice rests against the cork. (3674). APPLE MARMALADE OR JAM (Marmelade de Pommes). Quarter some apples, core and cup up small; put them into a basin with the juice of several lemons and a little water; cook. As soon as done pour on a sieve to drain, pressing them through afterward. Add to this pulp three-quarters of its weight of lump sugar, and stir well together. Pour it all into a tinned copper pan and stand it on the fire to cook the marmalade until it coats the spatula and drops from it in beads; stir continuously with a spatula. As soon as it is done pour into stone pots that have been previously heated. (3675). APRICOT OR PEACH MARMALADE OR JAM (Marmelade d'Abricots ou Marmelade de Pêches). Split some very ripe apricots or peaches in two, suppress the kernels, mince and put them into a copper pan with a few spoonfuls of water. Melt over the fire, stirring constantly with a spatula, then strain the pulp through a sieve and weigh it. Cook three-quarters of its weight of sugar to "small crack" (No. 171); when it has attained this degree remove from the fire and pour the pulp into it, stirring vigorously; continue to cook until it coats the skimmer and the jelly drops in beads, then transfer immediately to stone pots or glasses heated beforehand. The jam must be quite cold before covering it over; keep in a cool, dry place. Apple, Apricot, Peach, Quince and Chestnut Paste. --Prepare a purée of apples, apricots, peaches, quinces or chestnuts; add to either one of these three-quarters of a pound of sugar cooked to "small crack" (No. 171); reduce until the preparation detaches itself from the pan; spread this about one-eighth of an inch thick on sheets of tin or it may be pushed through a cornet in rounds. Put in a hot closet for two days, remove from the tins and when cut roll in coarse powdered sugar. (3676). FIG AND ORANGE MARMALADE OR JAM (Marmelade de Figues et d' Oranges ) . Select large white, ripe, but very firm figs; remove the skins and cut up the fruits; weigh, and for each pound allow seven ounces of sugar dissolved in a little water. Boil this up once or twice, put in the figs and cook until the marmalade coats the skimmer and drops from it in beads, then pour into glass jars previously heated. Orange Marmalade. --Choose some not too ripe oranges, remove their zests with the knife shown in Fig. 156, prick them with a coarse needle and put them in a pan with boiling water; cover them over to cook until the remaining skin becomes softened, then place in an abundance of cold water for twenty-four hours. Drain, open them, suppress the seeds, and pass the orange and peel through a sieve. Cook the same weight of sugar to "ball" (No. 171) as there is orange, mix both together and cook until the marmalade falls from the skimmer in a sheet. (3677). MELON MARMALADE OR JAM (Marmelade de Melon ). Suppress all the rind and seeds from the fruit and rub this through a sieve. If very sweet a quarter of a pound of sugar will suffice for each pound of pulp; reduce the marmalade in a copper pan until it covers the skimmer and drops from it in beads, then pour it into glasses. (3678). LARGE WHITE CURRANTS, BAR-LE-DUC JELLY (Confiture de Groseilles de Bar-le-Duc). Have one pound of large picked white currants and a pound of loaf sugar; seed the fruits, using a pointed goose quill, and lay them in a vessel. Put half a pound of the sugar into a sugar pan with two gills of water, let it soak, then cook it to "bead" (No. 171); mix in the berries, leaving their juice in the vessel, and place the pan on the side of the range; five minutes later pour both fruits and liquid into a bowl, and three hours after lay a small sieve over the sugar pan and pour the fruits and syrup into this. Mix with the syrup half of the remaining sugar, and let it melt thoroughly, then cook it until it coats the skimmer and drops from it in beads; return the currants to the syrup; give them a single boil and return the whole to the bowl. Four hours after strain the syrup into the pan again, put the rest of the sugar with it and cook once more until it coats the skimmer; now add the currants and boil the whole up once. Set the pan back on the range for five minutes, but so that the syrup does not boil. Pour the jam into small jelly glasses; let get very cold before closing with paper. A few spoonfuls of clear apple juice can be added if necessary to give more consistency to the preserve. (3679). PRESERVED GREENGAGES (Reines-Claudes Confites). Take twenty pounds of very green and sound greengages, prick the surfaces with a large pin and throw into a panful of cold water. Fill an untinned copper pan holding ten gallons three-quarters full of water; add a heavy handful of salt, three gills of vinegar and three handfuls of spinach; stir the liquid so all the ingredients are properly mingled; drain the gages from their water and throw them into the copper pan; stand it on the fire. After the water begins to heat stir the fruits around carefully with a skimmer, and as soon as they float on the surface take them out and throw into a panful of cold water; place under a faucet and allow the water to flow over them. Prepare a twelve-degree syrup; drain the greengages properly and throw them into this, then let boil up once, pouring them afterward into shallow vessels to leave for twelve hours. Drain off the syrup, add a little sugar, and boil it again several times until it attains fourteen degrees, then throw it over the fruits and let stand again for twelve hours. Continue this operation daily until the syrup reaches thirty degrees; for the last time drain off the syrup once more, and boil it to thirty-two degrees; then put in the fruits, boil up once and transfer the whole to jars; close hermetically as soon as cold and keep in a cool, dry place. (3680). PRESERVED LIMES (Limons Confits). Remove the cores from the limes with a quarter-inch tin tube and leave them to soak in a pailful of water, adding a heavy handful of salt; let them remain four hours in this, then drain and throw them into a large basin of boiling water to blanch. As soon as soft take them up one by one and put into a pailful of cold water to refresh, changing it at frequent intervals. To have them turn green again, put ten quarts of water in an untinned copper pan, add two heaping handfuls of kitchen salt, half a pint of vinegar and a few handfuls of spinach; stand this vessel on the fire and boil for a few moments; drain the limes from their water and throw them into this while still in the act of boiling, allowing them to boil up several times. Take the basin from the fire and leave the fruits therein for three or four hours; they should now have assumed their natural color. Drain and plunge them into a pailful of cold water for twelve hours, changing it frequently during this time. Prepare a fifteen-degree syrup. As soon as it boils drain the limes and throw them into this, boil up once, then transfer the whole to vessels and leave in a cool place for twelve hours. The following day pour off the syrup and cook it to sixteen degrees, throw it once more over the fruits, leaving it for twelve hours; drain the syrup again, boil until it reaches twenty degrees, then pour it over the limes and leave for twelve hours longer, repeating the process every twelve hours until the syrup reaches thirty-two degrees, then pour it back into the basin and as soon as it begins to boil throw in the limes and boil up once. Transfer them immediately to their respective stone jars, cool and close hermetically. (3681). PRESERVED ORANGE OR LEMON PEEL (écorces d' Oranges ou de Citrons Confites). Cut some oranges or lemons in four, remove the pulp and put the peels in a basin with water; blanch thoroughly. When they are soft to the touch take from the fire, drain and put them in a panful of cold water; leave to soak for twenty-four hours, changing the liquid from time to time, or, if possible, stand the pan under the faucet and let the water run over continuously, then drain. Range the peels in a vessel, cover with a boiling syrup at fifteen degrees and leave them in for twelve hours; at the expiration of that time drain off the syrup, boil it up to eighteen degrees, then pour it again over the peels, leaving them steep for ten or twelve hours. Repeat this operation six or seven times, gradually increasing the strength of the syrup until it reaches thirty-two degrees. The last time prepare a fresh thirty-two degree syrup. Drain the fruits from the syrup they are in and put them into this fresh one that is in the act of boiling; boil up once; remove from the fire and lay them in stone pots, covering with this last syrup; close hermetically when quite cold. (3682). WHOLE PEACHES, PRESERVED--LARGE (Grosses Pêches Entières Confites). The Brothers Carresa, of Nice, France, prepare boxes of preserved peaches, each one containing only four, but of extraordinary size; in the boxes are also leaves, blanched with acid; they can be arranged so exquisitely that they easily pass for fine fresh ones. Drain off the peaches one by one, wipe dry on a fine cloth, then tint their surfaces with powdered carmine dissolved in water and pounded with the finger. This first layer should only be slightly tinted, then begin again on each side of the parting division, spreading the color over well with the finger so as to represent the bright shades of a fresh peach. As soon as they are tinted place them on a dish and cover entirely with clear jelly, applying it with a brush. First dress three of these peaches in a preserve dish and lay the fourth one on top of the under triangle; surround with a few peach leaves and pour some thick syrup into the bottom of the dish, being careful not to spill any over the peaches. (3683). CANDIED AND CRYSTALLIZED FRUITS ( Fruits Confits Glacés et Cristallisés). Apricots, green almonds, greengages, mirabelles, cherries, and in fact all preserved fruits, must first be washed in hot water to remove the sugar adhering to them, then drain and leave to dry properly. After these fruits are very dry arrange them in a single layer, one beside the other, in a candy pan having a grate on the bottom; when this first grate is full lay another one on top and fill it the same as the other, and continue thus until they reach to slightly below the edges of the candy pan. Cover the last layer of fruits with another grate, and on it lay a weight to keep the fruits submerged in the syrup. Now cook a sufficient quantity of sugar to thirty-four degrees to cover the whole of the fruit and pour it over as soon as done; put these fruits in a hot closet and leave without disturbing for twelve hours; at the end of that time drain the fruits from this syrup, lay them on dry grates and leave till very dry. A good way to judge of the thickness of the layers of candy is to put small pieces of wood reaching above the edges of the candy pan into the corners at the same time as the fruits. After a few hours take out one of these pieces of wood, drain it well and see whether it be covered with a sufficiently thick layer of candy; if the layer attached to this piece of wood be the desired thickness then certainly the fruit should be covered the same, and if not thick enough then leave the fruits in the closet for a longer time. After the lapse of a short time draw out another one of the sticks and observe it the same as the first, and continue this operation until the candy be of the desired thickness; then drain off the fruits and dry them the same as described above. Preserved Pears. --Choose fine, sound Sickle pears in preference to others; peel them round, suppress the cores with a small vegetable spoon, and lay them at once in cold water; drain from this and blanch, taking them out one by one as soon as they rise on the surface of the boiling liquid and throw them into a panful of cold water to refresh. Drain immediately; put them into a boiling syrup at twelve degrees, leave in a cool place for twelve hours; drain the syrup, adding a little sugar to bring to fourteen degrees, pour it over the pears, and the next day draw this off, add a little sugar to bring the syrup to sixteen degrees, and continue the process daily, each time augmenting the syrup two degrees until it has reached thirty degrees; now drain off this syrup from the pears, boil it up by itself once or twice, and when it attains thirty-two degrees, put in the fruit; give it one more boil and transfer the whole to jars to cool. As soon as cold close hermetically and leave in a cool, dry place. Preserved Fruits Coated with Grained Sugar. --To coat preserved fruits with grained sugar proceed the same as for fruits with candy. Cook some sugar to "thread" (No. 171), take from the fire and with a wooden spoon spread a layer on the sides of the pan in which it has been cooked and rub it on for a few seconds with the spoon. As soon as this rubbed sugar begins to whiten mix it with the remainder of the sugar, then dip in the fruits, using a fork, and range them at once on a grate, leaving them till the sugar be dry. Preserved and Fresh Fruits Coated with Caramel. --For preserved fruits that have to be coated with caramel, proceed first by washing them in hot water, drain and cut them into halves or quarters, or leave whole, according to necessity and to the nature of the fruits, then stick them on wires pierced into a cork and leave them to dry. When ready, cook some sugar to "large crack" (No. 171), or three hundred and forty degrees. As soon as it has attained this heat take it at once from the fire and dip in the fruits, then lay them on a marble to drain and cool; when nearly cold pull out the wires. For Quartered Oranges. --Peel and separate in sections, leave to dry, then dip them in the sugar, using a pair of pastry pincers, and then lay them one by one on a slightly greased marble. For Grapes. --Take them off their stalks and dip them the same way as the oranges. These fruits are used for decorating pyramids and for cases of iced fruits. (3684). PRESERVED PINEAPPLE (Ananas Confits). Pare some very ripe pineapples to the pulp, suppress the cores with a tin tube and cut them up into quarter-inch thick crosswise slices; throw them immediately into a panful of cold water, drain and put them into a basin of boiling water to blanch, refreshing afterward in a panful of cold water. Prepare a twelve-degree syrup, add to it the well-drained pineapple and boil up once. Now transfer to vessels to leave stand for twelve hours. At the end of this time drain off the syrup and pour it into a copper pan. Add a little sugar, boil to bring it to fourteen degrees, then add the pineapple; twelve hours later boil the syrup a little more, until it reaches sixteen degrees; pour it over the fruit and continue this same process until the syrup is at thirty degrees; when this takes place boil up several times, throw in the sliced pineapple and leave them for a few moments, then transfer the whole to jars; when cold close hermetically and keep in a cool, dry place. (3685). PRESERVED QUINCES (Coings Confits). Quarter some good, sound quinces; peel, core and throw them at once into cold water, then plunge them into boiling water and boil until they become quite tender. Refresh, drain, and range them in wide, shallow vessels; cover with boiling syrup at fifteen degrees and keep them in a cool place for twenty to twenty-four hours; drain off the syrup, add a little sugar, boil up and let it attain two degrees more; continue the same process until it reaches thirty-two degrees, then put in the fruits and boil up once. Pour into stone jars and when cold close hermetically. (3686). STEWED APPLES WITH JELLY (Compote de Pommes à la Gelée). Peel some fine medium-sized apples; suppress the cores with a tin tube, rub the surfaces with half a lemon and cook in a twelve-degree acidulated syrup, being careful to keep them whole. As soon as done drain and range in a tureen, cover with fresh syrup at thirty-two degrees, leaving to cool in this; keep the syrup they were cooked in for further use. Drain the apples from their syrup and dress on a compote dish; filter the syrup kept aside, add a little sugar to it and cook it to the consistency of a jelly (see apple jelly, No. 3668 ); leave this stand for one moment on the corner of the range, then pour it over the apples; serve when cold. (3687). STEWED BANANAS (Compote de Bananes). Skin some sound bananas; suppress the coarse threads and throw them immediately into boiling water; drain at once, then transfer them to a hot twenty-eight degree syrup; leave to cool in this. Drain once more, range them pyramidically in a compote dish and cover with their own syrup; they are now ready. (3688). STEWED CHERRIES (Compote de Cerises). Cut the stalks halfway up from a pound of fine, large, sour cherries. Boil a light syrup in a sugar pan, just having sufficient to cover the fruit, then throw in the cherries; toss them for two minutes, boiling the liquid up once only, then pour the whole into a bowl to leave till cold. Lay both syrup and fruits on a sieve placed on top of the sugar pan and take away some of the fallen syrup, pouring sufficient sugar into the remainder that when boiled again it forms a thick syrup; as this becomes almost cold add the cherries to it, take from the fire and half an hour later dress the stewed fruit. (3689). STEWED CHESTNUTS (Compote de Marrons). Suppress the shells from two pounds of fresh chestnuts without breaking the meats; soak them for seven or eight hours in cold water with a little citric acid added. Drain and place in a recently tinned saucepan with plenty of water, having a bag containing bran. At the first boil remove the pan to the side of the fire so that the liquid only quivers for two hours, being careful to replace at times a part of the black water by a little c lean boiling water, so as to keep the chestnuts as white as possible. When tender but yet whole, drain off a few at a time to peel without getting cold, then put them at once into another saucepan with tepid syrup cooked to twelve degrees and half a stick of split vanilla; use only the whole chestnuts. Cover the saucepan and keep it on one side of the range to have the liquid hot without boiling, and two hours after drain off half the syrup, replacing it by a stronger hot one of thirty degrees; keep the chestnuts in this for one hour on the side of the fire. Drain them again delicately one by one to dress on a compote dish; strain the syrup, reduce it to twenty-eight degrees, and when cold pour it over the chestnuts. (3690). STEWED ORANGES AND ORANGE SALADS (Compote d' Oranges et Salade d' Orange ). Cut each of four or five good oranges into six parts; pare them to the pulp, suppressing the peels and white skin, then extract the seeds. Put the oranges into a bowl and pour over a few spoonfuls of thirty-degree cold syrup flavored with orange peel and a little kirsch; half an hour after dress the fruits with the syrup poured over. Orange Salad. --Select sweet, juicy oranges, peel them to the pulp, cut in crosswise slices, and range them in a circle in a dish; bestrew with sugar and pour rum over. Orange and Apple Salad. --Peel some fine, sound apples, core and cut them up into thin slices, dress them in a circle on a dish with slices of orange between each piece of apple, throw powdered sugar over, and pour on some kirsch and rum. (3691). STEWED PEACHES (Compote de Pêches). Select very fine, sound, ripe peaches; cut them in two, peel and lay them in a twenty-eight degree boiling syrup; leave to quiver for a few moments on the side of the range, remove from the fire and put them into a tureen, leaving to cool in their own syrup; drain and dress on a compote dish, pouring the syrup over. (3692). STEWED PEARS (Compote de Poires). Cut some fine ripe pears in two or four, but if small keep whole; throw them into a saucepan containing cold water; blanch in hot water acidulated with the juice of a lemon; drain, range in a vessel, and cover with a boiling twenty-eight degree syrup; leave them in this until cold, then drain, dress and pour over the syrup after reducing it. (3693). STEWED PINEAPPLE (Compote d'Ananas). Pare neatly a fine pineapple; remove the core with a tin tube; split lengthwise in two, and cut each half in crosswise slices three-sixteenths of an inch thick. Arrange these in a vessel, and pour over some boiling thirty-two degree syrup, leaving them to marinate for two hours, then dress in a circle on a compote dish and cover with their own syrup. (3694). STEWED PRUNES (Compote de Pruneaux). Put a pound of fine dried prunes in a saucepan; cover with water; place on the range to boil up a few times so they can soften, then drain and cover with a twenty-eight degree syrup, adding two or three slices of lemon, a small piece of cinnamon and a quarter of a bottleful of red wine. Place the saucepan on the fire and let the whole boil slowly until the prunes are done, then leave stand till cold and serve on a compote dish. (3695). STEWED STRAWBERRIES AND RASPBERRIES (Compote de Fraises et de Framboises). Pick some fine not too ripe strawberries or raspberries; cook some syrup to "ball," throw in the berries and pour the whole at once carefully into a vessel to leave till cold. Drain and arrange on a compote dish; pour part of the syrup over and serve. SALTED ALMONDS, CHEESES AND FRESH FRUITS (Amandes Salées, Fromages et Fruits Frais). (3696). SALTED ALMONDS (Amandes Salées). Select fine, whole almonds, peel and lay them on a paper -covered baking sheet. Push this into a hot oven, and when roasted to a fine golden brown throw them into a basin and sprinkle with a little water, slightly thickened with gum arabic, then dredge with very fine salt through a salt box having a perforated lid. Stir the almonds from time to time until dry, then leave to cool. Hazel- nuts, walnuts, and pistachios can also be salted; these are generally dressed in crimped paper cases or small fancy boxes; they are passed around with the desert, or at the same time as the hors d'œuvre, and then left on the table during the entire length of the dinner. It is an improvement to mix these nuts and serve them together. (3697). CHEESES (Fromages). American, Brie, Camembert, Chester or Brighton, Cream, Briquebec, Eidam, Gorgonzola, Swiss or Gruyère, Holland, Munster, Mont-d'Or, Neufchâtel, Parmesan, Pont Leveque, Port Salut, Roquefort, Stilton, Strachino, Shedder, Gervais. Cheese is served either after the roast, before the sweet entremets, or else with the dessert; the first is most appropriate. Cheese must be accompanied by crackers or very thin slices of toast; it should be cut in pieces or slices. At a dinner it is better to have two kinds handed to the guests, with fresh butter; serve salted almonds and nuts at the same time. Stilton must be served whole wrapped in a plaited napkin; it should be scooped out with a cheese spoon and each time it is used the vacuum should be filled with sherry wine; it must always be kept sufficiently damp to prevent cracking. Chester should be served the same as Stilton in a plaited napkin, after paring it neatly; it should also be cut with a spoon and filled each time with good Madeira wine. For Camembert, Mont-d'Or or Pont Leveque: scrape any of these cheeses and serve with a silver knife for each guest. For Roquefort and Gorgonzola carefully suppress the outer rinds and serve with silver knives; pass around at the same time some fresh butter. Strachino and Millanais are serve in a plaited napkin folded to resemble a tulip; scoop out with a cheese spoon the same as Stilton. Holland cheese should be cut in quarters or slices. Neufchâtel should be scraped and served whole. Swiss cheese, Eidam, Munster, Port Salut and Briquebec are cut in slices. They must be chosen very mellow, cleaned and served with silver knives. Gervais is a sort of fresh bondon, the paste being very fine; it must be served quite cold. It should be covered with paper, to be removed when sending to the table. (3698). CREAM CHEESE (Fromage à la Crème). Put two quarts of milk into a vessel and keep it in a cool place until it curdles, then pour this curdled milk on a hair sieve to drain, and pass it through the same sieve, standing over a deep vessel; add to it a little salt and half as much firmly beaten, unsweetened whipped cream. Take some heart -shaped tin molds, perforated with small holes, each mold one inch deep and three and a half inches long; line them with pieces of muslin and fill with the above; place these in the ice-box for two hours. When ready to serve invert on a plate, lift off the muslin and serve, accompanied by some thick and very cold cream. (3699). FRESH FRUITS ( Fruits Frais). Choose ripe fruits; arrange them either in baskets, fruit stands or plates garnished with green grape leaves and fresh moss. The base must be solid so that when carried they will not be dislodged; place the handsome part of the fruit on the outer side. Early fruits are always appreciated as they foretell those that are to follow in their season. Fruits for dressing are apricots, pineapples, pears, peaches, oranges, lady apples, grapes, cherries and strawberries. In case no fresh green leaves are procurable, use artificial ones made of muslin and dipped in wax. If a pineapple is to be arranged in the center of a basket, stand it on a cardboard cylinder four inches high by three inches in diameter. All fruits to be found in New York are designated on the table for the different seasons (see page 17). Dry fruits consist of almonds, raisins, figs, dates, and innumerable others. CHOCOLATE, COFFEES, RACAHOUT, TEAS, ETC. (Chocolat, Cafés, Racahout, Thés, Etc. (3700). CHOCOLATE (Chocolat). Have good, fine vanilla chocolate; dissolve it in a tin saucepan, or better still in a chocolate pan as shown in figure, using the mixer to dissolve it, over a slow fire, using a pound of chocolate for a quart of water. When well dissolved strain it through a fine wire sieve and serve in a chocolate pot with a jug of hot water, and one of milk and sugar. Some persons prefer whipped cream in their chocolate. Serve at the same time brioches, grissinis, biscuits and other fancy breads. Fig. 760 An illustration of a mixer. Fig. 761 An illustration of a chocolate pan. (3701). HOW TO MAKE COFFEE (Manière de Faire le Café). The best-known coffee-pot is the one with a filter, of which a design is shown ( Fig. 762). They are to be had of various sizes and more or less luxurious. To obtain a limpid infusion quickly place the ground coffee in the cylinder on top of the coffee-pot, then put in the strainer on top of the coffee, press it down and pour boiling water over so that the infusion runs slowly down into the pot. While the infusion filters the coffee-pot should be kept in a vessel containing hot water to the depth of two fingers so that the infusion attains the same degree of heat without allowing it to boil. For the sake of economy, after the infusion is made, the grounds can be boiled up once more and an infusion prepared with it to take the place of plain water, but, in order to obtain a good result, the grounds must first settle, then the water be poured off, strained and heated to boiling point. In this way less coffee can be used without deteriorating from its excellence. Use one and a half pounds of Java coffee, a pound and a half of Maracaibo, one pound of Mocha and seven gallons of water. The best way to obtain good coffee is to make it only when required; the maxim should be "little and often." It takes three kinds of coffee to obtain a good result; for instance, Mocha for the aroma, having it only slightly roasted, Maracaibo for the color, which should be well roasted, and Java for the strength, roasted to a degree between the other two. Fig. 762 An illustration of a coffee-pot with filter. Fig. 763 An inside look of a coffee-pot. (3702). TURKISH COFFEE (Café à la Turque). To be made with the same proportion of Java as Mocha, ground and passed through a very fine sieve. Put ordinary black coffee in a coffee-pot, as many cups as needed, and add for each cup a common coffeespoonful of coffee passed through a sieve, also a lump of sugar; stand it on the fire or gas stove, boil for two minutes, then take it off and pour in a little cold water to settle the coffee; let stand again for a few minutes. Serve powdered sugar with the coffee. Fig. 764 A coffee-pot. Fig. 765 An illustration of a small cup. Fig. 766 An illustration of a cup. (3703). ARABIAN RACAHOUT (Racahout des Arabes). Put a pint of milk into either a silver or tin saucepan. Place in a bowl two level spoonfuls of racahout, then four or five spoonfuls of cold milk; dissolve the racahout and pour it into the boiling milk; let cook for four or five minutes, stirring all the while, sweeten to taste and serve. It can also be prepared with water instead of milk. (3704). TEA (Thé). Black Tea for Sixty-four Cups. --One pound of black tea and four gallons of water. Green Tea for Forty-eight Cups. --One pound of Oolong and green tea for three gallons of water. Black Tea. --Put one ounce of black tea into a teapot; moisten it with two gills of boiling water to infuse and open the leaves and leave it thus for ten minutes, then add eight gills of boiling water. A few moments later stir with a teaspoon and let stand. Serve at the same time, sugar, cream, toast or cakes. Never allow utensils for tea -making to be used for any other purpose. The teapot should always be plunged in hot water before making the tea. For Green and Oolong. --Use an ounce and a half instead of an ounce and prepare it with the same quantity of water. Serve the tea on a tray covered with a cloth, accompanied by a sugar bowl, sugar tongs, teaspoons, cups and saucers, a pot of cream, boiling water, a teapot with a strainer, toast, fancy rolls, muffins, etc. For a party use the same preparation, only having the tea poured into cups. Russian Tea for Twelve Cups, Samovar. --The samovar is a brass or silver-plated urn having a cylinder in the center, with a grating at the bottom. Lay some paper in the cylinder, over place small splints of wood, and on these some charcoal. Light it from underneath and on the cylinder arrange a pipe that is then connected to the outside of the chimney. Fill the urn with water, between the cylinder and the outside; this part of the samovar is provided with a faucet. As soon as the water boils put the samovar on the table on a silver or brass salver. A crown is fastened to the center cylinder to infuse the tea and keep it hot. Put in twelve teaspoonfuls of the very best Oolong, Formosa or any other preferred brand of tea. Pour over three teacupfuls of boiling water and allow it to draw for five minutes, keeping it hermetically closed and very hot, then add nine more cupfuls of boiling water, and even more should the tea be too strong. Gentlemen are seldom present at afternoon teas. Serve the tea in cups, but for the evening (eight o'clock), tea is then poured into glasses for the gentlemen guests. These glasses are plain, four inches high, three inches wide on top and two inches at the bottom; they are to be placed in silver or silvered glass holders, having handles; the ladies' tea is served in cups. Cream must be handed around at the same time, also very thin slices of lemon in crystal dishes, accompanied by small silver forks. Strawberry or raspberry jam, rose or currant jelly flavored with vanilla, according to taste, very thin slices of buttered bread, dry sweet tea cakes and sugar broken into pieces the size of a currant may also be served with the tea. WINES (Vins). (3705). WINES AND CARE OF WINES (Le Vin et les Soins qu'il Demande). Grimod de la Reyniere has said that "No one ages at table;" he might have added, when the dinner is good and the wines are of the finest. Wine is the intellectual part of the meal and is to be served at a proper temperature in the order of the service, as will be explained further on. However, this is not an absolute rule; preference should be given to such and such a wine according to one's taste and according also to the influence it bears on one's health. This last point is easier to define for there can be no rule given regarding taste, as each individual sensation is apt to differ. Some prefer the keen savor of Bordeaux, others the delicate aroma of champagne; this one the warmth of the wines from Languedoc; another exciting flavor of Burgundy. Tastes, for some reason or other, are formed on temperament; nature indicates and inspires in its very best way the proper method to follow for the good of our health. Sanguine temperaments feel the want of a light wine, such as champagne and Rhine wines; the phlegmatically inclined love the warmth of spirits, and the wines from Languedoc and Frontignon; gloomy dispostions crave for sweet Spanish, Italian, Roussillon and Burgundy wines; and those of a bilious nature, absorbed by the contention of their daily physical pain, require a stimulating wine such as Bordeaux. Bordeaux wine is generous, stomachic, easily digested, leaves the mouth clear and the head free, even when liberally drank. This wine can be transported to a great distance. Burgundy wine is aphrodaisical; it is extremely delicate and of a delightful aroma. Champagne wines are heady; they are limpid, light, odorous and unctuous. When champagne is frozen its effect is entirely changed; the temperature of the ice increases its tonic power and better contributes to the act of digestion, it condenses on the stomach and prevents the largest proportion from stimulating and rising to the brain. Frequently dinner parties are given when champagne alone is served. Champagne is not a natural wine, for on its preparation depends the superior qualities it is required to possess. Rhine wines are liked for the delightful mellowness of their flavor. They can support very long journeys, which instead of deteriorating only increases their value. The Cellar. --Be very careful that the cellar is not exposed to sudden vibrations or shocks, or they will cause the lightest part of the dregs to arise, and when this mingles with the wine it produces sourness; also avoid placing any green wood in the cellar when the sap is ascending, or any vegetables, for these produce fermentation, impair the quality of the wine and prevent its preservation. Cellars should be kept very clean and at a temperature of 50 to 55 degrees Fahrenheit, without any thorough draught. In the warmest part of the cellar place the Bordeaux, and the Burgundy in the coldest. Placing the Casks in the Cellar. --Before a cask of wine is placed in the cellar it should be thoroughly examined to see whether it be in good condition and the hoops perfectly solid. Stand the casks on wooden joists six to eight inches square, placed on bricks high enough so that a bottle can be set under the faucet; when in this position wedge each one separately with blocks of wood and be careful not to move or disturb the casks. When wines are required to be left in their barrels they should be placed sufficiently far apart to allow a free circulation between. Should the wines be of the present year the cask should be bored near the bung and the hole closed by a small plug removed from time to time so that the fermentation can be known. If, when the plug is taken out, the air comes whistling forth, then fermentation still exists; in this case remove the plug daily and at less frequent intervals as fermentation diminishes. Casks should always be refilled as quickly as they are emptied. Light wines spoil easily if their casks are not kept constantly full. The drier and more airy is the cellar the faster the barrels must be refilled. This should be done every month, and the wine used for refilling should be of exactly the same quality as that already contained therein; this alone will prevent it from deteriorating. (3706). BOTTLING WINES (La Mise en Bouteilles). The faucet should be partly opened to allow sufficient time for corking the bottles that have been removed. The corks should be selected perfectly sound, especially if to be kept for a long while. Dip them first in lukewarm water and force them into the bottle with a mallet or a special machine, then cut them off leaving an eighth of an inch above the bottle. Wines are bottled to have them attain the ripeness to which they are susceptible and to be able to keep them in a better condition; generally it requires two years before bottling red wines; only do so when they are found to be of a proper degree and ripeness, neither too sweet nor too sour, but of a perfect and pure flavor. White wine can be bottled earlier than red--one year to eighteen months, after it has lost its sweet taste. The clearness of a wine being one of its most essential points, an effort should be made to obtain this result; if not of a perfect limpidity, then wait a few days longer, and if not then clear it must be drawn off and transferred to another very clean cask, and clarified over again. Bottles must be rinsed carefully with lead shot or small pebbles. Bottle the wine on a clear, cold day; avoid stormy weather, and if possible select a day when the wind blows from the northeast. Bore the cask with a gimlet at an inch and a half from the inside border and stop as soon as the wine appears, then push in the opened faucet and strike it in such a way as not to disturb the dregs. The spigot must be left sufficiently open to allow enough time for filling the bottles while the corks are being put in. If required for keeping, then cover the cork and about an inch and a half of the neck of the bottle with some prepared wax, by dipping it in the heated wax and rotating the bottle until the adhering wax is cold; this coating keeps the corks from molding and from being eaten up by insects. To make this wax melt a pound of common rosin with two ounces of yellow wax and half an ounce of mutton tallow; color it with animal black, ochre, etc.; if too brittle add more tallow, and if the opposite, then more rosin. The bottles are to be stacked slightly inclined so that the wine can touch the cork at all times. The above is an abridged direction on preparing and bottling wines. The utensils needed are: one large funnel, two measures of three gallons each, a faucet for drawing off the wine and one other one, a mallet to push in the corks, a beater for the bung-hole in the cask, a pump and a felt filter, or round paper filters, for filtering the wine from the bottom of the cask. (3707). CLARIFYING WINES (Collage des Vins). Clarifying is not only for the purpose of rendering wines clear, but also to free them of any dissoluble matter which might precipitate later. To Clarify Red Wines. --To clarify a cask of wine containing two hundred and twenty-five quarts, beat up partly five egg-whites with half a bottleful of wine; take out eight quarts of wine from the cask, pour in the clarifying matter and insert a stick split in four; move this about in every direction for two minutes so as to mix in the whites well, then refill the cask with the eight quarts previously extracted, and finish filling with wine or water; put back the bung. Five or six days after the wine should be clear, but in case it is not sufficiently so draw all the wine off into another very clean cask and reclarify once more the same as before, leaving it five or six days; it can then be drawn. To Clarify White Wines. -- White wines are clarified with fish isinglass. Beat with a hammer a quarter of an ounce of the isinglass, tear it to pieces, cutting it apart with a pair of scissors, then soak it for eight hours in sufficient wine to cover; when swollen, and it has absorbed all the liquid, pour over as much as before and leave it for twenty-four hours; then add half a pint of hot water; stir this about to crush, then press forcibly through a towel. Beat it with a whip, pouring a little white wine slowly over until the entire solution makes one quart of liquid. Before pouring it into the cask beat it up with three pints of white wine and finish the same as the red. The egg-whites or isinglass can be replaced by prepared powders. (3708). DECANTING WINES AND BASKET FOR SERVING WINE (Vins Décantés et Panier à Verser le Vin). Decanting consists of gently pouring from the bottles, inclining them slightly, any liquor that leaves a sediment; on this depends the clear appearance of an old wine. Well-decantered liquors present a beautiful limpid color through the decanter, contributing greatly to the enjoyment of drinking a glass of good wine. Basket for Serving Wines. --In well-appointed houses the fine wines are decantered before dinner and poured into cut-glass decanters. A simpler way is to lay the bottles in a small wicker basket, fastening them in with two strings; but in order to carry out this precaution it will be absolutely necessary to have the bottle laid in the basket several hours before putting it on the table, so that however little sediment the wine may contain it will settle at the bottom of the bottle. It is unnecessary to add that the basket must not be violently shaken and that the wine be poured out with the greatest care. Fig. 767 An illustration of a bottle of wine in a basket. (3709). DELMONICO'S WINE CELLAR LIST. Absinthe. Vermouth. SHERRY. From the De Renne Estate. Duff Gordon. Première. Imperial. Brown. Pando. Amontillado, Dry. Amontillado, 1834. Old Mantilla. G. S., 1815. J. S., 1815. Pale Gordon. Suarez Superior. Suarez Pasto. Suarez Oloroso. Pale Pemartin. C. Old around the cape. Peerless Cape. Choice Amont'ado 1857 P. G. Old, No. 5. Dry Soleras, 1828. Solera Cape. Harmony. Peter Domecq Jerez Med. 1818. Montilla xxxx. Wellington, P. Domecq. Jerez, 1730. P. Domecq £100 Royal, Pale. MADEIRA. From the De Renne Estate. Imperial. Green Seal. O. S. Y., 1820. L. I., 1815. Thompson's Auction. Old Reserve. Agrella Madeira, 1818. L. C. Madeira. Thorndike A, 1809. N. G. 1798. F. Amory Imported, 1806. Y. Amory Dom Pedro, 1791-92. F. Amory, Imported, 1811. MOSELLE. Scharzberg Muscatel. Berncasterler Doctor. Brauneberger. Zeltinger. Scharzhofberger. Sparkling. Piesporter. Josephshofer. RHINE. Johannisberger Red Seal. Johannisberger Gold Seal. Johannisberger Schloss. Rauenthaler Berg. Steinberger Cabinet. Steinberger Auslese. Steinberger Cab. Imp'l. Bocksbeutel. Geisenheimer. Marcobrunner. Marcobrunner Aus. Domdechaney. Rüdesheimer. Rüdesheimer Berg. Rüdesheimer Berg Aus. Rüdesheimer Berg Cab. Hochheimer. Liebfraumilch. Deidesheimer. Assmannshauser (Red). Laubenheimer. Niersteiner. HUNGARIAN. Budai. Villanyi. Tokay Imperial (White). Tokay Cabinet (White). Somlyai (White). Budai Crème. BORDEAUX. White. Château Yquem. Château Yquem Crème de Tête. Graves. Haute Sauterne. Barsac. Sauterne. Sauterne 1re. Lafaurie. Latour. BORDEAUX. Pichon. Pontet Canet. Larose. Château Lagrange. Batailley. St. Pierre. Château Langoa. Château Pontet Canet. Rauzan. Léoville. Mouton Rothschild. Haut Brion. Magnum Bonum. St. Julien. St. Julien Supérieur. Château Couffran. St. Estèphe. Château de Pez. Château Léovillé. Château Larose. Château Margraux. Château Latour. Château Laffitte. BURGUNDY. Nuits. Corton. Chambertin. Macon. Macon Vieux. Pommard. Clos de Vougeot. Romanée. Romanée Conti. Beaujolais. Volnay. Beaune. BURGUNDY. White. Montrachet. Montrachet Mousseux. Chablis. Chablis Vieux. RHONE. Hermitage. Côtes Rôties. Hermitage (White). CHAMPAGNES. Cook's Imperial. Jules Mumm Grand Sec. Deutz & Geldermann Sec. Dry Monopole. Monopole Club, Dry. Giesler. Giesler Brut, 1884. Pommery. Pommery Vin Nature. Clicquot. L. Roederer. Ruinart Brut. Royal Charter. Montrachet Mousseux. Moët, White Label. Moët, Imperial Brut. Piper Heidsieck Sec. Delbeck, Extra Dry. Delbeck, Brut. Delmonico. Krug See. Krug Sec, 1880. Perrier Jouet, Special. Heidsick Brut. Perrier Jouët, Brut. Mumm's Extra Dry. Irroy. Irroy Brut. MALAGA, OLD. PORT. Première. Very Old (White). Osborn. Sandeman's Old. BRANDY. Renault & Co. Jules Robin & Co. Vierge. Renault, 1858. Martell. Martell Old. Private Importation. Very Old English Brandy. WHISKEY. Delmonico's Private Stock-Rye. Bourbon. Rye. Delmonico's Private Stock-Bourbon. Hollywood. McGrath. Irish. Irish (Powers). Old Cabinet Rye. Scotch. MISCELLANEOUS. Old Tom Gin. Holland Gin. Old Rum. Very Old Jamaica Rum. LIQUEURS. Noyau. Prunelle de Bourgogne. Crème de Menthe. Kümmel. Kirsch. Eckau. Bénédictine. Chartreuse (Yellow). Chartreuse (Green). Curaçoa. Curaçoa Sec. Anisette. Maraschino. ALES, ETC. Scotch. Porter. Ginger Ale (Imported). Beadleston & Woerz's Imperial Lager. St. Louis Lager. Ind. Coope & Co. Pale Ale. Kaiser Beer. Yuengling's Tivoli Beer. Milwaukee Lager. Bass--McMullen. Bass Dog's Head. Cider, Jericho. MINERAL WATERS. Apollinaris. Clysmic. Juliushaller. Vichy (Imported). (3710). HOW TO FREEZE CHAMPAGNE (Manière de Frapper le Champagne). In order to freeze champagne pounded ice and rock salt are generally used. Have a pail made of galvanized sheet iron or of wood, but the iron one is preferable, for the wine cools quicker in it. Put the bottle into a pail thirteen inches deep, seven and a half inches in diameter at the bottom and nine inches at the top; this pail must be furnished with a handle. Make a mixture of three pounds of finely pounded ice with a pound and a half of rock salt, not too coarse; fill the pail to the top, mix well together and turn the bottle by the neck to give it a backward and forward movement from right to left. If the champagne be taken from the ice-box where it has been lying for several hours, then it will only take twelve to fourteen minutes to freeze, but if it has not been previously on ice, then it will require fifteen to eighteen minutes for the operation. Champagne can be frozen without turning it around by leaving it in the salted ice for half an hour before serving. Machines are sometimes used which simplify the work greatly; the same time is required, only the labor is less fatiguing. When finished serve in a metal silver-plated pail with salted ice around. These are to be placed either on the table or on a small side table. FIG. 768. A bottle of champagne placed into a pail filled with ice cubes. The champagne is hold by a holder that is fastened on top of the handle. FIG. 769. A bottle of champagne placed in a small silver-plated pail with salted ice around. (3711). APPETIZERS AND MIXED DRINKS (Apéritifs et Boissons Mélangées). Iced drinks are those to which plenty of ice is added, then covered with a tin shaker and shaken until the contents are very cold and iced. Cold drinks are those mixed into chopped ice with a spoon. A glass of vermuth equals half a gill and is the glass meant in the recipes when not otherwise specified. Five small glassfuls equal a gill. Six dashes fill a teaspoon. Vermuth Cocktail. --Put some fine ice into a large glass, add a glassful of Italian vermuth and one dash of Boker's bitters; mix the whole together with a spoon, strain and serve in small glasses. Another kind of vermuth cocktail is made by replacing the Italian vermuth by French vermuth and having orange bitters instead of Boker's. Sherry and Bitters. --Sherry into which a little bitters is mixed. Brandy, Whiskey, Holland Gin and Tom Gin Cocktails. --Put some very finely broken ice in a large glass, add a glassful either of brandy, whiskey or Holland gin, one dash of Boker's bitters, and two dashes of sweetening (gum syrup); mix well together with a spoon, strain and serve in small glasses. Tom gin cocktail is made exactly the same, only using old Tom gin and suppressing the sweetening. Calisaya Cocktail. --Mix in a large glass some finely chopped ice, a vermuth glassful of calisaya, one dash of orange bitters and a little vermuth; mix well, strain and serve in small glasses. Peruvian Cocktail. --Add to some finely chopped ice in a glass, a vermuth glassful of Peruvian bitters, one dash of orange bitters and a little vermuth; mix thoroughly, strain and serve in small glasses. Martine Cocktail. --Have some broken ice in a large glass with the third of a glassful of Tom gin and two-thirds (making a glassful in all) of vermuth, and one dash of Boker's bitters; mix well, strain and pour into small glasses. Manhattan Cocktail. --Place some very finely broken ice in a large glass, add the third of a glassful of whiskey and two-thirds of vermuth, also one dash of Boker's bitters; mix properly, strain and serve in small glasses. Jersey Cocktail Iced. --For three cocktails put into a vermuth glass some apple jack and two glassfuls of Italian or French vermuth, adding three dashes of Angostura bitters and finely pounded ice. Cover with a tin shaker, toss, strain and pour into small glasses. Absinthe Cocktail Iced. --Put some finely chopped ice in a large glass, add a small glassful of absinthe, two dashes of orange bitters and two dashes of sweetening; mix properly, cover with a shaker, toss, strain and serve in small glasses. Iced Absinthe. --Have soome finely chopped ice in a large glass, add a small glassful of absinthe and water, cover with a tin shaker, toss thoroughly, strain and serve in medium-sized glasses. Riding Club Cocktail. --Put some finely broken ice in a glass with two-thirds of a glass of Hostetter's bitters, half a teaspoonful of Horsford's acid phosphate, two dashes of French vermuth; cover with a tin shaker and toss until the cocktail is iced, then strain and pour into small glasses. For all cocktails a piece of lemon peel is generally twisted over the cocktail. (3712). CLARET CUP AND CLARET CUP à LA WILLARD'S. Sweeten a pint of claret to taste, add to it one gill of maraschino or Curaçoa, one pint of soda water, a few mint leaves, fresh strawberries or raspberries and pieces of pineapple. Cucumbers or borage leaves may be added. à la Willard's. --Crush one pound of strawberries, add four spoonfuls of powdered sugar, the juice of one lemon, a pint of whipped cream and a bottleful of soda water. (3713). LEMONADE OR WITH SYRUP AND ORANGEADE (Limonade, Limonade au Sirop et Orangeade). Lemonade. --Take a pint and a half of lemon juice and a pound and a half of sugar, add water to taste, add thin slices of lemon and serve very cold. Lemonade with Syrup. --Ten gills of syrup at thirty-two degrees, one quart of lemon juice, the peel of one lemon and a quart of water; let the peel infuse, strain through a silk sieve and bring it to eleven degrees, syrup gauge (Fig. 167). Orangeade. --Eight gills of syrup at thirty-two degrees, ten gills of lemon juice, the peel of two oranges, two and a half quarts of water, and the juice of four lemons; bring it to eleven degrees, syrup gauge, strain through a silk sieve and serve very cold. (3714). CHAMPAGNE, CLARET AND RUM PUNCH; DESSERT DRINKS (Punch au Champagne, Bordeaux et Rhum; Boissons Pour le Dessert). Champagne. --Three quarts of champagne wine, two quarts or bottles of Sauterne wine, three bottles of soda water, one gill of Curaçoa and fresh fruits in season. Claret. --Four bottles of Bordeaux, one quart of water, one pound of sugar, one gill of Curaçoa and kirsch, half of each, half a gill of lemon juice and fresh fruits in season, such as cherries, strawberries, pineapple or raspberries. Rum. --Two quarts of St. Croix rum, one pint of Jamaica rum, three pints of water, one pound of sugar, one gill of lemon juice and fresh fruits in season. A delicious drink is currant juice, grenadine or orgeat, in large glasses, and moistened with ice cold water. Dessert Drinks. --Fine champagne brandy, iced eckau kümmel, iced cream of peppermint (crème de menthe), Chartreuse, yellow and green, and kirsch. Pousse Café. --The pousse café is a drink composed of four kinds of liquor of different color; that is to say, white cream of peppermint, green Chartreuse, cream of cocoa and brandy. These four liquors are poured into a glass tumbler in such a way that they remain in distinct layers, which is done by carefully pouring the above liquors, one after the other, against the side of the glass; thus the liquors flow down gently without mixing. (3715). CLAUDIUS PUNCH AND WINE PUNCH--HOT (Punch Claudius et Punch au vin Chaud). To one pound of Scotch oatmeal mix four quarts of boiling water; whip it in, stirring vigorously; then boil the preparation, working it steadily; add one and a half pounds of seeded Malaga raisins, the peel and juice of four lemons, a pint of good sherry wine and sufficient sugar to sweeten, a little grated nutmeg, ground cloves and cinnamon; also add a quarter of a pound of finely shredded citron, and should it be too thick then put in more boiling water, strain through a fine sieve, let cool and serve. Wine Punch--Hot. --Put into a jar two bottles of Bordeaux wine, the juice of six oranges and the peel of three, a small stick of cinnamon, and three cloves; let the whole infuse for twelve hours, then pass through a sieve. Put the liquid in an untinned copper saucepan with six ounces of sugar; heat until it nearly reaches the boiling point and serve in punch glasses. LAST CENTURY TABLES. Following will be found several plates taken from works of the last century. I have thought them sufficiently interesting to publish and even to have them made use of, that is by modifying the models; for instance, replacing the colored sand beds by those of arabesques of flowers or grass; the marble statues by bronzes, the trees by graceful potted plants and the center by handsome ornamental sugar pieces. The following cuts will give a correct idea of how these tables were dressed. The center of the table was decorated with "dormants" or looking-glass platforms; on these were placed ornaments made by cutting out cardboard arabesques (see plate 1). The edges of these cardboards were trimmed with green chenille fastened on with green wax; this chenille filled up any vacant space that might occur between the cardboard and the looking-glass. The center B is decorated with a balustrade shown in the design on the top of the page. The center of this is a square flower-bed, in the middle of which a figure generally stood, and the remainder of the bed is decorated around with variegated colored sand; to meet this balustrade is a gum-paste border garnished with small fancy cakes or dried fruits. There must always be a space two feet wide left between the platform and the edge of the table. The designs A and C are decorated with beds the same as B, having also a figure in the center. In case of large tables these "dormants" or platforms were made in sections. PLATE II.--Represents a table already dressed, taken from a work published in 1768. PLATE III.--A table laid with the dessert, decorated with colored sand arabesques. PLATE IV.--Represents a more modern horseshoe-shaped table; this design being frequently used for large society dinners and banquets. This form of table is very convenient, as the president is seated in the center of the rounded part and the two principal officers at the ends; on the right of the president, the most honored guest; on his left, the one next in distinction and so on, alternating from right to left for the guests or members of the society. No high center pieces or other tall ornaments should be placed before the president, merely a basket of natural flowers or one of pulled sugar flowers. On the length of the table and in the center or middle line can be placed several high pieces, candelabras, epergnes, etc., all around, sixteen inches from the edge. Arrange the plates and glassware at the usual distances, with two forks on the left, one for fish and another for the entrées; on the right have a knife, a soupspoon, a butter knife and an oyster fork, butter and salt in front, and around arrange the glasses for water, Burgundy, port, champagne, Sauterne, and sherry. The space between each place is twenty-four inches for those seated straight and twenty-two for those on the curve. Before each plate set a chair and on the plate a folded napkin containing a roll; in front a card with the number and name written on of the person who is to occupy the seat. This is a short synopsis of the manner of arranging a horseshoe-shaped table. PLATE V.--Represents divers ornaments used for decorating a table the same as Plate I. The design D represents the palace of Circe, who metamorphosized Ulysses' companions into swine. E F are statues to stand at each end; G are pedestals with vases on top; placed around the beds of sand or flowers and between each pedestal is a tree as shown in H. The looking-glass "dormant" or platform can be left undecorated. M may be used instead of the temple for a small table. PLATE VI.--Figure No. 1 represents a border around the dormant made of gum paste; No. 2 platforms to place the dried fruits and nuts on; No. 3 flower beds; No. 4 the position for the trees; No. 5 for pedestals having grass around each one; No. 6 represents mounds of earth to stand figures on, and all the intervening empty space is to be of looking-glass, or else of sand, according to taste. PLATE I. 8" Handwritten inscription. PLATE II. PLATE III. PLATE IV. PLATE V. PLATE VI. 1862.    DELMONICO'S MENUS.     1894. I give here a series of bills of fare served by Delmonico, in 14th street and 5th avenue, and Madison square and 26th street. These are only a few among many that have been prepared, and I regret that I cannot add more, for I am sure they would please the subscribers of THE EPICUREAN. I have endeavored to select those most interesting. The bills of fare are generally and frequently very elaborate, some being engraved on sterling silver leaves; others are lithographed and are perfect masterpieces of art, the original costing several hundred dollars; others are printed on satin and others enclosed in small Russian leather books; many have been made of celluloid with relief figures, giving a very beautiful and artistic effect; they are also made of beveled-edged cards, painted by hand in water colors, either subjects or monograms being used. A bill of fare that is very much admired is two equal-sized cards having two holes in the top of each and tied together with two pretty ribbons; with these there is no necessity of having a bill of fare holder, as when opened they stand alone. TABLE DECORATED WITH FLOWERS AND FOLIAGE An illustration of a decorated table. "Brillat-Savarin in his digression on taste observes that only men of wit know how to eat, while I add, that it requires a man of taste to prepare the food that pleases the men of wit." EVERS. In the last dinner given by the Chamber of Commerce in the year 1893 will be found the diagram and the manner the tables were laid; the upper one is the principal table, the president and his guests being seated in the center. The other tables are placed lengthwise in front of the presidents's: they are classed alphabetically. Each place is designated by a number and the name of the person to occupy it. The end of each table is reserved for the members of the arrangement committee; a special table is for the press. The one numbered F is for the object of completing the seating capacity of the three hundred guests. DéCEMBRE, 1862. DîNER DE 28 COUVERTS. Un Menu de la Série des fameux DîNERs grecs. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Châtelaine. Crème de gibier à la Française. HORS-D'ŒVRE. Croquettes à la Comtesse. POISSONS. Saumon à la Royale. Bass à la Béchamel. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf Chateaubriand. Dinde sauvage au Chasseur. ENTRéES. Côtelettes de volaille Maréchale. Filets de grouse à la Dauphine. Timbales à la Parisienne. Croustades de Terrapènes. Pâté de foies gras en Bellevue. Sorbet à l'Andalouse. RôTS. Faisans Anglais piqués et truffés. Canvas back ducks. ENTREMETS SUCRéS CHAUDS. Compiègne aux poires. Cygne surprise, sauce pistaches. ENTREMETS SUCRéS FROIDS. Macédoine Alexandre Dumas. Gelée aux fraises. Gelée au raisin de Muscat. Pain d'abricots Montaigne. Lait d'amandes rubané au chocolat. Crème Portugaise, Goronflot à l'angélique. Charlotte Montpensier. PIèCES MONTéES. Pavillon des Colonnes. Corbeille arabesque garnie de fruits. Nougat Impérial. Chaumiére des Colombes. GLACéS. Napolitaine. Bombe à la fleur d'oranger. Dessert. NOVEMBRE, 1862. MR. D. B. FEARING, DîNER DE 28 COUVERTS. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Sévigné. Purée de gibier. HORS-D'ŒUVRE CHAUD. Chartreuse à la Régence. POISSONS. Bass rayée, sauce aux écrevisses. Eperlans frits, sauce Mayonnaise. RELEVé. Filet de bœuf à la béarnaise. ENTRéES. Ailes de dinde à la Léopold. Salmis de bécasses Elisienne. Côtelettes de cailles à la Reine. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Haricots Flageolets sautés. Fonds d'artichauts farcis. Asperges à la sauce Hollandaise. Punch aux liqueurs. RôT. Faisans piqués et truffés. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR CHAUD. Pouding diplomate. Macédoine de fruits, Chateaubriand. Glace moulée le casque Romain. Parfait au café. DéCEMBRE, 1862. MR. GIRAUD FOSTER. DîNER DE 16 COUVERTS. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGE. Purée de gibier. HORS-D'ŒUVRE CHAUD. Croquettes à la Piémontaise. POISSON. Filets de bass, Cambacérès. RELEVé. Selle de chevreuil, sauce venaison. ENTRéES. Estomacs de dindes sauvages à la Goddard. Suprême de faisan à l'Impériale. Côtelettes à la Pogarski. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Choux de Bruxelles. Fonds d'artichauts farcis. Asperges, sauce crème. Punch au Cardinal. RôTS. Cailles piquées. Canvas back duck. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Timbale de poires Napolitaine. Gelée au Madère. Gâteau Savarin. Glaces. Parfait au café. Biscuits glacés. DESSERT. Café. BALL. NOVEMBER 5, 1868, AT THE ACADAMY OF MUSIC. RUSSIAN FLEET. Rear-Admiral Lessoffsky, Russian flagship "Alexander Weosky," 51 guns. Captain Kopytor, Russian screw frigate "Peresvat," 48 guns. Captain Bontakoff, Russian screw frigate "Osliaba," 33 guns. Captain Lund (or Lurd), Russian screw sloop "Vitioz," 77 guns. Captain Kremer, Russian screw sloop "Variag," 17 guns. MENU. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Huîtres à la poulette. Huîtres en marinade. Bouchées de gibier. Canapés de filets d'ortolans. Snit-mitch à la Russe. GROSSES PIèCES. Saumons au beurre de Montpellier. Filet de bœuf à la Mazarin. Galantines de cochon de lait. Jambons de Westphalie à la moderne. Truites à la Régence. Pâtés de canvas-back ducks. Pâtés de gibier sur socles. Galantines de dindes aux truffes. ENTRéES. Salade de volaille à la Russe. Côtelette de pigeons en macédoine. Chaudfroid de filets de faisans. Pain de gibier à la Royale. Terrines de Nérac. Canetons Rouennaise. Bordures d'escalopes de homards. Aspics de filets de soles Victoria. Timbales à la Renaissance. Bécassines à la Geoffroy. RôTS. Cailles aux feuilles de Vignes. Bécasses Bardées. Faisans Piqués. Grouses. ENTREMETS SUCRéS ET DESSERTS. Savarins au Marasquin. Gâteaux de mille feuilles. Charlottes Sibériennes. Biscuits Moscovites. Babas glacés au Rhum. Charlottes, New York. Meringues panachées et vanillées. Gelées macédoine au champagne. Gelées Dantzie Orientale. Gelées de poires à la maréchale. Gelées au Madère. Pain d'abricots à la Bérisina. Blanc manger rubané au chocolat. Bavarois aux fraises. Biscuits glacés à la rose. Gâteaux assortis. Petits fours. Compotes. Fruits. PIèCES MONTéES ET GLACéES. Pierre le Grand. Alexandre II. Le berceau des Palmiers. La fontaine moderne. L'Arc de Triomphe. Sultane à la Parisienne. Washington. Lincoln. La rotonde d'Athénes. L'Ermitage Russe. Cornes jumelle d'abondance. Le Pavillon des aigles. L'aigle Américain. Le casque sur socle. Pouding Nesselrode. LA LIONNE. Colombus. Corbeille jardinière. Les Dauphins. Diane. Madeleine. Mousse aux amandes. Bombe spongade. Citron et fraise. Ceylan au café. Vanille chocolat. MAI, 1863. DîNER DE 18 COUVERTS. Offert au Général McClellan par Mr. Dunham. MENU. Lucines. POTAGES. Consommé Royale. Bisque d'éerevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Bouchées de gibier. POISSONS. Truite à la Portugaise. Soles à la Vénitienne. RELEVé. Selle d'agneau à la Périgueux. ENTRéES. Caisses de ris de veau. Salmis de bécassipes. Terrapène Maryland. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Flageolets maître-d'Hôtel. Haricots verts sautés. Asperges, sauce crème. Punch Régence. RôTS. Poulets gras truffés. Pluviers dorés. ENTREMETS SUCRéS CHAUDS. Beignets de pêches. Pouding aux amandes. Macédoine de fruits. Crème Française aux amandes. Gâteau Napolitain. Charlotte Doria. Glace mousse au café. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. DECEMBRE, 1863. BUFFET DE 100 COUVERTS, 20 PETITES TABLES. LéONARD JéRôME. MENU. CHAUD. Consommé Royale. Huîres Poulette. Huîres Farcies. FROID. Saumon au beurre de Montpellier. Filets de sole à la Rothschild. Dinde en galantine. Pâté de canvas-back. Pain de gibier Royale. Terrine de fois-gras. Chaudfroid de côtelettes de Pigeons. Mayonnaise de Volaille. Aspics de homards. Faisans Anglais en Volière. Cailles Piquées. Grouses Bardées. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Pain de pêches à la Louisiane. Macédoine de fruits. Crème Renaissance. Bavarois aux fraises. Gâteau Breton. Mille feuilles. Corbeille de fruits glacés. Sultane Bayadère. Charlotte Russe. GLACES. Casque Romain. Christophe Colomb. Fruits. Café. NOVEMBRE, 1864. DîNER DE 26 COUVERTS. Offert à l'Amiral Renaud de la Flotte Française. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Crème de volaille. Consommé Royale. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Croquettes à la Victoria. POISSONS. Saumon à l'Impériale. Soles farcies, sauce au champagne. RELEVé. Selle de chevreuil, sauce poivrade. ENTRéES. Dindonneaux à la Toulouse. Caisses de bécasses à la Diane. Pâté de foies gras. Mayonnaise de homard. Punch à la Régence. RôTS. Canvas back. Filet de bœuf. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Petits pois. Haricots verts. Choux fleurs. Tomates farcies. ENTREMETS SUCRéS CHAUDS. Pouding Cabinet. ENTREMETS SUCRéS FROIDS. Gelée macédoine. Savarin Chantilly. Gelée Madère. Charlotte russe. Blanc manger. Meringues. PIèCES MONTéES. Le casque Romain. Trophée maritime. Bombe spongade, Napolitaine. Petits fours. Fruits. Café Nougat Impérial. Chaumière des Colombes. Glace Napolitaine. Bombe fleur d'oranger. Dessert. FéVRIER, 1864. SOUPER DE 18 COUVERTS. Offert .à MR. J.G. BENNETT, JR MENU. Huîtres. Consommé de gibier. Coquilles d'huîtres au gratin. Œufs pochés purée de gibier. Filets de canvas-back, gelée de groseille. Faisans Anglais truffés. Punch Régence. Truites au beurre de Montpellier. Paté de foie en Bellevue (sur socle). Chaudfroid de perdreau. Galantine de chapon aux truffes, sur socle. Célestine de homard. Gelée moscovite. Bavarois au café. Macédoine au champagne. Gelée aux fraises. Gâteau Berchoux. Gâteau Portugais. Charlotte Doria. Vase de nougat garni de fruits. Corne d'abondance. Glace la Lionne. Bombe surprise. Corbeille jardinière. Fruits. Petits fours. Dessert. JUIN, 1864. BUFFET POUR 150 PERSONNES. MR. W.R. TRAVERS. MENU. Bisque aux Lucines. Crème de volaille. Coquilles de crabes moux. Saumon au beurre de Montpellier. Filet de bœuf macédoine à la gelée. Galantine de poulet à la Royale. Pain de gibier en Bellevue. Aspics de filets de bass. Chaudfroid de cailles. Salade à la Russe. Mayonnaise de volaille. Salade de homard. Gelée aux ananas. Bavarois aux fraises. Crème Parisienne. Glée au Marasquin. Gâteau Angélique. Charlotte à la Doria. Le casque Romain. Le coquerico. Bombe Latinville. Biscuits glacés. Nougat Parisienne en surprise. Sultane de raisins et oranges. DINNER GIVEN BY SIR MORTON PE TO,       AT DELMONICO'S, OCTOBER 30, 1865. MENU. Barsac. Huîtres. POTAGES. Xérès F. S., 1815. Consommé Britannia. Purée à la Derby. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Cassolettes de foies-gras. Timbales à l'écarlate. POISSONS. Steinberger Cabinet. Saumon à la Rothschild. Grenadins de bass, New York. RELEVéS. Champagne Napoléon. Chapons truffés. Filet de bœuf à la Durham. ENTRéES. Château Latour. Faisans à la Londonderry. Côtelettes d'agneau Primatice. Cromesquis de volaille à la purée de marrons. Aiguillettes de canards à la bigarade. Rissolettes à la Pompadour. ENTRéES FROIDES. Côtes Rôties. Volière de gibier. Ballotines d'anguilles en Bellevue. Chaudfroid de rouges-gorges à la Bohémienne. Buisson de ris d'agneau Pascaline. Sorbet à la Sir Morton Peto. RôTIS. Clos-Vougeot. Selle de chevreuil, sauce au vin de Porto groseilles. Bécasses bardées. ENTREMETS. Choux de Bruxelles. Haricots Verts. Artichauts farcis. Petits pois. SUCRéS. Tokai Imperial. Pouding de poires à la Madison. Louisiannais à l'ananas. Gelée aux fruits. Pain d'abricot à la vanille. Moscovite fouettée. Gelée Indienne. Vacherin au marasquin. Cougloff aux amandes. Mazarin aux pêches. Mousse à l'orange. Caisses jardinière. Glaces assorties. Fruits et Desserts. PIèCES MONTéES. Madère Faquart. Cascade Pyramidale. Corbeille arabesque. Ruines de Poëstum. Le Palmier. Trophée militaire. Corne d'abondance. Nougat à la Parisienne. MAI, 1865. DîNER DE 22 COUVERTS. OFFERT AU GENERAL SHERMAN. MENU. Lucines. POTAGES. Consommé à la Royale. Bisque aux quenelles. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Cassolettes au salpicon. RELEVéS. Saumon à la Parisienne. Filet de bœuf à la Godard. ENTRéES. Poulets Reine braisés à l'ivoire. Ris de veau Victor Hugo. Turban de filets de soles au gratin. Haricots verts sautés. épinards à la crème. Choux fleurs. Artichauts farcis. Punch à l'Andalouse. Selle d'agneau, sauce menthe. Pluviers au cresson. ENTREMETS SUCRéS CHAUDS. Pouding des deux Carolines. Gelée Californienne. Bavarois aux fraises. Cornets Chantilly. PIèCES MONTéES. Le vase tulipe. Le casque moderne. GLACES MOULéES. L'Aigle Américain. Déesse de la Lionne. Dessert. MAI, 1865. DîNER DE 8 COUVERTS. MR. HECKSCHER. MENU. Clams mignons. POTAGE. Consommeé Rachel. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Coquilles de crabes moux. POISSON. Saumon à la Dauphine. RELEVé. Quartier d'agneau à l'Espagnole. ENTRéES. Estomacs de pigeonneaux à la Toulouse. Croustades de bécassines au fumet. Soufflés de volaille purée de champignons. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Petits pois. épinards. Asperges. Punch à l'Anglaise. RôTS. Pluviers. Filets de bœuf aux truffes. Salade. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR CHAUD. Croûtes aux ananas Richelieu. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR FROIDS. Gelée marasquin. Crème Parisienne. Meringues Chantilly. GLACES. La poule aux œufs. Bombe spongade. L'arbre Prodigieux. Dessert. DINNER GIVEN BY THE CITIZENS OF NEW YORK TO HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT JOHNSON, In honor of his visit to the city, Wednesday, August 29, 1866. MENU. POTAGES. Amontillado. Consommé Châtelaine. Bisque aux quenelles. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales de gibier à la Vénitienne. POISSONS. Hochheimerberg. Saumon Livonienne. Paupiettes de kingfish, Villeroi. RELEVéS. Champagne. Selle d'agneau aux concombres. Filet de bœuf à la Pocahontas. ENTREéS. Suprême de volaille Dauphine. Ballotines de pigeons Lucullus. Chât. Margaux, '48. Filets de canetons Tyrolienne. Côtelettes à la Maréchale. Ris de veau Montgomery. Boudins à la Richelieu. Sorbet à la Dunderberg. RôTS. Clos-Vougeot. Bécassines Bardées. Ortolans farcis. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Tomates farcies. Aubergines frites. Artichauts Barigoule. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Tokaï Impériale. Pêches à la New York. Abricots Siciliens. Macédoines de fruits. Moscovites aux oranges. Bavarois aux fraises. Gelée Californienne. Crème aux amandes. Meringues Chantilly. Beauséjour au Malaga. Mille feuilles Pompadour. Gâteau soleil. Biscuits glacés aux pistaches. FRUITS ET DESSERTS. Madère Faquart. PIèCES MONTEéS. Monument de Washington. Fountaine des Aigles. Temple de la Liberté. Trophée National. Casque Romain. Colonne de l'Union. Char de la Paix. Rotonde Egyptienne. Cassolette Sultane. Corne d'Abondance. OCTOBRE, 1866. DîNER DE 15 COUVERTS. MS. BRADFORD. Washington Square. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé à la Royale. Purée de gibier. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Bouchées de terrapène. POISSONS. Sheepshead à la Portugaise. Kingfish à la Dieppoise. RELEVé. Filet be bœuf au Madère. Tomates farcies. Choux fleurs. ENTRéES. Cailles à la Financière. Haricots verts. Timbales à l'Impériale. Petits pois à la Française. Punch à l'Anglaise. RôTS. Faisans garnis d'ortolans. Bécasses bardées. ENTREMETS SUCRé CHAUD. Pouding à la Royale. ENTREMETS SUCRéS FROIDS. Macédoine de fruits. Charlotte russe. Blanc manger. Gelée fouettée kirsch. Mille feuilles Pompadour. Gâteau goronflot. Cornes d'abondance. Croquembouche. Glace Ceylan au café. Compotes. Petits fours. Fruits. Dessert. JUIN, 1866. DîNER DE 30 COUVERTS. MR. FACHIRI MENU. POTAGES. Consommé Rachel. Purée de faisans. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Bouchées de crevettes. Pieds d'angeau Villeroi. POISSONS. Saumon, sauce Génoise. Kingfish à la Joinville. RELEVé. Filet de bœuf, Rothschild. ENTREéES. Poulets ambassadrice. Salmis de bécasses. Caisses de filets de pigeons. Fonds d'artichauts. Petits pois. Haricots verts. Choux fleurs. Punch à la Régence. RôTS. Canards (Mongrels d'Australie). Cailles truffées. FROID. Pâté de foies gras. Filets de truites Historiés. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Timbale à la Madison. Pouding à la Reine. Gelée macédoine. Charlotte russe. Bavarois aux fraises. Gelée Moscovite. Glaces moulées. Fruits. Dessert. AVRIL, 1867. DîNER DE 175 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur de Charles Dickens. MENU. Huîtres sur coquilles. POTAGES. Consommé Sévigné. Crème d'asperges à la Dumas. HORS-D'ŒUVRE CHAUD. Timbales à la Dickens. POISSONS. Saumon à la Victoria. Bass à l'Italienne. Pommes de terre Nelson. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf à la Lucullus. Laitues braisées demi-glace. Agneau farci à la Walter Scott. Tomates à la Reine. ENTRéES. Filets de brants à la Seymour. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Croustades de ris de veau à la Douglas. Quartiers d'artichauts Lyonnaise. Epinards au velouté. Côtelettes de grouses à la Fenimore Cooper. ENTRéES FROIDES. Galantines à la Royale. Aspics de foies-gras historiés. INTERMèDE. Sorbet à l'Americaine. RôTS. Bécassines. Poulets de grains truffés. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Pêches à la Parisienne (chaud). Macédoine de fruits. Moscovite à l'abricot. Lait d'amandes rubanée au chocolat. Charlotte Doria. Viennois glacé à l'orange. Corbeille de biscuits Chantilly. Gâteau Savarin au marasquin. Glaces forme fruits Napolitaine. Parfait au Café. PIèCES MONTéES. Temple de la Littérature. Trophée à l'Auteur. Pavillion international. Colonne Triomphale. Les armes Britanniques. The Stars and Stripes. Le Monument de Washington. La Loi du destin. Fruits. Compotes et pêches et de poires. Petits fours. Fleurs. Dessert. FEVRIER, 1867. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. MR. A.T. STEWART. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Britannia. Crème d'asperges. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Boudins à la Richelieu. POISSON. Bass rayée à la Chambord. Croquettes de pommes de terre. RELEVé. Selle de mouton à l'Anglaise (gelée de groseille). Petits pois. ENTRéES. Chapons truffés à la Périgord. Escaloppes de filet de bœuf Sicilienne. Choux de Bruxelles. Haricots verts. Punch à l'Impériale. RôT. Cailles piquées au cresson. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Beignets à la Médici (chaud). Gelée d'orange. Bavarois aux fraises. Glaces asperges, sauce marasquin. Bombe aux fruits. PIèCES MONTéES. Le Cupidon batelier. Corbeille arabesque. Paniers sultane garnis de petits fours. Devises. Bonbons. Marrons surprise. Dessert. NOVEMBRE, 1867. DîNER DE 20 COUVERTS. MR. MURPHY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGE. Consommé à la Régence. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Boudins de volaille à la Viennoise. RELEVéS. Saumon à la Franklyn. Pommes Dauphine. Selle de mouton jardinière. ENTRéES. Filets de poulet à la Patti. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Salmis de bécasses au champagne. Haricots verts. Punch à l'Américaine. RôT. Canvas-back duck. Salade. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Pêches à la Richelieu. Gelée aux ananas. Crème Moka. Gâteau Sicilien. Meringue Chantilly. PIèCES MONTéES. Souvenirs Indiens. Sultane Bayadére. Le char des cygnes. Nougat Parisien. Glacés oranges Portugaise. Biscuits Tortoni. Dessert. DéCEMBRE, 1868. DîNER DE 280 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur du Professeur Morse. MENU. Huîtres sur coquilles. POTAGES. Consommé Sévigné de perdreau. Purée d'asperges aux croûtons soufflés. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins au suprême. RELEVéS. Saumon à la Franklyn. Pommes gastronome. Escalopes de bass aux éperlans Dauphin. Filet de bœuf aux fonds d'artichauts macédoine. Dindonneaux à la moderne. ENTRéES. Ris de veau à la Valençay. Salmis de grouses aux truffes. Paupiettes de poulet Vénitienne. ENTRéES FROIDES. Pains de faisans Chantilly. Galantine de pigeons à la Royale. Homard mayonnaise en Bellevue. Pâté de gibier Parisienne. Sorbet Dalmatie. RôTS. Canvas-back. Cailles truffées. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Petits pois au beurre. épinards velouté. Choux fleurs gratin. Haricots verts sautés. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR CHAUD. Pommes à la Manhattan. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR FROIDS. Ananas à l'Orientale. Lait d'amandes rubané. Savarin aux fraises. Charlotte russe, vanille ornée sucre filé. Baravois au cacao. Sicilien glacé au marasquin. Gâteau à l'angélique. Panier de meringues. Pièces montées. Glace excellent au café. Montélimar. Fruits. Petits fours. Compotes. Café. JUIN, 1868. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. EN L'HONNEUR DES AMBASSADEURS CHINOIS. MENU. POTAGE. A la Brunoise. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Bouchées à la Reine. RELEVéS. Saumon à la sauce Hollandaise. Bass rayée au gratin. Filet de bœuf à la jardinière. Pommes de terre Duchesse. ENTRéES. Poulet sauté à la Valenciennes. Epinards au velouté. Petits pois aux laitues. Ris de veau braisés, sauce Madère. Haricots verts sautés. Sorbet Californienne. RôTS. Brants. Salade d'escarolle. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Pouding d'ananas au Sabayon. Gelée au Madère. Bavarois aux fraises. Gâteau Savarin. Mille feuilles. Glaces variées. Petits fours. Fruits. Compotes. PIèCES MONTéES. Le Pavillon du Mandarin. Monument de Washington. L'Arrivée du Clipper de Hong Kong, l'Enfant du Soleil. Dessert. OCTOBRE, 1869. DîNER DE 120 COUVERTS. LES PIONNIERS DE LA CALIFORNIE. MENU. Chablis. Huîtres. POTAGES. Amontillado. Consommé Sévigné. Crème de gibier. HORS-D'ŒUVRE CHAUD. Brissotins au suprême. RELEVéS. Hochheimer. Bass à la Dieppoise. Pommes tartlettes. Champagne. Filet de bœuf aux Champignons nouveaux. ENTRéES. Bordeaux. Côtelettes de volaille, sauce Périgueux. Petits pois au beurre. Ris de veau à la Valençay. épinards à l'Espagnole. ENTRéES FROIDES. Galantine à la gelée. Jambon décoré. Salade de homard. Sorbet à la Dalmatie. RôTS. Champagne. Perdreaux. Bécasses. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Timbale à la Madison (chaud). Gelée aux ananas. Bavarois aux fraises. Corbeille de meringues Chantilly. Charlotte Parisienne. Gâteau Sicilien. PIèCES MONTéES. L'état de l'Or. Le Viaduc. Le Tunnel. Le Trophée du Commerce. Glaces moulées. Dessert. FéVRIER, 1869. DîNER DE 16 COUVERTS. MR. L.P. MORTON. MENU. Huîtres sur coquilles. POTAGES. Consommé Sévigné. Bisque de crabes Victoria. HORS-D'ŒUVRE CHAUD. Rissolettes à la Pompadour. RELEVéS. Bass rayée aux éperlans Diplomate. Selle de chevreuil Tyrolienne. Pommes de terre Duchese. épinards au jus. ENTRéES. Faisan à la Aquitaine. Petits pois au beurre. Filets de poulet macédoine aux truffes. Champignons farcis. Quenelles de gibier, Londonderry. Foods d'artichauts au Suprême. Sorbet à l'Américaine. RôTS. Champons truffés. Canvas back. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Timbale à la Richelieu. Gelée d'orange Orientale. Bavarois rubané. Gâteau Napolitain. Nougat de Provence à la crème. Glaces excellent au café garni de Tortoni. Asperges, sauce Marasquin. Dessert. AVRIL, 1869. DîNER DE 22 COUVERTS. MR. SLOANE. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Royale. Bisque aux quenelles. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins au Suprême. RELEVéS. Saumon à la Chambord. Pommes Dauphine. Selle d'agneau aux laitues farcies. ENTRéES. Pigeons à la Montmorency. Petits pois à la Parisienne. Chartreuse de ris de veau à la Moderne. Côtelettes de filets de bœuf à la Russe. épinards à la crème. Sorbet à la Dalmatic. RôTS. Poulets de grain. Bécassines. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE SUCRéS. Poires à la condé. Gelée Orientale. Bavarois rubané. Gâteau baba glacé au rhum. Charlotte vanille. Glace corbeille jardinière. Mousse café. Pièces montées. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. OCTOBRE, 1870. DîNER DE 50 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur du Gouverneur Hoffman et de Son Etat Major. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Impériale. Tortue verte au Clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE CHAUD. Croquettes de ris de veau. RELEVéS. Bass rayée à la Manhattan. Filet de bœuf braisé aux Champignons. ENTRéES. Estomacs de poulet, sauce céleri. Ballotines d'agneau à la Créole. Homard farci à la Diable. Sorbet au Kirsch. RôTS. Perdreaux sauce au pain. Grouses à la gelée de groseille. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Pommes de terre Duchesse. Haricots verts à l'Anglaise. Tomates sautées. SUCRéS. Timbale Madison (chaud). Gelée au Madère. Charlotte Russe. Crème Française aux amandes. Corbeille meringues Chantilly. Mille feuilles Pompadour. Gâteau Breton. Glace Napolitaine. Pièces Montées. Dessert. NOVEMBRE, 1870. DîNER DE 12 COUVERTS. MR. W. ASTOR. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Rachel. Purée de gibier à la Cussy. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbale Palermitaine. RELEVéS. Saumon à la Diplomate. Pommes à la Duchesse. Dindonneau farci aux marrons. ENTRéES. Côtelettes de filet de bœuf à la Russe. Haricots verts. épinards au velouté. Cailles à la Bagration. Choux fleurs. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Boudins de volaille à la Viennoise. Sorbet à l'Américaine. RôTS. Perdreaux truffés. Canvas-back duck. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Croûte aux ananas à la Florentine. Gelée au kummel. Bavarois à la vanille. Charlotte Doria. Saravin au kirsch. Caisses de fruits glacés. Petits gâteau assortis. Glace Napolitaine. Excellent au café. Dessert. DéCEMBRE, 1870. SOUPER DE 20 COUVERTS. MS. BRADLEY. MENU. Consommé Royale. Rissolettes d'huîtres à la Pompadour. Suprême de volaille aux truffes. Petits pois. Terrapène à la Maryland. Volière de faisans Anglais décorés. Pâté de gibier en croûte. Canvas-back duck rôti. Cailles grillées. Salade de céleri. Péches à la Condé. Gelée aux oranges. Moscovite aux fraises. Gâteau Portugaise. Meringues. Gaufres Chantilly. Glaces. Excellent au café. Fruits. Petits fours. Pièces Montées. Café. DéCEMBRE, 1871. DîNER DE 100 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur de S.M. le Grand Duc Alexis. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé au Grand Duc. Tortue verte au Clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Variés. POISSONS. Bass rayée Portugaise garnie de filets d'éperlans frits. Saumon de Californie à la sauce Génevoise. RELEVE. Filet de bœuf à la Richelieu. ENTRéES. Côtelettes de chevreuil, sauce poivrade. Filets de perdreaux à l'Aquitaine. Terrapène à la Maryland. FROID. Galantine de faisan à la Royale. Chaudfroid de bécasses en croûstades à la gelée. Sorbet à la Régence. RôTS. Canvas-back duck. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Petits pois au beurre. Haricots flageolets. Artichauts à la Provençale. Choux fleurs au gratin. Pommes Duchesse. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Poires à la Florentine. Macédoine de fruits. Charlotte russe. Moscovite aux abricots. Bavarois rubané. Gâteau mousseline. Coupole Chantilly. Glaces Napolitaine. Excellent au café. Piecès montées. Dessert. MARS, 1871. DîNER POUR 35 PERSONNES. MR. FRANK LESLIE. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Impériale. Crème d'artichauts. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Rissolettes au salpicon. POISSON. Truite de rivière à la Véntienne. Pommes gastronome. Selle d'agneau aux tomates à la Reine. ENTRéES. Paupiettes de faisan à l'Aquitaine. Petits pois nouveaux aux laitues. Caisses de ris de veau à la Parisienne. Haricots verts sautées. Asperges nouvelles en branches, sauce blanche. Sorbet à l'Américaine. RôTS. Chapons aux marrons mauviettes. ENTREMETS. Pouding diplomate. Coupoie Chantilly. Gelée aux ananas. Bavarois aux pêches. Gâteau baba au Rhum. Timbale de gauffres. Glaces. Excellent au café. Pièces montées. Dessert. JANVIER, 1871. DîNER DE 18 COUVERTS. MR. W.H. HURLMEY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Tortae verte au Clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins au suprême. POISSONS. Bass rayée à la Chambord. Pomme gastronome. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf aux champignons farcis. Selle de moutton à l'Anglaise. épinards au velouté. ENTRéES. Filets de grouse Bernardine. Tomates sautées. Cailles farcies Périgueux. Petits pois au beurre. Ris de veau macédoine. Asperges en branches. Sorbet en écorce. RôT. Canvas-back. Salade. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Gelée aux fruits. Bavarois à la vanille. Gâteau Cougloff. Corbeille Charlotte. Glace le Tyrolien sur socle. Parfait au café garni de Tortoni. Pièces Montées. Dessert. OCTOBRE, 1872. SOUPER BUFFET ET ASSIS. MR. AUGUST BELMONT. MENU. CHAUD. Consommé de volaille. Huîtres à la béchamel aux truffes. Huîtres farcies. Croquettes homard à la Victoria. Ragoût de Terrapène. FROID. Saumon, sauce ravigote vert-pré. Filet de bœuf aux légumes. Galantine de dinde aux truffes. Pâté de gibier de Colmar. Chaudfroid de grouses. Cailles piquées à la gelée. Salade de volaille mayonnaise. Mayonnaise de homard. RôTIS CHAUDS. Chapons. Dindonneaux. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Gelée aux ananas. Pain à la Reine. Gâteau baba au rhum. Gaufres Chantilly. Bavarois aux fraises. Charlotte Parisienne. Petites glaces variées. Pièces Montées. Dessert. JANVIER, 1872. DîNER DE 90 COUVERTS. BULLS AND BRASS ANNUAL DINNER. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Sultane. Tortue verte au clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins au suprême. RELEVéS. Bass à la Hollandaise. Pommes Duchesse. Filet de bœuf aux champignons. Laitues farcies. ENTRéES. Suprême de grouse au chasseur. Haricots verts. Cailles braisées, sauce céleri. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Ris de veau Maintenon. Tomates sautées. Sorbet au Rhum. RôTIS. Canards à tête rouge. Chapons. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Plum pouding à l'Anglaise. Gelée à l'Orientale. Bavarois aux fraises. Gâteau Savarin. Charlotte Parisienne. Pièces montées. Dessert. MAI, 1872. DîNER DE 72 COUVERTS. MR. RECORDER HACKETT. MENU. POTAGES. Consommé Printanier. Queus de bœuf à l'Anglaise. POISSONS. Saumon à la Joinville. Œufs d'alose grillés. Pommes Duchesse. RELEVéS. Selle d'agneau Salvandi. Filet de bœuf aux champignons nouveaux. Petits pois aux laitues. ENTRéES. Suprême de volaille purée de truffes. Flageolets maître-d'hôtel. Terrapène à la Philadelphia. Asperges en branches sauce blanche. Sorbet Spongade au kirsch. RôTS. Chapons. Pigeonneaux. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Pouding Bagration. Gelée d'ananas Dantzic. Gelée au champagne. Pain de fraises Moderne. Corbeille de meringues. Bavarois au lait d'amandes. Gâteau Cavour. Glaces. Tutti-frutti. Biscuit Tortoni. Fruits. Petits fours. Pièces montées. Café. Liqueurs. MARS, 1873. DîNER DE 12 COUVERTS. SUIVI D'UN SOUPER DE 80 PERSONNES. En l'honneur du Général Grant. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES . Consommé Pierre le Grand. Crème d'asperges. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Montglas. POISSON. Truites de rivière à la Joinville. Pommes gastronome. RELEVé. Selle d'agneau à la Chancelière.. ENTRéES. Filets de canvas-back à l'Aquitaine. Petits pois. Grenades de volaille purée de marrons. Haricots verts. Aspics de foies gras en Bellevue. Ballotines de pigeons. Sorbet à l'Américaine. RôT. Poulets de grain truffés. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR CHAUD. Pêches à la Colbert. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR FROIDS. Gelée aux fruits Sultane. Lait d'amandes. Pièces montées. Glaces moulées. Fruits. Dessert. SOUPER. CHAUD. Consommé de volaille. Huîtres béchamel aux truffes. Croquettes d;huîtres Africaine. Timbales à l'écarlate. Truites de rivières ravigote. Selle d'agneau de lait jardinière. Escalopes de volaille à la Talleyrand. écrevisses à la Bordelaise. FROID. Volière de faisans Anglais. Mayonnaise de volaille. Salade de homard. Aspics de foies-gras. CHAUD. Bécassines au cresson. Asperges nouvelles. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR CHAUDS ET DESSERTS. Gelée d'oranges. Bavarois rubané. Gâteau Impérial. Corbeille Chantilly. Glaces: Bacchus et le puits garni de Tortoni. Excellent au café. Petites glaces variées. Dessert. FéVRIER, 1873. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur du Professeur Tyndall. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Marie Stuart. Bisque de homard aux quenelles. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins au suprême. POISSONS. Rockfish à la Régence. éperians frits, sauce tartare. Pommes Dauphine. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf à l'Indienne. épinards à l'Espagnole. ENTRéES. Poularde à la Lyonnaise. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Escalopes de grouses, sauce bigarade. Haricots verts sautés. Côtelettes de ris de veau aux pointes d'asperges. FROID. Galantine de dinde. Aspic de gibier. Sorbet à la Dalmatic. RôTS. Canard à tête rouge. Selle de mouton. Salade d'escarolle. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR CHAUD. Plum pouding au sabayon. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR FROIDS. Gelée au fruits. Charlotte Parisienne. Gâteau Victoria. Corbeilles de meringues. Glaces Napolitaine. Dessert. FéVRIER, 1873. DîNER DE 75 COUVERTS (le diner des cygnes). MR. LUCKMEYER. MENU. POTAGES. Consommé Impériale. Bisque aux crevettes. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Condé. POISSONS. Red snapper à la Vénitienne. Paupiettes d'éperlans, sauce des gourmets. RELEVé. Filet de bœuf à l'égyptienne. ENTRéES. Côtelettes de volaille à la Sévigné. Ailes de canvas-back, sauce bigarade. Asperges froides en branches, sauce vinaigrette. Sorbet de l'Ermitage en éncore. RôTS. Chapons truffés. Selle de mouton. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Cardons à la moelle. Choux fleurs sauce crème. Petits pois au beurre. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Poires à la Richelieu. Pain de pêches Maréchale. Gelée aux ananas. Gaufres Chantilly. Gelée aux fruits. Coupole à l'Anglaise. Gâteaux à la Reine. Glace délicieux aux noisettes. Biscuits Tortoni. Petits fours. Caisses de fruits glacés. Devises, Victoria. Bonbonnières garnies. Fruits. Bonbons surprise. Dessert. A BORD DU "CITY OF PEKING" DE LA PACIFIC MAIL STEAMSHIP COMPANY. DéJEUNER--GOûTER--DîNER--SOUPER. AOûT, 1874. POUR 300 PERSONNES. DéJEUNER. Œufs. Omelette aux fines herbes. Œufs au jambon. Œufs Soubise. Poissons. Saumon grillé, maître-d'hôtel. Filets de soles à la Horly. Entrées. Poulets frits, sauce tomate. Côtelettes d'agneau purée de pommes. Rognons sautés aux champignons. Tête de veau vinaigrette. Froid. Bœuf à la mode. Galantine à la gelée. Noix de veau piquées et glacées. GOûTER. Relevé. Selle d'agneau rôti à l'Anglaise. Entrées. Poulet sauté aux pommes de terre et fonds d'artichauts. Froid. Sandwiches, jambon, langues, Longe de veau à la gelée. Dessert. Fromages, fruits, compotes, café, thé. DîNER. Potages. Consommé printanier. Tortue verte à l'Anglaise. Hors-d'œuvre. Bouchées de homard. Poissons. Bass rayée à l'Italienne. Salade de tomates. Maquereau Espagnol, sauce Colbert. Salade de concombres. Entrées. Ris de veau macédoine. Pigeonneaux aux petits pois. Poulets sautés aux truffes. Rôts. Côtes de bœuf. Yorkshire pudding. Bécasses. Chevreuil. Canards. Salade de laitue. Entremets. Haricots de Lima. Maïs en feuilles. Petits pois au beurre. Pêches Condé. Meringues Chantilly. Glace vanille. Dessert. Gaufres cigarettes. Devises. Bonbons. Fruits. Fromage. Compotes. Petits fours. SOUPER. Consommé en tasses. Crabes moux frits. Pluviers grillés. Froid. Filet de bœuf. Galantine aux truffes. Salade de homard. Glaces Napolitaine. MAI, 1874. DîNER DE 6 COUVERTS. MR. PARKER. MENU. Lucines (clovisses). POTAGES. Consommé Deslignae. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Renaissance. RELEVéS. Kingfish au diplomate. Pommes Duchesse. Selle d'agneau aux tomates Reine. ENTRéES. Poulets de grain à la Bagration. Petits pois aux laitues. Aiguillettes de canard métis Renaissance. Artichauts à la Barigoule. Sorbet au Rhum. RôT. Bécassines au cresson. FROID. Pâté de foies gras. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Croûte aux ananas. Gaufres de Carlsbad. Chantilly aux fraises. Glace mousse aux bananes. Dessert. MAI, 1874. DîNER DE 5 COUVERTS. OFFERT à MR. HENRI ROCHEPORT PAR QUELQUES AMIS. MENU. Clovisses. POTAGES. Consommé châtelaine. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbale Palermitaine. RELEVéS. Maquereau Espagnol, sauce Colbert. Quartier d'agneau aux tomates farcies. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet à l'Orientale. Casseroles de ris de veau truffes et champignons. Sorbet à l'Américaine. RôTS. Bécassines au cresson. Aspic de foies gras. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Artichauts à l'Italienne. Petits pois au beurre. Asperges, sauce crème. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Croûte aux ananas. Glaces. Cygne aux roseaux. Gaufres Chantilly. Dessert. MAI, 1875. DîNER DE 15 COUVERTS. MR. SAM WARD. MENU. Clovisses. Huîtres de Bridgeport. POTAGES. Consommé printanier. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Boudins à la Polonaise. RELEVéS. Turban de saumon, sauce crème. Pommes gastronome. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet Montpensier. Petits pois. Côtelettes de pigeonneaux Signora. Haricots verts à la crème. Asperges blanches, sauce Hollandaise. Sorbet ananas au Marasquin. RôTS. Pluviers. Bécassines. Salade de Romaine. Soufflés de Stilton à la Sam Ward. Glaces aux noisettes garnies d'excellent au café en caisses. Dessert. NOVEMBRE, 1875. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. MR. WRIGHT SANFORD. Milieu de table dormant de fleurs. Musique. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Descazes. Gombo aux crabes. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Cassolettes à la Dumas. POISSONS. Sheepshead, sauce Hollandaise et Génevoise. Pommes de terre croquettes. éperians désosséS et frits, mayonnaise printanière. RELEVéS. Selle de chevreuil à la Tyrolienne. Haricots verts sautés. ENTRéES. Croustades d'escargots aux cérvelles de perdeaux. Fonds d'artichauts suprême. Estomacs de dindonneaux Ambassadrice. Petits pois au beurres. Ris de veau à la Messiers. Choux fleurs, sauce crème. Sorbet à la Hélène. RôTS. Canvas back. Hominy sample. Cailles en casseroles. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Timbales à la Madison. Délicieux aux noisettes. Ceylan au café. JUILLET, 1876. DîNER DE 40 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur du Gouverneur Tilden. MENU. Lucines orangées. POTAGES. Consommé à la Talleyrand. Crème de pois verts, Saint Germain. HORS-D'ŒVRE. Timbales à la Renaissance. RELEVéS. Saumon à la Chambord. Pommes Duchesse. Selle d'agneau Salvandi. ENTRéES. Poulets nouveaux Bagration. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Côtelettes de pigeonneaux Signora. Fonds d'artichauts sautés. Ris de veau grillés, sauce Colbert. Chicorée à la crème. Sorbet Andalouse. RôTS. Bécasses. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Croûte aux ananas à la Victoria. Gelée aux fruits. Coupole Chantilly. Gâteau Viennois. Gaufres de Carlsbad. Glace moulée le faisan garni de biscuits Tortoni. Excellent au café. Petits fours. Bonbons. Devises. Fruits. DéCEMBRE, 1877. BUFFET POUR 100 PERSONNES. PURIM BALL. MENU. CHAUD. Bouillon. Croquettes de volaille. Bouchées de ris de veau. FROID. Galantine de dinde. Pâté de gibier aux truffes. Salade de légumes langues. Mayonnaise de volaille. Perdreaux et cailles à la gelée. Sandwiches assortis. DESSERT. Gelée aux fruits. Bavarois aux pêches. Gâteau Mathilde. Meringues Chantilly. Glaces Napolitaine. Biscuits glacés. Tutti-frutti. Mousse aux marrons. Fruits. Petit fours. Pièces montées. Bonbons. Devises. AVRIL, 1878. DîNER DE 225 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur de Mr. Bayard Taylor, Ministre des états Unis à Berlin. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Washington. Tortue verte. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins à la Richelieu. RELEVéS. Saumon de Kennebeck, sauce crevettes. Pommes de terre Dauphine. Filet de bœuf au Madère. Tomates farcies. ENTRéES. Estomacs de dinde à l'Impératrice. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Escalopes d'agneau à la Chéron. Haricots flageolets, maître-d'hôtel. Mignons de canards, sauce bigarade. Asperges en branches, sauce crème. Maïs sauté au beurre. Sorbet Young America. RôTS. Chapons. Pigeonneaux. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Pouding à la Masséna. Aspic de fruits. Charlotte Russe. Corbeille de meringue. Pain de pêches Chantilly. Gâteau noisettes. Gâteau mille feuilles. Glaces mignonne. Dame blanche. Fruits. Petits fours. Bonbons. Devises. FEVRIER, 1879. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. MR. W.K. VANDERBILT. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Rachel. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Napolitaines. RELEVéS. Escalopes de bass, Henri IV. Pommes de terre surprise. Selle de mouton Salvandi. ENTRéES. Caisses de filets de poulet Grammont. Choux de Bruxelles. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Sauté de filets de grouses Tyrolienne. Céleri au jus. Terrapène à la Colombia. Sorbet Aya-Pana. RôTS. Canvas-back duck. Cailles truffées. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Pouding à la Humboldt. Gelée d'orange Orientale. Gaufres à la crème. Blanc manger rubané. Charlotte Victoria. Glaces fruits en surprise. Délicieux Impériale. Dessert. AOûT, 1879. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. OFFERT à MR. HENRY IRVING. MENU. Lucines. POTAGES. Consommé d'Orsay. Crème d'orge Viennoise. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Nilson. RELEVéS. Maquereau Espagnol, sauce Aurore. Pommes croquettes. Filet de bœuf au Madère. Tomates à la Reine. ENTRéES. Suprême de volaille aux truffes. Petits pois aux laitues. Brochettes de ris de veau, sauce Laurent. Maïs nouveaux sautés. Fonds d'artichauts. Choux fleurs gratin. Sorbet àl'Andalouse. RôTS. Grouses flanquées d'ortolans. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Croûte aux ananas. Gelée au parfait amour. Timbales au souvenir. Glaces poires farcies. Excellent au café. Pièces montées. Dessert. MARS, 1879. DîNER DE 12 COUVERTS. MR. H.R. BISHOP. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Impériale. Crême d'artichauts. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Rissoles Demidoff. RELEVéS. Bass à la Chambord. Pommes Duchesse. Selle d'agneau à l'Anglaise. Pointes d'asperges. ENTRéES. Filets de volaille Lorenzo. Petits pois. Caisses de reedbirds Périgueux. Fonds d'artichauts aux champignons gratinés. Sorbet Young America. RôTS. Pluviers. Pigeonneaux. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Timbale Eugénie. Gelée macédoine. Moscovite kummel. Gâteau mousse orange. St. Honoré Chiboust. GLACES. Le Moulin à vent et le parfait café. Dessert. JANVIER, 1880. DîNER DE 32 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur du Général Hancock. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Rachel. Purée de volaille à la Reine. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins au suprême. POISSONS. Bass rayée aux éperlans Dauphin. Pommes de terre Duchesse. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf aux cèpes. Selle de mouton à l'Anglaise. épinards à l'Espagnole. ENTRéES. Ailes de volaille à la Hongroise. Petits pois Parisienne. Côtelettes d'agneau maison d'Or. Haricots panachés. Fonds d'artichauts farcis aux champignons. Terrapène en casserole à la Maryland. Sorbet Montmorency. RôTS. Canvas-back duck. Cailles bardées (salade laitues). ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Timbale Madison. Gelée Orientale. Gaufres Chantilly. Glace Napolitaine. Mousse aux bananes. Pièces montées. Petits fours. Fruits. Café. Liqueurs. MARS, 1880. DîNER DE 230 COUVERTS. MR. DE LESSEPS. MENU. Huîtres sur coquilles. POTAGES. Consommé Sultane. Crème d'asperges Princesse. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Périgordines. RELEVéS. Bass rayée à la Conti. Pommes Duchesse. Filet de bœuf à la Rossini. Tomates farcies. ENTRéES. Suprême de volaille Lucullus. Petits pois à la Française. Côtelettes d'agneau à la Signora. Haricots flageolets sautés. Salmis de bécassines Lithuanienne. Fonds d'artichauts Provençale. ENTRéES FROIDES. Pain de gibier en Damier. Volière de faisans. Aspics de foies-gras en Bellevue. Galantine de poulet aux truffes. Sorbet Montmorency. RôTS. Canvas-back. Pigeonneaux. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Croûte aux ananas. Gelée printanière. Lait d'amandes rubané. Gaufres à la Chantilly. Gâteau Sicilien. PIèCES MONTéES. Glaces Napolitaine. Biscuits glacés. Dessert. JANVIER, 1881. BUFFET POUR 200 PERSONNES. MENU. CHAUD. Bouillon de volaille. Huîtres à la poulette. Coquilles de pétoncles à la Brestoise. Dinde farcie aux marrons et aux truffes. Croquettes de volaille. Terrapènes. FROID. Filet de bœuf à la Varsovienne. Buisson de langues à la gelée. Galantine de chapon truffée. Aspics de perdreaux historiés. Volières de cailles. Salade de volaille au cèleri. Mayonnaise de crevettes à la laitue. Petits pains garnis Rillettes. Sandwiches assortis. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Gelée aux oranges. Bavarois au café. Charlotte Doria. Gaufres à la crème. Gâteau baba. Gâteau Mathilde. GLACES. Petites glaces à la crème et aux fruits. Tutti-frutti. Parfait au café. Biscuits glacés. Fruits. Petits fours. Bonbons. Devises. Caisses et fruits glacés. MARS, 1881. DîNER DE 220 COUVERTS. Offert à l'Honorable Carl Schura. MENU. Sauterne. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Rachel. Amontillade Xérès. Purée à la Condé. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Brissotins au Suprême. RELEVéS. Hochheimer Moselle. Bass rayée, sauce Hollandaise. éperlans en Dauphin. Pommes de terre Duchesse. St. Julien Supépieur. Filet de bœuf aux cèpes. Epinards au velouté. ENTRéES. Champagne. Ailes de poulet à la Toulouse. Petits pois au beurre. Pigeonneaux à l'Allemande. Tomates sautées. Ris de veau purée de marrons. Sorbet au Kirsch. Punzon, 1874, Bourgoyne. RôTS. Brants. Selle de mouton. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Plum pouding au sabayon. Gelée au Madère. Gaufres de Carlsbad. Cigares et fleurs. Glaces Napolitaine. Mousse aux bananes. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. Liqueurs. JUIN, 1881. DîNER POUR 10 PERSONNES. MR. J.F. LOUBAT. MENU. Lucines. POTAGES. Consommé Sévigné. Purée de gibier au Chasseur. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Petites croustades financière. RELEVéS. Saumon de Kennebeck, sauce Hollandaise. Pommes Marquise. Filet de bœuf à la Provençale. ENTRéES. Poulet de grain à la Périgueux. Petits pois. Aspics de homards à la gelée. Fondu au Parmesan. Sorbet au Champagne. RôTS. Selle d'agneau, sauce Cumberland. Bécassines sur canapés. Salade de Romaine. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Asperges en branches, sauce crème. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Timbales de fruits à la Parisienne. GLACES. Parfait au café. Petites Génoises glacées. Fruits. Dessert. NOVEMBRE, 1882. BUFFET POUR 40 PERSONNES. MR. CHARLES DANA. MENU. CHAUD. Consommé de volaille. Huîtres béchamel. Rissolettes Pompadour. Croquettes panachées. Huîtres farcies. Bouchées au financier. FROID. Daxne de saumon à la Russe. Filet de bœuf printanière. Pâté de gibier aux truffes. Ballotines de cailles en buisson. Chaudfroid de poularde à la gelée. Salade de homard. Mayonnaise de volaille. Sandwiches. Canapés. Rillettes. ENTREMETS SUCRéS FROIDS. Gelée d'oranges Orientale. Crème bavaroise à l'abricot. Gaufres crème. Charlotte Parisienne. Gâteau Viennois. Gâteau noisettes. Pièces Montées. GLACES. Napolitaine. Merveilleuse. Biscuit glacé. Tutti-frutti. Toronchino. Devises. Fruits. Petits fours. Bonbons. Dessert. Café. SEPTEMBRE, 1882. DîNER DE 175 COUVERTS. En l'Honneur d'Expidition Melville. MENU. Haut Sauterne. Huîtres. POTAGES. Amontillado. Consommé Andalouse. Crème d'artichauts. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Périgordines. RELEVéS. Piesporter. Aiguillettes de base Joinville. Pommes de terre Anglaise. Cliquot Soc. Filet de bœuf Bernardi. Aubergines frites. ENTRéES. Ailes de volaille Princière. Pontet Canet. Petits pois aux laitues. Ris de veau Napolitaine. Haricots de Lima. Côtelettes Chateaubriand. Mais sautés. Sorbet Maniniou. RôT. Perdreaux garnis de mauviettes. FROID. Pâté de foies-gras à la Gelée. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR CHAUD. Pouding Cambacérès. Gelée aux fruits. Gaufres crème. GLACES. Merveilleuse. Napolitaine. Pièces Montées. Fruits. Petits fours. Fruits glacés. Café. Liqueurs. MARS, 1882. DîNER DE 12 COUVERTS. MR. W.H. WICKHAM. MENU. Chablis Vieux. Huîtres. POTAGES. Amontillado. Consommé Marie Stuart. Tortue verte. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales écarlate. RELEVéS. Cliquot Rouge. Alose grillée à l'Africaine . Concombres. Selle d'agneau Colbert. Pommes croquettes. ENTRéES. St. Pierre. Ailes de poulet à la Patti. Petits pois. Salmis de canvas-back au vin de champagne. Haricots verts. Terrapène en casserole. Sorbet Andalouse. RôT. Château Latour. Bécassines Anglaises. Pâté de foies-gras. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Champagne Roederer. Croûte aux fruits. Gelée abricotine. Crème Carlsbad. Pièces montées. Glaces. Toronchino. Milanaise. Fruits. Dessert. Café. MARS, 1883. Menu d'un Dîner Original de 14 Couverts. MR. BENSON. BUFFET RUSSE. Canapés de caviar. Olives farcies. Céleri. éperlans. Marinés radis. Canapés d'anchois. Olives de Lucques. Saucisson de Lyon. Saucisson. Vermuth. Sherry et bitters. Absinthe. Johannisberg. Huîtres. Madère. Bisque de Lucines (clams). Potage à l'oseille aux croûtons. Crabes d'huîtres frits. Concombres marinés. Château Yquem. Timbales de sheepshead à l'Ambassadrice. Homards grillés. Salade de tomates. Lacrima Christi. Vol au vent d'animelles d'agneau financière. Terrapène désossée à la Newberg. Château Larose. Filet de bœuf Brillat-Savarin. Croquettes de pommes de terre surprise. Casseroles de volaille au gourmet. Quenelles de pigeonneaux aux Topinambours. Champagne Pommery. Côtelettes d'agneau à l'Espagnole. Champagne Perrier Jouët. Asperges nouvelles à l'huile et à la sauce Alcide. Bourgogne Mousseux. Champignons nouveaux sur croûtes grillées. Soufflés au fromage. Sorbet, café et kirsch en écorce de fruits variés. Clos Vougeot. Faisans Anglais rôtis au cresson. Jambon grillé. Bananes frites. Salade laitue. Mâches. Artichauts, sauce bavaroise. Pouding de fruits. Sabayon Madère. Glace cygne aux roseaux. Moulin à vent sur socle. Macédoine de fruits en bordure de Madeleine Café. Liqueurs. AVRIL, 1883. DîNER DE 18 COUVERTS. MR. W.H. MORGAN. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Sully. Bisque de homard. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Cassolettes à la Dumas. RELEVéS. Truites de rivière grillées. Concombres. Selle d'agneau à la Florentine. Croustades macédoine. ENTRéES. Filets de poulet à la Lucullus. Petits pois au beurre. Quenelles de faisan Anglais à la Molière. Asperges sauce blanche. Sorbets Fantaisie Divers. RôTS. Poulardes truffées et pigeonneaux bardés. Aspics de foies-gras. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRé CHAUD. Poires à la Richelieu. ENTREMETS SUCRéS FROIDS. Gelée aux reines claude. Bavarois vanille. Gâteau Africain. Petits fours. Pièces montées. GLACES. Rachel historiée. Fruits surprise. Fruits. Dessert. Café. AOûT, 1883. DîNER DE 25 COUVERTS. MR. ELLIOTT F. SHEPARD. MENU. Lucines. POTAGES. Consommé Dumas. Crème de choux fleurs. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Bouchées financière. POISSON. Maquereau Espagnol mariniére. Concombres. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf Bernardi. Haricots de Lima. Pommes Duchesse. ENTRéES. Suprême de poulet aux truffes. Petits pois. Salmis de pluviers aux champignons nouveaux. Haricots verts. Sorbet à la Royale. RôT. Pigeonneaux au cresson. Salade de Romaine. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Ananas Caroline. Gelée Dantsick. Bavarois vanille. Pièces montées. GLACES. Fiori di latte au chocolat. Plombière Montesquieu. Fruits. Dessert. Café. MARS, 1884. DîNER DE 150 COUVERTS. "USQUE AD SUPéROS" L'UNION DES TITANS Grand repas classique et soirée Olympienne en l'honneur de notre mère la Terre. MENU. Chablis Vieux. Huîtres sur coquilles de Neptune. POTAGE. Amontillado. Consommé aux œufs de Léda. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Céleri des Hespérides. Olives du Mont Ida. Timbale à la Reine Junon. POISSON. Rudesheimer Berg. Bass à la Méduse Divine. RELEVé. Cliquot doux. Filet de bœuf à l'Hercule Antique. ENTRéES. St. Pierre. Dinde aux trois Grâces. Agneau aux sourires de Psyché. Côtelettes à l'Harmonie des Sirènes. Sorbet aux plaisirs Olympiens. RôTS. Clos Vougeot. Canard sauvage à la Jupiter. Salade aux larmes d'Hébé. LéGUMES. Petits pois à la Priam. Haricots verts à l'Aurore. épinards à la fleur de Lotus. Pommes à la Toison d'Or. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Croûtes d'ananas aux reflets de l'Enfer. Gelée aux raisins de Bacchus. Charlotte à la Phineas. Gaufres à la Proserpine. Pièces Montées à la Mercure. Vieux Porto. Glaces à la Vierge Vestale. Petits fours à l'Ambroisie. Fruits au Mont Hélion. Fromage à la Flore. Café au Nectar Divin. OCTOBRE, 1884. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. EN L'HONNEUR DE JAMES G. BLAINE. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Victoria. Crème de volaille Berchoux. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Reynière. POISSONS. Kingfish Richelieu. éperians frits. Pommes à l'Anglaise. RELEVéS. Selle de chevreuil Tyrolienne. Filet de bœuf Clareadon. Tomates Trévise. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulets à la Lucullus. Petits pois Française. Ris de veau au Chancelier. Haricots verts. Terrapène Maryland. Sorbet à l'Impériale. RôT. Canvas-back duck. FROID. Aspics de foies-gras. Galantine de poularde aux truffes. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Mazarine à l'ananas. Gelée à la prunelle. Charlotte Bengalienne. Pièces montées. Glaces Arlequin. Soufflé aux marrons. Petits fours. Gâteau. Fruits. Dessert. Café. NOVEMBRE, 1884. DîNER DE 225 COUVERTS. NEW YORK PRESS CLUB. MENU. POTAGES. Consommé Souveraine. Bisque de homard. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Variés. POISSON. Bass rayée à la Hongroise. Pommes à la Viennoise. RELEVéS. Filets de bœuf à la d'Orléans. Tomates à la Trévise. ENTRéES. Dindonneaux aux marrons. Petits pois. Côtelettes de ris de veau Montebello. Haricots verts. Sorbet à la Dalmatie. RôTI. Canard à tête rouge. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Pouding à la Humboldt. Glaces Napolitaine. Dessert. Café. Pièces montées. MAI, 1885. DîNER DE 30 COUVERTS. MR. N.L. THIEBLIN (RIGOLO). MENU. Chablis. Lucines (clams). POTAGES. Amontillado, 1834. Consommé Sévigné. Tortue verte à l'Anglaise. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Bressoles Chateaubriand. POISSONS. Scharzhofberger Ausslese. Saumon grillé à la Colbert. Concombres. Aiguillettes de kingfish Marguery. Pommes gastronome. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf à la Richelieu Moderne. Selle d'agneau de lait aux laitues braisées. ENTRéES. Rauzan. Pâté chaud à la financière. Ris de veau à la Théodora. Sorbet à la Montmorency. RôTS. Poulets reine truffés à la Périgueux. Chambertin. Bécassines sur canapés au cresson. RELEVé. Soufflés au fromage. FROID. Aspics de foies-gras historiés aux truffes. Cliquot Doux. Homard rémoulade à la gelée. ENTREMETS DE LéGUMES. Artichauts à la Duxelle. Asperges à l'Allemande. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Crème frite à l'Augusta (chaud). Charlotte de pommes aux abricots (chaud). Gaufres crème marasquin. Tartelettes aux cerises. PIèCES MONTéES. Fruits frais. Fraises. Compotes. Fromage. Amandes salées. Bonbons. Devises. Fruits cristallisés. Marrons rôtis. Liqueurs. Café. FéVRIER, 1885. DîNER DE 240 COUVERTS. ST. NICHOLAS SOCIETY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Adélina. Crème d'asperges. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Reine. POISSON. Bass rayée Marguery. Pommes Hollandaise. RELEVé. Filet de bœuf Piémontaise. Tomates Trévise. ENTRéES. Chapons braisés aux marrons. Petits pois à la Française. Ris de veau à la Bearnaise. Haricots panachés. Sorbet Impérial. RôTI. Canvas-back ducks. Salade de laitue. FROID. Pâté de foies-gras. ENTREMETS CHAUD. Croûtes aux ananas. ENTREMETS FROIDS. Oubliers à la crème. Gâteau noisettes. Pièces montées. Glaces: Soufflés Favart. Petits fours. Fruits. Dessert. Café. FéVRIER, 1885. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. MR. J.B. HOUSTON. MENU. Crème de Tête. Huîtres. POTAGES. Amontillado. Consommé Aurélien. Tortue verte claire. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Lagardère. POISSONS. Moët White Seal. Red snapper, sauce Hollandaise vert-pré. Crabes d'huîtres frits. Concombres. RELEVéS. Selle d'agneau de lait à la Bernardi. Choux de Bruxelles. ENTRéES. Rauzan. Filet de poulet à la Lucullus. Petits pois à la Parisienne. Terrapène à la Philadelhie. Sorbet Elisabeth. RôTIS. Clos Vougeot. Faisans Anglais piqués. Bécassines au cresson. Pâté de foies-gras. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Beignets Médicis. GLACE. Arbre en nougat entouré de lapins et ours. Liqueurs. Dessert. MARS, 1886. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. FRIENDLY SONS OF ST. PATRICK. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Impériale. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Diplomate. POISSONS. Saumon, sauce Hollandaise vert-pré. éperlans frits. Pommes Viennoise. RELEVé. Filet de bœuf Napolitaine. Haricots verts sautés. ENTRéES. Ris de veau chevreuse. Tomates farcies. Escalopes de bass à la Joinville. Petits pois Française. Sorbet Monthière. RôTS. Canards à tête rouge. Salade de laitue. Salade de crabes mayonnaise. ENTREMETS SUCRéS. Pouding Impératrice. Gelée aux mirabelles. Charlotte Parisienne. Pièces montées. Glace crème pralinée. Biscuits glacés. Fruits. Dessert. Café. NOVEMBRE, 1886. DîNER DE 16 COUVERTS. MR. JOSEPH PULITEER. MENU. Château Yquem. Huîtres sur coquilles. POTAGES. Amontillado. Consommé Souveraine. Tortue verte à la Royale. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Lagardère. POISSONS. Johannisberg. Aiguillettes de bass à la Chivry. Concombres. RELEVéS. Perrier Jouët-- Special Magnum. Selle de chevreuil à l'Athalin. Haricots panachés. ENTRéE. St. Pierre. Terrapène à la Baltimore en casserole. Sorbet à l'Andalouse. RôT. Romanée Conti. Canvas back. FROID. Perrier Jouët. Aspics de foies-gras historiés. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Poires à la Ferrière. Cognac. Fromage. Glaces de fantaisie. Chartreuse. Pièces montées. Kirsch. Fruits. Petits fours. Bénédictine. Café. JANVIER,1886. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. MR. WARD MCALLISTER. MENU. Potage. Tortue verte au Clair. Hors-d'Œuvre. Boudins de volaille Richelieu. Poisson. Aiguillettes de bass au gratin. Relevé. Filet de bœuf Rothschild. Entrées. Terrapène à la Maryland. Aspics de foies gras en Bellevue. Fonds d'artichauts à l'Italienne. Sorbet au Marasquin. Rôt. Canvas-back duck. Céleri mayonnaise. Entremets Chaud. Pommes à la Parisienne. Glace. Pouding Nesselrode. NOVEMBRE, 1887. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. ST. ANDREWS SOCIETY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Deslignac. Tortue verte au Clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Reine. POISSONS. Saumon, sauce Hollandaise vert-pré. Pommes à la Viennoise. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf aux champignons. Choux de Bruxelles. ENTRéES. Poularde à la Chevreuse. Petits pois au beurre. Caisse de ris de veau Italienne. Haricots verts à l'Anglaise. Haggis à l'écossaise. Sorbet Impériale. RôT. Canards à tête rouge. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Pouding aux bananes. Gelée aux cerises. Charlotte Russe. Glaces fantaisie variées. Pièces montées. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. DéCEMBRE, 1887. DîNER DE 18 COUVERTS. MR. LASOQUE. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Bonvalet. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Dumas. POISSON. Aiguillettes de red snapper à la Masséna. Pommes Duchesse. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf à la Bernardi. épinards à la crème. ENTRéES. Suprême de volaille aux truffes. Petits pois au beurre. Terrapène Maryland Club. Sorbet Béatrice. RôT. Canvas-back duck. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Gelée aux oranges. Charlotte Doria. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Bonbons. Devises. Café. DéCEMBRE, 1887. DîNER POUR 14 PERSONNES. MR. OSWALD OTTENDORFER. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Mécène. Bisque aux crevettes. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Lagardère. Truites de rivière ravigote vert-pré. White bait frit. Concombres. Pommes Sarah. RELEVéS. Selle d'agneau à la Colbert. Tomates Trévise. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet à la Lucullus. Petits pois au beurre. Terrapène à la Maryland. Asperges, sauce Hollandaise. Sorbet Béatrice. RôTS. Bécassines. Pigeonneaux. FROID. Petits aspics de foies-gras. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Pommes à la Portugaise. Pièces montées. Glaces de fantaisie. Fruits. Marrons glacés. Petits fours. Café. AVRIL, 1888. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. OHIO SOCIETY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Deslignac. Crème d'asperges. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Mentana. POISSON. Saumon sauce crevettes. Pommes à l'Anglaise. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf à la Chevrelat. Tomates farcies. ENTRéES. Chapons à la Lyonnaise. Petits pois au beurre. Croquettes de homard à la Victoria. Sorbet Régence. RôT. Bécassines bardées. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Savarin aux cerises. Glaces Napolitaine. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. NOVEMBRE, 1888. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. MR. C.A. SEWARD. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Meternich. Tortue verte au clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Palmettes à la Perrier. POISSON. Aiguillettes de bass à l'Italienne. Concombres. Pommes Sarah. RELEVéS. Dinde farcie aux marrons. Haricots panachés. ENTRéES. Ris de veau aux champignons nouveaux. Petits pois Française. Terrapène Newberg. Sorbet à la Prunelle. RôTS. Canvas-back duck et cailles piquées. Petits aspics historiés. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Gelée aux pistaches. Charlotte Russe. Glaces moulées. Fruits. Fromage. Petits fours. Amandes salées. Marrons glacés. Fruits confits. Bonbons. Compotes. Poires et pêches. Café. OCTOBRE, 1888. DîNER DE 29 COUVERTS. DR. LEFFERTS. MENU. Lucines. POTAGES. Consommé Balzac. Tortue verte au Clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Variés. Timbales Lagardère. POISSON. Aiguillettes de bass Richelieu. Pommes Viennoise. RELEVéS. Selle d'agneau tardif aux fritadelles. Céleri braisé. ENTRéES. Ailes de volaille Marceau. Tomates Trévise. Casseroles de terrapène Baltimore. Sorbet Impériale. RôT. Perdreaux garnis de mauviettes. Salade de tomates en quartiers mayonnaise. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Pêches à la Condé. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. JANVIER, 1889. DîNER DE 250 COUVERTS. Annual Dinner given by the Superintendent, Inspectors and Captains of the New York Police. MENU. POTAGES. Consommé Rémusat. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Périgordine. POISSON. Saumon, sauce Hollandaise vert-pré. Pommes à la Rouennaise. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf aux champignons. Tomates au gratin. ENTRéES. Dinde farcie aux marrons. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Caisse de ris de veau Grammont. Haricots panachés. Sorbet Royale. RôTS. Canvas-back duck. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Pouding Schiller. Gelée au Centerba. Gaufres à la crème. Pièces montées. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. MARS, 1889. DéJEUNER DE 16 COUVERTS. MR. COQUELIN. MENU. Canapé d'anchois. Caviar. Radis. Olives. Céleri. Huîtres. Filet de poulet à la Génin. Pommes Sarah. Petits pois Française. Asperges nouvelles, sauce Hollandaise. Sorbet à la Russe. Bécassines rôties au cresson. Petits terrines de foies-gras à la gelée. Salade de laitue. Omelette soufflée. Glaces: Champignons, sauce Marasquin. Fruits. Petits fours. Compotes. Café. FéVRIER, 1889. DîNER DE 21 COUVERTS. MR. E.A. PRICE. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Samaritaine. Tortue verte au Clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Parisienne. POISSONS. Aiguillettes de bass à la Whitney. Concombres. Pommes Duchesse. RELEVéS. Selle d'antilope Tyrolienne. Asperges sauce crème. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet à la Lucullus. Petits pois au beurre. Terrapène Maryland. Sorbet Béatrice. RôTS. Canvas-back duck et pigeonneaux. Petites terrines de foies-gras. Salade de laitue. Pièces moutées. Gelée aux cerises. Charlotte Doria. Glaces fantaisie. Marrons glacés. Devises. Bonbons. Petits fours. Amandes salées. Fromage. Café. JANVIER, 1890. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. SECOND PANEL SHERIFF'S JURY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Bourdaloue. Crème d'artichauts. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Reine. POISSON. Saumon sauce homard. Pommes de terre Duchesse. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf Périgueux. Choux de Bruxelles. ENTRéES. Poulet braisés à la Lyonnaise. Ris de veau sauce tomates Andalouse. Haricots flageolets sautés. Sorbet Dalmatie. RôT. Canvas-back ducks. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Croûtes aux poires. Pièces montées. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. JANVIER, 1890. DîNER DE 220 COUVERTS. HOTEL MEN'S ASSOCIATION. MENU. POTAGES. Consommé St. Germain. Bisque d'écrevisses Dumont Durville. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Petites timbales à la Soubise. POISSONS. Aiguillettes d'halibut à la Dugléré. éperlans frits. Pommes Viennoise. RELEVéS. Filet de bœuf à l'Aquitaine. Petits pois Parisienne. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet à la Génin. Macédoine St. Cloud. Ris de veau purée marrons. Aubergines frites. Sorbet Marquise. RôT. Canards à tête rouge. FROID. Terrine de foies gras de Strasbourg. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Croûtes aux ananas. Pièces montées. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. JANVIER, 1891. BUFFET ASSIS POUR 300 PERSONNES. THE "PATRIARCHS." MENU. CHAUD. Consommé. Huîtres Viennoise. Croquettes de chapon. Bouchées aux crevettes. Terrapène à la Maryland. Café et thé. FROID. Filet de bœuf Francillon. Galantine de poulet à l'Anglaise. Terrine de Nérac aux truffes. Aspic de foies-gras décoré. Dinde en daube à l'Ancienne. Cailles piquées rôties au cresson. Salade de homard. Mayonnaise de volaille. Sandwiches. Rillettes. Canapés. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Gelée aux oranges. Brisselets à la Chantilly. Gâteau Madeleine. Bavarois aux abricots. Pièces montées. Glaces fantaisie . Tutti-frutti. Montélimar. Biscuit Diplomate. Bonbons. Devises. Fruits. Petits fours. Dessert. JANVIER, 1891. SOUPER ASSIS DE 50 COUVERTS. MR. PRICE. MENU. Huîtres. Consommé. Bouchées aux champignons. Terrapène Maryland. Poularde Viennaise. Petits pois Parisienne. Côtelettes de ris de veau Moderne. Cailles bardées rôties. Terrine de foies-gras. Salade de laitue. Gelée à la prunelle. Gaufres crème. Pièces montées. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Devises. Petits fours. Café. FéVRIER, 1891. DîNER DE 3 COUVERTS. MR. FRANK WORK. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé. Tortue au clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Mousseline Chantilly. POISSON. Aiguillettes de bass aux éperlans Dauphin. Concombres. RELEVéS. Selle d'agneau de lait Colbert. Artichauts Parmentier. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet aux truffes. Petits pois Parisienne. Terrapène à la Baltimore. Sorbet Impériale. RôT. Canard à tête rouge. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Croûtes aux ananas. Glaces de fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Bonbons. Devises. Café. NOVEMBRE, 1892. DîNER DE 250 COUVERTS. Offert à l'Honorable Grover Cleveland. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé à la Grammont. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales Renaissance. POISSON. Aiguillettes de bass Masséna. Concombres. Pommes Viennoise. RELEVé. Filet de bœuf Condé. Tomates Trévise. ENTRéES. Ailes de volaille suprême aux truffes. Petits pois Parisienne. Terrapène Baltimore. Sorbet Columbus. RôT. Canvas-back ducks. FROID. Foies-gras à la gelée. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Pommes au praslin. Pièces montées. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. AVRIL, 1892. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. Donné par la Chambre du Commerce en l'honneur de MR. WHITELAW REID. MENU. Sherry and Bitters. Huîtres. Haut Sauterne. POTAGES. Consommé Berchoux. Sherry Princesse. Tortue verte au clair. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à la Dumas. POISSON. Diedesheimer. Saumon à la Royale. Pommes Duchesse. RELEVé. Champagne. Filet de bœuf à la Périgueux. Choux-fleurs au gratin. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet Montebello. Château Lagrange. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Terrapène à la Baltimore. Sorbet Impériale. RôT. Beaujolais. Pluviers bardés. FROID. Terrine de foies-gras à la gelée. Salade. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Savarin aux ananas. Gelée aux fruits. Meringues Chantilly. Pièces montées. Liqueurs. Glaces de fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. JANVIER, 1892. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. FIRST PANEL SHERIFF'S JURY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Deslignac. Tortue verte claire. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Bouchées Chevreuse. POISSON. Saumon de l'Orégon, sauce Montebello. Pommes de terre Duchesse. RELEVé. Selle de mouton Anglaise. épinards au velouté. ENTRéES. Poulardes farcies aux truffes. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Ris de veau en caisses à la Grammont. Haricots panachés. Sorbet Impériale. RôT. Canards à tête rouge. FROID. Terrine de foies-gras de Strasbourg. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Poires à la Judic. Pièces montées. Glaces Napolitaine. Petits fours. Café. FéVRIER, 1892. DîNER DE 9 COUVERTS. GéNéRAL HORACE PORTER. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Condorcet. Bisque de crevettes. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Variés. Variés. POISSON. Bass rayée à l'Amiral. Pommes Dauphine. RELEVé. Selle de Chevreuil Tyrolienne. Aubergines frites. ENTRéES. Filets de poulet Toulouse. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Terrapène Baltimore. Sorbet au Champagne. RôT. Canard à tête rouge. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Plum pouding au rhum. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. MENU. Huîtres Potages Consommé, Souveraine Tortue verte à l'anglaise Hors d'oeuvre Timbales, Périgourdine Poisson Bass rayée, Massena Pommes de terre, fondantes Releve Filet de bœuf aux olives farcies Tomates, Trévise Entrees Châpon à l'Amphitryon Petits pois, parisienne Térrapène à la Newberg SORBET TULIPE Rot Canvas-back Duck Cailles Froid Terrine de foie-gras Salade de laitue Entremets de douceur Pommes à la Condé Gelée aux oranges Gaufres, Chantilly Piéces montées Glaces fantaisies Fruits Dessert Petits fours Café Mardi, le 21 Novembre, 1893. DELMONICO'S Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH ANUUAL BANQUET. DELMONICO'S, TUESDAY EVENING, NOVEMBRE 21ST, 1893. An illustration of a menu table. MAI, 1893. DîNER DE 14 COUVERTS. Columbus Centennial Dîner en l'Honneur de S. A. I. le Prince de Russie. MENU. BUFFET. Canapés d'anchois. Caviar. Olives. Thon mariné. Tartelettes de homard. Lucines (clams). POTAGES. Consommé à la Souveraine. Crème d'asperges. HORS-D'ŒUVRE CHAUD. Timbales au Prince Impérial. POISSON. Truites de rivière, sauce Hollandaise vert-pré. Pommes de terre fondantes. RELEVé. Selle d'agneau aux fritadelles. Tomates à la Reine. ENTRéES. Ailes de poulet à la Lucullus. Petits pois à la Parisienne. Champignons sous cloche. Sorbet bouquetière à la Russe. RôT. Pigeonneaux au cresson. FROID. Mousse de foies-gras en bordure. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Savarin aux ananas. Glace pouding Romanoff. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. AVRIL, 1893. DîNER DE 200 COUVERTS. ST. GEORGE SOCIETY. MENU. Huîtres. POTAGES. Consommé Souveraine. Crème St. Germain. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Timbales à l'écarlate. POISSON. Bass rayée au gratin. Pommes de terre Viennoise. RELEVé. Baron de bœuf Yorkshire pouding. Pommes de terre rôties. Tomates farcies. ENTRéES. Pigeonneaux à la Chevreuse. Petits pois à l'Anglaise. Asperges sauce crème. Sorbet Régence. RôT. Chapons. Salade d'escarolle. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Plum pouding St. George. Pièces montées. Charlotte Russe. Gelée au Madère. Glaces fantaisie. Fruits. Petits fours. Café. NOVEMBRE, 1893. DîNER OFFERT PAR MR. L.C. DELMONICO à MR. JEAN CHARLES CAZIN. MENU. Haut Sauterne. Huîtres. POTAGES. Amontillado. Consommé à la Daumont. Bisque d'écrevisses. HORS-D'ŒUVRE. Mousseline Chantilly. POISSONS. Hochheimer. Aiguillettes de bass Mornay gratin. Pommes de terre fondantes. RELEVéS. Chât. Lagrange. Selle d'agneau tardif à la Colbert. Fonds d'artichauts Florentine. ENTRéES. Terrapène à la Maryland. Vol au vent de ris de veau financière. Petits pois à la Parisienne. Sorbet "Elsinore." RôTS. Chambertin. Canvas-back duck, hominy et currant gelée. Chapons farcis aux truffes et marrons. FROID. Petits aspics de foies-gras. Salade de laitue. ENTREMETS DE DOUCEUR. Krug Sec. Beignets Alliance, sauce abricots. GLACES. Cygne aux roseaux. Liqueurs. Lapin en surprise. Fruits. Petits fours. Café.
