THE GOOD HOUSEKEEPER. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. Bodily health, satisfied appetite, and peace of mind, are great promoters of individual morality and public tranquility.--DR. COMBE. THE main object of those who have prepared works on cookery, has been to teach the art of good living, or of cheap living; --the "Cook's Oracle" is one of the best examples of the first purpose, the "Frugal Housewife" of the last. My aim is to select and combine the excellences of these two systems, at the same time keeping in view the important object of preserving health, and thus teach how to live well, and to be well while we live. The physiology of digestion and the principles of dietetics, as laid down and explained by Dr Andrew Combe, of Edinburgh, form the basis of my plan, which will inculcate temperance in all things, but rarely enforce total abstinence from anything which the Creator has sanctioned as proper food for mankind. I follow chiefly the system of Dr Combe, because, though I have examined many popular works on Diet, Health, &c., and have found much to commend, and some things to adopt from these writers, yet he defines, with most clearness and precision, those rules of living, which my own experience has taught me are good and judicious. Indeed, in most cases, even when I may quote the language of Dr Combe, I still write what I know to be true. I have been a housekeeper, both in the country and the city, and have had a practical knowledge of those rules of domestic economy which I shall recommend. And I have brought up a family of children, without the loss, or hardly the sickness of one of them, during infancy and childhood. I can, therefore, claim some experience in a successful manner of managing the health and constitution of the young. As our bodily health, and, of consequence, our happiness and usefulness in domestic and social life, depend very much on the proper quantity of food we eat, and the time and circumstances under which it is taken, I shall give a few hints on these subjects, before laying down rules for the preparation and quality of the food. TIMES OF TAKING FOOD. Nature has fixed no particular hours for eating. When the mode of life is uniform, it is of great importance to adopt fixed hours; when it is irregular, we ought to be guided by the real wants of the system as dictated by appetite. A strong laboring man, engaged in hard work, will require food oftener and in larger quantities than an indolent or sedentary man. As a general rule, about five hours should elapse between one meal and another--longer if the mode of life be indolent, shorter if it be very active. When dinner is delayed seven or eight hours after breakfast, some slight refreshment should be taken between. Young persons, when growing fast, require more food and at shorter intervals than those do who have attained maturity. Children, under seven years of age, usually need food every three hours; a piece of bread will be a healthy lunch, and a child seldom eats bread to excess. During the first months of infancy there can be no set times of giving nourishment. Different constitutions require different management. The best rule is to satisfy the real wants of the child, but never tempt it to take food to still its crying from pain, when it is not hungry. Those persons who eat a late supper should not take breakfast till one or two hours after rising. Those who dine late, and eat nothing afterwards, require breakfast soon after rising. Persons of a delicate constitution should never exercise much before breakfast. If exposure of any kind is to be incurred in the morning, breakfast should always be taken previously. The system is more susceptible of infection and of the influence of cold, miasma, &c., in the morning before eating, than at any other time. Those who walk early will find great benefit from taking a cracker or some little nourishment before going out. Never go into a room of a morning, where a person is sick with a fever, before you have taken nourishment of some kind--a cup of coffee, at least. In setting out early to travel, a light breakfast before starting should always be taken; it is a great protection against cold, fatigue and exhaustion. In boarding schools for the young and growing, early breakfast is an indispensable condition to health. Children should not be kept without food in the morning till they are faint and weary. Never eat a hearty supper just before retiring to rest. It is injurious to eat when greatly heated or fatigued. It would very much conduce to the health of laboring men if they could rest fifteen or twenty minutes before dinner. PROPER QUANTITY OF FOOD. As a general fact, mankind eat much more than is required for their sustenance. Nearly one half of the diseases and deaths, occuring during the first two years of existence, are owing to mismanagement and errors in diet. Children should never be fed or tempted to eat when appetite is satisfied; and grown persons should also be careful of eating beyond that point. The indigestion so much complained of, and which causes so many disorders and sufferings in the human system, is a wise provision of nature, to prevent the repletion which would otherwise ensue, when too much food is taken. The power of digestion is limited to the amount of gastric juice the stomach is capable of providing; exercise, in the open air, promotes the secretion of the gastric juice. It is a good and safe rule to proportion our meals to the amount of exercise we have taken; if that exercise has been in the open air, there is less danger of excess. The delicate lady, who scarcely walks abroad, should live very sparingly, or she will be troubled with nervousness, headache, and all the horrors of indigestion. Young persons, when growing, should have plenty of food; if they are active and healthy, and the food is of a proper kind and well prepared, there is little danger of their taking too much. But never tempt their appetites by delicacies when plain food is not relished. When the growth is attained, and active exercises are, in a great measure abandoned--as is the case with females, particularly,--then be very careful to regulate the appetite, and never take such a quantity of food at a time, as to oppress or disturb the stomach. Remember that food which does not digest cannot nourish the system, but rather weakens it. Variety of food is chiefly dangerous because it tempts to excess; otherwise it is beneficial. The gastric juice acts more easily where the contents of the stomach are of different kinds of food mixed together. Let no person think he is certainly temperate because he eats of but one dish. It is more hurtful to take too much of that one, than though he had eaten the same quantity of several. Generally speaking, when food does not agree with the stomach, it is a sign that too much has been taken. WHAT IS THE PROPER FOOD OF MAN? No certain rules can be given respecting the kind of food to be taken. The same diet which is healthful for an adult will be injurious for a child. The stimulating animal diet which in winter is necessary for a laboring man, would be destructive to an inactive and excitable man during the summer months. Food should be adapted to the age, constitution, state of health and mode of life of the individual; to the climate, and the season of the year. The milk of the mother ought, in every instance to constitute the food of the infant, unless such an arrangement is impracticable. After the child is weaned, fresh cow's milk, in which a small portion of soft water has been mingled, and sometimes a little sugar, with a small quantity of crust of bread softened, is usually the most healthy food; but this should be varied by occasional meals of gruel, arrow-root, or sago, and if the child is delicate and shows signs of acidity or flatulence, then a preparation of weak chicken broth or beef tea, freed from fat, and thickened with soft boiled rice may be given. The same kind of food ought to be continued, with the addition of good bread (and potatoes when well cooked seem as healthy food nearly as bread), till the appearance of the "eye teeth;" when these are fairly through, a portion of soft-boiled egg, and occasionally a little meat, the lean part, well cooked and not highly seasoned, may be given. There is great danger of over-feeding young children with animal food. If given too early and too freely, it irritates the system and greatly aggravates the diseases of infancy. Ripe fruits should never be given to children till they have teeth, and unripe fruits ought never to be eaten. During childhood and early youth, the breakfast and supper should consist principally of bread and milk, ripe fruits and vegetable food; it will be sufficient to allow a portion of animal food with the dinner. Fish, chicken, and other white meats are best for children. Fat pork is nearly indigestible for the young and delicate, and ought never to be eaten by them. Pastry, rich cakes, plum-puddings, hot short-cakes, and all the family of fried cakes, are the most generally indigestible of all kinds of food. These should rarely be eaten, except by the strong and actively employed, and sparingly even by those. In truth, there are few articles of diet which a person in health, and leading a very active life, may not eat without feeling much inconvenience, still a preference should be given, as far as possible, to such kinds of food as are most in accordance with the natural constitution. A phlegmatic temperament requires a mild, nutritious diet, but not the same amount of animal food as may be needed by the sanguine, which inclines to great physical activity. Those in whom the brain and nervous system predominate, should avoid a stimulating diet, unless they are in the habit of taking considerable muscular exercise. If it be the wish to rouse a phlegmatic organization to greater activity, then use a richer diet, more animal food--but be sure and take exercise at the same time, or it will prove highly injurious. The natural temperament may be essentially altered by diet and exercise. Rich soups are injurious to the dispeptic. Much liquid food is rarely beneficial for adults; but a small quantity of plain nourishing soup is an economic and healthy beginning of a family dinner. Meats should always be sufficiently cooked. It is a savage custom to eat meat in a half-raw-half-roasted state, and only a very strong stomach can digest it. Rich gravies should be avoided, especially in the summer season. Butter is not a healthy article of diet in hot weather--in winter it is nutritious and generally beneficial; but for young children it is not a good article of diet. Rancid butter is very unhealthy. Pepper, ginger, and most of the condiments, are best during summer; they are productions of hot climates, which shows them to be most appropriate for the hot season. On the other hand, fat beef, bacon, and those kinds of food we denominate "hearty," should be most freely used during cold weather. The diet should always be more spare, with a larger proportion of vegetables and ripe fruits, during summer. Fruits are most wholesome in their appropriate season. The skins, stones, and seeds, are indigestible. Food should never be taken when it is hot--bread is very unhealthy when eaten in this way. Eat slowly. One of the most usual causes of dispepsia among our business men, arises from the haste in which they swallow their food, without sufficiently chewing it, and then hurry away to their active pursuits. In England very little business is transacted after dinner. There ought to be, at least, one hour of quiet after a full meal, from those pursuits which tax the brain as well as those which exercise the muscles. WHAT SHALL WE DRINK? Why water--that is a safe drink for all constitutions and all ages,--provided persons only use it when they are naturally thirsty. But do not drink heartily of cold water when heated or greatly fatigued. A cup of warm tea will better allay the thirst, and give a feeling of comfort to the stomach which water will not. Toast and water, common beer, soda-water, and other liquids of a similar kind, if they agree with the stomach, may be used freely without danger. Fermented liquors, such as porter, ale, and wine, if used at all as a drink, should be very sparingly taken. Distilled spirituous liquors should never be considered drinkable--they may be necessary, sometimes, as a medicine, but never, never consider them a necessary item in house-keeping. So important does it appear to me to dispense entirely with distilled spirits, as an article of domestic use, that I have not allowed a drop to enter into any of the recipes contained in this book. As the primary effect of fermented liquors, cider, wine, &c., is to stimulate the nervous system, and quicken the circulation, these should be utterly prohibited to children and persons of a quick temperament. In truth, unless prescribed by the physician, it would be best to abstain entirely from their use. Most people drink too much, because they drink too fast. A wine-glass of water, sipped slowly, will quench the thirst as effectually as a pint swallowed at a draught. When too much is taken at meals, especially at dinner, it hinders digestion. Better drink little during the meal, and then, if thirsty an hour or two afterwards, more. The practice of taking a cup of tea or coffee soon after dinner is a good one, if the beverage be not drank too strong or too hot. Dispeptic people should be careful to take but a small quantity of drink. Children require more, in proportion to their food, than adults. But it is very injurious to them to allow a habit of continual drinking, as you find in some children. It greatly weakens the stomach, and renders them irritable and peevish. The morning meal requires to be lighter and of a more fluid nature than any other. Children should always, if possible to be obtained, take milk--as a substitute, during the winter, good gruel with bread, or water sweetened with molasses is healthy. Never give children tea, coffee, or chocolate with their meals. Coffee affords very little nourishment, and is apt, if drank strong, to occasion tremors of the nerves. It is very bad for bilious constitutions. The calm, phlegmatic temperament can bear it. With a good supply of cream and sugar, and drank in moderation, it may be used without much danger. Strong green tea relaxes the tone of the stomach, and excites the nervous system. Persons of delicate constitution are almost sure to be injured by it. Black tea is much less deleterious. If used with milk and sugar, it may be considered healthy for most people. Chocolate, when it agrees with the constitution, is very nutritious and healthy. But it seldom can be used steadily, except by aged persons who are very active. It agrees best with persons of phlegmatic temperament; and is more healthy in the winter season than during warm weather. No kind of beverage should be taken hot--it injures the teeth and impairs digestion. I have now given those general rules and hints in regard to diet, which will greatly preserve the health and promote the comfort of those who follow them. Particular directions and peculiar constitutions cannot be considered or recorded in this book, which is rather intended as a manual for those who require to be instructed how to remain well, than for the sick. Though for these, the plan of diet here recommended, if strictly followed, will be a great relief--in most cases, a radical cure. We are now to give all necessary directions for the preparation of food in accordance with these rules for health and real enjoyment. I trust that every woman will agree in sentiment with the lady in Milton's Comus-- "That which is not good (beneficial) is not delicious To a well-govern'd and wise appetite." CHAPTER II. BREAD. Importance of good bread--Diet proper for mankind--Proofs that a mixed diet is the best--Advantages of taking a portion of animal food--Flour--Bread--Making yeast--Hints on the economy of bread making, &c. THE art of making good bread I consider the most important one in cookery, and shall therefore give it the first place in the "Good Housekeeper." Not that I believe bread to contain the "quintessence of beef, mutton, veal, venison," or that an exclusive vegetable diet is best for mankind. There has been of late years, much said and written respecting the benefits of adhering to a strict vegetable diet, and many excellent people are sadly perplexed about their duty in this matter; and whether they ought to give up animal food entirely. As I profess to make my book a manual for those who wish to preserve their health, as well as prepare their food in the most judicious manner, I will here give a brief sketch of the reasons which induce me to recommend a mixed diet, bread, meat, vegetables and fruits, as the best, the only right regimen for the healthy. It is an established truth in physiology, that man is omnivorous * --that is, constituted to eat almost every kind of food which, separately nourishes other animals. His teeth and stomach are formed to digest and masticate flesh, fish and all farinaceous and vegetable substances--he can eat and digest these even in a raw state, but it is necessary to perfect them for his nourishment in the most healthy manner, that they be prepared by cooking--that is, softened by the use of fire and water. The following footnote appears on the bottom of page 9 in the original text. Some determined advocates of the vegetable system maintain, that the teeth and stomach of the monkey corresponds, in structure very closely with that of man, yet it lives on fruits--therefore, if man followed nature he would live on fruits and vegetables. But though the anatomical likeness between man and monkeys is striking, yet it is not complete; the difference may be and doubtless is precisely that which makes a difference of diet necessary to nourish and develop their dissimilar natures. Those who should live as the monkeys do would most closely resemble them. Such is the evidence of nature to the suitableness of a mixed diet for the human race. The appointments of the Creator correspond with the structure of man. At the first, indeed, he was limited; "Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat," was the language of God to Adam. There is no intimation that any other diet was in use for nearly seventeen hundred years. But this vegetable food did not nourish and develop the human faculties. The physical propensities must have had an almost overwhelming dominion, and if the intellectual powers were developed, they must have been made subservient to the basest animal passions, for the whole earth was filled with violence and men were utterly corrupt and wicked. The moral sentiments seem scarcely to have been felt or cultivated at all. And does not the same character, that is, the predominance of the physical over the intellectual and moral, mark even now in a considerable degree, every nation where, either from climate, custom or condition, the mass of the people are compelled to subsist chiefly on vegetable food? When, after the destruction of the old world, Noah and his family came forth from the ark, and God assured him that, while the earth continued, the race should not be again plunged in such utter ruin, what new agent of human improvement and civilization was brought to the aid of mankind? We are told of none excepting a change in their diet;--the permission or command rather, to Noah to use animal food. "Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat." Such was the Creator's arrangement, when he had determined that the character and condition of his rational creatures should go on improving, till the whole earth should be peopled and all be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. And here we may remark, that the tribe or nation, who violates the express command of God, to separate the flesh from the blood and not to use the latter, and eats raw meat, never improves in character or condition. In truth, the command includes the rudiments of cookery, the preparation of food by the aid of fire; and till this is the constant habit of the community, men are savages. If it be asked why, when flesh as a part of man's diet was so necessary to his well-being, was it not appointed him at the beginning?--Solve me this question--Why was the earth a progressive creation, which, as the researches of philosophers have conclusively proved, required thousands of ages to bring to its present state of mineral, vegetable and animal perfection? The same answer is true for both--it was the purpose of God to show forth his power, wisdom and goodness in a progressive rather than an instantaneous perfecting of his works. In this respect man is in harmony with the sphere he inhabits. But one thing is certain; since the appointment of flesh as a part of man's diet, no instance is recorded of its having been prohibited by divine authority. Intoxicating drinks have been forbidden to certain individuals; but from the time of righteous Abraham, who dressed a calf the better to entertain his angel visitors, till the coming of John, "whose meat was locusts and wild honey," no servant of God has been confined to a vegetable diet. The prophet who was fed by his express command, had "bread and flesh" twice each day. In strict accordance with this theory, which makes a portion of animal food necessary to develop and sustain the human constitution, in its most perfect state of physical, intellectual and moral strength and beauty, we know that now in every country, where a mixed diet is habitually used, as in the temperate climates, there the greatest improvement of the race is to be found; and the greatest energy of character. It is that portion of the human family, who have the means of obtaining this food at least once a day, who now hold dominion over the earth. Seventy thousand of the beef-fed British govern and control ninety millions of the rice eating natives of India. In every nation on earth the rulers, the men of power whether princes or priests, almost invariably use a portion of animal food. The people are often compelled, either from poverty or policy, to abstain.--Whenever the time shall arrive, that every peasant in Europe is able to "put his pullet in the pot," even of a Sunday, a great improvement will have taken place in his character and condition; when he can have a portion of animal food, properly cooked, once each day, he will soon become a man. In our own country, the beneficial effect of a generous diet, in developing and sustaining the energies of a whole nation is clearly evident. The severe and unremitting labors of every kind, which were requisite to subdue and obtain dominion of a wilderness world, could not have been done by a half starved, suffering people. A larger quantity and better quality of food were necessary here than would have supplied men in the old countries, where less action of body and mind are permitted. Still, there is great danger of excess in all indulgences of the appetites, and even when a present benefit may be obtained, this danger should never be forgotten. The tendency in our country has been to excess in animal food. The advocates of the vegetable diet system had good cause for denouncing this excess, and the indiscriminate use of flesh. It was, and now is, frequently given to young children--infants, before they have teeth, which is a sin against nature, which often costs the life of the poor little sufferer--it is eaten two freely by the sedentary and delicate: and to make it worse still, it is eaten, often in a half-cooked state, and swallowed without sufficient chewing. All these things are wrong and ought to be reformed. I hope "The Good Housekeeper" will do something towards enlightening public opinion on the proper kinds of food and the proper manner of preparing it. These subjects have never been sufficiently considered. Many, probably most, of the receipts now in use, have been the result of chance or the whim of a depraved appetite. But as the spirit of enquiry is abroad, searching out abuses of all kinds, let us hope that the abuses of the good things God has so bounteously given us will not be suffered to go unreproved. When women are thoroughly instructed in physiology, and the natural laws which govern the human constitution, in chemistry and in domestic economy, then we may expect that desideratum of Doctor Johnson--a cookery book on philosophical principles. And now we will return to the subject of bread , and describe minutely the best practical manner of preparation at present understood. FLOUR. The first requisite for good bread is that the flour or meal be good. Wheat is always better for being washed; if it be at all injured by smut, it is not fit for food unless it be thoroughly washed. In the country this is easily done. Put the grain in a clean tub, a bushel at a time; fill the tub with water, and stir the whole up from the bottom, briskly, with your hand, or a stick. Pour off the water and fill it with clean till the water ceases to be colored or dirty. Two or three waters usually are sufficient. Finish the washing quickly as possible, so as not to soak the grain; then spread it thinly on a large, strong sheet, (it is best to keep a coarse unbleached sheet solely for this purpose, if you wash your grain,) laid on clean boards in the sun, or where the sun and air can be freely admitted. Stir the grain with your hand every two or three hours,--it will dry in a day, if the weather be fair. Fresh ground flour makes the best and sweetest bread. If you live in the vicinity of a mill, never have more than one or two bushels ground into flour at a time. A bushel of good, clear wheat will make fiftysix pounds of flour, besides the bran and middlings. If you purchase flour by the barrel or sack, be careful to ascertain that it is good and pure. In Europe flour is often adulterated, that is, mixed with other substances, to swell its bulk and weight. Whiting, ground stones and bones, and plaster of Paris, are the ingredients chiefly used. To be sure, none of these things are absolutely poisonous, but they are injurious, and no one wants them in bread. In our country we think such deceptions are seldom attempted, still it may be well to know how to detect the least bad matter in flour. To discover whiting, dip the ends of the fore-finger and thumb into sweet oil, and take up a small quantity of flour between them. If it be pure, you may freely rub the fingers together for any length of time, it will not become sticky, and the substance will turn nearly black; if whiting be mixed with the flour, a few times rubbing turns it into putty, but its color is very little changed. To detect stone-dust or plaster of Paris; drop the juce of lemon or a little sharp vinegar on a small quantity of flour; if adulterated, an immediate commotion or effervescence takes place; if pure, it will remain at rest. Another quick, easy and pretty sure method of trial is to take a handful of flour and squeeze it very tightly for a minute--if it be good and pure, when you open your hand, the flour will remain in a lump, in the form you have given it, even the grains and wrinkles of the skin of the hand will be visible--you may place it on the table without breaking--but if it contains foreign substances, it will not adhere thus, but crumble and fall almost immediately. Sour or musty flour may be easily known by the smell. Such damaged stuff can never make good, healthy bread, though public bakers, it is said, often prefer to use it, because it is cheapest, and they know methods of preparation by which they can produce light and white bread from this damaged flour. The bread is, to be sure, nearly tasteless, and it cannot be equally nourishing as good flour would make; but if it looks well, it will sell. Those who bake their own bread have the opportunity of knowing that it is made of good ingredients; and if they make it after the following recipe, they may be sure of good bread. MAKING BREAD. A large family will, probably, use a bushel of flour weekly; but we will take the proper quantity for a family of four or five persons. Take twentyone quarts of flour, put it into a kneading trough or earthen pan which is well glazed, and large enough to hold double the quantity of flour. Make a deep, round hole in the centre of the flour, and pour into it half a pint of brewer's yeast, or the thick sediment from home-brewed beer--the last if good, is to be preferred. In either case the yeast must be mixed with a pint of milk-warm water, and well stirred before it is poured in. Then with a spoon stir into this liquid, gradually, so much of the surrounding flour as will make it like thin batter; sprinkle this over with dry flour, till it is covered entirely. Then cover the trough or pan with a warm cloth, and set it by the fire in winter, and where the sun is shining in summer. This process is called "setting the sponge." The object is to give strength and character to the ferment by communicating the quality of leaven to a small portion of the flour; which will then be easily extended to the whole. Setting sponge is a measure of wise precaution--for if the yeast does not rise and ferment in the middle of the flour it shows that the yeast is not good; the batter can then be removed, without wasting much of the flour, and another sponge set with better yeast. Let the sponge stand till the batter has swelled and risen so as to form cracks in the covering of flour; then scatter over it two table spoonfuls of fine salt, and begin to form the mass into dough by pouring in, by degrees, as much warm water as is necessary to mix with the flour. Twenty-one quarts of flour will require about four quarts of water. It will be well to prepare rather more; soft water is much the best; it should in summer be warm as new milk; during winter, it ought to be somewhat warmer, as flour is a cold, heavy substance. Add the water by degrees to the flour, mix them with your hand, till the whole mass is incorporated; it must then be worked most thoroughly, moulded over and over and kneaded with your clenched hands, till it becomes so perfectly smooth and light as well as stiff, that not a particle will adhere to your hands. Remember that you cannot have good bread, light and white, unless you give the dough a thorough kneading.--Then make the dough into a lump in the middle of the trough or pan, and dust it over with flour to prevent its adhering to the vessel. Cover it with a warm cloth, and in the winter the vessel should be placed near the fire. It now undergoes a further fermentation, which is shown by its swelling and rising; this, if the ferment was well formed, will be at its height in an hour--somewhat less in very warm weather. It ought to be taken at its height, before it begins to fall. * Divide the dough into seven equal portions; mould on your paste-board, and form them into loaves; put these on well floured tin or earthen plates, and place immediately in the oven. The oven, if a good one and you have good dry wood, will heat sufficiently in an hour. It is best to kindle the fire in it with dry pine, hemlock furze or some quick burning material; then fill it up with faggots or hard wood split fine and dried, sufficient to heat it--let the wood burn down and stir the coals evenly over the bottom of the oven, let them lie till they are like embers; the bricks at the arch and sides will be clear from any color of smoke when the oven is sufficiently hot. Clean and sweep the oven,--throw in a little flour on the bottom,--if it burns black at once, do not put in the bread, but let it stand a few moments and cool. It is a good rule to put the fire in the oven when the dough is made up--the batter will rise and the former heat in about the same time. When the loaves are in the oven, it must be closed and kept tight, except you open it for a moment to see how the bread appears. If the oven is properly heated, loaves of the size named, will be done in an hour and a half or two hours. They will weigh four pounds per loaf, or about that--thus giving you twentyeight pounds of bread from twentyone quarts (or pounds) of flour. The weight gained is from the water. It is the best economy to calculate (or ascertain by experiment) the number of loaves of a certain weight or size, necessary for a week's consumption in your family, and bake accordingly. In the winter season bread may be kept good for a fortnight; still I think it the best rule to bake once every week. Bread should not be eaten at all till it has been baked, at least, one day. When the loaves are done, take them from the oven, and place them on a clean shelf, in a clean, cool pantry. If the crust happen to be scorched, or the bread is too much baked, the loaves, when they are taken out of the oven, may be wrapped in a clean, coarse towel, which has been slightly damped. It is well to keep a light cloth thrown over all the loaves. When a loaf has been cut, it should be kept in a tight box from the air, if you wish to prevent its drying. The Following Footnote appears in the Original Text at the End of Page 16. *There are three processes in fermentation--the vinous, which makes the dough light and white--the acetous, which turns it sour and rather brown--and the putrefactive, which utterly spoils it.--The only good bread is made by baking the dough when the vinuous fermentation is exactly at its height. As soon as the acetous commences, the dough is injured. It it may be in a measure restored by mixing diluted pearlash or salæratus, and working it thoroughly with every portion of the dough--then baking it quickly. BROWN OR DYSPEPSIA BREAD. This bread is now best known as "Graham bread"--not that Doctor Graham invented or discovered the manner of its preparation, but that he has been unwearied and successful in recommending it to the public. It is an excellent article of diet for the dyspeptic and the costive; and for most persons of sedentary habits, would be beneficial. It agrees well with children; and, in short, I think it should be used in every family, though not to the exclusion of fine bread. The most difficult point in manufacturing this bread, is to obtain good pure meal. It is said that much of the bread commonly sold as dyspepsia, is made of the bran or middlings, from which the fine flour has been separated; and that saw-dust is sometimes mixed with the meal. To be certain that it is good, send good, clean wheat to the mill, have it ground rather coarsely, and keep the meal in a dry, cool place. Before using it, sift it through a common hair sieve; this will separate the very coarse and harsh particles. Take six quarts of this wheat meal, one tea-cup of good yeast, and half a tea-cup of molasses, mix these with a pint of milk-warm water and a tea-spoonful of pearlash or salæratus. Make a hole in the flour, and stir this mixture in the middle of the meal till it is like batter. Then proceed as with fine flour bread. Make the dough when sufficiently light into four loaves, which will weigh two pounds per loaf when baked. It requires a hotter oven than fine flour bread and must bake about an hour and a half. RYE AND INDIAN BREAD. This is a sweet and nourishing diet, and generally acceptable to children. It is economical, and when wheat is scarce, is a pretty good substitute for dyspepsia bread. There are many different proportions of mixing it--some put one third indian meal with two of rye; others like one third rye and two of indian; others prefer it half and half. If you use the largest proportion of rye meal, make your dough stiff, so that it will mould into loaves;--when it is two thirds indian, it should be softer and baked in deep earthen or tin pans after the following rules. Take four quarts of sifted indian meal; put it into a glazed earthen pan, sprinkle over it a table-spoonful of fine salt; pour over it about two quarts of boiling water, stir and work it till every part of the meal is thoroughly wet; indian absorbs a greater quantity of water. When it is about milk warm, work in two quarts of rye meal, half a pint of lively yeast, mixed with a pint of warm water; add more warm water, if needed. Work the mixture well with your hands; it should be stiff, but not firm as flour dough. Have ready a large, deep, well buttered pan; put in the dough, and smooth the top by putting your hand in warm water, and then patting down the loaf. Set this to rise in a warm place in the winter; in the summer it should not be put by the fire. When it begins to crack on the top, which will usually be in about an hour or an hour and a half, put it into a well-heated oven, and bake it three or four hours. It is better to let it stand in the oven all night, unless the weather is warm. Indian meal requires to be well cooked. The loaf will weigh between seven and eight pounds. Pan bread keeps best in large loaves. Many use milk in mixing bread;--in the country where milk is plentiful, it is a good practice, as bread is certainly richer wet with sweet milk than with water; but it will not keep so long in warm weather. Baking can very well be done in a stove; during the winter this is an economical way of cooking--but the stove must be carefully watched or there is danger of scorching the bread. RICE BREAD. Boil a pint of rice very soft; when it is nearly cool add a pint of leaven, and work in three quarts of rice flour. Let it rise, till it is light--one hour, in warm weather is sufficient--Divide the dough into three parts, bake it in tin pans, well buttered; and you will have three large loaves of bread. It soongrows dry. YEAST. It is impossible to have good light bread, unless you have lively sweet yeast. When common family beer is well brewed and kept in a clean cask, the settlings are the best of yeast. If you do not keep beer, then make common yeast by the following method. Take two quarts of water, one handful of hops, two of wheat bran; boil these together twenty minutes; strain off the water, and while it is boiling hot stir in either wheat or rye flour, till it becomes a thick batter; let it stand till it is about blood warm; then add a half pint of good smart yeast and a large spoonful of molasses, if you have it, and stir the whole well. Set it in a cool place in summer and a warm one in winter. When it becomes perfectly light, it is fit for use. If not needed immediately, it should, when it becomes cold, be put in a clean jug or bottle; do not fill the vessel and the cork must be left loose till the next morning, when the yeast will have done working. Then cork it tightly, and set in a cool place in the cellar. It will keep ten or twelve days. MILK YEAST. One pint of new milk; one tea-spoonful of fine salt, and a large spoon of flour --stir these well together; set the mixture by the fire, and keep it just lukewarm; it will be fit for use in an hour. Twice the quantity of common yeast is necessary; it will not keep long. Bread made of this yeast dries very soon; but in the summer it is sometimes convenient to make this kind when yeast is needed suddenly. Never keep yeast in a tin vessel.--If you find the old yeast sour, and have not time to prepare new, put in salæratus, a tea-spoonful to a pint of yeast, when ready to use it. If it foams up lively, it will raise the bread, if it does not, never use it. HARD YEAST. Boil three ounces of hops in six quarts of water, till only two quarts remain. Strain it, and stir in while it is boiling hot, wheat or rye meal till it is thick as batter. When it is about milk warm add half a pint of good yeast, and let it stand till it is very light, which will probably be about three hours. Then work in sifted indian meal till it is stiff dough. Roll out on a board; cut it in oblong cakes about three inches by two. They should be about half an inch thick. Lay these cakes on a smooth board, over which a little flour has been dusted; prick them with a fork, and set the board in a dry clean chamber or store-room, where the sun and air may be freely admitted. Turn them every day. They will dry in a fortnight unless the weather is damp. When the cakes are fully dry, put them into a coarse cotton bag; hang it up in a cool dry place. If rightly prepared these cakes will keep a year, and save the trouble of making new yeast every week. Two cakes will make yeast sufficient for a peck of flour. Break them into a pint of lukewarm water and stir in a large spoonful of flour, the evening before you bake. Set the mixture where it can be kept moderately warm. In the morning it will be fit for use. ADVANTAGES OF BREAD MAKING. If you wish to economize in family expenses, bake your own bread. If this is good, it will be better as well as healthier than baker's bread. If you use a stove, you can bake during the winter with very little expense of fuel; and the flour to make bread for a family will cost about one third less than the bread. I knew a family of six persons, who saved fifty dollars by baking their bread during about eight months in the year. When flour is cheapest, the saving is greatest. The rich will find several advantages in having a portion, at least, of their bread baked at home, even though the saving of money should not be an object. They can be certain that their bread is made of good flour. This is not always sure when eating baker's bread. Much damaged flour, sour, musty, or grown, * is often used by the public bakers, particularly in scarce or bad seasons. The skill of the baker and the use of certain ingredients--(alum, ammonia, sulphate of zinc, and even sulphate of copper, it is said, has been used!)--will make this flour into light, white bread. But it is nearly tasteless, and cannot be as healthy or nutritious as bread made from the flour of good, sound wheat, baked at home, without any mixture of drugs and correctives. Even the best of baker's bread is comparatively tasteless, and must be eaten when new to be relished. But good home-baked bread will keep a week, and is better on that account for the health. Those who live in the country, bake their own bread, of course; and there every lady, old and young, must be, more or less, familiar with the process. But in our cities, ladies marry and commence housekeeping, without knowing anything of bread making. Yet there is not one individual, not even the wealthiest, but is liable to be placed in circumstances where the comfort and health of her husband and children may depend in a great measure, on her own knowledge of this important culinary art. She may be settled where it is impossible to obtain help, or such as understand their duties; her skill and judgment, if not her hands, must supply the deficiency. If she cannot do this, she will, if she be a sensible and conscientious woman, feel, with Miss Sedgwick's heroine, in "Means and Ends," that Italian and music are worthless accomplishments compared with the knowledge of bread-making. Indeed, this knowledge ought to be considered an accomplishment; and, like cake-making, the province of the mistress of the house and her daughters. Then the hard, heavy, sour, crude stuff, now often found under the name of "family bread," would not be tolerated. Ladies would be as particular in this respect as in the quality of their cakes. the Following Footnote Originally appeared at the End of Page 21 in the Book. *When the harvest season is very wet, and the wheat cannot be gathered and dried when it is ripe, it often swells in the ear; and this is called grown grain. It is very difficult to make light bread from the flour of such grain. Is it not a thousand times more important that the bread, necessary to the health and comfort of those we love, and which is required at every meal, should be made in the best manner (remember it is a saving of expense to make bread well) than that the cake, made for "the dear five hundred friends," who attend a fashionable party for their own amusement, sometimes found in ridiculing the hostess, should be "superb?" It would not require a very great sacrifice of time to attend, once each week, to this department of "household good." If the sponge be set at seven or half past, in the morning, and every thing well managed, the bread will be ready to be drawn from the oven by twelve. Four or five hours of attention, then, is required; but three fourths of this time might be employed in needlework, or other pursuits. Only half or three quarters of an hour, devoted to kneading the bread, is wanted in active exertion; and this would be one of the most beneficial exercises our young ladies could practise. The exercise of the hands and arms, in such a way as to strengthen all the muscles of the body, is very seldom practised by ladies; and hence much of the debility and languor they undergo. Many kinds of household labour are unpleasant, because they soil the clothes, or render the hands dark, rough and hard. But bread-making (not the heating and cleaning of the oven,) is as neat as cake-making; and kneading the dough will make the fairest hand fairer and softer, the exercise giving that healthy pink glow to the palm and nails which is so beautiful. I have dwelt at length on this subject, because I consider it as important as did "Uncle John," that "Girls should learn to make bread--the staff of life"--and that to do this well is an accomplishment which the lovely and talented should consider indispensable, one of the " must haves " of female education. There are three things which must be exactly right, in order to have good bread--the quality of the yeast; the lightness or fermentation of the dough; and the heat of the oven. No precise rules can be given to ascertain these points. It requires observation, reflection, and a quick, nice judgement to decide when all are right. Thus, you see, that bread-making is not a mere mechanical treadmill operation, like many household concerns; but a work of mind; the woman who always has good home-baked bread on the table shows herself to have good sense and good management. CHAPTER III. MEATS. Effect of animal food--Proper manner of using it--Different kinds of meat--Comparative economy of different modes of cooking--Beef--Pork--Mutton--Lamb--Veal--Venison--Fowls--Birds--Preserving meats. PHYSICAL health, vigor of mind, and comfort of bodily feeling, depend in a very great degree, on the manner in which animal food is used. To secure the greatest amount of benefit from this costly * article of diet, which God has appointed for the sustenance, in part, of his rational creatures, three conditions seem indispensable--it must be prepared in a proper way; taken at proper times; and in proper quantities. The proper manner of preparation is, to cook it till it is entirely separated from the blood, and the fibres are rendered soft and easy of digestion. The proper times of taking meat may be best told by negatives--it is not proper to give it to infants under three years of age; nor should it then be freely given. After the infantile diseases are mostly over, and exercise in the open air is daily practised, the child may be permitted to eat a portion of animal food with its dinner; but not till youth enters on the real labors of life, study, business or work, in good earnest, should a full portion be allowed. The Following Text Originally appeared at the End of Page 23. *The cost of life. Animal food should never be given to the sick, when any symptoms of excited action in the system from fever are apparent. It should not be taken in large meals by the sedentary, the idle, or the delicate; nor by any person immediately before retiring to rest at night. There is much more danger of excess in using animal than vegetable food. The reason is, that meats can be cooked in a greater variety of ways, are more condensed by cooking and made so "savory" by seasoning, &c. that the taste is tempted when the appetite is satisfied. Not so with plain bread; let it be made in the best possible manner, still we seem to decide, as if by instinct, the exact point when we have had enough. But meats tax the reasoning powers, observation and reflection, to decide when the proper quantity has been taken. Thus to understand rightly the nature and regulate the conditions of using animal food is an intellectual process, of a much higher kind than is required for the arrangement of a vegetable diet. It is rational then to suppose that animal food strengthens the reasoning powers, or the brain, the organ of the mind, better than vegetable food could do. Let no one suppose from this, that the more meat he eats the wiser he will grow. It is using animal food rightly, not in gross quantities, which shows that our reason is strengthening. Remember, too, that "Good things spoiled corrupt to worst." Oxygen is necessary to support life, but we could not live in an atmosphere of oxygen. The Creator has himself mingled the right proportions of the different gases, which form vital air for the lungs. He has left to our discretion the preparation of food for the stomach, only designating the several kinds of aliment. It would be about as rational to covet pure oxygen to breathe, as to argue that living wholly on animal food would be best, because a portion of it is advantageous. The quantity of animal food required to sustain the constitution in its most perfect state, is greatest in the coldest countries, and, decreasing according to the warmth of the climate, when we reach the torrid zone, but a small quantity is needed. In temperate climates, like our own, the largest quantity is required during the winter. None should use it freely during the hottest weather, except it be those who labor hard in the open air; it rarely appears to injure such, yet probably it would be best for them to eat less meat and more bread and vegetables during summer. They would not then suffer so much from thirst, which usually induces the desire for stimulating liquids. As a general rule, animal food is more easily and speedily digested than vegetable food of any kind--and this it is which makes meats more heating and stimulating. The great essentials for the easy digestion of animal food are that the fibres be tender and fine grained. Of the different sorts of butcher meat, Pork is that of which the least quantity should be taken at a time. It requires longer to digest roasted pork than any other kind of meat. Beef agrees well with most constitutions; it is cheapest in the autumn, but best in the winter season. Many have a distaste to mutton; but for those who relish it, it is a nutritious food and easy of digestion. Lamb, veal, and fowls are delicate and healthy diet for the young and sedentary; and for all who find fat meats and those of coarse fibre do not agree with them. The most economical way of cooking meat is to boil it, if the liquid be used for soup or broth, as it always ought to be. Baking is one of the cheapest ways of dressing a dinner in small families, and several kinds of meat are excellent done in this way. Legs and loins of pork, legs of mutton and fillets of veal will bake to much advantage; especially if they be fat. Never bake a lean, thin piece, it will all shrivel away.--Such pieces should always be boiled or made into soup.--Pigs, geese and the buttock of beef are all excellent baked. Meat always loses in weight by being cooked.--In roasting the loss is greatest. It also costs more in fuel to roast than to boil--still there are many pieces of meat which seem made for roasting; and it would be almost wrong to cook them in any other way. Those who cannot afford to roast their meat, should not purchase the sirloin of beef. BEEF. DIRECTIONS FOR CHOOSING AND COOKING. Ox beef is considered the best; heifer beef is excellent where well fed, and is most suitable for small families. If you want the best, choose that which has a fine smooth grain--the lean of a bright red; the fat white or nearly so. The best roasting piece is the sirloin; then the first three ribs; if kept till they are quite tender, and boned, they are nearly equal to the sirloin, and better for a family dinner. The round is used for alamode beef and is the best piece for corning. The best beef steak is cut from the inner part of the sirloin. Good steak may be cut from the ribs. If you wish to practise economy buy the chuck, or piece between the shoulder and the neck; it makes a good roast or steak, and is excellent for stewing or baking. The thick part of the flank is also a profitable piece; good to bake or boil, or even roast. The leg and shin of beef make the best soup--the heart is profitable meat, and good broiled or roasted. The leg rund is used for mince pies--it needs to be boiled till it is very tender. The tongue when fresh is a rich part for mince pies. If eaten by itself, it should be pickled and smoked. The other pieces of the animal are best salted and boiled; or if used fresh, stewed or in soups. Beef should rarely be fried. Fresh beef is better for being kept three or four days in moderate, and much longer in cold weather. One reason why beef is not so good or wholesome in summer is, that it must be eaten too fresh, and while the fibre is tough, or it will spoil. Do not attempt to keep it longer than till the second day in hot weather. In the winter, if frozen, and packed in snow, it may be kept many days, even weeks. To thaw frozen meat always lay it in cold water; and allow one third longer time to cook meat in the winter, especially if it has been frozen, than would be required in warm weather. When beef is to be kept for any length of time it should be carefully wiped every day. In warm weather, it is well to sprinkle it over with pepper to keep it from the flies. Should it become in the least tainted, wash it in cold water, then in strong chamomile tea, afterwards sprinkle it with salt, if it is not to be used till the following day. It must be again thoroughly washed in cold water, before it is cooked. Roughly pounded charcoal rubbed all over the meat will remove the taint. These directions equally apply to all sorts of meat. TO ROAST BEEF. The sirloin is too large for a private family; one weighing fifteen pounds is the best size for roasting; but this may be divided if a small one is required. It should be washed in cold water, then dried with a clean cloth and rubbed over with salt, and the fat covered with a piece of white paper tied on with thread. The spit should be clean as sand and water can make it. Be sure and wipe it dry immediately after it is drawn from the meat, and scour and wash it always before using. The fire must be bright and clear, but not scorching when the meat is put down. Place it about ten inches from the fire at first and gradually move it nearer. It should be basted with a little clean dripping or lard, put into the roaster or tin-kitchen, as soon as it is down. Be sure this roaster is perfectly clean. Continue to baste the meat at intervals, and turn the spit frequently, and when the roast is nearly done--or about half an hour before you take it up--remove the paper from the fat, sprinkle on a little salt and baste it well--then pour off the top of the dripping, which is nearly all liquid fat, and would prove unhealthy if used in the gravy; then take a tea-cup of boiling water, into which put a salt-spoonful of salt, and drop this by degrees, on the brown parts of the joints (the meat will soon brown again.)--Stir the fire and make it clear; sprinkle a little salt over the roast, baste it with butter and dredge it with flour --very soon the froth will rise; then it must be taken up directly and dished.--Pour the gravy from the roaster, skim it, and give it a boil, then send it to table in a boat. Scraped horse-radish is used to garnish it, or may be sent up in a plate with vinegar. The inside of the sirloin is excellent for hash. Twenty minutes of time to each pound of meat is the rule for roasting. In cold weather, and when the meat is very fat it will require a little more time--in warm weather, and with lean beef fifteen minutes to a pound will be sufficient. Experience and judgment must regulate these things. BEEF ALAMODE. Take a thick piece of beef, bone it, beat it well and lard it with fat bacon, then put it into a stew-pan with some rind of bacon, an onion, carrot, a bunch of sweet herbs, a clove of garlic, some cloves, salt, and pepper, pour over the whole a pint of water, let it stew over a slow fire for six hours at least. A clean cloth should be placed over the stew-pan before the lid is put on, which must be carefully closed. When it is done, strain the gravy through a sieve, clear off the fat, and serve. BEEF BAKED. Let a buttock of beef, weighing ten pounds, which has been in salt about a week, be well washed and put into an earthen pan, with a pint of water; cover the pan tight with two or three sheets of foolscap paper--let it bake four or five hours in a moderately heated oven. BEEF BAKED WITH POTATOES. Boil some potatoes, peel, and pound them in a mortar with one or two small onions; moisten them with milk and an egg beaten up; add a little salt and pepper. Season slices of beef, or mutton chops, with salt and pepper, rub the bottom of a pudding dish with butter, and put a layer of the mashed potatoes, which should be as thick as a batter, and then a layer of meat, and so on alternately till the dish is filled, ending with potatoes. Bake it in an oven for one hour. BEEF STEWED. Take ten pounds of a brisket of beef, cut the short ribs, and put it into a well-buttered saucepan, with two large onions, stuck with three or four cloves, two or three carrots cut into quarters, a bunch of sweet herbs, a small lemon sliced, and five quarts of water; let it stew seven hours. Strain and clarify the gravy --thicken it with butter and flour. Chop the carrots with some capers, mushroom catchup, and Cayenne. Any other pickle that is liked may be added. BEEF BALLS. Mince very finely a piece of tender beef, fat and lean; mince an onion, with some parsley; add grated bread crumbs, and season with pepper, salt, grated nutmeg, and lemon-peel; mix all together, and moisten it with an egg beaten; roll it into balls; flour and fry them in boiling fresh dripping. Serve them with fried bread crumbs, or with a thickened brown gravy. BEEF, SHORT OR SPICED. (To be eaten cold.) Hang up ten or twelve pounds of the middle part of a brisket of beef for three or four days, then rub well into it three ounces of finely powdered saltpetre, and, if spice is approved of, one ounce of allspice, and half an ounce of black pepper; let it stand all night, then salt it with three pounds of well-pounded bay salt, and half a pound of treacle, in which let it remain ten days, rubbing it daily. When it is to be boiled, sew it closely in a cloth, let the water only simmer, upon no account allowing it to boil, for nine hours over a slow fire, or upon a stove. When taken out of the water, place two sticks across the pot, and let the beef stand over the steam for half an hour, turning it, from side to side, then press it with a heavy weight. It must not be taken out of the cloth till perfectly cold. BEEF BOILED. The perfection of boiling is that it be done slowly and the pot well skimmed. If the scum be permitted to boil down it sticks to the meat and gives it a dirty appearance. A quart of water to a pound of meat is an old rule; but, there must always be water sufficient to cover it well, so that the scum may be taken off easily. When beef is very salt (which it rarely will be if rightly cured) it must be soaked for half an hour or more in lukewarm water, before it is put on to boil, when the water must be changed. The ROUND is the best piece to boil--then the H-BONE. Take part of a ROUND of beef --put into your boiler with plenty of cold water to cover it; set the pot on one side of the fire to boil gently, if it boil quick at first, no art can make the meat tender. The slower it boils the tenderer it will be. (How much good fuel is wasted, to say nothing of the hard labor cooks impose on themselves and the injury to their health by heating over a great blaze, through this carelessness in making fires. In the country, especially, and often during summer, a fire is prepared nearly hot enough for Nebuchadnezzar's furnace, merely to boil the pot! Instead of hanging the boiler low, it seems the ambition of the housewife to elevate it as near the stars as possible. Three small sticks of wood or two with chips, will boil a large dinner, and if the pot is hung very low, but little inconvenience will be felt from the fire. This, in hot weather, for those who are obliged to be in the kitchen, is a great comfort. But the pot is boiling all this time. So to our receipt.) Be sure to take off all the scum as it rises. When you take the meat up, if any stray scum sticks to it, wash it off with a paste brush. Garnish the dishes with carrots and turnips. Boiled potatoes, carrots, turnips and greens, on separate plates, are good accompaniments. If the beef weigh ten pounds it requires to boil, or rather simmer about three hours. In cold weather all meats need to be cooked a longer time than in warm weather. Always cook them till tender. BEEF STEAKS BROILED. The inside of the sirloin is the best steak --but all are cooked in the same manner. Cut them about half an inch thick--do not beat them; it breaks the cells in which the gravy of the meat is contained and renders it drier and more tasteless. Have the gridiron hot and the bars rubbed with suet --the fire clear and brisk; sprinkle a little salt over the fire, lay on the steaks, and turn them often. Keep a dish close to the fire, into which you must drain the gravy from the top of the steak as you lift it to turn. The gridiron should be set in a slanting direction on the coals, to prevent the fat from dropping into the fire and making a smoke. But should a smoke occur, take off the gridiron a moment, till it is over. With a good fire of coals, steaks will be thoroughly done in fifteen minutes. These are much healthier for delicate stomachs than rare done steaks. When done lay them in a hot plate, put a small slice of good butter on each piece--sprinkle a little salt, pour the gravy from the dish by the fire, and serve them hot as possible. Pickles and finely scraped horse-radish are served with them. I have now given the most important receipts for cooking beef.--The re-cooking requires skill and judgement which experience only can give. When well done it makes excellent dishes, and is economical in housekeeping. The following are good receipts. BEEF, COLD TENDERLOIN. Cut off entire the inside of a large sirloin of beef, brown it all over in a stew-pan, and then add a quart of water, two tablespoonfuls of vinegar, some pepper, salt, and a large onion finely minced; cover the pan closely, and let it stew till the beef be very tender. Garnish with pickles. BEEF, COLD STEAKS TO WARM. Lay them in a stew-pan, with one large onion cut in quarters, six berries of allspice, the same of black pepper, cover the steaks with boiling water, let them stew gently one hour, thicken the liquor with flour and butter rubbed together on a plate; if a pint of gravy, about one ounce of flour, and the like weight of butter, will do; put it into the stew-pan, shake it well over the fire for five minutes, and it is ready; lay the steaks and onions on a dish and pour the gravy through a sieve over them. BEEF MINCED. Mince you beef very small; put it into a saucepan with a little gravy and a little of the fat of fowl or any other fat, season according to your taste, then let it simmer over a gentle fire till it is sufficiently done. Boiled beef, when thoroughly done is excellent to eat cold, as a relish at breakfast. The slices should be cut even and very thin. PORK. Pork that is fed from the dairy, and fattened on corn is the best--potatoes do very well for part of the feeding. But pork fattened from the still-house is all but poisonous; it should never be eaten by christians or those who wish to preserve their health. The offals, &c., with which pork in the vicinity of a city is fattened, make it unsavory and unwholesome. Such stuff should be used for manure, and never given as food to animals whose flesh is to be eaten by man! When pork is good, the flesh looks very white and smooth and the fat white and fine. Hogs two years old make the best--older than that, their flesh is apt to be rank. Measly pork is very unwholesome, and never should be eaten. It may be known, as the fat is filled with small kernels. When the rind is thick and tough, and cannot easily be impressed with the finger, the pork is old, and will require more cooking. If pork is not cooked enough it is disagreeable and almost indigestible; it should never be eaten unless it is thoroughly done. The fat parts of pork are not very healthy food. Those who labor hard may feel no inconvenience from this diet; but children should never eat it; nor is it healthy for the delicate and sedentary. Fat pork seems more proper as material for frying fish and other meats, and as a garnish, than to be cooked and eaten by itself. It is best and least apt to prove injurious during the cold weather. The lean, especially the ham, is excellent; and when eaten moderately seldom proves injurious; but a full meal of roast pork or pig is a hazardous experiment. Unless the stomach be very strong, it will cause heaviness and nausea. In short, there is no doubt that pork is the kind of meat which should be most sparingly used in substance. As an auxiliary in the culinary department, we could not comfortably dispense with it. PORK TO ROAST. Take a leg of pork, one weighing eight pounds will require full three and a half hours to roast it. Wash it clean, and dry it with a cloth; with a sharp knife score the skin in diamonds about an inch square. Make a stuffing with grated bread, a little sage, and two small onions chopped fine, seasoned with pepper and salt, and moistened with the yolk of an egg. Put this in under the skin of the knuckle, and in deep incisions made in the thick part of the leg; rub a little fine powdered sage into the skin where it is scored; and then, with a paste brush or goose feather, rub the whole surface of the skin with sweet oil or butter; this makes the crackling crisper and browner than basting it with dripping, it will be perfect in color, and the skin will not blister. Do not put it too near the fire; and it must be moistened at intervals with sweet oil or butter, tied up in a rag. When it is done, skim the fat from the gravy, which may be thickened with a little butter rolled in flour. Apple-sauce is always proper to accompany roasted pork--this, with potatoes, mashed or plain, mashed turnips, and pickles are good. SPARE-RIB Should be rubbed with powdered sage mixed with salt and pepper, before it is roasted. It will require, if large and thick, two or three hours to roast it--a very thin one may roast in an hour. Lay the thick end to the fire. When you put it down, dust on some flour, and baste with a little butter. The shoulder, loin, or chine are roasted in the same manner. A shoulder is the most economical part to buy, and is excellent boiled. Pork is always salted before it is boiled. PICKLED PORK Takes more time than any other meat. If you buy your pork ready salted, ask how many days it has been in salt; if many, it will require to be soaked in water for six hours before you dress it. When you cook it, wash and scrape it as clean as possible; when delicately dressed, it is a favorite dish with almost everybody. Take care it does not boil fast; if it does, the knuckle will break to pieces, before the thick part of the meat is warm through; a leg of seven pounds takes three hours and a half very slow simmering. Skim your pot very carefully, and when you take the meat out of the boiler, scrape it clean. The proper vegetables are parsnips, potatoes, turnips, or carrots. Some like cabbage, but it is a strong, rank vegetable, and does not agree with a delicate stomach. It should not be given to children. PORK STEAKS. Cut them off a neck or loin; trim them neatly, and pepper them; broil them over a clear fire, turning them frequently; they will take twenty minutes. Sprinkle with salt when put in the plate, and add a small piece of butter. BROILED HAM. Cut ham into very thin slices and broil on a gridiron. If the ham is too salt, soak the slices before broiling in hot water; if you are obliged to do this, dry them well with a cloth before broiling. Fry what eggs you want in butter, and when dished lay an egg on each slice of ham, and serve. HAM BOILED. A ham if dry, requires to be soaked from twelve to twentyfour hours in warm water. Then put it on in cold water, and let it simmer, not boil, four or five hours. It is better and goes farther not to be cut till it is quite cold. Boiled ham is delicate to broil. SAUSAGES FRIED. Sausages are best when quite fresh. Put a little dripping or bit of butter in the frying pan; as soon as it is melted, put in the sausages and shake them and turn often. Fry them over a very slow fire and be sure not to break or prick them. Fry them till they are a nice brown--then drain them from the fat and serve. They are easily digested and a very nutritious food--proper for the elderly whose teeth are not good. TO MAKE SAUSAGE MEAT. Chop two pounds of lean with one of fat pork very fine--mix with this meat five teaspoonfuls of salt, seven of powdered sage, two of black pepper and one of cloves. --You can add a little rosemary, if you like it. TO ROAST A PIG. A pig about three weeks old is the best. It should be killed the morning if it is to be eaten for dinner. Make the stuffing with about six ounces of grated bread, a handful of sage minced fine, (or two ounces) and a large onion. Mix these together with an egg, some pepper, salt, and a bit of butter as large as an egg. Wash the pig in cold water, cut off the petti-toes, leaving the skin long to wrap around the ends of the legs.--Then fill the belly with the stuffing and sew it up. The liver and heart may be kept with the feet for gravy. The fire must be clear and hotter at the ends than in the middle. You can place a flat iron before the middle of the fire. Before the pig is put down rub it over with sallad oil or fresh butter, and baste with these till it is done. It requires constant care. A small one will be done enough in an hour and a half. Before you take it from the fire, cut off the head and part it down the middle, take out the brains, chop them fine with some boiled sage leaves and mix these with veal or beef gravy or that which runs from the pig when you cut it down the middle, which must be done before you lay it in the dish. MUTTON. Mutton is best from August till January. It is nutritious and often agrees better than any other meat with weak stomachs. To have it tender, it must be kept as long as possible without injury. Be sure and cook it till it is done; the gravy that runs when the meat is cut should never show the least tinge of blood. It is an abomination to serve it, as some do, half raw. To roast mutton, make a brisk fire, and allow fifteen or twenty minutes to the pound. Paper the fat parts. Baste and froth it, the same as beef. The hind quarter or haunch is the prime piece to roast--the leg, loin, neck and breast may all be cooked in this manner--though it is more profitable to boil the leg. The following is a good receipt. A Stuffed Loin of Mutton. Take the skin off a loin of mutton with the flap on; bone it neatly; make a nice veal stuffing and fill the inside of the loin with it where the bones were removed; roll it up tight, skewer the flap, and tie twine round it to keep it firmly together; put the outside skin over it till nearly roasted, and then remove it that the mutton may brown. Serve with a nice gravy, mashed turnips and potatoes. Currant jelly is eaten with mutton. Mutton must be boiled the same as other meats--that is, simmered very slowly, and the scum carefully removed. Always wash it before cooking and put it in cold water. Only allow water sufficient to cover it, and the liquor makes excellent broth, with a little rice and a few carrots, &c. Mutton for boiling must not be kept so long as it may be for roasting. Two or three days is sufficient; in warm weather less. MUTTON LEG TO BOIL. Cut off the shank bone and trim the knuckle--if it weigh nine pounds it will require three hours to cook it. Parsley and butter, or caper-sauce should be served with it-- onion sauce, turnips, spinage and potatoes are all used. TO STEW A SHOULDER OF MUTTON. Bone and flatten a shoulder of mutton, sprinkle over it pepper and salt, roll it up tightly, bind it with tape, and put it into a stew-pan that will just hold it, pour over it a well seasoned gravy made with the bones, cover the pan closely, and let it stew till tender; before serving, take off the tape, thicken the gravy. It will take about three hours to stew the shoulder. MUTTON CHOPS. Cut the chops off a loin or the best end of a neck of mutton; pare off the fat, dip them in a beaten egg and strew over them grated bread, seasoned with salt and finely minced parsley --then fry them in a little butter, and make a gravy, or broil them over coals, and butter them in a hot dish. Garnish with fried parsley. LAMB. Lamb is a delicate and tender meat; but it requires to be kept a few days, when the weather will permit--and should be thoroughly cooked to be healthful. Never take lamb or veal from the spit till the gravy that drops is white. The forequarter of lamb consists of the shoulder, neck and breast together; this is best roasted; it requires about two hours to cook it well. The leg may be boiled or roasted. Mint sauce (the leaves of mint chopped fine and mixed with sugar and vinegar -- lettuce leaves prepared in the same way, if you have no mint, will do) is much esteemed with roast lamb. Lamb is fine for cutlets, or with rice cooked as follows. LAMB DRESSED WITH RICE. Half roast a small fore quarter; cut it into steaks; season them with a little salt and pepper; lay them into a dish, and pour in a little water. Boil a pound of rice with a blade or two of mace; strain it, and stir in a good piece of fresh butter, and a little salt, add also the greater part of the yolk of four eggs beaten; cover the lamb with the rice, and with a feather put over it the remainder of the beaten eggs. Bake it in an oven till it has acquired a light brown color. VEAL. The loin is the best part of a calf, and requires to be roasted about three hours. Paper the kidney--if it be very fat, cut off a part before roasting, it is excellent suet. Both the fillet and shoulder should be stuffed before roasting. Make the stuffing as for beef. The fillet is good stewed like a shoulder of mutton. The neck of veal makes fine cutlets--season and fry or broil like mutton chops. Veal is a delicate meat, but not easy of digestion unless it be done very tender. Broiled, it is most difficult to digest. When boiled, stewed or made into soup it must be very carefully skimmed, as it sends up a great quantity of scum and is easily discolored. The knuckle is best stewed as the whimsical receipt of Gay, the poet, testifies. "Take a knuckle of veal, (You may buy it or steal) In a few pieces cut it, In a stewing-pan put it." Where it must remain (seasoned with a great variety of sweet herbs) about three hours, when it is fit for any dignitary. The knuckle is also excellent boiled, if the gristles are made perfectly tender. Serve parsley and melted butter in a boat; or veal gravy with the parsley is much better. The liquor of boiled veal should always be saved and boiled down for gravy, if not made into broth. VENISON. It hardly seems worth while to give receipts for cooking venison, so little is to be had in the markets.--It is said to be the most easily digested of any kind of meat, consequently would be good food for those who are troubled with weak and slow digestive powers, if it could be obtained. It ought to be kept some time--a fortnight if the weather permits--after it is killed; then roasted before a strong close fire. The fat parts must be covered with paper and a paste made of flour and water to prevent burning--baste it well; a haunch of twelve pounds will require about four hours to roast. Current jelly is served with it. VENISON STEAKS. May be broiled or fried in the same manner as mutton chops or veal cutlets. Mutton is the best substitute for the real venison; dressed by the following receipt, it is much relished. VENISON MOCK. Hang up, for several days, a large fat loin of mutton; then bone it, and take off all the kidneyfat, and the skin from the upper fat; mix together one ounce of ground allspice, two ounces of brown sugar and one ounce of ground black pepper. Rub it well into the mutton; keep it covered with the skin; rub and turn it daily for five days. When to be roasted, cover it with the skin, and paper it the same way as venison is done. Serve it with made gravy, and current jelly. It must be well washed from the spices before it is roasted. POULTRY. No kind of animal food is so delicate and delicious as the flesh of fowls and birds, and no kind is so generally healthful. Rarely does it disagree with those who are well; even the feeble in constitution, or those debilitated by sickness, find this a most agreeable and nutritious diet. The white meat of a young turkey, when well boiled, is easier of digestion than that of any other fowl. In a young turkey, the toes and bill are soft. A young goose (a very old one is not fit to be eaten) is plump in the breast, and the fat white and soft--the feet yellow, the web of the foot Ducks, if young, feel very tender under the wing, and the web of the foot is transparent. The best fowls have yellow legs--if very old, the feet look stiff and worn. Pigeons should be quite fresh, the breast plump and fat. Poultry should lie one night after being killed in warm weather to make it tender; in cold weather it may be kept a much longer time to advantage. To prepare fowls for dressing, scald them in hot water, pick out every pin-feather, take out the gall bag without breaking, singe off the hairs over a quick blaze, made with white paper is the best; cut off the head, feet and neck; boil the latter with the liver and gizzard (well cleaned) in a small quantity of water for gravy; then, TO ROAST A TURKEY. Make a stuffing like that for veal; or take a tea-cup of sausage meat and add a like quantity of bread crumbs, with the beaten yolks of two eggs --then fill the crop; dredge the turkey over with flour, lay it before the fire, taking care this is most on the stuffed part, as that requires the greatest heat. A strip of paper may be put on the breast bone to prevent its scorching. Baste with a little butter or salt and water at first, then with its own dripping. A little before it is taken up, dredge it again with flour, baste with butter and froth it up. A large turkey requires full three hours roasting--a smaller in proportion. Ham or tongue is usually eaten with turkey; stewed cranberries also. TO BOIL A TURKEY. Clean it as to roast, make a stuffing of bread, green parsley, one lemon peel, a few oysters or an onion --season with, salt, pepper, a little nutmeg and mix one egg and a small bit of butter; put this into the crop, fasten up the skin, put the turkey on in cold water enough to cover it, let it boil slowly, and take off all the scum; when this is done, it should only simmer closely covered till it is done. It will take about two hours for a small turkey, longer if large. A little salt, three teaspoonfuls, may be put in the water and the turkey dredged with flour before it is boiled. The neck, and liver are chopped and put in the gravy. Fowls and chickens may be boiled in the same way, with a like stuffing, only allowing less time. A chicken will take about 35 minutes. A fowl nearly an hour. Let them boil till tender--serve with parsely-sauce or egg-sauce. Fowls and chickens are cooked in a great variety of ways. Fowls are good stuffed and roasted, the same as turkeys, only allowing less time at the fire;--an hour and a half for a large fowl --not quite an hour for a chicken; this last need not be stuffed. It is needless to repeat over again the ingredients for stuffing, way of making gravy, &c. A female who has sense enough to cook a dinner will manage these things to her own liking and means. It is not necessary to good cooking, that every one should season alike. Young chickens are best broiled or fricaseed. TO BROIL A CHICKEN. Pick and singe them nicely, wash them clean, and dry them in a cloth; cut them down the back, truss the legs and wings, as for boiling; flatten them, and put them upon a cold gridiron; when they become a little dry, put them upon a plate, turn them with butter, and strew a little salt and pepper over the inside, which part is laid first upon the gridiron : turn them frequently, and let them broil slowly for about half an hour. Serve them hot, with melted butter poured over them, or plenty of stewed mushrooms. The livers and gizzards may be broiled with them, fastened into the wings, well seasoned, and served with the chickens. TO FRICASEE A CHICKEN. Wash and cut the chicken into joints; scald and take off the skin, put the pieces in a stew-pan, with an onion cut small, a bunch of parsley, a little thyme and lemon-peel, salt and pepper --add a pint of water, a bit of butter as large as an egg. Stew it an hour; a little before serving, add the yolks of two eggs beaten up, with a tea-cup of sweet cream, stirring it in gradually; take care that this gravy does not boil. CHICKEN BAKED IN RICE. Cut a chicken into joints as for a fricasee, season it well with pepper and salt, lay it into a pudding-dish lined with slices of ham or bacon, add a pint of veal gravy, and an onion finely minced; fill up the dish with boiled rice well pressed and piled as high as the dish will hold, cover it with a paste of flour and water, and bake one hour in a slow oven. If you have no veal gravy use water instead, adding a little more ham and seasoning. TO ROAST A GOOSE. Geese seem to bear the same relation to poultry that pork does to the flesh of other domestic quadrupeds; that is, the flesh of goose is not suitable for, or agreeable to, the very delicate in constitution. One reason doubtless is, that it is the fashion to bring it to table very rare done; a detestable mode! Take a young goose, pick, singe, and clean well. Make the stuffing with two ounces of onions (about four common sized), and one ounce of green sage chopped very fine; then add a large coffee cup of stale bread crumbs, a little pepper and salt, a bit of butter as big as a walnut, the yolk of an egg or two; mix these well together and stuff the goose; do not fill it entirely; the stuffing requires room to swell. Spit it; tie the spit at both ends to prevent its swinging round, and to keep the stuffing from coming out. The fire must be brisk. Baste it with salt and water at first--then with its own dripping. It will take two hours or more to roast it thoroughly. A green goose, that is one under four months old, is seasoned with pepper and salt instead of sage and onions. It will roast in an hour. DUCK, TO ROAST, May be stuffed the same as a goose. It will roast in an hour, or less if it be young. DUCK, TO STEW. Cut one or two ducks into quarters; fry them a light brown in butter; put them into a saucepan, with a pint of gravy, four onions whole, pepper, and some salt, a bunch of parsley, two sage leaves, a sprig of winter savory, and sweet marjoram. Cover the pan closely, and stew them till tender; take out the herbs and pepper; skim it; if the sauce be not sufficiently thick, mix with two table-spoonfuls of it a little flour, and stir it into the saucepan; boil it up, and garnish the dish with the four onions. Both geese and ducks, if old, are better to be parboiled before they are roasted. Put them on in just sufficient water to boil them; keep the vessel close covered; let a tough goose simmer two hours, then dry and wipe it clean; stuff and roast, basting it at first with a little bacon fat or butter. PIGEONS. About the only birds in New England worth cooking, are the pigeon and partridge. A few quails and woodcocks are occasionally found; the robin is sometimes killed; but it is a sin against feeling to destroy a singing bird--one, too, so innocent and gentle. Any one who kills a robin to eat, ought to have it hung round his neck as the albatross was around the "Ancient Mariner." Pigeons are dry and easily digested food, but not quite so delicate as partridges. For the sick, the latter are very appropriate, and may be eaten, if good, (they are sometimes almost poisonous, in the early spring, supposed to be caused by feeding on a certain berry,) when other meats would be injurious. Pigeons may be broiled like chickens, or roasted, only tying over the breast thin slices of fat bacon. When the bird is nearly done, then remove the bacon; dredge with flour; baste with a little butter and froth. They will roast in about half an hour. They may be stuffed or not, as you like. Make a gravy with the giblets, mixed with parsley, seasoned with pepper and salt, and thickened with a little flour and butter. TO STEW PIGEONS. Wash and clean six pigeons, cut them into quarters, and put all their giblets with them into a stew-pan, a piece of butter, a little water, a bit of lemon peel, two blades of mace, some chopped parsley, salt, and pepper; cover the pan closely, and stew them till they are tender; thicken the sauce with the yolk of an egg beaten up with three table-spoonfuls of cream and a bit of butter dusted with flour; let them stew ten minutes longer before serving. This is an excellent and economical way of cooking them. Partridges may be roasted like pigeons; but they are better stewed, because such dry meat. TO STEW PARTRIDGES. Truss the partridges as fowls are done for boiling; pound the livers with double the quantity of fat bacon and bread crumbs boiled in milk; and some chopped parsley, and mushrooms; season with pepper, salt, grated lemon-peel, and mace. Stuff the inside of the birds, tie them at both ends, and put them into a stew-pan lined with slices of bacon; add a quart of good gravy, if you have it, otherwise water, two onions, a bunch of sweet herbs, and a few blades of mace; let them stew gently till tender; take them out, strain and thicken the sauce with flour and butter, make it hot, and pour it over the partridges. PRESERVING MEATS. Salt is the grand preservative of meats; but in using these, care should be taken to soak them if too salt. It is not healthy to eat our food very salt. In the summer season particular attention must be observed, lest fresh meat be injured. In the country this care is very necessary. Be sure and take the kernels out of a round of beef; one in the udder, in the fat, and those about the thick end of the flank. To salt the meat thoroughly, rub in the salt evenly into every part, and fill the holes full where the kernels were taken out. A pound and a half of salt will be sufficient for twenty-five pounds of beef, if you only want to corn it to be eaten in a few days. In the summer, the sooner meat is salted, after it is cool, the better. In winter it is better to be kept a few days before salting. Pork ought not to be allowed to freeze before it is salted for family use. If you wish beef to look red, rub it first with saltpetre and sugar; half an ounce of each mixed together, is sufficient for twenty pounds of meat. PICKLE FOR BEEF. Allow to four gallons of water two pounds of brown sugar and six pounds of salt, boil it about twenty minutes, taking off the skum as it rises; the following day pour it over the meat which has been packed into the pickling-tub. Boil it every two months, adding three ounces of brown sugar and half a pound of common salt. By this means it will keep good a year. The meat must be sprinkled with salt, and the next day wiped dry, before pouring the pickle over it, with which it should always be completely covered. You must add four ounces of saltpetre. The same pickle will do for tongues and hams. Canvas lids should be placed over salting tubs, to admit air and exclude flies, which are more destructive to salting meat than to fresh. Care must be taken to secure bacon and hams from the fly. The best method is, to put them in coarse calico or canvas bags; paper is apt to break in damp weather. Always keep smoked meat in a dark place. TO SALT FAT PORK. Pack it down tightly in the barrel, each layer of pork covered with clean coarse salt; then make a strong brine with two gallons of water and as much coarse salt as will dissolve in it; boil and skim; let it stand till it is perfectly cold, and then pour it to the meat till that is covered. Pork is best without sugar or saltpetre, provided it be always kept covered with this strong brine. An excellent way to keep fresh meat during the winter, is practised by the farmers in the country, which they term "salting in snow." Take a large clean tub, cover the bottom three or four inches thick with clean snow; then lay in pieces of fresh meat, spare-ribs, fowls, or whatever you wish to keep, and cover each layer with two or three inches of snow, taking particular care to fill snow into every cranny and crevice between the pieces, and around the edges of the tub. Fowls must also be filled inside with the snow. When the tub is filled the last layer must be snow, pressed down tight; then cover the tub, which must be in a cold place, the colder the better. The meat will not freeze, and unless there happen to be a long spell of warm weather, the snow will not thaw; but the meat remain as fresh and juicy when it is taken out to be cooked, as when it was first killed. CHAPTER IV. SOUPS AND GRAVIES. Soups hurtful to Dyspeptics--suitable for the Healthy--Economic way of making Soups and Gravies--Turtle Soup--Currie--Veal--Beef or Mutton--White--Pigeon--Vegetable--Rice--Peas--For an Invalid--Gravies--Melted Butter. ONE of the popular errors in regard to diet is considering soups and broths as light food, and therefore always proper for weak stomachs, and feeble constitutions. "Oh, this nice broth cannot hurt you!"--"The hot soup must do you good this cold day," is often said to the poor shivering dyspeptic, or drooping invalid. And if they take this food and are injured by it--why their case must be desperate, indeed, not to bear a little soup! In Dr Beaumont's experiments on the effect of the gastric fluid on the different kinds of food usually taken into the stomach, soups were found to be among the most indigestible; and the reason is, that the water in the soup must be separated from the nourishment before the process of digestion can begin. This separation takes some time; then if the stomach be weak or diseased, and secrete (or form) but little gastric juice, this becomes diluted and the action of the stomach materially deranged by the effort of separating the water from the nutritive particles in the soup. Dyspeptics, therefore, should not take this kind of food; nor any kind that is very liquid. Bilious persons, and those who are troubled with heart-burn and indigestion, would be injured by eating soups often. For children, if a good share of rice and other vegetables be in the liquid, or considerable bread eaten with it, soup is a generally healthy and invigorating food; and for those who are in health and labor hard, and require large meals, it is a good plan to begin the dinner with soup of some kind, as otherwise they would be inclined to take too much solid food. With these restrictions, then, the good housekeeper will know how to plan her soup days, and for whom to make this savory dish, one of the most delicious when well prepared. I have before remarked, that the liquor in which meats of all kinds are boiled (except smoked meats), should be saved and used, either in soups or gravies. This liquor contains much of the essence of the meat (if the pot was kept closely covered, which it always should be when meats are boiling), and, if rightly prepared, will prove a great saving in the expense for animal food in a family. If the meats or poultry are boiled for the table, it is better not to use the liquor the first day. Pour it into a well-glazed earthen pot or pan, and let it stand till the next morning. Then skim off the fat, and strain the liquid into a clean soup-boiler. By this means you entirely separate the blood from the meat, which is the great object of cookery, and should be as conscientiously attended to by the Christian, as abstaining from pork is by the Jew. Most of the particles of blood, when meat is boiled rise in the form of scum; these should be carefully removed--but there are always stray particles left floating in the water, and when this liquor is strained through a sieve or cloth (a colander is not fine enough) there will be coagulated blood at the bottom in form of sediment. After the liquor is thus purified, you can add whatever vegetables you choose, rice, carrots, cabbage, onions, and potatoes are all used. If the liquor is too much, boil it awhile uncovered and let it evaporate. If it requires richness, you had better take some of the fat skimmed off--melt it in a saucepan with a spoonful of flour well stirred in--this unites with the fat and prevents it from floating like oil, on the top of the liquor. Then stir this mixture into the soup, add whatever flavors of seasoning you choose; pepper and sweet herbs are usually in favor.--Crackers toasted or hard bread may be added a short time before the soup is wanted; but do not put in those libels on civilized cookery, called dumplings! One might about as well eat, with the hope of digesting, a brick from the ruins of Babylon, as one of the hard, heavy masses of boiled dough which usually pass under this name. Indeed, it is on many accounts, preferable, that bread should be eaten with rather than in our soups. In the former case, the bread assists to cool the broth, which is otherwise almost always taken too hot. Here is one great cause of disease to the stomach from this article of diet. Besides, hot liquors greatly injure the teeth; and also by passing immediately into the blood, and thus circulating through the whole system, cause an unnatural glow and perspiration which often predisposes to colds, and is weakening to delicate constitutions. When we are well, and wish to continue so, it is best never to take food or drinks warmer than new milk. In sickness hot drinks are some times needed as stimulants. MOCK TURTLE SOUP. * Scald and clean thoroughly a calve's head with the skin on; boil it gently one hour in four quarts of water, skimming it well. Take out the head, and when almost cold, cut the meat off and divide it into bits about an inch square. Slice and fry of a light brown in butter, two pounds of the leg of beef, and two of veal with five onions cut small and two ounces of green sage. --Add these to the liquor in which the head was boiled, also the bones of the head and trimmings, two whole onions; a handful of parsley, one teaspoonful of ground allspice and two of black pepper, salt to your taste, and the rind of one lemon; let it simmer and stew gently for three hours--then strain it and when cold take off the fat. Put the liquor into a clean stew-pan, add the meat cut from the head, and for a gallon of soup add half a pint of madeira wine, or claret, and some mix a spoonful of flour with a little of the broth and stir it in. Let it stew very gently till the meat is tender, which will be about an hour. About twenty minutes before it is to be served, add a small tea-spoonful of cayenne, the yolks of eight or ten hard boiled eggs and a dozen force-meat balls; some add the juice of a lemon. When the meat is tender, the soup is done. To make the meat balls, boil the brains for ten minutes, then put them in cold water, when cool chop and mix them with five spoonfuls of grated bread, a little grated nutmeg, pepper, salt and thyme and two eggs; roll the balls as large as the yolk of an egg and fry them of a light brown in butter or good dripping. {footnote}*There is no use in a receipt for making the real turtle --that is so seldom done in a family. The Following Footnote Appears at the End of Page 48 in the Original Text. Very good soup in imitation of turtle is also made from calves' feet. Four of these boiled in two quarts of water, till very tender--the meat taken from the bones, the liquor strained--a pint of good beef gravy and two glasses of wine added, seasoned as the calves' head soup--with hard eggs, balls, &c. CURRIE SOUP. Make about two quarts of strong veal broth, seasoned with two onions, a bunch of parsley, salt and pepper; strain it, and have ready a chicken, cut in joints and skinned; put it into the broth, with a table-spoonful of currie-powder; boil the chicken till quite tender, a little before serving, add the juice of a lemon, and stir in a teacupful of cream. Serve boiled rice to eat with this broth. VEAL SOUP. Skin four pounds of a knuckle of veal, break, and cut it small, put it into a stew-pan with two gallons of water; when it boils skim it, and let it simmer till reduced to two quarts; strain, and season it with white pepper, salt, a little mace, a dessert-spoonful of lemon juice, and thicken it with a large table-spoonful of flour, kneaded with an ounce of butter. BEEF OR MUTTON SOUP. Boil very gently in a closely covered saucepan, four quarts of water, and two table-spoonfuls of sifted bread crumbs, with three pounds of beef cut in small pieces, or the same quantity of mutton chops taken from the middle of the neck; season with pepper and salt, add two turnips, two carrots, two onions, and one head of celery, all cut small; let it stew with these ingredients four hours, when it will be ready to serve. WHITE SOUP. Take a good knuckle of veal, or two or three short shanks, boil it about four hours, with some whole white pepper, a little mace, salt, two onions, and a small bit of lean ham; strain it, and when cold take off all the fat and sediment; beat up six yolks of eggs and mix them with a pint of good cream, then pour the boiling soup upon it by degrees, stiring it well, and if it is liked, add the best part of the gristles. PIGEON SOUP. Take eight pigeons, cut down two of the oldest, and put them with the necks, pinions, livers, and gizzards of the others, into four quarts of water; let it boil till the substance is extracted, and strain it; season the pigeons with mixed spices and salt, and truss them as for stewing; pick and wash clean a handful of parsley, chives or young onions, and a good deal of spinach, chop them; put in a frying-pan a quarter of a pound of butter, and when it boils, mix in a handful of bread crumbs, keep stirring them with a knife till of a fine brown; boil the whole pigeons till they become tender in the soup with the herbs, and fried bread. If the soup be not sufficiently high seasoned, add more mixed spices and salt. VEGETABLE SOUP. Pare and cut small one dozen of common-sized onions, five large yellow turnips, two heads of celery, and the red part of three large carrots; wash and put them in a stew-pan with two ounces of butter, cover it closely; and when the vegetables are a little soft, add to them four quarts of well seasoned gravy soup made of roast beef bones, and let it stew four or five hours; rub it through a sieve, put it on the fire, boil and skim it before serving. RICE SOUP. Boil in four quarts of water the scrag end of a neck of veal and one pound of lean ham, till it is reduced nearly half; carefully skimming it, season with white pepper, and two blades of mace. Wash very clean three quarters of a pound of rice, strain the soup, and boil the rice in it till it is tender. OLD PEAS SOUP. Put a pound and a half of split peas on in four quarts of water, with roast beef or mutton bones, and a ham bone, two heads of celery, and four onions, let them boil till the peas are sufficiently soft to pulp through a sieve, strain it, put it into the pot with pepper and salt, and boil it nearly one hour. Two or three handsful of spinach, well washed and cut a little, added when the soup is strained, is a great improvement; and in the summer young green peas in place of the spinach. A tea-spoonful of celery seed, or essence of celery, if celery is not to be had. SOUP FOR AN INVALID. Cut in small pieces one pound of beef or mutton, or part of both; boil it gently in two quarts of water; take off the scum, and when reduced to a pint, strain it. Season with a little salt, and take a teacupful at a time. GRAVIES. The French have a much greater variety of gravies than the English or Americans, who copy the English mode of cookery. Melted butter is with us the gravy for most meats. This is unnecessary, as nearly every kind of meat would yield gravy sufficient of its own; and we should thus have the flavor peculiar to each, if we cooked rightly. The French understand this, and their gravies are better as well as cheaper. Butter in the winter season, is always enormously dear, and it should be the study of the good housekeeper, to dispense with it, almost entirely when preparing meat. When meat is roasted or stewed, the gravy should always be boiled and strained before it is sent to the table, to clear it from the coagulated blood; then thickened a little, if necessary, and flavored. MELTED BUTTER. Always use sweet butter; if in the least injured, it spoils the gravy. To make it of the best quality,--cut two ounces of butter into little bits, put these in a clean stew-pan, with a large teaspoonful of flour and a table-spoonful of milk. When thoroughly melted and mixed, add six table-spoonfuls of water, hold it over the fire, and shake it round every minute (all the time one way) till it just begins to simmer, then let it stand quietly and boil up. It should be of the thickness of good cream. EGG SAUCE is made by putting two or three hard boiled eggs, minced fine, into melted butter --The butter need not be as thick when eggs are to be added. PARSLEY AND BUTTER is made by adding parsley that has been boiled a few minutes and chopped fine, to the melted butter. WHITE SAUCE FOR BOILED FOWLS. Melt in a teacupful of milk a large table-spoonful of butter kneaded in a little flour; beat up the yolk of an egg with a teaspoonful of cream, stir into the butter, and put it over the fire, stirring it constantly; chopped parsley may be added. CAPER SAUCE is made by adding one or two spoonfuls of capers to melted butter. OYSTER SAUCE. Beard and scald the oysters, strain the liquor, and thicken it with a little flour and butter, squeeze in a little lemon juice, and add three table-spoonfuls of cream. Heat it well, but do not let it boil. BREAD SAUCE. Boil a half pint of milk, and put into it a teacupful of bread crumbs a little powdered, a small chopped onion which has been boiled in three waters, and let it simmer twenty minutes; then add a piece of butter as large as a walnut, boil up and serve. TOMATO SAUCE. Peel and slice twelve tomatoes, picking out the seeds; add three pounded crackers, pepper and salt to your taste, stew twenty minutes. TOMATO CATSUP. Take two quarts skinned tomatoes --two table-spoonfuls of salt --same of black pepper, one of allspice; four pods of red pepper, two table-spoonfuls of ground mustard; mix and rub these thoroughly together; and stew them slowly, in a pint of vinegar, for three hours--then strain the liquor through a sieve, and simmer it down to one quart of catshup. Put this in bottles and cork it tight. CHAPTER V. FISH AND CONDIMENTS. Remarks on Fish--Cod--Salmon--Mackerel--Shad--Frying fish--Chowder--Shell fish--Oysters--Lobster--Condiments. As food, fish is easier of digestion than meats are, with the exception of salmon; this kind of fish is extremely hearty food, and should be given sparingly to children and used cautiously by those who have weak stomachs, or who take little exercise. The small trout, found in rivers, are the most delicate and suitable for invalids; lake fish are also excellent, and any kind of fresh-water fish, if cooked immediately after being caught, are always healthful. But the ocean is the chief dependence for the fish-market, and there is little danger (if we except salmon and lobsters) that its kind of aliment will, in our country, be eaten to excess. It would be better for the health of those who do not labor, if they would use more fish and less flesh for food. But then fish cannot be rendered so palatable, because it does not admit the variety of cooking and flavors that other animal food does. Fish is much less nutritious than flesh. The white kinds of fish, cod, haddock, flounders, white-fish, &c., are the least nutritious; the oily kinds, salmon, eels, herrings, &c., are more difficult to digest. Shell fish have long held a high rank as restorative food; but a well-dressed chop or steak is much better to recruit the strength and spirits. Cod, whiting, and haddock, are better for being a little salted, and kept one day before cooking. COD'S HEAD AND SHOULDERS, TO BOIL. Wash it clean; tie it up, and dry it with a cloth. Allow in the proportion of every five measures of water, one of salt; when it boils take off the scum; put in the fish, and keep it boiling very fast for twentyfive or thirty minutes. Serve with the roe and milt parboiled, cut into slices and fried, and garnish with curled parsley and horse-radish. Sauces;-- oyster, melted butter, or egg. TO CRIMP COD. Cut a fresh cod into slices or steaks; lay them for three hours in salt and water, and a glass of vinegar; when they may be boiled, fried, or broiled, as you please. COD SOUNDS. This is reckoned a great delicacy: and may be either boiled, baked, roasted or broiled. Previous to cooking in any way they must be well soaked, the black skin all picked off and washed clean; then parboiled. If broiled, dust with flour, season with pepper and salt. Put a table spoonful of catsup into a little melted butter for the gravy, or stew with bread crumbs and fry them. TO BOIL FRESH SALMON. Salmon requires more boiling and in a larger quantity of water than any other kind of fish. It must be thoroughly done, or it is very unhealthy. Make the water strong with salt, let it boil, skim and put in the salmon; continue to skim off all the scum that rises. A piece weighing half a pound requires fifteen minutes. Sauces-- lobster, egg and butter. TO PICKLE SALMON. To a quart of liquor the fish has been boiled in, put rather more than half a pint of vinegar, and half an ounce of whole black pepper; boil it, and when it is cold pour it over the fish previously laid in a deep dish. This is a good way to dress the salmon left after a dinner. If you boil it purposely to pickle, do not remove the scales, it keeps better. Pour a little sweet oil over the top of the pickle, and the fish will keep good for months. TO BROIL SALMON. Cut it in slices about an inch and a half thick, dry it in a clean cloth, sprinkle over a little salt --put your gridiron over a clear but not very hot fire, when the bars are warm rub them with sweet oil or lard, lay the salmon on, and when done on one side, turn it gently and broil the other. TO BOIL MACKEREL. The excellence of mackerel is to have it fresh as possible--it must be cleaned nicely--put it into sufficient water to cover it--(a little salt should be sprinkled in the water ) and let it rather simmer than boil. A small mackerel will be done in fifteen minutes.--Do not allow them to stand in the water a moment after they are done. Trout, perch and bass are boiled in the same manner. Melted butter is used for boiled fish. TO BROIL MACKEREL. Clean and split them open; wipe dry; lay them on a clean gridiron, rubbed with suet over a very clear slow fire--turn, season with pepper, salt and a little butter --fine minced parsley is also used. Trout and perch are broiled in the same way. TO BROIL A SHAD. This is a delicate and delicious fish --Clean, wash, and split the shad, and wipe it dry; sprinkle it with pepper and salt, and broil it like mackerel. TO FRY COD OR OTHER FISH. It is much more difficult to fry fish than meat. Lard or dripping is better than butter, because the last burns so easily. The fat fried from salt pork is best of all. The fire must be clear and hot but not furious; the fat hot when the fish is put in, and there should be sufficient to cover the fish. Skim the fat before laying in the fish. Cut the cod in slices half or three quarters of an inch thick; rub them with indian meal to prevent breaking, fry it thoroughly. Trout and perch are fried in the same manner; only do not rub indian meal on them--dip in white of an egg and bread crumbs or dust with flour. TO MAKE CHOWDER. Lay some slices cut from the fat part of pork, in a deep stew-pan, mix sliced onions with a variety of sweet herbs, and lay them on the pork. Bone and cut a fresh cod into thin slices, and place them on the pork; then put a layer of pork, on that a layer of biscuit, then alternately the other materials until the pan is nearly full, season with pepper and salt, put in about a pint and a half of water, cover the stew-pan very close, and let it stand, with fire above as well as below, for four hours; then skim it well, and it is done. This is an excellent dish and healthy, if not eaten too hot. SHELL FISH. Oysters and clams generally agree well with those who like them; but lobster must be eaten cautiously. It is very apt to disagree with delicate stomachs. TO FRY OYSTERS. Make a batter as for pancakes, seasoned with grated nutmeg, white pepper and salt, and add some finely grated bread crumbs; dip in the oysters and fry them of a light brown. Or, dip them into the white of an egg beat up, then roll them in bread crumbs, seasoned with a little salt and pepper. TO STEW OYSTERS. Open and take the liquor from them, cleanse them from grit, strain the liquor and add the oysters with a little mace and lemon peel, a bit of butter rolled in flour, and a few white peppers. Simmer them very gently for eight or ten minutes. Toast thin slices of bread, lay these at the bottom of a dish and pour the oysters over. TO SCALLOP OYSTERS. Take off the beards; stew them in their liquor strained with a little mace, pepper and salt, fry some grated bread crumbs in a little butter, till of a nice brown; put the crumbs alternately with the oysters into a dish and serve. TO STEW LOBSTERS. A middling sized lobster is best--pick all the meat from the shells and mince it fine; season with a little salt, pepper and grated nutmeg, add three or four spoons of rich gravy and a small bit of butter --if you have no gravy, use more butter, and two spoonfuls of vinegar; stew about twenty minutes. LOBSTER COLD. It is frequently eaten in this way, with a dressing of vinegar, mustard, sweet oil, and a little salt and cayenne. The meat of the lobster must be minced very fine--and care must be taken to eat but little of the dish. CONDIMENTS. The fashions of cookery, as well as of dress, have changed very materially since the days of worthy Mrs Glass, whose receipts seem little else but a catalogue of herbs, spices, essences, and all manner of flavors; a perfect "Magazine of Taste." The crape cushion and periwig were not greater violations of the beauty of the natural hair and the comfort of the individual, than was the deluge of condiments, then thought indispensable to good cookery, to the pure taste of the palate and the real enjoyments of appetite. We are just beginning to learn that the natural flavor of every kind of animal and vegetable production, suitable for food, is more delicate, and exquisite, when properly prepared, then any which can be imparted by an incongruous medley of seasoning. Still, there are many improvements to be made in the "art of cookery" before the perfection of simplicity will be obtained; before we learn the right process of dressing each kind of food, so as to retain all its best nutriment and essence; or discover the appropriate condiment and sauce for every dish. To learn these things we must study the natural laws of the human constitution, and the arrangements of Providence. We find a great diversity of productions in the different climates--and there is little danger of error in assuming the rule that each sort is most healthful and to be used most freely, where it has been most plentifully provided by Nature. Thus in the climate of the Greenlander oil, and the fattest substances are necessary to sustain the human constitution, nor is any condiment or scarcely a vegetable required. In the warm climates of the East, pepper and other spices are produced, and no doubt, required where the diet is chiefly vegetable or meats newly killed, and the stomach and system are relaxed by the heat. It is the nature of all kinds of spices, and high-seasoned food, to irritate, in a degree, the lining or inner membrane of the stomach; and they prove hurtful or healthful in proportion as this stimulus is needed or not. In our own climate, the season of the year, as well as the age and constitution of the individual, must be taken into the calculation. During the cold weather, more fat meats and richer gravies may be eaten, but few or no condiments except a little salt is needed. In summer fish and a large proportion, of vegetable diet should be used; meats more sparingly, and sauces made with cream and eggs instead of butter; (this, when new, should be eaten chiefly in substance with bread) and then condiments are doubtless advantageous, if not too freely used. For those who exercise much in the open air, and require very hearty food, pepper, mustard and cayenne may be beneficial because they provoke thirst; and a very large amount of water is required to be taken into the stomach to supply the waste of the blood by perspiration. But do not give high seasoned food to children at any time. CHAPTER VI. VEGETABLES. Importance of vegetable food--Best manner of cooking--Potatoes--Turnips--Cabbage--Onions--Beets--Carrots--Parsnips--Peas--Beans--Squash--Cucumbers--Tomatoes. THE importance of using a portion of vegetable food can hardly be overrated, though to make this our only diet does and must prove injurious, because contrary to man's nature and the arrangements of the Creator. The farinaceous (or mealy) are far more nutritious than other vegetables; but none are sufficiently so to sustain the constitution under the cares and labors necessary to the full development of the energies of body and mind. And unless these can be developed and sustained, the rational and moral character of the human race will never be perfected. Still, though animal food is never, except in peculiar cases of disease, to be wholly abandoned, we must be quite as scrupulous not to neglect the vegetable part of our diet. This is necessary in order to prevent the concentrated diet of flesh from too sudden and stimulating action. Besides, our nature demands a portion of vegetables to keep the system in proper and healthy order. A mixed diet is the only right regimen--the proportions, of the different kinds of food, vary, with different ages and constitutions, in different climates, and seasons; still, in some degree, this rule should never be abandoned. The very young require a large portion of mild farinaceous vegetables--such as rice, sago, tapioca and potatoes; the two first are very easy of digestion. Potatoes contain much water and therefore remain longer in the stomach; for this reason they are not good for dyspeptics. Beans and peas, when well cooked, are healthy food for those who exercise much and eat considerable animal food. Vegetables require more attention in cooking than is generally bestowed. How often they are brought to table in a half raw or insipid state! Thus we have waxy, watery, or soddened potatoes, parboiled cabbage, and green peas so hard they might be used effectively as shot. If these dishes are eaten, they can hardly be digested;--but they rarely are taken freely; the consequence is that too much meat is used at dinner. If the vegetables were only cooked properly, the appetite for them would be increased as well as the power of digestion. There are three things to be attented to in cooking vegetables; make them sufficiently soft--develop their best flavor; and correct any rank or disagreeable taste they may have. These things are very easily accomplished--Boil them sufficiently--change the water if they are rank or unpleasant--and add a little salt, sugar or spice, as the case may require. Vegetables are always best when newly gathered--except the potato; that is better in winter if well kept. They are in greatest perfection when in greatest plenty, that is, in their proper season. Except spinach all vegetables should be boiled quickly (soft water is much the best) in an open vessel, and carefully skimmed. POTATOES. Potatoes should be kept in the cellar covered and carefully sprouted, as soon as the spring opens. The middling sized potatoes are best; the white mealy kind are better than the colored. To boil Potatoes in the best manner, is a very great perfection in cookery. The following way is a good one. Take potatoes as nearly equal in size as possible, wash, but do not pare or cut them; put them into a pot, the largest potatoes at the bottom, cover them with cold water, and about one inch over. Too much water injures them very much. Throw in a spoonful of salt, and let them boil about five minutes, then take off the pot and set it where it will simmer slowly for thirty minutes--then try the potatoes with a fork; if it passes easily through they are done; if not, let them simmer till they are; then pour off the water, place the pot where the potatoes will keep hot, but not burn, and let them stand, uncovered, till the moisture has evaporated. Then they are mealy and in perfection. To roast Potatoes. --Choose all of a size, wash clean and rinse; put them on a tin and bake them in a stove, or Dutch oven. It takes nearly two hours. Send them to the table with the skins on. They are excellent with cold meat, and healthy food for children, mashed with a little salt and gravy or cream. ANOTHER WAY TO BOIL POTATOES. Pare, wash and throw them into a pan of cold water; then put them on to boil in a clean pot with cold water sufficient to cover them, and sprinkle over a little salt; let them boil slowly uncovered till you can pass a fork through them; pour off the water, and set them where they will keep hot till wanted.--When done in this way they are very mealy and dry. Potatoes either boiled or roasted, should never be covered to keep them hot. MASHED POTATOES. When old, potatoes are best boiled and mashed, with a little butter, salt and cream, or milk. --They may be also sliced and fried raw, in hot salt-pork fat --or after they are boiled--Both these dishes are relished. But a plain, boiled, or roasted potato, when well cooked, is the best and most healthy; and though not a substitute for bread, it is one of the most useful vegetable productions. TURNIPS should be pared; put into water with a little salt; boiled till tender; then squeeze them thoroughly from the water, mash them smooth, add a piece of butter and a little pepper and salt. CABBAGE requires to be well washed before it is cooked; boil it in a large quantity of water, with a little salt, till it is soft and tender; skim the water carefully when it first boils. If the head is large, cut it--but a small head is the best. ONIONS are best boiled in milk and water. BEETS should be washed clean but never cut--put in boiling water, and cooked till very tender. CARROTS may be cut if too large; put in boiling water, with a little salt. PARSNIPS must be washed and scraped very clean, boiled like carrots. GREEN PEAS should be young and fresh-shelled, wash them clean, put them on in plenty of boiling water, with a little salt and a teaspoonful of pounded loaf sugar. Boil till tender. Green peas are a most delicious vegetable when cooked enough, but half-done, hard things, are very unhealthy. It takes from half an hour to an hour to boil them. Never let them stand in the water after they are done. Season with a little butter and salt. TO STEW YOUNG PEAS AND LETTUCE. Wash and make perfectly clean one or two heads of cabbage lettuce, pick off the outside leaves, and lay them for two hours in cold water with a little salt in it; then slice them, and put them into a saucepan, with a quart or three pints of peas, three table-spoonfuls of gravy, a bit of butter dredged with flour, some pepper and salt, and a teaspoonful of pounded loaf sugar. Let them stew, closely covered, till the peas are soft. GREEN BEANS OR STRING BEANS , as they are usually called, must be done till very tender--it takes nearly an hour and a half. Put them on in boiling water, after they have been prepared and well washed. GREENS of all kinds, spinach, beet-tops, &c. must be put in when the water boils. SQUASH is a rich vegetable, particularly the yellow winter squash. --This requires more boiling than the summer kind. Pare it, cut in pieces, take out the seeds and boil it in a very little water till it is quite soft. Then press out all the water, mash it and add a little butter, pepper and salt. TO STEW CUCUMBERS. Pare eight or ten large cucumbers, and cut them into thick slices, flour them well, and fry them in butter; then put them into a saucepan with a teacupful of gravy; season it with cayenne, salt and catsup. Let them stew for an hour and serve them hot. CHAPTER VII. PUDDINGS AND PIES. Nature of this diet--Preparation of puddings--Arrow root--Sago--Tapioca--Rice--Batter--Potato--Bread--Custard--Apple--Damson--Lemon--Christmas Pies--Not healthy food--Paste for pies--Apple pie--Rhubarb--Fruit--Squash--Pumpkin--Custard--Tarts--Puffs--Mince pies. CONSIDERED in relation to health, there is not much to be said in favor of either of these kinds of diet, as usually managed; that is, taken after a full dinner of meat and vegetables. Many kinds of puddings are excellent and nutritious food; rice, sago and arrow-root, in particular; and if needed as food, nothing would be more healthy. The mischief is that these delicious compounds often tempt to repletion, which plain bread, cheese and fruit would not be so likely to do. Dyspeptic people are generally injured by taking rich puddings or pies at any time. And there is a kind of pudding, made of fruit in paste, and boiled, which those who wish to avoid dyspepsia should never taste. No woman who regards her own health or that of her family, should ever allow a dumpling or paste pudding to be boiled in her house. I shall give no receipts for either. There is no way of boiling wheat dough which can render it fit for food; it will be crude and heavy and lay hard in the stomach, unless a person has from nature or violent exercise, such a voracious appetite that, like the one described by Hood--"he could all but eat and digest himself." Fruit mixed with batter, if rightly prepared, is far less objectionable; though this kind of pudding is not so nourishing or healthful as those made of rice, sago or indian meal, baked. A boiled indian pudding, if made nearly as thin as batter, is not very apt to be injurious; still made like hasty-pudding it is more easily digested. In preparing nice puddings, always beat the eggs very light, yolks and whites apart; the flour should be dried and sifted; if currants are used, they must be carefully picked, washed, and dried, and then dusted with flour before being put into the batter--raisins must be stoned; sugar dried and pounded; spices must be very fine, and all the ingredients thoroughly mixed. It is better to mix the pudding an hour or two before it is to be baked or boiled. ARROW-ROOT PUDDING. From a quart of new milk take a small teacupful, and mix it with two large spoonfuls of arrow-root. Boil the remainder of the milk, and stir it amongst the arrow-root; add, when nearly cold, four well beaten eggs, with two ounces of pounded loaf sugar, and the same of fresh butter broken into small bits; season with grated nutmeg. Mix it well together, and bake it in a buttered dish fifteen or twenty minutes. SAGO PUDDING. Boil five table-spoonfuls of sago, well picked and washed, in a quart of milk till quite soft, with a stick of cinnamon. Then stir in one teacup of butter and two of powdered loaf sugar. --When it is cold add six eggs well beaten, and a little grated nutmeg. Mix all well together, and bake it in a buttered dish about three quarters of an hour. Brown sugar, if dried will answer very well to sweeten it. TAPIOCA PUDDING. Wash four large table-spoonfuls of tapioca, and soak it for an hour in a little warm water; strain it through a sieve, and mix it with the well beaten yolks of four, and the whites of two eggs, a quart of good milk, half a teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, and sweeten it with sugar. Bake it in a dish, with or without puff paste round the edges, one hour. RICE PUDDING BAKED OR BOILED. Wash in cold water and pick very clean six ounces of rice; boil it in one quart of milk, with a bit of cinnamon, very gently, till it is quite tender; it will take about an hour; be careful to stir it often. Take it from the fire, pick out the cinnamon, and stir in a teacupful of sugar, half a cup of butter, three eggs well beaten, a little powdered nutmeg --stir it till it is quite smooth. You can line a pie-dish with puff paste, or bake it in a buttered dish which is better,--about three quarters of an hour will bake it. If you wish it more like custard, add one more egg and half a pint of milk. If you boil it you can add whatever fruit you like,--three ounces of currants, or raisins, or apples minced fine; it will take an hour to boil it. Serve with wine sauce or butter and sugar. RICE BLANCMANGE. Simmer a teacupful of whole rice into the least water possible, till it almost bursts, then add half a pint of good milk or thin cream, and boil it till it is quite a mash, stirring it the whole time it is on the fire, that it may not burn. Dip a mould in cold water, and pour the hot rice in and let it stand till cold, when it will come easily out. This dish may be eaten with cream and sugar, or custard and preserved fruits; raspberries are best. It should be made the day before it is wanted. It can be flavored with spices, lemon-peel, &c; and sweetened with a little loaf sugar; it is then very excellent. ARROW-ROOT BLANCMANGE. Dissolve a teacupful of arrow-root in a little cold water, take one pint of new milk, and one pint cream, boil it for a few minutes with six blades of mace, a nutmeg and lemon-peel pounded--then add a quarter of a pound of sugar, and boil all together for ten minutes. Strain it over the arrow-root, and stir it till it is cool--then wet the mould and pour it in; it will be congealed when it is cold. RICE SNOW BALLS. Boil some rice in milk till it is swelled and soft; pare and carefully scoop out the core of five or six good-sized apples, put into each a little grated lemon-peel and cinnamon; place as much of the rice upon a bit of linen as will entirely cover an apple, and tie each closely. Boil them two hours, and serve them with melted butter, sweetened with sugar. BATTER PUDDING. Take six ounces of fine flour, a little salt, and three eggs; beat up well with a little milk, added by degrees till the batter is quite smooth; make it the thickness of cream; put into a buttered pie-dish, and bake three quarters of an hour; or in a buttered and floured basin, tied over tight with a cloth: boil one hour and a half, or two hours. Any kind of ripe fruit that you like may be added to the batter,--only you must make the batter a little stiffer. Blueberries or finely chopped apple are most usually liked. POTATO PUDDING. Boil three large mealy potatoes, mash them very smoothly, with one ounce of butter, and two or three table-spoonfuls of thick cream; add three well beaten eggs, a little salt, grated nutmeg, and a table-spoonful of brown sugar. Beat all well together, and bake it in a buttered dish, for half or three quarters of an hour in a Dutch oven. A few currants may be added to the pudding. SWEET POTATO PUDDING. Boil the potatoes and mash them very smooth. To two cups full of potato add one cup of sugar, one of butter, one glass of wine, five eggs, one nutmeg and the grated rind of lemon. Bake with an under crust. PLAIN BREAD PUDDING. Pour a pint of boiling milk over four ounces of bread crumbs, cover it till cold, and mix with it three well beaten eggs, a table-spoonful of sugar, and half the peel of a grated lemon, or a little pounded cinnamon; bake it in a buttered dish, and serve with sweet sauce. CUSTARD PUDDING. Mix with one table-spoonful of flour, a pint of cream or new milk, a spoonful of rose water, one ounce of fresh butter broken in small bits; sweeten with pounded loaf sugar, and add a little grated nutmeg. Bake it in a buttered dish for half an hour. Before serving, you can strew over it pounded loaf sugar, and stick over it thin cut bits of citron, if you wish it to look very rich. RICH APPLE PUDDING. Peel and core six very large apples, stew them in six table-spoonfuls of water, with the rind of a lemon; when soft, beat them to a pulp, add six ounces of good brown sugar, six well beaten eggs, a pint of rich cream, and a teaspoonful of lemon juice; line a dish with a puff paste, and when baked, stick all over the top thin chips of candied citron and lemon-peel. DAMSON PUDDING. Make a batter with three well beaten eggs, a pint of milk, and of flour and brown sugar four table-spoonfuls each; stone a pint of damsons, and mix them with the batter; boil it in a buttered basin for an hour and a half. LEMON PUDDING. Boil in water, in a closely covered saucepan, two large lemons till quite tender; take out the seeds, and pound the lemons to a paste; add a quarter of a pound of pounded loaf sugar, the same of fresh butter beaten to a cream, and three well beaten eggs; mix all together, and bake it in a tin lined with puff paste; take it out, strew over the top grated loaf sugar. As Christmas comes but once a year, a rich plum pudding may be permitted for the feast, though it is not healthy food; and children should be helped very sparingly. The following is a good receipt. Chop half a pound of suet very fine; stone half a pound of raisins; half a pound of currants nicely washed and picked; four ounces of bread crumbs; four ounces of flour; four eggs well beaten; a little grated nutmeg -- mace and cinnamon pounded very fine; half a teaspoonful of salt; four ounces of sugar; one ounce candied lemon; same of citron. Beat the eggs and spices well together; mix the milk with them by degrees, then the rest of the ingredients; dip a fine, close linen cloth into boiling water, and place it in a hair sieve; flour it a little, then pour in the batter and tie it up close; put it into a pot containing six quarts of boiling water; keep a tea-kettle of boiling water and fill up your pot as it wastes; be sure to keep it boiling, at least six hours--seven would not injure it. This pudding should be mixed an hour or too before it is put on to boil; it makes it taste richer. PIES. Pies are more apt to prove injurious to persons of delicate constitutions than puddings; because of the indigestible nature of the pastry. Those who eat much of this kind of food, when made rich (and poor pies are poor things indeed) usually complain of the loss of appetite, and feel a disrelish for any but high seasoned food. It would really be a great improvement in the matter of health, (and without that we cannot long enjoy pleasure or even comfort in good living) as well as evince superior nicety of taste, if people would eat their delicious summer fruit with good light bread, instead of working up the flour with water and butter into a compound that almost defies the digestive powers, and baking therein the fruits, till they lose nearly all their fine original flavor. Apples are about the only fruit that seems intended for cooking; (pears and quinces are good to preserve); the stone fruits, cherries, plums, &c. are absolutely ruined by it; and nearly all the summer berries are injured by baking. And yet women will make pies; and mothers will give them to their young children, when a bowl of bread and milk, with a little ripe fruit in it, would satisfy their unvitiated appetites better, and in every respect do them much more good.--Pies are best for winter food, because then we can bear a rich, concentrated diet, better than during the hot weather. In the spring and summer, when milk and eggs are plenty and fresh, we should use custards and all the light farinaceous puddings; and ripe fruits. In cold weather, there is less danger of injury from mince pies and plum puddings; still for the sedentary, the delicate, or dyspeptic they are never safe. And if the mistress of a family be a "good housekeeper"--that is if she thoroughly understand the nature of food and the effect of its various combinations on the health of those for whom her table is spread, she will not permit the appearance of those kinds which can scarcely be taken by the strong and healthy without injury, and which are sure to prove hurtful to the young, weak, or invalid. In making paste, particular care must be taken that the board, rolling-pin, cutters, &c. are very clean and dry. The flour used should always be of the best quality, dried and sifted. If the butter is very salt, it should be washed several times. Never use bad butter in pastry--it spoils it. PUFF PASTE. Weigh an equal quantity of flour and butter, rub rather more than the half of the butter into the flour, then add as much cold water as will make it into a stiff paste; work it until the butter be completely mixed with the flour, make it round, beat it with the rolling-pin, dust it, as also the rolling-pin, with flour, and roll it out towards the opposite side of the slab, or paste-board, making it of an equal thickness; then with the point of a knife put little bits of butter all over it, dust flour over and under it, fold in the sides and roll it up, dust it again with flour, beat it a little, and roll it out, always rubbing the rolling--pin with flour, and throwing some underneath the paste, to prevent its sticking to the board. If the butter is not all easily put in at the second time of rolling out the paste, the remainder may be put in at the third; it should be touched as little as possible with the hands. TART PASTE. Rub into half a pound of flour, six ounces of butter and a table spoonful of powdered loaf sugar; make it into a stiff paste with hot water. SHORT PASTE FOR FRUIT PIES. Rub into three quarters of a pound of flour a quarter of a pound of lard and a spoonful of grated sugar. Make it into a paste with milk, roll it out, and add a quarter of a pound of butter. For a fruit tart it must be rolled out half an inch thick. RAISED CRUST. Melt in one pint of water one pound of lard; put four pounds of flour in a pan and sprinkle over a large spoonful of salt, and when the water and lard is hot, stir it with a spoon among the flour. When well mixed work it with the hands till it is a stiff paste, when it is fit for use. Beef drippings may be used to shorten pie-crust, but it must be well clarified. Allow half a pound of drippings to a pound of flour. APPLE PIE. Apples of a pleasant sour and fully ripe make the best pies--pare, core and slice them, line a deep buttered dish with paste, lay in the apples, strewing in moist brown sugar and a little pounded lemon-peel or cinnamon; cover and bake about forty minutes. The oven must not be very hot. When apples are green, stew them with a very little water before making your pie. Green fruit requires a double quantity of sugar. Gooseberries and green currants are made in the same manner. RHUBARB PIES. In England they call this "Spring fruit," which is a much more relishing name than rhubarb. Peel off the skin from the young green stalks, and cut these into small pieces--put them in the pie with plenty of brown sugar, you can hardly put in too much. Cover the pie and bake like apple. You may stew the "Spring fruit" very soft and make tarts. FRUIT PIES. When making pies from ripe summer fruits, such as raspberries, blueberries, cherries, damsons, &c. always take a deep plate, line it with paste, place a teacup, inverted in the middle and fill the pie with fruit, a good quantity of brown sugar, with very little spice or seasoning. The cup is placed to receive the juice which will flow from the fruit as they bake, and which would otherwise ooze out at the edges. It will all settle under the cup; which must be removed when the pie is cut open. It is a pity to make these ripe fruits into pies; they would be so much healthier eaten with bread than pie-crust; still they are harmless compared with meat pies, which should never be made. SQUASH PIE. Pare, take out the seeds and stew the squash till very soft and dry. Strain or rub it through a sieve or colander. Mix this with good milk till it is thick as batter; sweeten it with sugar. Allow five eggs to a quart of milk, beat the eggs well, add them to the squash and season with rose water, cinnamon, nutmeg, or whatever spices you like. Line a pie-plate with crust, fill and bake about an hour. PUMPKIN PIE. Stew the pumpkin dry, and make it like squash pie, only season rather higher. In the country, where this real yankee pie is prepared in perfection, ginger is almost always used with other spices. There too, part cream instead of milk, is mixed with the pumpkin, which gives it a richer flavor. Roll the paste rather thicker than for fruit pies, as there is only one crust. If the pie is large and deep it will require to bake an hour in a brisk oven. CUSTARD PIE. Beat seven eggs, sweeten a quart of rich milk, that has been boiled and cooled--a stick of cinnamon or a bit of lemon-peel should be boiled in it--sprinkle in a saltspoon of salt, add the eggs, and a grated nutmeg, stirring the whole well together. Line two deep plates with good paste, set them in the oven three minutes to harden the crust; then pour in the custard and bake twenty minutes. CUSTARD TART. Line a deep plate with puff paste; have ready six or eight middling sized apples, pared and the cores taken out. They should be mellow and pleasant. Put into each apple any kind of preserve you have, or a bit of sugar flavored. Now fill the dish with rich custard and bake it about half an hour. Make it in the same manner without crust--it is then called "Custard Pudding." TARTS OF PRESERVED FRUITS. Cover patty-pans, or shallow tins or dishes, with light puff paste, and lay the preserve in them, cover with light cross bars of puff paste, or with paste stars, leaves, or flowers. For the most delicate preserves, the best way is to bake the paste first, then put in the preserves, and ornament with leaves, baked for the purpose, on tins. PUFFS . Roll out puff paste nearly a quarter of an inch thick, and, with a small saucer, or tin cutter of that size, cut it into round pieces; place upon one side raspberry or strawberry jam, or any sort of preserved fruit, or stewed apples; wet the edges, fold over the other side, and press it round with the finger and thumb. Or cut the paste into the form of a diamond, lay on the fruit, and fold over the paste, so to give it a triangular shape. MINCE PIES. The custom of eating mince pies at Christmas, like that of plum puddings, was too firmly rooted for the "Pilgrim fathers" to abolish; so it would be vain for me to attempt it. At Thanksgiving too, they are considered indispensable; but I may be allowed to hope that during the remainder of the year, this rich, expensive, and exceedingly unhealthy diet will be used very sparingly by all who wish to enjoy sound sleep or pleasant dreams. The dyspeptic should always avoid them as he would his bane, and for children they should be forbidden food; so tempting is the taste, that the only security consists in not tasting. So the "good housekeeper" will be careful not to place the temptation too often before her family. RICH MINCE MEAT. Cut the root off a neat's tongue, rub the tongue well with salt, let it lie four days, wash it perfectly clean, and boil it till it becomes tender; skin, and when cold, chop it very finely. Mince as small as possible two pounds of fresh beef suet from the sirloin, stone and cut small two pounds of bloom raisins, clean nicely two pounds of currants, pound and sift half an ounce of mace and a quarter of an ounce of cloves, grate a large nutmeg; mix all these ingredients thoroughly, together with one pound and a half of good brown sugar. Pack it in jars. When it is to be used, allow, for the quantity sufficient to make twelve small mince pies, five finely-minced apples, the grated rind and juice of a large lemon, and a wine glass and a half of wine; put into each a few bits of citron and preserved orange peel. Three or four whole green lemons, preserved in good brown sugar, and cut into thin slices may be added to the mince meat. FAMILY MINCE PIES. Boil three pounds of lean beef till tender and when cold chop it fine. Chop three pounds of clear beef suet and mix the meat, sprinkling in a table-spoonful of salt. Pare, core and chop fine six pounds of good apples; stone four pounds of raisins and chop them; wash and dry two pounds of currants; and mix them all well with the meat. Season with powdered cinnamon one spoonful, a powdered nutmeg, a little mace and a few cloves pounded and one pound of brown sugar --add a quart of Madeira wine and half a pound of citron cut into small bits. This mixture, put down in a stone jar and closely covered will keep several weeks. It makes a rich pie for Thanksgiving and Christmas. PLAIN MINCE PIES. Take two pounds of lean beef boiled and one pound of suet, chop fine--three pounds of apples --two pounds of raisins or currants, one pound of sugar, a little salt, pepper, cinnamon, cloves, and one nutmeg --moisten with new cider or sweet cream. Make a good paste, and bake about an hour. The currants must be washed and dried at the fire; raisins stoned and chopped. CHICKEN PIE. Pick, clean, and singe the chickens; if they are very young, keep them whole, if large, cut them in joints, and take off the skin, wash them well, parboil in a pint of water, season them with salt, white pepper, grated nutmeg and mace mixed, and if whole, put into them a bit of butter rolled in flour, and a little of the mixed spices; lay them into a dish with the livers, gizzards, and hearts well seasoned, add the gravy, and the yolks of five hard boiled eggs; cover with a puff paste, and bake it for an hour. Slices of cold ham and forcemeat balls may be added to this pie. Or wash in cold water two or three ounces of macaroni, break it into small bits, simmer it for nearly half an hour in milk and water, drain, and put it with the chickens into the dish, and also an ounce of butter. CHAPTER VIII. FRUITS, PRESERVES, ETC. Nature of fruits--Best times of using them--Ripe and fresh--Cooked--Preserves--Jellies--Custards--Cream, &c. FRUITS were the diet first allowed man; and it seems that the Eden taste still lingers in our race, for in childhood there is no food so eagerly sought and relished. But nothing which earth produces has escaped the curse, or rather mankind, by the excitement and indulgence of a depraved appetite, often convert the blessings and bounty of heaven into sources of disease and disquiet. That fruits are naturally healthy in their season, if rightly taken, no one, who believes that the Creator is a kind and beneficent being, can doubt. And yet the use of summer fruits appears often to cause most fatal diseases, especially in children. Why is this? Because we do not conform to the natural laws in using this kind of diet. These laws are very simple and easy to understand.--Let the fruit be ripe when you eat it; and eat it when you require food. Now, nearly one half of the summer fruits used are eaten in an unripe or decaying state; more than half sold in the cities are in this condition. And this unhealthy fruit is often taken when no food is needed, after the full dinner, or for pastime in the evening. It is given to children to amuse them or stop their crying, when they are often suffering from repletion. Is it a wonder that fruits make people and children sick under such circumstances? In the country, fruits in their season, usually form part of the morning and evening meal of children with bread and milk; fresh gathered fruits; and they seldom prove injurious eaten in this manner. Indeed, though far the greatest quantity of fruit is eaten in the country, and some in an unripe state, yet very little comparatively, is used when it is decaying. And hence it doubtless is, that the diseases which so fatally afflict children in the cities, during the fruit season, are seldom of much consequence in the country. The fruits sold in the city almost always are gathered in an unripe state, in order the better to bear the delay and disturbance of bringing to market; they are therefore in that most crude and unhealthy condition,--"rotten (or at least decaying) before they are ripe," and all their best qualities are lost. Do not give such fruit to your young children. If it is possible send or go with them into the country, during the fruit season, and let them ramble over the green hills and through the wide pastures, where in the grass or by the rough fences, grow those delicious fruits, the raspberry, or blackberry, and strawberry, and pick for themselves. There they will scarcely be persuaded to eat an unripe or decaying berry. If you cannot do this, keep such fruits as much as possible from their knowledge; for though it is undoubtedly of essential benefit to the health to use ripe fruits in the hot season, yet it is better to do without them entirely, than to eat them when utterly unfit for the stomach. Stone fruits are still more objectionable, because the stones and skins frequently swallowed by children are entirely indigestible. Peach skins are very unhealthy and should never be eaten. In the southern cities, many bowel complaints are caused by the use of this fruit. Apples and winter pears are very excellent food for children, indeed for almost any person in health; but best when eaten at breakfast or dinner. If taken late in the evening fruit often proves injurious. The old saying that apples are gold in the morning, and silver at noon, and lead at night is pretty near the truth. Both apples and pears are often good and nutritious when baked or stewed, for those delicate constitutions that cannot bear raw fruit. Much of the fruit, gathered when unripe, might be rendered fit for food by preserving in sugar. This is an expensive article of diet, if freely used, and therefore there is less danger that people will indulge to excess. I would not recommend sweetmeats or fruit sauces at every meal; but a portion of these delicate preparations are healthy and economical; they decorate the table and give zest to the evening meal of plain bread and butter, when otherwise rich cakes would be craved. Eaten with custards or rice, preserves or ripe berries are excellent in the summer season, when such kinds of food, nutritious, yet mild and light, are essential to the comfort of the sedentary, indeed, of all, except those who exercise much in the open air. The following receipts for this kind of cookery, which is truly a lady's department, are those combining most fully pleasantness of taste with economy and suitableness for family use. Fruit for preserves is better not to be over ripe; gather it on a dry day, and after a dry day if possible. Good sugar is cheaper in the end than poor for this use; but for family preserves, if loaf or good lump sugar is used, it need not be clarified. Much time and waste of sugar is thus spared. TO BOIL SUGAR. To every pound of sugar allow one gill of water; stir it over the fire till the sugar is entirely dissolved; when it first boils up, pour in a very little cold water, and when it boils the second time, take it off the fire; let it settle ten minutes, carefully skim it, and boil it for half an hour, or till it will candy, and then put in the fruit. Very good preserves for family use are made with brown sugar. If you wish to clarify the sugar, add the white of one egg, well beaten to every three pounds of sugar. The preserving pans must be very clean. The rule is to allow a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit; if to be kept for several months, this proportion is necessary; to use in the family three quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit is sufficient. Cherries should be stoned, and berries picked over very carefully. RASPBERRY JAM. Weigh equal proportions of pounded loaf (or lump) sugar and raspberries; put the fruit in a preserving pan, and with a silver spoon or flat wooden stick, bruise and mash it well; let it boil up, then add the sugar, stirring it well with the fruit; when it boils skim it, and then boil fifteen or twenty minutes. STRAWBERRY JAM is made the same way. PEACH JAM. Gather the peaches when quite ripe, peel and stone them, put them into a preserving pan, and mash them over the fire till hot; rub them through a sieve, and add to a pound of pulp the same weight of pounded loaf sugar, and half an ounce of bitter almonds, blanched and pounded; let it boil ten or twelve minutes, stir and skim it well. TO PRESERVE DAMSONS. To every pound of damsons allow three quarters of a pound of powdered sugar; put into jars or well glazed earthen pots, alternately a layer of damsons, and one of sugar; tie strong paper or cloth over the pots and set them in the oven after the bread is drawn; and let them stand till the oven is cold. The next day, strain off the syrup and boil it till thick; when it is cold, put the damsons into small jars or glasses, pour over the syrup which should cover them, and tie a wet bladder or strong cloth over them. BLACK BUTTER. This is a very nice preserve to spread on bread for children and much healthier in the winter than salt butter. Take any kind of berries, currants, or cherries (the latter must be stoned)--to every pound of fruit allow half a pound of sugar, and boil till it is reduced one fourth. TO PRESERVE QUINCES. Pare the quinces very thin, cut them in quarters, and to every five pounds of fruit put three pounds of sugar and half a pint of water; cover them to keep in the steam and let them simmer gently for three hours. Or they may be preserved whole. BAKED PEARS. Take a pound of fine pears; peel, cut them in halves, and take out the cores; put them into a pan with a few cloves, half a pound of sugar, and some water. Set them in a moderate oven till tender, then put them on a slow fire to stew gently; add grated lemon peel. STEWED PEARS. Slice and stew a small beet root in a pint of water; take out the beet; pare, core and quarter your pears, and stew in the same water, sweeten to your taste, and add a little lemon peel. PRESERVED APPLES. Weigh equal quantities of good brown sugar and of apples; peel, core and mince them small. Boil the sugar, allowing to every three pounds a pint of water; skim it well, and boil it pretty thick; then add the apples, the grated peel of one or two lemons, and two or three pieces of white ginger; boil till the apples look clear and yellow. This preserve will keep for years. CLEAR APPLES. Boil half a pound of loaf sugar in a pint of water; take off the scum, and put in some large apples, pared, cored and cut into quarters, with the peel and juice of a lemon; let them boil till clear, without a cover upon the saucepan. TO STEW FRUIT. The best way to stew any kind of fruit is to put the quantity you wish to cook into a wide mouthed jar, with enough brown sugar to sweeten it; then cover the jar close, set it in a kettle of cold water, and boil it till the fruit is tender. This preserves the flavor of the fruit. APPLE SAUCE. In the country it is thought almost as indispensable to provide the stock of apple sauce for winter use, as the pork; and there is no doubt of the healthiness as well as pleasantness of fruit taken in this way as food. To eat with meat it is best made of sour apples, not too mellow, but pleasant flavored. Boil down new sweet cider till it is nearly as thick, when cold, as molasses; strain it through a sieve; wash the kettle (it must be brass) put in the syrup, and as soon as it boils put in the apples, which must have been previously pared, quartered and cored. Stew over a slow fire of coals till very tender. A barrel of cider will make half a barrel of very strong apple sauce, which will keep through the winter. If you like it sweet to eat with tea, use sweet apples, and skim out the whole quarters, when soft;--then boil the syrup and pour over them. CURRANT JELLY. Strain the juice of currants, add a pound and a quarter of sugar to every pint of juice. Boil it gently till it is clear, skimming it all the time. Raspberry, strawberry, &c. are made in the same manner. TO PRESERVE PUMPKINS. Choose a thick yellow pumpkin which is sweet; pare, take out the seeds and cut the thick part into any form you choose, round, square, egg shaped, stars, wheels, &c. weigh it, put it into a stone jar or deep dish and place in a pot of water to boil till the pumpkin is so soft that you can pass a fork through it. The pot may be kept uncovered, and be sure that no water boils into the jar. Take the weight of the pumpkin in good loaf sugar, clarify it and boil to syrup with the juice of one lemon to every pound of sugar, and the peel cut in little squares. When the pumpkin is soft, put it into the syrup and simmer gently about an hour or till the liquor is thick and rich, then let it cool and put it in glass jars well secured from air. It is a very rich sweetmeat. FRESH CALVES FEET JELLY. Scald, take off the hair, and wash very clean four feet; put them into a saucepan with two quarts of cold water, and when it comes to a boil let them simmer for six or seven hours; take out the feet, and strain the liquor into a deep dish. The following day remove the fat carefully from the top, and give it another boil, which will reduce it to one quart of stiff stock or jelly.--This may be flavored as you like; it must be dissolved and boiled again when seasoned. It is very delicate and nourishing for an invalid. CRANBERRY AND RICE JELLY. Boil and press the fruit, strain the juice, and, by degrees, mix into as much ground rice as will, when boiled, thicken to a jelly; boil it gently, stirring it, and sweeten to you taste. Put it in a basin or form, and serve to eat with milk or cream. ARROW-ROOT JELLY. Steep for some hours, in two table-spoonfuls of water, the peel of a lemon, and three or four bitter almonds pounded; strain, and mix it with three table-spoonfuls of arrow-root, the same quantity of lemon-juice, and one of wine; sweeten, and stir it over the fire till quite thick, and when quite cold, put it into jelly glasses. WHOLE RICE IN A SHAPE. Wash a large teacupful of rice in several waters, put it into a saucepan with cold water to cover it, and when it boils, add two cupfuls of rich milk, and boil it till it becomes dry; put it into a shape, and press it in well. When cold, turn it out, and serve with preserved currants, raspberries, or any sort of fruit round it. ARROW-ROOT CREAM. Mix a table-spoonful of arrow-root with a teacupful of cold water; let it settle, and pour the water off. Sweeten and boil a quart of milk with the peel of a lemon and some cinnamon; pick them out, and pour it boiling upon the arrow-root, stirring it well and frequently till it is cold. Serve in a glass or china dish, with or without grated nutmeg on the top. It may be eaten with any preserved fruit, or fruit tarts. CREAM FOR FRUIT TART. Boil a stick of cinnamon, two or three peach leaves, or a few bruised bitter almonds, in a quart of milk; strain. sweeten, and mix it, when cool, with three or four well-beaten eggs; stir it constantly over the fire till it thickens, It may be eaten with stewed apples, prunes, damsons, or any other fruit. RED CURRANT OR PINK CREAM. Squeeze three quarters of a pint of juice from red currants when full ripe, add to it rather more than a quarter of a pound of pounded loaf sugar, and the juice of one lemon; stir it into a pint and a half of cream, and whisk it till quite thick. Serve it in a glass dish, or in jelly glasses. It may be made with currant jelly, which mix with the lemon juice and sugar. Raspberry and strawberry cream may be made in the same way. APPLE CREAM. Peel and core five large apples; boil them in a little water, till soft enough to press through a sieve; sweeten, and beat with them the whisked whites of five eggs. Serve it with cream poured round it. WHITE LEMON CREAM. Boil the thin peel of two lemons in a pint of cream; strain and thicken it with the well beaten yolks of three and whites of four eggs; sweeten with pounded loaf sugar; stir till nearly cold, and put it into glasses. CUSTARD. Sweeten a quart of thin cream or good milk with pounded sugar; boil it with a bit of cinnamon and half the peel of a lemon; strain it and when a little cooled, mix it gradually with the well beaten yolks of ten eggs; stir it over a slow fire till it is pretty thick; pour it into a basin and add a table-spoonful of rose-water; keep stirring it every now and then; put it into glasses, cups or a dish. It may be made the day before it is wanted. LEMON CUSTARD. Put the juice of four lemons with three ounces of pounded loaf sugar into a deep dish. Boil the grated peel of one lemon and two ounces of sugar in a quart of cream, and pour it over the sugar and juice. Stir it well. It will keep several days. ORANGE CUSTARD may be made in the same manner. BAKED CUSTARD. Boil a pint of cream with mace and cinnamon, or peach leaves; when cold add three eggs, well beaten, a little rose-water and nutmeg; sweeten to your taste, and bake in china cups. RICE CUSTARD. Mix a pint of milk, half a pint of cream, one ounce of sifted ground rice, five or six bitter almonds, blanched and pounded with two table-spoonfuls of rose-water; sweeten with loaf sugar, and stir it all together till it nearly boils; add the well beaten yolks of three eggs; stir, and let it simmer for about a minute; pour it into a dish, or serve it in cups, with sifted loaf sugar over the top. TO ORNAMENT CUSTARDS OR CREAMS. Whisk for one hour the whites of two eggs together with two table-spoonfuls of raspberry, or red currant syrup or jelly; lay it in any form upon a custard or cream, piled up to imitate rock. It may be served in a dish with cream round it. CHAPTER IX. CAKES. Remarks on cake--Manner of making--Various kinds--Sponge cake--Seed--Macaroons--Kisses--Sugar drops--Rice--Rice cakes with butter--Carraway--Sugar--Tea--Gingerbread--Light cake--Composition--Tunbridge--German puffs--Common plum--Rich--Pound--Heart--Iceing for cakes--Warm cakes for breakfast and tea. CAKE is one of the luxuries of the table, and like all luxuries must be sparingly indulged in order to be enjoyed, its value depending chiefly on its rarity. If gold were plenty as granite it would be little prized; and were cakes used freely as bread, it would not only prove injurious to the constitution, but we should soon tire of the luscious compound. As a delicacy at the tea-table, occasionally introduced, cake is not objectionable, unless made very rich with butter. The common gingerbread and several varieties of the cheap and simple cakes, which will be given in this work, are much better as a part of the evening meal than hot biscuit or even a full supper of cold bread and butter in the winter season, when butter is usually too salt to be healthful. But never spread butter on cake; it is a sin against that economy and propriety which domestic rules should always exhibit; and besides, it renders the cake too rich for the stomach. The kinds of cake most apt to prove injurious are pound cake and rich plum cake; but very little of these should ever be eaten, and if they could be wholly superseded by the sponge cake and other light varieties it would be much better for the health of those who are in the habit of frequenting parties. Sponge cake, or those made in a similar manner, chiefly of eggs, sugar and flour, beaten light and well baked, would rarely prove injurious, if not eaten immoderately. It will be well, however, always to bear in mind, that cake of every sort, is to be partaken of as a luxury, not eaten for a full meal. Those who attend evening parties several times in a week can hardly take too small a quantity of the sweet and rich preparations. Many a young lady loses her appetite, bloom and health by indulgence in these tempting but pernicious delicacies; and dyspeptic complaints frequently are aggravated, if not originated, by the absurd fashion of making our evening circles places for eating and drinking rather than social and mental enjoyment. They manage these things better in Paris. Those ladies who live in the country must make their own cake; but for those who dwell in cities it is usually cheaper to buy it ready made for parties; then it is sure to be of good quality, and as the quantity needed can be pretty accurately calculated, it will not be so expensive as to bake it at home, where considerable waste in the kitchen must be expected. In preparing cake, the flour should be dried before the fire, sifted and weighed; currants washed and dried; raisins stoned; sugar pounded and rolled fine and sifted; and all spices after well dried at the fire, pounded and sifted. Almonds should be blanched, which is done by pouring hot water over them, and after standing some minutes taking off the skins, then throwing it into cold water. When not pounded they should be cut lengthwise into thin bits. Lemon and orange peel must be pared very thin and pounded with a little sugar. Butter, after being weighed, should be laid in cold water, or washed in rose water; if salt, wash it well in several waters. The yolks and whites of eggs should always be separately beaten in making nice cake, and strained. First weigh or measure the ingredients; then sift the flour; powder the sugar; grind the spice; prepare the fruit; stir the butter and sugar together; and the last thing beat the eggs. SPONGE CAKE. Take one pound of finely pulverized loaf sugar, nine eggs and twelve ounces of dried and sifted flour. Beat the eggs, yolks and whites separately, nearly half an hour; then beat the sugar with the eggs till the whole is of a foam, have the oven ready, and stir in the flour lightly, adding a grated nutmeg and a little cinnamon or mace, then put the mixture in buttered tins filled only half full, and bake about half an hour; if in one large cake it will require one hour. The oven should be quick--that is, just heated, but not so hot as to scorch. LEMON SPONGE CAKE. Take one pound of dried flour, three quarters of a pound of finely-pounded loaf sugar, seven eggs, the yolks and whites beaten separately, the grated peel and juice of a lemon, a table-spoonful of rose water; beat all for an hour with the hand; butter a tin, line it with a paper also buttered, put in the cake, and sift pounded sugar over the top. Bake it for an hour. SEED CAKES. One pound of flour --twelve ounces of lump sugar, pounded fine; seven eggs well beaten with the sugar; one ounce of caraway seeds dried and pounded, and two large tablespoonsful of sour cream with a teaspoonful of pearlash. Bake an hour, if in one cake--in small tins fifteen minutes. MACAROONS. Beat to a froth the whites of eight eggs, then add two pounds of finely pounded and sifted loaf sugar, one pound of blanched sweet almonds, which must be pounded to a paste with rose-water. Beat all these together till they become a thick paste then drop it from a spoon upon a buttered tin. Place the drops a little apart, as they may spread. Bake them about ten minutes in a moderate oven. KISSES. Beat the whites of four eggs till they stand alone. Then beat in, gradually, a pound of finely powdered sugar, a teaspoonful at a time. Add eight drops of the essence of lemon, and beat the whole very hard. Lay a wet sheet of paper on the bottom of a square tin pan. Drop on it, at equal distance, small teaspoonfuls of stiff currant jelly. Put a little of the beaten egg and sugar at first, under the currant jelly. With a large spoon, pile some of the beaten white of egg and sugar, on each lump of jelly, so as to cover it entirely. Drop on the mixture as evenly as possible, so as to make the kisses of a round smooth shape. Set them in a cool oven, and as soon as they are coloured, they are done. Then take them out and place them two bottoms together. Lay them lightly on a sieve, and dry them in a cool oven, till the two bottoms stick fast together, so as to form one ball or oval. SUGAR DROPS. Beat the whites and yolks of four eggs separately to a light foam; dilute the yolks with two teaspoonfuls of water and turn them with the whites, and beat them some time; then add by degrees a pound of sugar in fine powder, and then four ounces of superfine flour, beating the mixture constantly. Drop the mixture on white paper placed in a tin plate, in any shape you please, ice them over with sugar in powder to prevent running, and bake about ten minutes in a moderate oven. RICE CAKES. Take eight yolks and four whites of eggs and beat to a foam, add six ounces of powdered sugar, and the peel of one lemon grated; then stir in half a pound of ground rice, and beat all together for half an hour. Put it into a buttered tin and bake twenty minutes. This cake is recommended as very easy of digestion. All the foregoing cakes are made without butter and therefore are not apt to prove injurious. RICE CAKES WITH BUTTER. Beat, till extremely light, the yolks of nine eggs; add half a pound of sifted loaf sugar, and the same quantity of sifted rice flour; melt half a pound of fresh butter, and mix it with the eggs, sugar, and flour, along with a few pounded bitter almonds; half fill small buttered tins and bake in a quick oven. CURRANT CAKES. Take half a pound of cleaned and dried currants, the same quantity of dried and sifted flour, a quarter of a pound of pounded sugar, a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, four yolks, and three whites of eggs, both well beaten, and a little grated nutmeg or pounded cinnamon; then beat the butter to a cream; add the sugar, and then the eggs and the flour; beat these well for twenty minutes, mix in the currants and the grated nutmeg. Drop the cakes in a round form upon buttered paper or bake them in small tins in a quick oven. CARAWAY CAKES. One pound of flour, half a pound of butter well rubbed into it, half a pound of sifted loaf sugar and half a teacup of caraway seeds; make them into a stiff paste with a little cold water, roll it out two or three times, cut it into round cakes, prick them and bake them upon floured tins, in a slow oven. Currants may be used instead of caraway seeds, if preferred. SUGAR CAKES. Take half a pound of dried flour, a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, a quarter of a pound of sifted loaf sugar; then mix together the flour and the sugar; rub in the butter, and add the yolk of an egg beaten with a tablespoonful of cream; make it into a paste, roll, and cut it into small round cakes, which bake upon a floured tin. TEA CAKES. With a pound of flour rub a quarter of a pound of butter : add the beaten yolks of two, and the white of one egg, quarter of a pound of pounded loaf sugar, and a few caraway seeds; mix it to a paste with a little warm milk, cover it with a cloth, and let it stand before the fire for nearly an hour; roll out the paste, and cut it into round cakes with the top of a glass, and bake them upon floured tins. HARD GINGERBREAD. Rub half a pound of butter into a pound of flour; then rub in half a pound of sugar, two table-spoonfuls of ginger and a spoonful of rose-water; work it well; roll out and bake in flat pans in a moderate oven. It will take about half an hour to bake. This gingerbread will keep good some time. SUGAR GINGERBREAD. Take two pounds of flour, one pound of butter and one of sugar, five eggs well beaten, two ounces of powdered ginger and a teaspoonful of pearlash. COMMON GINGERBREAD. Take a pound and a half of flour, and rub into it half a pound of butter; add half a pound of brown sugar and half a pint of molasses, two table-spoonfuls of cream, a teaspoonful of pearlash, and ginger to the taste. Make it into a stiff paste, and roll it out thin. Put it on buttered tins and bake in a moderate oven. SOFT GINGERBREAD. Six teacups of flour, three cups of molasses, three cups of cream, two of butter, one table-spoonful of pearlash and the same of ginger. Bake in a quick oven about half an hour. A LIGHT CAKE TO BAKE IN CUPS. Take a pound and a half of sugar, half a pound of butter rubbed in two pounds of flour, one glass of rose-water, eight eggs well beaten, and half a nutmeg. COMPOSITION CAKE. Take one pound of flour, one pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, seven eggs, half a pint of cream, and spices to your taste. Beat all well together, and bake in a buttered tin, or in cups. TUNBRIDGE CAKE. Rub six ounces of butter into a quart of flour; then mix six ounces of sugar into three well beaten eggs, and make the flour into paste, adding a little rose-water and what spices you like. Roll the paste very thin and cut with the top of a glass, prick the cakes with a fork, and cover with caraways, or wash with the white of an egg and dust a little white sugar over. Bake on tins in a moderate oven. GERMAN PUFFS. Take a quarter of a pound of almonds; beat well in a mortar with a little rose-water or cream, six eggs, three spoonfuls and a half of flour, half a pint of cream, quarter of a pound of butter; sweeten to your taste; butter your cups and bake them half an hour; this quantity makes twelve puffs in middle-sized teacups. COMMON PLUM CAKE. Mix five ounces of butter with three pounds of dry flour and five ounces fine powdered sugar; add six ounces of currants washed and dried and some pimento or cinnamon and mace finely powdered. Put three table-spoonfuls of good yeast into a pint of new milk warmed and mix the dough; let it stand till it is light. Make it into twelve cakes, and bake on a floured tin half an hour. Raisins may be used instead of currants if more convenient; but raisins must be stoned and chopped. RICH PLUM OR WEDDING CAKE. Take two pounds and a half of dried and sifted flour, allow the same quantity of fresh butter washed with rose-water, two pounds of finely pounded loaf sugar, three pounds of cleaned and dried currants, one pound of raisins stoned, one nutmeg grated, half a pound of sweetmeats cut small, a quarter of a pound of blanched almonds pounded with a little rose-water, and twenty eggs, the yolks and whites separately beaten. The butter must be beaten with the hand till it becomes like cream; then add the sugar, and by degrees the eggs, after these the rest of the ingredients, mixing in at last the currants, with nearly a teacupful of rose, or orange-flower water. This mixture must be beaten together rather more than half an hour, then put into a cake-pan, which has previously been buttered and lined with buttered paper; fill it rather more than three quarters full. It should be baked in a moderate oven for three hours, and then cooled gradually, by at first letting it stand some time at the mouth of the oven. If you fear the bottom of the cake may burn, put the pan on a plate with saw-dust between. POUND CAKE. Take one pound of dried and sifted flour, the same of loaf sugar, and butter --the well beaten yolks of twelve, and the whites of six eggs. Then with the hand beat the butter to a cream, add the sugar by degrees, then the eggs and the flour; beat it all well together for an hour, mixing half a glass of rose-water, or twelve drops of the essence of lemon, and a nutmeg or a little cinnamon powdered. Bake it in a tin pan buttered or in small ones in a quick oven. PLUM POUND CAKE. Take of dried and sifted flour, sifted loaf sugar, fresh butter, cleaned and dried currants, one pound each, and twelve eggs; then whisk the yolks and whites of the eggs separately, while another with the hand beats the butter to a cream; and as the froth rises upon the eggs add it to the butter, and continue so doing till it is all beaten in; mix the flour and sugar together, and add them by degrees; the last thing, mix in the currants, together with a glass of rose-water, and a powdered nutmeg. It will require to be beaten during a whole hour. Bake it in a buttered tin. HEART CAKES. Beat one pound of butter to cream, with some rose-water, one pound of flour dried, one pound of sifted sugar, twelve eggs, beat all well together; add a few currants washed and dried; butter small pans of a size for the purpose, heart shaped, pour in the mixture; grate sugar over them; they are soon baked. They may be done in a Dutch oven. FROST OR ICEING FOR CAKES. Beat the whites of four eggs to a stiff foam, and add gradually three quarters of a pound of the best double refined loaf sugar, pounded and sifted; mix in the juice of half a lemon, or a teaspoonful of rose-water. Beat the mixture till very light and white; place the cake before the fire, pour over the iceing and smooth over the top and sides with the back of a spoon. WARM CAKES FOR BREAKFAST AND TEA. If I thought there was any hope of the advice being followed, I would say do not eat warm cakes at all; cold or toasted bread is far better for the constitution. But as most people will have warm bread of some kind, a part of the time, at least, I consider it better to give directions for the sorts which seem likely to do the least injury; only adding here, that those persons will be least likely to be injured who eat the smallest quantity of hot cakes in proportion to their cold bread, which our customs allow. TEA CAKES. Rub into a pound of flour, an ounce of butter, a beaten egg, and half a teaspoonful of salt --wet it with warmed milk; make the paste rather stiff, and let it remain before the fire, where it will be kept warm for an hour or two; then roll it thin and cut it with the top of a tumbler; bake it quick. BREAKFAST CAKE. Put into a quart of flour four ounces of butter, and, if you use new milk, put in three large spoonfuls of yeast; make it into biscuits and prick them with a fork. If you have sour milk, omit the yeast, and put a teaspoonful of pearlash in the sour milk; pour it while effervescing into the flour. These biscuits are less likely to injure the health, than if raised with yeast. BUCKWHEAT CAKES. Take one quart of buckwheat meal, a handful of indian meal, and a teaspoonful of salt, mix them with two large spoonfuls of yeast and sufficient cold water to make a thick batter. Put it in a warm place to rise, which will take three or four hours; or if you mix it at night, let it stand where it is rather cool. When it is light, bake it on a griddle, or in a pan. The griddle must be well buttered, and the cakes are better to be small and thin. INDIAN SLAPJACKS. Mix one pint of sifted indian meal and four large spoonfuls of wheat flour into a quart of new milk, add four eggs beaten, and a little salt. Bake them on a griddle like buckwheat cakes; eat with butter and molasses. PLAIN INDIAN CAKES. Take a quart of sifted indian meal, sprinkle a little salt over it, and mix it with scalding water, stirring it well; bake it on a board, before the fire, or on a tin in a stove.--It is healthy food for children eaten warm (not hot) with molasses or milk. Indian cake made with buttermilk, or sour milk, with a little cream or butter rubbed into the meal, and a teaspoonful of pearlash in the milk, is very light and nutritious. BREAKFAST BATTER CAKES. One pint of milk, three eggs, a piece of butter as large as an egg, two spoonfuls of yeast, and flour enough to make a stiff batter, bake them in tin hoops or on a griddle, let them stand and rise all night, but not in a very warm place. BATTER CAKES FOR TEA. Beat two eggs, put them in half a pint of milk and a teacup of cream, with half a teaspoonful of pearlash dissolved in it; sprinkle a teaspoonful of salt and grate half a nutmeg, a little cinnamon, and rose-water, if you like. Stir in sifted flour till the batter is smooth and thick. Bake them on a griddle or in a pan. Butter the pan well, and drop the batter in small round cakes, and quite thin. They must be turned, nicely browned, but not made black; lay them on a plate, in a pile, with a little butter between each layer. This batter will make good pancakes, fried in hot lard. CREAM SHORT CAKES. In the country where cream is plenty this is a favorite cake at the tea table.--Put into a quart of flour a bit of butter as large as an egg, sprinkle over a teaspoonful of salt --take half a pint of thick cream, a little sour, half a teaspoonful of pearlash dissolved in water, poured into the cream, and milk added sufficient to wet the flour. Some use all cream and that sweet. Then there needs no pearlash. It is expensive food. ROLLS. Rub into a pound of sifted flour two ounces of butter; beat the whites of three eggs to a froth and add a table-spoonful of good yeast, a little salt, and sufficient warm milk to make a stiff dough. Cover and put it where it will be kept warm, and it will rise in an hour. Then make it into rolls, or round cakes, put them on a floured tin, and bake in a quick oven or stove. They will be done in ten or fifteen minutes. CHAPTER X. CHEAP DISHES. Not for the poor, but those who are growing rich--Indian bread--Puddings--Rice--Beef stewed--Mutton chops--Lamb fry--Veal liver--Veal and rice--An economical dinner--Hashes--Pea soup--Ox cheek soup--Fish--Cakes, Pies--Blackberry jam. THIS chapter is not written for the poor. The two classes, which in our country constitute the poor care little for economy.--There is the miserable poor, usually made so by intemperance in drink; these seldom take any thought how they shall live, but cook whatever they can obtain in the readiest way; and there is the luxurious poor, who live on credit and by "speculations;" these are generally most fastidious in appetite and careless of expense; they would be disgusted at the thought of a "cheap dish." It is not for such that I shall take pains to prepare receipts for dishes combining the greatest economy of cost with the most nourishing and healthy materials--because it would be care and pains thrown away. But the rich, who intend to continue so, the thriving, who mean to be rich, the sensible and industrious, who love comfort and independence, the benevolent, who wish to do good--these classes all practise economy, and will not despise "cheap dishes." CHEAP BREAD. Indian meal is the cheapest, and a bushel furnishes more nutriment than the same quantity of wheat. It is also a generally healthy diet, and those who wish to practise close economy should use much of this meal in their families. It makes excellent puddings, and warm cakes, which are much less apt to oppress the stomach than hot wheat bread or short cakes of any kind. And good, light, nourishing bread may be made by using five parts of indian and one of rye or wheat flour, (see receipts for "Rye and Indian Bread"); which is better than to cook it hot at every meal. PLAIN BAKED INDIAN PUDDING. Scald a quart of skimmed milk, and stir in while it is hot, half a pint of sifted indian meal and a teacup of molasses; season with a little salt, ginger or cinnamon. Let it cool, (it is better to stand an hour or two,) then pour it into an earthen pot or deep pan, that has been well buttered ( clarified drippings will answer to rub the pan, but butter is best) and bake it three or four hours. Pour in half a teacup of cold milk, and stir the whole when you set it in the oven. INDIAN FRUIT PUDDING. Take a pint of hot milk and stir in sifted indian meal till the batter is stiff; add a teaspoonful of salt and a little molasses; then stir in a pint of whortleberries, or the same quantity of chopped sweet apple. Tie it in a cloth that has been wet and leave room for it to swell, or put it in a pudding pan, and tie a cloth over--boil it three hours. The water must boil when it is put in. You can use cranberries, and eat it with sweet sauce. PLAIN BAKED RICE PUDDING. A pint of rice, washed and boiled soft in a pint of milk with a salt -spoonful of salt, --when cold add three eggs, two cups of sugar, a small piece of butter, a little cinnamon or a nutmeg. Bake it an hour in a buttered dish. PLAIN BOILED RICE. Wash in four or five waters a pint of good rice; tie it in a pudding cloth, allowing plenty of room to swell;--put it on in a pot of cold water and let it boil slowly for two hours. It may be eaten with butter and sugar, or molasses. PLAIN APPLE PUDDING. Make a batter with two eggs, a pint of milk, and three or four spoonfuls of flour; pour it into a deep dish, and having pared six or eight small apples, place them whole in the batter and bake it in a stove or oven. It will be done in an hour. A CHEAP AND QUICK PUDDING. Beat up four eggs, add a pint of milk, and a little salt and stir in four large spoonfuls of flour, a little nutmeg and sugar to your taste. Beat it well, and pour it into buttered teacups, filling them rather more than half full. They will bake in a stove or dutch oven in fifteen minutes; and if you have company unexpectedly to dinner, and wish to add a little dish, this is a good and cheap one. BREAD PUDDING. Pieces of dry bread, crust, &c., if kept clean and used before they are sour, make good puddings; no prudent housekeeper will allow them to be wasted. Soak the crusts in milk till they are soft--then add eggs, sweetening and spice to your taste. Bake or boil. PEASE PUDDING. Take a pint of good split peas, and having washed, soak them well in warm water; then tie them in a cloth, put the pudding into a saucepan of hot water, and boil it until quite soft. When done, beat it up with a little butter and salt; serve it with boiled pork or beef, or with a little cold meat it makes a good dinner for children in the winter season. PORK AND BEANS Is an economical dish; but it does not agree with weak stomachs. Put a quart of beans into two quarts of cold water, and hang them all night over the fire, to swell. In the morning pour off the water, rinse them well with two or three waters poured over them in a colander. Take a pound of pork, that is not very fat, score the rind, then again place the beans just covered with water in the kettle and keep them hot over the fire for an hour or two; then drain off the water, sprinkle a little pepper and a spoon of salt over the beans; place them in a well glazed earthen pot, not very wide at the top, put the pork down in the beans, till the rind only appears; fill the pot with water till it just reaches the top of the beans, put it in a brisk oven and bake three or four hours. Stewed beans and pork are prepared in the same way, only they are kept over the fire, and the pork in them three or four hours instead of being in the oven. The beans will not be white or pleasant to the taste unless they are well soaked and washed--nor are they healthy without this process. BEEF STEAKS STEWED. This is a very good and economical way of cooking steaks that are not very tender. Put the steaks in a stew-pan with a little butter, and fry them brown. Then add a little gravy or boiling water, some pepper, salt, and a table-spoonful of vinegar, and let them stew gently till tender. Thicken the gravy with a bit of butter rolled in flour. TO STEW A ROUND OF BEEF. Tie up the beef with a strong tape and put it on to stew with as much cold water as will cover it--season with salt, black pepper, a little allspice, mace or cloves, and a gill of vinegar. Let it stew gently skimming it well, seven or eight hours, till it is tender. Take out the beef, skim off the fat, strain the gravy and thicken with a little flour, let it boil and pour it over the beef before serving. This is a rich dish and economical, because stewing meat saves all the juices and essence. BAKED MUTTON CHOPS. Cut a neck of mutton into neat chops, season them with salt and pepper, butter a dish, lay in the chops and pour over them a batter made of a quart of milk, four eggs beaten up, four table-spoonfuls of flour, and a little salt. An hour will bake them. This is a quick mode of dressing a dinner, if you are baking. LAMB FRY. Take the heart, liver and sweet bread of a lamb; cut it into slices and fry it in salt pork fat; or dip it in the beaten white of an egg and strew bread crumbs over it, before you fry it. Garnish with crisp parsley. VEAL LIVER. There is none of the solid meat of animals so cheap as the liver, and if well cooked it makes a good dish. Cut it in thin slices, rub them with flour or indian meal, and fry in salt pork fat till thoroughly done--or you may broil it like a steak. Beef liver is cooked in the same way. VEAL AND RICE. Take one pound of veal; wash the same quantity of rice, and stew them together in three quarts of water, seasoned with pepper and salt. Let it stew gently two hours, then add half a pint of milk, and let it just come to a simmer. This with boiled potatoes will make a comfortable dinner for a large family. A VERY ECONOMICAL DINNER. One pound of sausages, cut in pieces, with four pounds of potatoes, and a few onions, if they are liked, with about a table-spoonful of flour mixed in a pint of water and added to the dish, will make a sufficient dinner for five or six persons. The potatoes must be cut in slices and stewed with the sausages till tender. Or you may use a pound and a half of meat ( mutton is best) instead of the sausages. Season with pepper, salt and sage or thyme. HASHES. All the pieces and bits of cold meat should be minced and warmed; if this is rightly done the dish is generally a favorite one. It is best to chop the meat very fine, (gristles and gelatinous matter from the bones may be included) then make a gravy by putting a lump of butter (what you judge necessary) into a stew-pan; when it is hot add a little flour and stir it into the butter; then add a teacupful of the broth the meat was boiled in and a little catsup. Let this boil up, then put in the mince meat, with a little chopped parsley, pepper and salt. Let it stand and simmer a few minutes covered, but do not let it boil--it hardens the meat to boil it.--Lay slices of toasted bread in the dish and pour the meat and gravy over. PEA SOUP WITHOUT MEAT. Take a quart of green pease, (keep out half a pint of the youngest; boil them separately, and put them in the soup when it is finished;) put them on in boiling water; boil them tender, and then pour off the water, and set it by to make the soup with; put the peas into a mortar, and pound them into a mash; then put them into two quarts of the water you boiled the peas in; stir all well together; let it boil up for about five minutes, and then rub it through a hair sieve. If the peas are good, it will be as thick and fine a vegetable soup as need be sent to table. OX CHEEK SOUP. Separate the bones from the meat, and break the former, cut the meat into pieces the length of a finger and the breadth of two, put a quart of water to every pound of meat, with a little salt, set it on a gentle fire, and skim it well during the first boiling; after it has stewed gently two hours, add carrots, turnips, onions, celery, a head of cabbage, and a bunch of sweet herbs, pepper, salt, and a quarter of a pound of vermicelli; let it stew two hours and a half longer, skim it, and take out the herbs and bones. Rice may be used instead of vermicelli, and potatoes instead of cabbage. This is an economical dinner for a number of laboring men. FISH. The salted cod fish is cheap food, if potatoes are used freely with it. Thick fish are more profitable than thin ones. To cook salt fish well requires considerable care. It should never boil; put it on in cold water, and let it soak over night. Then wash and scrape it very clean--put it into a kettle of cold water, and let it stand near the fire where it can be hot, but not boil up, for two hours. It should be scalding hot the last half hour. Drain it and send it to table. Egg sauce or melted butter is eaten with it. Should any fish remain after dinner, have it minced before it is put away, and the potatoes mashed up with it. They can be done much better and easier when warm than if allowed to stand till morning. Then the fish may be rolled into balls, flattened and fried in hot butter or lard. Dip the balls into the beaten white of an egg, and they will not break. This is a fine dish for breakfast in the winter season. CAKES, PIES, ETC. In making these kinds of food, people who live in the country must often use maple or brown sugar; in these cases, always dry it well for cake and pound it fine. Honey or molasses will answer for preserves of fruit, that are to be used in the family, but they will not keep long unless scalded often. BLACKBERRY JAM. Gather the fruit in dry weather; allow half a pound of coarse brown sugar, to every pound of fruit; boil the whole together gently for an hour, or till the blackberries are soft, stirring and mashing them well. Preserve it like any other jam, and it will be found very useful in families, particularly for children, regulating their bowels and enabling you to dispense with cathartics. It may be spread on bread or on puddings instead of butter; and even when the blackberries are bought it is cheaper than butter. In the country, every family should preserve, at least, a half peck of blackberries. CHAPTER XI. DRINKS. Remarks on family drinks--Coffee--Shells--Chocolate--Tea--Common Beer--Spruce--Ginger--Lemonade--Oragneade--Currant wine--Water. THERE is one rule for drinks which no woman should violate;--never make any preparation, of which alcohol forms a part, for family use! Let distilled liquors, of every name and sort, be religiously banished from that sanctuary of domestic comfort, our homes, and the appetite for them would, in a great degree, become extinguished. And if we rightly feel the importance of guarding our own families from the insidious destroyer, can we be guilty of the in hospitality of pressing on our friends the poison, which, however it may be disguised by delicious flavors, is still the same in character, the deadly foe of social improvement and human happiness! Leaving the preparations of alcohol out of our account, the other mixtures for family drinks which require receipts, are few and simple. The one which demands most care and consideration is coffee. That this beverage is rarely made right in our country, all who have drank it in France or the East, affirm; and whether the bad effects it not unfrequently produces on the health of those who use it freely, arise from this defect in preparation, or from our climate, or the nature of coffee itself, has never been satisfactorily settled. It certainly does in America often prove injurious to those who drink it very strong; and therefore it is best to use it cautiously; those who are at all inclined to be dyspeptic or nervous should abstain altogether. There are several methods of making coffee, each highly recommended--I cannot decide which is best, but the following way is a good one. TO MAKE COFFEE. Take fresh-roasted coffee, (a quarter of a pound for three persons is the rule, but less will do;) allow two table-spoonfuls for each person, grind it just before making, put it in a basin and break into it an egg, yolk, white, shell and all. Mix it up with the spoon to the consistence of mortar, put in a warm not boiling water in the coffee pot; let it boil up and break three times; then stand a few minutes and it will be as clear as amber, and the egg will give it a rich taste. ANOTHER WAY TO MAKE COFFEE. Pour hot water into your coffee pot, and then stir in your coffee a spoonful at a time, allowing three to every pint of water; this makes strong coffee. Stir it to prevent the mixture from boiling over, as the coffee swells, and to force it to combine with the water. This will be done after it has boiled gently a few minutes. Then let it stand and boil slowly for half an hour; remove it from the fire, and pour in a teacup of cold water, and set it in the corner to settle.--As soon as it becomes clear, it is to be poured, gently, into a clean coffee-pot for the table. Made in this manner it may be kept two or three days in summer, and a week in winter; you need only heat it over when wanted. The grounds and sediment, may be boiled over and used once for coffee. Fish skin is often used to settle coffee, and will answer tolerably well, if rightly prepared. Pull off the skin from a salted cod, scrape, wash and dry it in the oven, after removing the bread--then divide it in pieces about an inch square, and put it in a paper bag for use. It will require one bit for every pint of water; put in when you make the coffee. Several substitutes for coffee are used by those who cannot afford the real berry. Rye, pease, &c.--none of these are very healthy, and certainly are not good--The best substitute is toasted crust of bread, but it is cheaper to drink water, and if taken for a little time will be as palatable; or else use COCOA SHELLS. These should be soaked over night, then boil them in the same water in the morning. They are considerably nutritious, and allowed to be healthy, and are cheap. CHOCOLATE. To each square of chocolate, scraped off fine, and put in the pot, allow a pint, (less if you like it strong) of water. Stir it while boiling; and let it be uncovered. Let it boil about fifteen minutes, or half an hour, then pour in your cream or rich milk, and let it boil up.-- Nutmeg grated over a cup of chocolate improves the flavor. TEA. Scald the teapot with boiling water; then put in the tea, allowing three teaspoonfuls to a pint of water --or for every two persons. Pour on the water, it must be boiling hot, and let the tea steep about ten minutes. Black tea is healthier than green. Hyson and Souchong mixed together, half and half, is a pleasanter beverage than either alone, and safer for those who drink strong tea, than to trust themselves wholly with green. COMMON BEER. Two gallons of water to a large handful of hops is the rule. A little fresh gathered spruce, or sweet fern makes the beer more agreeable, and you may allow a quart of wheat bran to the mixture--then boil it two or three hours. Strain it through a sieve, and stir in, while the liquor is hot, a teacup of molasses to every gallon. Let it stand till lukewarm, pour it into a clean barrel and add good yeast, a pint if the barrel is nearly full; shake it well together; it will be fit for use the next day. SPRUCE BEER. Allow an ounce of hops and a spoonful of ginger to a gallon of water. When well boiled, strain it, and put in a pint of molasses and half an ounce or less of the essence of spruce --when cool add a teacup of yeast, and put into a clean tight cask and let it ferment for a day or two, then bottle it for use. You can boil the sprigs of spruce fir in room of the essence. GINGER BEER QUICKLY MADE. A gallon of boiling water is poured over three quarters of a pound of loaf sugar, one ounce of ginger, and the peel of one lemon; when milk-warm, the juice of the lemon and a spoonful of yeast are added. It should be made in the evening, and bottled next morning, in stone bottles, and the cork tied down with twine. Good brown sugar will answer, and the lemon may be omitted, if cheapness is required. LEMONADE. Three lemons to a pint of water, makes strong lemonade; sweeten to your taste. This is the best beverage for parties, cool, refreshing, pleasant and salubrious. ORANGEADE. Roll and press the juice from the oranges in the same way as from lemons. It requires less sugar than lemonade. The water must be pure and cold, and then there can be nothing more delicious than these two kinds of drink. CURRANT WINE. Gather the currants when dry, extract the juice, either by mashing and pressing the fruit, or putting it in a jar, placed in boiling water --strain the juice and for every gallon allow one gallon of water and three pounds of sugar. Dissolve the sugar in the water and take off the scum; let it cool, add it to the currant juice, and put the mixture in a keg--but do not close it tightly till it has ceased fermenting, which will not be under a week. In three or four weeks it may be bottled. The white of an egg beaten, mixed with a teaspoonful of cream of tartar and stirred into the liquid makes the wine look clear and bright. WATER. The foregoing receipts will teach the manner of preparing those drinks which are most agreeable to the palate, suitable for the purposes of hospitality, economy and that attention to the real welfare of a family which should never be neglected. But after all, the best beverage for the healthy, who wish to continue well, is good pure cold WATER! The danger in recommending it as the common and constant drink of all persons, at all times and places, arises from the difficulty of finding it pure and good. There is no doubt that, besides the diseases known to be generated by drinking bad water, serious injury is frequently inflicted on the constitution from the long continued use of much that is called good, that is, though known to be hard and consequently impregnated with chemical solutions of lime, still it does not taste unpleasant, and is clear. But this hard water always leaves a mineral matter on the skin, when we use it in washing, which renders the hands and face rough and liable to chap. Does not this water, if we drink it, likewise corrode and injure the fine membranes of the stomach? The Boston people who constantly use hard water for all purposes of cookery and drink, certainly have bad complexions, sallow, dry, and hard -looking; and complaints of the stomach or dyspepsia are very common among them. A Salem gentleman declared that when his daughters, who frequently visited at Boston, passed two or three weeks at a time there, he could see a very material change in their complexions. At Salem there is plenty of soft water, and the ladies of that ancient town are famed for their beauty, which is chiefly owing (its superiority I mean) to a peculiarly fair, delicate tincture of skin, contrasted with the half petrified of appearance of those who are obliged to drink hard water always, and often to wash in it. The best water to drink as well as wash with, when it can be obtained pure, or rendered so, is rain-water. This may generally be effected with a little care and expense. A clean reservoir to collect the rain water is needed, and a portable filterer --that is all the expense; the care of filtering, every young lady who values her health or complexion, always synonymous, will gladly undertake. Filtering cools the water, and in the summer ice may be used. CHAPTER XII. HOUSEHOLD ECONOMY. IF you would practice this economy to the greatest advantage, be regular in the arrangement of your work, punctual in preparing your meals, and take good care that nothing is wasted. It is best to have the washing done on Mondays, if this can be managed without encroaching on that rest from labor, which the holy Sabbath should always bring, as well to the domestics as to every other member of a christian family. But whether Monday or Tuesday be the day, let it be fixed, and the washing never omitted when it is possible to have it done. The next morning, early, should be the time to begin ironing, so that the clothes may have time to be aired and put away before night. Mend clothes before washing, except stockings; these can best be darned when clean. FLANNELS should be washed in clean hot suds in which a little bluing has been mingled--do not rinse them. Woollens of all kinds should be washed in hot suds. COLORED DRESSES. Turn the inner side out, and wash them in cold water, in which a little boiled soap is well mixed; rinse them well in clean cold water, and the last time with a little salt in the water, and dry them in the shade. They should be washed and dried with as much expedition as possible. MILDEW STAINS Are very difficult to remove from linen. The most effectual way is to rub soap on the spots, then chalk, and bleach the garment in the hot sun. INK AND IRON MOULD May be taken out by wetting the spots in milk, then covering them with common salt. It should be done before the garments have been washed. Another way to take out ink is to dip it in melted tallow. For fine, delicate articles, this is the best way. FRUIT AND WINE STAINS. Mix two teaspoonfuls of water and one of spirit of salt, and let the stained part lie in this for two minutes; then rinse in cold water. Or wet the stain with hartshorn. TO WASH CARPETS Shake and beat it well; lay it upon the floor, and tack it firmly; then with a clean flannel wash it over with one quart of bullock's gall, mixed with three quarts of soft cold water, and rub it off with a clean flannel or house cloth. Any particularly dirty spot should be rubbed with pure gall. SOFT WATER is indispensable to the washerwoman-- rain or river water is the best. If you have good water, do not use soda, it gives a yellowish tinge to the clothes. If you buy your soap, it is most economical to use hard soap for washing clothes, and soft for floors, &c. TO CLEAN PAINT. Put a very little pearlash, or soda in the water to soften it, then wash the paint with flannel and soft soap; wash the soap off, and wipe dry with a clean linen cloth. TO CLEAN PAPER WALLS. The very best method is to sweep off lightly all the dust with clean cloths, bound over a long handled broom, then rub the paper with stale bread --cut the crust off very thick, and wipe straight down from the top, then begin at the top again, and so on. CARPETS; the oftener these are taken up and shaken the longer they will wear, as the dust and dirt underneath grinds them out. Sweep carpets with a stiff hair brush, instead of an old corn broom, if you wish them to wear long or look well. At any rate, keep a good broom purposely for the carpet. TO POLISH MAHOGANY FUNITURE. Rub it with cold drawn linseed oil, and polish by rubbing with a clean dry cloth, after wiping the oil from the furniture. Do this once a week, and your mahogany tables will be so finely polished that hot water would not injure them. The reason is this, linseed oil hardens when exposed to the air; and when it has filled all the pores of the wood, the surface becomes hard, and smooth like glass. TO TAKE INK OUT OF MAHOGANY. Mix in a teaspoonful of cold water, a few drops of oil of vitriol; touch the spot with a feather dipped in the liquid. TO CLEAN PICTURES. Dust them lightly with cotton wool, or with a feather brush. TO CLEAN MIRRORS. Wipe them lightly with a clean bit of sponge or fine linen that has been wet in spirits of wine, or in soft water; then dust the glass with fine whiting powder; rub this off with a soft cloth--then rub with another clean cloth and finish it with a silk hankerchief.--Dust the frames with cotton wool. TO CLEAN STRAW CARPETS. Wash them in salt and water, and wipe them with a clean dry cloth. TO CLEAN MARBLE. Pound very finely a quarter of a pound of whitening and a small quantity of stone blue; dissolve in a little water one ounce of soda, and mix the above ingredients carefully together with a quarter of a pound of soft soap; boil it a quarter of an hour on a slow fire, carefully stirring it. Then, when quite hot, lay it with a brush upon the marble, and let it remain on half an hour. Wash it off with warm water, flannel, and a scrubbing-brush, and wipe it dry. TO CLEAN FREESTONE. Wash the hearth with soap and wipe with a wet cloth. Or rub it over with a little freestone powder, after washing the hearth in hot water. Brush off the powder when dry. TO BLACK A BRICK HEARTH. Mix some black lead with soft soap and a little water, and boil it--then lay it on with a brush.--Or mix the lead with water only. TO CLEAN BRASS. Rub it over with a bit of flannel dipped in sweet oil --then rub it hard with finely powdered rotten stone--then rub it with a soft linen cloth--and polish with a bit of wash leather. Rub creaking hinges with soft soap. GLASSES should be washed and rinsed in cold water, and the water wiped off with one cloth; then rub dry and clean them with another. CUT GLASS should be rubbed with a damp sponge dipped in whiting, then brush this off with a clean brush and wash the vessel in cold water. An ironing board, sheets, and holders, should always be kept purposely for the ironing. A small board--two feet by fourteen inches wide, covered with old flannel and then with fine cotton is handy to iron small articles on. ISINGLASS is a most delicate starch for fine muslins. When boiling common starch, sprinkle in a little fine salt; it will prevent its sticking. BED LINEN should be well aired before it is used. Keep your sheets folded in pairs on a shelf--closets are better than drawers or chests for linen, it will not be so likely to gather damp. HAIR, or even straw mattresses are more healthy to sleep on than feather beds. Never put children on these heating beds. Keep your sleeping rooms very clean and well aired; and do not cumber them with unnecessary furniture. BED CURTAINS are unhealthy, because they confine the air around us while we are asleep. When baking is done twice a week, Wednesdays and Saturdays should be chosen; if only once a week, Saturday is the best, because it allows of preparation for the Sunday dinner--a pudding can be baked--and meat, too, if the family have a real desire of keeping the day for that which it was evidently intended, rest from worldly care, as well as for moral and religious improvement. OLD BREAD may be made almost as good as new by putting it in the oven after the bread is drawn, or in a stove, and let it heat through. CRUSTS and pieces of bread should be kept in an earthen pot or pan, closely covered in a dry cool place. Keep fresh lard and suet in tin vessels. Keep salt pork fat in glazed earthen ware. Keep yeast in wood or earthen. Keep preserves and jellies in glass, or china or stone ware. Keep salt in a dry place. Keep meal in a cool dry place. Keep ice in the cellar, wrapped in flannel. Keep vinegar in wood or glass. Housekeepers in the country must be careful that their meats are well salted and kept under brine. PICKLE FOR BUTTER. Allow half a pound of salt, an ounce of saltpetre, and half a pound of sugar to three quarts of water. --Dissolve them together; scald and skim the pickle; let it be entirely cold and then pour it over the butter. THE DAIRY. Always to make good butter or cheese shows great care and excellent judgment in the farmer's wife. When every department of the dairy is kept perfectly neat, there is hardly any exhibition of woman's industry more likely to make her husband proud or gratify a beholder of good sense and benevolence than the sight of a neat dairy-room filled with the rich, valuable productions which her skill has fashioned from the milk of the cow. "The farmer's wife," says the accomplished Addison, "who has made nine hundred cheeses, and brought up half a dozen healthy children, is far more amiable in the eyes of unprejudiced reason, than the fine lady, who has made two millions of insipid visits, and propagated scandal from one end of the town to the other." The moral of this sentiment is true; rational employment, the industry either of hand or head, which produces benefit to society, is the real test of excellence in character,--and few American ladies desire any other standard. The secret of success in the dairy is strict attention and scrupulous neatness, in all its operations. The best time to make butter is in June, when the pastures are rich with clover, and October, when the fall feed is in its perfection. July, August, and September are the months for cheese; then the rich new milk and cream cheeses are made. Dairy work must be learned by practice, and requires as nice judgement and taste as cake making. A few general directions may be followed to advantage; but there have not yet been any settled rules for this work which will insure good butter and cheese; it seems to depend very much on the skill of the individual manager, who does not often choose to communicate the secret of her infallible success. It is to be hoped that some of the intelligent women who are eminently successful in managing the dairy, will give the result of their experience--we might then frame receipts which would be very advantageous to the young farmer's wife, and of great benefit to the public; for it is a real calamity to have poor butter and cheese sent to market. Bad butter, particularly, is not only unhealthy, but it entirely spoils every good article of food in which it is mingled. Never purchase it, let it be ever so cheap. It is far better to eat molasses, or honey, or preserves with bread, and use lard, beef drippings, suet, &c. for gravies and shortening, than to use bad butter. To ensure good butter you must always scald your pans, pails, &c. in hot water, and then heat them by the fire, or in the hot sun, so that they may be perfectly sweet. Keep your cream in a cool place in the summer, and churn twice a week. Work out all the butter-milk --this must be done or the butter will not keep well; and do not make the butter too salt. Never put butter in a pine tub. Keep your cheese in a dark, dry room, and turn and rub them every day. The fat, fried out of salt pork, is the best preservative to rub on cheese, and gives a rich color and smoothness to the rind. Never wash your cheese shelves; but always wipe them clean with a dry cloth, when you turn your cheese. Do not heat the milk too hot, it should never, for new milk cheese, be more than blood warm; be sure that your rennet is good, and do not use more than it requires to bring the curd. Cut the curd, when fully formed, carefully with a knife; never break it with your hand; and be very particular when draining it from the whey, not to squeeze or handle the curd; if you make the white whey run from the curd, you lose much of the richness of the cheese. CHAPTER XIII. HINTS TO HELP. Domestics in American families are very differently situated from persons of the same class in any other part of the world. Few enter the employment with any intention of remaining servants; it is only for a present resource to obtain a living and a little cash so that they may begin business or house-keeping for themselves. American help, therefore, should be very particular in their good behavior, and be careful to do by their employers, as they will want help to do by them, when their turn to keep domestics shall arrive. Never leave a good place because a little fault has been found with your work; it is a very great injury to a domestic to change her place often; she will soon have the name of being bad tempered, and besides, she cannot gain friends; you must remain sometime in a family before they will become attached to you. And if you are, as is generally the case, out of employment for a week before you go to a new place, you lose your time; and often have to pay for board too; thus a loss of two or three week's wages is incurred, because you will not bear to be reproved, even for a fault. What folly! thus to punish yourself for the sake of punishing your mistress, even if she did blame you without cause. The better way is to remain and behave so well that she shall be made to acknowledge your excellence; which she will be pretty sure to do if she finds you faithfully try to please her. Do not think it degrades you to endeavor to please your employer. It surely adds to your respectability, for it shows, that you live with people you respect. You are bound to please your employers as far as you honestly can, while you receive your wages. No person hires a domestic to be idle, or cross, or disrespectful. It is worse than theft to take wages from your employers which you must know you have not earned, if you have been unfaithful, impertinent and, quarrelsome, and made them constant trouble. Resolve, therefore, when you go as help , to prove help in deed, which you will be if you practise the following rules. Always treat and speak of your employers with respect. Be faithful and honest in managing all that they entrust to you. Be kind and obliging to every body, particularly to all the domestics of the family. In a word.--Do to others, in all things, as you would wish them to do by you in similar circumstances. If you conduct thus, you will, though working in the kitchen, be as really respectable and independent as the lady in the parlor. In truth she will be more dependent on your assistance than you will be on her for employment, and she will feel this, and treat you with the consideration and kindness which your merit deserves. But do not presume on this favor, and grow slack and careless. As long as you find it necessary to receive wages, be conscientious to perform all your duties as help. Never think any part of your business too trifling to be well done. The foregoing are general rules; a few particular directions may be needed. One of the faults which a cook should most seriously guard against, is bad temper. She has a good many trials. Her employment, in the summer season, is not a pleasant or healthy one--obliged as she is, to be over the hot fire, and confined, often in a dark, close kitchen. Then she sometimes has a difficult lady to please, who does not know when the work is done well, and often gives contradictory or impracticable orders. And the other domestics, frequently interrupt the arrangements of the cook; or, she is not furnished with proper implements and articles. All these things try her patience, and if it sometimes fails we ought not too much to blame her. But she need not be always cross. And she should remember, too, her privileges--mistress of the kitchen, the highest wages, and, if she conducts well, the favorite always of her employers. It is in the power of the cook to do much for the comfort and prosperity of the family; if she is economical and conducts with propriety, the whole establishment goes on pleasantly; but if she is cross, intemperate and wasteful, the mischief and discomfort she causes are very great. Never let the family have reason to say--"the cook is always cross!" Intemperance is said to be the failing of cooks, oftener than of other domestics. It is a vice which if persisted in, will soon destroy the character and usefulness of the best cook. Every one who desires to sustain a respectable station in her employment must abstain totally from spiritous liquors. "Touch not, taste not, handle not." It is poison to your blood,--it is death to your reputation, if not to your body and soul. Country girls who come to the cities as help, because they can there obtain large wages, should be careful in their diet. Remember that as you cannot take so much exercise in the open air, you must live sparingly at first or the change will injure your health. And all that injures the health, injures also the bloom and beauty of youth. To take a young woman, one of our farmers' daughters, from the free, pure air of the country, and confine her in the hot kitchen, often under ground, of one of our crowded city establishments, is such a change, that unless she is very particular in her care of herself, will soon cause her to look old and haggard and disagreeable. Her hair will be often matted with sweat and dust and her complexion like a mummy. To avoid these unpleasant results, let the cook, from the first, adopt the following rules-- 1st.--Eat regular meals, instead of tasting of every good thing you cook, till you have no appetite for food. 2d.--Keep your sleeping room well aired and your skin clean. The best way is to wash yourself thoroughly when going to bed; comb your hair also, and wear a night cap or handkerchief on your head. The next morning, you will only require to smooth your hair, not take it down, and wash your hands. You can thus be quickly dressed, and your face will not burn or redden while cooking over the fire, as it will when recently washed. It would look neater, and keep your hair much smoother if you would wear a cap or handkerchief while at work, as English servants do. Let your dress be of good durable materials, that will wash well; keep it clean as possible, and always wear an apron. In the afternoon when the work is done, then you can wash, and dress yourself as neatly as you choose, only remember that a domestic in a showy flimsy gown, and decked out with pinchbeck rings and ear-ornaments always makes a ridiculous figure in the eyes of every sensible person. Because such persons see that you are spending your hard earned wages for that which really does you no good. Keep your kitchen, and all the utensels clean and neat as possible. Sweep the chimney often, with an old broom kept for the purpose, so that no soot may collect to fall down on the dishes at the fire, and be sure that the hearth is neat as a table. Always have plenty of hot water ready; and take care that your wiping cloths are washed every day. The three rules you must follow, if you would always have your work done well are these-- "Do every thing at the proper time. Keep every thing in its proper place. Use every thing for its proper purpose." If your mistress professes to understand cookery, the best way will be to follow her directions; if you find the dish is not so good as when you cooked it your own way, respectfully ask her to let you try once alone. But never be angry or pout when you are told how your employer wishes to have the work done. The great fault of the Irish help is, that they undertake to do what they have never learned. They will not acknowledge their ignorance; if they would do this, and patiently try to learn, they would soon, with their natural quickness, become good cooks--if they have good teachers. And what a privilege and blessing it is to a poor Irish girl, who has only lived in a hovel, with scarcely an article of furniture, save the pot "to boil the praties," to be instructed in household work! It is really a fortune to her; she can then always have good places and good pay, and soon clothe herself well and lay up money. There are benevolent and sensible ladies who do act thus kindly by the Irish girl; not only learn her how to work in the kitchen, but teach her needlework, and instruct her in reading and writing. If you have had such a kind mistress, my poor girl, for the honor of old Ireland be grateful and faithful to your benefactress; and show yourself worthy to be the mother of American citizens; for to such good fortune, your children, should you marry, will be entitled. There is no danger that our domestics will have too much ambition, if it be of the right kind--the ambition of doing their duty as faithful, capable help, while they continue to work for others. But I would wish every young female domestic to hope that she may sometime be mistress of her own house; and I would urge her to improve every opportunity she has of learning the best and most prudent manner of doing all kinds of work. Then she will be fitted to make her husband happy and bring up her children to be respectable members of society. One of the most certain evidences that she is worthy to enjoy prosperity, is her faithfulness to promote the interest of those for whom she works. If she is really trustworthy she will show it in all her conduct. There is a class of cooks who cannot be trusted; every thing they dare to take is slyly carried out of the house and given to their friends--and they go on with this system of pilfering till they are turned away from every respectable place. Do not be tempted to begin this system, nor think that the broken bits, which the family may not need, belong to you. The mistress of the house must manage these charities; ask her, and if she give you leave to dispose of the broken pieces, be very careful not to make fragments unnecessarily for the sake of giving them to your poor relations. Act, in all these things, as you would if your employer was looking on you; and forget not that One, to whom you are more responsible than to any earthly master or mistress, is constantly watching you. CHAPTER XIV. HINTS TO HOUSEKEEPERS. "It is much the same in governments as in families; those statesmen and housewives, who make a great bustle about the difficulties they are in, are the very ones who are too indolent, too awkward, or too ignorant to remove them."--MADAME ROLAND. THE term housekeeper, in this book is used in its American signification, the same as "Mistress of the family," or "Lady of the house." In our republican land, thanks to its rational institutions, which preserve in a high degree of purity the moral relations of domestic life, it is rare to find a married woman who does not superintend personally, the economy of her own household, let the wealth, profession, or political station of her husband be what it may. The most delicate lady, unless her ill health were the pretext, would scarcely boast of retaining a hired housekeeper to perform her duties; and no lady would gain credit or consequence in society by so doing. In truth our richest and most fashionable women, are often models of good housekeeping; many whose talents and accomplishments would adorn the first circles of Europe, perform the woman's part of superintending the affairs of their own household, as scrupulously and well as though they had been taught nothing besides. That the American ladies are better educated in all the solid branches of learning, than those of any other country in the world there is no doubt--even Englishmen acknowledge their superior intelligence--and their good housekeeping proves the assertion of Miss Sedgwick true, namely, that the more intelligent a woman becomes, other things being equal, the more judiciously she will manage her domestic concerns. And we may add, that the more real knowledge she possesses of the great principles of morals, philosophy and human happiness, the more importance she will attach to her station and the name of a "good housekeeper." It is only the frivolous, and those who are superficially taught, or only instructed in showy accomplishments, who despise and neglect the ordinary duties of life as beneath their notice. Such persons have not sufficient clearness of reason to see that "Domestic Economy" includes every thing which is calculated to make people love home and feel happy there. One of the first duties of woman in domestic life is to understand the quality of provisions and the preparation of wholesome food. The powers of the mind, as well as those of the body, are greatly dependent on what we eat and drink. The stomach must be in health, or the brain cannot act with its utmost vigor and clearness, nor can there be strength of muscle to perform the purposes of the will. But further, woman to be qualified for the duty which Nature has assigned her, that of promoting the health, happiness and improvement of her species, must understand the natural laws of the human constitution, and the causes which often render the efforts she makes to please the appetite of those she loves, the greatest injury which could be inflicted upon them. Often has the affectionate wife caused her husband a sleepless night and severe distress, which, had an enemy inflicted she would scarcely have forgiven--because she has prepared for him food which did not agree with his constitution or habits. And many a tender mother has, by pampering and inciting the appetites of her young sons, laid the foundation of their future course of selfishness and profligacy. If the true principles of preparing food were understood these errors would not be committed, for the housekeeper would then feel sure that the best food was that which best nourished and kept the whole system in healthy action; and that such food would be best relished, because whenever the health is injured the appetite is impaired or vitiated. She would no longer allow those kinds of food, which reason and experience show are bad for the constitution, to appear at her table. Among those kinds of food which the good housekeeper should scrupulously banish from her table, is that of hot leavened bread. From what I have seen and from the nature of this almost indigestible food, when taken in large quantities, I believe it more often lays the foundation of diseases of the stomach, than any other kind of nourishment, used among us. Hot bread is eaten, morning and evening, at many of our city boarding houses; and at establishments connected with the places of education for the young. And there it is that the incipient disease, which terminates in dyspepsia, (an indefinable word implying almost every sort of distress and anguish to which the human frame is subject) is contracted. The want of sufficient exercise, or too strict attention to business or study may, and no doubt does, have much influence in predisposing to this disease. But it is the hot bread, lying undigested, and of course hard and heavy in the stomach, which prostrates the system and thus makes the mental fatigue injurious. When much bodily exertion is used, in the open air, hot bread, as well as all other kinds of heavy food, is comparatively harmless. Hard laboring people in the country, seldom suffer from indigestion. Still there are cases of disease, and the good housekeeper even in the country, should beware of placing this food before her family. If you are out of bread, it is much better, both as regards economy and health, to bake an indian cake by the fire, or make batter cakes, or even a short cake, if you do not put in too much butter, than to cut a hot loaf from the oven. Unleavened bread when eaten warm, is more easily digested than leavened; or if, in the former, you use pearlash or salæratus, it is still healthier. Yet the best bread for constant use, is light, leavened bread, from one to five or six days old. This may be toasted if you like variety. But do not, as you value the health and happiness of those who sit at your table, place before them hot leavened bread or biscuit. Another kind of food, which ought to be banished from modern tables is meat pies. It seems strange that this kind of barbarous cookery should hold its place, since the introduction of so many excellent vegetables to eat with animal food; and since such substantial diet is not now required as was needed when nearly all labor had to be performed by the physical strength of man. The Black Knight and Friar Tuck could take an enormous meal of venison, pastry washed down with wine without any danger of injury, for their exercises in the open air, and the weight of armor which the knight bore, required this concentrated and stimulating food to sustain their strength; but now when the modes of life have so far abated the muscular power of men, that it takes the united strength of five to lift a knight in armor into his saddle, would the same kind and quantity of food be beneficial? Some may think that if this food were still as commonly eaten, men would now have more strength--but it would not be so, unless they used as much and as violent exercise in the open air as was then the custom. It is only the food that is digested which gives strength and really nourishes the system; when the mode of life is sedentary and confined, the powers of digestion are soon weakened, and we must adapt our diet to this condition of our nature. I have therefore entirely omitted receipts for meat pies; and though sometimes those who labor very hard may eat them without much danger, yet it would be more safe, as well as saving, to dress the meat by itself, and use vegetables and bread with it, rather than make it into a high seasoned pie, with rich crust, a dish commonly eaten without vegetables. Another improvement in this dietetic system of cookery is the entire exclusion of distilled spirits. I have not permitted the name of rum or brandy to sully a receipt in this book--There is no need of these as condiments; and though men may not be willing to relinquish their legal right to the use of such liquors, yet I cannot believe, any man will regret their banishment from the cook's department. No father who deserves the name can wish to have his children taught to love the taste of rum and brandy from having it mixed with their food. If woman will decidedly and entirely banish ardent spirits * from the household arrangements, and they can do this if they choose, the progress of true temperance habits would soon either make temperance laws unnecessary, or cause them to be respected and obeyed. The Following Footnote Appearend at the End of Page 120 and Page 121 in the Original text. *Rum or brandy is used by some ladies as cosmetics to wash the face and hair, or as a remedy against colds, &c. to bathe the head and feet. It is a very mistaken notion that these heating, drying liquids will make the hair grow--except it be to grow gray--or the complexion fair and smooth. There is always a sort of stickiness left on the skin after washing in rum, which pure soft water never leaves. This stickiness closes the pores of the skin and thus proves really injurious to its healthy action, and consequently beauty. I have known one example of this effect of rum which was not at all favorable; a lady, in consequence of a nervous affection in her jaw, had used rum for fourteen years to wash in--not a drop of water had touched her face or neck during that time. She was not very old, but her skin looked as dry and shrivelled as a baked sweet apple--you could scarcely put down a pin's point without touching a wrinkle. In regard to the use of rum, brandy, &c. as a medicine, as far as my observation has extended, when considered as family remedies, they never effect a cure. Those persons who are in the habit of using them always require them. If you wish to be well and have your family enjoy health, do not use rum or brandy in any way as medicines. But the art of selecting and preparing food, or seeing that this is done by others, constitutes only a part of the good housekeeper's duty. She ought to understand the character and capacity of each member of her family, know how to assign, advantageously, the different kinds of work to her help, to calculate expenses, provide for exigencies, and remedy, as far as possible, all the mistakes and accidents which occur in her housekeeping. Far the greater proportion of households, throughout our whole country, are managed without the aid of much hired help, by the females of each family. The maxim, "if you would be well served you must serve yourself," has considerable truth in it; at least those families who serve themselves, escape many vexations of spirit, because, if the work be not very well done, when we do it with our own hands, we are more apt to be satisfied. There are some sorts of domestic work, that of dairy work is one, which no hired help would be competent to discharge. This must be done by a wife or daughter, who feels a deep personal interest in the prosperity of her husband or father. Many of our farmer's wives are among the best housekeepers in the land, possessing that good sense, vigor of mind, native delicacy of taste or tact, and firm conscientiousness, which gift the character with power to attempt every thing that duty demands. These are the "noble matronage" which our republic should honor; for it is the sons of such mothers who have ever stood foremost to defend or serve their country-- "With word, or pen, or pointed steel." One of the greatest defects in the present system of female education, is the almost total neglect of showing the young lady how to apply her learning so as to improve her domestic economy. It is true that necessity generally teaches, or rather obliges her to learn this science after she is married; but it would have saved her from many anxious hours and tears and troubles, if she had learned how to make bread and coffee, and cook a dinner before she left her father's house; and it would have been better still, if she had been instructed at school to regard this knowledge, as an indispensable accomplishment in the education of a young lady. I was once told by a lady of Boston, that when she was married she scarcely knew how a single dish should be prepared. The first day of her housekeeping the cook came for orders--"what would she have for dinner?" The lady told her, among other items, that she would have an apple pudding. "How shall I make it?" was the question which the lady was unable to answer; she knew no more how to make a pudding than to square the circle. She evaded the question as well as she could, by telling the girl to make it in the usual way. But the circumstance was a powerful lesson on the inconveniences of ignorance to the housekeeper. The lady possessed good sense, and was a woman of right principles. She felt it was her duty to know how to order her help--that wealth did not free her from responsibility in her family. She set herself diligently to the study of cookery, and by consulting friends, watching the operations of her servants, and doing many things herself, she has become a most excellent housekeeper. For the young bride, who is entirely ignorant of her household duties, this is an encouraging example; let her follow it if she would be happy and respected at home. But it would be better to begin her lessons a little earlier; it is not every woman who has sufficient strength of mind to pursue such a rigid course of self-education. And no lady can be comfortable, unless she possesses a knowledge of household work; if she need not perform it herself, she must be able to teach her help, otherwise she will always have bad servants. I am aware that it is the fashion with many ladies to disparage Irish domestics, call them stupid, ignorant, imprudent, ungrateful, the plagues of housekeeping. That they are ignorant is true enough; it does require skill, patience, and judgement, to teach a raw Irish girl how to perform the work in a gentleman's family; but they are neither stupid nor ungrateful, and if they are taught in the right manner, they prove very capable, and are most faithful and affectionate domestics. A friend of mine, who is just what a woman ought to be, capable of directing--even doing if necessary, in the kitchen as well as shining in the drawing room, hired one of these poor despised Irish girls, new from the land of the Shamrock, who only understood the way of doing work in a hovel, yet, like all her class, she told the lady "sure she could do any thing she wanted." The lady, however, did not trust the girl to make any experiments, but went to the kitchen with her and taught her, or rather did the work herself, and allowed the help to look on and learn by example, which for such is much more effectual than lectures. When the dinner was nearly ready, the lady retired to dress, telling Julia to watch the roast, and she would return soon and show her how to prepare it for the table. We may imagine with what utter bewilderment the poor girl had been overwhelmed during this, her first lesson in civilized life. The names of the articles of furniture used in the kitchen as well as their uses, were entirely unknown to her; and she had seen so many new things done, which she was expected to remember, that it must have made her heart-sick to reflect how much she had to learn. But there was one thing she thought she understood, that was to cook potatoes. These were done, and she would show the lady she knew how to prepare them for the table. When the lady returned, she found the girl seated in the middle of the floor, the potatoes in her lap, while she, with a very satisfied look, was peeling them with her fingers! Are there not ladies who would have exclaimed--"Oh, the stupid, ignorant, dirty creature! She cannot be taught to do my work. I must send her away!" And away she would have been sent, irritated if not discouraged, and perhaps without knowing a place where to lay down her head in this strange country. My friend did not act in this manner--she expressed no surprise at the attitude of the girl, only quietly said--"That is not the best way to peel your potatoes, Julia--just lay them on this plate, and I will show you how I like to have them done." That Irish girl remained a servant in the same family for five years, proved herself not only capable of learning to work, but willing and most devoted in the service of her mistress, whom she regarded with a reverence little short of what a Catholic feels for his patron saint. * And thus, if with patience and kindness these poor Irish girls are treated and taught, may good and faithful help be obtained. But unless ladies know how the work should be done and and are willing to teach their domestics, they should not employ the Irish when they first arrive. Those who do employ and carefully instruct this class of persons, perform a most benevolent act to the usually destitute exiles, and also a good service to the community, by rendering those who would, if ignorant, become a burden and a nuisance, useful and often respectable members of society. To educate a good domestic is one of the surest proofs that a lady is a good housekeeper. *Julia married before she left her mistress, and the manner in which that kind lady treated her on the occasion, will show the character of both. It was late in the afternoon when Julia informed her mistress she must be married that same evening, because her intended husband was to start the next morning for the West. "I will send for the Bishop, then, and have some cake and wine ready for you, Julia," said the lady. "Thank you ma'am--but I suppose I must be married in the church," replied Julia, who was a good Catholic. "Then I will go and see you married," said the lady. "Will you, will you do that same," said Julia, with uplifted hands, her very pretty face sparkling with joy. "Yes--and you must invite the Bishop (Cheverus) to return home with you and partake of some cake and wine." At the marriage, when the bride was to make her promises of faithfulness, obedience, &c. the Bishop enquired who would be her surety. In the catholic marriage service this sort of guaranty is required, like that of sponsors in baptism. Julia had not thought of this; but her mistress was there, she came forward, saying to the Bishop--"I will be surety for Julia--she has been in our family five years, and has proved herself an excellent domestic; I will answer for her faithfulness as a wife." "You are too kind!" exclaimed the Bishop; clasping his hands in thankfulness--and in his exhortation to the wedded pair, he reminded the bride how deeply she was indebted to her mistress who had taught and directed her in the right way, and exhorted her to prove herself worthy, by continued good conduct, of such a generous friend. And Julia has done this--she is settled at the West, her husband a respectable mechanic, and she a good wife. CHAPTER XV. A WORD TO MOTHERS. "Train up a child in the way he should go, &c." To be known as a "good housekeeper"--in the comprehensive sense of the term,--should secure to a woman high respect; but if you are a mother the crowning grace of your household management will be, that you have rightly trained the children committed to your care. Only bear in mind that the first feeling of the infant is desire for food, the first pleasure in life the gratification of appetite, and we shall see of what immense importance it is that the habit of regulating this instinct for food by the rules of reason and experience should be the first one formed in our children. Of course the foundation of this habit must be laid in the entire submission of the appetites of the young child to the reason and experience of its mother. The kinds of food most proper for young children have been briefly noticed in this work. But the regulation of the quantity and times of taking food are of the utmost importance--this should be the mother's province. There is great danger that an infant, under three years of age, will be over-fed, if it be left to the discretion of the nurse. These persons, generally, have but one resource to stop the screaming of a child, whether it proceed from pain, or crossness, or, repletion (as it often does)--they give it something to eat--often that which is very injurious, to tempt the appetite; if it will only eat and stop crying, they do not care for the future inconvenience which this habit of indulgence may bring on the child and its mother. Arrange as early as possible, the regular times of giving food to your children, according to their age and constitution. But remember that all temperaments are not alike. Some of the same age may require more food than others. One rule, however, will apply to all--never give a child food to amuse and keep it quiet when it is not hungry, or to reward it for being good. You may as rationally hope to extinguish a fire by pouring on oil, as to cure a peevish temper or curb a violent one by pampering the appetite for luxuries in diet; and all the traits of goodness you thus seek to foster, will in the end, prove as deceptive as the mirage of green fields and cool lakes to the traveller in the hot sands of the desert. "My children have very peculiar constitutions," said an anxious mother--"They are so subject to fevers! If they take the least cold, or even have a fall they are sure to be attacked by fever." The family lived high, and those young children had a seat at the table and were helped to the best and richest of every thing. And their luncheon was cake and confectionary. It was suggested to the mother that if she would adopt a different diet for those children, give them bread and milk morning and evening, and a plain dinner of bread, meat and vegetables, their liability to fevers would be much lessened. "But my children do not love milk, and won't touch plain food"--was the answer, with a sort of triumphant smile, as though this cramming of her children with good things, till the blood of the poor little creatures was almost in a state of inflammation, was a high credit to her good housekeeping. But do not err on the other hand; and for fear your child should be over-fed, allow it insufficient nourishment. There is not in our country, much reason to fear that such will be the case; the danger is, usually on the side of excess; still we must not forget that the effects from a system of slow starvation are, if not so suddenly fatal as that of repletion, more terrible because it reduces the intellectual as well as the physical nature of man, till he is hardly equal to the brutes. In many parts of civilized and christian Europe, the mass of the people suffer from being over-worked and under-fed; few may die of absolute starvation, but their term of life is much shortened, and their moral and intellectual powers dwarfed or prostrated. "Under an impoverished diet," says Dr Combe, "the moral and intellectual capacity is deteriorated as certainly as the bodily"--and he adverts to the work-house and charitable institution system of weak soups and low vegetable diet, and to the known facts that children brought up on such fare are usually feeble, puny and diseased in body, and are at the best, but moderate in capacity. The rational course seems to be, to feed infants, till about three years old chiefly with milk and mild farinaceous vegetable preparations--after that period, to proportion their solid food to the amount of exercise they are able to take. Children who play abroad in the open air, will require more hearty nourishment, more meat, than those who are kept confined in the house or school room. From the age of ten or twelve to sixteen or eighteen, when the growth is most rapid and the exercises (of boys especially) most violent, a sufficiency of plain nourishing food should be given; there is little danger of their taking too much, if it be of the right kind and properly cooked. But do not allow them to eat hot bread, or high seasoned meats and rich gravies, or use any kind of stimulating drinks. I feel sure that every sensible mother will be willing to dispense with all alcoholic preparations in cookery. There is no doubt that many a fair promising boy who has ended his life an intemperate man, had the taste for liquor first excited and fostered by seeing it used daily as a necessary in the family, and often tasting it in the richest and most savory kinds of food. What christian mother will venture to teach by her own example, the love of this moral and mental poison to her young children?--If the family mode of living were "temperate in all things;" with suitable bathings and recreations, very little sickness would occur among children. And simple remedies would generally be found to relieve common attacks of disease. I shall give a few such remedies--those that are most easily to be obtained and used, chiefly for accidental injuries. FOR BURNS. Apply cotton wool dipped in oil as soon as possible, and keep it on till the fire is entirely out, which will usually take from two days to a week. FOR A CUT. Wash off the blood in cold water, and bind it up with a clean cotton bandage--if it inclines to bleed, put on scraped lint, after bringing the edges of the wound together as closely as possible, and bind it rather tight. FOR A BRUISE OR SPRAIN. Bathe the part in cold water, till you can get ready a decoction of wormwood. This is one of the best remedies for sprains and bruises. When the wormwood is fresh gathered, pound the leaves and wet them either with water or vinegar and bind them on the bruise--when the herb is dry, put it into cold water and let it warm by the fire a short time, then bathe the bruise and bind on the herb. Always keep cotton wool, scraped lint and wormwood on hand. The best preventive of colds is to wash your children every day thoroughly in cold water, if they are strong enough to bear it--if not, add a little warm water, and rub the skin dry. This keeps the pores open. If they do take cold, give them a warm bath as soon as possible; if that is not convenient, bathe the feet and hands and wash the body all over in warm water, then give a cup of warm tea and cover the patient in bed. If a sore throat follow, take a tumbler of molasses and water, half and half, when going to bed; and rub the throat with a mixture of sweet or goose oil and spirits of turpentine, then wear a flannel around it. For canker or sore mouth, steep blackberry leaves, sweeten with honey, sprinkle in a little burnt alum and wash the mouth often with this decoction. The cookery for the sick requires great nicety and exactness, and should rarely be trusted to a common domestic. If you have a nurse constantly with your children, she may do this part of domestic duty well, otherwise, it must generally devolve on the mother. TO MAKE GRUEL. Sift the Indian meal through a fine sieve--wet two spoonfuls of this meal with cold water, and beat it till there are no lumps; then stir it into a pint of boiling water, and let it boil half an hour, stirring it all the time. BEEF TEA. Cut half a pound of lean fresh beef into slices, lay it in a dish and pour over it a pint of boiling water, cover the dish and let it stand half an hour by the fire, then just boil it up--pour it off clear and salt it a very little. VEAL TEA is made in the same way--and CHICKEN TEA also. BARLEY WATER. Upon one ounce of pearl barley, after it has been well washed in cold water, pour half a pint of boiling water, and then boil it for a few minutes; the water must then be strained off and thrown away; afterwards a quart of boiling water must be poured over the barley; and which should then be boiled down to one pint and a quarter, and strained off. The barley water thus made is clear and mucilaginous; and when mixed with an equal quantity of good milk and a small portion of sugar, is an excellent substitute for the mother's milk, when infants are, unfortunately, to be brought up by hand. Without milk, it is one of the best beverages for all acute diseases, and may have lemon juice, raspberry vinegar, apple tea, infusion of tamarinds, or any other acidulous substance that is agreeable to the palate of the patient, mixed with it. ARROW-ROOT. Forms an excellent nutritive mucilage. Put two teaspoonfuls of the powder into a half pint basin; mix them smooth with a few teaspoonfuls of cold water, and then let another person pour boiling water over the mixture while you continue to stir it, until it forms a kind of starchy-looking substance. Arrow-root thus prepared, may be used in the same manner as gruel. It is well adapted for the food of infants, because it is less liable to ferment than either gruel or barley water; and, for the same reason, it is the best fluid nourishment for those who are afflicted with diseases of indigestion. As it is very insipid, it requires either milk, or wine, or acids, to be mixed with it, whichever may suit the taste and the state of habit of the person for whom it is intended. It forms an excellent pudding, when prepared like rice, for children who are a little beyond the age of infancy. DECOCTION OF ICELAND LIVERWORT. An ounce of liverwort must be carefully freed from the moss, fragments of stalks, and particles of dirt, with which it is frequently mixed, by rubbing it between the hands in cold water. Then steep it, for two hours, in such a quantity of cold water as will completely cover it; after which it must be bruised, pounded, or cut, and the steeping continued for three or four days longer in a fresh quantity of boiling water, which when the steeping is finished, must be strained off by pressure. The liverwort is then to be put into a quart of fresh water, and kept boiling until the fluid be reduced two-thirds, or to a pint and a quarter. When strained and allowed to cool, it forms a thick mucilage, free from any bitter taste; and may be rendered very palatable by the addition of sugar and lemon juice; or by white wine, in those cases which permit the use of wine. This decoction of liverwort is an excellent demulcent nutriment, in consumption, dysentery and in convalesence from acute diseases, and particularly after the hooping cough, in which case the bitter need not be completely removed, as it tends to invigorate the digestive organs. WHITE WINE WHEY. To make this whey, put half a pint of milk diluted with a quarter of a pint of water into a sauce-pan, which must be placed on the fire uncovered. Watch the moment when the milk boils, which may be known by the frothing and rising up of the milk to the top of the pan; pour into it, at that instant, two glasses of white wine, and a teaspoonful of powdered sugar, which should be previously mixed with with the wine. The curd will immediately form; and, after boiling the mixture for a few minutes, may be separated from the whey, either by letting it settle at the bottom, and then pouring off the whey clear from it, or by straining it through a fine sieve. BALM, MINT, AND OTHER TEAS. These are simple infusions, the strength of which can only be regulated by the taste. They are made by putting either the fresh or the dried plants into boiling water in a covered vessel, which should be placed near the fire for an hour. The young shoots both of balm and of mint are to be preferred, on account of their strong aromatic qualities. These infusions may be drunk freely in feverish and in various other complaints, in which diluents are recommended. Mint tea, made with the fresh leaves, is useful in allaying nausea and vomiting. CHAPTER XVI. HIRING A COOK. "If it were only a wife now, that I wanted, there would be some hope for me--but a cook!--Well, as it rains too hard for you, my love, to venture out, I must go," said Mr Manning. "I regret the necessity, my love, but this is the day; and if the woman does not hear from me, she will doubtless engage herself;--and she refuses to call here," replied Mrs Manning. How I wish we could have a patent invention for cooks as well as cooking-stoves! thought Mr Manning, as he entered the house where his intended cook resided. She appeared--a large formed, well dressed female, with an air of much importance. In fashionable life she would have been what is called 'a showy woman.' "Your terms are"-- "Three dollars a week, Sir"-- "That is more than we have been accustomed to give. My family is not large; five in the parlor, only; and we have a house maid and boy," said Mr Manning. "You may hire cooks cheaper, I suppose," said Madame Cook--"that is my price." "I will give you two dollars and a half--though we never have paid over nine shillings." "It is of no consequence to talk about it," said the woman, indignantly; and she swept out of the room with a lofty gesture that might have been a lesson to an insulted tragedy queen. "Let me calculate"--thought Mr Manning, as he walked home. "I cannot expect to realize more than fifteen hundred clear, from the profits of my store--very likely it will be less. And now--$3 per week for a cook--1,25 each for the boy and chambermaid; is five dollars and a half per week--Then the board $2 each per week; it will cost all that at the present rate of provisions--$6--making $11,50--or five hundred and seventy-five per year for help-- "Then for rent, provisions, taxes, fuel, clothing, and all et ceteras for myself and family there remains $925--and my daughters want masters, and my wife must, for her health, go one journey in the year. "There must be something radically wrong in the present fashions of our society. An educated man thinks it no shame to do the business of his profession, whatever it may be. I work hard in my store every day. But women, who have been educated, think it degrading to put their hands to any household employment, though that is all the task we assign to our females. A lady would be ashamed to be seen in her kitchen at work. Oh, how many are now sitting at ease in their pleasant parlors, while their husbands, fathers, brothers and sons are toiling like slaves! And, what is worse than toil, anxiously bearing a load of care, lest their income should not, with all their exertions, be sufficient to meet the expenses of their families. "It cannot continue thus. If women who receive a fashionable education are thereby rendered incapable of performing their domestic duties--why, an educated man must remain single till he amasses a fortune--or must marry a real help in order to have a help meet for him. "Yet it may be the folly and pride of us men, after all. We want the sole control of business and the whole credit of the pecuniary management of our households. We do not confide to our wives and daughters the embarrassments we suffer, or the need we have for their assistance--at least co-operation. I will now try what this confidence will produce. I will tell my wife and daughters precisely how my affairs stand." The two elder Misses Manning (the youngest is at school) take each her turn in the kitchen every other week, and with the counsel of Mrs Manning and the help of the boy and a washerwoman once a week, every thing in the household department goes on like clock-work. They declare they will never be at the trouble of attempting to hire another cook. And what is still more agreeable, Mr Manning avers that their table was never before so well arranged or his daughters so gay and contented for a month together; and they say, that they never had so much time for their music and studies. Early rising and active employment, for a few hours each day, are wonderful promoters of good health and cheerfulness; and leisure is never appreciated till it is earned by efforts to be useful, or enjoyed as relaxation from that industry which, in some way, is the duty of every rational being.
