CHAPTER I. SOUPS AND BROTHS. To excel in making rich and palatable soup or broth, requires more judgment in the combination of its component parts than the variety of its flavors; and more care and pains-taking in conducting its process, than in selecting its ingredients. A rich and nutricious soup may be made with little or no expense; for in most cases it is real economy to convert the broth in which your meat or poultry has been boiled, into soup, especially if you have a young family. No dish is more wholesome and acceptable to children than well-seasoned soup. In the first place, (take no offence, madam!) it is highly necessary that your vessel should be perfectly clean; a little smut might pass incog. in a dish of roasted beef or broiled mackerel, but never in soup. Soup must be prepared in a perfectly neat kettle, the top should fit closely, or the most essential qualities of the soup will evaporate, as the juices of the meat are extracted. An open kettle will give the most delicious of its flavors to the surrounding atmosphere, instead of condensing them within, and though you be ever so neat and fastidious, there will always be a collection of impurities which must be carried off by scum, especially if limestone water be used. Place your kettle over a slow fire, where it will gradually warm for at least half an hour without boiling. During this process it will become penetrated and cleansed from the small clots of blood and other matters to be carried off by the scum, which will rise profusely, and which should be constantly taken off. When the half hour has expired, quicken the fire, let your soup boil, still continuing to remove the scum as it rises, until it is entirely clear; then place it where it will remain boiling slowly. It is decidedly erroneous to purpose extracting the most nutricious qualities of a fowl or beef-shank by hard boiling. They must, of course, escape with the steam. Never throw in salt until it has boiled. This will also clarify it, and it is proper to remove the scum as long as it presents itself to the surface. Clear soups must be perfectly transparent, those designed to be thickened must be a little thicker than rich cream. Thickened soups require more seasoning than clear. Bread crumbs are most excellent thickening, especially if toasted to a light brown, and it is both wholesome and savory. Rice may also be used in most compounds, or browned flour. An invited dinner-party should invariably be presented with a plate of soup as a first course, and no doubt it would be a judicious arrangement to have soup make its regular appearance at every day's dinner. OBSERVATION.--In preparing soups, always cut the pieces of meat you send in the tureen small enough to be eaten without introducing a knife and fork into the soup plate. CALIFORNIA SOUP. Take a leg of beef, weighing about ten pounds, and, after breaking the bones, put it into a soup-pot quite large enough to hold it, just cover it with cold water, and heat it gradually till it nearly boils. This should take not less than an hour. Skim it attentively while any scum rises, then pour in a little cold water and let it come to a boil again, skimming it till perfectly clear. Let it boil for eight or ten hours, and strain it through a hair sieve into a brown stone pan, and set it where it will soon become cool. Next day remove every particle of fat from the top of it, and pour it through a fine sieve into a stewpan, taking care not to disturb the settling at the bottom of the stone pan. The stewpan should be of copper, well tinned. Put in an ounce of whole black pepper, and let it boil briskly on a quick fire, taking off the scum if any rises. When it is reduced to about a quart, set it over a gentler fire in a smaller vessel, till it is reduced to the consistence of a very thick syrup. Be very particular now that it does not burn, for a moment's carelessness may ruin the compound. Cool a little of it in a spoon, and if it has the consistence of jelly it is done; if not, boil it till it has. Put it away in small dry vessels, or, if you wish to preserve it more than six months, in bladders, such as are used for German sausages. If you prefer it in cakes, turn it into a shallow dish; and when it is cold, turn it out and weigh the cake, and divide it with a paste-cutter into half ounce or ounce pieces. Place them in a warm room, and turn them frequently till they are quite dry, which will take a week or ten days. When well hardened and kept in a dry place, they may be preserved for several years in any climate. BEEF BROTH. Desire the butcher to crack a shin of beef in two or three places, wash it very clean, and add to it any trimmings of meat, game, or poultry you may happen to have. Cover them in cold water, stir it up carefully from the bottom, and the moment it begins to simmer, skim it well. On the clearness of this broth depends the goodness of the soups, sauces, and gravies of which it is the basis. When it seems perfectly clear, add some cold water to make the scum rise again, and then skim it until the surface of the broth is quite clear, and no more scum rises. Then put one common sized carrot, a head of celery, two turnips, and two onions, cover it close, and set it where it will simmer very gently for four or five hours. Strain it through a sieve into a clean, dry, stone pan, and set it in the coolest place you can find. This is a good foundation for all sorts of soups and sauces, brown or white. CLEAR GRAVY SOUP. Cut half a pound of ham into slices, and lay them at the bottom of a large stewpan, with two or three pounds of lean beef and as much veal; break the bones and lay them on the meat, take off the outer skins of two large onions and two turnips, wash clean and cut into pieces two large carrots and two heads of celery; put in a few cloves and a little mace, and cover the stewpan close and set it over a smart fire. Turn the meat when it begins to stick to the bottom of the pan, and as soon as there is a brown glaze at the bottom, cover the meat with hot water. When it is coming to a boil, pour in half a pint of cold water, take off the scum, and then put in another half pint of cold water, skim it again, and repeat this process till no more scum rises. Then set it to boil gently for four hours, strain it through a clean napkin, or a fine sieve, into a clean stone vessel, and let it remain till cold, when you must remove all the fat. When you pour it off, be careful not to disturb the settlings at the bottom of the pan. This is the basis of all gravy soups, which are called by the name of the vegetables used. MOCK TURTLE SOUP. Take the upper from the lower part of a calf's head, and put both in a gallon of water and boil till tender. Strain the liquor, let it stand till next day, and take off the fat. Hang it over the fire three-quarters of an hour before serving it, and season it with salt, cloves, pepper, mace, and sweet herbs, tied in a bag. Add half a pint of rich gravy. Darken it with browned flour or fried sugar. Then put in the yolks of eight eggs boiled hard, the juice of two lemons, and force-meat balls. When ready to serve, add half a pint of wine. GUMBO SOUP. Put a shin of veal and an old fowl into a soup-pot with two carrots, two turnips sliced, an onion whole, and six quarts of water; let it boil gently five hours. Take the chicken out and cut it up into small pieces; cut two onions in slices, and fry them brown in butter, then take out the onion and put in the chicken, and fry it brown. Put the onions into a saucepan, and shake a little flour into the hot butter, stirring it all the time, and take care that it does not oil or burn. Then put it in with the chicken, strain the soup into it, and let it boil for a half-hour. Mix three table-spoonsful of gumbo in half a pint of cold water, stir this in the soup while the soup is boiling, but it must not boil after the gumbo is put in. There should be, on the table, a dish of boiled rice; a spoonful of which should be served with each plate of soup. It adds greatly to this soup, to mix with it three quarts of oysters, including the liquor, and let it boil up once, before the gumbo is put in. CALF'S HEAD SOUP. Get a calf's head with the skin on, take out the brains, wash the head several times in cold water, let it soak about an hour in spring-water, then lay it in a stewpan and cover it with water and a half-gallon over. Take off the scum as it rises, let it boil gently for one hour, take it up, and when almost cold, cut the head into pieces about an inch long, also the tongue--add the brains. When the head is taken out, put in a knuckle of veal and as much beef, add the trimmings and bones of the head, skim it well, cover it close, and let it boil five hours. Then strain it off, and let it stand till next morning, and take off the fat. Set a large stewpan on the fire with half a pound of good, fresh butter, twelve ounces of onions sliced, four ounces of green sage; chop it a little; let these fry one hour; then rub in half a pound of flour; then, by degrees, add the broth, till it is the thickness of cream. Season it with quarter of an ounce of ground allspice and half an ounce of black pepper, ground very fine. Salt to your taste. The rind of one lemon, peeled very thin. Let it simmer very gently for one hour and a half, then strain it through a hair sieve; do not rub your soup to get it through the sieve; it will make it grouty; if it does not run through easily, knock your spoon against the side of your sieve. Put it in a clean saucepan with the head, and season it by adding to each gallon of soup, half a pint of wine, (either claret or Madeira, ) two table-spoonsful of lemon juice; let it simmer gently till the meat is tender; this may take from half an hour to an hour. Take care it is not overdone. Stir it frequently to keep the meat from sticking to the bottom of the stewpan, and when the meat is quite tender, the soup is ready. SOUPE รก LA JARDINIERE. Wash a leg of lamb or veal, of moderate size, and put it into four quarts of cold water. Boil it gently, and when the scum rises, take it off carefully. Take of potatoes, carrots, cabbage, onions, tomatoes, and turnips, a tea-cupful of each, chopped fine. Add salt and pepper to your taste. Carrots should be put in first, as they require most time for boiling, and onions last. This soup must be boiled three hours. PEASE SOUP. To a quart of split pease put three quarts of cold, soft water, with half a pound of bacon, not very fat, or roast-beef bones. Wash two heads of celery, two onions, peeled, a sprig of savory, or parsley; set it on the fire and let it simmer very gently, stir every quarter of an hour, to keep the pease from sticking to the soup-pot, until the pease are tender, which will be in about three-quarters of an hour. Then work the whole through a hair sieve, put it into a clean stewpan with half a tea-spoonful of black pepper, ground. Let it boil again ten minutes, and if any fat arises, skim it off. ASPARAGUS SOUP. This is made with the points of asparagus, in the same manner as the green pease soup. Let half the asparagus be rubbed through a sieve, and the other half be cut in pieces about an inch long, and boiled till done enough, and sent up in the soup. To make two quarts, there must be a pint of heads to thicken it, and half a pint cut in. Take care to preserve these green, and a little crisp. This soup is sometimes made, by adding the asparagus heads to common pease soup. SOUP--ROUGH AND READY. Crack a shin-bone well, boil it in five or six quarts of water four hours. Take half a head of white cabbage, three carrots, two turnips, and three onions; chop them up fine, and put them into the soup with pepper and salt, and boil it two hours. Take out the bone and gristle half an hour before serving it. OYSTER SOUP. Take a pound or two of veal, boil it in a gallon of water till it is reduced to two quarts, then add the juice of a quart of oysters. Season it with pepper and salt to your taste. Put in the oysters fifteen minutes before serving it. Ten minutes before taking it up, put in ten crackers. Add half a pint of milk after it stops boiling. VERMICELLI SOUP. Take a nice fowl and a shin of veal, two carrots, a turnip and an onion, a little salt, and put them into four quarts of water. Boil this three hours. Put into it two teacups full of vermicelli, and boil it an hour. Before serving, take out the bones and vegetables. CARROT SOUP. Scrape and wash half a dozen large carrots, peel off the red outside, which is the only part that should be used; put it into a gallon stewpan with one head of celery and a sliced onion. Take two quarts of beef, veal, or mutton broth, put it to the roots, cover the pan close, and set it on a slow fire for two hours and a half; boil it for two or three minutes, then rub it through a fine sieve with a wooden spoon, and add as much broth as will make it of the proper thickness. Put it into a clean stewpan, make it hot, season it with salt, and send it up with some toasted bread, cut in small pieces. PLAIN GREEN-PEA SOUP, WITHOUT MEAT. Take a quart of green pease, keeping half a pint of the youngest, put them on in boiling water and boil them till they are tender. Then pour off the water, and set it by to make the soup with. Pound the pease to a mash, in a mortar. Boil the young pease separately, to put into the soup when finished. Put into the mashed pease two quarts of the water they were boiled in, stir all well together, and let it boil for about five minutes, and then rub it through a hair sieve. This will be a thick and fine vegetable soup. JULIENNE SOUP. This is a French dish, and takes its name from the months of June and July; and to make it in reality, as originally made, a small quantity of every description of vegetables should be used, including lettuce, sorrel, tarragon; however, some few sorts of vegetables mixed together make a most estimable soup. Weigh half a pound of the vegetables, in fair proportions to each other; that is, carrots, turnips, onions, celery, and leeks; which, cut into small fillets an inch in length, and of the thickness of a running needle; when done, wash, dry, and pan them in butter and sugar as before--proceeding the same with the soup, adding, just before it is done, a little sorrel, cabbage, lettuce and pease, if handy, but it would be excellent without either. CHAPTER II. FISH. As we have not a very great variety of fish in our beautiful Western rivers, our chapter on this subject will not be very long. It is best always to put fish in cold water to boil. First, let them soak in clear salt and water. Always fry fish in lard. Parsley is the most appropriate herb to garnish with. Let the lard be hot enough to brown it in a few minutes; it destroys the flavor to soak it in grease. Wipe the fish quite dry, dip it in bread-crumbs or flour, just before laying it in the fryingpan. CHOWDER. Cut the fish in pieces of an inch thick and two inches square. Take half a dozen large slices of salt pork, and lay in the bottom of an iron pot, and fry till crisped. Take the pork out of the fat, and chop it fine. Put in the pot a layer of fish, a layer of split crackers, some of the chopped pork, black and red pepper, and onion chopped fine, then another layer of fish, split crackers, &c. Continue this till all the fish is used. Barely cover the fish with water, and slowly stew it till it is tender. Then take out the fish, and thicken the gravy with pounded cracker, and season it with mushroom catsup, and the juice of a lemon. Pour the gravy over the fish, after it has boiled up once. Garnish it with slices of lemon. CODFISH PIE Put the fish in cold water to soak, the night before wanted; then boil it well, and pick it into small pieces; set it on a fish drainer to get cold. Boil four eggs hard, peel and slice them very thin; the same quantity of onion sliced thin. Line the bottom of a pie-dish with a layer of potatoes sliced thin; then a layer of onions, then of fish, and of eggs, and so on till the dish is full. Season each layer with a little pepper, then mix a tea-spoonful of mustard and a little mushroom catsup in a gill of water, put it in the dish, and put on top an ounce of fresh butter, broke in bits. Cover it with puff-paste, and bake in one hour. BOILED PERCH. Clean them carefully, and put them in a fish-kettle with as much cold spring-water as will cover them, and a handful of salt. Set them on a quick fire till they boil, and when they boil, set them on one side to boil gently for about ten minutes or more, according to their size. TO COOK SALT COD. Soak the fish in spring-water, the night before it is to be dressed. In the morning take it out and put it in a vessel of clean water, add a tea-spoonful of saleratus, change the water again just before dinner, and let it barely simmer; it will not bear boiling. TO COOK COLD CODFISH. Pick it up very fine put it in a clean pan, add an equal quantity of mashed potatoes, some black pepper, a little cream, and salt, mash them well together, roll them in balls, and fry in hot lard. TO STEW OYSTERS. Take a quart of oysters, lay them out of the liquor, into cold water, take the liquor and strain it through a sieve, add an equal quantity of water, put it in a saucepan, then a tea-spoonful of black pepper, an ounce of sweet butter, then lay the oysters in, let them simmer a few minutes, have ready a deep dish with some nice slices of toasted bread, then pour the oysters over them. FRIED PERCH. Clean them, lay them in salt and water, and let them remain an hour or so, wipe them perfectly dry, dip them in flour, have your lard properly heated, that is to say, boiling. Fry them a light brown. SALMON FRIED. Is fried the same way. FRIED OYSTERS. Dip the oysters in nice, grated crackers, or crumbs, and drop them in hot fat. Lay them to drain on a sieve. CHAPTER III. BOILING. IT is absolutely necessary to keep the water boiling, after you have commenced. If the meat or joint continues in the water after it ceases to boil, it will absorb the water, and lose its sweetness and natural flavor. When it is necessary to add more water, be very particular to let it be boiling, as it is a great disadvantage to suspend this process. When your meat first begins to boil, take the scum off carefully, and add the salt immediately, as it greatly accelerates the clarification of the water. Fresh meat should always be put in boiling water. Salt meat should be put in cold water and heated by degrees. Never boil meat hard, particularly at the beginning, and it is decidedly best, never to permit it to boil rapidly. Always keep the kettle, or pot, covered, so that the genuine taste may not be lost. TO BOIL HAM. Put it in soak the night before. Give it plenty of water room, and put it in while the water is cold. Skim it well and keep it simmering gently. A middling sized ham will be done in four or five hours. If not to be cut cold, it will cut the shorter and tenderer for being boiled still longer. Pull off the skin carefully, and preserve it as whole as possible--it will serve to keep it moist. Grate a crust of bread over it. TO BOIL TONGUE. A tongue is so hard, whether prepared by drying or pickling, that it requires much more cooking than a ham; nothing of its weight takes so long to dress it properly. A tongue that has been salted and dried, should be put to soak, (if it is old and very hard,) twenty-four hours before it is wanted, in plenty of water. A green one, fresh from the pickle, requires soaking only a few hours. Put your tongue into a plenty of cold water, let it be an hour gradually warming, and give it from three and a half to four hours, very slowly simmering. TO BOIL FOWLS. All fowls are boiled exactly in the same manner, only allowing time according to their size. They must be well washed in warm water, and then dredged well with flour. Set on a clean pot, over a good clear fire, have pure, clean water enough to cover the fowl well. The slower it boils, the whiter and plumper it will be. Take care to remove the scum carefully as it rises. Of course, sufficient salt is thrown in to make it savory. They are always sent to the table with an appropriate sauce. TO BOIL HOMINY. Wash two quarts of hominy in cold water, then put it in a large pot, fill it up with cold water, and let it boil gently all day long; when pretty dry, take a wooden mallet and pound it while warm, add salt enough to make it palatable, then take it out in a stone pan. Season it with fresh butter while warm, as much as you intend to use at the present; that you put by, will be excellent for breakfast. Fry it in hot lard, without stirring it; turn it out whole in a dish. Hominy should never be stirred while boiling or frying. This is one of the most substantial and wholesome dishes in the West, and can be always had. During the winter months, it should never be absent from the table; for no dish can supply its place. CHAPTER IV. SAUCES AND GRAVIES. TO PREPARE MELTED BUTTER. CUT two ounces of butter into little bits; put it in the stewpan with a large tea-spoonful of flour, arrow-root, or potatoe starch, and two table-spoonsful of milk. When thoroughly mixed, add six table-spoonsful of water, hold it over the fire and shake it round every minute, till it just begins to simmer, then let it stand quietly and boil up, till it is the thickness of good cream. If the butter oils, put a spoonful of cold water to it and stir it; if it is very much oiled, pour it backward and forward from the stewpan to the sauceboat, till it is right again. THICKENING FOR GRAVY, SAUCE, OR SOUP. Put some fresh butter into a stewpan over a slow fire: when it is melted, add flour sufficient to make it the thickness of paste; stir it well together, with a wooden spoon, fifteen or twenty minutes, till it is quite smooth and yellow. This must be done gradually. When cold, it should be thick enough to cut with a knife. Always add this thickening to your gravy or soup, according to the consistency you would wish them to have. It will keep a fortnight in summer, and longer in winter. GRAVY FOR ROAST MEAT. Most joints will afford sufficient trimmings to make half a pint of plain gravy, which you may color with a little burnt sugar. For those that do not, about half an hour before you think the meat will be done, mix half a tea-spoonful of salt in a quarter of a pint of boiling water. Drop this by degrees on the brown part of the meat, set a dish under to catch it, and set it by. Let it cool, and remove the fat from the top, and when the meat is ready, warm it, and pour it into the dish. GRAVY FOR BOILED MEAT. This may be made with parings and trimmings; or pour half a pint of the liquor in which the meat was boiled into the dish with it, and pierce the inferior part of the joint with a sharp skewer. TURTLE SAUCE. Put into the stewpan a pint of beef gravy, thickened; add to this a wine-glassful of Madeira, the juice and peel of half a lemon, an eschallot quartered, a few grains of cayenne pepper, and let them simmer together five minutes, and then strain them through a fine, hair sieve. TOMATO SAUCE. Take fifteen ripe tomatoes, take off the stalk, cut them in half, and squeeze them just enough to get all the water and seeds out. Put them in a stewpan with a capsicum and two or three table-spoonsful of beef gravy; set them on a slow stove for an hour, or till properly melted; then rub them through a hair sieve into a clean stewpan, and add a little pepper and salt, and let them simmer together five minutes. Some add to this an onion or eschallot, a clove or two, and a little vinegar. APPLE SAUCE. Pare and core three good sized baking apples, put them into a saucepan with two table-spoonsful of cold water. Cover the saucepan close, and set it on a trivet, over a slow fire for two hours, more or less, as some apples are much more easily cooked than others. When the apples are done enough, pour off the water and let them stand a few minutes to get dry, then put in a small piece of butter and a tea-spoonful of powdered sugar. Some add grated lemon peel. TO MIX MUSTARD. Mix it very gradually in a mortar, so you can rub it well together. Take an ounce of mustard, three table-spoonsful of milk or cream, half a tea-spoonful of salt, and the same of sugar. EGG SAUCE. Boil three eggs about fifteen minutes, and put them into cold water until you want them. Cut them up neatly, using only two of the whites, and pour on them a pint of melted butter, and stir them together. This is an agreeable accompaniment to roast or boiled poultry, or salt fish. LEMON SAUCE. Pare a lemon, slice it in thin slices, and divide the slices into small pieces, and put them into a quarter of a pint of melted butter. CELERY SAUCE, FOR BOILED FOWLS. Cut a half-dozen heads of white celery into small pieces, and slice two onions; put them in a stewpan with a small lump of butter. Stew them over a slow fire till quite tender, then put in two spoonsful of flour, half a pint of water, salt and pepper, and a little cream, or milk. Boil it a quarter of an hour, and pass it through a hair sieve with the back of a spoon. When celery is not in season, a small quantity of celery-seed will impregnate the sauce with the celery flavor. CURRANT JELLY SAUCE, FOR VENISON. Put some currant jelly into a stewpan. When it is melted, pour it into a sauceboat. SALAD MIXTURE. Boil a couple of eggs fifteen minutes, and put them in a basin of water a few minutes. The yolks must be quite cold and hard. Rub them through a sieve with a wooden spoon, and mix them with a table-spoonful of water or rich cream. Then add two table-spoonsful of oil or melted butter. When these are well mixed, add by degrees a tea-spoonful of salt, or powdered loaf-sugar, the same of mustard, and, when these are smoothly united, add, very gradually, three table-spoonsful of vinegar, and rub it with the other ingredients till it is thoroughly incorporated with them; cut up the white of the egg, and garnish the top with it. This is a good sauce for any kind of salad, and is delicious when mixed with minced turkey or chicken, and celery. Let the sauce remain in the bottom of the bowl, and do not stir the salad in it till it is to be eaten. SAUCE FOR BOILED TRIPE, OR CALF'S HEAD. Strong vinegar a table-spoonful, a tea-spoonful of mustard, the same quantity of brown sugar and black pepper, stirred into half a pint of melted butter. MINT SAUCE, FOR VEAL OR MUTTON. Take two table-spoonsful of green mint, half a tea-cupful of vinegar, and two table-spoonsful of pounded loaf sugar, and mix them well together. IMITATION OF CAPERS. Gather green peas while young and tender, pickle them with vinegar, put them away in tight bottles in a dry place, and they will make a good sauce as capers. MY UNCLE'S SAUCE. Take some bits of ham, beef, and veal, cut up with them some celery, onions, carrots, and parsnips, pour some boiling water over them, and let it stand till cool; add a glass of Madeira, some cloves, and slices of lemon. Boil it on a slow fire till the meat is done, strain it, and chop a little parsley in it just before it is used. FISH SAUCE. Take walnuts when they are old enough to pickle, slice them, and between every layer of walnuts, throw a handful of salt. Stir it every day for two weeks. Then strain the liquor, let it settle, pour off the clear and boil it with a pound of anchovies to each pint; skim it, and when it is cool boil it again; add a pint of Port wine, one of good vinegar, to each pint of the liquor, also half an ounce each of mace and cloves, some sliced horse-radish, and a head of garlic, to a quart of the liquor, and some grains of black pepper. Cork it up tight in bottles. OYSTER SAUCE. So soon as the oysters boil, strain off the liquor, put it in a clean saucepan, then take the oysters and cut up the soft parts and lay them in a dish where they will keep warm until the sauce is ready. The gristly part of the oysters must not be used. Roll two ounces of butter well in flour, and put it with the liquor in the saucepan; let it boil well, pass it through the sieve, and pour it over the oysters. This is the most delicious sauce in the whole catalogue of culinary compounds, but it is often spoiled by too many ingredients; the flavor of the oyster is preserved when prepared with salt and butter only: pepper is superfluous. Spice should never be used in making oyster sauce. CHESTNUT SAUCE. Take a pint of nuts, boil and hull them, press them through a sieve, put them in a saucepan, add a little salt, a clove or two, and a half-pint of rich cream, a small lump of butter, mix them well over the fire, but do not let it get brown. CHESTNUT STUFFING. Chestnuts make a delightful stuffing for turkeys, by working into them butter and pepper. It is very rich, and better mixed with bread-crumbs. MUSHROOM CATSUP. Take fresh-gathered and full-grown mushrooms; put a layer of these at the bottom of a deep earthen pan, and sprinkle them with salt; then another layer, and more salt on them, and so alternately, salt and mushrooms. Let them remain two or three hours, then pound them well in a mortar, or mash them with your hands, and let them remain for a couple of days, not longer, stirring them up and mashing them each day. Then pour them into a stone jar, and to each quart add an ounce of whole black pepper; stop the jar very close, and set it on a stewpan of boiling water, and keep it boiling for two hours at least. Take out the jar, and pour the clear juice from the settlings through a hair sieve, without squeezing, into a clean stewpan; let it boil very gently for half an hour. Those who are for SUPERLATIVE CATSUP will continue the boiling till the mushroom juice is reduced to half the quantity. Take especial care that it is closely corked and sealed down, or dipped in bottle-cement. If kept in a cool, dry place, it may be preserved a long time. MUSHROOM SAUCE. Take eight mushrooms, clean and wash them well, chop them quite fine, put them in a saucepan with twelve table-spoonsful of brown sauce or rich veal gravy, add a little cayenne pepper, a tea-spoonful of sugar, boil them about five minutes. This sauce is very excellent for game or broiled cutlets. STEWED MUSHROOMS. When mushrooms are old, pour boiling water over them; if they are young, it is unnecessary to do so; let them lie a few minutes in cold spring-water, then rub the skins off with clean, coarse napkin. Cut them up in fine pieces, put them in a saucepan with a small quantity of water --barely cover them--add some butter, pepper, salt, and let them boil about six minutes; thicken them with cream. Toast a slice of bread very neatly, and lay it in a dish, and pour the mushrooms over it. This is a very cheap dish, and very easy to prepare. QUINTESSENCE OF MUSHROOMS. Sprinkle a little salt over your mushrooms, let them remain three hours; then mash them well, and let them lie till the next day, then strain off the liquor that will flow from them, put it in a saucepan, and boil it down to half its original quantity. It is best without spice. SORREL SAUCE. Wash some fresh bunches of sorrel, put it in a stewpan, that will just hold it, with a bit of butter the size of an egg, cover it, set it over the fire for a quarter of an hour, pass the sorrel, with the back of a wooden spoon, through a sieve, season it with pepper, salt, and a tea-spoon barely full of sugar, make it hot, and serve it up under lamb, veal, or sweetbreads. It is quite a domestic sauce, and very good. ONION SAUCE. Peel some onions and lay them in salt and water for at least an hour, then wash them and put them in a kettle with plenty of water; boil them until they are very tender, pass them through a sieve, add a little butter, pepper, and a small quantity of made mustard. OYSTER CATSUP. Take fresh oysters, if you can get them, scald them in their own liquor, pound them in a mortar. To a pint of oysters add a pint of wine, an ounce of cayenne; let it boil up, skim it, and rub through a sieve; when cold, bottle it, and seal it with wax. INDIANA SAUCE. One ounce of scraped horseradish, one ounce of mustard, one of salt, half an ounce of celery seed, two minced onions, and a half ounce of cayenne, add a pint of vinegar; let it stand in a jar a week, then pass it through a sieve, and bottle it up securely. CUCUMBERS A LA MODE. Get them fresh and green, cut them in long slices, sprinkle them with salt and pepper, and fry them in sweet lard. STEAMBOAT SAUCE. Mince up a hard-boiled egg very fine, also a few slices of beets, add to these some salt and pepper, stir them well, and garnish with them. FIGS. Take six pounds of sugar to one peck (or sixteen pounds) of the fruit. Scald, and remove the skin of the fruit in the usual way. Cook them over the fire, their own juice being sufficient, without the addition of water, until the sugar penetrates and they are clarified. They are then taken out, spread on dishes, flattened, and dried in the sun. A small quantity of syrup should be sprinkled over them while drying; after which, pack them down in boxes, treating each layer with powdered sugar. The syrup is afterward concrecated and bottled for use. Brown sugar may be used, a large portion of which is retained in the syrup. TOMATO KETCHUP. Take a gallon of skinned tomatoes, four tablespoonsful of salt, four of black pepper, and three of mustard. Grind these articles fine, and simmer them slowly in sharp vinegar, in a pewter basin, three or four hours, and then strain it through a wire sieve, and bottle for use. It may be used in two weeks, but improves much by age. Use enough vinegar to make half a gallon of liquor when the process is over. TOMATO SAUCE, FOR PRESENT USE. Pour boiling water on the tomatoes, take the skin off, cut them up in pieces, and cover them all over with loaf-sugar. No more should be prepared than you wish to use at once, as they will not keep good. TOMATO OMELET. Skin and stew your tomatoes, then beat up half a dozen new-laid eggs, the yolk and white separately; when each is well beaten, mix them with the tomatoes; put them in a pan and heat them up, you have a fine omelet. PRESERVED TOMATOES--NO. I. Take them when quite small and green, put them in cold clarified syrup with an orange. Simmer gently over a slow fire two or three hours. Equal weight of sugar and tomatoes, and more than water enough to cover the tomatoes used for the syrup; boil down quite thick. PRESERVED TOMATOES--NO. II. Pour boiling water on the tomatoes, and take the skins off; then add the weight of them in sugar, and some sliced lemons; take a cup of ginger and tie it up in a bag loosely, and boil it in half a pint of water; put this into the preserves, and boil the whole three hours, skimming off the froth as it rises. When cold, it is ready for use. GRAPE SYRUP. Fill a stone pot with ripe grapes, pour in enough molasses to cover them, set them in a cool place, in a pan, as, in working, it may run over. It will be ready for use in a month. It is useful through the winter, for making mince-pies. APPLE PRESERVES. Take some pleasant sour apples, pare them, take the core out at the bottom, and leave the stem in; make a syrup, of white sugar and water, to half cover the apples; bake or boil them till they are just done through. Serve them up whole, with sugar and cream. TO PRESERVE WHORTLEBERRIES. Put the berries in a bottle, and then cork and seal it, place the bottle in a kettle of cold water, and gradually let it boil. As soon as it boils, take it off and let it cool; then take the bottles out and put them away for winter use. Gooseberries, plums, and currants, may be preserved in the same manner. ORANGE SALAD. Cut the large oranges crosswise, lay them neatly in a glass dish, sprinkle them with two ounces of powdered loaf-sugar, pour over a table-spoonful of brandy, or a glass of wine. This dish ought not to be prepared long before it is required. PEACH SALAD. Peel four or five ripe, juicy peaches, and slice them neatly, and have each slice as much alike as possible in shape and thickness; lay them in a glass dish, and cover them with loaf-sugar, pour over them a spoonful of brandy or wine; turn them off the top to the bottom, so they may all be seasoned alike. The most of fruits may be prepared in the same way; but never mix fruits. STRAWBERRY SALAD. Take a quart of strawberries, cover them with loaf-sugar, and sprinkle them with wine. TOMATO SALAD. Slice fine, ripe tomatoes very thinly, and sprinkle with salt; let them lie a minute or so, then add pepper and vinegar, and a tea-spoonful of loaf-sugar. MINT SAUCE. Take two table-spoonsful of mint, chopped very fine, two table-spoonsful of loaf-sugar, two table-spoonsful of vinegar; mix it all well together, and add a little melted butter. SANDWICHES. Cut slices of light loaf bread, very thin and even, line them with cold meat of any kind you may prefer, or cheese, sausage, tongue, or hard eggs pounded with butter; they may be seasoned with curry powder, mustard, pepper, and salt. POWDERED HORSERADISH. Cut it in thin slices, (late in the fall,) put it in a stove, dry it well, then pound it in a mortar, and bottle it closely. CHAPTER V. PICKLING. TO PICKLE CUCUMBERS. The cucumber should be small, and free from spots. Keep them in strong salt and water nine days, stirring them twice every day. Then pour the water off, cover the cucumbers with vine leaves; boil the water, and pour it over them. As soon as it gets cold, boil it again, and continue this process till they are of a fine green, which will be in about five times pouring. Keep them covered with something close over the vine leaves, to keep in the steam. Drain them from the salt water. Take, to every two quarts of good vinegar, an ounce of black pepper, a pod of red pepper, a handful of salt, a few cloves, half an ounce of mace, six teaspoonsful of ground ginger, and two or three cloves of garlic. Boil this compound five minutes, and pour it on the pickle. Tie it down close. A stone jar is the best vessel for pickles. MANGOES. Take small muskmelons of a late growth, and cut a small piece out of the side of each. Scrape out the inside, and wipe all the furze from the outside; put them in salt and water nine days, and prepare them for the vinegar in the same way you do cucumbers. When they are ready, fill them with small pieces of horseradish, ginger, mace, cloves, black pepper, nasturtion-seed, nutmeg, very small onions, or garlic, and white mustard-seed. Sew in the piece that was cut out. Boil good vinegar a few minutes and pour it on them. If they are not sufficiently green, put a tablespoonful of alum to every three quarts of vinegar. This adds to the consistence, as well as to the color of green pickles. If you use a copper, brass, or bell-metal vessel, be sure not to let the vinegar cool in them, as it would be rendered poisonous. Common earthen ware should not be used for pickles. ONIONS. Put them into salt and water for nine days, changing the water every day. Then take them out and pour fresh boiling salt and water over them; cover them close till they are cold, and repeat the process once more. Drain them when cold, and put them into glass jars. Fill them with vinegar, and put in some horse-radish, cloves, mace, and black pepper. A tea-spoonful of olive oil will keep them white. Cover them very closely, and keep them in a dry place. YELLOW PICKLE. Take six firm heads of cabbage, take off all the loose leaves, quarter them and dip them separately in a kettle of boiling water; lay them in dishes, and sprinkle them well with salt; lay them in the sun until the water is pretty well drained from them, then dip them separately in strong, boiling vinegar; let them be well saturated. Prepare your spice; an ounce of cinnamon, an ounce of cloves, one of mace, black pepper, orange-peeling, and ginger; let them be all well pounded. Three ounces of white mustard-seed, scald them in vinegar and let them stand and soak at least two hours; a half pound of horseradish, nicely sliced in long narrow pieces, these must be scalded also, as you do the mustard-seed. Then take a stone jar, put in a layer of cabbage, a layer of spice, horseradish, and mustard-seed, and a bag of tumerick, about as large as a hickory nut, then another layer of cabbage, then one of spice, horseradish, mustard-seed, and another bag of tumerick. On the top layer put a bag holding a half ounce of tumerick, then fill up with cold vinegar; have your jar air-tight, and do not disturb it for at least three months; they are always best when undisturbed, for at least a year. I have seen pickles made by this receipt, seven years old, which were delicious. Pickles should always be kept a long time before using them. Onions may be added to the above--they make a very fine yellow pickle. TO PICKLE TOMATOES. Wash a peck of very green tomatoes, wipe them with a coarse napkin, then slice them as fine as it is possible for a knife to cut, sprinkle them with salt, and lay them in a sieve to drain. Slice a half peck of onions, and scald them in salt and water; have ready allspice, white mustard-seed, black pepper, six red pepper-pods, cinnamon, cloves, horseradish, ginger. Take a large stone jar, put in a layer of tomatoes, then lay on some of each spice and horseradish, then layer of onions, then another of tomatoes, let the last layer be spiced well, and then fill it up with strong cider vinegar. An ounce of each kind of spice and a pint of cramped horseradish is sufficient to a peck of tomatoes. Try and have the jar air-tight. PICKLE RIPE TOMATOES. Take ripe and sound tomatoes, lay them in a stone jar, tie up spices in little bags, wet them in hot water, dissolve some salt in warm vinegar, after it is perfectly cool pour it on the tomatoes, put in the bags of spice, and fill it up with the strongest cold vinegar. Be very careful to keep your pickle tight and close, the air destroys them very soon. I have kept both the above tomatoes from one season to the other in the West. GREEN TOMATOES. Put them in salt and water, take them out in ten days, wash them in cold water, scald them in strong vinegar, lay them in a jar, put on each layer several pods of red pepper, cut up fine, then fill up the jar with cold vinegar. Cover up closely. LARGE, GREEN PEPPERS. Cut out the part that holds the stem, be very particular to cut them even, scrape them out, and lay them in salt and water two or three days; then wash them well in cold water, then lay them to drain. If you have a peck of peppers, prepare a large cabbage head thus: cut it up as you do for cold-slaw, very fine; use none but the whole part of the cabbage; a dozen large onions minced very fine, four or five young cucumbers cut in very small pieces, mix them together; add an ounce of allspice, ginger, a half ounce of cloves, cinnamon one ounce, and two ounces of white or black mustard-seed; scald these all well in barely as much vinegar as will cover them, then pour it in a stone vessel and let it cool, then take your peppers and fill them as full as possible, then sew on the stem, or the pieces you have cut out; put them in a jar and fill with cold, strong vinegar. PICKLE CHERRIES. To two quarts of cherries take a pound and a half of brown sugar, and two quarts of vinegar; lay your cherries in small glass jars or wide-mouthed bottles; boil the sugar and vinegar to a nice thin syrup; after it cools, pour it over the fruit; be sure and have them well covered with the syrup. Make them air-tight. Tomatoes, grapes, wild grapes, and damsons, or plums of any kind may be done the same way. Be sure and have them air-tight. PEACHES DOUCE ET AIGRE. Peaches are best peeled and sliced, when put up in this manner; take six pounds of peeled peaches and lay them immediately after they are peeled in small jars. Take four pounds of brown sugar, six quarts of strong vinegar, a few races of ginger, an ounce of cinnamon; boil it well, and after it forms a syrup, let it cool, and then pour it over the peaches. They will be fit to eat in four weeks. CUCUMBERS SLICED. Slice your cucumbers thin, lay some of them in a jar, sprinkle with pepper and salt, put in more cucumbers, sprinkle again with pepper and salt, so on until your jar is full; fill up with cold vinegar, make the jar air-tight; keep them in a cool place. TO PICKLE WALNUTS. Make a brine of salt and water, a quarter of a pound of salt to a quart of water; put the walnuts into this to soak, for at least a week; stick them through several times with a knitting-needle, so that the brine may penetrate; when they are softened put them in a stew-pan with some clean water, let them simmer gently; put them on a sieve to drain, then lay them on dishes, and let them stand in the air until they become black; this may take two days--then put them in a stone jar--let the jar be two-thirds full, and then fill with the following pickle: To a quart of the strongest vinegar put an ounce of black pepper, the same of ginger, of shallots, the same of salt, a half ounce of allspice, half ounce of cayenne. Put these in a stone jar, cover it with a bladder wetted with the pickle, tie over that some leather, and set the jar on a trivet by the side of the fire for three days, shaking it up three times a day, and then pour over the walnuts while hot; cover them well; tie the bladder and leather over the jar. The liquor from the pickle is the very best walnut catsup. CHAPTER VI. VEGETABLES. POTATOES. No vegetable is more wholesome, more easily prepared, and more easily procured in this country than potatoes. They should never be wet until they are to be used; and should not be pared or cut unless they are very large. You should always try to have them nearly of an equal size, as the small ones will get done before the large. They should not be boiled in too much water; merely allow enough water for the potatoes to be barely covered when they are done boiling. Let them boil over a moderate fire, and then simmer them by the side of the fire till they are soft enough to admit a fork, then pour off the water used, cover the saucepan, and set them far enough from the fire to prevent burning. If you let them remain in the water after they are done, they will not be good. The moisture will soon evaporate after the water is poured off, and they will be dry and mealy. Potatoes are very good steamed, but it takes twice the time. Some like them sent to the table with the skins on, and they are certainly best this way. MASHED POTATOES. When your potatoes are thoroughly boiled, drain and peel them, pick out the specks and rub them through a cullender. To a pound of potatoes, put half an ounce of butter, and a tablespoonful of cream. Mix them well together. BAKED POTATOES. Prepare them as the foregoing; make it into a round shape in a baking dish; egg the top with yolk of egg, and brown very slightly. Take them out of the oven, make a little hole as large as an egg in the top, and fill it with melted butter. ROASTED POTATOES. Wash and dry your potatoes, have them all of a size, and put them in a tin oven or a cheese toaster. Do not put them too near the fire. Large potatoes require two hours to roast them. POTATOES AND ONIONS. Boil the onions, rub them through a sieve, and mix them with potatoes prepared as in mashed potatoes. Regulate the quantities to your taste. CABBAGE. Is best boiled with middling or side of bacon, never fill the pot up with cold water after it has commenced boiling; a tea-spoonful of saleratus improves boiled cabbage, when they are old. Always dish the cabbage first, and after you skin the bacon lay it on top. Corn bread is a necessary appendage to bacon and cabbage. COLD-SLAW. Cut your cabbage beautifully, in fine threads. You must not use any but the white heart of the cabbage; put it in a steamer over boiling water two minutes, then lay it in a deep dish. Boil two eggs very hard, chop them up fine, take a big spoonful of curry powder if you have it, if not, take some catsup of some kind, a little pepper, salt, and a pint of vinegar; heat these hot, and pour it over the cabbage. CABBAGE ANOTHER WAY. Boil it in salt and water, drain it on a sieve, dress it with butter and pepper. FRIED CABBAGE. Cut it up fine, have a small quantity of hot lard in a fry pan, put the cabbage in, then a cup of water, cover it up closely; dress it with salt and pepper. TO MAKE SOUR KRAUT. Take a strong wooden vessel that will not leak, and large enough to hold sufficient for the consumption of a family during the winter. Take off the green leaves from the cabbage heads, and chop the cabbage into small pieces, pressing them closely, and between every two or three layers of cabbage, scatter an handful of salt, until the cask is full. Then cover it, and place a heavy weight in it, and let it stand in a warm place four or five days. Then remove the cask to a cool situation, and keep it always covered up. Anise-seed, strewed among the layers in the course of preparation, communicates to it a peculiar and agreeable flavor. It requires two hours to boil. CHAPTER VII. BREAD. GOOD bread is essential to health, and to domestic comfort. Experience is the best teacher as it regards this, as great allowance must be made for the variety of baking apparatus; and, as it is necessary not to let the bread rise too much, and no direction can be given in these particulars which can supply the place of experience; but one thing is certain: good bread can never be made without sweet yeast. Flour should always be sifted before it is used for anything. GRAHAM BREAD. Take two quarts of unbolted flour, put some salt in, and two table-spoonsful of brewer's yeast, mix it into a stiff dough with warm water. Let it rise four or five hours, then work into it enough white flour to make it stick together well, and bake it in a quick oven. COMMON BREAD. Take two quarts of flour, rub into it two table-spoonsful of lard, a little salt; add two tablespoonsful of brewer's yeast, and work it up with warm milk. Knead it till it is very smooth, set it to rise six hours, work it over and make it into rolls. Bake in a quick oven. POTATO YEAST. Boil a handful of hops half an hour, in two quarts of water. Take ten boiled potatoes and mash them very fine, and strain the water from the hops on them as soon as it has boiled. Mix into it a pint of flour, and two table-spoonsful of salt. When it is lukewarm, add a pint of good brewer's yeast, and let it stand six hours to rise. Strain it through a cullender, and put it into a close stone vessel. It will keep a week in summer, and longer in winter. HOME-MADE YEAST. Take a handful of hops, put them in three pints of water, and boil half an hour. As soon as you take it off, strain half the water on a pint of flour, mix it well, and then pour on the rest of the water. When it is almost cool, put in a cup of yeast, half a cup of molasses, and some salt. CRACKERS. Rub two ounces of butter into a quart of flour. Put in a tea-spoonful of saleratus, and half a tea-spoonful of salt. Make it up with milk enough to have a stiff dough. Beat it for half an hour, or till it is quite smooth; roll it out thin, and cut it into small cakes; stick them with a fork, and bake them in a moderate oven. BREAD-SPONGE. Put a quartern of flour into a tray with two tea-spoonsful of salt, put in four table-spoonsful of yeast, a pint of milk, lukewarm, and stir it, just to make of it a thin batter, then strew a little flour over the top; cover it, and set it in a warm place till next morning; then make it into dough; add half a pint of warm milk, knead it for ten minutes, and then set it in a warm place for an hour and a half. Then knead it again, and it is ready, either for loaves or rolls. Bake them according to the size. FRENCH ROLLS. Put a pint of milk into three quarts of water. In winter it should be pretty hot, but only milk-warm in summer. Lay a pint and a half of good brewer's yeast into a gallon of water, the night before. Pour the yeast off into the milk and water, and then break in rather more than a quarter of a pound of butter. Work it well, and then beat up two eggs and stir them in. Mix a peck and a half of flour with the liquor, making the dough stiffer in winter than in summer; mix it well, and the less it is worked, the better. Stir the liquor into the flour, and, after the dough is made, cover it with a cloth, and let it stand to rise while the oven is heating. When the loaves have lain in a quick oven about a quarter of an hour, turn them over and let them lay another quarter of an hour. PUMPKIN BREAD. Take two quarts of sweet pumpkin, stewed dry; two quarts of fine Indian meal, two tea-spoonsful of salt, a table-spoon heaping full of lard, and mix them up with sufficient hot water to make it of the consistence of common corn-meal dough. Set it in a warm place, two hours, to rise, and bake it in a pan, in a moderate oven. It will take an hour and a half to bake. SALLY LUNN. Take one pint of milk, quite warm, a tea-cupful of yeast; put them into a tray with sufficient flour to make it into a stiff batter. Let it stand two hours to rise, then add two ounces of sugar, dissolved in a tea-cupful of warm milk; rub a quarter of a pound of butter into some flour. Add flour sufficient to make it into dough; let it stand half an hour. Then make it into a loaf, let it stand a little while to rise, and bake it in a moderate oven, Split it across three times while it is hot, and put plenty of fresh butter between. It is then ready for the table. CREAM OF TARTAR BISCUIT. Take a quart of flour, mix into it two tea-spoonsful of cream tartar, two tea-spoonsful of salt, a table-spoonful of lard; then take a pint of warm water and a tea-spoonful of soda, knead it into the flour, and work it well. Roll it out about half an inch thick, and cut the biscuit with a round cutter, or into square pieces. WHEAT MUFFINS. Beat up two eggs with a pint of sweet milk; add a table-spoonful of yeast and some salt. Beat in flour enough to make a thick batter, and let it rise five or six hours. Then bake in rings. CORN MUFFINS. Take a quart of corn meal, an ounce of butter, rub them together. Beat it up with a quart of milk, two table-spoonsful of yeast, one of molasses, and a little salt. Let it rise four or five hours, and bake in muffin rings. BUCKWHEAT CAKES. Take a quart of buckwheat flour, a table-spoonful of yeast, and a teaspoonful of salt. Mix it up with enough warm water to make a thick batter. Cover it, and let it stand all night. If it is at all sour in the morning, add a tea-spoonful of saleratus. Cakes of this kind may be made of unbolted flour. They are equally good, and much more wholesome. WAFFLES. Take a quart of flour, put into it a teaspoonful of salt, and three table-spoonsful of brewer's yeast. Mix it gradually with a quart of warm milk, having in it a table-spoonful of melted butter. Let it rise, and then put two eggs, well beaten, into it. Grease the waffle-irons well each time they are used. MRS. COLLINS' BATTER CAKES. Take four eggs, beat them separately, and to the yolks add a pint of rich milk, beat in enough flour to make it into a thick batter. Put in a tea-cupful of sour cream, a tea-spoonful of saleratus; add this to the batter, mix in lightly the white of the eggs, beaten to a froth, and bake on a hot griddle like buckwheat cakes. TO MAKE CORN DODGERS. Sift some Indian meal, throw into it a little salt, pour enough hot water over it to make it stick well together; work it well with the hand, make it into rolls, and bake in a moderate oven. TO MAKE TOAST. Cut your bread a third of an inch thick; stale bread is the best. Toast it a light brown on each side. Put a pint of rich milk on the fire, add to it half a pound of butter; when the butter is well melted, dip each slice of the toast in the liquor, lay it in a dish, and pour the rest of the liquor over it. Put the cover on the dish, and send it to the table. CORN MEAL BATTER CAKES. Into a quart of sour milk, stir a table-spoonful of well-pounded saleratus, beat into it five eggs, two or three tea-spoonsful of salt, and as much corn meal as will make it into a stiff batter. Bake on a griddle like buckwheat cakes. EGG BREAD. (Mrs. Sanders' way.) Warm a quart of sweet milk, melt a quarter of a pound of butter in it, add four eggs and a tea-spoonful of salt, beat it well, and put in enough meal to make a stiff batter. Bake it in a tin pan half an hour. Or, make it a little stiffer with meal and drop it with your hand, in lumps, in a quick oven. MRS. OURY'S LIGHT BATTER CAKES. Take a lump of light dough, soften it with warm water till it comes to a thick batter, beat four eggs separately, add them to the batter, and bake on a hot griddle. CORN MEAL MUSH. Fill an iron pot as full of water as you think will make mush enough for the occasion, salt it to your taste, sift the meal, and begin to stir it in as soon as the water boils, but not before. Let the meal fall slowly and lightly through your fingers; after putting in two or three handfuls, let it boil a minute or two, still stirring; after it boils well, stir in more until it is thick enough. What is better for supper than milk and mush? CORN PONE "Carry me back to old Virginny." Pour boiling water on three pints of sifted corn meal, beat it up to a batter with a wooden spoon, add two tea-spoonsful of salt. Let it stand until cool, then put it in a tray and work it well with your hands, adding two quarts of dry corn meal, until it is pretty stiff. Have your oven very clean and well buttered, warm it through, and fill it more than half full. Set it in a warm place, and let it stand twelve hours; it will, in that time, sweeten and become light. When ready to bake, put the oven over bright coals, heat the top on the fire, and when you place it on the oven, cover it with hot coals. Let it bake slowly, and when done, set it by and let it cool in the oven. This bread cannot be baked in anything but an oven, ( Dutch oven, ) or deep skillet; if baked any other way, it would not, nor could not, be CORN PONE. BUTTERED BISCUIT. Work one pound of butter into seven pounds of flour; wet it up with one quart of warm water and half a pint of good yeast, and a table-spoonful of salt; work it very hard until it is smooth and light. Bake in a brisk heat. NAPLES BISCUIT. To six ounces of moist sugar, add six ounces of white, a tea-cupful of water, beat the yolks and whites of twelve eggs together, just enough to break them. Put the sugar in a saucepan, and put it on the fire; take it off before it comes to a boil, put the eggs in, and stir till cold; have your tins ready, fill nearly full of the batter, sugar over the tops, bake quickly. RATAFIAS. Take three ounces of sweet almonds, boil and skin them, put them in a mortar with a pound of loaf sugar and the whites of two eggs; beat it all together well, drop them out upon coarse, white paper. Have them all the same size, about an inch apart; bake on tins; when cold, take them off the paper. CHAPTER VIII. ROASTING. YOU should be careful, in roasting, to have a suitable fire; clear and steady, or brisk, according to the size and quality of the meat. Roasting must be done in the open air, and the joint should be well balanced on the spit. Place it near enough to the fire to imbibe heat quickly, or it will be dry and shriveled; and you should begin to baste it as soon as it is warm. It is better not to sprinkle too freely with salt while roasting; the strongest meat should be very slightly sprinkled, the others not at all. The time required to roast a joint varies according to the nature of the meat, the time it has been kept, and the size of the joint. Twenty minutes to a pound, in summer, and twenty-five or thirty in winter, is a good rule. When the gravy begins to be clear, and the smoke draws toward the fire, the meat is not far from being done. SIRLOIN OF BEEF. A sirloin of about fifteen pounds will require to be before the fire about three and a half or four hours. Take care to spit it evenly, so that it may not be heavier on one side than on the other. Put a little clean dripping into the dripping pan, baste it well as soon as it is put down, and every quarter of an hour during the time it is roasting, till the last half hour. Then make some gravy for it, stir the fire to make it clear, sprinkle a little salt over it, baste it with butter, and dredge it with flour. Let it go a few minutes longer, till the froth rises, take it up and put it on the dish. Garnish it with hillocks of horseradish, finely scraped. The Yorkshire pudding is an excellent accompaniment. It is made in this way: Take six table-spoonsful of flour, three eggs, a tea-spoonful of salt, and a pint of milk; this makes a tolerably stiff batter. Beat it well, so as to prevent its being lumpy. Put a dish under the meat, and let the drippings drop into it till it is well greased, then pour in the batter. When the upper surface is brown, turn it, and brown the other side. If the pudding is an inch thick, it will take two hours to bake it. A SUCKING PIG. The pig should be killed in the morning, and requires very careful roasting. The ends must have more fire than the middle, and, for this purpose, some persons keep an iron to hang before the middle part, called a pig iron; but, in the absence of this, a common flatiron may be used. For the stuffing, take about five ounces of the crumbs of stale, light bread, and rub it through a cullender. Cut up a large onion into small pieces, also a handful of sage, and mix these with an egg, some pepper and salt, and a small piece of butter. Stuff the pig with this, and sew it up. Lay it to the fire, and baste it with salad oil till it is quite done. Do not leave it a moment. Before you take it from the fire, cut off the head, and part that and the body down the middle; chop the brains very fine, together with some boiled sage leaves, and mix them with the juices that run from the pig when you cut its head. Lay the pig back to back in the dish, with one half the head on each side, and the ears, one at each end. When you cut off the feet, leave the skin long round the legs. When you first lay the pig before the fire, rub it over with fresh butter, or salad oil, and in ten minutes dredge it well with flour. Let it remain an hour, and then rub it off with a soft cloth. TO ROAST A TURKEY. Put the stuffing in under the breast, where the craw was taken out. Dredge the turkey well with flour, and baste it with melted butter. Keep it at a distance from the fire for the first half-hour, that it may warm gradually, then put it nearer, and when it is plumped up, and the steam draws near the fire, it is done nearly enough. Then dredge it lightly with flour, and baste it gradually with melted butter. A very large turkey will require about three hours to roast thoroughly. It is better to keep a turkey several days before you dress it. STUFFING FOR VEAL, ROAST TURKEY, &c. Mince a quarter of a pound of beef-suet, or marrow, the same weight of bread-crumbs, some parsley, a small quantity of grated lemon peel, and a little grated nutmeg. Add some pepper and salt, and pound it well with two eggs. For boiled turkey, add the soft part of a dozen oysters, and a little grated ham or tongue. STUFFING FOR A GOOSE OR DUCK. Chop about two ounces of onion very fine, an ounce of green sage leaves; mix these with four ounces of bread-crumbs, an egg, and a little pepper and salt. TO ROAST A SADDLE OF VENISON. To preserve the fat, make a paste of flour and water, as much as will cover the venison; wipe the meat dry, rub some butter over a large sheet of paper, and cover the venison with it; then roll out the paste about three-quarters of an inch thick, and lay this all over the fat side, and cover it well with three or four sheets of strong, white paper, and tie it down securely. Have a strong fire, and baste the venison as soon as you lay it down to roast. It must be well basted all the time. A quarter of an hour before it is done, the string must be cut, and the paste carefully taken off; then baste it with butter, dredge it lightly with flour, and, when the froth rises, and it is a light brown color, send it up, with gravy in one boat, and currant jelly sauce in the other, or plain currant jelly. It takes about four hours to thoroughly roast a saddle of venison. THE HUNTER'S DELIGHT. Cut slices from the ham of a deer, lay them on a dresser, beat them as you would beef-steak, season them with salt, pepper, cloves, mace, and nutmegs, then dip them in a rich egg batter. Take soft bread-crumbs, some of the venison minced fine, a little beef-suet, sweet herbs, and strew all these over the collops; roll them up, put them on skewers, and roast them. Make a rich gravy with the minced meat and herbs, some butter, pepper, salt, cloves, and pour it over the roasted delights. ROAST OYSTERS. Roast your oysters over a clear, hot fire, till they are done dry, do not burn them, but turn them out in a plate, without their liquor, then put some butter, pepper, and a little vinegar over them. TO ROAST A SPARE-RIB. Rub your ribs with salt, pepper, and sage, set the bone side next the fire, bake very slowly, put a lump of butter and some water in a dripping pan, dredge on a little flour, and baste it frequently; when it is pretty well done on that side, turn it around, and so continue until it is done; it will take two hours, at least, to roast thoroughly, and is very fine when well done. ROASTED, OR BAKED HAM. Parboil a ham, if very salt, change the water, draw off the skin, set it before the fire, or on a stove, for at least half an hour, let the fire be very moderate, then set it off, baste it with a small lump of butter, grate a stale cracker thickly over it, sprinkle it with wine, or a little sweetened vinegar, put it back, let it roast slowly for an hour, and then serve it with sauce. Champagne wine sauce is very fashionable with roasted or baked ham. CHAPTER IX. BROILING, ETC. CLEANLINESS is extremely essential to this mode of cookery. Keep your gridiron quite clean between the bars, and bright on the top. When it is hot, wipe it well with a linen cloth. Just before you use it, rub the bars with clean mutton suet, to prevent the meat from being marked by the gridiron. A brisk and clear fire is highly necessary, so that you may give the meat that browning which constitutes the perfection of broiling. Be very attentive to take it off the moment it is done, and do not hasten anything that is broiling, for fear of smoking it. Let the bars of the gridiron be hot throughout, and yet not burning hot on the surface. TO BROIL BEEFSTEAKS. Try to have your steaks cut of an even thickness throughout, and throw a little salt and pepper on them. Do not beat them, unless you suspect they will not be tender. Have a clear, brisk fire, make the gridiron hot, and set it slanting, to prevent the fat from dripping into the fire and making it smoke. Turn it once; it will be done in fifteen or twenty minutes. Rub some butter over it, and send it up, garnished with pickles and finely-scraped horseradish. TO BROIL A FOWL OR RABBIT. Cut it open down the back, wipe the inside clean with a cloth, and season it with pepper and salt. Have a clear fire, and set the gridiron at a good distance over it, lay the fowl on the inside, toward the fire, and broil it till it is a fine brown. Do not burn the fleshy side. Lay it on a hot dish, garnish it with parsley, and pour over it some melted butter. BEEF A LA MODE. Take a large piece of fleshy beef, cut into pieces of three or four ounces each; put two or three ounces of beef-drippings, and a couple of large onions, into a deep stewpan, and keep stirring it with a wooden spoon. When it has been on ten minutes, dredge it with flour, and keep doing so until you have stirred in enough to thicken it; then cover it with boiling water, adding it by degrees, and stirring it together. It will take about a gallon. Skim it when it boils, and then put in a drachm of ground, black pepper, two of allspice, and a few cloves. Let it stew very slowly for three hours. When you find the meat sufficiently tender, put it in a tureen, and it is ready for the table. HOW TO COOK HALF A CALF'S HEAD. Cut it in two, and take out the brains, wash the head well in several waters, and soak it in warm water ten minutes before you dress it. Put the head into a saucepan with plenty of cold water; when it is coming to a boil, and the scum rises, carefully remove it. Half a calf's head with the skin on, will take from two hours and a quarter to three hours; without the skin, an hour's less time will suffice. It must be stewed very gently until it is tender. Boil a small handful of sage leaves or parsley till it is tender, and chop it fine. Wash the brains well in two waters, put them in a pan of cold water, with a little salt in it, and let them soak for an hour, then pour away the cold, and cover them with hot water, and when you have cleaned and skinned them, put them into a stewpan with plenty of cold water. When it boils, take off the scum very carefully, and boil gently for fifteen minutes. Now chop them, not very fine, and put them into a saucepan with the sage leaves, and two table-spoonsful of melted butter, a little salt, and cayenne pepper. Stir them together, and as soon as they are well warmed, skin the tongue, trim off the roots, and put it into the middle of the dish, with the brains around it. Beat up the yolk of an egg, and rub it over the head with a feather, powder it with dried sweet-herbs and bread-crumbs, and brown it in an oven. Then pour a little melted butter over it. BEEF A LA MODE. Take a small round of beef, cut holes entirely through it, cut small strips of salt pork, roll them in curry powder, with thyme and summer savory, draw them entirely through the holes; at the top of each hole, sprinkle black pepper, cloves, and nutmeg, pounded together--some use orange-peel --put it in a pot, take five small onions, with a few cloves stuck in them, lay them around your beef, pour hot water on, barely enough to cover it. Let it simmer very moderately for five or six hours; if you like, you may add a pint of wine to the gravy, when you dish it. It is entirely delicious enough without the wine; but, as some prefer it, it is best to know when to add it. BEEF A LA MODE. Take a round of beef, tie it up tightly, to improve its shape, and have it as round as possible. Cut pretty large holes in it--large enough to admit a hen's egg. Take two table-spoonsful of sugar, one of black pepper, one of cloves, one of salt; rub the beef well with this mixture, the night before. Make a stuffing of bread-crumbs --the half of a small loaf--two ounces of butter, a tea-cupful of finely-chopped onions, a few tea-spoonsful of dried herbs, such as savory, sage, or parsley, a nutmeg, and a tea-cupful of very fine-minced ham, with two eggs; work this combination well together, and fill the holes in the round, and sew them up as closely as possible, cover it with water, and let it simmer four hours at least; when nearly done, you may add, if you like, a pint of wine. CHICKEN PIE. Carve, neatly, two young chickens, simmer them in salt and water at least half an hour. Lay a deep pan, or dish, with rich crust, put the chicken in with small pieces of pork, an ounce of butter, a tea-spoonful of black pepper, and half a nutmeg; sprinkle a little flour, or grated cracker, over the surface, pour the liquor, in which the fowl was boiled, over the whole, and bake it in a brisk oven or stove. POTATO PIE. Mash about a pound of boiled potatoes, a tea-spoonful of salt, a cup of sweet, rich cream, an ounce of butter; spread it in a baking pan, as you would crust; take cold ham, chicken, beef, or any tender meat, mince it neatly, and lay it in the pan, pour over it a few table-spoonsful of catsup, either walnut or tomato, then another layer of potatoes, then meat, finally a crust of potatoes. Bake it very gradually, but be sure that it is hot throughout. SAUSAGE-HOOSIER FASHION. Peel six potatoes, lay them in a stewpan with salt and pepper sprinkled over them, then cut in small pieces three small sausages, a small slice of lean ham, minced neatly, the crumbs of two crackers, or a slice of toasted bread, crumbled over the surface, another layer of potatoes, pour in a cup of water with melted butter; stew it slowly. BEEFSTEAK PIE. Take a large beefsteak, fry it slightly in very hot lard, cut it up, and let it cool. Line your pan with rich pie-crust, put in a layer of beef, salt, pepper, and catsup, then lay on some potatoes sliced very thin, with some very fine-chopped onions, a little parsley, then a layer of beef, then, again, potatoes; cover it with crust. Take the gravy that the steak was fried in, put into it a cup of cream and a lump of butter, say an ounce, well rubbed in browned flour; let it simmer a minute or two, then make a hole in the middle of the top crust, and pour in the gravy; if too thick, add a gill of water. Bake very slowly, and be very sure not to have it too brown. VEAL--WESTERN FASHION. Cut up your veal in neat, thin slices, beat it with a little salt and pepper sprinkled over it, put it in a saucepan, with a cupful of carrots, cut very fine, one of onions and turnips, cut the same way, a handful of brown bread-crumbs, a tea-spoonful of pepper, and an ounce of butter. Let it stew very slowly, and, when done, add some catsup. POT APPLE PIE. Pare and slice your apples, and put them in a pot. Make your crust of a half a pint of sour milk, sweeten it with a little molasses, add a little allspice, lay it over the top of your apples, leave an opening for the steam to pass through; put a little water to your apple, let it stew slowly, three-quarters of an hour; when done, take up your crust in one dish, spice and sweeten your apple in another; slice your crust, and cover it with your apples. To be eaten with butter, while warm. PORK APPLE PIE. Make your crust in the usual way; spread it over a large, deep plate; cut some slices of fat pork, very thin, also some slices of apples; place a layer of apples, and then of pork, with a very little allspice, and pepper, and sugar between--three or four layers of each--with crust over the top. Bake one hour. POT PIE. Take raised pie-crust, line a pot, or small Dutch oven, or a very deep stewpan, bottom and sides, with one-half an inch thickness; lay your fowls and pork, or veal, in very small pieces, (the pork is always best boiled first,) in, with salt, and pepper, and small pieces of butter, then potatoes, cut in very delicate slices, then a layer of crust, one, again, of meat, then potatoes, then crust. Then pour in the water in which the pork has been boiled, through a hole in the top crust. The pie must be baked very judiciously, or it will be a failure. It is, therefore, always best to cook the meat and fowl, unless they are very young and tender. Lay a sheet of foolscap over the top, to keep it from baking too rapidly. This is a most excellent dish for a harvest-party, or log-rolling; it can be made at any season of the year; in winter they are very fine, made of sweet-breads, tender-loins, and spare-ribs, finely sliced, or cut up. TO MAKE CURRY POWDER. One ounce of mustard, dried in the sun, or, on a sheet of white paper, by the fire, two of coriander-seed, finely-pounded, two of ginger, one ounce of cayenne pepper, half-ounce of black pepper, one ounce of cinnamon, half-ounce of cloves, half-ounce of cardimums, and a quarter of an ounce of cummin-seeds; pound them all, rub them well together, and put it in a clean, dry bottle, and cork it closely. When used, to be well shaken. FRICASSEE CHICKEN. Cut up two chickens, very neatly, put them in a saucepan with several slices of pork, with pepper and salt; let them boil until quite tender, then lay them out in a dish; take a table-spoonful of flour and a piece of butter as big as an egg, roll them together until they are well mingled; put it in the saucepan with the gravy, add a cup of cream, put the chicken back, and let it simmer together until it is done to a rich, light brown; lay some toasted crackers in a deep dish, and pour it in. BAKED BEANS--YANKEE FASHION. Take three pints of white beans, put them in cold water over night, take them out in the morning, wash and rub them well, then put them in a pot, and boil them until tender; then put them in an earthen dish. Cut a neat piece of pork, place it on the top of the beans; bake them slowly until well browned. This is a fine dish for a snowy day. BAKED TOMATOES. Scald your tomatoes, peel off the skins, lay them in a pan, sprinkle them with pepper and salt, then put a layer of bread-crumbs and butter, then, again, tomatoes, until your pan is full. One hour in a quick stove will bake it perfectly. Some love onions in this dish. VEAL CROQUETES Cut your veal in thin slices, fry it in sweet lard, and lay it to drain. Take one egg, half-pint of milk, tea-spoonful of salt, the same of pepper; dip the veal in this batter, and fry it again. After you have dished the veal, throw some chopped parsley in, and a few spoonsful of batter; ornament the dish with these. Young chickens are good, fried the same way. FRIED PARSNIPS. Cut them in long slices, dip them in flour, fry them in sweet, hot lard; put butter, pepper, and salt over them; cover closely, send them to the table quite hot. FRY OYSTERS. Dip them in batter, such as you are directed to make for veal cutlets; dip them in the batter, then in dry flour. Fry them quickly. FRY COLD POTATOES. Mash them up with salt, pepper, and butter, make them in balls, and fry them to a light brown. TO FRY BEEFSTEAKS. Cut the steak rather thin. Put some lard into an iron fryingpan, and, when it is hot, lay in the steaks, and keep turning them till they are done enough. VEAL CUTLETS. Cut them about half an inch thick, and flatten them with a cleaver, dip them in egg beat up with a little salt, and then in fine bread-crumbs, or flour. Fry them a light brown, in boiling lard. LAMB, OR MUTTON CHOPS. Dress them in the same way, and garnish with parsley and slices of lemon. PORK CHOPS. Cut them about half an inch thick, trim them neatly, beat them flat, put them into a stewpan with a bit of butter or lard. Let them have one fry; then beat two eggs with a little salt, and add to them some sage and onion, chopped fine; dip the chops in, one at a time, then sprinkle them with bread-crumbs, or flour, and fry them in hot lard till brown. OMELETTE. Break five or six eggs into a basin, and beat them well; add half a tea-spoonful of salt, two drachms of onions, chopped fine, or three drachms of parsley; beat it up well with the eggs. Then take four ounces of fresh butter, break half of it into little bits, and put it into the omelette. Put the other half into a fryingpan, and when it is melted, pour in the omelette, and stir it with a spoon till it begins to set. Turn it up all around the edges, and when it is a nice brown, it is done. Turn it out on a hot dish. ANOTHER OMELETTE. Boil the eggs ten minutes, and let them lie a little while in cold water. Then roll them lightly on the table, and they will peel without breaking; cut them in half, and have ready a sauce, made of two ounces of butter and flour rubbed together on a plate, and put it in a stewpan with three-quarters of a pint of new milk. Set it on the fire, and stir it till it boils. If it is not quite smooth, strain it through a sieve. Chop some parsley and a clove of eschallot very fine, and put it in your sauce. Season it with salt, to your taste; put in a little mace and lemon-peel. Place the eggs on a dish with the yolks upward, and pour the sauce over them. SADDLE OF LAMB--RUSSIAN FASHION. Roast a small saddle of lamb, keeping it pale, having had it covered with paper. Take ten good sized boiled potatoes, mash them with about two ounces of butter, a tea-spoonful of salt, a quarter of a tea-spoonful of pepper, a table-spoonful of chopped parsley, and a little grated nutmeg; mix all well together with a fork, adding a half a gill of milk, and one egg; when cold, roll them into a long shape, the size of plovers' eggs; egg and bread-crumb twice, and fry light colored; dress the saddle, and surround it with potatoes; make a sauce of melted butter, or tomato sauce, and then it is ready for the table. TO ROAST A PIG. Prepare some stuffing, the same as for a turkey; fill it full, and sew it up with a coarse thread; flour it well over. Be sure to have all the gravy that comes out of it, by setting pans under the pig, in a dripping pan, as soon as the gravy begins to run. When the pig is done enough, stir the fire up, take a coarse cloth with a piece of butter on it, and rub the pig over until the crackling is crisp, then take it up. Lay it in a dish, and, with a sharp knife, cut off its head, and then cut the pig into two parts, by cutting down the back; cut the ears off the head, and lay them at each end; cut the under jaw in two, and lay the parts on each side. Melt some good butter, take the gravy you saved and put in it, boil it, pour it in the dish with the brains bruised fine, and some sage, mixed together, and then send it to the table. If just killed, a pig will require an hour to roast; if killed the day before, an hour and a quarter; if a large one, an hour and a half. PRESSING MEATS. All meats intended to be eaten cold, should be pressed between two boards with a heavy weight. NECK OF LAMB, รก LA JARDINIERE. Roast the neck plain, as you would that of mutton, dish it up with sauce, and while it is roasting, cut one middling-sized carrot in small slices, the same quantity of turnip, and thirty button onions; wash all in cold water, put them in a small stewpan with one ounce of butter and half a teaspoonful of sugar, place on the fire till no liquid remains in the stewpan; add to it a gill of brown sauce, half a gill of broth, and a small bunch of parsley and sage-leaf. After once boiling, set it to simmer on the corner of the stove, skim off all the fat; when ready, taste if very palatable. It must be a nice brown color, and the sauce lightly adhere to the back of the spoon. Serve on the dish, and place the neck over. A DISH FOR MY FRIEND. Cut two young partridges in halves, season them lightly with a little pepper and salt; lay them in a stewpan containing two or three tea-spoonsful of salad oil, put a cover on the stewpan, place it over a moderate fire, until one side of the partridges is browned, then turn them over, proceeding the same until browned on both sides; then pour off part of the oil, and add half a table-spoonful of flour, which, well mix in, then add a glass of sherry, half a pint of broth, and twenty small button-mushrooms, (previously blanched,) let it simmer; skim off all the oil which rises to the surface, until the partridges are tender, and the sauce thick enough to adhere to them. Sauce the partridges upon a dish. JUGGED HARE. Put about half a pound of butter, with ten ounces of flour, into a stewpan, put it on the fire, and keep stirring it round until it has a yellow tinge; add a pound of bacon, cut in pieces, stir it a little longer on the fire. Cut up the hare, put it in, and stir it until it gets firm, add four glasses of port wine, and sufficient water to cover it; season, and add four cloves, and, when half done, about fifty button onions, or ten large ones, in slices, a table-spoonful of brown sugar; let it simmer until it is well done, and the sauce rather thick; sauce it over and serve it. If an old one, it will take about four hours. FORCE-MEAT BALLS, FOR MOCK TURTLE OR TURTLE. Pound some veal in a marble mortar, rub it through a sieve, with as much of the udder as you have veal, or about a third the quantity of butter; put some bread-crumbs into a stewpan, moisten them with milk, add a little parsley; rub them well together in a mortar, till they form a smooth paste; put it through a sieve, and when cold, pound and mix all together, with the yolks of three eggs, boiled hard; season it with salt, pepper, and cayenne, add to it the yolks of two raw eggs, rub it well together, and make small balls. Ten minutes before your soup is ready, put them in. BRAIN BALLS. Beat up up the brains of a calf in the way above directed. SUCCOTASH, รก LA TECUMSEH. Boil the beans from half to three-quarters of an hour, in water, a little salt. Cut off the corn from the cobs, boil the cobs with the beans, be sure and not cut too close to the cob. When the beans have boiled three-quarters of an hour, take out the cobs and put the corn in; let it, then, boil fifteen minutes, if the corn is tender, if not, twenty. Have more corn than beans. When it is boiled sufficiently, take a lump of butter as large as you think will be in proportion with the vegetables, roll it well in flour, put it in the pot with the beans, with black pepper enough to season it well. This is a real Western dish, and is very easily made. CORN IN A HURRY. Cut the corn from the cob, boil it in just enough water to cover it, a little salt and pepper; when well boiled, thicken it with butter and flour. TO MAKE TOMATO SAUCE. Boil five large tomatoes, after taking off the skins; add a lump of butter the size of an egg, a tea-spoonful of pepper, five cloves, and two teaspoonsful of sugar; stew slowly two hours. BOLOGNA SAUSAGE. Take a pound of beef-suet, a pound of pork, a pound of bacon, and a pound of beef and veal; mince them up very fine; season with a handful of finely-chopped sage leaves, small quantities of any other kind of sweet-herbs, and pepper and salt to your taste. Stuff it in a large, well-cleaned gut; Put it in boiling water, first pricking it, and boil one hour. TOAST AND CHEESE. Slice some stale, light bread thin, and toast it slightly on each side. Cut a slice of cheese quite thin, lay it on the bread, observing to pare off the rind. Do not let it be quite as large as the bread. Put the bread, with the cheese on it, in a cheese toaster, and stir it gently with a spoon while toasting. Season it with pepper, salt, and mustard. POUNDED CHEESE. Cut a pound of good, rich cheese into bits, add to it two ounces of fresh butter, and rub them together in a mortar till quite smooth. This is an excellent way of eating cheese, for dyspeptics. Spread it on bread, and it is very good. BONED TURKEY. Take a very sharp knife and cut around the bones of your turkey; use all your ingenuity as a carver, in order to preserve its original form, and the grace of its wings and legs; endeavor, also, to keep the skin whole. This is a very difficult task, and requires time and patience. Such things should never be done in a hurry. If you have not ample time to accomplish it, never attempt to have boned turkey. After cutting the wings, and breast, and around the legs, split the back half-way up, and the bones can then be drawn out. Take a small loaf of very stale bread, a half-pound of butter, one nutmeg, salt and pepper to your taste, sweet-herbs, mix it up with a couple of eggs, work it until very smooth. Then fill the skin of the turkey, and make it look as turkey-like as possible. Sew it up securely, so that the stuffing may not escape. Crack the bones which have been taken from the turkey, and two calf's feet, put them in a saucepan with an onion, one carrot, and a few cloves, pepper, and salt, also a few blades of mace. Let your turkey be placed on the bones and feet, add a quart of water, cover closely, and watch it constantly--for one moment of forgetfulness will make it a failure. Take the gravy and beat it up with the whites and shells of four eggs; strain it through the jelly-bag into a mould, and, when cold and hard, place it on the breast of the fowl. "Practice makes perfect." SHOULDER EN GALANTINE. Bone a fat shoulder of veal, cut off the ragged pieces to make stuffing. To make stuffing, take one pound of veal, one of salt pork; mince them very finely, season it well with salt, pepper, spices, and mix with it three eggs; spread a layer of this stuffing over the whole shoulder, an inch thick; on the top of that lay some thin slices of bacon, tongue, and some threads of carrots; then roll the shoulder lengthwise, tie it with a string, put it in a clean, white cloth. Take the bones of the shoulder, two calf's feet, slips of bacon, six carrots, six onions, some cloves, a little bunch of thyme and parsley; put them in a pot, your meat also, in the cloth, and boil steadily for three hours. Then press the liquor out of it, set it by to grow cold. Pass your jelly through a sieve; put two eggs in a pan, beat them well, and pour the strained liquor on them, mixing them both together; add a little of the spices; let them all boil half an hour, strain them through a napkin; put your shoulder on the dish, and pour the jelly over it. EGG BALLS. Boil four eggs for ten minutes, and put them into cold water; when they are quite cold, put the yolks into a mortar, with the yolk of a raw egg, a tea-spoonful of flour, the same of chopped parsley, as much salt as will lie on a shilling, and a little black pepper, or cayenne; rub them well together, roll them into small balls, (as they swell in boiling;) boil them a couple of minutes. FRIED PARSLEY. Let it be nicely picked and washed, then put into a cloth, and swung backward and forward till it is perfectly dry; put it into a pan of hot fat, fry it quick, and have a slice ready to take it out the moment it is crisp, (in another moment it will be spoiled;) put it on a sieve, or coarse cloth, before the fire to drain. FRIED BREAD-CRUMBS. Rub bread, which has been baked two days, through a wire sieve, or, you may rub them in a cloth till they are as fine as if they had been grated and sifted; put them into a stewpan with a couple of ounces of butter, place it over a moderate fire, and stir them about with a wooden spoon, till they are the color of a guinea; spread them on a sieve, and let them stand ten minutes to drain, turning them frequently. They are sent up with roasted sweet-breads, larks, partridges, woodcocks, or moor game. BRAISING. Braising is a mode of cooking decidedly French, as the article, or pan, used for the purpose, was invented and first used by them. A braised chicken, or turkey, is thought to be delicious by many, and is unrivaled when it makes its appearance at a city hotel. We shall, no doubt, soon, in the West, adopt this process of preparing roasts. A pan for the purpose has no substitute. It is indispensably necessary that cooks should be furnished with proper articles for the different departments of their science. For those who are prepared to braise, I will give a few receipts from a work just published. BRAISED TURKEY. Take two carrots, one onion, and one turnip, cut them in thin slices, with a little celery and parsley; lay three sheets of paper on the table, on these spread your vegetables, and pour over them two or three table-spoonsful of oil. Your turkey must be trussed; cover the breast with thin slices of bacon, and lay the back of the bird on the vegetables; a few slices of lemon on the breast to keep it white; tie the paper round with string, then put some paper over the breast and legs also, to keep them from burning. Roast it three hours, at a pretty good distance from the fire. BRAISED CHICKEN. If not convenient to roast, put a little bacon in a stewpan, then a chicken, an onion, half a carrot, some celery, two cloves, one table-spoonful of salt, a little pepper, and a quart of water; let it simmer till tender. After draining it well, dish up, take the string off, and pour over it any sauce you like. A most excellent dish. CHAPTER X. PRESERVES. IN general, fruit for preserving should not be excessively ripe, and should invariably be gathered when dry. The only way to be certain of keeping them without fear of spoiling, is to use sugar enough in making them, and to have them well secured from the air. The best way to do this, is to cover them with paper dipped in brandy, and bladder covers over that, or to seal them closely. They should stand without covers two or three days after they are made; they should be kept in a dry, cool place. Jelly-bags should be wrung out of boiling water just before they are used, and you should never press or squeeze fruit while straining it; always use a silver or a wooden spoon in preserving. It is better to put your preserves in small jars, as they are much more apt to spoil after being opened. Jelly should be put away in tumblers or jelly-glasses. It is ascertained that less than a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit, will not preserve the fruit any great length of time. You should never boil any fruit too long, as it hardens it, injures the color, and destroys the flavor. CLARIFIED SYRUP. Break two pounds of fine loaf-sugar into a well-tinned stewpan; pour over it a pint of cold water; when dissolved, set it over a moderate fire. Beat half the white of an egg, and put it into the sugar before it gets warm, stirring it well together; when it boils take off the scum, and boil it till no more scum rises; and then strain it through a napkin. Put it into a close-stopped bottle. TO PRESERVE STRAWBERRIES WHOLE. Take an equal weight of fruit and fine loaf-sugar. Place the fruit in a large dish, and sprinkle half the sugar over them in fine powder. Next day make a thin syrup with the remainder of the sugar; allow one pint of currant-juice to every three pounds of strawberries, and simmer them together an hour, TO BOTTLE DAMSONS, GOOSEBERRIES, &c. Take the fruit before it is over ripe, pick off the stalks, and put it into wide-mouthed bottles, taking care to put in none that are blemished. Shake the bottles, so that the fruit will be closely packed; stop the bottles with good corks, but do not put the corks in tight. Set them in a slow oven, four or five hours; be sure not to have the oven warm enough to burst the fruit. Take them out and drive in the corks quite tight. Set them in a dry place, with the mouths downward. TO PRESERVE PEACHES WHOLE. Take the cling-stone peaches before entirely ripe, wash them and put them in a jar; put a tablespoonful of pearlash to some soft water, and pour it over them boiling hot; cover them, and let them stand all night, then put them into cold water, wash and wipe them well; and to every pound of peaches, have a pound of loaf-sugar. Make a syrup of the sugar, and put the peaches in it while hot; simmer them slowly till they are done, take the peaches out, and boil the syrup down till it is quite thick. Put the peaches in jars, pour the syrup over them, and when cold cover them with paper dipped in brandy. PEAR SAUCE. Take a gallon of molasses and a quart of cider vinegar; boil them together in a brass kettle, not failing to skim the compound well. Add fourteen pounds of peeled and quartered pears, and boil slowly till done. Do not cover them while boiling. Season with race ginger. PLUM BUTTER. To a gallon of plums, add half a gallon of molasses; boil them together, and as soon as the plums begin to soften, stir constantly with a large spoon or ladle, taking out as many of the stones as possible. Keep it boiling till entirely smooth, and thick enough to keep. APPLE MARMALADE. Pare your apples and scald them repeatedly, till they are soft enough to mash from the core. Take equal weights of pulps and sugar; barely dip the sugar in water, and boil it till it is a thick syrup, skimming it well. Then add the pulps, and boil it on a quick fire fifteen minutes. APPLE JELLY. Peel and core the apples, and stew them till they are tender, with a pint and a half of water. Strain the liquor from the apples, and to every pint of juice add a pound of fine sugar. Flavor with grated lemon peel, and boil to a jelly. TO PRESERVE QUINCES. Take a peck of the fruit, and cover with cold water in a preserving kettle. Boil gently, until done soft; take them out, and, when cool, take off the skin and cut the core out, endeavoring to keep the fruit as whole as possible. Take their weight in loaf-sugar, boil it with a quart of water, skimming it till it is clear; put the fruit in, add two sliced oranges, boil half an hour; then take the fruit out, boil the syrup down, and pour it over the quinces. QUINCES ANOTHER WAY. Pare your quinces, and slice them thin; boil them in clear water till soft; then take them out and set them in the sun, in a shallow dish. Add their weight in sugar to the water in which they were boiled, and let it simmer three hours, skimming it well. Put the fruit in jars, and pour the syrup over it while hot. Cover with paper dipped in brandy. TO PRESERVE MAGNUM-BONUM PLUMS. Make two pounds of loaf-sugar into a weak syrup, pour it boiling over twelve pounds of plums, let it remain closely covered twelve hours; then peel them, and add two oranges, sliced thin. Take eight more pounds of loaf-sugar, dip it into water, and boil it till it is a good syrup. Put in the fruit with the first syrup, and simmer them gently until they look clear. Then put the fruit very carefully into jars, and pour the syrup over them. Some prefer not peeling the plums; when this is the case, drain them nicely from the first syrup, and prick them with a needle. BLACKBERRY JAM. Take a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit; boil the fruit, (after mashing it) for half an hour; then put in the sugar, and boil it together twenty minutes, stirring it all the time. TO MAKE STRAWBERRY, OR RASPBERRY JAM. Weigh equal quantities of fruit and sugar; mash the fruit up in the preserving kettle, with a wooden spoon. Add the sugar, and set it over a brisk fire; let it boil thirty minutes, stirring it and skimming it well. Put it away in jars, covered with paper dipped in brandy. TO PRESERVE PEACHES. Select good plum-peaches, pare, and cut them from the stone. Take equal weights of fruit and crushed sugar, lay them in an earthen vessel, and let them remain all night. In the morning, drain the fruit from the syrup, place it in dishes, and set it in the sun. Put the syrup into a preserving pan, and boil it three hours, skimming it well; then put the fruit into jars, and pour syrup over every two or three layers of fruit until the jar is filled; observe that the fruit must be entirely covered with syrup. Cover them tightly with brandied paper, and set them in a dry place. TO PRESERVE TOMATOES. Pour boiling water over the tomatoes, let them stand covered a few minutes, and peel them. Set them in the sun, while you make a syrup with an equal quantity of crushed sugar; when the syrup has boiled a little while, put in the tomatoes and let it simmer slowly for three hours. Cover them with brandied paper, in close jars; and set them in a dry place. CALF'S FOOT JELLY. Take four calves' feet, slit them in two, take away the fat from between the claws, wash them well in luke-warm water, then put them in a stew-pan and cover with water; let them boil gently six or seven hours, till the liquor is reduced to about two quarts, skimming it well; then strain it through a sieve, and skim off all the oily part on the surface; let it stand till the next day, when you can take off all the oily part without wasting any of the jelly. Then melt the liquor, and put into it a pound of loaf-sugar, two lemon-peels, the juice of six lemons, six whites and shells of eggs beaten together, and a bottle of sherry or Madeira wine; whisk the whole of it together till it is ready to boil, and then set it by the side of the stove and let it simmer a quarter of an hour. Strain it through a jelly-bag several times, until it is as clear as water; then put the liquor in moulds to cool. If the weather is warm, it will require ice. Hogs' feet are just as good as calves' feet. CURRANT JELLY. Gather the fruit, when it is quite ripe, on a dry day, pick it, and put it in a close jar. Set the jar in a vessel, pour cold water around it, and let it simmer over a gentle fire half an hour. Then pour the fruit into a jelly-bag, and let it be strained twice, but do not squeeze the bag. To each pint of juice add a pound and a half of crushed sugar; when the sugar is dissolved, boil it gently till it is perfectly clear. Stir it and skim it all the time. It will take twenty or thirty minutes. Pour it, while warm, into pots or glasses, and when cold cover them with paper wet with brandy. Jellies from other fruits are made in the same way, and cannot be preserved in perfection with a smaller quantity of sugar. BLANC MANGE. Take two ounces of Russia isinglass, one quart of new milk, half a pound of sugar, flavor it with rose, or peach-water. Boil it five minutes, let it cool till it is about milk-warm, then put it in moulds. GREEN GAGES. Take the gages when nearly ripe, cut the stalks about half an inch from the fruit, put them into cold water with a small lump of alum, set them on a slow fire till they simmer. Then put them into cold water, drain, and put them into a preserving kettle, pour over them enough clarified sugar to cover them, simmer them, and put them by in earthen or porcelain vessels till next day. Then drain them from the syrup, and boil the syrup with more sugar, till quite thick; put in the gages, and simmer them two or three minutes. Repeat this process two days. Then boil the syrup again, till it comes to a blow. Put the fruit in jars, and pour the syrup over it. Tie bladders over them, when cold, and put them away in a dry place. TO PRESERVE WATERMELON RINDS. Peel the rind, and cut it in any form that pleases your fancy. Lay it in cold salt and water, and let it remain twenty-four hours; then wash it and lay it in alum water another twenty-four hours; then take it out and drain. Take a pound of loaf-sugar to a pound of the rind, and make a syrup of the sugar, putting a tea-cupful of water to each pound of sugar. Skim it well, put the rind into it, and boil slowly till the rind is quite clear. Then take it out, lay it on a dish in the sun; boil the syrup till thick, adding the juice of two lemons and a few races of ginger. Put the rinds into jars, and pour over them the syrup. Citron is prepared in the same way. BRANDY PEACHES. Take the best cling-stone peaches, wash and wipe them, to get the furze off, prick them with a needle, and scald till you can pierce the skin with a straw. Make a syrup with loaf-sugar, taking three-quarters of a pound of sugar to every pound of peaches. Let the syrup boil till it is quite thick, then let it cool, and when it is milk-warm, put an equal quantity of good brandy with it, and pour it over the fruit. TO PRESERVE FRUITS WITH SUGAR. Prick your fruit several times with a fork, or large needle, to allow the sugar to penetrate the more freely. As you do them, throw them into a pan of cold water, which prevents their turning black at the places where they are pricked; add a little soda or potash, and set the pan by the side of the stove to heat gradually, but not to boil, or, at the most, only to simmer; when the fruit swims, take it out with a skimmer, and put it into cold water. If they are not green enough, drain them, and put them again into the water they were first boiled in, or else into a weak syrup; place them by the side of the stove to heat gradually, as before, skimming them sometimes. They may be covered with vine leaves. If salt is used in greening them, they will require to be soaked for a few hours, in clean, cold water, to again extract that portion which they have abosorbed, or it will spoil their flavor. RIPE PEACHES, WHOLE, WET. Get the finest ripe peaches, without any green spots on the skin; prick them all over with a large needle, to the stone; they may be cut in halves and peeled, or preserved with the skin on. Have a preserving pan on the fire, with water boiling, throw them in, and as they rise to the top, take them out and put them in cold water. If they are blanched too much, they will break; therefore it is better to have two pans of cold water to throw them in, so as those may be separated which are broken; drain them from the water, and put them in a thin syrup which is boiling on the fire; do not put in too many at a time; put in the hardest first, and give them about a dozen boils; take them out carefully, and put them in an earthen pan; give the soft ones only two or three boils; cover them with the syrup, and let them remain until the next day. Drain the syrup from them, add more sugar to it, and boil and skim it until it has acquired the degree of large thread; give the peaches two or three boils in it; the soft ones only require to have the syrup poured on them boiling hot. Repeat this for four or five successive days, and on the last day, boil the syrup to the large pearl. If you find, after they are finished, that the syrup has been boiled too high, mix a little powdered alum with a spoonful of water, and add to it. CHERRIES, WET OR DRY. Cut a quill as if you were going to make a pen, only, instead of its being sharp, it must be round at the end; hold the cherry in your left hand, and with the other, push the quill into it by the side of the stalk, as far as the top of the stone; then take hold of the stalk, and, with the aid of the quill, pull the stone out with the stalk, without breaking the fruit in pieces. Put sufficient clarified sugar into a preserving pan for the cherries to swim, boil it to the blow, and throw in the prepared fruit; let them boil in it for five or ten minutes, keeping them under the syrup by pushing them down with a flat piece of wood, having a handle at the back. The next day drain off the syrup, reduce it by boiling, put in the cherries, and boil them again for five minutes. Repeat this for four days, giving the cherries a few boils in the syrup each day. If they are required dry, drain the syrup from them, spread them on sieves, and dry on the stove at a good heat, turning them each day. Put only sufficient on the sieves so as just to cover the bottom. CHAPTER XI. PUDDINGS. GREEN PUDDING. BREAK eight eggs in a saucepan, a pound of powdered sugar, half a pound of very sweet butter, without salt; place the saucepan on a trivet over a few coals, stir it until it thickens, but be sure not to let it simmer; let it be taken off as soon as it becomes thick, to cool. Place a rich puff-paste in the dish, and pour in the pudding. Bake it an hour, in a moderately-heated stove or oven. CHICKEN PUDDING,--OLD VIRGINIA WAY. Take two very young tender chickens, cut them up, wash them in cold water, until perfectly clean and white, wipe them very dry with a linen napkin, roll them up closely, while you prepare your batter. Break eight eggs in a pan, a tea-spoonful of salt, and one of black pepper, a quarter of a pound of butter, eight heaped table-spoonsful of flour, one quart of rich milk; beat this mixture until it is very smooth and light; then put in the chickens, stir it well, and pour it in a pan well buttered, set it in a very hot oven or stove; after it commences to brown on top, put a sheet of white paper on the top. It will take more than one hour to bake it. MY GRANDMOTHER'S PUDDING. Take eight eggs, separate the yolks from the whites, and beat them well separately; put into the yolks, very gradually, eight table-spoonsful of flour, taking care to beat it perfectly smooth; add a pint of rich milk, and the whites of the eggs, and bake over a brisk fire. SAUCE FOR MY GRANDMOTHER'S PUDDING. To six table-spoonsful of sugar add ten of water, and heat it very hot; stir in half an ounce of butter and let it melt, but do not let it boil; when ready for use, season it with a little wine and nutmeg, or lemon-peel. A BOILED PUDDING. Take three eggs, and beat them up well; add slowly, a gill of milk or cream, two ounces of sugar, four ounces of flour, and a little nutmeg; taking pains to beat it into a very smooth batter. Then mince seven ounces of beef-suet very fine, and stir it in gradually, and two or three ounces of bread-crumbs. Beat it all together well, for some time, and pour it into a pudding-bag, and boil it three hours; let the water be boiling when it is put in, and do not let it cease boiling. This may be baked, if you will add half a pint more of milk. MRS. PRESTON'S PUDDING. Take good cooking apples, pare them, and cut the cores out, without breaking the apple. Set them in a baking dish, leaving a tolerable space between each apple; fill the spaces left, by cutting out the cores, with sugar, tightly packed in. Take eight eggs, leaving out three whites, five tablespoonsful of flour, and a pint of cream, or rich milk, beat well into a batter, and pour this into the dish over the apples. Bake in a slack oven, half an hour. Served up with sauce. SAUCE FOR MRS. PRESTON'S PUDDING. Melt together, a tea-cupful of fresh butter, and the same quantity of crushed sugar; add a wine-glass of Madeira or sherry, half a glass of brandy, some grated lemon-peel, and nutmeg. Let it stand a little while on the fire, but not long enough to boil. HARD SAUCE, FOR PUDDINGS OR DUMPLINGS. Take a pound of fresh butter, and a pound of crushed sugar; work them well together with a spoon, and put away in a cool place. CHESTNUT PUDDING. After blanching the chestnuts in boiling water, let them become dry; then put them in a mortar, with a stick of vanilla, pound them well together, sift it through a wire sieve into a saucepan, then break in (say to three dozen chestnuts ) eight eggs, beat them well together, boil a quart of milk and pour over it; stir it well over the fire, until it becomes thick and adhesive, add a few raisins, and a cup of wine, put it in a mould, place it in ice to get cold; it is best frozen. MINCE-MEAT PUDDING. Butter a pan, and paper it neatly, put a layer of cake, either sponge or plain pound cake, then put a layer of mince-meat, then a layer of cake, so on until nearly full; then pour over it some rich boiled custard. Bake fifteen minutes. CARROT PUDDING. Take a pint of flour, and a pint and a half of carrots, minced up very finely, or rather grated, half pound of raising , a tea-cupful of brown sugar; beat up two whole eggs and four yolks, with a gill of cream, pour it into the first mixture, beat it all well together, and boil or bake it. PIE-PLANT PUDDING. Peel and wash well, four dozen stalks of Rhubarb, and put them into a stewpan with a little cinnamon, and as much sugar as will sweeten it sufficiently. Stew it till reduced to a marmalade; then pass it through a hair sieve, add to it the yolks of four eggs, and one white, a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, half a nutmeg, some grated lemon-peel, and beat it all well together. Line the inside of a pie-dish, with good puff-paste, and put in the pudding. It takes half an hour to bake. BREAD PUDDING. Put a pint of bread-crumbs into a stewpan, with as much milk as will cover them, the peel of a lemon, and a little grated nutmeg, a small piece of cinnamon; boil about ten minutes; sweeten with powdered loaf-sugar. Take out the cinnamon, and put in four eggs. Beat all well together, and bake half an hour. ANOTHER BREAD PUDDING. Pour three-quarters of a pint of boiling milk over five ounces of bread-crumbs, and put a plate over the top, to keep in the steam. Let it stand twenty minutes, then beat it up quite smooth, with two ounces of sugar, and a little nutmeg. Beat up four eggs, leaving out one white, and add them to the pudding. Stir it all well together, and boil in one hour. CUSTARD PUDDING. Boil a pint of milk, and a quarter of a pint of good cream, thicken with flour and water, made perfectly smooth, till it is stiff enough to bear an egg, sweeten with crushed sugar; grate in a little nutmeg and the peel of a lemon. Add half a glass of brandy; then whip the whites of five eggs till quite stiff, and mix all gently together. Line a pie-pan with rich paste, and bake half an hour. Ground rice, and all puddings made of powders, may be prepared in this way. PLUM PUDDING. Six ounces of finely-chopped suet; six ounces of Malaga raisins, stoned; eight ounces of currants, nicely washed and picked; three ounces of bread-crumbs; three ounces of flour; three eggs; one sixth of a nutmeg; small quantities of mace and cinnamon, pounded finely; half a tea-spoonful of salt; half a pint of milk; four ounces of sugar; one ounce of candied lemon; half an ounce of citron. Beat the eggs and spice well together; mix the milk gradually with them, then the rest of the ingredients; dip a fine, close linen cloth, into boiling water, and put it in a hair sieve, flour it a little, and tie it up close; put it in six quarts of boiling water, and fill your pot as it wastes, with boiling water. Keep it boiling at least six hours. TRANSPARENT PUDDING. Take half a pound of loaf-sugar, put it in a saucepan; break on it eight eggs, beat them well together; then add half a pound of butter, beat it again; add a nutmeg, or a tea-spoonful of essence of lemon, set it on the fire, stir it till it thickens a little, but do not let it cook. Spread your pans, with rich crust, or puff-paste, pour it in, and bake in a moderate oven. TO MAKE NEWCASTLE PUDDING. Butter a mould, and stick it all round with cherries or raisins, fill it up with bread and butter, and steam it about half an hour. When you put it in a dish, to send to the table, have a rich sauce accompany it. GOOSEBERRY CHEESE. Pick them very carefully, both blossoms and stems, lay them in a basin of cold water for an hour, then bruise and pound them to pieces. Put them in a brass kettle, stir them over the fire until tender, then add a pound of loaf-sugar; then boil it until quite thick, and of a pale, clear green. Stir it all the time. TO MAKE FRUMENTY. Boil an approved quantity of wheat; when soft, pour off the water; keep it for use as it is wanted. The method of using it is, to put milk, to make it of an agreeable thickness, add sugar and nutmeg, and boil it gently for a minute. A DISH OF MACCARONI. Boil four ounces of maccaroni, till it is quite done, lay it on a sieve to drain; then put it into a saucepan with a gill of cream, a piece of butter about the size of an egg, rolled in flour, stew it a few minutes, and pour it in a plate, lay toasted cheese over it, and send it to the table hot. COCOANUT PUDDING. A quarter of a pound of grated cocoanut, the same quantity of pounded loaf-sugar, three ounces and a half of sweet butter, the whites of six eggs, a little brandy, a little rose-water; pour into your paste, and bake. N. B. Sweet potatoes are just as good as cocoanut, and much cheaper and easier procured. VERMICELLI PUDDING. Boil a pint of milk with lemon-peel and cinnamon, sweeten with crushed sugar, strain through a sieve, and add a quarter of a pound of vermicelli. Boil it ten minutes; then put in the yolks of five, and the whites of three eggs. Mix them well together, and steam it one hour and a quarter. The same may be baked in half an hour. APPLE PUDDING. Peel a dozen and a half of good apples, take out the cores, cut them up, and put them in a stewpan that will just hold them, with a little cinnamon, two cloves, and the peel of a lemon. Stew them over a slow fire till quite soft, then sweeten with crushed sugar, moistened, and pass it through a hair sieve; add to it the yolks of four eggs, and one white, a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, half a nutmeg, some grated lemon-peel, and the juice of one lemon. Beat all well together, and line a pie-pan with puff-paste, put in the pudding, and bake half an hour. MRS. MADISON'S PUDDING. Take a quart of new milk, with half a lemon-peel, and a little cinnamon; boil it gently, five or ten minutes, sweeten with loaf-sugar; break the yolks of five, and the whites of three eggs into a dish, beat them well; add the milk, and beat all well together; then strain them through a fine, hair sieve. Put a layer of bread and butter in a pie-dish, and then a layer of currants, until the dish is full; then pour the custard over it, and bake half an hour. The bread should be cut thin. CORN PUDDING. Let the corn be very young and tender; scrape from the cob about a quart; put it in a quart of milk, three eggs, a few grains of salt, and a small tea-cupful of sugar; beat it up well, and let it bake slowly for two hours. Tomatoes are very good, cooked the same way. FRITTERS. Beat five eggs separately, add a pint of milk, a little salt, beat in flour enough to make a light batter. Fry a large spoonful at a time, in clear, hot lard. CORN FRITTERS. Are made the same way, only grate the corn in, instead of flour, and add a little black pepper. These taste very much like fried oysters. APPLE FRITTERS. Are also made like the above, with the addition of apples, but do not omit the flour, as in the latter. LEMON PUDDINGS. Peel and pound well three lemons in a mortar; beat nine eggs, half a pound of white sugar, half a pound of sweet butter; beat them well; line your plate with the best puff-paste; bake it an hour. MACCARONI OR VERMICELLI. Take a pint of either, simmer it in a quart of milk; have done very tender; add a cup of cream, when you take it up, six eggs beaten well, with a tea-cupful of white sugar; season with lemon, butter a deep dish, and bake in an hour and a half. APPLE DUMPLING--MY WAY. Roll a nice, rich piece of pie-crust about nine or ten inches wide, and about a foot long and half inch thick, cover it well with thin slices of sour apples, roll it up neatly, pinch it well at the ends, so as to secure the fruit; put it in a bag, boil it an hour and a half, very slowly. Turn it over to keep it from burning. SAUCE--FOR MY DUMPLINGS. Take three table-spoonfuls of sugar, two of butter, one of brandy, half a nutmeg, and one tea-cupful of cream; stir it over the fire until it becomes thick. CHARLOTTE RUSSE. Boil, in half a pint of milk, the extract of one vanilla bean; when the milk is cool, stir in a quarter of a pound of loaf-sugar and the yolks of two eggs; set it back on the coals, and let it simmer slowly, constantly stirring it to keep it from curdling, but take it off before it boils. Then set it away to cool. Then boil an ounce of the best Russia isinglass in a pint of water, stirring it till dissolved, to prevent it from adhering to the bottom of the pan and burning, which makes the flavor very offensive to the tongue and smell; then strain the dissolved isinglass into the custard, and allow it to cool, after stirring it all well; but do not let it congeal before the cream is whipped into it. Then take a circular mould, of the shape of a drum, or oval moulds, the sides being straight. Cut to fit the mould, two slices from the top and bottom of a sponge cake; glaze them with white of egg, and lay one at the bottom, reserving the other for the top. Having thus covered the bottom, line the sides with more of the sponge cake, cut into long squares and glazed with white of egg; they must stand up all round, and be cut the hight of the mould, and evenly trimmed. Then whip to a stiff froth, a quart of rich cream, taking it off in spoons-fuls as the froth rises, and putting it to drain in an inverted sieve. When the custard is nearly cold, stir the whipt cream gradually into it; then fill your moulds with it, and cover the top with the reserved piece of sponge cake. Set the moulds in a tub of pounded ice and coarse salt for an hour, to congeal; then turn it upon a china dish, and serve. CHAPTER XII. PIES. PUFF-PASTE. To a pound and a quarter of sifted flour, rub gently in with the hand, half a pound of fresh butter; mix it up with half a pound of fresh butter; mix it up with half a pint of spring-water. Knead it well, and set it by for a quarter of an hour; then roll it out thin, lay on it, in small pieces, three-quarters of a pound more of butter, throw on it a little flour, double it up in folds, and roll it out thin three times, and set it by an hour in a cold place. RAISED PIES. Put two pounds and a half of flour on the paste-board, and put on the fire, in a saucepan, three-quarters of a pint of water and half a pound of good lard. When the water boils, make a hole in the middle of the flour, pour in the water and lard gradually, gently mixing the flour with it, with a spoon; and when it is well mixed, knead it with your hands till it becomes stiff. Dredge a little flour on the board to prevent it sticking; roll it with your hands about the thickness of a quart pot; cut it in six pieces, leaving a little for the top. Put one hand in the middle of the piece of dough, and keep the other close on the outside, till you have worked it into a round shape. Have your meat ready cut, and seasoned with pepper and salt. If it is pork, cut it in small slices; if mutton, cut it in neat cutlets, and put them in the pies as you make them. Roll out the covers just the size of the pie, wet them round the edge, put them on the pies, and press them together with your thumb and finger, and then cut it all around with a pair of scissors, quite even, and pinch them inside and out. Bake them an hour and a half. MINCE-MEAT. Two pounds of beef-suet, chopped fine; two pounds of apples, cored, pared, and chopped fine; three pounds of currants, washed and picked; one pound of raisins, stoned and chopped fine; one pound of good brown sugar; half a pound of citron, cut into thin slices; two pounds of ready-dressed roast beef, free from skin and gristle, chopped fine; two nutmegs, grated; one ounce of salt; half an ounce of allspice, half an ounce of cloves, all ground fine; the juice of six lemons, with their rinds grated; half a pint of brandy, a pint of sweet wine, a quart of good cider. Mix the suet, apple, currants, meat, plums, and sweetmeats, well together, in a large pan, and strew in the spice by degrees; mix the sugar, lemon-juice, wine, brandy, and cider, and pour it into the other ingredients, and stir them well together. Cover it closely, and set it away in a cold place; when wanted, stir up the meat from the bottom, and add some brandy to the quantity you use. PUMPKIN PIE. Stew a rich, sweet pumpkin, pass it through a sieve. Take five eggs, beat them well with two tea-cupsful of sugar, half a pound of butter, a little salt, half a nutmeg, two tea-spoonsful of essence of lemon; beat this well, then thicken it with pumpkin, and bake it on puff-paste. PEACH PIE. Slice some nice, ripe peaches, very thinly, put them in a dish, and sprinkle them with sugar; let them stand an hour; have ready some rich puff-paste, line your plates neatly, and fill them full; add some more sugar, and bake them in half an hour. RHUBARB PIES. Peel the rhubarb, and cut it up in very small pieces; to a quart of these, add a quart of sugar, put them in a saucepan, stew them well, perfectly soft, then add a gill of brandy, an ounce of butter, half a nutmeg; mash them up well; have your plates lined with paste, pour in the fruit, and, instead of a lap crust, ornament it with twisted bits of paste. Bake it quickly. APPLE PIE. Take twelve apples, pare and cut them from the core, into a stewpan, with a very small quantity of water; stew them till they are soft, and then put in two ounces of butter, a little mace, nutmeg, and grated lemon-peel, and sugar to the taste. Line your pie-pans with good crust, and when the fruit is cold, put it in, and put on a rim and cover of puff-paste. This will make three pies. SWEET-POTATO PIE. Take five eggs, half a pound of butter, and a quarter of a pound of sugar, add as much sweet potato as will thicken it, the juice and grated peel of one lemon; beat it well, and bake it in a light crust. PUMPKIN, YANKEE FASHION. Beat ten eggs, and two small tea-cupfuls of sugar, add two quarts of rich milk, a cup of cream, a little salt, an ounce of butter, a table-spoonful of ginger, and the same of cinnamon, half a nutmeg; add one quart of strained pumpkin; bake in a rich puffy paste. CHAPTER XIII. CAKES. IF you wish to have your cake look white and beautiful, you must use loaf-sugar; but good brown sugar is equally good as to taste. Always use fresh butter, as a strong taste in the butter always communicates itself to the cake. When you put in fruit, sprinkle it with flour, and put in the butter and the fruit alternately. In making cakes without yeast, the flour should not be put in, till you are ready to put the cake to bake. To ascertain if cake is done, run a broom-straw through it, and if no batter sticks to the straw, it is done. Baking is the most important part of cake-making, and the best materials may be ruined, if not well baked. The greatest heat should be at the bottom of the cake. CUP CAKE. Beat up five eggs; add to them two tea-cupsful of sugar, and the same quantity of fresh butter, well creamed; beat this well, and put in two tea-cupsful of flour and a grated nutmeg. Bake in shallow pans, over a moderate fire. Just before baking, add a tea-spoonful of saleratus, dissolved in half a tea-cupful of sour cream. RICE CAKE. Take half a pint of rice, wash it well, put it in a quart of morning's milk, sweetened to your taste; put in a vanilla bean, or, if you prefer it, cinnamon or nutmeg; set it on the fire, or on the stove, where it will keep warm without simmering; you must not let it cook at all, stir it up very frequently, but do not mash it; after it has become perfectly soft and dry, beat in the yolks of two eggs, and a little salt. Butter a dish or pan, and bake it slowly for an hour. An oval-shaped dish is best to bake in. BATH CAKE. Take one pound and a quarter of good, moist sugar, roll it fine, put in a pan, with three-quarters of a pint of water; let it stand all night. Rub three ounces of butter into four pounds and a half of flour; make a hole, and pour in your sugar, with half a pint of honey-water; rub it out thin, cut out, and place them on buttered tins, and bake in a quick oven. QUEEN'S DROPS. Prepare your mixture, the same as for pound cakes, but add about two ounces more of flour, one pound and a half of currants; drop them on whited, brown paper, in drops about the size of a large nutmeg, about two inches from each other; put your sheets on tins, and bake them in a steady oven. SEED CAKE. Three eggs, one cup of butter, two of white sugar, and two of flour; add half a cup of coriander seeds; roll it out with sugar, instead of flour. Bake it in a quarter of an hour. QUINCE PUDDING. Stew and sift eight quinces; add half a pound of sugar, six eggs, a pint of cream, and a little cinnamon. Bake in a dish, lined with paste; let it bake an hour and a half. LEMON CAKE. Take the yolks of fourteen eggs, beat them well, and add to them one pound of crushed sugar, the raspings and juice of four lemons, and two tablespoonsful of rose-water. Beat them all well together in a bowl, for half an hour. Have the whites well frisked, and mix lightly; when well mixed, sift the flour in, and knead it as lightly as possible. Three-quarters of a pound of flour will be enough. Butter the tins well, and bake them in a moderate oven. CREAM CAKE. Beat the whites of nine eggs to a stiff froth; to every white of an egg, grate the rinds of two lemons, stirring the whites all the time, to prevent them from falling; shake in gently a pound of powdered loaf-sugar; lay a sheet of paper on a tin, and drop the froth, with a spoon, in little lumps, near each other; sift loaf-sugar over them, and place them in a moderately-heated oven, and close the mouth of it, which will occasion the froth to rise. As soon as they are colored, they are sufficiently baked. Lay them on a sieve, and put in a cool place. BRIDE'S CAKE. Two pounds of sifted flour, two pounds of sifted loaf-sugar, two pounds of fresh butter, eighteen eggs, four pounds of currants, one pound of raisins, stoned and cut up; one half-pound of almonds, blanched and chopped; one half-pound of citron, one pound of candied orange and lemon-peel, cut into thin slices; a large nutmeg, grated; half an ounce of ground allspice; of ground cinnamon, mace, ginger, and corianders, a quarter of an ounce each, and a gill of brandy. Put the butter into a suitable vessel, in a warm place, cream it with the hand, and mix it with the sugar and spices for some time; break in the eggs by degrees, and beat it twenty or thirty minutes; stir in the brandy, and then the flour, gradually; beat it well; then add the fruit, sweetmeats, and almonds, and mix all lightly together. Put it in a cake-pan, and bake it four hours or more, in a slow oven. The goodness of a cake depends very much on its being well baked. When it is nearly cold, ice it, according to the following receipt. ICEING. Take a pound of double refined loaf-sugar, pounded and sifted through a fine sieve; beat the whites of six eggs into a froth; put in the sugar gradually, beating it well; then squeeze in the juice of a lemon, or sufficient essence of lemon to flavor it, and beat it till it becomes quite thick. Spread it over the top and sides, as smoothly as possible, before the cake is quite cold. SPONGE CAKE. Beat the yolks of twelve eggs half an hour; then put in one pound and a half of crushed or pounded loaf-sugar, and beat it well; beat the whites of the eggs till they are well frothed, and whisk them well with the sugar and yolks; gradually put in fourteen ounces of flour, and two lemon-peels, grated. Butter the moulds, and bake them an hour, in a pretty quick oven. GINGERBREAD. Mix three pounds of flour with four ounces of brown sugar, half an ounce of powdered ginger, and a pound and a quarter of warm molasses. Melt half a pound of fresh butter, and pour it in; work it all up together and bake. PLAIN POUND CAKE. Cream a pound of fresh butter, and work into it a pound of crushed sugar, till quite smooth; beat nine eggs, the whites and yolks separately, and add them by degrees to the butter and sugar, and beat them together twenty minutes; then beat in, gradually, one pound of flour. Put it in a mould, and bake in a moderate oven one hour. Plum cake is made as the foregoing, only, after you have beaten it sufficiently, you add two pounds of raisins, stoned, and one pound of currants. RICE CAKE. Beat the yolks of fifteen eggs, for twenty minutes; put in ten ounces of crushed sugar, half a pound of ground rice, a little brandy, two lemon-peels, grated, the whites of seven eggs, beaten to a stiff froth, and stir the whole together for a quarter of an hour. Put it in a mould, and bake it in a quick oven half an hour. QUEEN CAKE. Take a pound of fresh butter, cream it well, add gradually a pound of crushed sugar, and beat them well together; beat the whites of eight eggs to a froth, and add them to the butter and sugar; then the yolks, after beating them half an hour; put in a grated nutmeg, and an equal quantity of pounded cinnamon and mace; beat the whole together, and put in, gradually, a pound of well-dried flour. Sift some sugar over them, and bake in tins. RUSKS. Beat up seven eggs; mix with them half a pint of new milk, warmed, and a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, melted; add a gill of yeast and three ounces of sugar; beat in enough flour to make a thick batter; let it rise before the fire half an hour, then add enough flour to make it into dough. Work it well, and bake it in small rolls. JUMBLES. Take a quart of flour, and stir into it two tea-spoonsful of cream-tartar; rub into it a tea-cupful of fresh butter, and two tea-cupsful of sugar. Put one tea-spoonful of soda into a pint of sweet milk, and work it all up into dough. Make it into jumbles, and bake as soon as made, in a quick oven. DOUGHNUTS. Sift together, three tea-cupsful of flour, and one of sugar; rub into it a table-spoonful of butter. Beat up three eggs, and add these, with a cup of sweet milk, warmed. Put into the flour some grated nutmeg, and pounded allspice, mace, and cinnamon. Mix them well together, and cut them in any shape you please. To be fried in hot lard. BLACK CAKE. Take a pound of fresh butter, and half a pound of lard, cream it well together, and add one pound and a quarter of brown sugar. Beat in four eggs, one at a time; put in a pint of new milk, and one grated nutmeg, a tea-spoonful of pounded mace, and a tea-spoonful of soda. Gradually mix with this, one pound and three-quarters of well-dried flour, and beat all well together. Then add a pound and a half of raisins, stoned, and the same quantity of currants. Flavor with wine and brandy, and bake one hour in a quick oven. JOHNNY CAKE. To a quart of sweet corn-meal, add a pint of warm water and a tea-spoonful of salt; beat it up very hard; spread it evenly and smoothly on the board. Place the board before a clear, moderate fire; when done, cut it in squares, and send it to table without buttering it. GINGER CAKE. Take two quarts of flour, rub into it an even tea-cupful of lard, and a little salt. Set a pint of molasses where it will get warm, and stir into it a tea-spoonful of saleratus. Sprinkle two table-spoonsful of ginger in the flour, and mix it up with the molasses; roll them, cut them into any shape you fancy, and bake in a quick oven. ALMOND CAKES. Beat up six ounces of sweet almonds, very fine, when they are sufficiently pounded, break in the yolks of seven eggs, and beat them well together; add half a pound of crushed sugar, and four lemon-peels, grated; beat it till it is quite light and fair. Whisk the whites of the eggs to a strong froth, mix them with the paste, then add six ounces of flour; mix it as light as possible Butter the mould, and bake in a slack oven an hour, with two sheets of paper under, and one on top. SAVOY CAKES. Beat the yolks of ten eggs and a pound of crushed sugar, for twenty minutes. Beat the whites to a strong froth, and stir them in by degrees; add three quarters of a pound of well-dried flour. Bake in a slack oven. CHAPTER XIV. FANCY DISHES. TO BLANCH ALMONDS. Lay them in boiling water, cover them closely, and let them remain a few moments, then throw into cold water, and rub off the skins; this is easily done. ALMOND CUSTARD. Take half a pound of blanched almonds, and pound them in a mortar; put them in a pint of milk to boil, add a small tea-cupful of sugar; beat up four eggs, and pour the milk and almonds boiling hot on the eggs, stirring them all the time. Set it in a jar of boiling water, and stir it all the time it is thickening. FLOATING ISLAND. Beat the whites of six eggs until very stiff, add a table-spoonful of jelly for each egg, ( currant jelly is the best;) boil a quart of rich milk, sweeten it with loaf sugar, put it in a dish, and when cold, lay the jelly and eggs in fanciful form, on the top; delicate bits of sweetmeats interspersed, adds much to its appearance. SHELLS. Lay puff-paste on little tin shapes; cut the edges carefully, bake quickly, and when going to table, fill with preserves. BAKED CUSTARD. Boil a pint of cream with some mace and cinnamon, and, when it is cold, take four yolks of eggs, a little rose-water, nutmeg, and sugar. Mix it well, and bake it. ORANGE PUFFS. Pare off the rinds of the oranges, rub them with salt, let them lie twenty-four hours in water; drain them, boil in four changes of water, the first salt; drain them well, bruise them and pound them, make them very sweet with white sugar, and boil it until quite stiff. Let it stand until cold, and then put it in shells, made of puff-paste. TO MAKE BON-BONS. Have some little tin moulds, oil them neatly; take a quantity of brown sugar syrup, in the state called a blow, which may be known by dipping the skimmer into it and blowing through the holes, when parts of light may be seen; add a few drops of lemonessence. If the bon-bons are prepared white, when the sugar is cooled a little, stir it round the pan till it grains and shines on the surface, then pour it in a funnel; fill the little moulds; when they are hard and cold, take them out and put them in papers. If you wish to have them colored, put on the coloring while hot. CATSUP. Boil tomatoes, full ripe, in their juice, to nearly the consistency of a pulp; pass them through a hair sieve; add salt, cloves, pepper, ginger, nutmeg. SWEET CATSUP. Mix a glass of wine, a half glass of vinegar, three tea-spoonsful of thyme, a lump of sugar, one sliced onion, a little cinnamon, and three cloves; boil them a quarter of an hour. TO MAKE BARLEY SUGAR. Take a quantity of clarified sugar, in that state called crack; you can ascertain this by dipping the end of your finger into the pan, if the sugar adheres to it, it will break, with a slight noise; when the sugar is near this, put in a little lemon-juice, or vinegar, to prevent its graining. When the sugar has come to the crack, take it off instantly, and dip the pan in cold water, to prevent its burning; let it stand a little, and then pour it on a marble, which must be rubbed with oil, (the bottom of a china dish does just as well;) cut it in small pieces; season with what you like best. HOARHOUND CANDY. Is made the same way. A strong decoction of the herb is used in boiling the syrup. MOLASSES CANDY. Boil a quart of molasses half an hour; add a tea-spoonful of saleratus, to make it stiff and brittle; boil it until it is stiff enough to pull; butter a dish, pour it in, and let it get cool; pull it in a cool place. You may add any kind of nuts, or popped corn. ICE CREAM. To a pound of any preserved fruit, add a quart of good cream; squeeze the juice of two lemons into it, and some sugar; let the whole be passed through a sieve; have the freezing-pot nice and clean, put the cream into it, and cover it; then put it into the tub with ice, broken in small pieces, and some salt; turn the freezer quickly, and as the cream sticks to the sides, scrape it down with an ice-spoon, and so on till it freezes quite hard. The more the cream is worked to the side with the spoon, the better it is; it makes it smoother and better flavored. After it is well frozen, take it out and put it in shapes: set it in a tub with ice and salt. When needed, take the shape out, wipe it carefully, for fear of the salt, dip it in luke-warm water. Turn it out on a glass dish, and send it to the table. FROZEN CUSTARD. Boiled custard is very good, frozen in this way. ICE CREAM. Take a quart of cream and two eggs, well beaten, a tea-cupful of pounded sugar, the essence of one vanilla bean; stir it over the fire until it thickens; add a pint of cold cream. Freeze as directed. RASPBERRY AND STRAWBERRY ICE CREAM. Mash a quart of strawberries in a quart of cream, add half a pound of sugar, mix well, and freeze them as directed. ICE CREAM, PURE. Take a quart of rich, thick cream, a tea-cupful of sugar, the essence of one vanilla bean; stir them over the fire until quite warm; add a cup of cold cream; freeze it with great care; press it in a handsome mould, and keep it deep in ice and salt, until wanted; turn it out carefully. ICE FRUIT. Grate apples, oranges, or pine-apples, mix with loaf-sugar, and freeze. WATER ICES. Take the pulp of fruits, mixed with syrup, lemon-juice, and a little water, so as to bring them to a good flavor and consistence when frozen. RASPBERRY-WATER ICE. One quart of ripe raspberries, four ounces of ripe cherries and currants, half a pint of syrup, half a pint of water, and the juice of two lemons. Mash the fruit, and pass the juice through a sieve; mix the syrup, water, and lemon with it, and freeze. PEACH-WATER ICE. Take one pound of the pulp of ripe peaches, half a pint of syrup, half a pint of water, the juice of two lemons, and mix them well. If the fruit is not ripe enough to pulp, open them and take out the stones, put them in a stewpan with the syrup and water, boil until tender, and pass them through a sieve; mix in the pounded kernels; when cold, freeze. APRICOT-WATER ICE. Eighteen or twenty fine, ripe apricots, half a pint of syrup, half a pint of water, and the juice of two lemons. Other fruits can be iced by the same receipt. CHERRY ICE CREAM. Take two pounds of cherries, one quart of cream, and twelve ounces of sugar, or syrup; pound the cherries with the stones in a mortar, adding a few ripe gooseberries, or currants; pass the pulp through a sieve, add the cream and sugar, with the juice of two lemons and a little cochineal, mix them well, and freeze them. If preserved fruit, add a little noyau, or a few bitter almonds pounded. FILBERT ICE CREAM. Take one quart of cream, one pound of nuts, and twelve ounces of sugar, or one pint of syrup; break the nuts, and roast the kernels in an oven; pound them with a little cream; make a custard, strain, and when cold, freeze. COFFEE ICE CREAM. Take one quart of cream, five ounces of coffee, and twelve ounces of sugar; roast the coffee in a stewpan, keeping it constantly stirred, until of a good brown color; throw it into the custard cream while it is quite hot, and cover it closely; let it infuse for an hour or two, then strain and freeze. TRIFFLE. Take a deep, glass dish, lay the bottom closely with slices of cold pound cake, or sponge cake, either will do, then pour on a quart of wine, fill the top with rich float or whip; ornament with preserves, cut in delicate bits. SUGAR CANDY. Take four pounds of sugar, put it in a brass, or copper kettle, over a very moderate fire; allow a tea-cupful of clear water to each pound of sugar, add an ounce of isinglass, and four tea-spoonsful of gum Arabic. Take off the scum very carefully; flavor it with lemon, or peppermint. You can ascertain when it is done, by pouring a little in cold water; if it is brittle, and breaks at a touch, it is ready to take off; color with saffron, indigo, beet-juice, &c. It can be made in any form; and you may have any kind of nuts chopped and put in it. Nice popped corn is very good in it. ICED FRUIT. Take handsome bunches of currants, or grapes, dip them in the white of eggs well beaten, lay them to dry on a sieve, sift pounded loaf-sugar over them, and suspend them in a warm place to dry. ICED APPLES, OR PEACHES. Grate them very fine, sprinkle with white sugar, and freeze them. OMELETTE SOUFFLE. Take six eggs, separate the yolks and the whites, and beat half a pound of crushed sugar into the yolks. Beat them well, and put in enough essence of lemon to flavor them. Let the whites of twelve eggs be beaten to a froth; beat it all together till quite light, put it in a buttered dish that it will just fill, and bake it fifteen minutes. It must be used immediately, before it falls. TO CANDY ORANGE-PEEL. Soak the peeling in cold water, which you must change frequently, until it loses its bitterness; then put them into the syrup, until they become soft and transparent. LEMON-PEEL. This is made by boiling lemon-peel in sugar, and exposing to the air, until the sugar crystallizes. TO PRESERVE ORANGES. Wash them in cold water, rub them hard with a coarse napkin; then boil them until quite easily perforated. Take three-quarters of a pound of sugar, for each pound of fruit; make a clarified syrup; take the oranges from the water, and pour the hot syrup over them, let them stand all night; next day boil them in the syrup until it is clear. WHIP SYLLABUB. Make a whip of eggs, mix a pint of cream, half a pint of sweet-wine, a glass of brandy, the juice of a lemon, a grated nutmeg, six ounces of sifted loaf-sugar; nearly fill your glasses with the mixture, and lay the whip on the top. ICEING FOR FRUIT TARTS. Beat up, in a half pint mug, the whites of two eggs to a solid froth, lay some on the middle of the pie, with a paste-brush; sift over a plenty of light, white sugar, press it down, wash the brush and splash the sugar with water until it is all damp; then set it in a warm stove, or oven, to dry. Let them be perfectly cold before taken to the table. VENISON PASTRY, OR PASTY. Take the neck or breast of venison, cut it up in fine pieces, put them in a stewpan with a pint of port wine, two onions, a few eschallots, some black pepper, a few blades of mace, a dozen grains of allspice; cover it with water, and let it stew until at least half done. Take them out as soon as they are sufficiently cooked, and let them cool. Put the little bits that you trimmed off the meat, prepared for the stew, in the sauce-pan, with the liquor the venison was boiled in; add some of the juice of a lemon, some butter, and thicken it with flour; let it simmer until the pasty is ready; line a deep dish with paste, lay in the pieces of venison, and cover with rich puff-paste; ornament the top, and pour on some of the gravy from the stewpan; bake slowly for two hours: send the rest up to the table with the pasty. This is a delicious dish, and is very well adapted to the taste and appetite of a Western hunter. APPLE BEAUTIES. Pare, and core, and cut in small pieces, eight pippins, place them as close as possible in the dish with four cloves, some lemon-juice, four ounces of sugar, and if agreeable, add some quince jam, cover it with puff-paste. When the pie is done, cut out the whole of the center, leaving the edges, let it cool; then pour over the apples some rich, boiled custard. BOILED CUSTARD. Beat six eggs well, add six table-spoonsful of sugar, beat it well with the eggs; boil three pints of milk, pour it over the eggs, but be sure to stir them all the time, or it will be apt to curdle; put it back in the saucepan; stir it a few moments, over the fire, take it off, stir it until nearly cool. CHEESE, ANOTHER WAY. Take six ounces of butter, and half a pound of flour in a saucepan, rub them well with a wooden spoon; add a quart of warm milk, stir over the fire a quarter of an hour, put in the yolks of eight eggs, and a pound of cheese in small slices; season rather slightly with pepper, salt, and cayenne; add the white of the eggs whipped very stiff, which stir lightly, have a dozen and a half of small paper cases, fill each one three parts full, place them in a moderate oven, bake about twenty minutes; when done, dress them upon a napkin on your dish, and serve hot. PUFF-CHEESE CAKE. Make half a pound of paste, which roll very thin, have ready some grated cheese, throw half a handful over the paste, which fold in three; roll it out to the thickness again, cover again with cheese, proceeding this way until you have used the whole of the cheese, (half a pound,) then cut them into any shape you like, with pastry-cutters, set on a wet baking sheet; egg them over, bake a nice color in a moderate oven; dress in a pyramid upon a napkin, on a dish, and serve very hot. DRY MERINGUES, IN THE FORM OF EGGS. Take two whites of eggs and twelve ounces of sugar; separate the white from the yolk very carefully; put the whites into a pan, which must be quite free from grease; whisk them to a very strong froth, so as it will support an egg, or even a greater weight; have the sugar pounded and sifted through a lawn sieve, and mix it as lightly as possible; spread some pieces of board about an inch thick, with a table or dressing-spoon, drop them on the paper about two inches asunder; dust them with fine-powdered loaf-sugar, blow off all that does not adhere, and put them into a cool oven to bake until they are a nice, light brown; if the oven should be too warm, when the surface gets dry or hardened, cover them with paper. As soon as they are done, take them off with a knife, press the inside or soft part down, with the top or the back of a spoon, place them on sieves, and put them into the stove to dry; when they are required to be served, fill them with any kind of preserved fruit, or cream; if it is rather acid, the better, and put two together. The quality of the meringues will depend on the eggs being well whipped to a very strong froth, and also to the quantity of sugar, --for if there is not enough, they will eat tough. KISSES. Twelve ounces of sugar pounded very fine, and passed through a silk sieve, the white of six eggs beaten to a strong froth; mix, and lay out on paper, as for dry meringues; when baked, place two together. The size should be about that of a pigeon's egg. CHARLOTTE RUSSE, ANOTHER WAY. Line the inside of a mould with sponge cake, or savoy biscuit, putting them in any form you fancy; place them around the sides; fill with any of the creams or jellies, but not fruits; place the mould in ice, let it remain till ready to serve; turn on a dish, and remove the mould. CREAMS. Creams are easily made of any flavor, and with any kind of fruits, jellies, or jams. Put the yolks of five eggs in a stewpan, with six ounces of sugar, beat it up with a spoon until white; boil a pint of milk, and one ounce of isinglass ten minutes, stir continually to prevent burning; flavor with anything you fancy, pour the milk on the eggs and sugar, put on the fire, stir well and together; do not let it boil; pass it through a sieve into a bowl; when cold set it on ice, add two glasses of liquor, keep stirring its contents, and when settling, add three parts of a pint of cream, well whipped; mix well together and pour into the mould, in the ice, and keep it there till required; turn it out as before. ITALIAN MERINGUES. One pound of sugar, the whites of six eggs; clarify the sugar, and boil it to the blow; in the mean time whip up the whites, as for dry meringues, take the sugar from the fire, and rub it against the sides of the pan to grain it; as soon as it begins to turn white, mix in the whipped eggs, stirring the sugar well from the bottom or sides of the pan, with the whisk; lay them off, and bake as dry meringues. These may be colored, by adding the liquid color to the syrup, so as to give the desired tint; and either of them may be flavored, by rubbing off the peel of oranges, or lemons, on sugar, and scraping it off as it imbibes the oil; or it may be flavored with vanilla, by cutting it in small pieces and pounding it with some sugar; or with any liquor, by adding a spoonful or two, when you mix the eggs, or sugar. They may also be varied in shape, and baked in tin or iron plates, instead of wood, that the bottom may be quite firm. The tops may be covered with almonds, blanched and cut small, or in fillets; or with currants, or colored sugars; the whole depending on the taste and ingenuity of the artist. MUSHROOMS. To make these, take either of the pastes for meringues, or light icing, as for cakes; put some into a bag in the shape of a cone, with a tin pipe at the end, lay them off in drops the size you wish them to be, on iron plates rubbed quite clean and dry; bake them as you would meringues; make also a smaller drop to form the stalk; when they are baked, take them off the tin, and scrape out a little with your finger underneath; then dry them in the stove; scrape some chocolate, and dissolve it in a little warm water, and rub a little over the rough part underneath; then place the stalk in the center, fixing it with a little icing, and let the flat part, which was on the tin, be placed undermost to represent where it was cut. HAZLENUT KISSES. Beat one pound of pulverized white sugar, with the whites of eight eggs, over a slow fire, until they are light, then add four ounces of blanched filberts, cut fine; lay them out on paper, and bake in a slow oven. SOUFFLรฉ, OR WHIPPED CREAM. Take one quart of cream, put it into a bowl with a quarter of a pound of powdered sugar, orange-juice, and a little water, and have another bowl near you, over which you must place the sieve to receive and drain the cream; whip the cream with a whisk, or blow it with a bellows, made on purpose, and as it rises in a froth, take it off with a spoon, and place it on the sieve; continue until all is used, then put back the drainings, and continue until you have none left; then put it into your dish, or in glasses, or on a trifle, and ornament with sweetmeats, or with green citron-peel, or angelica, cut very fine and tastefully. It can likewise be iced. CHANTILLY BASKET. Dip in sugar, prepared to the seventh degree, small ratifias; stick them on a dish, in whatever form your fancy may dictate; then take larger ones, and having dipped them in the sugar, build up the basket, by sticking them together, until about six inches high; make a rim of candy, or drops, and a handle of the boiled sugar; put the handle across the basket, and when you want to use it, fill it with triffle or whip. This makes a beautiful ornament for a supper; it looks well, filled with kisses or candy. TO SPIN CARAMEL. * Boil the sugar until it comes to the seventh degree; this you can tell by dropping a spoonful in a cup of water, if it remains hard it is just right; squeeze in the juice of a lemon, and let it remain one minute longer over the fire; then set the pan into another of cold water; have a mould of any shape you please, oil it over with sweet oil; drop a spoon or fork into the sugar, and throw it over the mould in fine threads, until it is quite covered; make a handle of the caramel, trim as you fancy. * Caramel is sugar boiled to the degree by some called crack. LIQUEURS. These are made by mixing equal quantities of the spirit you desire, and sugar; that is, one pint of spirit, one pound of sugar, and one pint of water; dissolve the sugar in the water, add to it the spirit, and filter it through a lawn sieve, or nice blotting-paper. Being perfectly colorless when drawn, it will be necessary to color them, to resemble the hues of the articles from which they were extracted; for this purpose, nothing should be used but what is perfectly harmless--as prepared cochineal, infusion of saffron, burned sugar, or indigo. Ratifias are liqueurs produced by the infusion of the ingredients in spirit; but instead of being distilled, they are simply strained or filtered. RATIFIA OF CHERRIES. Take six pounds of cherries, one ounce of coriander seeds, one half ounce of cinnamon, one half ounce of mace, two pounds of fair currants, one gallon of proof-spirits; press out the juice from the fruit, and take one half the stones of the cherries, and pound them with spices, and add two pounds and a half of sugar; steep them for a month, and filter and bottle them very carefully. RATIFIA OF COFFEE. Take one pound of neatly-roasted coffee, one gallon of proof-spirits, one pound and a half of loaf sugar; infuse for a week, stir it every other day; then filter and bottle it. These liqueurs may be made of any fruit, &c. CHAPTER XV. BEVERAGES. COFFEE. IT requires a table-spoonful of ground coffee, to every cup of tincture. Take six tea-spoonsful of ground coffee, add the white of an egg, mix it well together with a small quantity of cold water, pour on it six or seven tea-cupsful of boiling water; stir it well, let it boil ten minutes; then let it stand by the fire, without boiling, ten minutes. It will then be ready to pour off. Coffee should never be roasted too much; a light brown is sufficient; when it is suffered to become black, it looses its flavor, and is bitter and disagreeable. MILK COFFEE. Boil a table-spoonful of coffee in a pint of rich milk, a quarter of an hour; then put in a shaving or two of isinglass, and clear it; let it boil a few moments; then set it aside by the fire to settle. Sweeten to your taste, when used. CHOCOLATE. Put the milk and water on to boil, then scrape from one to two squares of chocolate to a pint of milk and water mixed. When the milk and water boil, take it off the fire; throw in the chocolate, beat it up well, and serve it up with the froth. This process will not take ten minutes; you may add sugar to your taste, either when you add the chocolate, or when poured off. TO MAKE GREEN TEA. Scald your tea-pot, put in two tea-spoonsful of tea to a quart of water, let it stand a few minutes in the hot tea-pot before you fill up. This is considered a good way; or, you can pour on a tea-cup of boiling water, and let it steep; this an old fashion, and the one I have always followed in making tea. Tea is never better for standing over fifteen minutes. BLACK TEA. It is best boiled a minute; it is not so powerful as green, and therefore requires at least a tablespoonful to a quart of water. It is made as green tea. PUNCH. For a gallon of punch, take six lemons, rub them very hard on the outside with lumps of loaf-sugar, until they become quite yellow, throw the lumps into a bowl, cut the lemons in slices, squeeze them over the sugar, add all the pulp you can to the juice and sugar; beat up the sugar well, continue to add to it as long as it will melt, so that it will be palatable without water. Add hot water enough to reduce it to a syrup thin enough to pass through a sieve, strain, and add equal quantities of brandy and rum. "The great secret of making punch," says a friend, "is this: have a great deal of lemon, more than enough of sugar, a fair proportion of spirits, and very little water. " EGG-NOGG. Beat the whites of six eggs separately; add a tea-cupful of sugar to the yolks, beat them well, then pour very slowly on a half pint of brandy; stir it all the time hard, or the brandy will harden the eggs; put a quart of milk on the fire in a saucepan, let it become quite hot, but do not let it boil; pour it over the mixture, beat it all well together; then add the whites --be sure to have them very stiff, or your nogg will not be good--beat it all again, then grate a nutmeg over the top. If you like it cold, add cold milk, instead of warming it. APPLE TODDY. Roast or bake three fine pippins; let them be thoroughly done; put them in a bowl, beat them well with sugar, to your taste; pour over them a half pint of brandy, beat well; then add a pint of water, beat again, so as to have it well compounded; add a few cloves, and half a nutmeg. THE END.
