APPETIZERS "If nature did not give you That which is yours by right Just nibble at these dainties To give you appetite." Anchovy Relish Cut pieces of bread round. Wash and make the anchovies boneless; chop them fine. Take a piece of sweet butter (tablespoon) for one dozen anchovies; stir to a cream. Put it on the bread. Grate the white of eggs on top, or the yellow, or use both. Garnish with parsley. Artichoke Relish On small squares of toast, spread pate de foie gras, place artichoke hearts on top, filled with chopped olives and mayonnaise . Artichoke and Shrimps Take an artichoke which has been boiled, scoop out and fill with shrimp salad; serve a small caviar sandwich on the same plate. Algerian Hors d'Oeuvre Select four fine lemons, wipe carefully, cut in halves and scoop out the pulp. Remove the tough inner skin and seeds, and to the pulp add one box of boneless sardines, and fill shells. Canape Lorenzo Chop a medium sized shallot, fry without coloring in two ounces of butter; add one tablespoon of flour, and in one minute one pint of cream. When hot, add one pint of crab meat, salt, and cayenne pepper to taste, and bring to a boil. Cut bread one-quarter of an inch thick into round pieces and toast on one side only. Cover the toasted side with the crab and spread with a thick layer of butter prepared as follows: Mix well together one-quarter pound butter and one-half pound of grated cheese. Powder with paprika. Put your canapes on a buttered dish, and color in the oven. Caviar Canape a la St. Dunstan Spread caviar on squares of hot buttered toast. Season with a little lemon juice. Put on a slice of tomato, on top of which is a bit of thick mayonnaise. Cheese Canape Toast circular pieces of bread, sprinkle with a layer of grated cheese, season with paprika, cayenne, mustard and salt. Place on tin sheets, and bake until cheese is melted. Chicken or Goose Livers Boil livers until very tender, take from water and mash while hot. Add piece of butter, salt, pepper, paprika, Worcestershire sauce, and juice of a lemon. Spread on toast. Put a slice of hard boiled egg in center, with a bit of caviar on the egg. Combination Appetizer Cover a medium sized plate with lettuce (cut in ribbons). At suitable intervals arrange the following: One artichoke heart covered with caviar; one rather thick slice of a large sized tomato, on which has been placed a layer of asparagus tips, with mayonnaise; one beet (boil and if liked, dipped in French dressing) scooped out sufficiently to hold one-half an egg which has been filled with chicken liver postate. Garnish with a few assorted stuffed olives and a slice of lemon sprinkled with paprika. Serve well chilled. Dressing for Crab, Lobster, or Shrimp Cocktail One tablespoon mayonnaise, one teaspoon Chili sauce, one teaspoon chopped green pepper, one teaspoon chopped pimentos, salt, paprika and a little vinegar. Crab Cocktail For two large crabs use the following ingredients: One full cup mayonnaise, juice of one lemon, one tablespoon Worcestershire sauce, one-half bottle or a little more Chili sauce, one large bell pepper and two pimentos chopped fine, salt, paprika, pepper. This serves seven people. Eggs a la Russe Have eggs boiled hard (twenty minutes). On a lettuce leaf, place a slice of tomato, then half of a hard boiled egg. Have caviar mixed with grated onion, pepper and lemon juice. Spread on the egg, and then spread with mayonnaise. Sprinkle finely chopped parsley on top. Egg Appetizer Boil eggs hard. Cut a slice off the end so that the egg will stand firm. Dip egg in French dressing, then with a pastry bag arrange sardellen butter on the top of egg. Have ready small squares of toasted bread, spread with a thin layer of sardellen butter, on which to stand the eggs. Caviar, mixed with some finely chopped onion ( pepper and lemon juice may be used instead of sardellen butter ), but mayonnaise must be used over the caviar. Eggs in Jelly Make a jelly that is firm, but will quiver, of any good gelatine, flavored with soup stock that has been well strained. It is better to make it the day before in order to have a firm jelly. Arrange slices of cold smoked tongue cut mediumly thick in the bottom of a mold. On each slice of tongue place a poached egg and allow the egg to cool. Be sure that your eggs are poached in the rings, are well done, and perfect in shape. Melt your gelatine and stock and allow them to cool, not to stiffen, and pour over the eggs, filling the space. Serve individually on top of lettuce leaf and decorate plates according to fancy. If liked, serve with mayonnaise. Grape Fruit Salad Remove from the skin the cells and juice; add a little sugar, and if desired, chopped pineapple and a few Maraschino cherries. Serve very cold in thin glasses, surrounded with crushed ice, or in fruit shells. Marrow Bones Six marrow bones, one teaspoon salt, parsley. Have your butcher cut the marrow bones three inches thick and scrape the sides perfectly clean. Place in a hot oven for six minutes. Salt and send to table at once. Dress in a parsley bed and serve with toast points. Hot Oysters Hors d'Oeuvre Stamp out rounds of bread two inches in diameter and one-fourth an inch thick. Spread these with butter and brown them in the oven, or in a frying pan in a little hot butter. Spread with anchovy paste, and on the paste set a small piece of bacon, hot and broiled to a crisp. Over the bacon set a hot broiled oyster. Spread with maitre d'hotel butter. Sprinkle the oysters with a very little finely chopped parsley and serve at once. Filled Lemons Cut lemons basket shape, scoop out and fill with asparagus tips and pour mayonnaise over them. Serve individually, and around the lemons put a sardine, an olive, and some caviar, and serve on greens. Oyster Relish Choose fine ripe tomatoes, skin and take out centers. Fill with a dozen blue point oysters, some finely chopped celery, a dash of tobasco sauce, a little lemon juice, and a pinch of salt. Place each tomato on a bed of lettuce leaves, and cover with mayonnaise. Canned Pears, Stuffed Fill the open spaces in canned pears (halved) with preserved ginger, cut fine. Place pear on crisp lettuce leaves. Surround with whipped cream, garnish with thin slices of preserved ginger. Canton ginger is the best. Plaza Appetizer To each person--one hard boiled egg. Remove yolk without breaking white, and refill with caviar and a bit of minced onion. Put top of egg on again. On each plate place one crisp lettuce leaf, on that a small square of toast, on which is a heart of  artichoke. Place the filled egg on this, and last, a sardellen which has been separated and cleaned. Shrimp, Anchovy, Caviar Canape Have ready round pieces of toast. Spread them carefully with caviar. Chop the yolks and whites separately of two hard boiled eggs. Put a row of chopped white around edge of toast and then the chopped yolks. On the top of each canape place three whole anchovies and one shrimp. Garnish with a bit of parsley and lemon. Serve on lettuce leaf. Tomato Aspic With Shrimps Can of tomatoes, two teaspoons sugar, one-half bay leaf, salt, pepper, paprika, parsley. Boil for a few minutes, strain, and add to one-half box Knox's gelatine dissolved in one-half cup boiling water. When slightly thick, mix with half pound of shrimps, and fill individual, or one large mold. Serve on lettuce leaves with mayonnaise. Watermelon and Canteloupe Balls Select ripe, sweet melons; cut the meat of same with a potato cutter (used for cutting small round balls) and chill. When ready to be served, arrange in high stemmed glasses, and pour over champagne, or other sweet wine. Can be used for luncheons or dinners. Schacht Cocktail (Hotel Portland) One oyster, one clam (hard shell), two crab claws on lettuce, caviar on lettuce, one piece of lobster, two anchovies, a teaspoon of minced onion, one-half lemon. Serve on ice. Westphalia Ham and Chicken Salad Make a cornucopia of Westphalia ham (tie with a colored ribbon to match table decoration). Fill with chicken salad. Salted Pecans Immerse the nuts in water for a few moments, then drain and dry thoroughly. Put them into a baking pan, and add one-half ounce of butter to one pound of nuts. Sprinkle liberally with salt. Put in a moderate oven, shifting the nuts every few moments, until crisp, then spread on soft paper to cool. Salted Almonds Blanch and dry the nuts thoroughly. Put them into a baking pan, allowing one-half ounce of butter to a pound of nuts. Sprinkle with salt, and put into a hot oven, gradually lessening the heat, and turning them frequently with a spoon until a golden brown. Remove from the stove, and spread on soft paper to cool. BREAKFAST DISHES "I like breakfast time better than any other moment of the day, no doubt has settled on one's mind then, and it presents a clearer mirror to the rays of things." CEREALS Table for Cooking Use one teaspoon salt to one quart water. In using prepared cereals, cook them at least twice as long as the time given on the package. Rolled wheat, rolled oats, rolled barley: Two to three cups water to one cup meal. Cook one hour. Cornmeal and coarse oatmeal: Four cups water to one cup meal. Cook two to three hours. Fine hominy: Four cups water to one cup meal. Cook one hour. Cream of wheat, farina, germea, wheatine: Five cups water to one cup meal. Cook one-half hour. Method of Cooking 1. Measure water and put in upper part of double boiler. Put on stove to boil. 2. Add salt, and when boiling, sprinkle in the required amount of meal , stirring all the time to prevent lumps. 3. When thickened, put into the double boiler and cook the required length of time. Do not let the water in the lower part of boiler boil away. 4. Serve with milk or cream. Baked Eggs Butter a muffin pan. Break an egg into each compartment, being careful not to break the yolk. Put on each egg a bit of butter, a little salt and pepper, and bake in the oven from four to six minutes. Nice to serve with a creamed shrimp gravy. Eggs Buckingham Make slices of milk toast, and arrange on large platter that can go into the oven. Scramble eggs, leaving slightly underdone. Pour over toast, and cover top with grated cheese or catsup. Return to oven, and if cheese is used, let remain in oven until cheese is melted. If catsup is used, just leave in oven long enough to harden eggs a bit. An illustration of a cereal box. Golden Rod Cereals are Guaranteed to be pure, clean and wholesome. Give the children a chance to enjoy GOLDEN ROD Oats Wheat Nuts Pancake Flour for Breakfast Send 2 cent stamp for our Receipe Book In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. Creamed Eggs Melt one teaspoon butter; add one-half cup sweet cream, salt and paprika. When hot, slip in four eggs, one at a time. When they are set, sprinkle with grated cheese, lay each egg on a piece of toast, pour over the cream, and serve at once. Eggs in a Nest Separate the white of an egg from the yolk. Beat white stiff and dry; put it in a cup or small bowl, and make in the top of it a hollow the size of the yolk. Then put the yolk in carefully, and cook in a covered saucepan containing boiling water, until the white is firm (about two minutes). Serve in a cup. Eggs Vermicelli Two and one-half tablespoons butter, two and one-half tablespoons flour, one and one-half cups milk, one-fourth teaspoon salt, one sprinkle pepper, four to six slices toasted bread, three hard boiled eggs. Make a white sauce of the first five ingredients. Chop whites of eggs, and add to white sauce. Pour over toasted bread. Press the yolks through a strainer, and sprinkle over the top. French Toast One egg, one teaspoon salt, one cup milk, four to six slices stale bread. Beat the egg lightly with a fork, in a shallow pudding dish. Add salt, cinnamon and milk. Soak the bread in this until soft. Turn the slices by putting those underneath on the top, and dip the custard over them, being careful not to break them. Have a griddle hot and well buttered. Brown them on one side, and then put a piece of butter on the top of each slice, turn, and brown on the other side. To be eaten hot with butter, or with sugar and cinnamon, if desired. German Toast Dip slices of stale bread in sweet milk, and then in beaten egg. Fry in hot butter. When fried, sprinkle sugar and cinnamon on top. French Pan Cakes One cup sifted flour, one saltspoon salt in flour, four eggs, one cup milk. Separate the eggs, beat yolks, and put in flour. Then gradually add milk, and mix to a smooth paste. Beat whites of eggs to a very stiff froth, add to batter, and put small spoonfuls on griddle pan. Spread cakes with butter, shake sugar and cinnamon over them and serve hot. French Pancakes II To the beaten yolks of four eggs add one-half teaspoon salt, two teaspoons sugar, one tablespoon melted butter, one cup sweet milk. Pour this mixture on two-thirds cup flour into which one-fourth teaspoon Crescent baking powder was first sifted. Beat to a smooth batter. Add remainder of the mixture and last the beaten whites of the eggs. Fry in butter, using about three tablespoons at one time. Spread all over the pan. Fry a nice brown on both sides. Spread with butter, then jelly, roll and sprinkle with powdered sugar. If preferred, just use sugar on the inside or roll and send to table, serving syrup with them. German Pancakes (Mrs. Nettie Koch's) Use a large skillet, about three inches deep. Make a thin batter of about one cup of milk and a tablespoon of flour, and break into this three whole eggs, beating well. Take a slice of butter about one-half an inch in thickness, melt and when hot pour into it the above batter; when brown, use a large cover to fit over the skillet, and turn the omelet on this cover. Add more butter and return the omelet to brown on the other side, keeping the cover on until the omelet is done. Serve on a hot platter and sprinkle with powdered sugar. German Pancakes One cup flour, one cup milk. Make into a smooth batter; break in six eggs, one at a time, and a pinch of salt. Heat a medium-sized frying pan, grease well, put in about three cooking spoons of the batter. Fry brown on one side; turn and put in a hot oven. Cook until well puffed up and brown. Serve with sugar, syrup, jelly or honey. Graham Gridle Cakes One quart graham flour, salt, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, three eggs, and milk enough to make a thin batter. Have griddle very hot and well buttered. German Omelet Yolks of two eggs beaten light and mixed with one teaspoon sugar, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, one tablespoon cracker meal , one saltspoon salt, added to whites beaten stiffly. Mix all ingredients well, and fry in well-buttered pan. Rice Waffles To one quart milk add: one-half teaspoon salt, one-half cup sugar, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, three eggs beaten very lightly, one-half cup melted butter, one cup cold boiled rice. Add sufficient milk to make a thin batter. Bake on waffle iron. Chicken Livers (Mrs. Nettie Koch's) Wash the livers, drying them thoroughly. Season with salt, pepper and ginger, and roll them in flour. Take half quantity each of butter and goose fat, let it get very hot, then brown quite a lot of thinly sliced onions in the same. Add the chicken livers, turning constantly until done, which will require about six minutes. Scrambled Eggs Put one tablespoon butter into a hot frying pan to cover entire pan. Break and stir (not beat) six eggs. Add salt and pepper. Put in hot pan, and stir briskly, taking care not to overcook. Turn on to hot platter. Shirred Eggs Butter an egg shirrer or a small vegetable dish. Cover bottom and sides with bread crumbs. Slip in an egg, and cover with seasoned bread crumbs and a little catsup. Bake in a slow oven until crumbs are brown. Wood and Coal OVERTON FUEL CO. 13th and Overton Streets Main 65 A1665 YARDS AND BUNKERS: 13th & Overton Sts. Mississippi Ave. & Jessup St. 1650 Williams Ave. For Better Cooking USE Damascus Butter ALWAYS PURE Ask Your Grocer Damascus Creamery PORTLAND, OREGON In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. Shredded Wheat Biscuit (For Breakfast) Warm the biscuit in the oven to restore crispness, and don't burn. Pour hot milk over it, dipping the milk over it until the shreds are swollen. Then pour a little cream over the top of the biscuit, or serve with cold milk or cream, according to the individual taste. Matzos Meal Pancakes Use two eggs for one person. Separate the whites from the yolks of two eggs. Add pinch of salt to the whites and beat stiff. Beat the yolks, adding when light one teaspoon matzos meal or cracker crumbs. Stir the whites lightly through the yolks. Pour into a well-buttered frying pan. Dot bits of butter on top, and when nice and brown, turn. Put butter, sugar and cinnamon on top, and serve immediately. Matzos Pancakes Soak about three matzos. Press out all the water, rub to a cream. Add pinch of salt, three tablespoons sugar, one-fourth teaspoon cinnamon, little grated lemon rind, two beaten eggs, a few chopped almonds, enough matzos meal to thicken the batter. Do not get it too stiff. Fry like hot cakes, a spoonful at a time, in good butter. Serve with sugar or syrup. Omelet au Fines Herbes Two green onions, three sprigs parsley, a little celery, four eggs, salt, pepper, two tablespoons milk, butter. Chop onion, parsley and celery very fine. Beat eggs in a bowl, add salt and pepper, milk and the chopped greens. Put butter in frying pan, and when hot turn in eggs and let set. When one side is light brown, double half over, and serve hot. Omelet Four eggs. Add to well beaten yolks one small cup milk, one teaspoon flour rubbed smooth in some of the milk; lastly, well beaten whites. Have skillet hot, put in a tablespoon of butter, and pour in the mixture. Cook until it begins to thicken. Then put in oven, and bake to a delicate brown. Fold over, and turn out on a heated platter. Puffy Omelet One egg, one teaspoon water, one teaspoon butter, one teaspoon sugar, little salt. Beat yolk, then add salt, sugar and water. Beat white of egg stiff, then fold into yolk mixture. Turn into hot buttered omelet pan, cook over moderate heat until slightly brown on the bottom, and set in moderate oven until baked through. It is cooked when firm to touch. Fold, turn out on hot buttered platter; serve at once. Plain Omelet (for one person) Two eggs, three tablespoons milk, a little salt. Beat yolks and whites of eggs separately. Add milk to yolks, and fold in the whites of eggs. Put a piece of butter in a spider and heat. Then pour the mixture in, and let cook for six minutes. Maryland Panned Oysters One heaping tablespoon butter, one dozen large oysters, one wine glass sherry, two slices toast. Put the butter in a saucepan over the fire; when brown throw the oysters in and stir till the edges curl. Dust with pepper and add wine glass of sherry or Madeira. Turn the oysters out on the toast, and serve hot. Poached Eggs on Toast Have a shallow pan two-thirds full of boiling water, salted, allowing one teaspoon salt to one pint of water. Put a slightly buttered muffin ring in the water. Break egg carefully into cup, and slip into muffin ring (in the water ). Water should cover egg. When there is a film on the top, and the white is firm, carefully take up ring and egg with a buttered griddle cake turner, and place egg on piece of toast. Southern Rice Into four quarts of boiling water put one cup of rice and one teaspoon of salt. Let boil twenty minutes. Remove from stove, put in a large strainer, and wash thoroughly with plenty of cold water. Stand over a pot of steaming water, and let steam for fifteen minutes. Serve with cream. Tomato Omelet Skin two or three tomatoes, cut in slices, and fry in butter. Beat up three eggs to make omelet, and season with salt and pepper. Warm some butter in a pan, put in eggs, stirring well to keep from adhering to pan, and then mix in the tomatoes. Turn out omelet on plate, doubling it in two. Another way is to roll up the tomato in omelet and serve with tomato sauce. Waffles I Two cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, two teaspoons sugar. Work into all of this a large tablespoon of butter, a pinch of salt, with two beaten eggs and one and one-fourth cups milk. Waffles II Two eggs beaten separately, three-fourths cup melted butter, four cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, sufficient milk to make a thin batter. Use three tablespoons batter to a medium-sized waffle iron. The iron must be hot and well greased. This makes a dozen large crisp waffles. Just Try Olympic Flour Olympic Pancake Flour Olympic Wheat Hearts Olympic Cake and Pastry Flour THE PORTLAND FLOURING MILLS CO. In answering these ads, please mention Neighboorhood Cook Book. BREAD "The very staff of life The comfort of the husband, the pride of the wife." Bread was one of the earliest foods of man, being used long before history was written. The first mention we find in the Bible in Genesis, in the words of Abraham to the angels: "I will fetch a morsel of bread." In Switzerland, in the prehistoric times, stones for grinding meal and baking bread, and even the bread itself, in the form of round cakes, have been found. The Egyptians knew the art of bread-making, and baked loaves and cakes in great variety of form and flavor. One ancient Greek writer names sixty-two kinds of bread in use. In Rome there were many bakeries. In our own day, bread is found in a variety of forms, many nations having a characteristic way of mixing it and baking--such as black bread of Germany, oat cakes of Scotland, rye cakes of Northern Sweden, baked only twice a year, and the Passover cakes or unleavened bread of the Jews. Bread forms the staple food of a large part of the human race, and is often the only subsistence of the poor. It should be palatable, nutritious and digestible. To fulfill these conditions, the flour must be rich in nutriment, the bread light and porous, and the baking develop the flavor, and render the food materials assimilable. Wheat produces a nutritious flour, in which the starch is in a digestible form. It has a further advantage over other grains; the kernel can be easily separated from the chaff; it is grown in almost every part of the world. The earliest form of bread was made simply by mixing flour and meal with water, and baking it into tough hard cake. The earliest method of producing light bread was by yeast. It is still the most satisfactory. The ancient leaven bread was made by mixing flour and water together and letting it stand until fermented, and in some places, salt-rising bread is still made that way. Yeast is a tiny one-celled plant, about 1-2000 of an inch in diameter, belonging to the class of budding fungi. In a certain temperature there appears in each one of these yeast cells two, three or four rounded bodies called spores. These expand and burst, and the spores are set free as new cells, to produce a new generation of yeast. Yeast requires food, like other living things. Moisture, oxygen, some nitrogenous matter, salts or mineral matter, and carbohydrates, especially sugary substances, are needed for the growth. Temperature is also important, 70° to 85° F. being most favorable. Three kinds of yeast are used for bread-making; liquid (home-made or brewers), dry, and compressed yeast. Liquid yeast is prepared from potatoes, sometimes with the addition of hops, sugar, and enough yeast to start fermentation. Dried yeast finds its sale among those too far removed from markets to procure fresh yeast. Compressed yeast, a most popular form, is a by-product in the manufacture of whiskey. It is prepared by skimming the masses of yeast from the surface of the fermenting liquid, sifting it and washing it repeatedly with fresh water; starch is then added, and it is formed into cakes of different sizes and wrapped in tinfoil. A fresh cake is essential for good results. Baking Powder Biscuits One tablespoon butter, one tablespoon kaola; mix with two cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, salt; add enough milk to make a light dough. Roll thin and bake in quick oven. Biscuits One quart flour sifted twice with three teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Shortening size of large egg, half butter, half lard. If you only use butter, take twice the size of an egg. One rounding teaspoon salt. Sweet milk enough to make a soft dough. Roll thin and bake in hot oven seven to ten minutes. Breakfast Rolls Put one pound of flour in a bowl; mix one ounce Fleischmann's yeast, one ounce butter, and a little salt with one-half pint warm milk and water. Make a hole in the center of the flour, and pour in yeast. Cover with a cloth and leave in warm place for three hours. Then knead to a light dough with one-half pint of warm milk and leave in a warm place for one-half hour. Then turn the dough on a board and make into any fancy shapes. Let it rise for awhile. Brush over rolls with a little milk or warm butter, and bake fifteen to twenty minutes. Brown Bread One cup corn meal, three cups sweet milk, one cup molasses, one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon soda dissolved in hot water, one cup bran and graham enough to make a stiff batter. Bake in a very slow oven. Bran Muffins Two cups bran (Educator), one cup whole wheat flour (measure after sifting), one-half teaspoon soda mixed with the flour, pinch of salt, two tablespoons New Orleans molasses, one egg beaten lightly, one tablespoon melted butter, milk enough to make a stiff batter. Mix bran, flour, butter, molasses, salt and one egg, then add milk and last the soda dissolved in a small quantity of boiling water. Bake in hot buttered gem pans about twenty minutes. Boston Brown Bread One cup corn meal, one cup graham flour, one cup sour milk, one-half cup sweet milk, one-fourth cup molasses, two large tablespoons brown sugar, one egg, butter size of an egg, one tablespoon baking soda dissolved in a little hot water, little salt. Steam two and one-half hours. Have water boiling when you put it on to steam. Corn Muffins One cup of cornmeal, one-half cup flour, into which sift two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Wet this with two cups of sweet milk, add one teaspoon butter, one teaspoon salt and one teaspoon sugar. Beat the yolks of two eggs lightly and add, and lastly the stiff beaten whites. Bake in muffin rings. Eat cold. Cornmeal Gems One cup flour, one-half cup cornmeal, one-third cup sugar, four teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one-half teaspoon salt, one egg, one cup milk, one tablespoon melted butter. Sift the dry ingredients together, add the milk, then the egg well beaten, and lastly the melted butter. A quick oven is required. To get the best results from any bread or cake recipe, you must have a First Class Flour. Try the new White River Flour Made from Oregon's Finest Wheat by Oregon's Finest Mill Not bleached for color, but in compliance with the Pure Food laws. Notice the Taste. You'll Like It Makes Better, Lighter Bread ALLEN & LEWIS, Distributors In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. Corn Bread, New Orleans Two cups sifted cornmeal, one-half cup flour, two cups sweet milk, two well beaten eggs, one-half cup molasses, one teaspoon salt, two tablespoons melted butter, two level teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Mix the meal and flour smoothly with the milk, then add butter, molasses and salt, then eggs and baking powder. Beat thoroughly all together. Bake nearly an hour in well buttered tins. Corn Bread (Southern) Two cups flour, two cups cornmeal, one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon sugar, four teaspoons Crescent baking powder, three tablespoons melted butter; two eggs, whites beaten separately; three cups milk. Sift flour, meal, sugar, salt and baking powder together, then add butter, yolks of eggs and milk. Beat all well together, lastly, folding in the beaten whites. Corn Bread-1 One quart sour milk, one heaping pint corn meal, one teaspoon soda, one teaspoon salt, one egg, lump of butter. Corn Bread-2 One cup white flour, one cup yellow cornmeal, one cup milk, one-fourth cup sugar, two tablespoons melted butter, one yolk of egg, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Bake in a shallow pan. Date Loaf One cup flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one-half teaspoon salt, one cup sugar, four eggs, one teaspoon vanilla, one pound dates, one pound walnuts. Prepare dates and walnut meats; do not chop, use them whole; put them in a bowl, sift over them flour, baking powder, salt and sugar together, add well beaten egg yolks. Fold in whites and flavoring. Bake one hour in a moderate oven. When cold, slice in thin slices with a sharp knife. Serve as you would coffee cake. Egg Biscuit Sift together a quart of flour and three heaping teaspoons of Crescent baking powder. Rub into this thoroughly a piece of butter the size of an egg; add two well beaten eggs, a tablespoon of sugar, a teaspoon of salt. Mix all together quickly into a soft dough with one cup of milk, or more if needed. Roll out nearly half of an inch thick. Cut into biscuits and bake immediately in a quick oven for fifteen to twenty minutes. Five o'Clock Tea Biscuits Mix one-fourth of a pound of flour and one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one cup of sugar, the rind and juice of two lemons with one-half pound of butter, which has been worked into a smooth paste, add to this the whites of two eggs and a little milk. Roll this and cut into biscuits, and brush them over with the yolks of the eggs. Sprinkle with a little sifted, pulverized sugar and bake in buttered tins. English Muffins One pound flour, one ounce Fleischmann's yeast, one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon sugar, one pint warm milk. Put flour, salt and sugar in bowl. Soak yeast in a little warm water, add it to flour and stir in milk. Beat well, sprinkle some flour on top, cover with cloth, and allow it to rise. When quite light, place some muffin rings on a greased griddle, and half fill with the dough. When it has risen to the top of rings bake with a slow fire. Do not let them brown. When they are baked on the bottom, turn them with cake turner and bake on the other side. When baked pull each in half and toast. Butter well. Put them together again and serve very hot. German Coffee Bread One cup scalded milk, one-fourth cup sugar, one-third cup butter, one-half teaspoon salt, one egg, one-third Fleischmann's yeast cake dissolved in a little warm milk, one-half cup seeded and chopped raisins. Add butter, salt and sugar to milk. When lukewarm, add dissolved yeast cake, well beaten egg, raisins and enough flour to make stiff batter. Let rise over night. In the morning spread in buttered dripping pan one-half inch thick. Cover, and let rise again. Before baking, brush over with beaten egg, and cover with following mixture: three tablespoons melted butter, one-third cup sugar, one teaspoon cinnamon. Gluten Bread Two cups lukewarm water, one-half cake fresh Fleischmann's compressed yeast, three and one-half cups gum gluten (ground), one-half teaspoon salt. Soften yeast in small quantity of water. Mix all the ingredients together to a stiff dough, and knead very thoroughly, using a little more gluten if necessary to keep it from sticking to the board. Avoid having the water too warm, or the bread will be very sticky. Shape into a loaf, place in a buttered pan and let rise about two and one-half hours, or until double in bulk. Then bake about forty-five minutes. Ginger Bread I One cup molasses, one-half cup brown sugar, one-half cup milk, three-fourths teaspoon each of mace, cloves, cinnamon and ginger, one-half teaspoon soda, two eggs, one and one-half cups flour, one-half cup butter. Bake in shallow pan. Ginger Bread II One cup granulated sugar, one cup molasses, one egg, pinch of salt, one-half teaspoon each of cloves, cinnamon, allspice, nutmeg. Mix all this first. One cup boiling water, one-half cup butter, melt in water; three and one-half cups flour, one teaspoon soda, one tablespoon ginger. Ginger Bread III One-half cup sugar, one cup molasses, one-half cup butter, melted; one-half teaspoon cinnamon, one-fourth teaspoon cloves, one tablespoon ginger, two teaspoons soda dissolved in one cup boiling water, three cups sifted flour, two well-beaten eggs. Mix in order in which written, taking care to beat in flour thoroughly so it does not lump. Bake in big dripping pan. Have oven hot when putting in bread, and then turn down gas at once and bake in slow oven about twenty minutes. Ginger Bread IV One-half cup of butter beaten to a cream, two whole eggs, three tablespoons brown sugar, three-fourths cup syrup, one cup milk, two teaspoons ginger. Mix two full teaspoons of Crescent baking powder with two cups of flour, adding flour gradually. Butter a baking pan and bake in a moderate oven. Hot Rolls Two cups fresh milk, two cups boiling water, level tablespoon salt, heaping tablespoon sugar, small tablespoon butter (heat until almost boiling) then add one cake Fleischmann's compressed yeast dissolved in warm water. Cool and mix in flour enough to thicken. Little Breads Two pounds flour, sifted; two cooked potatoes, grated; two large spoons butter, good handful sugar, little salt, one Fleischmann's yeast cake dissolved in lukewarm milk and enough lukewarm milk to make dough that will clean away from the pan. After kneading, cover with cloth and put in a warm place over night. When ready to form, braid into individual twists and let rise again for short while. Then paint with a whole egg, well beaten, and sprinkle poppy seeds on top. Muffins I One-fourth cup butter, one-fourth cup sugar, three-fourths cup milk, one egg, two cups flour, four level teaspoons Crescent baking powder, a little salt. Bake twenty minutes. Muffins II One egg, one tablespoon sugar, one tablespoon melted butter. one cup milk, one and one-half cups flour with one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Club House Rolls Two cups scalded milk, three teaspoons butter, two teaspoons sugar, one teaspoon salt, one cake Fleischmann's yeast, six to six and one-half cups hard wheat flour. Add butter and salt to milk. When lukewarm add yeast cake (which has been dissolved in one-fourth cup lukewarm water ), and three cups of flour. Beat five minutes. Let rise, then add remainder of flour, turn on lightly floured board and knead thoroughly. Let rise until increased in bulk. Knead, roll to one-half inch thickness, shape with biscuit cutter, denting middle with case knife handle, brush with melted butter, fold and press edges together. Place in greased pans one inch apart, let rise; brush over with milk, and bake twenty to thirty minutes in a hot oven. Popovers I Three whole eggs beaten well with egg beater. One scant cup flour, mixed with one cup milk, a little salt. Bake twenty minutes in hot oven. Popovers II Two cups of milk, two cups of flour, one teaspoon salt, three eggs, one teaspoon melted butter. Beat eggs very light, then add them to the milk and salt. Add this very slowly to the flour; if lumpy strain through a sieve. Bake in a quick oven. Serve hot. Prune Bread Three cups of stewed dried prunes which have been pitted and well mashed, two-thirds cup of molasses, two-thirds cup of brown sugar, one cup sour milk, two cups white flour, three cups graham flour and one teaspoon soda. Mix and bake immediately. This will make three small loaves. Nut Bread I Two eggs well beaten, one cup brown sugar, two cups milk, four cups sifted flour mixed with one cup chopped nuts, four teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Let mixture stand in greased pans twenty minutes. Bake one-half hour in moderate oven in two loaves. Nut Bread II Four cups sifted flour, four teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one-half cup sugar, one teaspoon salt, one egg well beaten, one cup milk, one cup walnuts chopped. Mix as for biscuits. Put in baking pan. Let rise twenty minutes in warm place. Bake forty minutes in moderate oven. Rusks One pint fresh milk, one cup sugar, two-thirds cup butter, two eggs, a heaping quart of flour. Cream the butter and sugar, beat the eggs well, and add to the tepid milk. Mix. Add the sifted flour, beating well. Dissolve one Fleischmann's yeast cake in a little tepid water and stir into the sponge. Let stand until morning. Then add enough flour to knead on board and let it rise again. When light make into round biscuits and drop into the center of a muffin pan, letting stand until light. Bake a delicate brown. Before putting in the oven, brush with melted butter. Rye Bread I One and one-half cups rye flour, two and one-half cups white flour, one cup home-made yeast, one cup water (lukewarm), a little caraway seed. Measure flour before sifting, mix rye flour with two cups of the white flour, and later add the remaining one-half cup of white flour. Make into stiff sponge, let rise over night. In the morning mold into a loaf and let rise again until light. Bake in moderate oven three-fourths of an hour. This quantity will make one large loaf. Rye Bread II Four cups warm water, four level teaspoons salt, one heaping teaspoon sugar, one heaping teaspoon caraway seed, tablespoon butter, one-half Fleischmann's yeast cake dissolved in warm water. Mix altogether, then add sufficient white flour to form a thin batter, then add rye flour enough to make a stiff dough and knead thoroughly, the longer the better. Brush the dough with butter, and allow to rise over night, or until it has doubled its bulk. Then knead again, and put in a greased pan, and paint with butter to prevent a dry crust forming. When light, or at least half again its size, bake about an hour. This makes one large loaf. Rye Bread III One sifter and a scant one-half of white flour, one-half sifter of rye flour, three-quarters cake of Fleischmann's compressed yeast, two large potatoes (cooked and when cold grated), two and one-half level tablespoons salt, caraway seed. Mix flour well to avoid being streaky; dissolve yeast in lukewarm water, then mix to a nice consistency. Knead well and put mixture in pans to rise over night. (This makes one large and one small loaf, or biscuits if preferred.) In the morning knead, shape, and put in baking pans, let rise again, bake in moderate oven one hour. Parker House Rolls I One quart flour, one pint or two cups milk, lukewarm; dissolve one-half Fleischmann's yeast cake in milk, one-half teaspoon salt, two tablespoons butter. Let rise over night, roll out, not more than a quarter of an inch thick, cut with large round cutter. Spread butter over top and fold one-half over the other by doubling it. Let rise and bake in quick oven. Parker House Rolls II Boil one pint of milk with butter size of an egg. When cool, add one teaspoon salt, one-half cup Fleischmann's yeast and flour enough to make a thick batter. Stir well. When light, knead fifteen minutes. Roll out, cut with a large cutter, spread with butter, fold over, put in pans. Let stand until light, then bake in a quick oven. Parker House Rolls III Two cups scalded milk, three tablespoons butter, two tablespoons sugar, one teaspoon salt, one Fleischmann's yeast cake dissolved in one-quarter cup lukewarm water, flour. Add butter, sugar and salt to milk; when lukewarm, add dissolved yeast and three cups flour. Beat thoroughly, cover, and let rise until light. Cut down, and add enough flour to knead (it will take about two and one-half cups). Let rise again, toss on slightly floured board, knead, pat and roll out to one-third inch thickness. Shape with biscuit cutter, first dipped in flour. Dip the handle of a case knife in flour, and with it make a crease through the middle of each piece. Brush over one-half of each piece with melted butter, fold, and press edges together. Place in greased pan, one inch apart. Cover, let rise, and bake in hot oven twelve to fifteen minutes. As rolls rise they will part slightly, and if hastened in rising are apt to lose their shape. Rice Muffins Mash two cups of boiled rice through a sieve. Beat the yolks of three eggs very light, and add; then three cups of milk and one tablespoon of butter, then sift in one cup of flour to which one-half a teaspoon of Crescent baking powder and one teaspoon of salt have been added. Last of all, fold in the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Bake in muffin rings or gem pans in a quick oven for about fifteen minutes. By using this batter in well greased waffle irons you have rice waffles. Graham Gems Two eggs, one cup graham flour, one-half teaspoon soda, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, three tablespoons sour milk, one tablespoon sugar. Bake twenty minutes. Rice Gems One heaping cup flour, two-thirds cup cold boiled rice, one and one-half cups sour milk, one tablespoon butter, one egg, pinch of salt, one teaspoon soda. Beat well and bake in buttered gem pans in hot oven about twenty minutes. White Bread I One tablespoon butter, one tablespoon salt, one tablespoon sugar, one boiled potato with the skin on; when cold, peel and grate fine; one cake Fleischmann's compressed yeast, dissolved in lukewarm water. Put all in the bread mixer, with one pint of warm water, one pint of warm milk, three quarts of flour. Mix until it forms a smooth ball, then let it rise about eight or ten hours, then mix it again and form into loaves and let it rise, then bake for one hour. White Bread II Two sifters of white flour, three-quarters Fleischmann's compressed yeast cake, two large potatoes cooked and when cold grated, two level tablespoons salt, a pinch of sugar, one-half cup lukewarm milk and the rest lukewarm water to make a fine batter. Mix and knead well. (This makes a dozen biscuits and one loaf.) Let rise over night, knead in shape in the morning, and put in pans, letting it rise again, and bake in moderately hot oven one hour. White Bread III Two cups warm milk or water, one tablespoon butter, two teaspoons salt, one Fleischmann's yeast cake, two teaspoons sugar, and about one and one-half sifters flour. Heat milk or water, add butter, salt and sugar. When lukewarm add yeast, which has been dissolved in one-half cup lukewarm water; add flour gradually. When stiff enough to handle, turn the dough on floured board. Cover and let rise until double its bulk; divide into loaves, place in pan and let rise again until double its bulk. Bake one hour in hot oven. Scotch Scones One pound flour, two ounces butter, one teaspoon Crescent baking soda, two teaspoons cream of tartar, pinch of salt. Mix the dry ingredients well. Make into dough with one-half pint milk. Roll out about one inch thick and bake in oven or griddle about twenty minutes. Salt-Rising or Milk Yeast Bread Put into a pail holding two quarts and one-half, one pint of new milk and one pint of boiling water; mix with this one tablespoon of sugar, one of salt, and three pints of flour; beat well together and cover tightly. Set pail into another pail of water, enough to come nearly to the top of it. To have the water the right temperature, let half be boiling and half cold; keep the same temperature until risen. Beat the batter as often as once every half hour until the last hour, when it must not be disturbed. It will rise in about five hours. When risen enough, the pail will be full. Put two quarts of flour into a pan; make a hollow in the center; dissolve a teaspoon of soda in a little hot water, put yeast and soda into the flour. Knead well and make into loaves. Set in a warm place to rise, which will take about forty-five minutes. Bake in a quick oven. It will take nearly a pint of flour to knead the bread on the board. Soda Biscuit One quart flour, one scant teaspoon soda, two teaspoons cream of tartar, one teaspoon salt, one tablespoon shortening. Mix with one-half pint of sweet milk. Bake in quick oven. Sally Lunns Mix one-half ounce of Fleischmann's yeast with four tablespoons warm cream and one tablespoon flour. Put in a warm place and let it rise. Take six ounces flour and mix into it a good pinch of salt, one ounce granulated sugar, two yolks of eggs, three ounces warm butter and one-fourth pint cream. Mix this well together, then add the yeast and work again for about ten minutes. Put into buttered tins and stand them on a baking tin in a warm place until the dough rises twice its original size. Brush over with warm milk and bake in a quick oven fifteen minutes. The tins should be about two and one-half inches deep. These cakes can be cut and toasted or split open when hot and butter poured in. Home Made Yeast Three-quarters cup sugar, one-half cup salt, one-half cup flour, one pound peeled potatoes , a few hops. Cook the potatoes in one quart water; when tender, mash the potatoes in the water in which they were cooked. Add the salt, sugar and flour and hops to the mashed potatoes , then add one quart cold water. To start the yeast, dissolve one Fleischmann's yeast cake in a little warm water for one-half hour, and add to the yeast. Strain the entire mixture. Place in a warm place for twenty-four hours before using. White Rolls Scald one quart sweet milk with three-quarters cup butter. When lukewarm add two tablespoons white  sugar, one large teaspoon salt, one Fleischmann's yeast cake dissolved in one small cup warm water and three pints flour. Mix well and let rise for five hours in a warm room. Add necessary flour to stiffen. Knead for ten minutes cut with a small round cutter, moisten and lap under the edges of each. Place in buttered baking pans far apart, and let rise two and one-half hours. Bake in hot oven, browning well. Scotch Shortbread One pound flour, one-half pound butter, six ounces sugar. Work all together on a board. When thoroughly mixed, press with the hand into cakes one-half inch thick; cut into shapes and bake in a slow oven. SUPREME SODAS Manufactured by F.F.HARADON & SON are all the word supreme implies Manufactured from the highest grade materials obtainable Two illustrations - one of a box of Albers wheat flakes and the other of a box of Albers flapjack flour. Albers Rolled Oats and Albers Flapjack Flour for a Delightful Breakfast Many recipes for making Appetizing dishes Albers Bros. Milling Co. In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. SOUPS "For soup is but the first of those delights, which go to make the coming bill of fare." Good rich soup is a hygienic food of large value, especially nutritious in cold weather for the old and young, for all whose vitality is severely tried by cold. It furnishes nutrition in a form easily taken and quickly assimilated and this gives it exceptional importance for the use of the aged and delicate. We all know how peculiarly comforting and invigorating a nice bowl of hot soup or broth is after unusual fatigue or exposure to cold or stormy weather. It is a real restorative, not stimulating merely, but at once inviting a response from the physical powers and providing the actual constituents to work with. On the side of economy the soup kettle is undoubtedly the very best and most profitable destination for much material that is often wasted. The ham bone, the tough end of beefsteak, the few spoonfuls of vegetables--corn, tomatoes, whatever it may be--the bared carcass of the turkey, all will yield up their final atoms of juiciness and flavor in the soup kettle only. In winter, the soup stock may be kept in perfect condition for several days. Soup Meat. Any lean piece of beef, not more than half bone, will make good soup, always remembering that the better the quality of the meat the less will be required. From three to four pounds to a gallon of water is about the average allowance. But in every household where much fresh meat is used, the bones and trimmings, remnants of roasts and steaks and the like, are so useful for this purpose that little need be bought expressly for soup. Poultry, veal and lamb or mutton are all available, and a very excellent family soup can be produced from materials that seem of little or no value. The Process of Cooking. Long and slow simmering, without interruption, is the one secret of reducing tough fibers to tenderness and extracting whatever soluble properties are contained. Put the kettle over a moderate fire, with cold water, breaking the bones and seeing that all are completely covered. Let it come slowly to a boil; then set where a very gentle simmering will be kept up continuously for a good part of the day. Of course the time required varies greatly with the meat used. A good soup may be made from juicy meat, cut fine, in a very short time, but with the ordinary material from three to six hours of steady, slow cooking is not too much. Vegetables. One carrot, one parsnip, one turnip, one onion with two cloves stuck in it, a bay leaf and a bunch of fine herbs. Cut in slices about a quarter of an inch thick; this quantity is enough for two quarts of soup. Used simply for giving flavor and richness, they are, of course, not served with the soup; but sometimes the carrot and parsnip are stamped out in fancy shapes (rings, stars, etc.), and make their appearance on the table. Other vegetables are used to give distinctive character, as, in summer, asparagus soup, pea soup, etc., and in winter the popular German cabbage soup, celery soup and purees. For all these the vegetables are put through a sieve or vegetable sifter just before taking up, making the soup as thick as cream. After cooking the meat, any fat upon the soup must be most scrupulously removed, and the easiest way is to set it aside and take it off when cold. The vegetables should be added an hour or more before taking up. If it is desired to keep soup for a second day, soup greens should be omitted in hot weather, as they have a tendency to sour stock. Asparagus Soup Boil one quart of asparagus cut in inch lengths in one quart of water until very tender; rub through a colander and put back into water in which it has been boiled; heat one pint milk; stir into it one tablespoon butter rubbed with one tablespoon flour; cook several minutes. Season and pour over asparagus. Let it commence to boil, then pour into tureen over toasted bread cut in dice shapes. Serve at once. Cream of Asparagus Soup From a bunch of asparagus break off the tough ends, using the tops and tender parts for stewing. Put the tough portions into two quarts of water and simmer gently until the water is well flavored with the asparagus. Make a cream sauce of two tablespoons flour, two cups rich milk, one level teaspoon salt, two tablespoons butter. Put butter in saucepan and melt; add flour, and cook together, being careful not to allow it to brown; add the milk cold, stirring constantly until it thickens; add water flavored with the asparagus; season with salt and pepper and serve. If preferred, you can put the cooked tops cut into small pieces into the soup before serving. Barley Soup For six plates of soup, use two tablespoons of pearl barley. Wash before using. Cook in soup stock for two and one-half hours very slowly; also put a small piece of bread therein, and cook same with barley. The bread may thereafter be removed or left in the soup as a matter of choice. Before serving, stir the yolk of an egg in the soup tureen, then pour soup in while boiling and stir a little. Bean Soup Parboil beans; then cook with onions, potatoes and bacon. Cut bacon into squares, fry and pour into soup. Beer Soup Take one quart beer, boil ten minutes with a piece of whole cinnamon, a piece of lemon peel and two tablespoons sugar; skim frequently. Then heat one tablespoon flour in one tablespoon butter until flour gets yellow; then pour slowly therein the boiling beer. Let it cook two or three minutes. Put yolks of three eggs in soup tureen, beat well and then pour in the soup slowly and stir with the eggs. Add small squares of toasted white bread. Some prefer stirring therein one-half cup sweet cream. Browned Flour Soup Take three-quarters tablespoon butter; heat and stir therein three tablespoons of flour until light brown and dry; keep same dry. Then take one tablespoon butter and stir slowly therein one and one-half tablespoon flour until light yellow, and pour into same almost one quart boiling water, in which has been placed a little salt. Stir while so doing. Thereafter put the other heated flour and butter into the soup; a little at a time and stir; and let it boil five minutes. Put yolk of one egg in tureen, beat well; pour the soup therein; stir while doing so, then add small squares of toasted white bread. Chicken Soup Take an old chicken, put on stove with cold water and let it cook for three hours. Soup greens put in at the same time give the soup a nice flavor. Before serving stir the yolk of an egg into the tureen, and pour therein the boiling stock, then stir a little; or it can be served clear, without egg. Clam Chowder Fifty clams, four cups milk, four teaspoons butter, one onion, four potatoes , salt and pepper to taste, two slices of bacon cut into small pieces. Chop the clams, cut the onions and potatoes into thin slices; add butter and seasoning, also bacon, and boil together one-half hour. Just before serving, add a few crackers broken into small bits. Clam Soup Fifty clams, one pint cold water, two tablespoons butter, crackers, four tablespoons flour, one quart milk, salt and pepper. Drain and chop clams; put juice to boil; as it boils remove all scum; add one pint water, then chopped clams; salt and pepper to taste. Let it boil up once. Stir in two tablespoons butter and four tablespoons of flour creamed together. Stir until butter and flour are dissolved. When soup begins to thicken remove from fire and add one quart boiled milk. Break up crackers in tureen and pour hot soup over. Clam Nectar Take one dozen razor clams, chop fine, add a little salt and a piece of green pepper, also one quart of water. Let boil thirty-five minutes, then strain. Serve in bouillon cups. Some people like a little whipped cream placed on top. Corn Soup Grate six ears uncooked corn; mix with a teaspoon of tapioca; add a little water and boil for one-half hour. Then add one quart milk and a little piece of butter. Put in soup tureen one hard-boiled egg, chopped fine. Cream Soup Cut about three slices of stale white bread, each into three or four parts. Place in soup tureen with a little salt. Add enough boiling water to make three plates of soup, and cover the tureen. Then heat thoroughly one-half pint sweet cream in a skillet. Stir constantly, but do not let it boil. Pour cream into the bread and water. Same should be served as soon as ready, as it is best when first made. Farina Soup Take about four plates of soup stock and when boiling put slowly therein two tablespoons of farina, stirring all the time so that it will not get lumpy. Let it boil for ten minutes. Then beat one egg, place it in the soup tureen, and pour the soup therein, stirring in the meantime. German Soup Make large, sweet milk pancakes of one egg and fry them very thin. When cold, roll them up and cut in fine long streamers like noodles. Put same in soup stock and let boil one minute. Before serving, put in a little parsley, chopped fine. Green Kern Soup This is prepared the same as barley soup, using green kern in lieu of barley. If they are to be left in the soup they should be ground fine before using. Some people prefer this soup strained for the purpose of removing the green kern. Roasting green kern for a few minutes before grinding improves same. Do not wash it. Lentil Soup This is prepared the same way as pea soup, or by using soup stock; it is much finer. Soaking lentils over night causes them to cook tender sooner. Strain if you like. Creme of Lobster Soup Pick the meat from a two-pound lobster; chop fine and pound in a mortar, adding from time to time a little milk or cream; when perfectly smooth add salt and a little cayenne; take out enough to make a dozen small balls; bind together with egg; fry the balls in butter. Mix the rest of the lobster with two quarts milk; rub through a sieve; put in a saucepan and simmer for ten minutes; add two ounces fresh butter and stir until smooth. Place the balls in a tureen, pour over the soup and serve. Cream of Lima Beans Soak one cup of beans over night; drain and cook in boiling water until soft; salt; drain and add three-quarters cup cream and a little butter. Reheat before serving. Cream of Mushroom Soup Peel, rinse and cut fine one pound fresh mushrooms; put them to boil with one quart of either chicken or veal stock; cook until tender; press through a sieve and return to kettle; add four tablespoons sago; cook twenty minutes longer; season with salt and paprika; add one quart scalded milk; simmer for five minutes longer. Take out about one cup of the broth; stir slowly into the well-stirred yolks of four eggs. Pour slowly into the soup and serve at once. Puree of Green Pea One pint of pulp of green peas. Thin it out with a little more than a pint of stock. Make a ball out of one tablespoon of butter and one of flour; put it in the stock and let it come to a boil; take one cup of cream and heat it in a double boiler. Ten minutes before serving put the hot cream into the soup and set it aside, so it does not boil. Put the yolks of two eggs into the soup tureen to thicken the soup. Okra Gumbo Soup Take nice ripe tomatoes or one-half can tomatoes, two quarts good rich beef stock; season with salt, pepper, paprika and a little garlic if liked; cut up a pint of okra into small rings; chop up an onion, a carrot, some parsley and celery; add two tablespoons rice, one tablespoon barley, a few lima bean s and some corn. Let all boil slowly for several hours. Add a little Worcestershire sauce. If too thick, you may add a little more soup stock. You may serve a small piece of chicken and the soup meat cut into small squares with each plate of soup. This soup should be quite thick when done. Onion Soup Four large onions cut in rings and fried in butter until brown; then add to the hot soup stock already prepared, allowing it to boil for twenty minutes; remove to a casserole; add squares of toasted bread, sprinkled with parmesan cheese, and browned in oven for a few minutes. Serve in the casserole. Oyster Soup Drain one pint oysters; put liquid into saucepan, and add enough water to make a quart; simmer slowly for three minutes; remove scum; add to the broth one tablespoon butter, one tablespoon flour stirred to paste. Cook three minutes, or until smooth stirring meanwhile. Add one-half cup cream. Season soup to taste with salt and pepper. When it boils add oysters. As soon as it comes to a boil again and the edges of oysters curl and separate, remove from fire and serve. Pea Soup Without Stock Prepare same as potato soup, but use dried peas (wash them), and then let them cook for three hours. Instead of fried bread, slice therein pieces of small sausage, and let the sausage boil for a few minutes. Soaking peas overnight causes them to cook tender sooner. Strain if you like. Potato Soup Without Stock Take a quart of water seasoned with salt and cook two fair-sized potatoes therein until done. The potatoes should then be mashed and put back into the water wherein they were cooked. Take a tablespoon of butter, put in a frying-pan, and cut fine therein a piece of onion, frying until brown. Then put a tablespoon of flour therein and brown. Next add the potatoes previously prepared to the fat, onions and flour. Stir in slowly, so that it will not get lumpy. Before serving put therein small squares of white bread, fried so that it becomes like toast. Tomato Soup Two cups milk, two level tablespoons flour, one can tomatoes; mix flour and milk; cook tomatoes with one-half onion; add a few whole cloves and one bay leaf. Cook slowly for fifteen minutes, then strain into the milk and flour mixture. Add also salt, paprika and a pinch of soda. Mock Turtle Soup Take head of one calf, six whole cloves, one-quarter teaspoon whole peppers, five whole allspice, two sprigs thyme, one-quarter cup sliced onion, one-quarter cup carrots, two cups brown stock, one-quarter cup butter, one-half cup flour, one cup stewed tomatoes, strained, juice of one-half lemon, a little Madeira wine. Clean calf's head, soak one hour in cold water; cover; cook in quart salt water to which seasoning and vegetables have been added; remove head; boil stock until reduced to one quart; strain and cool; melt butter, add flour, brown; then pour slowly over the brown stock; add the head stock, tomatoes, one cup veal cut in dice and the lemon juice, simmer for five minutes. Then add Madeira wine, salt and pepper to taste. Rice Soup Prepare the same way as barley soup, using rice instead of barley. Wine Soup Take one tablespoon butter, heat, and stir slowly therein one small tablespoon flour; continue to heat same, but do not let the flour brown or even get yellow. Season one quart white  cooking wine with whole cinnamon and lemon peel and tablespoon or more sugar, and pour slowly into butter and flour. Let boil for five minutes. Put yolks of three eggs in soup tureen, beat well, and then pour slowly the boiling wine into the soup tureen and stir with the egg. Add small squares of toasted white bread. SOUP INGREDIENTS Almond Balls for Soup One-sixth pound almonds, chopped fine; beat well the yolk of one egg; add almonds to egg, a little salt and a little grated lemon; add stiffly beaten whites; drop a little from end of teaspoon into boiling oil. Put into soup just before serving. Egg Barley Soup Take one egg and make thereof a stiff noodle dough; grate it, then dry it and put same in soup stock, letting it boil ten minutes. One egg will make enough barley for eight or nine plates of soup. Egg Einlauf Soup Take two tablespoons of flour mixed with enough water to make a thick, smooth batter; then beat one egg well and thereafter mix with the flour and water. Season with a little salt, ginger and nutmeg, and drop a little at a time into the boiling soup stock. Let it cook for ten minutes. Marrow Balls for Soup Take a full tablespoon of marrow, beat so that all the blood comes out; add one egg and beat with marrow five minutes, then season with a little salt, pepper, ginger, nutmeg; add enough cracker flour to hold same together; roll into small balls, and then boil same in soup stock twenty minutes. Do not put into soup stock till it boils. Soup With Rolled Oats Take soup stock for four plates of soup; put two tablespoons of rolled oats in the boiling soup; let it cook slowly for one hour, then strain. After straining same, let it boil up again. Beat one egg, place in soup tureen with a little parsley, chopped fine. Pour stock into tureen and stir while so doing, then serve. Potato Einlauf for Soup Beat one egg, add a little salt and two raw potatoes , grated; mix well together, then drop slowly in boiling soup and cook for ten to twelve minutes. Liver Kloesse for Soup Take a small piece of raw liver, chop very fine. Then cut fine one-quarter of an onion and brown in a small piece of butter; mix with the liver; add a little finely chopped parsley; season with nutmeg, ginger, red and white pepper; then add one egg and cracker flour enough to mold same into balls. Drop one at a time into boiling soup. Matzos Kloesse Soak matzos in water a couple of hours. Drain water off and dry matzos well; put good soup fat or goose fat in frying pan; when hot put in a few slices of onion, chopped fine, and when light brown, put matzos in. Stir until mass clings together. While warm, stir in eggs, allowing one egg to three matzos, and season to taste, beating well. Form into balls. German Noodles Two eggs, one-half teaspoon salt, flour to make a very stiff dough. Beat the eggs slightly, add salt and the flour gradually; knead until dough is smooth and quite stiff; roll very thin; cover with towel and set aside to dry about twenty minutes; fold the dough or cut into broad strips lengthwise, and then into very fine strips crosswise, if wanted for soup; about one-half inch wide if wanted instead of a vegetable. They may be dried and kept in a jar, covered with cheese-cloth. Schwaemmchen for Soup Take a tablespoon of good fat, pinch of salt, a very little nutmeg and a very little parsley, chopped fine. Stir this with one egg and enough cracker flour or matzos meal to hold together. Put a small spoonful at a time into the boiling soup stock. Let it boil for ten minutes. ADDITIONAL RECIPES ENTREES "Take yesterday's remnants from all the three meals, And place in the oven to roast. Then mix 'em and shake 'em, and cut 'em and bake 'em, And serve as an entree on toast." Anchovy Nests Toast round pieces of bread, spread lightly with anchovy paste, then with layer of ham, chopped fine; season well with cayenne and paprika, and moisten with soup stock or white sauce; cover the top of each piece of toast with the white of an egg beaten to a stiff froth; place carefully, so as not to break, the yolk in the center of each one; bake in oven almost one minute, just long enough to set the yolk and make the whites a golden brown; garnish with parsley and serve on a hot plate. Artichoke Hearts and Mushrooms Take the hearts of boiled artichokes and fill with fresh mushrooms cut in pieces and mixed with cream sauce; let them steam after being filled; grate a little cheese on top, and put in the oven a few minutes before serving. Artichokes With Paté de Foie Gras Fill hearts of boiled artichokes with foie gras; cover with thick cream sauce, season well and sprinkle with bread crumbs; brown in oven. Artichokes Filled With Fried Oysters Cut off stems and the tops of artichokes evenly with a sharp knife; boil in salt water until tender, then remove center leaves and keep hot. Fill with fried oysters, and pour over them a Bernaise sauce. Artichokes With Sweetbreads Cut off tops before cooking. Cook and scoop, leaving cup-shaped; take the part scooped out, and tops, and press through a sieve. In a pan, put a large piece of soaked bread, squeezed dry, with a good sized piece of butter, three tablespoons cream, little soup stock, mushroom-catsup, salt, pepper, strained artichokes, one-half pound of chopped cooked sweetbreads and the mushrooms; fill artichokes with this and place in pan and heat with a little soup stock. Serve with hot sauce, made of one cup soup stock, one tablespoon butter, seasoning of salt and pepper and one tablespoon flour. Artichoke Poulette Take six good sized artichokes and cook until tender; cut heart into pieces, scrape leaves, and put into ramekins; make a poulette sauce as follows: Take two heaping tablespoons of flour, one good slice of butter; heat one pint milk and one pint cream and add it to flour and butter and let come to boil. Flavor with Worcestershire sauce and salt; pour poulette sauce over artichokes and sprinkle with Parmesan cheese. Artichokes With Veal Boil six large artichokes until tender. Get about one pound of veal and cook until tender. Make a dressing of six slices toasted bread chopped fine, one small onion minced fine, one slice of melted butter; season well with salt, pepper, paprika, Worcestershire sauce and tomato catsup. Remove the hearts of the artichokes and leaves surrounding, leaving sufficient leaves to form a cup in which to place the filling; scrape each leaf taken out with a spoon, and add this also to the dressing; chop veal very fine, mix all well and fill the artichokes. Place in pan with little hot water, bake in slow oven twenty minutes. Croquettes of Calf's Brains Boil one-half pound calf's brains for about twenty minutes, then put in cold water for a few minutes, peel off the outside; chop the brains and add one-half cup bread crumbs; mash all together, add a teaspoon of finely chopped parsley, one ounce butter, the yolk of an egg, a little lemon juice, grated nutmeg, salt and pepper to taste. Mix all well, shape, and fry in fat or butter. Serve with cream sauce. Brains au Beurre Noir Parboil one pound brains and put on a hot platter in warming oven on squares of toast. Put in a saucepan a good sized piece of butter; when this gets very brown, add a tablespoon of vinegar, a very little salt and pepper, and some finely chopped parsley. Pour this over the brains and serve immediately. This sauce is also used with poached eggs on toast. Brains a la Vinaigrette Put into a frying pan two large tablespoons butter; make smoking brown. Add one tablespoon chopped estregon or small garlic, one tablespoon chopped parsley, one cup of bouillon or soup stock , one cup of white wine, two tablespoons vinegar, black pepper and salt to taste. Boil all together ten minutes; add one pound of brains, which have been parboiled, to the mixture and boil fifteen minutes. Let the brains be cut in large pieces, not chopped fine. Sweetbreads may be used instead of brains. Brain Timbales Take one pound of brains, put them in salt water, remove the skin and strain through a fine strainer; soak a thick slice of white bread in milk, remove crust, squeeze milk out of bread, put in paprika, red pepper and salt, then the yolk of four eggs; beat up well, and lastly add the stiffly beaten whites; grease your timbale irons well, fill with mixture and cook in a pan of boiling water, on top of oven, for thirty minutes. Filet of Beef For twelve persons allow about four pounds of the tenderloin of beef. Have butcher lard it well; cut into slices an inch thick; sprinkle with salt, pepper and flour, and broil over a bright fire for seven minutes. Brain Patties Clean one pound brains and boil ten minutes; strain them through a fine strainer; soak one square slice of white bread in milk, beat smooth with the brains, season with salt and pepper and add one beaten egg. Bake in buttered molds. Sauce --Use three or four stewed tomatoes strained through a fine sieve; beat well yolks of three eggs with one cup cream; beat eggs and cream gradually into tomatoes, season to taste, heat through, and serve a few spoonfuls over each patty. Celery Timbales Three celery roots peeled and cooked. Press through a strainer, add yolks of four eggs, season to taste. Add one-half cup of cream and lastly the beaten whites of the eggs. Put in timbale form or forms, and bake forty minutes. Oyster sauce served with it, is made as follows: Take a tablespoon of butter, add flour to make a smooth paste, then the juice of the oysters, half a cup of cream, and season to taste. Lastly, add oysters. Celery Soufflé With Cheese Sauce Cut into very thin slices the white inside celery stalks, and one thin slice of onion. Cook in boiling water until tender, then drain, reserving liquid, in three tablespoons melted butter, cook three tablespoons corn starch, two tablespoons flour, one-half teaspoon salt, and pepper to taste. Then gradually add one-half cup celery liquor, one-half cup cream and cook thoroughly. Remove from fire, add cooked celery, the well-beaten yolks of three eggs, and lastly fold in the stiffly beaten whites. Bake in ramekins or shallow dish, for about twenty minutes. Cheese Sauce--To one cup of cream add a third of a cup of grated cheese, season with paprika and celery salt. Cheese Scallop Soak one cup bread crumbs in fresh milk. Beat into it three eggs; add one tablespoon butter and one-half pound grated cheese; strew sifted bread crumbs on top and bake a delicate brown. Cheese Meringues To three tablespoons grated cheese, add whites of two eggs beaten stiff, and pepper and salt to taste. Form into balls the size of walnuts, fry a light brown and serve hot. Cheese Timbales One-half pound American cheese, two eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately; season well, add one tablespoon cream, and beat all together lightly. Put in timbale forms and bake. Cauliflower and Shrimps Boil a head of cauliflower and pour over it a tomato cream sauce, in which has been heated a pint of shrimps. Serve hot. Chili Con Carne Take suet the size of an egg, two onions, and put through meat chopper; set on stove till slightly brown; add one-half can tomatoes, one can beans and one pound steak or chopped meat, tablespoon salt, and paprika to suit taste. Let simmer for twenty-five minutes. Chicken Pudding Boil, skin and cut in small pieces, the meat of one chicken, add chopped mushrooms and season well. Then take a lump of butter and stir to a cream, with the four yolks of eggs well beaten, and add to the chicken; then fold in one-half pint of cream and the beaten whites. Boil in pudding form, and serve with cream sauce and mushrooms. Chicken Aspic Cook a large chicken until tender, cut fine and add one pound of cooked sweetbreads, one tin of French mushrooms, two cups of chopped walnuts and season well with salt and pepper. Dissolve a box of Knox's gelatine in a little cold water, and put into boiling chicken broth . Put chopped chicken, sweetbreads, nuts, mixed together, in timbale forms. Pour hot liquor over them. Let stand over night and serve with following sauce : Sauce --Three yolks of eggs; one-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon sugar, one cup of diluted vinegar, two teaspoons dry mustard, stirred in a little hot water and butter the size of a walnut; mix in a bowl, set in boiling water until it thickens. When ready to serve add sour or sweet cream. Chicken Croquettes Mince the meat of two chickens as fine as possible, add two sets of brains boiled and chopped fine, pepper and salt, and the least bit of nutmeg if desired; take a large tablespoon of butter, two of flour, half a glass of cream, mix well and stir the meat in when cold; take a good spoonful of the mixture and roll into shapes; dip in egg, then in bread crumbs; fry in hot butter or fat deep enough to cover. Serve with poulette sauce. Chicken Terrapin Cook one large chicken until tender and cut in small pieces. Make scant quart of cream sauce, add chicken, two large hard-boiled eggs, one tin of mushrooms, one tablespoon finely chopped parsley, one glass of sherry wine, salt, pepper and paprika. Chicken Soufflé Some finely minced chicken, one pint cream sauce, one teaspoon chopped parsley, one teaspoon onion juice, six eggs, salt and pepper to taste and a little paprika; add chicken and seasoning to boiling sauce; take off stove and put in beaten yolks of eggs. When cold, add well beaten whites. Bake in baking dish and serve immediately. Chicken a la King Boil one fat chicken until tender; when cool cut into cubes; melt two tablespoons butter, two tablespoons flour, and mix until smooth; add gradually one cup of the liquor in which the chicken has cooked and which has been previously strained; one-half pint double cream, little Worcestershire sauce, tomato catsup, paprika, salt and pepper, one green pepper chopped fine, then add chicken, a small can of mushrooms, and cook thoroughly. Lastly, add one-half pint of small oysters, drained from the liquor, heat through, and serve on toast. Chicken Livers en Brochette Scald the livers in boiling water for five minutes; cut breakfast bacon into pieces the size of the liver; drain and wipe the livers; then put a piece on a steel or silver skewer, then a piece of bacon and alternate until skewer is nearly filled; now dredge with salt and pepper, and baste with melted butter. Broil over a clear fire for five minutes, and serve on the skewer with a little melted butter poured over them. Chicken Mousse One cup grated chicken breast, one cup whipping cream, a truffle cut fine, one cup thin cream, two eggs, one tablespoon gelatine; boil eggs and cream to a custard, then add gelatine, and let cool; whip the cream, add to cold custard, truffles and chicken. Season; put in molds and let harden. Garnish. Chicken Timbales One pint chopped cold chicken (cooked), two beaten eggs, one cup stale bread crumbs, one teaspoon salt, some celery salt, one cup soup stock or milk, one-half teaspoon white pepper, a little onion juice or herbs; mix and pack in buttered molds and steam fifteen minutes. Serve with a sauce given for sweetbread timbales. Cheese Soufflé Put one cup of bread crumbs and one cup milk on the fire to boil, stir and boil until smooth, then add four tablespoons grated cheese, a small piece of butter, salt and pepper; stir until the cheese is dissolved, then remove from the fire. Beat two eggs separately, stir the yolks into the mixture, and then add the stiffly beaten whites. Put in a pudding dish and bake fifteen or twenty minutes. Cheese Ramekins Make a cream sauce of one-half cup milk, two level tablespoons butter, one heaping tablespoon flour, red pepper and salt, three eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately, one cup grated cheese; add yolks to white sauce, then cheese; when cool add the well beaten whites; fill buttered ramekins half full, bake twenty minutes and serve at once. Corn Timbales Score six ears of sweet corn and press out the pulp, or take canned corn. To one cup of corn add one tablespoon melted butter, half teaspoon salt, one-quarter teaspoon Hungarian paprika, the beaten yolks of three eggs, then the stiffly beaten whites; add a tablespoon of flour. Butter timbale molds, fill with the mixture two-thirds full, set in a pan of hot water and place in hot oven. Bake until firm; remove from mold to a hot plate. Egg Entrée Slice bread and toast it in butter; fry an egg for each piece of toast, take one-half can strained tomatoes for twelve persons, add to tomatoes two large tablespoons butter, salt, pepper and one cube sugar. Thicken with a little flour, pour over eggs and serve hot. Sprinkle with cheese if desired. Eggs Benedict Place a slightly fried piece of ham on a piece of toast, place poached egg on ham, and pour over all a Hollandaise sauce. Egg Croquettes With Tomato Sauce Allow one hard boiled egg to each person, pass through a sieve, add a small piece of butter, two thick slices of bread grated (no crusts), salt, red pepper, chopped parsley and a little cream. Shape like an egg, roll in egg and cracker crumbs and fry brown in hot fat. Serve with tomato sauce. This may be prepared in the morning and fried before serving. Tomato Sauce Blend a heaping teaspoon of butter with one of flour and add a cup of milk, one-half cup of strained tomatoes (if very acid add pinch of baking soda ), a little catsup, chopped parsley, red pepper and Worcestershire sauce. Add tomatoes gradually. Serve over croquettes. Egg Gems One cup of chopped cold meat, one cup bread crumbs, one tablespoon melted butter, salt and pepper, and enough milk to bind together nicely. Have ready gem-pans well buttered, and fill with the mixture. Break an egg on top of each, season with salt and pepper, and sprinkle with cracker crumbs. Bake eight minutes. Eggs a la Martin Put a large lump of butter in a stew pan with two tablespoons flour; when a light yellow, stir in slowly one pint of hot milk (make very thick), and add cayenne pepper, salt and one-half pint cream; grate one-half pound Eastern cheese, reserve one tablespoonful, and add all the rest to the whole mixture; break as many eggs as wanted in a baking dish, pour sauce over and spoon of grated cheese, and let stand in hot water in oven to brown. Egg Timbale Allow one egg for each timbale. To four eggs slightly beaten, add one-quarter cup of cream, a few drops onion juice, salt and paprika. Turn the mixture into small buttered molds, set in a pan of hot water and cook until firm. Serve with mushroom or shrimp sauce. Egg and Tomato Custard Break five eggs into a bowl, beat up well and add four tablespoons tomato pulp, one of milk or cream, one of grated Parmesan cheese, season with salt and pepper; butter seven or eight molds, fill with mixture and bake slowly for about twenty minutes. Sauce--After using the pulp in a can of tomatoes for the custard, drain off the liquid for sauce, add cream, seasoning, and then thicken. Stuffed Eggs in Tomato Jelly Boil eggs hard, cut lengthwise and mash yolks with salt, pepper and ground chicken livers, which have been previously cooked, and a little chopped celery; take one-half can tomatoes, one tablespoon Knox's gelatine, heat and strain, adding salt and pepper. Fill the eggs with the first mixture, set each egg lengthwise in a small mold. Fill the mold to the top with the tomato jelly; set and cool. Serve on lettuce leaves. Fried Frogs' Legs (a la Oscar of the Waldorf) Prepare eighteen frog legs, put them in a bowl with a marinade composed of one tablespoon each of vinegar, sweet oil, salt and pepper to taste; mix well together in the bowl; plunge them singly into very hot fat, and fry for five minutes. Drain, arrange on a hot dish with a folded napkin and garnish with parsley. Any desired sauce may be served with this dish. Goose Liver Patties Place several goose livers in milk and allow to remain one day. Drain, add some sliced truffles, salt and pepper. Smother in goose fat or butter, or both, until very tender. When cold, chop, add the butter in which they were cooked and a little Madeira wine; heat the mixture, fill the patties (which have been heated) and serve at once. Lamb Chops Fry chops only a little. Allow them to cool, then dip in cream sauce, cover with bread crumbs and fry in deep fat. Kidney Sauté Take skin and fat off kidneys and cut into thin slices; heat fresh butter, add onions cut into small pieces and allow to brown; add kidneys and stir until cooked, then add about one teaspoon flour and stir; next add soup stock enough to make a little gravy. Flavor with one tablespoon red wine, one teaspoon vinegar, pepper and salt to taste. Fry slices of bread, free from crust, in table butter and place on hot platter and pour kidneys over. Meat Pudding With Mustard Sauce Two pounds meat and suet (about an ounce) both chopped fine; one-half the quantity of white bread, free from crust, soaked in water and pressed well; about three raw eggs, one boiled potato grated, pepper, salt, ginger and nutmeg; fry onions yellow in plenty of butter and add last; grease pudding form and sprinkle with grated bread crumbs. Press the mixture in as firmly as possible. Put into a pot of boiling water and boil about an hour. Mustard Sauce One tablespoon table butter, one tablespoon mustard (prepared), one tablespoon vinegar; stir and boil; thicken with a little flour and milk mixed; add more milk, pepper and salt. Meat Soufflé Make a smooth white sauce with two tablespoons of butter, a heaping tablespoon of flour and two-thirds of a cup of milk or cream. Season with salt, pepper, onion juice and chopped parsley. While hot add the beaten yolks of two eggs and one cup of finely chopped poultry or meat, and let come to the boiling point. When cool stir in the well beaten whites of the eggs. Bake in a pudding dish and serve hot. May also be served with mushroom sauce. Minced Meat With Jelly Sauce One cup chopped cooked mutton, one-half tablespoon butter, one-third cup currant jelly, few grains cayenne, one-quarter cup sherry wine; put butter and currant jelly in chafing dish; as soon as melted add pepper, wine and meat. Simmer five minutes and serve with toast. Baked Mushrooms Peel the mushrooms, then cut the tops and upper portions of the stems into pieces of uniform size. Place in a buttered pan with salt, pepper and bits of butter; bake until the mushrooms seem tender, or about fifteen minutes. When almost ready to serve, pour over them enough sweet cream to cover; let heat together and serve very hot on squares of buttered toast. Scalloped Mushrooms Cook mushrooms in a little olive oil or butter, salt, pepper, onion and a little parsley; take one tablespoon butter to one pound of the fresh mushrooms. Then make a white sauce of two tablespoons flour and two tablespoons butter and one cup milk; add the mushrooms. Butter ramekins, throw in bread crumbs, put in mixture, adding more crumbs on top. Bake until crumbs are brown. This can also be served in green peppers. Oyster Noodles Into a pudding dish put layers of broad boiled noodles, alternating with layers of oysters dipped in cracker crumbs, with plenty of butter and salt to taste; pour over whole a pint of pastry cream and the juice of oysters; bake until brown--about twenty minutes. Oxtail Entrée Two ox tails cut into pieces, heat a large spoonful fat, throw in tails, and sliced carrots and brown on both sides; add enough water to cover, salt and cook until tender; put in one-half glass claret, some juice of mushrooms and thicken with flour; heat mushrooms in separate pan; line platter with pieces of toast, pour over the mixture and serve very hot. Purée of Peas Two tins of peas cooked and strained through a sieve, one-half cup soup stock , yolks of six eggs beaten lightly, salt, pepper, teaspoon of sugar. Bake about twenty minutes in border mold, put in pan of water; turn out on platter; fill the center with creamed lobster, fresh mushrooms or sweetbreads and mushrooms. Bell Peppers and Cheese Scoop out peppers and put in boiling water fifteen minutes; stuff very tight with dice of stale bread and cheese, salt and red pepper, putting pieces of butter on top; place in a pan of water and bake twenty minutes, or until brown; serve hot. Rissoles Roll some good short pastry one-half inch thick into round or oblong pieces the size desired, and in the center of each place one teaspoon of creamed chicken, sweetbreads or oysters. Brush round the edge with beaten egg, fold, press edges together and fry in deep fat until brown; drain on cheese cloth before serving. Sardine Croquettes Wipe the oil from about a dozen sardines and remove the skin and bone; press the pulp through a puree sieve. There should be one cup of puree. Soak one-half cup of grated bread in one-half or three-quarters cup of milk until smooth. Add two tablespoons butter, one yolk of beaten egg, three yolks cooked, paprika, one spoon lemon juice; then add sardine puree; mix thoroughly and shape into balls; dip in beaten egg, roll in fine crumbs, and fry in deep fat; serve with sandwiches and place the croquettes on lettuce that has been dipped in French dressing. Serve as a relish at the beginning of luncheon or dinner. Saddle Bags a la Rothchild Slit a pocket in a large tenderloin steak, fill it with oysters (small ones) which have been seasoned with salt, pepper and catsup or a little Worcestershire sauce; broil or bake the steak, adding butter and more seasoning. Sardellen Soufflé One pint whipped cream, six eggs, one cup sifted flour; beat cream well, add the yolks of eggs and mix with flour; add at last the beaten whites and bake in muffin tins twenty minutes; serve with sardellen butter. Spaghetti Soufflé Cook spaghetti in salt water three hours; when tender, pour cold water over the spaghetti and drain. Butter molds very generously. Line them with spaghetti, winding round and round. When starting to wind, leave little hole in center of cup for small piece of pimento or mushroom, if one cares for it. Make a cheese souffle of one and one-half tablespoons of butter, one and one-half tablespoons flour, one-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon paprika, and one cup milk. Remove from stove and beat in two whole eggs and two-thirds cup of grated American cheese. Fill cups almost to brim with mixture; bake in the oven in a pan of water twenty-five minutes; turn out and serve with poulette sauce and fresh mushrooms. Fried Sweetbreads Wash, trim and parboil sweetbreads fifteen minutes. Then cut them in small pieces, dip in egg and then in bread crumbs, and fry in boiling fat. Serve with cream sauce. Sweetbreads a la Newburg Parboil one set of sweetbreads by simmering three-quarters of an hour in salted water with two bay leaves; drain, cool rapidly, remove membranes and with a silver knife cut into small dice. Chop a cup of cooked mushrooms very fine; in a double boiler heat a cup of rich cream and add the sweetbreads and mushrooms. Beat three egg yolks with a salt spoon of salt and dash of paprika; add two tablespoons of lemon juice and one tablespoon Worcestershire sauce. Stir into the cream, continuing to stir until it thickens. Put into heated ramekins and serve very hot. Spinach Timbale Take about two pounds of spinach, boil it, press it well, then put through a puree sieve; soak two slices of dry twist bread, press it very dry through the hands, then add to the spinach. Season with salt and pepper. Add the yolks of four eggs, beat the whites stiff and add last. Butter the round mold well, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs, fill mold and set in a deep sauce pan of boiling water and boil about thirty minutes; turn out on round dish or platter and fill with sweetbreads and mushrooms cooked in poulette sauce. Should water boil down in sauce pan add a little at a time, but be careful that the water does not come near the top of the mold. Sweetbread and Oyster Pie Blanch and parboil a pair of fine sweetbreads; break in small pieces and place half in a pudding dish which has been lined with puff paste. Drain a pint of oysters and place a layer on the sweetbreads; pour over this a rich cream sauce, then add another layer of oysters and sweetbreads, cover with the sauce and lastly add a top of puff paste. Bake in a quick oven. Sweetbread and Peas Parboil the sweetbreads, then slice in pieces the size of a long oyster. Season some cracker dust with salt and paprika. Dip the cold sliced sweetbreads into beaten eggs, then into the seasoned cracker dust and fry in butter to a golden brown. From a can of peas drain most all of the liquor and put them on to stew with one-half pint cream and a piece of butter; when tender pour, while hot, over the sweetbreads, and serve. Sweetbread Patties One pair sweetbreads parboiled one-half hour and picked into small pieces. Make sauce of one tablespoon butter, one tablespoon flour, one-half pint milk, one-half can chopped mushrooms, one-quarter cup finely chopped almonds; add sweetbreads, and serve hot in patty shells. Sweetbread Croquettes One pound sweetbreads, one tablespoon chopped ham, one-quarter can mushrooms, one wine glass thick cream, one wine glass thick soup stock , two eggs; boil the sweetbreads until tender in salt water. When done separate into small pieces, removing all skin, and season highly with salt and pepper. Boil ham and chop very fine. Cut mushrooms into small pieces; mix all ingredients together and boil about one minute. Let the mixture become perfectly cold, then form into balls, roll in egg and fine cracker crumbs and fry in hot butter. Sweetbread Timbales One pound sweetbreads serves six people. Cut the prepared and cooked sweetbreads in small pieces with silver knife; mix the well beaten yolks of two eggs with salt, pepper and a little cream, if necessary, then fold in the well beaten whites; put in buttered molds and set on paper in a pan of water. Cook one-half hour; turn out to serve with the following sauce: Sauce--One and one-quarter cups milk or cream, one-quarter cup mushroom liquor or chicken stock, one and one-half tablespoons flour, one tablespoon butter, salt and pepper. Add cut up mushrooms or pimentoes and about two tablespoons sherry wine. Hungarian Sauerkraut Three pounds of sauerkraut (or one can), six sour apples, one can tomatoes, two tablespoons of salt, one-half cup sugar, one tablespoon pepper sauce, one pint water, one large onion, four tablespoons suet, three tablespoons flour and a little soup stock . Boil the tomatoes about ten minutes, then strain them into the sauerkraut; add the peeled and sliced apples, the salt, sugar, pepper sauce and water, and boil all together about one hour and a half. Brown the flour in the suet, then the finely chopped onion, and add the sauerkraut and soup stock , heating them all thoroughly together. Green Pea Timbales I Drain and rinse one can of peas and rub through a sieve. To one cup pea pulp add two beaten eggs, two tablespoons melted butter, two-thirds teaspoon salt, one-eighth teaspoon pepper, a few grains cayenne and a few drops onion juice. Turn into buttered molds, set in pan of hot water, cover with buttered paper and bake until firm. Serve with one cup white sauce, to which is added one-third cup canned peas drained and rinsed. Green Pea Timbales II Boil long pieces of spaghetti in salt water until tender. Butter molds; begin in center of bottom and gradually wrap the spaghetti around until the mold is all lined with it. Sometimes the spaghetti will not stick, if so, dip it in the beaten white of an egg. Filling--Mash and strain one cup of peas, one egg well beaten, two teaspoons pate de foie gras, salt and pepper to taste, three tablespoons cream, two tablespoons white sauce, one teaspoon flour wet in a little chicken stock. When mixed it should be the consistency of molasses. Pour into mold and bake fifteen minutes. Turn out on rounds of toast. Serve with poulette sauce. Liver Timbale One to one and one-half pounds of calf's liver, according to size; chop and strain through a colander. Add salt and pepper, paprika, two yolks, and lastly two whites of eggs well beaten, one spoonful of cream, and stir well. Pour into greased mold, set in pan with cold water and place in oven about twenty minutes. If mixture is too thin, stir in a little cracker dust. Serve with a cream sauce. Brain and Spinach Timbales One can of spinach chopped fine, five eggs well beaten, one large brain cooked with onion and put through a sieve. Butter timbale form; arrange a layer of seasoned spinach, a layer of brain puree and another layer of spinach. Bake twenty-five minutes. Take out and cover with poulette sauce and mushrooms. Pimento Timbales Butter and line each mold with pimentoes, fill mold with the following mixture: one-half cup of boiled spaghetti, one tablespoon pate de foie gras, four tablespoons cream, one beaten egg, two tablespoons white sauce, salt and pepper to taste. Chop spaghetti fine and stir all together. Put in molds and sprinkle on top with Parmesan cheese and cracker crumbs. Place molds in pan, standing in a little water, and bake fifteen minutes. Turn out on rounds of toast, and cover with cream or butter sauce. This is for one-half dozen timbales. Swedish Timbale Forms Mix together three-quarters cup of flour, one-half teaspoon salt, one-quarter teaspoon sugar, gradually one-half cup milk and one egg well beaten; then add one tablespoon melted butter. Dip the hot timbale iron into this mixture and fry in deep fat until crisp and brown. Remove from iron and invert on paper to drain. Fill these cases with oysters, chicken, sweetbreads or mushrooms. Tripe Tripe is the large stomach of the ruminating animals, and is chiefly composed of albumen, fibrine and water. How to Prepare Tripe Scald the stomach with boiling water until the inside coating becomes loose. If properly scalded it will scrape off easily. Wash it well in several changes of boiling water, then put it to soak in cold water over night. Scrape again until clean and white. Place in a stew pan, cover with cold water; add one onion, a sprig of parsley, twelve whole cloves and twelve pepper corns; simmer gently for six hours, and it is ready to use in any way. That sold in the markets in cities is usually cleaned but not boiled. Fried Tripe Boil tripe the day before it is to be used. Cut the tripe into pieces the size of an oyster, sprinkle with salt and pepper, let stand ten minutes. Dip first in beaten egg and then in bread crumbs and fry in boiling fat. Serve with tartar sauce. Spanish Tripe Brown a piece of onion with a spoon of soup fat and a level tablespoon of flour; add one can strained tomatoes, season lightly with salt, cayenne and a few bay leaves. After this boils put in tripe, which has been thoroughly cooked in salt water and cut in narrow strips, and let cook a little longer. Remove the bay leaves before serving. Terrapin a la Baltimore Place the meat, previously boiled and prepared, and eggs, if any, of two terrapins in a sauce pan, adding a dash of cayenne, white pepper, a grating of nutmeg, small salt spoon of ground cloves, a wine glass of Madeira or sherry; cook five minutes and put away to cool for future use. Place in a sauce pan a cup of good soup stock , add a glass of Madeira; blend one-half cup butter with two tablespoons of flour, add this to the gravy with a piece of lemon; put in the terrapin and heat. Have ready the yolk of six eggs hard boiled and mashed fine; beat and mix gradually with the terrapin. The whites of the eggs can be chopped fine and added. Terrapin a la Maryland This differs only from Terrapin a la Baltimore by substituting cream for stock. The cream is warmed and added gradually to the eggs at the last minute, and not allowed to boil. Mock Terrapin of Veal Make a sauce of one tablespoon butter, one tablespoon flour, one-half tablespoon each of catsup and lemon juice, one cup cream, two eggs hard boiled and a little paprika. Add two cups cold veal cut in small dice. Stuffed Tomatoes Fill tomatoes with minced meat, then drop egg on meat and put in oven until the egg is set. Beef Tongue Cut thick slices of braised beef tongue. Cover them with thin slices of bacon, sprinkle over a few minced sweet herbs and wrap the whole around with pieces of greased paper folded in such a manner that the liquor cannot run out. Place them on a gridiron over a clear fire and broil. When done lay them on a dish and serve. Deviled Toast Spread deviled ham on toast. Put in oven, and serve with scrambled eggs on top. Mayer's "Society" Coffee Mayer's "Society" Tea Decorative banner with the company name and address, L. MAYER & CO.,PURE FOOD PURVEYORS, 148 THIRD ST., PORTLAND, OREGON. Portland's Exclusive Handlers of Everything Good to Eat In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. ADDITIONAL RECIPES ADDITIONAL RECIPES SHELL FISH AND SHELL FISH ENTREES "Oysters come and walk with us! The Walrus did beseech. A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk Along the briny beach." Toasted Angels Wrap a large oyster in very thin slice of bacon, putting on the oyster a little cayenne and two drops of lime juice, fasten with a string or pin the bacon with a wooden toothpick; broil till the bacon is crisp, and serve very hot on squares of buttered toast. Fried Clams Clams may be fried similarly to oysters, dipped into beaten egg and cracker crumbs and fried in butter. Roast Clams Wash shells well and put on gridiron or over hot coals. When the shell opens remove the upper one and serve in the under shell at once, with butter and seasoning. Clam Fritters Drain the clams and chop the hard part. Use the liquor to make a fritter batter. Add the clams and fry by small spoonfuls in hot fat. Fritter Batter Yolks of two eggs beaten well; add one-half cup milk or water and one tablespoon of olive oil, one salt spoon of salt, one cup of flour, or enough to make it almost a drop batter. When ready to use, add the whites of the eggs, beaten very stiff, and one tablespoon lemon juice or vinegar. This batter will keep several days. Clam Loaf Two dozen razor clams chopped fine, twelve crackers reduced to crumbs, three eggs, salt and pepper; mix these ingredients together and form into a loaf. Scatter bits of butter on top and bake with the clam liquor about thirty minutes in a moderate oven. Baked Crab With Mashed Potatoes Line a dish with mashed potatoes and fill center with crab meat. Sauce--One pint of milk, thickened with two teaspoons flour and butter the size of a large walnut, add paprika and salt to taste, juice of a lemon, and boil together five minutes. Pour over crab, bake twenty minutes. Crab a la San Francisco Take out the meat of a large cooked crab in as large pieces as possible, put in cocktail glasses and, just before serving, pour over it the following sauce: One cup cream, half cup tomato catsup, one tablespoon Worcestershire sauce, salt and paprika. Let stand on ice for at least two hours. This will serve six people. Crab a la Mode Take small loaves of stale bread. Cut each into three squares, remove all crust and scoop out center, leaving about a half inch or less on sides and bottom. Brown very lightly in boiling fat. This can be prepared in the morning. Cream crab, adding sherry, and fill bread shells, which have been previously warmed. Place in oven until piping hot. Garnish by placing small slice of boiled beet, slice of hard boiled egg, one-half sardellen, one on top of the other, on filled bread shell. Sauce to one side. Sauce--Mix butter and flour, add anchovy paste and lemon juice. If too thick or salty, thin with water. Crab Poulette One crab, one lobster, three-fourths cup shrimps and oysters, six or seven tomatoes , red pepper, celery, onion, garlic and parsley. All cooked and served with a poulette sauce and surrounded with a border of boiled rice. Crab Served Plain Three large, heavy crabs, mayonnaise sauce or French dressing. To boil crabs put them in the water alive with plenty of salt. Let them boil twenty minutes. When cold, crack the claws and the meat that is in the shell place on a platter. Garnish with lettuce and parsley. Serve with mayonnaise or sauce  made of French mustard, olive oil, vinegar, salt and pepper. One can also use a tartar sauce. Crab Creole One can of tomatoes , one large onion cut in pieces, one tiny piece of garlic the size of pin head, one piece of celery, a couple of pieces of parsley. Let these cook slowly for three-quarters of an hour, and strain. Meat of a crab shredded, one-half pound shrimps, 50 small oysters and liquor. Put in a pan one-half cup of melted butter, three tablespoons of flour, one cup of milk or cream, and add the strained vegetables and season. Add shrimps, oysters, liquor and crab. Serve this in center of dish, and boiled rice on outer edge, forming a border. Deviled Crab One crab, two hard boiled eggs chopped fine, two tablespoons cracker crumbs rolled fine, juice of one lemon, two tablespoons sherry, red pepper, salt (mix this well), butter the size of an egg, flour to thicken. Cook, then thin with milk and season with salt and a half teaspoon mustard. Mix well with the crab, sift with cracker crumbs and cover with bits of butter. Heat in oven until brown. Crab in Ramekins To some cooked spinach, chopped very fine, add a little cream to thin it. Put in ramekins to the height of half an inch, on top of this some creamed crab, and over all some American cheese, and bake for about fifteen minutes. Deviled Crabs in Shells One crab shredded fine, one slice butter, salt and red pepper, one whole egg beaten in, one teaspoon Worcestershire sauce, chopped parsley, juice of one-half lemon, one cup of cream or milk; sprinkle with cracker crumbs. Mix all ingredients thoroughly. Place in shells, sprinkle top with cracker crumbs. Place a slice of lemon on each. Bake twenty minutes. Crab or Halibut St. Laurent One cup of boiled crab meat, one tablespoon butter, two tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese, two tablespoons white wine, one tablespoon flour, one-half cup of stock, one-half cup of cream or milk, one-half teaspoon salt, one-fourth teaspoon pepper, dash of cayenne. Put into a sauce pan one tablespoon butter; when melted add the flour; cook, but not brown; add slowly the stock and stir until perfectly smooth, then add the cream, and when thickened add the salt and pepper, the crab meat and the cheese; simmer for a few minutes and add the wine; spread this mixture over pieces of buttered toast cut in squares or circles; sprinkle with grated Parmesan cheese, and place on each piece a small bit of butter. Set in the oven for three minutes; serve very hot. This may also be prepared in a chafing dish. Crab Soufflé Make a pint of rich cream sauce, add the yolks of three eggs and beat well, then a dash of cayenne and a cup of grated New York cheese. Now add one pint of crab meat finely picked, then fold in the whites of the eggs well beaten. Pour into a baking dish and bake in a quick oven. Crab Terrapin One pint picked crab. Make sauce of one and one-half cups cream, two tablespoons butter, two tablespoons flour, salt, red and white  pepper. Use yolks of two or more hard boiled eggs sifted; flavor with sherry; add crab and serve in ramekins. Lobster a la Creole Cut lobster in small pieces, then let simmer in a sauce pan. Three tomatoes cut fine, one-half green pepper, one clove garlic finely cut. When cooked about twenty minutes remove from the fire and strain. Put in pan a lump of butter size of a walnut, a little flour, strained tomatoes , one-half pint sweet cream and yolk of one egg. Put in lobster; heat thoroughly; serve on toast; salt to taste. Lobster a la Newburg Pick the meat from the shells of two good sized freshly boiled lobsters and cut it in one-inch pieces. Place the meat in a sauce pan over a hot fire with one ounce of fresh butter; season with a pinch of salt, pepper, two medium sized truffles cut into dice-shaped pieces, and after cooking for five minutes add wine glass of sherry or Madeira wine. Let cook for a few minutes longer, until it is reduced to one-half. Have in readiness the yolks of three eggs in a bowl, with one-half pint of sweet cream, and beat well together; add this to the lobster, gently stir for two minutes longer, until it becomes thick, and serve immediately. Lobster Farcie One lobster, one slice of stale white bread soaked in milk and pressed out. Chop lobster and bread, season well, add one-quarter onion chopped fine, and beat with tablespoon good butter; add lobster, one-half pint of cream. When heated put into shells and bake. Breaded Lobster Split the meat of the tail and claws, and season well with salt and pepper. Dip in beaten egg and then in bread crumbs, which let dry on the meat, and then repeat the operation. Place in a frying basket and plunge in boiling fat. Cook until a golden brown--about two minutes. Mussels a la Bordelaise One quart mussels, one onion, salt, pepper, three cloves garlic, parsley, butter, flour. Wash mussels in several waters. Chop onion and garlic very fine. Place mussels in a pot, cover one-fourth with water, throw in onion, garlic and parsley; add a lump of butter, salt and pepper. Cover close and let boil ten to fifteen minutes. Remove the mussels and thicken with flour. Throw the sauce over the mussels. Baked Oysters Have the oven very hot. Use large oysters on the half shell. Put a piece of butter on each oyster, also salt and pepper, and place in the oven for two or three minutes until the edges curl. The addition of lemon juice and tomato catsup makes this a very dainty dish. Oyster Cocktail One hundred small oysters, catsup, Worcestershire sauce, lime juice, salt, pepper and paprika. Put part of the juice of the oysters in a bowl. Squeeze the juice of three limes. Add salt, pepper, paprika, Worcestershire sauce, and a liberal supply of catsup. Lastly throw in the oysters. Serve in small glasses with crackers. This will serve five or six people. Oyster Scrambled With Eggs Two dozen oysters, four eggs, milk, salt, pepper and butter. Drain and wipe oysters. Season with salt and pepper. Beat lightly the eggs and milk. Put a small piece of butter in frying pan; when warm throw in oysters and fry a little. Then throw the eggs over the oysters and scramble with a spoon. Serve hot. Oysters Fried in Batter Oysters, flour enough to thicken, one teaspoon baking powder, one egg, one cup milk, liquor of oysters, salt and pepper, olive oil, butter or drippings. Beat egg lightly, add one-half cup oyster liquor, sufficient flour to make a thin batter, baking powder, salt, pepper, and lastly the milk. If too thin add more flour. Dip the oysters into butter and fry each in deep fat, olive oil or butter. Oyster Loaf Take a loaf of bread, either white or rye, and with a sharp pointed knife cut off the top of the bread (about five inches long and four inches wide), according to the size of the loaf. Be careful not to break the crust, for it is to form the lid. Now scoop out the soft part of the bread and lay the loaf as well as the removed crust lid in the oven to toast and become thoroughly hot. While this bread is heating prepare the fried oysters. Take the heated bread, butter it well, also the lid on the inside, then put in the fried oysters and close with the lid, and you will have a toothsome oyster loaf. From this oyster loaf one can improvise and form most palatable dishes by taking small loaves of bread or oblong rolls and treating them in a like manner. The prepared oblong rolls or little loaves can be used for serving entrees as well as for lobster, oyster, clam, newburgs and poulettes, turkey, chicken or roast beef hash, beef, or tripe in cream. Oysters a la Normandie To serve six people. Take three dozen oysters with liquor, salt and pepper, butter size of an egg, and heat well. When they curl up take out with a skimmer and pour the hot liquor over the following, which has been prepared: yolks of six eggs thoroughly beaten, juice of one lemon, one-half onion grated and one-quarter cup chopped parsley. When mixed put back on stove and stir until thick. Replace oysters to heat and serve on toast or in ramekins at once. Oyster Poulette One-half onion chopped fine, browned in one-quarter pound of butter and three tablespoons flour, one pint oyster juice, and stir. When boiling add yolks of three eggs well beaten and a little lemon juice; stir until it boils, and add oysters seasoned to taste. Serve on toast. Roast Oysters on Toast Fifty large oysters, toasted bread or soda crackers, salt, pepper, butter. Toast some slices of bread or take soda crackers. Place oysters on toast or crackers, season with salt and pepper and plenty of butter. Place in a baking pan in a hot oven until the edges curl. Oyster Pan Roast Oysters, catsup, chili sauce or peppers, salt and pepper. Place oyster liquor in a small pan. Season with catsup and one-half chili pepper cut fine or chili sauce. Add salt. When this comes to a boil add oysters and serve in same dish in which they are cooked. Fried Oysters Fifty oysters, salt, pepper, butter, two eggs, cracker meal or bread crumbs, lemon. Drain oysters and wipe them. Season with salt and pepper. Roll in cracker meal or bread crumbs. Then dip them in eggs which have been well beaten. Fry in butter until nice and brown. Serve with slices of lemon. Oyster Stew With Pepper Sauce Oysters, salt, pepper, pepper sauce, tomato sauce, Worcestershire sauce, lemon. Drain off the liquor, put on to boil with a tablespoon of catsup, a few drops of pepper sauce, one-half teaspoon Worcestershire sauce and the juice of a lemon. Throw in oysters and serve hot. Scalloped Oysters One quart oysters, one and one-half pints cracker crumbs, one pint milk, one-half pint oyster juice, one-half cup very soft butter, pepper and salt. Put cracker crumbs in a bowl, add the butter and liquor, stir in the oysters and seasoning. Fill a buttered baking dish or individual shells or ramekins. Beat the yolk of an egg and add one-half cup of milk, and spread on top of oyster mixture. Bake twenty minutes or one-half hour until brown. Saute Royale One medium sized lobster, one small crab, one cup picked shrimps, fifty California oysters in their liquor; cut up six large tomatoes , one large onion, one clove garlic, one large sweet pepper, one sprig celery, one sprig parsley. Cook three-quarters hour, strain and set aside. In another sauce pan blend one-half cup butter with three tablespoons flour and one-half cup cream. When well cooked add oyster liquor, a wine glass of sherry, dash of paprika, salt, and lastly the strained tomatoes . When all is blended add the lobster meat cut into dice, the crab, shrimps and oysters, and stir until the oysters curl. Serve with a border of well cooked rice. Shad Roe Wash a shad roe, cook twenty minutes in boiling water, to which has been added a little salt and vinegar. Then put roe in cold water, drain and clean thoroughly and cut into small pieces. Melt three tablespoons butter, add one-half cup chopped celery, a little onion and lemon juice, salt and pepper. Reheat roe in this sauce and serve on shaped pieces of toast. Fried Shad Roe Wash, dust with flour and fry in plenty of butter, keeping the sauce pan covered while frying. Turn with a pancake turner and brown on other side. Serve with tartar sauce and slices of lemon. Shrimp Fritters Make a batter of three well beaten eggs, a pinch of salt, one-quarter cup of milk, one tablespoon of melted butter. Chop slightly with a silver knife one-half pound of picked shrimps and stir into the mixture, adding enough stale bread crumbs to make a stiff batter. Drop by the spoonful into boiling fat and fry a light brown. Drain on paper and serve hot with a rich cream sauce, which has been colored with a little tomato or anchovy sauce. Shrimps a la Creole Stew a few tomatoes , a small green pepper and a small clove of garlic together. Make a poulette sauce of the following: Small piece of butter, one tablespoon of flour, add one pint cream or milk; when done strain tomatoes into sauce. Then let shrimps cook a few minutes and serve hot in ramekins or on buttered toast. Shrimps a la Newburg Clean one pint of shrimps, soak three minutes in two tablespoons of butter, add one-half teaspoon salt, a dash of cayenne, one teaspoon lemon juice and cook one minute. Make a cream sauce of one tablespoon of butter and one teaspoon flour, cook, adding one-half cup of cream. When thickened add two well beaten yolks of eggs, then shrimp mixture and two tablespoons sherry wine. Serve in ramekins. Turtle Steaks Prepare raw green turtle steaks by trimming bone and flattening steak. Heat two tablespoons of butter very hot in a frying pan; add one-half teaspoon of Worcestershire sauce, one-half tablespoon of currant jelly, one gill of port wine and a little salt. Lay the steaks in this and cook. Serve on hot platter with the sauce poured over same. Raviola Two pounds cooked spinach, one large calf's brain which has been cooked, one pound of sausage meat. Put the sausage meat into a hot skillet and work with a spoon until all the fat comes out into the pan, then throw in a sieve and drain well. Work each of the three above ingredients through a fine sieve, the sausage meat while hot. Mix all these ingredients together, add two whole eggs and season well. Make noodle dough with three eggs, cut it out with a saucer to shape the turnovers and turn the side for filling into water (have a dinner plate of water at hand). Put a large spoonful of the mixture on one-half circle of the turnover, then turn this over the other half of the circle for a cover, pressing the edges together firmly with the fingers to keep the filling in. Leave to dry until ready for cooking. Cook in a large round granite pan four inches deep, filled with boiling water, and boil hard four at a time for five minutes. At the side have a large baking pan with sauce  made of soup stock thickened with a little flour and well seasoned. Take the turnovers out with a skimmer and put into sauce of soup stock . Have melted butter on hand, with pastry brush ready. Brush all the turnovers with butter, throw over a handful of grated Swiss cheese and cook in a hot oven for ten minutes. Serve on a large platter. This quantity makes ten turnovers. If you buy TIP-TOP BREAD to-day, you'll buy it tomorrow. "It is better than home made." Ask for the Genuine Tip-Top-Bread Every loaf bears the TIP-TOP Label AT ALL GOOD GROCERS Made by the LOG CABIN BAKING CO. Portland, Oregon In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. ADDITIONAL RECIPES FISH "Master, I marvel how the fishes live in the sea?" "Why, as we do on land, the great ones eat up the little ones." "My hand alone my work can do; So I can fish and study too." The Season for Fish in Oregon Crawfish--March 1 to October 31. Trout (except salmon trout)--April 1 to October 31. Salmon--June 1 to October 31. Oysters--September 10 to June 1. Clams--September to June. Crab--October 1 to June 30. In selecting fish one must take care that it be fresh and in the best of condition, as there is nothing more unwholesome than fish which has passed that stage. The flesh must be firm and hard, and rise at once when pressed with the finger. The gills should be red, the scales bright, and the sooner it is eaten after being caught the finer will be the flavor. To clean, scale fish well and rinse thoroughly in cold water. If not to be used immediately, sprinkle with salt and keep in a cool place. When baked, and served at table, the head and tail may be left on to make its appearance more attractive. Cold fish may be used as a salad, creamed or scalloped. Baked Fish A salmon trout of three or four pounds, larger or smaller as required. Any kind of fish may be served. The day previous season with salt. Put a large slice of butter in the pan, upon which place the fish, adding a little pepper, one-half bottle catsup, large teaspoon Worcestershire sauce and one-half cup of water. Bake about one-half hour, basting at times. Just before serving place fish on hot platter, add to sauce shrimps, oysters, or both. Let boil up and pour over fish. Aunt Betsy's Fish Have a sole boned; boil in a white wine gravy. Mix a sauce a la poulette , add the white wine gravy, mix with the yolks of three eggs, then bake in oven ten minutes. Bass a la Francaise Wash fish. Cut a deep incision down the back of sea bass. Put in a baking dish with half a glass of red wine, pinch of salt, pinch of pepper. Sprinkle with finely cut shalot. Cover with buttered paper and cook in moderate oven for fifteen minutes. Take fish out and place on a platter. Put the juice in a sauce pan with half a cupful Universal sauce, four finely shredded mushrooms and thin slice of onion finely chopped. Finish cooking for five minutes more. Then pour it over the fish and serve very hot. This is for a two or three-pound bass. Striped Bass in Aspic Boil a three-pound bass in salt water, let it cool and place in the center of a large platter, put around it a two-inch border of celery root cut into small cubes, then a border of carrots cut into small cubes; circle this with green peas, around which put hard boiled eggs chopped fine; cover all with a clear white aspic made of veal bone, and after it hardens place around the entire edge a thick mayonnaise; garnish with parsley and beets cut in small squares. All the vegetables should be previously cooked. Baked Black Cod or Sole Butter a pan and sprinkle with bread crumbs, put fish in pan, season and scatter small pieces of butter on top. Sauce--One-half can tomato juice, juice of one-half can mushrooms, a little oyster juice, bouillon, white wine and Worcestershire sauce. Cook all for a few minutes, then strain over the fish. Add a few mushrooms, oysters and shrimps, and bake all for thirty minutes. Salt Codfish (Served Whole) One whole codfish, butter, onions, parsley. Soak fish over night. Boil twenty minutes. Chop onions very fine, also the parsley. Take fish from water, dry carefully. Place a good sized piece of butter in a pan, fry onions light brown, squeeze juice of one lemon with butter, sprinkle parsley over the fish. After serving on a platter pour over melted butter and onions. Serve hot. Codfish Balls Two cups salt codfish, six good sized potatoes , two teaspoons melted butter, two eggs, one salt spoon pepper. Wash the fish and pick apart (in cold water ) in one-half inch pieces. Pare raw potatoes and cut into squares; put potatoes and codfish into boiling water and cook until they are soft (about twenty-five minutes), drain very dry and shake. Mash together until you cannot distinguish one from the other; beat the eggs light, mix with the fish and add pepper and butter. Work together with mashed ingredients until light. Have fat very hot, make mixture into balls with flour ed hands and cook until a rich brown. Drain on brown paper before serving. Make cream sauce and serve over balls with diced bacon and hard boiled eggs. Fish With Wine Gravy One-half glass wine, one-half glass vinegar, one-half cup sugar, all kinds of spices, two lemons sliced and juice of one-half lemon, piece of butter and a clove of garlic. When all is well cooked put fish in and cook until done. Strain gravy and add one-half cup of flour or less, according to quantity of gravy, and let come to a boil. Beat the yolks of two or three eggs and stir gravy into them. Blanch almonds and sprinkle on top. Fish au Gratin One pound shrimps, about fifty small oysters, one-half glass of sherry, one-half cup of mushrooms, one pint tomato sauce highly seasoned (but not thickened), one-half onion, one-half green pepper and small bouquet of parsley, all chopped together finely; about one-half cup cracker crumbs. A fine white fish is preferable to any other. Clean well, add salt and pepper. Scatter small pieces of butter over platter in which fish is to be baked, and over this a layer of chopped greens and liberal dusting of cracker crumbs. On this place the fish and cover with small pieces of butter, and another layer of greens and crumbs. Over the whole pour the tomato sauce, sherry, bouillon, mushrooms, shrimps, and if to your taste, some grated cheese. Put in a hot oven and bake from twenty minutes to half an hour, according to size of fish. The oysters are added before taking fish from oven. Garnish prettily and serve on platter in which it has been baked. Baked Halibut Three or four pounds halibut. Dip the dark skin in boiling water and scrape clear. Rub well with salt and pepper. Bake in pan and pour milk over it until half an inch deep. Bake about one-half an hour, basting with milk. Remove skin and bones and place on the platter in original form. Serve with plain drawn butter, egg or cream sauce, and garnish with boiled egg. Stuffed Halibut Place two large slices of halibut in a pan, make a dressing of bread, butter and paprika, put between the slices of halibut, pour over the fish some strained tomatoes ,  dot with small pieces of butter and bake from one-half to three-quarters of an hour. Serve with sauce made from butter in the pan. Finnan Haddie To one pound of finnan haddie or salted haddock, which must be shredded before putting in chafing dish or cut in small slices if preferred, take two tablespoons butter, two of flour, one-eighth teaspoon of pepper, one cup hot milk, one-half teaspoon salt, paprika, yolks of two eggs. Melt the butter in the sauce pan, remove from fire and stir in flour, add two-thirds of the hot milk at once and the rest gradually, then pour all the sauce over the yolks of two eggs, stirring continually. The mixture thickens, and just before it boils put in the haddie. Serve with small pieces of toast. Fish With Orange Sauce Yolks of six eggs, two heaping tablespoons sugar, juice of four oranges, juice of one lemon, one teaspoon vinegar, one wine glass white wine, salt. Boil fish (either rock- cod, salmon or halibut ) in seasoned water. When cooked, arrange on individual plates or large platter. Serve each slice of fish on four half slices of unpeeled oranges. Pour over following sauce: Stir eggs and sugar, add rest of ingredients and when thick remove from fire, pour over fish and serve cold. Halibut Cutlets Remove the skin and bone of halibut, using enough to make one pound. Pass through meat chopper twice. First work into the fish a quarter of a cup of butter that has been beaten to a cream, then three tablespoons of cream, one-half teaspoon salt, a little pepper and a little onion juice. Roll into cutlets and chill. When ready to fry roll in bread crumbs, then in egg and in bread crumbs again. Fry in deep fat. Serve with tartar sauce. Halibut Rolls Take slices of halibut, each being one-half inch thick, five inches in length and three inches wide. Season well with salt and pepper. Place a teaspoon of peas or oysters on each slice, leaving enough oysters or peas out for the sauce. Roll each slice,  placing a toothpick in the middle and one on each end so as to hold fish firmly. Place in sauce pan which contains enough water to cover the rolls, also a few slices of onion, celery and a small carrot cut fine. Let fish boil until tender, then take off stove, remove toothpicks and place rolls on a platter. Sauce--Strain liquor in which fish has been cooked, add thickened flour and cream, also peas or oysters. Pour this sauce over the rolls and serve hot. Marinierte Herring Take Holland herring, remove heads if desired and skin, take sharp knife and open, take out the milch, then with a dull knife scrape the inside well, wash, and then lay the herring and milch in milk or water over night. Next morning lay the herring in a stone jar with some slices of onion, slices of lemon, a few cloves, whole peppers, bay leaves and mustard seeds. Take milch and run through a fine strainer, stir in enough vinegar to cover the herring and pour into the jar. See that the vinegar is not too strong. Fish Oriental Striped bass, two tablespoons olive oil thoroughly heated, a bunch of parsley and an onion chopped fine, small piece of garlic. When oil is hot add one tablespoon flour and the parsley, onion and garlic, and enough water to cook fish in, add salt and pepper to sauce and fish. Cut fish in pieces when serving. Bake twenty minutes. Baked Pompano or Shad Dry the fish and season, cut the skin in several places. Take some butter and parsley (chopped) and beat to a cream. Take white paper, oil it and place in center two slices of lemon, parsley and butter, and then put sauce on the fish after laying it on the paper, fold paper carefully, put into a pan and bake ten minutes. Lemon Fish Take a white fish (striped bass ), cut in pieces and salt. Meanwhile put one-fourth cup butter in kettle and cut in thin slices one onion, add to butter and let simmer about ten minutes, but do not brown. Then mix one tablespoon dry mustard and about two cups vinegar and add to butter and onions, and then as much water as will be necessary to cover the fish, cayenne, salt, etc. Place the fish in kettle and cook uncovered for about fifteen minutes until tender. In a separate bowl mix carefully yolks of five eggs with juice of three lemons. Take a ladle of the gravy and pour slowly over the eggs. Return all to kettle, but do not let boil. Stir continually till gravy thickens, then remove fish, arrange on platter, pour the gravy over, add chopped parsley and serve cold. Filet of Sole a la Margery Place the filets in a low sauce pan and cover with white wine, seasoning with salt and pepper. Cook for about ten minutes and place on a dish; garnish with oysters, shrimps and mussels. Then let the sauce boil until it begins to thicken, and add the yolks of eggs (two eggs for every pound of filet). Put the sauce over a slow fire and whip with a wire beater until it becomes creamy; then add butter bit by bit, still beating with the wire and taking care not to let it burn or boil. Add enough butter to make it thick (about one pound) and then take from fire. Add chopped parsley and pour sauce over the fish, covering completely. Place in hot oven for about five minutes and serve at once. Sole Normandie After the fish is thoroughly washed, season with salt, pepper and garlic, chop some parsley, onions and a little garlic. Melt about two and one-half tablespoons of butter in the pan, in which you will cook the fish. Then add layer of greens, then some fish, some greens, and so on, until all are used. Pour over this a wine glass of sherry or white wine, and put on top of the oven for ten minutes. Then put inside of the oven and baste very often. Sweet and Sour Fish Wash and salt some fish. Then take three parts of water and one of vinegar; put in saucepan, with some onions sliced, whole spices, cinnamon, cloves and a few laurel leaves, raisins, cut almonds, four or five ginger snaps, one lemon sliced, three or four tablespoons, molasses or syrup to taste. Boil the sauce, then place on fish and let it all cook twenty minutes. When done, arrange on platter with lemon and parsley. Shad Roe This may be prepared in a chafing dish or otherwise. Wash the roe and parboil in salt water for fifteen minutes. Drain off the water, then break up the roe lightly. Meanwhile put into a saucepan two tablespoons of butter, one-half cup sifted bread crumbs, the mashed yolks of two hard boiled eggs, the roe, one teaspoon of chopped parsley, and seasoning to suit. Heat and serve. Baked Salmon Season the fish. Put flakes of butter on the entire top. Bake until the fish begins to brown and then add several spoons of water. When the fish is almost baked, add about one cup of catsup and tomatoes mixed. Two or three spoons of sherry, some shrimps and some oysters to make the gravy. Filet of Sole Roll as many pieces of sole as needed. Boil in clam juice and a little celery. Roll and fasten with a toothpick and put oyster in each piece. Cook spinach, well seasoned, and place it on a platter with the sole around it. Cover all with fine cream sauce and on top sprinkle grated cheese. Put in oven and bake for a few minutes. Salmon Loaf One pound of salmon cooked in salt water. One-half cup of cracker crumbs soaked in two tablespoons of cream, three eggs, salt, pepper to taste. Mix thoroughly. Steam for three-quarters of an hour. Sauce for Salmon Loaf One pint of cream or milk. A level tablespoon of corn starch. Salt and pepper. Tablespoon of melted butter. Two tablespoons of catsup. Mix well, cook in a double boiler. To be served with salmon. Salmon Loaf With Frozen Horseradish Sauce One can salmon, one tablespoon flour, one-half tablespoon salt, one teaspoon mustard, one egg, one and one-half tablespoon melted butter, three-fourths cup milk, three tablespoons vinegar, three-fourths tablespoon gelatine, two tablespoons cold water, dash of cayenne pepper. Flake the salmon. Mix salt, flour, mustard, pepper, egg (slightly beaten), milk, butter and vinegar. Cook over hot water until mixture thickens, stirring constantly at first. Add gelatine soaked in cold water, strain mixture and add to fish. Turn into mold and thoroughly chill. Arrange on bed of greens, serving with following sauce: Sauce for above--One tablespoon butter, one tablespoon flour, one-half cup milk, one-half cup soup stock , two-thirds cup heavy cream, one-half teaspoon salt, two tablespoons vinegar, one-fourth cup grated horseradish root, and a little pepper. Melt butter, add flour and pour on gradually milk and soup stock . Cool and freeze a little, then add cream, which has been beaten stiff; salt, pepper, vinegar and grated horseradish. Continue freezing until the consistency of mush. Baked Shad Bone shad, saving bone to make a fish bouillon, split shad, butter both sides well, sprinkle with cracker crumbs, pour over two and one-half cups sour cream and a good covering of Parmesan or American cheese, season, bake. Use the fish gravy and more sour cream to baste and bake twenty to thirty minutes. Scalloped Fish Remnants of cold boiled or baked fish, may be freed from skin and bones, and flaked. Put fish in a shallow pan in alternate layers, using either bread or cracker crumbs, cream sauce to moisten and cover with butter and crumbs and bake until crumbs are brown. Scharfe Fish Take one pint of water, put in it a good sized onion (sliced), a small bunch of parsley with stems, two or three pieces of celery, one-eighth of a green pepper, a pinch of ginger, a little black pepper, and a piece of carrot. Let the vegetables cook tender, then put in salmon trout, whole or cut in pieces. After fish is cooked (about twenty minutes) take it out and put it on a platter, on which it is to be served. Take a scant tablespoon flour, thin it with a little cold water, and thicken the mixture allowing it to boil a few minutes. Then remove the vegetables. Break yolks of two eggs in a bowl, stir in the hot gravy slowly, so it will not curdle. Before serving, sprinkle finely cut parsley over it. Whitefish may also be used. Cold Salmon With Dressing Boil the salmon until tender in two cups of vinegar and one cup of water, with slices of onion, whole pepper, salt and bay leaves; beat yolks of two raw eggs, with the yolks of two hard boiled eggs, mashed as fine as possible; add gradually a tablespoon mustard, three tablespoons salad oil, a little salt and pepper, vinegar to taste, lemon juice and brown sugar. Beat a long time. Cover salmon thickly with dressing. Stuffed Baked Salmon After the fish has been thoroughly cleaned, remove all the meat possible, being careful not to break the skin. Cut open along the backbone, removing it also. Make a dressing, by heating a lump of butter in a frying pan, and add a loaf of white bread that has been soaked in water, stirring a few minutes to get out most of the moisture, then add this to the finely chopped fish meat, add some fine chopped parsley, a small grated onion, salt, pepper, a few grated almonds and two or three eggs, mix all thoroughly, and fill in the skin, until it looks natural; roll in flour and place in pan with one cup of hot water and plenty of butter. Bake until a nice brown. Filet of Salmon or Halibut Salt and pepper fish, roll in flour, beaten egg and bread crumbs. Fry in butter to a golden brown. Serve with tartar sauce and lemon. In ordering, have the fish prepared for filet. Broiled Sardines Drop sardines into hot butter. Let remain until brown. Remove from fire and place on strips of prepared toast. Add the following sauce : Rub together a sifting of paprika, a bit of mustard, the juice of a lemon, a tablespoon of Worcestershire sauce and a bit of salt. Mix thoroughly into the hot butter left after removing sardines, then add a few chopped olives. When very hot, pour over the sardines and serve at once. Baked Smelt Remove head, wash and clean large smelt, season with salt, pepper and paprika, then lay crosswise on oval fishpan. Put on flakes of butter. Take yolks of two eggs, scant three-fourths cup of water and juice of one lemon, stir well together and pour over the fish, bake, and a few minutes before serving strew with shrimps or mushrooms. Garnish and serve on pan. Turbot of Fish Steam fish until tender (sufficient to make two and one-half cups). Remove bones and skin, flake the fish sprinkle with salt and pepper, and a little lemon juice. Make white sauce of one pint of milk, four tablespoons flour, four tablespoons butter, season with salt and pepper and cook until thick. When cool add two eggs well beaten. Put layer of fish and one of sauce in well buttered baking dish until filled. Cover with three-fourths cup of bread crumbs and melted butter. Bake until brown. This can be made of any left over fish. Fried Brook Trout Clean, wash and thoroughly dry fish. Salt, pepper, and flour them. Place a tablespoon of butter in hot frying pan. Fry quickly one side and turn carefully on the other, using a generous supply of butter. Lay side by side on heated platter, pouring over some drawn butter. Garnish with sliced lemon and border with parsley. Stewed Trout Boil in fish boiler one large carrot, one turnip, one large onion, mix into this a large piece of butter rolled well in flour. When the vegetables are tender add the cleaned, salted fish. When done, take out the fish, lay on platter, strain all the gravy. Put the gravy to boil, and when boiling add gradually the yolks of six eggs well beaten, and a little pepper. Let boil slowly until it thickens, stirring constantly. Pour over fish and serve cold. Trout Baked With Oysters Salt fish, place in pan, cover with cracker crumbs; place sliced tomatoes on top, add a teaspoon Worcestershire sauce, and a large quantity of butter, the more butter the better. Mushrooms may be added. Bake about one-half hour, then add oysters, from which the liquor has been drained, and bake until oysters are cooked, which requires only a few minutes. Gefullte Fish In making this dish, some people use the skin of the fish, and serve the balls in it, fastening the skin together with toothpicks. Others serve the balls plain. Pass two pounds of halibut and two pounds of salmon through a meat grinder. Add salt and pepper to taste, finely sliced onion, which has been smothered in butter, from one to three whole eggs, three or four slices of bread, which have been soaked in water and most of the moisture pressed out, and some parsley. Form the above mixture into balls. Into a deep stewpan place the fish bones (for flavoring), some sliced carrots, celery, onion and parsley, and add the fish balls, covering all with water. After boiling steadily for twenty minutes, remove the balls carefully, strain the gravy, and add a cube of sugar. Beat the yolks of three eggs well, add the hot gravy slowly, stirring constantly while doing so, and serve with the fish. Planked Fish A white fish weighing between three and four pounds is the most satisfactory to plank. If your plank is new, oil all over very well; put it into a warm oven and gradually increase the heat until the oven is very hot, to prevent warping. Have cracker crumbs, finely chopped greens, such as parsley, onion and green peppers, at hand, and all kinds of vegetables, shrimps, mushrooms, etc. Clean and season the fish well, inside and out, and on the plank put small pieces of butter, scattering cracker crumbs and chopped greens over. On this place the fish, and after flaking with butter, scatter more greens; add seasoning, such as tomato catsup, Worcestershire sauce, one-quarter cup of sherry and strained tomato juice, keeping some of the latter for basting later on. Prepare some creamed potatoes and just before putting the fish into the oven place them around the edge of the plank in tablespoonfuls, using a fork to fashion them like roses, and flaking same with small pieces of butter. Have the oven very hot, and allow the fish to bake from one-half to three-quarters of an hour, according to the size of the fish. While the fish is baking prepare the vegetables, slicing cucumbers, peppers, tomatoes , etc. Watch the fish, occasionally basting with the tomato juice. Ten minutes before removing the fish from the oven garnish with the vegetables, boiled peas (if you have some on hand), shrimps, mushrooms, truffles, etc. Do not disturb the fish or garnishings, but put the plank on a large tray and serve. It is a most attractive dish. ADDITIONAL RECIPES Sauces for Fish Fried salmon--Egg sauce. Broiled mackerel--Stewed gooseberries. Boiled or baked fish--White cream sauce. Boiled or baked fish--Drawn butter sauce. Boiled or fried fish--Tartare sauce. ADDITIONAL RECIPES SAUCES FOR FISH AND MEATS In serving savory sauces, there are just two to be served with meat or fish. White and brown. All others are modifications of these two. The simple brown sauce becomes the famous chateaubriand by the addition of glaze (solidified stock) or very strong gravy, and a glass of white wine, is the mother of equally fine gravies. All sauces should be stirred with a regular, even, and slow circling of the spoon, not only in the center of the dish, but around the sides. A small copper sauce pan is the best possible utensil for sauce making. The rule for seasoning is a level salt spoon of salt, to half a pint. Pepper, one-fourth the quantity. This, however, only when the stock is unseasoned. White Sauce Use two ounces of butter in a thick sauce pan with two ounces of flour (two tablespoons approximate the ounce), but weight only should be relied upon for fine cooking. Let these melt over the fire, so that the butter and flour become well mixed; then let them bubble a little, stirring enough to prevent the flour from sticking or changing color. Three minutes will suffice. Add a pint of clear white stock that has been strained through a cloth; this must be poured slowly, or the sauce will thicken too fast. Let this simmer an hour until very thick, then add a gill of very rich cream, stir, and the sauce is ready. This is the foundation for the following grand sauces: Poulette, Allemande, Uxelles, Soubise, Supreme, besides simpler ones, which take their names from the chief ingredients, such as caper, cauliflower, celery, lobster, etc. For sauces that have vinegar or lemon juice it is better that the white sauce should have no cream until the last minute or it may curdle. Bechamel This differs from the white stock only in the fact that the white stock used for the latter need not be very strong. For bechamel, it should either be very strong, or boiled down rapidly to make it so, and there should always be half cream, instead of one-third. White sauce is frequently made of milk, or milk and cream, and answers admirably for many purposes, but not for all. Allemande Take one-half pint of white sauce, add to it half the liquor from a can of mushrooms, and one-half dozen mushrooms chopped very fine. Let simmer, stirring all the time, for five minutes, then remove from fire. Set saucepan in another, containing boiling water. Have the yolks of three eggs ready beaten, put a little sauce to them, beat together, then add the eggs gradually to the rest of the sauce, which must be returned to the fire and stirred, until the eggs begin to thicken. Remove quickly, and stir until slightly cool. Season with saltspoon of salt, one-fourth of pepper, and strain carefully. Poulette Sauce Make allemande sauce as in the foregoing, add a wine glass of white wine. If sweetbreads or chicken are to be cooked in this sauce, add the eggs the very last thing. Villeroi Sauce Make one-half pint of white sauce (which may be made of fish stock when used for fish ), chop one-half dozen mushrooms, add a gill of liquor, a sprig of thyme, two sprigs of parsley and half a bay leaf. Simmer fifteen minutes, strain through a scalded cloth, replace on fire. Add a piece of glaze large as a hazelnut, or a tablespoon of strong meat gravy; thicken with two yolks of eggs as for allemande sauce. Sauce a la d'Uxelles Chop fine a dozen button mushrooms, or half a dozen large ones; parsley and chives of each enough to make a teaspoon when finely chopped; of lean ham a tablespoon and one small shallot. Fry gently in a tablespoon of butter, but do not let them brown. Stir these into one-half pint of white sauce, simmer three or four minutes, then add two yolks of eggs, and lastly a half teaspoon of lemon juice and just enough glaze to make the same the shade of a pale suede glove. This sauce is used to cold meats and many that are fried in bread crumbs for entrees. Supreme Supreme, gives its name to several sauces dear to epicures, supreme de volaille, supreme de Toulouse, etc. It is made with a pint of thick, white sauce, a pint of very strong chicken broth, four stalks of parsley, six white pepper corns boiled down to one-half pint. Stir sauce and broth together until thoroughly blended, then boil rapidly down till thick again, taking care it does not burn. Add one gill of rich cream, and salt to taste. Boil up till thick enough to mark the back of a spoon, strain, and lastly add small teaspoon of lemon juice. When white sauce has to be made expressly for supreme, it is easier to use chicken broth in place of white stock. Oyster Sauce For oyster sauce use oyster liquor instead of stock. The oysters should be bearded, just allowed to plump in the liquor, then strained for sauce, using a gill of it, with a gill of thick cream to make one-half pint. For this quantity, use one and one-half dozen small oysters. Shrimp, parsley, or lobster sauce, are white sauces with the addition of the different ingredients naming them. Caper Sauce A dessert spoon of capers put into a half pint of white sauce, with a teaspoon of vinegar, makes caper sauce. Bernaise Sauce This is one of the most difficult to make, on account of the danger of the eggs curdling. Chop four small shallots fine, put them into a saucepan with one-half gill of Tarragon vinegar and one-half gill of plain vinegar. Boil till reduced to one tablespoon; then add one gill of white sauce, mixing well. Stand saucepan in another of boiling water, add, one at a time, the yolks of three eggs, beating well, before adding another. Do not let it boil. Remove from fire when all eggs are in and show signs of thickening. Have ready three ounces of butter cut in small pieces, drop one in at a time, and beat with an egg -whisk until all the butter is blended. Great care must be taken that each piece is blended before adding another. This sauce should have the appearance of Welsh- rabbit when ready. Celery Sauce Celery sauce is white sauce with the pulp of boiled celery. Boil four heads of celery in milk (about one hour) until it will mash. Then rub pulp through a coarse sieve, stir into a half pint of white sauce, made with half rich cream. Hollandaise Sauce Melt one tablespoon butter, then stir in one heaping tablespoon flour until smooth, and add one cup of boiling water. When it boils, remove from fire and stir in one by one, yolks of four eggs; return to fire and boil one minute. Remove and stir in juice of one-half lemon, one tablespoon butter, and one teaspoon of chopped parsley. Stir until smooth, then serve. Drawn Butter Sauce Put two tablespoons fresh butter in a saucepan to melt (not brown), stir in two tablespoons sifted flour until smooth, then stir in slowly two cups of boiling water, and let it simmer until it thickens. Season with salt and pepper, and squeeze in the juice of half a lemon. Sweet and Sour, No. 1 Take one and one-half cups water and one cup vinegar, add one onion cut in round slices, one dozen raisins, one lemon cut in round slices, two bay leaves, six cloves; let this mixture boil. Add three tablespoons granulated sugar, which have been melted and browned in a pie plate, without water, then add two tablespoons flour, which have been rubbed smooth with a little water. Sweet and Sour, No. 2 Put water on to boil, add two bay leaves, three slices of lemon, one sliced onion, sugar, vinegar, molasses, salt, pepper, Worcestershire sauce, a little ground allspice and cinnamon, and let this boil well. Then take gingersnaps or browned flour and stir with water and pour into the above, and let it boil until it thickens, strain; a few raisins can be added after it is strained. Lemon Sauce Boil some soup stock with a few slices of lemon, a little sugar and grated nutmeg; add chopped parsley, thicken with teaspoon of flour or yolks of eggs. Tomato Cream Blend tablespoon of butter with one tablespoon of flour; when light yellow, stir in milk, add salt, pepper, Worcestershire sauce and tomato catsup. Mushroom Sauce Melt one tablespoon fresh butter in a saucepan, stir in two tablespoons flour, when light brown, stir in some soup stock or milk. Add one teaspoon Worcestershire sauce, and two of tomato catsup, and a little salt. Cut mushrooms in half, put in and let boil ten minutes. Sauce Tartare Chop fine two small pickles, one teaspoon capers, three or four pitted olives, one-half teaspoon chives or onion and a little parsley. Chop fine, and drain off the juice, and gradually blend with one small cup mayonnaise dressing. Keep cool until used. Egg Sauce Dissolve in a saucepan on stove two tablespoons of butter, then stir in two tablespoons flour, mix smooth and add two cups boiling water, stir until smooth and thick. Remove from fire and add yolks of three eggs and juice of one lemon (one tablespoon vinegar can be used instead of lemon if preferred). Add also a little chopped parsley. Serve with boiled fish or tamales. Maitre d'Hotel Sauce Take a heaping tablespoon of nice drippings or goose fat, heat it in a spider, stir two tablespoons of flour into this, then add gradually and carefully a small teacup of hot soup or water, the former preferable; add some chopped parsley, also the juice of a lemon, salt, and pepper. Stir up well. Maitre d'Hotel Butter Cream one heaping tablespoon of butter, add one-half teaspoon salt, pinch of pepper, and one tablespoon of lemon juice, then one tablespoon of chopped parsley. Put on ice until ready to serve. Serve with broiled steaks and chops. Brown Sauce Brown one tablespoon butter or beef drippings in a skillet, stir in one small chopped onion, let brown, then add one tablespoon flour, brown also, add one cup soup stock . Let thicken and season with salt and pepper. Strain. Bordelaise Nice for broiled steaks. Take one medium size onion, chopped very fine, and browned in butter, add one cup of strong beef gravy and a cup of claret or white wine; add pepper, salt and some finely chopped parsley. Thicken with a little browned flour. Tomato Sauce Brown one tablespoon butter in a saucepan, with one chopped onion, then add one tablespoon flour. When brown, stir in one pint tomatoes , which have previously been cooked and strained. Add also one teaspoon sugar, one tablespoon vinegar, a pinch of salt, pepper and red pepper, also one tablespoon tomato catsup. Spanish Make as directed for brown sauce and add two tablespoons sherry. Piquante To one cup brown sauce add one tablespoon each of chopped capers and pickles and simmer five minutes. Garlic Sauce Heat a tablespoon of fat, cut up two cloves of garlic very fine, let it brown, add a tablespoon of flour and soup stock , salt and pepper. Onion Sauce Stew some finely chopped onions in fat. You may add one-half clove of garlic cut extremely fine; brown a very little flour in this, season with salt and pepper and add enough soup stock to thin it. Mint Sauce Chop some mint fine, boil half a teacup of vinegar with one tablespoon of sugar; throw in the mint, and boil up once. Pour in a sauce boat and cool off a little before serving. Italian Simmer together for twenty minutes one-half can tomatoes , six cloves, three sprigs parsley, one teaspoon mixed herbs, one-half teaspoon pepper corns, one-half teaspoon whole allspice. Slowly brown two tablespoons chopped onion, and one tablespoon butter until very dark, add two tablespoons flour, brown again, add gradually one cup rich brown stock, then the cooked tomatoes . Simmer ten minutes, rub through a sieve and add more seasoning if desired. Curry Sauce Slowly cook one tablespoon chopped onion and one tablespoon butter five minutes, without coloring. Add one teaspoon curry powder, cook two minutes. Add one cup white sauce, cook two minutes longer. Horseradish Sauce Take a tablespoon of fat, and one of flour, and blend together over the fire, add one-half cup of vinegar, a little salt, sugar to taste, some raisins (if desired), cinnamon, pepper, a few slices of lemon, and some soup stock . Let this boil, then add horseradish, boil until ready to serve. ADDITIONAL RECIPES The art of cookery depends on the quality of ingredients used. That is why more and more women every day insist upon using Columbia Brand HAM, BACON, LARD These products are known for their absolute purity and wholesomeness. Under the watchful eye of the U.S. Government Inspectors, COLUMBIA BRAND Products are prepared to meet the most exacting demands for cleanliness and sanitation. When ordering, specify COLUMBIA BRAND-- Its your protection--our perfection. AT ALL BEST DEALERS Made by UNION MEAT COMPANY In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. MEATS "If wisdom's ways you wisely seek, Five things observe with care: What to eat, who cooked the meat, And how and when and where." Meat is the name applied to the flesh of all animals used for food. The chemical composition of meat varies considerably, depending on the particular "cut" examined, on the breed of the animal, and on the degree to which it has been fattened. By no means does the whole of butcher's meat consist of edible matter, a large part being made up of bone, gristle, tendon and other inedible portions. In an average piece of meat, these waste matters may be reckoned at 15% of the whole, and the proportions of the constituents in the edible part are about as follows (Konig): Water.................. 75% to 77% Muscle fibers .......... 13% to 18% Connective tissue ...... 2% to 5% Fat .................. 1/2% to 3% Ash .................... 8% to 18% Extractives........... 1/2% to It must be clearly realized that these results are merely approximate, and may vary considerable in different cases. The object of cooking food is twofold: "First, to improve its appearance, and to develop in it new flavors; second, to sterilize it to some extent, and to enable it to keep longer." Now, it would appear that the characteristic flavors of the different kinds of meat are due to the minute differences in the amount and kind of extractives present. Both extractives and salts are readily dissolved by water. The water in which the meat has been cooked is to be consumed in the form of soup, the partial removal of some of the flavoring ingredients, is not of much importance; but if the meat alone is to be eaten, precautions must be taken to prevent their being dissolved out. One way of doing this is to use as small a quantity of water as possible, the other way of obviating removal of soluble substances is to seal up the piece of meat. In roasting, the oven must be heated to the proper temperature beforehand--400° Far. After the pores have been closed, reduce the heat, and cook slowly at about 240° Far., fifteen minutes to each pound, making allowances for degree of rarity desired. When boiling meats, cover with boiling water, boil rapidly for five minutes, then reduce temperature to 180° and cook twenty minutes to each pound. Meat must be carefully covered. In making stew, where meat is cut in small pieces, it is better to brown meat either in a dry kettle or with very little fat, then make sauce and allow meat to cook two hours slowly in the sauce. Baking acts in precisely the same way as roasting, in this case the heat being applied all around the meat at once, instead of only to one side at a time. All meats should be nearly done before seasoned with salt, as salt draws out the juices, and has a tendency to harden the fiber. As regards the relative digestibility of the different kinds of meat, there are but few exact data obtainable. Mutton and beef are certainly more digestible than either veal or pork, beef showing possibly the greatest degree of digestibility. Veal comes after mutton, in length of time taken for its digestion. Neither is this meat as nutritious as beef or mutton, because of its high percentage of water and hence small amount of fat. The comparative indigestibility of pork is accounted for by the large accumulation of fat between the fibers. Lastly, it must be pointed out, in connection with the relative digestibility of different sorts of meat that idiosyncrasy plays a very large part in the process, as for instance, mutton is known to make some people ill, while beef is easily digested, and so on. This matter can in no way be accounted for. Sauces for Meats Roast beef--Tomato catsup. Roast beef--Grated horseradish. Roast veal--Tomato sauce. Roast mutton--Stewed gooseberries. Roast lamb--Mint sauce. Roast pork--Apple sauce. Broiled steak--Mushrooms or fried onions. Broiled tongue--Olives stuffed with red peppers. Corned beef--Mustard dressing. How to Roast Meats With Gas Meat is much better when roasted below the flame than baked in the oven. Lay the roast on the broiling pan, placing it as near the flame as possible, till the meat is thoroughly seared outside. Then remove the roast to a medium distance from the flame, depending of course, on its size. When the bake oven is not in use, you can finish roasting your meat there more quickly than in the broiling oven, if you are in a hurry. The advantage of the broiling oven, for roasting, however, lies in the fact that it is heated by the same flame that heats the bake oven. Time Table for Meats Braised beef, 3 1/2 to 4 1/2 hours. Beef sirloin or rib, rare, weight 5 lbs., 1 hour, 5 minutes. Beef sirloin or rib, rare, weight 10 lbs., 1 hour, 30 minutes. Beef sirloin or rib, well done, 5 lbs., 1 hour, 20 minutes. Beef sirloin or rib, well done, 10 lbs., 1 hour, 50 minutes. Beef rump, rare, weight 10 lbs., 1 hour, 35 minutes. Beef rump, well done, weight 10 lbs., 1 hour, 55 minutes. Beef (filet), well done, weight 10 lbs., 20 to 30 minutes. Mutton (saddle), 1 1/4 to 1 1/2 hours. Lamb (leg), 1 1/4 to 1 3/4 hours. Lamb (fore quarter), 1 to 1 1/4 hours. Lamb (chops), in paper cases, 15 to 20 minutes. Veal (leg), 3 1/4 to 4 hours. Veal (loin), 2 to 3 hours. Pork (chine or spareribs), 3 to 3 1/2 hours. BEEF Beef, the most largely consumed of all animal foods, and by many thought to be the most nutritious, is the meat of steer, ox or cow. "Good beef should be of firm and fine-grained texture, bright red in color, and well mottled and coated with fat, that is firm and of a yellowish color." The beef creature is divided by splitting through the backbone, and again into a hind and fore-quarter. The best cuts of beef for roasting: tip or middle of sirloin, back of rump, or first three ribs. Tip of sirloin is desirable for a small family, and the back of rump for a large one. Rib roasts contain more fat than either of the others, and are somewhat cheaper. Best cuts of beef for broiling are porterhouse, sirloin, cross cuts of rump steaks, and second and third cuts from top of round. Brisket of Beef Take about five pounds of fat, young beef (you may make soup stock of it first), then take out the bones, salt it well and lay it in the bottom of a porcelain-lined kettle and put a quart of nice sauerkraut on top of it and let it boil slowly until tender. Add more vinegar if necessary, thicken with a grated raw potato and add a little brown sugar. Some like a few caraway seeds added. Brisket of beef may be prepared in numerous ways. After taking it out of the soup you may prepare it with a horseradish sauce, garlic, sauce, onion sauce, etc. Sweet and Sour Beef Three pounds brisket of beef, one onion sliced, one lemon (juice), small piece of bay leaf, three tablespoons sugar, one cup boiling water, salt and pepper. Place the meat in a stew pan, add the onion sliced thin and also the boiling water. Stew meat until tender, adding salt, pepper and a bit of bay leaf for seasoning; add lemon juice and sugar until sweet and sour. Spanish Pot Roast First cut up a good size carrot in shape of cubes, have a half dozen or so pointed so it can be stuck through the meat in different places. Peel two whole garlic and separate in pieces, and cut up two good size onions in small cubes. Rub the meat well with flour and seasoning, and brown all over in frying pan with grease, and one onion and one kernel garlic that have been cut up. While browning, take the juice of a can of tomatoes and add the rest of the garlic, onion and carrots. Salt and pepper to taste well, let boil up once, and pour all over the browned meat in a large pot, and simmer slowly several hours. Sauce should be rich brown when done. Beef a la Mode Four pounds beef (shoulder); one onion, sliced; eight cloves; two bay leaves; salt; one tablespoon sugar, vinegar; one-fourth cup celery root (diced); two tablespoons fat; three gingersnaps. Place meat, onion, bay leaves, cloves in an earthen dish; cover meat half with vinegar and cover dish closely. Let stand twelve hours, turn on the other side and let stand twelve hours longer. Heat the fat in the spider or casserole, add the celery and meat, brown nicely on all sides; add some of spiced vinegar or simply boiling water; cover closely, set in the oven and let simmer and bake several hours or until tender. Add salt, cook a little longer. Take out meat, strain gravy; skim off the fat; add the gingersnaps and sugar to taste. If you wish the gravy more tart, add lemon, sliced. Return meat and gravy to kettle, heat and serve the meat hot in the gravy. Short Ribs of Beef Spanish Get the small ribs of beef and put on with water enough to cover, seasoning with salt, pepper, an onion and a tiny kernel of garlic. Let it cook about two hours and then add a can of tomatoes and season highly, either with red peppers or paprika, or Gebhard's Chili Powder. The last is very fine for Spanish flavoring. Short ribs must cook at least three hours. Pot Roast Three or more pounds of beef ( chuck or rump ), one tablespoon drippings, one pint boiling water, one tablespoon flour, one onion chopped fine, salt and pepper. Season and prepare meat as desired, and sprinkle over with flour. Heat the fat and fry the onion in it, until light brown; add the meat, brown on all sides to harden the albumen, to keep in the juices. Pour on the boiling water and then let simmer slowly until tender. Add a little boiling water to prevent burning. Sliced or stewed tomatoes laid on top of the meat one-half hour before serving makes a fine flavor. Thicken gravy with one tablespoon flour. Roast Beef I The best roasts are sirloin, porterhouse and rib roasts. If desired rare, allow ten minutes to the pound; if medium, twelve to fifteen minutes, and if very well done, twenty minutes. Cut up a small onion, a celery root and part of a carrot into rather small pieces and add to these two or three sprigs of parsley and one bay leaf. Sprinkle these over the bottom of the dripping pan and place your roast on this bed. The oven should be very hot when the roast is first put in, but when the roast is browned sufficiently to retain its juices, moderate the heat and roast more slowly until the meat is done. Do not season until the roast is browned, and then add salt and pepper. Enough juice and fat will drop from the roast to give the necessary broth for basting. Baste frequently and turn occasionally, being very careful, however, not to stick a fork into the roast. Never allow your butcher to skewer your meat, but have it tied carefully into shape and cut and remove the strings before serving. Wooden skewers invariably give an unpleasant taste to the beef, and any skewer makes a hole for the escape of the juices. If it is dusty, wring a cloth from cold water and wipe it off. Many a careless cook wastes a good proportion of the best part of the roast in a pan of water which is thrown away. If a patent roaster is used the roast does not require turning or basting. No household ought to be without one. Add to the roast about two sliced fresh tomatoes or two tablespoons of canned ones. Roast Beef II The best cuts of beef for roasting are: Tip or middle of sirloin, back of rump or first three ribs. Tip of sirloin roast is desirable for a small family. Back of rump makes a superior roast for a large family, and is more economical than sirloin. It is especially desirable where a large quantity of dish gravy is liked, for in carving the meat, juices follow the knife. Rib roasts contain more fat than either of the others, and are somewhat cheaper. To Roast Beef --Wipe, put on a rack in dripping pan, skin side down, rub over with salt and dredge meat and pan with flour. Place in hot oven, that the surface may be quickly seared, thus preventing escape of inner juices. After flour in pan is browned, reduce heat and baste with fat which has been tried out; if meat is quite lean, it may be necessary to put trimmings of fat in pan. Baste every ten minutes; if this rule is followed, meat will be found more juicy. When meat is about half done turn it over and dredge with flour, so that skin side may be uppermost for final browning. For roasting consult time table for baking meats. If there is danger of flour burning in pan, add a small quantity of water; this, however, is not desirable and seldom need be done if size of pan is adapted to size of roast. Beef to be well roasted should be started in hot oven and heat decreased, so that when carved the slices will be red throughout, with a crisp layer of golden brown fat on the top. Beef roasted when temperature is so high that surface is hardened before heat can penetrate to the center is most unsatisfactory. Sirloin or rib roasts may have the bones  removed, and be rolled, skewered and tied in shape. Chicago butt is cut from the most tender part of back and rump, and if fresh and from a heavy beef, make excellent roasts at a small price. Roast Beef Gravy --Remove some of the fat from pan, leaving four tablespoons. Place on front of range, add four tablespoons flour and stir until well browned. The flour dredged and browned in pan should give additional color to gravy. Add gradually one and one-half cups boiling water, cook five minutes, season with salt and pepper and strain. If flour should burn in pan, gravy will be full of black particles. Beef en Casserole Two and one-half pounds beef chuck or round, two tablespoons beef drippings, one small carrot, cut in dice, one tablespoon flour, one small onion sliced, salt and pepper to taste, one cup strained tomatoes , one bag leaf. Salt and pepper the meat and dust with the flour. Heat the fat in a frying pan and brown the meat in it on all sides. Place meat in casserole, add other ingredients, cover and let simmer at a low temperature until tender, keeping the casserole well covered so as not to allow the steam and juices to escape. Serve hot with mashed or baked potatoes . Filet of Beef Time, thirty minutes in hot oven. Lard the filet plentifully. Place in a small baking pan pieces of suet. Over the suet place a layer of chopped onion, carrot, turnip and celery; lay the tenderloin or filet on top. Pour in the pan a cup of stock, add one-half teaspoon of salt, one-quarter teaspoon of pepper and some parsley, one bay leaf and two cloves. Bake in a hot oven thirty minutes and baste frequently. The filet should be rare. Remove it when done; strain off the gravy and skim off the grease. Put into the pan two tablespoons each of butter and flour; stir until browned, then slowly add the strained pan gravy; if not enough for a cup, add some stock. Stir until it boils, then add a can of drained mushrooms and let them simmer five minutes; no longer, or mushrooms will harden. Taste if properly seasoned and add one-half teaspoon of Kitchen Bouquet to make it brown. The sauce should be the consistency of cream. One-half cup of Madeira or Sherry may be used in place of mushrooms if preferred. Filet de Boeuf au Champignons For this you must get a tenderloin roast, which you will have to order at least a day or two before you wish to use it, as butchers do not always keep them on hand. Rub the roast well with salt and pepper; make a bed of onions, celery and parsley root in the roasting pan, lay the roast upon this bed and put flakes of fat or butter here and there on top of the roast, and cut up a few tomatoes and lay on top also. Cover up the roast, air tight and roast in a quick oven. Look after it carefully, basting when necessary and adding hot water. When done lay on a platter, strain the sauce and add the mushrooms; thicken the sauce with a teaspoon of flour and pour it over the roast when ready to serve. Dissolve the flour in a very little cold water before adding to the sauce. Spinach is a nice accompaniment. A very attractive looking dish may be made of this roast by putting all kinds of vegetables around it on the same platter, such as cauliflower, green peas, lima bean s, spinach and carrots; of course, judgment must be used as to harmonizing of colors; do not put more than about four tablespoons of each vegetable around the roast. Serve the sauce in a sauceboat. Slice the roast, but do not destroy its shape. Baked Steak Season meat with salt and pepper, chop two large onions, and three bell peppers very fine, and scatter over steak. Slice a lemon very thin and put over pepper, then pour over one and one-half cups of tomato catsup. Roast in oven twenty or thirty minutes. After meat is in oven, baste continually and after ten minutes add one cup soup stock . Steak in Casserole Broil a thick steak a few minutes, then put it into a casserole, add one carrot, one onion, one parsley sprig, one bay leaf, one-half turnip, one teaspoon catsup, six mushrooms, one wine glass Madeira wine; let cook slowly until vegetables are tender. Porterhouse Steak, Bordelaise Sauce Serve broiled porterhouse steak with Bordelaise sauce. Cook one shallot finely chopped, with one-fourth cup claret until claret is reduced to two tablespoons and strain. Melt two tablespoons butter, add one slice onion, two slices carrot, sprig of parsley, bit of bay leaf, eight peppercorns and one clove and cook until brown. Add three and one-half tablespoons flour and when well browned add gradually one cup brown stock. Strain, let simmer eight minutes, add claret and one tablespoon butter. Season with salt and pepper. Remove marrow from marrow bone and cut in one-third inch slices; then poach in boiling water. Arrange on and around steak and pour around sauce. Broiled Steak Wipe, trim off extra fat. Grease the broiler with some of the fat; broil over a clear fire, turning every ten seconds; cook four or five minutes if liked rare; longer if well done. Place on a hot platter and season, serve with Maitre d'Hotel sauce. Beefsteak should be tender and cut one inch thick. Porterhouse steak may be served with mushroom sauce. Beefsteak a la Victor Hugo Wipe a porterhouse steak, broil and serve with Victor Hugo sauce. Cook one-half teaspoon finely chopped shallot in one tablespoon tarragon vinegar five minutes. Wash one-third cup butter and divide in thirds. Add one piece butter to mixture with yolks of two eggs, one teaspoon lemon juice and one teaspoon meat extract. Cook over hot water, stirring constantly; as soon as butter is melted add second piece and then third piece. When mixture thickens add one-half tablespoon grated horseradish. Pan-Broiled Steak Remove from the steak extra fat; heat a frying pan very hot and grease it with the fat scraps. Put in the meat and cook one minute; turn it and sear the other side; then cook more slowly until done--five minutes, if liked rare. Season and serve on a hot dish. Fried Beefsteak Steak fried in a spider, if done properly, is almost as good as broiled. Have the spider very hot, cut a piece of fat off the steak and allow this to heat just enough to grease the spider. Lay in the steak, turning very often to keep the juices in; salt and pepper. When done put on a hot platter and cover up. Now cut up a piece of onion and throw into the spider, stir up quickly, add a few spoons of water and a few spoons of canned tomatoes to make the gravy; cover for a few minutes and pour this over the steak and serve. Beefsteak and Onions Slice onions thin, place in spider with a little fat and season with salt and pepper, brown slightly, add steaks, cover tightly. When meat is brown on one side turn and brown on the other. When ready to serve, spread onions on top. A nice way to warm over steak. Filet of Beef With Vegetables Wipe a three-pound filet, trim and remove fat; put one-half pound butter in hot frying pan and when melted add filet and turn frequently until the entire surface is seared and well browned; then turn occasionally until done, the time required being about thirty minutes. Remove to serving dish and garnish with one cup each cooked peas and carrots, cut in fancy shapes, both well seasoned, one-half cup raisins seeded and cooked in boiling water until soft, and the caps from one-half pound fresh mushrooms sauted in butter five minutes. Serve with brown mushroom sauce. Pour off one-fourth cup fat from frying pan, add five tablespoons flour and stir until well browned, then add one cup brown soup stock , one-third cup mushroom liquor and the caps from one-half pound mushrooms cut in slices and sauted in butter three minutes. Season with salt and pepper and just before serving add gradually, while stirring constantly, the butter remaining in frying pan. To obtain mushroom liquor, scrape stems of mushrooms, break in pieces, cover with cold water, and cook slowly until liquid is reduced to one-third cup. Steak for the Oven Sirloin steak about two inches thick; put in pan, salt it, add two tablespoons Worcestershire sauce, and three tablespoons catsup, and little lumps of butter over the top. Put in hot oven for twenty minutes. Beefsteak a la Mirabeau Garnish a broiled porterhouse or cross-cut of rump steak with anchovies and stoned olives stuffed with butter and chopped parsley. Arrange around steak stuffed tomatoes and fried potato balls served in shells, made from noodle mixture. Pour around the following sauce : Melt two tablespoons butter, add two and one-half tablespoons browned flour, then add one cup chicken stock. Season with one tablespoon tomato catsup and salt and pepper. Beefsteak With Oyster Blanket Wipe a sirloin steak, cut one and one-half inches thick, broil five minutes, and remove to platter. Spread with butter and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Clean one pint oysters, cover steak with same, sprinkle oysters with salt and pepper and dot over with butter. Place on grate in hot oven, and cook until oysters are plump. Sauted Filet of Beef With Stuffed Mushroom Caps Prepare and cook six filets same as sauted filets of beef a la Moelle. Put a sauted stuffed mushroom cap on each, sprinkle with buttered crumbs and bake until crumbs are browned. Remove to serving dish, pour around Espagnole sauce and garnish caps with strips of red and green pepper cut in fancy shapes. Stuffing for mushroom caps: Clean and finely chop six mushroom caps . Add one tablespoon each of parsley and onion finely chopped and one tablespoon butter. Moisten with Espagnole sauce. Chateaubriand of Beef Trim off fat and skin, from three pounds of beef cut from center of filet, and flatten with a broad-bladed cleaver; sprinkle with salt, brush over with olive oil and broil over a clear fire twenty minutes. Remove to serving dish, garnish with red pepper cut in fancy shapes and parsley. Serve with Espagnole Sauce--To one and one-half cups rich brown sauce, add two-thirds teaspoon meat extract, one tablespoon lemon juice and one and one-half tablespoons finely chopped parsley. Just before serving add one tablespoon butter and salt and pepper to taste. Rolled Stuffed Steak Take two pounds of beefsteak, lay it on a chopping board and pound it with a rolling pin twenty minutes. Mix a handful of bread crumbs, a tablespoon of chopped cherries, an ounce of butter, pepper and salt and an egg. Mix all together. Put on the steak, tying it tightly. Bake in oven for twenty minutes. Serve with horseradish sauce and parsley. Round Beefsteak If you are compelled to live very economically, round steak prepared in above manner is indeed very palatable; and how few know what a delicious steak may be prepared out of a flank. Ask your butcher, he knows, and will prepare it ready for frying. Goose or any kind of poultry drippings is nice to fry this steak in. Smoked Beef With Split Peas and Barley Put on to boil in cold water a nice piece of smoked brisket of beef and boil slowly until tender. Boil two cups of large barley and two cups of split peas in enough water to cover them, using as much of the smoked beef water as possible. As this water might be salty enough, taste before adding salt, and add a little white pepper. Boil several hours slowly; when done and if it is too moist, place in the oven for about one-half hour. Serve with slices of the smoked brisket. It improves it by putting it into the oven. Hamburger Steak This palatable dish is made of round steak chopped extremely fine, and seasoned with salt and pepper. You may grate in part of an onion or fry with onions. For invalids, scrape the steak instead of chopping. Boiled Ham For a twelve-pound Columbia ham. Cover ham with cold water and add two bay leaves, four cloves and six peppercorns. Let come to boil slowly, and boil four hours, or until the small bone pulls out. Let cool in that water, take ham out and remove skin. Cover ham with brown sugar, and press a few whole cloves into the ham. Then pour over one cup cooking sherry, bake in a moderate oven about forty minutes. Sauerbraten Take a solid piece of meat, say about five or six pounds, put it in a deep earthen jar and pour enough boiling vinegar over it to cover it; you may take one-third water. Add to the vinegar when boiling, four bay leaves, some whole peppercorns, cloves and whole mace. Pour this over the meat, and turn it daily. In summer three or four days is the longest time allowed for the meat to remain in this pickle; but in winter eight or ten days is not too long. When ready to boil, heat some nice poultry drippings in a stew pan. Cut up one or two onions in it, stew until tender, and then put in the beef, salting it on both sides before stewing. Stew (closely covered), and if not acid enough, add some of the brine it was pickled in. Stew about three hours and thicken the gravy with flour. Pickled Meat Use a piece of brisket of beef about seven pounds, have all bones removed, wash clean, pepper and salt well. Boil enough water to cover; put in stone jar to cool and add a piece of saltpetre the size of a walnut, four or five bay leaves, a few cloves, allspice, whole black peppers and salt enough to make a brine on which an egg will float. Leave in brine ten days. Hungarian Goulash I One pound lean beef, one pound lean veal; one tablespoon fat, one large onion diced, one teaspoon paprika, one cup strained tomatoes . Cut veal and beef into one inch squares, mix and brown in hot fat with the onion, salt and paprika. When the meat is brown, add the tomatoes and one-half hour before serving add some small potatoes . Let cook slowly, closely covered. Hungarian Goulash II Use the big end of a loin of veal, cut in large pieces; add four large onions and a good slice of butter and heat in a casserole. Season with salt and paprika, cover and let simmer three-quarters of an hour. Peel four or five potatoes , put on top of the meat, and let cook slowly three-quarters of an hour longer, adding a little water if too dry. Goulash No. III Get a choice piece of beef and cut into small parts; then cut up a good sized onion and let same brown in hot fat, after which add the meat, seasoning same well with salt and paprika and let it simmer from fifteen to twenty minutes, turning it occasionally so as not to burn or scorch on either side. Then let same stew for three-quarters to an hour (or just long enough till nearly cooked), adding three potatoes quartered and enough water over same to boil. The potatoes should not be added until from fifteen to twenty minutes before serving. Pickled Beef Ten pounds beef, one cup brown sugar, one-quarter tablespoon soda; three-quarters tablespoon saltpetre, salt and pepper to taste, ginger and a little garlic if desired. Place in a stone jar, cover with large soup plate and allow to draw juice over night. Then cover with cold water and leave in this brine ten days. Tongue or goose meat may be pickled in the same manner. Corned Beef Corned beef has but little nutritive value. It is used to give variety to our diet in summer, when fresh meats prove too stimulating. It is eaten by the workingman to give bulk to his food. The best pieces of corned beef are the rattle rand and fancy brisket. The fancy brisket commands a higher price, and may be easily told from the rattle rand by the selvage on the lower side and the absence of bones. The upper end or brisket (butt end) has a large quantity of fat. The rattle rand contains a thick lean end; the second cut contains three distinct layers of meat and fat, and is considered the best cut by those who prefer meat well streaked with fat. The rattle rand has a thin end, which contains but one layer of lean meat and much fat, consequently is not a desirable piece. To Boil Corned Beef--Wipe the meat and tie securely in shape, if this has not been already done at market. Put in kettle, cover with cold water and bring slowly to boiling point. Boil five minutes, remove scum and cook at a lower temperature until tender. Cool slightly in water in which it was cooked, remove to a dish, cover and place a weight on it that meat may be well pressed. The lean meat and fat may be separated and put in alternate layers in a bread pan, then covered and pressed. To Boil Smoked Tongue One smoked tongue, cold water to cover, six bay leaves, one teaspoon whole peppers, one teaspoon cloves, one onion sliced. Wash the tongue and if dried out, soak in cold water over night. Place in kettle with seasoning, and let simmer slowly until tender--from two to four hours. Then remove from the brine, pull off the outer skin, cut off root and let cool in the brine. May be sliced cold or served hot, with sweet and sour sauce. Croquettes Chop cold cooked meat into small pieces, add seasoning to taste-- salt, cayenne pepper, chopped parsley; add a thick white sauce and cool. Shape into cylinders and cover with crumbs, egg and again with crumbs. Cook in deep hot fat until brown. Plain Hash Brown a chopped onion in a large spoon of fat, and stir in hashed cooked meat, and also a little cold cooked potatoes . Season with salt, pepper and paprika and mix together well, adding soup stock or left over gravy to moisten. Hash Baked Cut up an onion fine and put in dripping pan to brown with a little butter and a little fat. When brown add one tomato and the meat, which has been chopped fine. Season with salt, pepper and Worcestershire sauce. Have your baking dish lined with mashed potatoes and fill with the above, which has been well mixed. Let brown nicely. THE NEW BUTTER-NUT BREAD It's the same high quality, with an improved mixing process that enables us to turn out a daintier loaf than ever. Even housewives proud of their baking admit that Butter-Nut is perfect. You'll think so, too, when you've tried it. 5 and 10 cents the loaf--but be sure you see the Butter-Nut label. In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. VEAL Veal is meat from a young calf killed when six to eight weeks old. Good veal has pinkish colored flesh and white fat, and is in season during the spring. Veal is divided in the same manner as lamb, into fore and hind quarters. The fore-quarter is subdivided into breast, shoulder and neck. The hind into loin, leg and knuckle; cutlets and filets are cut from the thick part of the leg. Roast Veal In the first place never buy veal that is not fat and white. Veal that is lean and red is not fit for use. The best parts for roasting are the loin or leg. Prepare for the oven in the following manner: Wash and then dry, rub it well with salt and a very little ground ginger and dredge it with flour. Lay in roasting pan and put slices of onion, celery and tomatoes on top with a few spoons of goose fat or drippings. If you have goose fat use it by all means. Cover tightly and roast, allowing twenty minutes to the pound and baste frequently. Veal must be well done. When cold it slices up as nicely as turkey. Roast Veal Take a thick piece of veal from the upper part of the leg, dredge with salt and pepper, ginger and flour. Put in dripping pan in a very hot oven with three tablespoons of beef or poultry drippings. When the meat is all browned over, baste with the fat and reduce the heat; add a little water and baste often until tender. Roast Veal Breast, Stuffed Select a piece of veal breast and have the butcher make an opening on the underside and stuff with bread dressing or potato stuffing. Sew up ends, dredge with salt, pepper, ginger and flour; place in hot oven, in roasting pan with two tablespoons beef or poultry fat, an onion cut fine and a little boiling water. Turn and baste often until brown and tender. A little allspice and bay leaf may be added for seasoning. Lamb breast may be prepared the same way. Veal Fricassee Cut in pieces, two pounds of veal from loin. Cook slowly in boiling water, covered; add one small onion, two stalks celery and six slices carrot. Remove the meat; season with salt and pepper, dredge with flour and brown in butter. Serve with brown sauce. Veal Cutlets Roll out some crackers until they are like flour. Season the cutlets with salt and ground ginger, sprinkle them well on both sides and dip each cutlet first in beaten egg and then in the rolled crackers. Have some nice goose oil or poultry drippings hot in a spider before you lay in the cutlets (if you put the cutlets in before the fat is hot they will stick to the spider ) and fry a nice brown. Lay on a hot platter and garnish with parsley and slices of lemon. Veal Loaf With Boiled Eggs Two pounds chopped veal, one small onion grated, one-quarter teaspoon pepper, one teaspoon salt, one-half cup cracker crumbs, one raw egg, two hard boiled eggs, one-half cup soup stock , two tablespoons melted butter. Mix all together with the exception of the hard boiled eggs. Put a layer about an inch in thickness in a well-greased pan, place the boiled eggs (whole) in the center, then fill up the pan with the veal remaining. Place bits of butter or drippings over the top and bake, basting frequently. Mock Birds Take thin veal steak and cut in slices three by five inches. Put in the center of each a little chopped boiled ham, a small lump of butter, salt, pepper, chopped parsley and a little chopped onion. Make little rolls of them and tie or pin with a toothpick. Brown them well in hot butter. Add a little soup stock , and flour and boil. Add one cup sour cream shortly before serving. Fricasseed Veal With Cauliflower Use the breast or shoulder for this purpose, the former being preferable, and cut it up into pieces, not too small. Sprinkle each piece slightly with fine salt and ginger. Heat a tablespoon of goose oil or poultry drippings in a stew pan and lay the veal in it. Cut up an onion and one or two tomatoes (a tablespoon of canned tomatoes will do), and add to this very little water, hot if any, and stew two hours, closely covered. When done mix a teaspoon of flour and a little water and add to the veal (you may use cream instead of water. ) Chop up a small handful of parsley, add it and boil up once and serve. Place the cauliflower around the platter in which you serve the veal. Boil the cauliflower in salt and water, closely covered; put it on at the same time you put on the veal. Veal Stew With Dumplings Cut up brisket of veal into small pieces for stew. When washed and drained season with pepper, salt and paprika. Take a tablespoon of fat, in which cut up an onion and brown lightly, then add meat, on which sprinkle a couple of tablespoons flour and stir until it browns a little, then add boiling water to cover, a carrot, leek and some celery cut up small. Cover and let cook slowly until almost done. Then add dumplings made as follows: One quart flour, one-half teaspoon salt, one and one-half teaspoons baking powder, one egg well beaten, water enough to make a thick batter. Then put over the meat (not the gravy ) a tablespoon of the batter at a time, and cover closely for about fifteen minutes. When ready for serving, remove dumplings, sprinkle stew with chopped parsley and serve in platter, surrounded by the dumplings. MUTTON Lamb is the name given to the meat of lambs, mutton to the meat of sheep. The latter being more mature, is also more nutritious. Good quality mutton should be fine-grained and of bright pink color. The fat, white, hard and flaky. Lamb chops may be easily distinguished from mutton by the red color of the bone. Lamb and mutton are split into two parts, then subdivided into fore and hind-quarter. "The leg is sold whole for boiling, or roasting. The fore-quarter may be boned, stuffed, rolled and roasted, or used for broth stew or fricassee. Rib chops come from the hind-quarter, while loin chops lie between these ribs and the leg." English Chops With Sweetbreads One-half pound of sweetbreads parboiled and prepared a la poulette--Broil double chops lightly on each side, and on each spread dressing. Place in the oven for ten minutes. Broiled Lamb Chops Season chops, remove extra fat. Grease wire broiler with some of it--and follow directions for broiling beefsteak. Lamb Cutlets Trim, season with salt and pepper, dredge with flour, dip in egg, then in bread or cracker crumbs and fry in fat from five to eight minutes, until nicely browned on top of stove, or place in oven four or five minutes to finish. Roast Lamb Salt and pepper lamb and dredge with flour, place on rack of dripping pan with one cup of water, in hot oven. When brown, baste every fifteen minutes. It will take about two hours to cook a medium sized roast. Leg of lamb may be boned and stuffed with bread dressing. Serve with mint sauce or mint sherbet. Crown of Lamb Select parts from two loins containing ribs, scrape flesh from bone between ribs, as far as lean meat and trim off backbone. Shape each piece in a semi-circle, having ribs outside and sew pieces together to form a crown. Trim ends of bones evenly and rather short, and wrap each bone in a thin strip of the fat scraps to prevent bone from burning. Roast one and one-quarter hours or until tender, covering bones with buttered paper. Remove fat from bones before serving and fill center with peas, puree of chestnut, or mashed potatoes . Mutton or Lamb Chops Those off the loin are best. Cut off some of the fat, throw into the spider and heat. Season the chops with salt and pepper or salt and ginger. Have the spider very hot with not too much fat in it. To be nice and tender, they must fry quickly to a nice brown. Breast of Mutton Stewed With Carrots Salt the mutton on both sides, adding a little ground ginger; put on to boil in cold water in a porcelain-lined kettle, and cover up tightly and stew slowly. In the meantime pare and cut up the carrots and add these and cover up again. Pare and cut up about half a dozen potatoes into dice shape and add them three-quarters of an hour before dinner. Cover up again, and when done make a sauce as follows: Skim off about two tablespoons of fat from the mutton, brown with flour and add water. Boiled Mutton With Caper Sauce Boil from two to three hours a leg of mutton in water seasoned with salt, pepper and an onion. For the sauce boil a pint of milk, thicken with flour, add butter, pepper and two tablespoons of capers. Pour over mutton and serve. Pot Roast of Lamb Salt and pepper shoulder of lamb. Put fat in saucepan, add onion and garlic and brown meat on both sides; pour off grease and add soup stock and cook until tender. Thicken gravy with a little flour. Sheep Tongues, Spanish Style Six sheep tongues, two Chili peppers, tomatoes , bouillon, salt, pepper, cayenne, parsley. Boil the tongues, remove skin, place a little fat in the pan; brown the onion, add a little flour, stir while pouring over some bouillon so that flour should not get lumpy; cut tomatoes and peppers small, and add to bouillon. When all commences to boil, add tongues which have been cut in half. Cook for three-quarters of an hour. Season to taste. Serve with chopped parsley. Calf's Tongues, Sauce Piquante Cook four tongues until tender in boiling water, to cover, with six slices carrots, two stalks celery, one onion stuck with eight cloves, one teaspoon peppercorns, and one-half tablespoon salt. Take tongues from water and remove skin and roots. Cut in halves lengthwise, and reheat in sauce. Sauce Piquante --Brown one-quarter cup butter, add six tablespoons flour and stir until well browned; then add two cups brown stock and cook three minutes. Season with two-thirds teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon paprika, a few grains cayenne, one tablespoon vinegar, one-half tablespoon capers and one cucumber pickle thinly sliced. Serve garnished with cucumber pickles and cold cooked beets cut into fancy shapes. Boiled Tongue A boiled corned tongue is cooked the same as boiled corned beef. If very salty, it should be soaked in cold water several hours, or over night, before cooking. Take from water when slightly cooled, and remove skin. Calf's Head a la Terrapin Wash and clean a calf's head and cook until tender in boiling water, to cover. Cool and cut meat from cheek in small cubes. To two cups meat dice add one cup sauce, made of two tablespoons butter, two tablespoons flour and one cup white stock, seasoned with one-half teaspoon salt, one-eighth teaspoon pepper and a few grains cayenne. Add one-half cup cream and yolks of two eggs slightly beaten; cook two minutes, and add two tablespoons Madeira wine. Fried Liver One pound calves' liver sliced, salt and pepper, two tablespoons flour, one large onion sliced, two tablespoons goose or bacon fat. Salt and pepper the liver to taste, then dredge with the flour; heat the fat in a spider. Fry the slices until brown on both sides. Push the liver aside, add the onions and let brown slightly; cover and let cook ten to fifteen minutes and serve with or without the onion --or pour over a brown sauce, using the gravy in the spider with hot water in place of other liquid, and serve hot with dumplings. Lyonnaise Tripe Cut honeycomb tripe in pieces two inches long by a half inch wide, making three cups. Put in a pan and place in oven, that water may be drawn out. Cook one tablespoon finely chopped onion in two tablespoons butter, until slightly browned. Add tripe drained from water, and cook five minutes. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and finely chopped parsley. Tripe a la Creole Cut, bake and drain tripe as for lyonnaise tripe. Cook same quantity butter and onion, add one-eighth green pepper finely chopped, one tablespoon flour, one-half cup stock, one-quarter cup drained tomatoes , and one fresh mushroom, cut in slices. Add tripe and cook five minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Tripe in Batter Wipe tripe and cut in pieces for serving. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, dip in batter, fry in small quantity of hot fat and drain. Tripe Batter--Mix one cup of flour with one-quarter teaspoon salt, add gradually one-half cup cold water and when perfectly smooth add one egg well beaten, one-half tablespoon vinegar and one teaspoon olive oil or melted butter. Broiled Tripe Fresh honeycomb tripe is best for broiling. Wipe tripe as dry as possible, dip in fine cracker dust and olive oil or melted butter, draining off all fat that is possible, and again dip in cracker dust. Place in greased broiler and broil five minutes, cooking smooth side of tripe the first three minutes; place on hot platter honeycombside up, spread with butter and sprinkle with salt and pepper. ADDITIONAL RECIPES POULTRY In selecting chickens yellow ones with yellow feet are preferred, as the meat is whiter and flavor superior. All poultry may be tested for being young by pressing the cartilege substance at the end of the breast bone, if bending easily it will be tender. All poultry should be killed and hung by the neck over night. In the morning singe over gas, removing pin feathers. Remove entrails by making incision at the vent, being very careful not to disturb gall which is near the liver. Remove windpipe and take out crop. Heart and gizzard may be used by cutting point off of heart pressing out the blood, and gizzard by cutting in two and removing undercoat. Wash well, then drain and season over night. All poultry is better flavored when seasoned over night whether for roast or fricassee. If stuffing is wanted prepare by filling body, but not too full at the breast. Sew up with white thread, removing same before serving. In roasting always try to avoid sticking with a fork. Sauces for Poultry Roast Turkey--Cranberry sauce, plum or grape sauce. Roast Chicken--Currant jelly. Roast Duck--Currant jelly. Boiled Turkey--Oyster sauce. Pigeon Pie--Mushroom sauce. Fried Chicken, No. 1 Wash and dress young spring chickens. Cut in halves and wipe dry. Cut off necks and wings ( wings interfere in frying), season with paprika and pepper, and dip in flour, salt is added later. Fry to a golden brown in butter or chicken fat. Remove chickens, season with salt, and place in hot casserole or Dutch oven, in which has been put a small piece of butter. Add a piece of green pepper and some onion if desired. Cover pot and finish in oven. Add a little stock, if necessary, which can be made by boiling the wings and necks. Fried Chicken, No. 2 Quarter young spring chickens, cut off wings if you wish, season with salt, pepper and paprika. Dip first in bread crumbs then in slightly beaten eggs, then in bread crumbs. Fry in deep fat or butter. Serve hot. Garnish with lemon and young green peas. Chicken a la Casserole Two medium sized chickens disjointed. Then wash thoroughly. Season with salt, pepper and a little ginger, flour slightly; place butter or chicken fat in a saucepan with a large onion cut fine and a little garlic; add chicken and brown. Place in a casserole, with water enough to cover, a little celery, salt and cook until chicken is tender. Then take chicken out, put on platter; add a half can of strained tomatoes , half a pint of pimolas, half a can of mushrooms, and a little paprika; put chicken back in casserole dish and finish cooking. Chicken Fricassee (Mrs. Nettie Koch.) Season the chicken the day before cooking with salt, pepper, ginger, garlic, bay leaves and onions. Cut the chicken in pieces and throw into a pot containing goose fat and butter which has been well heated, and keep turning constantly in the fat until well braised. Then add water to cover, cook steadily on a slow fire until the chicken is tender. Thicken the gravy with flour, and add plenty of parsley. Chicken Spanish Wash and cut up chicken seasoned with salt. Boil until almost tender; make sauce by stirring two tablespoons of dry flour in two tablespoons of butter or chicken fat, and let get light brown; add hot soup stock a little at a time, stirring constantly until consistency of cream, adding Grandma's Spanish pepper to taste. Pour over chicken, and let boil until perfectly tender. Chicken a la Hungarian Take a good sized chicken, singe, draw and then wash well; dissect as for fricassee and season well with salt over night. Before preparing, slice three or four large onions and smoother to a light brown in chicken fat or rendered butter; put in a stew kettle, add chicken, cayenne pepper to make it as hot as one desires, little paprika, three tablespoons of canned tomatoes , mix well, cover and let draw its own juice. After ten or fifteen minutes, add sufficient water so as to cook tender. Fifteen minutes before serving, add a good tablespoon of chopped parsley and one cup of sour cream. You will find no thickening necessary. Chicken Paprika Singe and wash carefully one good sized stewing chicken. Cut into pieces and season over night with salt, pepper, ginger and garlic. Cut up an onion into about three tablespoons of chicken fat, fry to a golden brown. Add the chicken and steam for one hour, always turning the chicken in the saucepan, so that it browns evenly, add boiling water to cover, also a carrot and celery. Let it cook until almost tender, usually two hours. Pour off the gravy and let it cool and skim off all the fat; then prepare the gravy of paprika sauce in the following manner: Brown a tablespoon flour in some chicken fat, adding chicken gravy. To this add one can strained tomatoes , one bottle stuffed olives (no juice), one can mushrooms (no juice), paprika and a dash of cayenne pepper. Pour this all over the chicken and let it cook until tender, usually a half hour. Chicken Mousse One-half cup finely minced chicken or turkey, one level tablespoon gelatine, one-fourth cup chicken broth, yolks of three eggs, one cup of scalded milk or broth, salt and cayenne to taste, and one cup of whipping cream. Soak the gelatine in one-fourth cup of cold broth. Then heat the milk and add the beaten yolk and cook in a double boiler (like a custard). When thick add the gelatine while hot. Add the chicken and season, place in cool place, then fold in the whipped cream. Put in a ring mold; fill the opening with celery and nut salad if liked. Do not stir while hardening. Leave four or five hours on ice. Chicken Tamale Take a fat chicken, cut up celery, onion and three cloves of garlic, a little parsley, three or four little red peppers, and water enough for gravy needed. After chicken is tender, put in two cups of tomatoes , two heaping teaspoons Grandma's Spanish pepper, wet with cold water. Thicken with a half cup cornmeal, also wet with cold water, or if thicker sauce is wanted, add more cornmeal and enough salt to taste. Olives may be added. Roast Chicken Wash and season chicken; let stand over night. Put chicken fat or rendered butter in a frying pan, and when hot, put in chicken after having wiped dry, and brown well by turning on all sides. Put soup stock in stew kettle ( water can be used) with pepper and ginger, add the chicken, with part of fat or butter ( onion or garlic may be used if desired) and cover. Let smother until tender, adding little chopped parsley. Then put in oven and get real brown, returning to kettle with gravy before serving. Squabs Split the squabs, and fry in olive oil; when nearly done, add a sprig of parsley, a handful of mushrooms, pepper and salt, several cloves of garlic and a little onion. Remove the squabs and add a cupful of rich stock, thicken with flour and pour over the squabs. Serve with eggs fried on both sides. Dressing for Squabs For squabs use bread dressing and add to it half a wine glass of sherry. Squab After singeing, drawing and washing well, season with salt over night. In preparing, brown well in butter, add a wine glass of claret and steam well for thirty minutes. Roast Duck The day or night previous to roasting the duck, singe or pick off all pin feathers, wash thoroughly and pat dry with a clean cloth. Rub inside and out with salt, pepper, ginger and garlic. Before roasting the duck stuff with dressing (dry preferred), lay in the roasting pan, season again slightly with salt and ginger. Cut up an apple and an onion, and sprinkle over the top with a little flour, also adding flakes of butter or fat. After duck is well browned in hot oven, add water, lessen the heat, cover up tight, from one and a half to two hours, and baste often. Dressing for the Above Cut up cubes of stale bread and brown in chicken fat and a little onion. Then throw into a bowl with a little chopped parsley, salt, pepper and a well beaten egg; also add flakes of butter or chicken fat. Gravy for Above When the duck is roasted lift out of pan and place in warming oven. Then skim off all fat, brown a tablespoon of flour in little butter or fat in a spider. Strain gravy from the roasting pan into the brown flour and cook until properly thickened, then return duck to roasting pan, pour over gravy, keeping covered until time for serving. This gives the duck a rich and juicy flavor. Goose Fricassee After the goose is singed, drawn and well washed, take head, feet and breast, which have been cut up and salted over night; put on with little water. If goose is not tender, more will probably have to be added. Put in little pepper, ginger, cut onion and garlic, let all cook together, skimming off accumulated fat. To thicken sauce, if desired, take a little flour and fat and let become a delicate brown and put over fricassee, letting it boil thoroughly. Gansegrieben Take a fat goose. After cleaning and singeing, cut off the neck, wings and the  feet; cut away at the thighs, then remove the entire skin as a butcher skins  calves. Separate back and breast, cut skin in two-inch squares, put all in cold water for one hour. Take out of water, and rub with salt, pepper and ginger. Put on to boil. If goose is young, with one cup of water, if old a little more. Cover for one-half hour. Then let it boil from two to two and one-half hours, watching closely to avoid getting too brown. When finished, take out the grieben, and strain off all fat. If desired, take the breast and joints, put in stone jar and cover with the goose fat. Will keep all winter. The grieben alone may be treated in this manner and the meats used for fricasse if desired. Roast Goose After the goose has been singed and cleaned properly, rub well with salt, pepper and a little ginger. Cut one piece of garlic fine and rub all over inside; oyster or other dressing may be used or stuff goose with two or three stalks of celery, onion and parsley. Put two tablespoons fat in pan (either roasting or soup fat ) and little water. Baste often when roasting. Roast Turkey Select a nice young turkey with a plump breast (a hen turkey is best) and dress and prepare same as any other poultry. Use a plain bread, chestnut or oyster dressing, and fill the body of the turkey, and sew up the slit in the vent with strong white cotton. Turn the wings back, so they will rest against the back of the turkey, and tie the legs together, forcing them up a little against the lower breast bone. Butter the breast well (strips of bacon may be used instead) put a little water in the bottom of roasting pan, add salt and pepper, and place in well heated oven, basting every ten minutes. Allow fifteen minutes to every pound. When done, remove strings, place on hot platter and garnish. Thicken gravy in the pan, add finely chopped giblets that have been previously boiled, and serve with turkey. Cranberry Sauce One quart cranberries, one pint water, one pound sugar. Wash the cranberries in cold water, put them in a porcelain lined kettle with one pint water and boil rapidly ten minutes or until the berries pop; press through a colander and return them to the kettle. Add sugar and stir over the fire until the sugar is thoroughly melted (this will take about two minutes); turn out to cool. Serve with poultry, game, venison or mutton. Chestnut Dressing One quart large chestnuts, one-quarter cup butter, one teaspoon salt, one egg, one pint bread crumbs or hot mashed sweet potatoes; one-half teaspoon parsley chopped. Liver of poultry chopped fine. Shake chestnuts (in each of which a gash has been cut in the shell) in a tablespoon of melted butter then set in the oven five or ten minutes. Remove shells and inner skins together and cook until tender in boiling salted water. Drain and pass through a ricer. Add the rest of the ingredients and mix well. If a moist dressing be preferred add cream or stock. Dressing for Poultry or Meat Soak a quart of stale bread in water and press dry. Heat a heaping tablespoon of fat in an iron frying pan and brown in it a little onion, cut fine. Add the soaked bread and stir until the fat is absorbed. Season with pepper, salt, a little ginger, and add some finely chopped parsley. Stir in two eggs slightly beaten and add heart, liver and tender parts of gizzard, which have been parboiled, either chopped very fine or grated. Potato Dressing Make same as bread stuffing and add two cups of hot mashed Irish or sweet potatoes. Oyster Dressing Make same as bread dressing and substitute a dozen or more large oysters chopped coarsely and a little of the oyster liquor instead of the chopped liver, heart and gizzard. If small oysters are used do not chop them. Fifty small ones will be sufficient. Poultry Dressing Soak a half loaf of milk bread and four soda crackers. Press out any remaining water. Heat a tablespoon of fat or butter in a frying pan, add a little onion cut fine and fry a light brown, then add bread and cracker and dry well, stirring often so it does not burn. Turn into bowl and let cool, season with salt, pepper, chopped parsley and the liver chopped fine, adding two eggs to the above, mixing well. GAME Season for Game in Oregon Duck--September 1st--January 15th. Chinese Pheasant--Unlawful until after October 15, 1913. Native Pheasant--October 15th--November 15th. Geese--October 1st--April 30th. Quail--October 15th--November 15th. Grouse--October 15th--November 15th. Braized Wild Duck Teal or Mallard Duck -- Onion, celery, salt, pepper and butter and a wineglass white wine. Wash and season ducks. Prepare and stuff as for roasting. Then have ready a deep pot, place in some butter or fowl fat. When hot put in the ducks and brown. Chop some onion very fine; throw over the ducks, add soup stock and wine. Cover closely and stew. One hour for mallard and forty minutes for teal. Serve on hot platter garnished with water cress. Strain and thicken the gravy and serve with currant jelly. Prairie Chicken Prepare and clean same as ordinary chicken. The breast of the chicken being rather dry, it is best pot-roasted. Cut and brown a few slices of onion in chicken fat or suet and brown the fowl well, turning until evenly browned on all sides. Then add hot water (about a pint) and simmer for one and one-half hours ( breast down), adding salt, pepper and seasoning. When ready to serve, remove chicken and thicken the gravy. Pheasant Put the pheasant, well seasoned, in a pot with large spoon of butter or goose fat, and allow it to brown slightly. Then take a large cabbage and carefully take off a few outer leaves, three or four for each bird, cut out hard middle stem; place these leaves in a large pot and cover with boiling water, cover pot and let stand until leaves are soft and tender. Then take birds which have been slightly browned and wrap each with two strips of bacon and with three or four cabbage leaves and tie securely into bundles. Put on to cook with large piece of butter and brown well, turning often. When thoroughly browned, add soup stock and let cook slowly until done. Remove strings before serving. Quail are equally good prepared this way. Venison Venison, like mutton, should be hung in a cool, dry place from one to two weeks. Haunch of Venison --Wipe well with a towel dipped in warm water. Season and lard. The meat being naturally dry, larding improves it. Place in a very hot oven and roast, allowing fifteen minutes to every pound and basting every ten minutes at first; use melted butter for the purpose and afterwards its own drippings. When done, add flour enough to thicken the gravy in the pan, one pint of good stock, stir constantly until it boils, take from fire, add one tablespoon sherry and one of currant jelly, season to taste, serve in gravy boat. Quail on Toast Cut the birds open down the back, salt and pepper and dredge with flour. Break down the breast and back bone, so they will be flat. Place in a pan with butter and a very little water, in a hot oven, covering them tightly until done. Then fry them in hot butter in a spider, until brown and serve on toast. Thicken the gravy left in the pan and pour over the quail placed on toast. VEGETABLES Vegetables are always best when they are in season. Have them fresh and, if possible, utilize the same day. Look them over carefully and wash thoroughly, cutting out all decayed portions. When peeled, place in cold water for a short time before cooking. The potash salts, and the flavor of vegetables are retained by cooking them in boiling water and boiling them steadily until thoroughly done. When partially cooked, the required amount of salt should be added, the proportion being a scant teaspoon to a quart of boiling water. The dried vegetables should be thoroughly soaked over night and cooked in cold water. Green peas, sprouts and spinach retain their bright, fresh, green coloring by not covering while being cooked. Cabbage, cauliflower and sprouts, also spinach, should be thoroughly washed and soaked in water. If a pinch of baking soda is added when boiling, the strong flavor and odor is destroyed. Vegetable Time Table Asparagus--Boiled, twenty to forty minutes. Beans, Lima--Boiled, sixty minutes. Beans, String--Boiled, sixty minutes. Cabbage--Boiled, sixty minutes. Carrots--Boiled, forty-five to sixty minutes. Cauliflower--Boiled, thirty to forty-five minutes. Corn--Boiled, eight to ten minutes. Green Peas--Boiled, twenty to thirty minutes. Onions--Boiled, thirty to forty-five minutes. Parsnips--Boiled, thirty to forty-five minutes. Potatoes, New--Boiled, twenty to twenty-five minutes. Potatoes, Old--Boiled, thirty minutes. Potatoes--Baked, forty to sixty minutes. Potatoes, Sweet--Baked, forty-five to sixty minutes. Potatoes, Sweet--Boiled, thirty to forty-five minutes. Pumpkin--Boiled, two to three hours. Pumpkin--Baked, one and one-half to two hours. Squash (Summer)--Baked, one hour. Squash (Summer)--Boiled, twenty to forty minutes. Spinach--Baked, twenty to thirty minutes. Tomatoes--Baked, twenty to thirty minutes. Turnips--Baked, forty to forty-five minutes. Preferred Stock Groceries in Cans Glass and Cartons Allen & Lewis Distributors In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. French Artichokes Strip off the outer leaves, cut off the stalks about a half an inch from the bottom and let them stand in cold water for an hour. Then throw into boiling water, add salt and let them boil until the leaves are tender, forty-five to sixty minutes. Take them out of the water and stand them upside down to drain and when cold they are ready to stuff, or prepare in different ways. For salad they can be served with plain mayonnaise to which a little French mustard has been added. Asparagus Boil asparagus about twenty minutes, or until tender, in well salted boiling  water. Serve with the following sauce : Mix one yolk of egg with two tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon mustard, one big teaspoon corn starch; beat well, put in a double boiler, add slowly three-quarters cup hot vinegar. Boil until thick. When cool add half a cup of cream. Asparagus With Eggs Boil a bunch of asparagus twenty minutes. Cut off the tender tops and lay them in a deep pie plate, buttering, salting and peppering well. Beat up four eggs, the yolks and whites separately, to a stiff froth; add two tablespoons of milk or cream, a tablespoon of warm water, pepper and salt to taste. Pour evenly over the asparagus mixture. Bake eight minutes, or until the eggs are set. Escalloped Asparagus Drain one can asparagus tips and place a layer in a baking dish which has been buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs. Sprinkle the asparagus with chopped hard-boiled eggs, pepper, salt and grated cheese. Continue until the baking dish is full, the top layer to be of asparagus. Make a thin white sauce of one tablespoon butter, one of flour and a cup of milk. Pour this over the above. Mix a little grated cheese with bread crumbs, and sprinkle over top. Bake to a light brown. Asparagus in Crusts Remove centers from small rolls, fry shells in deep butter, drain and fill with asparagus in cream sauce. Beans, German Style Wash and string beans (green preferred for this style) very carefully; if long, break in halves; put on to boil with cold water just barely to cover, adding one very large or two medium size onions to a mess, for about six people; one and one-half cooking spoons of meat fat (no suet), let boil about two hours. About one-half hour before serving, add potatoes cut in medium size. If water has boiled down too much, add a little when putting in potatoes ; also add a handful of finely chopped parsley. This vegetable must not have a watery sauce, but a nice consistency, which is caused by the potato and onion. Spanish Beans Wash pink beans and cook until tender with one onion and a few red pepper corns and salt. When the beans are tender take some butter and flour and blend until brown, then add the beans with liquor, some catsup, quite a piece of American cheese and Grandma's pepper. Sweet and Sour String Beans Wash and string beans and cut in half. Put on with soup stock or meat with fat, or gravy, one-half cup vinegar, piece of an onion, cut up fine, little salt. When soft, put in three tablespoons brown sugar; then brown one large tablespoon of flour in a tablespoon of melted fat, to thicken; add to the beans, and let cook half an hour. String Beans With Parmesan Cheese Slice the string beans lengthwise and boil in salted water until tender. After draining the water off, put a lump of butter into a pan over a hot fire, add the beans, one-half cup milk and season with a little more salt if necessary and a dash of cayenne pepper, then scatter in freely grated parmesan cheese. Let cook for eight or ten minutes. Boston Baked Beans Soak three cups of small white beans over night in plenty of cold water. In the morning, add fresh cold water; let come to a boil; pour off water and add fresh boiling water, slightly salted. Allow to boil until almost tender. Into a stone jar or baking dish first put a few pieces of cut up bacon, then a thick layer of beans, then again the bacon and beans, and so on, until the beans are used up, placing a few pieces of bacon on top. Take one tablespoon of dried mustard, mix smooth with two tablespoons of molasses, a good dash of white pepper and if necessary more salt. Mix this with the water in which the beans were boiled and pour over the beans, covering them. If not enough sauce, add more water. Cover the beans and bake in a moderate oven at least four hours, and add more water if necessary from time to time. Small pieces of smoked brisket can be used instead of bacon. Beets Do not break the skins in washing the beets or they will lose their color in cooking. Boil one hour in hot, slightly salted water. For this purpose only use young beets. When tender, skin quickly while hot, slice them or cut in pieces. Pour melted butter over them; season with salt and pepper. If preferred, add a little sugar and vinegar. Curly Cabbage Cook cabbage until tender, then throw into a colander and drain. Chop very fine and season with salt and pepper. Brown one tablespoon of flour with a little butter, add one-half cup of soup stock , and mix with the cabbage. Red Cabbage Cut cabbage very fine and add half a cup of vinegar and one cup soup stock , one apple cut small and three tablespoons brown sugar. Cook until tender. Add flour that has been browned with butter until it attains the proper consistency, and serve. Cabbage Cooked Scharf Clean and wash cabbage, cut into small pieces and boil until tender. Drain and rinse in cold water; chop very fine. In a spider put one tablespoon fat and one-quarter onion cut fine, and brown with one tablespoon flour. Add one-half pint soup stock to cabbage and cook ten minutes longer. Salt and pepper to taste, and, if desired, a pinch of ginger may be added. Carrots Cut three large carrots into small pieces and put into saucepan with just enough water to cover them; add a pinch of salt and boil until tender. When cooked pour off nearly all the water, add lump of butter, a little sugar if liked, some finely chopped parsley. Rub about a teaspoon of flour into a smooth thin paste with a little water. Add to the carrots and boil five minutes longer. French Carrots Heat one-half tablespoon fat, cut and stir carrots in it. Salt and add water to cover and cook until tender. Thicken with a little flour and add one tablespoon of brown sugar. Carrots and Peas Take one cup of French carrots, two or three inches long, wash thoroughly with a vegetable brush. Add to the carrots one pint of green peas; cook until tender in just enough water to cover them; season with salt, a little pepper, one-half teaspoon of sugar, and a little butter. Carrots With Poulette Sauce Wash, scrape and cut carrots. Cook until soft in salted water, to which has been added a half tablespoon butter. Make sauce of three tablespoons butter, three tablespoons flour, one cup chicken or meat stock and one-half cup cream. Season to taste with salt and pepper, and just before serving add yolks of two eggs and one teaspoon lemon juice. Asparagus tips also may be served with this same sauce. Cauliflower With Mushrooms Steam the cauliflower in the usual manner until tender. Separate into flowers and dispose each on a round of buttered toast. Chop six mushroom caps and saute five minutes in three tablespoons of butter; add three tablespoons of flour and when blended with the butter add gradually a cup and a half of white stock; stir until the boiling point is reached. After all the broth has been added, let simmer ten minutes. Remove from the fire and stir in the yolks of three eggs beaten and diluted with the juice of a lemon. Season with salt and pepper. If the heat of the sauce does not suffice to cook the egg, return to the fire over hot water for five minutes, stirring constantly. Pour this over the cauliflower on the toast. Sprinkle with buttered crumbs and brown quickly in very hot oven. Serve on a large dish, garnished with mushrooms. Cauliflower With Shrimps or Crab Cook cauliflower until tender, then make poulette sauce and put one tablespoon catsup and paprika in sauce, then let crab cook in the poulette sauce a few minutes and pour over cauliflower. Cauliflower au Gratin Boil flower in salt water. Make a cream sauce, season with nutmeg. Place flower in baking dish and pour the sauce over it. Sprinkle grated parmesan cheese on top. Bake twenty minutes. Baked Celery Take one quart of veal stock and, having parboiled a proper amount of celery stalks, put them in a baking dish. Rub together smoothly two tablespoons of butter and two tablespoons of flour; then beat in the yolks of three eggs and stir these into the veal broth and pour over the celery. Cover with finely grated bread crumbs, then with grated cheese. Bake ten minutes in a quick oven. Creamed Celery in a Cheese Shell Cut the cleaned celery stalks into pieces about an inch long and cook in boiling salt water until tender. For three cups of pieces make a pint of white sauce, using the water in which the celery was cooked with cream as the liquid. Turn into the shells of an Edam cheese, cover the top with a half cup of cracker crumbs mixed with two tablespoons of melted butter and let brown in the oven. Serve a slight scraping of cheese with each service of celery. Parboiled oysters may be added with the celery, then use the oyster liquor in making the sauce as part of the liquid. Celery Croquettes For these you can use the outside stalks of the celery, which are not fit for the table. Discard all the leaves, wash celery, drain, then chop up fine or run through the meat grinder; add as much bread or cracker crumbs as you have minced celery; moisten the crumbs with a little milk, season with salt and a good dash of white pepper. Bind with one egg, drop a tablespoon at a time into frying pan with butter. Fry a nice brown on both sides and serve with your meat. Chestnuts Cooked With Wine Parboil two pounds of chestnuts; remove skins and cover with water to which add a cup of soup stock . Half an hour before they are done, add a wine  glass of claret, and if chestnuts are not sweet, add sugar. Cook until tender, but try to keep the chestnuts whole. They are nice served with poultry. Chestnut Puree Remove the shells, boil ten minutes, then drain and remove the skins. Put them in boiling salted water and soak until tender, then drain, mash and press them through a colander. Season with butter, salt and pepper. Moisten with cream or milk or stock. Chestnuts and Prunes Shell chestnuts and pour over boiling water to remove skins. Boil prunes separately. Boil chestnuts and add a little salt. When both are finished mix to a paste one tablespoon flour with vinegar; add allspice and sugar and the water from the chestnuts. Pour this over the chestnuts and prunes and let cook together fifteen minutes. Corn Fritters Take six ears of good full corn; grate them; beat two eggs very light; add this to grated corn, beating constantly. Season with salt and pepper. Drop from spoon into boiling hot butter, oil or beef fat. Serve hot. Garnish with parsley. Escalloped Corn One can corn (with its liquid), three tablespoons cream, one teaspoon sugar, one teaspoon salt, little pepper, two tablespoons flour, two tablespoons butter, one cup bread crumbs. Mix corn, pepper, salt, flour, sugar and then cream. Melt butter, adding part of bread crumbs. Cover bottom of buttered baking dish with crumbs; add corn mixture and put crumbs on the top. Pour over all the melted butter and remainder of crumbs. Bake in moderate oven for twenty minutes and serve hot. Corn Souffle Six ears of corn cooked and scraped off the cob (Canned corn, spinach, peas or cauliflower may be used also, but should be passed through a colander. ) Two eggs, sugar to taste, melted butter, pinch of salt, pepper, one cup milk. Bake in pudding form by standing in hot water in oven about twenty minutes. Corn Tamale One can corn, one cup yellow corn  meal, one and one-half cups milk, two eggs, three tomatoes , one green pepper, one-half onion, chopped fine. Season to taste with Spanish pepper. Bake one hour in slow oven. Corn a la Southern To one can chopped corn add two eggs slightly beaten, a little salt, pepper, one and one-half tablespoons melted butter and one pint scalded milk. Pour into pudding dish and bake in slow oven until firm. Fried Cucumbers Peel and slice cucumbers lengthwise about half an inch in thickness. Lay them in salt water for about an hour, then dip in beaten eggs and in cracker dust, and French fry in boiling drippings, taking care to drain well before serving. Egg Plant Peel and cut the egg plant into thin slices; lay them in a bowl. Mix one quart of water with one tablespoon salt; pour it over egg plant. Put a small plate on top of the slices to keep them under salt water; let remain in the water for several hours; when ready to cook, dry the egg plant on a towel, dip in beaten egg and cover with cracker or bread crumbs. Fry in deep fat, preferably butter. Stuffed Egg Plant Cut the egg plant into two; scrape out all the inside, and put in saucepan with a little minced cooked veal or chicken. Cover with water, and boil until soft. Drain off the water, add two tablespoons of grated bread crumbs, one tablespoon butter, half a minced onion, salt and pepper. Stuff each half of the shell with this mixture, add small lump of butter to each, and bake fifteen minutes. Baked Egg Plant Parboil egg plant after peeling; then chop, but not very fine. Season with pepper and salt, add a couple of hard boiled eggs, chopped, a tablespoon of butter and two tablespoons of cream. Sprinkle top with bread crumbs and bake twenty minutes. Parsnip Balls Scrape and pare parsnips. Cook in boiling salt water until tender. Mash and season with butter and pepper. Add a scant tablespoon of flour and two well beaten eggs. Form into small balls, and fry in deep fat, a golden brown. Baked Mushrooms Prepare twelve large mushrooms, two tablespoons butter, two-thirds cup cream, salt, pepper and toast. Wash mushrooms, remove stems, peel caps and put in baking pan, cap side up. Sprinkle with seasoning and flakes of butter. Add cream. Bake ten minutes in hot oven. Put mushrooms on toast and pour over them the liquid in baking pan. Serve at once. Mushroom Saute Wash and remove stems, peel caps and break in pieces. There should be one cup of mushrooms. Put two tablespoons butter in a hot pan. When melted, add mushrooms, which have been dredged with flour, a few drops of onion juice, one-fourth teaspoon salt, a few grains pepper, and cook five minutes. Add one teaspoon finely chopped parsley and one-fourth cup boiling water. Cook two minutes, and serve on dry toast. Kohlraben Strip off young leaves and boil in salt water. Peel heads, cut into thin slices and then drop into hot fat. After a few minutes, add soup stock and cook until tender. In the meantime, drain off all the water from the leaves, and chop them, add to the sliced head, and thicken with flour. Season with pepper and salt. You can also cook a piece of beef or mutton with this, if you desire. Peas and Mushrooms One can peas, one-half can mushrooms. Heat with the liquor and then drain. Make a sauce of one tablespoon butter, one tablespoon flour, one cup thin cream. Pour over the peas and mushrooms. Serve in patty cases. Split Peas With Dumplings For dumplings use three eggs, butter half the size of an egg, and cream together, add a pinch of nutmeg, three tablespoons cracker meal, three tablespoons flour, one-half tablespoon sugar. Cover two cups peas with water and cook about two hours; add salt, pepper, and two cubes sugar. Add dumplings about fifteen minutes before serving. With peas, put about half a teaspoon flour and milk. Macaroni and Cheese Break macaroni in pieces about an inch long, then throw them into boiling water and add salt. Let cook about twenty-five minutes until tender, and drain. Put a layer of grated cheese into baking dish, then a layer of macaroni, add a few bits of butter, about a teaspoon of milk and a pinch of salt. Add another layer of cheese, and so on, until dish is full, and bake fifteen to twenty minutes. Stewed tomatoes may also be added, if desired. Stuffed Peppers Take six large green peppers and cut off tops and stems; cut out seeds and veins, but be careful not to cut into the peppers; if you do, the juice will escape. Put them into a bowl and pour boiling salted water over them; let stand until cold; drain and wipe each one inside with a clean cloth. Then butter them well on the inside. Make a filling with boiled veal and boiled ham (about a cup), chopped in rather small pieces (not too fine), one cup of bread crumbs or cracker crumbs; season with salt, pepper, paprika, and a few drops of onion juice, one-half teaspoon tomato catsup, a little finely chopped celery and parsley, and enough of any nice gravy to moisten the whole. Fill your peppers, put some crumbs and bits of butter on top of each one. Place in baking pan, add just enough hot water to cover up half way and bake from three-quarters to one hour. Any left-over poultry or meat can be used instead of ham. Vegetable Marrow Select marrow that is the same size the whole length; pare, cut in rather thin slices. Sprinkle lightly with salt. Dip thoroughly in flour, and fry till brown and tender, in hot butter, oil, or beef fat. Baked Potatoes Use medium-sized ones. Scrub and clean well. Place on floor of hot oven or in thin pan, and let bake thirty to forty minutes until soft. Serve at once. Hashed Brown Potatoes Chop cold boiled potatoes (about two cups) into small bits. Season with salt and pepper. Melt a tablespoon of butter in a pan, add the chopped potatoes and toss and turn frequently until they show brown, then add a half cup of cream and put in a hot oven to brown. Serve hot. Saratoga Potatoes Pare medium-sized potatoes and slice very thin with a sharp knife, or special cutter for that purpose. Throw into cold salt water, and dry between towels. Have a kettle of deep hot lard or fat ready, and throw in each slice separately, until a delicate brown. Remove with simmer, drain and spread on brown paper, sprinkling with salt. Can be served hot or cold. Mashed Potatoes To about six potatoes , use an ounce of butter, one-half cup milk and salt to taste. Peel and throw the potatoes into cold water for a few minutes. Then have boiling water ready to throw them into, adding a liberal pinch of salt. When tender, in about one-half hour, drain and let dry, after which mash quickly with a wire masher, until light and free from lumps; add milk or cream, and beat until very light. Potato Croquettes Mix together about two cups of mashed potatoes , the yolk of an egg and about two tablespoons of butter, until very smooth. If any lumps are present, put through a sieve. Shape into balls or rolls. Dip in bread crumbs, then in beaten egg, and lastly in bread crumbs again. Fry in deep fat. Drain and serve hot. New Potatoes Scrape and let stand in cold water one-half hour, then put into boiling water,  add salt, and cook until tender. Drain and dry, then add a little finely chopped parsley and butter, judging amount by the quantity of potatoes . Shake well and serve hot. Can also be served in cream sauce. Kartoffel Kloesse (Potato Dumpling) Take twelve large boiled potatoes that have been boiled the day before; grate them into a large bowl, add a half teaspoon of salt, two tablespoons of flour, two tablespoons of farina. Make a hole in the center of the potatoes and break in two eggs; mix all well together. Flour the hands and form into oblong dumplings. Put them into boiling water slightly salted and boil half an hour. Take up one and try it, after it has been boiling twenty minutes. If done, it will be perfectly dry. Heat some fat and fry an onion chopped up fine in it. When nice and brown, put some on each dumpling, first cutting them in halves. These are very nice rolled out one-quarter inch thick, cut in round shapes like cookies, and fried in fat. Potato Suzette Bake a large potato for each member of your family. Cut off tops a little larger than an egg. Scoop out inside and season to taste with salt, pepper and butter. Put back in shell and leave a large enough hollow to break in an egg. Put back into oven and bake until egg is set. Serve immediately. Stuffed Potatoes Bake as many potatoes as desired without cutting off ends. Cut each potato in half lengthwise with a sharp knife. Scrape out the inside of each half with a spoon, being careful not to break the shells. Run the scraped potato through a sieve or potato masher. Season with salt and pepper, add half a teaspoon sweet cream or milk for each potato, and a lump of butter and one or two eggs; mash smooth, then fill each half with this mixture, sprinkle cracker crumbs and bits of butter over, and brown in stove. Serve at once. Fried Potatoes Cut cold boiled potatoes into thin slices. Have a frying pan, well greased with butter, suet or other fat. Cook until brown, turning occasionally, and serve hot. Boiled Potatoes in Jackets Scrub and clean the potatoes , then place in stew pan and pour over boiling water. Add a good pinch of salt, and let boil until easily pierced by a fork. Drain, place on the stove a short time to dry, and serve hot. Potatoes au Gratin Six large boiled potatoes , cut in thin slices; two tablespoons of butter, two tablespoons of flour, four tablespoons of grated cheese, one-half pint of milk, one-half pint of soup stock . Make this into a sauce. After removing from the fire, add four yolks of eggs, salt and pepper; alternate potatoes and sauce in baking dish, with sauce on top and a sprinkle of bread crumbs. Bake; season highly. Lyonnaise Potatoes Fry about one teaspoon of finely chopped onions in drippings, till golden brown, then add potatoes which have previously been sliced thin; turn occasionally to prevent burning, and when done, sprinkle over with finely chopped parsley. Sweet Potato Croquettes Boil sweet potatoes until soft. Remove skin and mash; add liberal amount of butter, salt, pepper and three-quarters cup of sugar. Roll in oblong shape, dip in egg and cracker crumbs. Fry in deep fat. Sweet Potatoes, Southern Style Select medium-sized potatoes , clean well and boil until tender. After peeling, cut in half and arrange in layers in a baking dish, with a liberal scattering of brown sugar over each layer. Cover the top with small pieces of butter, add a little water, and bake slowly about an hour. Sweet Potatoes, Sweet and Sour Wash potatoes and boil in as little water as possible. Peel potatoes and slice. Make sweet and sour gravy and allow potatoes to get throughly heated in the gravy. Fried Sweet Potatoes Put good-sized sweet potatoes in cold water and boil until tender, then drain dry. When cold, pare and slice them, not too thin, and fry a golden brown. Rhubarb and Raisins Pick stems from one-third cup seedless raisins. Add one cup boiling water, and cook until water is reduced to about a quarter of a cup. Peel and cut into half-inch lengths, sufficient rhubarb to make a pint; add to the raisins, with one cup of sugar; cover, and cook slowly until rhubarb is tender. Spanish Rice One cup rice boiled in salt water rapidly. When almost cooked, add one-half can tomatoes , chopped onion, pepper, two tablespoons olive oil; cook until thick, for one hour. Sauerkraut One quart sauerkraut, three pounds brisket, two tablespoons flour, one onion, one-quarter teaspoon caraway seed. In a stew pan  place part of the quart of sauerkraut, then the brisket and onion, following with the remainder of sauerkraut and the caraway seed, and cover with boiling water. Let simmer about two hours or more, until tender. Mix flour to a smooth paste with a little cold water, and before adding to the kraut, remove the onion; then mix well and boil ten minutes before serving. Brussels Sprouts Clean; boil in salt water until tender. Make a sauce of butter, flour, soup stock , Worcestershire sauce, salt and pepper. Put in sprouts last. Cook in sauce awhile before serving. Summer Squash Cut the squash in half. Take out the seeds. Cut out all the meat, being careful not to cut into the skins. Steam squash by placing it in a colander over a pot of boiling water. Keep covered until tender, then mash it in a bowl. Season with salt, pepper and a lump of butter. Place the vegetable back into the shell, scatter a little cracker or bread crumbs on top with bits of butter and place the squash on a buttered tin in the oven for eight or ten minutes. Place the shells on a platter and serve. Spinach Pick and clean thoroughly two pounds of spinach; cover with boiling water, and let cook until tender. Pour off water and drain in colander. Chop very fine. Heat two tablespoons of fat or butter in a pan; add chopped spinach, two cloves of garlic or a little finely chopped onion, salt, pepper and water or soup enough to moisten. Let cook about half an hour. Chop a hard boiled egg and sprinkle over the top when ready to serve. Vegetable Stew Chop together one small onion, one green pepper, three skinned tomatoes ; add one small squash cut into pieces, the corn from two ears, one-half pound of string beans, cut into small pieces. To this add four tablespoons olive oil, and cook until vegetables are tender. Spaghetti a la Madrid One package Italian spaghetti, one-half pound Eastern cheese, tomato catsup, fat or butter; any kind of good meat gravy you happen to have on hand. Boil spaghetti twenty-five minutes in salt water; cut onions fine, and fry a light yellow. When spaghetti is done, throw into a colander and pour cold water over it. Mix spaghetti with the fat and onion. Add catsup and a little Worcestershire sauce, some gravy, and a sprinkling of cayenne pepper. Take some of the grated cheese, mix with spaghetti. Sprinkle some of the cheese in bottom of a baking dish. Put the spaghetti in and sprinkle rest of cheese on top. Bake until a nice brown. Succotash Cut from the cob enough green corn to fill one cup; add two cups of string beans cut up in two-inch pieces, and one cup of lima beans, taken out of their shells. Put them on to boil in just enough water to cover them, adding a little salt and pepper. When the beans are tender, add a lump of butter, a little more salt and pepper, and thicken with a little brown flour. You can use canned corn and dried beans, but the lima beans must be soaked first in cold water over night. Tomatoes and Rice Spanish One cup rice, one onion, almost a can of tomatoes . Wash rice and put on to boil in plenty of cold water, adding salt. When tender, drain and dry. Cut onion fine and let simmer until a light yellow, in butter, then add to tomatoes and rice. Season with white and "Grandma's pepper "; let all cook together, until well blended. Tomato Farcie Cut tomatoes in halves, place in a frying pan, the open side down, in one-half inch of hot fat. Move them about until they are tender, then lift them carefully without breaking, and place them side by side in a baking dish. Pour a little olive oil around them. Sprinkle with chopped garlic and parsley, salt, pepper and cayenne. Bake in hot oven fifteen to twenty minutes. Serve in same dish. Scalloped Tomatoes Butter the sides and bottom of a pudding dish. Put a layer of bread crumbs in the bottom; on them put a layer of sliced tomatoes , sprinkle with salt, pepper, some bits of butter and a very little white  sugar. Then repeat with another layer of crumbs, another of tomatoes , and seasoning, until full, having the top layer of slices of tomatoes with pieces of butter on each. Bake covered until well cooked through. Remove the cover and brown quickly. Stuffed Tomatoes Select large, firm tomatoes ; cut off the tops and scoop out the inside pulp, but do not peel. Then fill them with a mixture made of a cup of grated corn, half a cup of bread crumbs, a tablespoon each of milk and melted butter, a teaspoon white sugar, and salt and pepper to taste. Put some bread or cracker crumbs on top of each one, with bits of butter. Place in baking pan; add just enough boiling water to come up half way. Do not baste, and bake about twenty minutes. Use the tomato pulp in soup or stews. Mashed Turnips Peel turnips. Cut in pieces and boil until tender. Drain, steam a little until dry, then mash, add a good pinch of salt, pepper, butter the size of an egg, and enough cream to moisten. Sugar may be added. Stuffed Turnips Peel and boil in slightly salted water until half done. Take them out and slice off a bit from the bottom to make them stand firmly. Cut a slice from the tops. Scoop out the inside and fill with a stuffing of minced meat ( veal if possible), onion, parsley and mushrooms. Place the slice back again on top. Place turnips in a saucepan; pour over them some boiling gravy or stock; add a bit of butter. Season with salt and pepper. Simmer gently until tender. Arrange in a deep dish. Thicken gravy with the yolk of an egg. Pour over turnips, and serve hot. ADDITIONAL RECIPES A famous recipe for Blue Monday-- PATRONIZE THE TROY LAUNDRY COMPANY AND AVOID The steam, mixed odors, hard work and racked nerves AND SAVE The doctor's bill, nervous strain and money. IT CAN BE DONE Phone East 33, or B 6118 In making mayonnaise or any salad dressing McNALLY'S OLIVE OIL should be used in preference to all others to insure the best results. It is not only pure, but is guaranteed to be of the highest possible quality--"The Oil of the Epicure"--made from selected ripe olives grown on our own groves at THE McNALLY RANCH LaMirada, California Lang & Company of Portland; Distributors for oregon In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. SALADS "Herbs and other country messes, Which the neat handed Phyllis dresses." Apple and Nut Salad Four tablespoons vinegar, two well beaten eggs, butter size of an egg, one teaspoon made mustard, two and one-half scant saltspoons salt, one-quarter teaspoon red and white pepper, one teaspoon sugar, three-fourths of a cup whipped cream. Let vinegar come to boil; stir in egg until it thickens; cool; stir in seasoning, and add cream before serving. Use equal amount chopped apple and walnuts. Alligator Pear Combination Salad Cover large platter with fine lettuce; on top of this put slices of tomatoes and large lengthwise slices of alligator pears, small bunches of asparagus tips and quarters of hard boiled eggs. Serve with a vinaigrette sauce. Filled Beets Scoop out boiled beets. Chop the scooped out pieces with olives and celery and refill the beets. Serve on lettuce leaf with mayonnaise. Beet Salad Boil a bunch of young beets until tender, and when cool enough, remove the skins. With a small, sharp knife or spoon, hollow out the center. For the filling, boil several eggs hard; add to them some olives and asparagus; chop all medium fine and mix with mayonnaise dressing. Fill the beets with this mixture and serve on lettuce leaves. Bean Salad Cook the beans until tender, or canned beans may be used. Drain thoroughly. Sprinkle with one teaspoon chives; cut as fine as possible, and pour French dressing over. Bartlett Pear Salad Peel chilled pears just before serving. Cut in half, remove core, and fill with walnuts. Lay on lettuce bed, and serve with mayonnaise dressing. Chiffonade Salad Take any salad in season, for example, lettuce, romaine, chickory, tomato, beets and celery, cut in long slices. One hard boiled egg, mashed as fine as possible with a fork, then add two pinches of paprika and a pinch of salt, one-half teaspoon of French mustard, a teaspoon of finely cut chives, two tablespoons of oil and three tablespoons of vinegar; add this to the salad. Mix well, and serve. Celery Root and Shrimp Salad Take medium-sized celery roots; boil until tender; scoop out center and fill with shrimps mixed with mayonnaise sauce. Serve on lettuce leaves. Celery Root Filled With Asparagus Tips Cook good sized celery roots, hollow out and fill with a few asparagus tips, covering all with mayonnaise. Cucumber Salad Medium-sized cucumbers cut in half. Remove insides. Filling.--Cut up one cucumber in small cubes, some celery and tomatoes ; mix together with a little mayonnaise. Salad Served in Cucumbers Select cucumbers same size. Cut lengthwise in half; scoop out; fill with combination salad; cover with mayonnaise and chopped pistachio nuts on top. Cucumber Jelly Salad Take eight long, slender cucumbers, and one good sized onion. Run them through meat grinder; drain juice from cucumbers; dissolve in it one tablespoon of Knox's gelatine; season cucumbers more highly than for an ordinary cucumber salad, using plenty of oil, vinegar to taste, one teaspoon Worcestershire sauce, a dash of cayenne pepper, and a few drops of green coloring (vegetable coloring is best); add juice in which the gelatine has been dissolved to cucumber mixture and then turn into molds. When firm, turn out on four lettuce leaves, and upon each lettuce leaf place one-quarter tomato. Combination Fish Salad Cold boiled salmon, cold boiled lobster, shreded, add anchovies, a few green peas and capers; season with pepper, salt, oil and vinegar. Fill tomatoes . Crab Louis Three tablespoons oil, one of vinegar, one-half of catsup, two teaspoons Worcestershire sauce, paprika, salt, little English mustard, two hard boiled eggs, one shredded crab and shredded lettuce; mix together. Serve on lettuce leaves. Celery Root Salad Boil and peel celery and cut into halves. When cold, hollow out and add small oysters in center. Serve on lettuce leaves with vinaigrette sauce. Cold Slaw With Eggs On a bed of shredded cabbage, place a hard boiled egg, cutting off the point of the egg, so that it will stand. Into a French dressing chop fine the yolks of two hard boiled eggs, and pour the same over the slaw and eggs. Serve whole or individually. Have the bed of the cabbage resemble a nest. Cauliflower Salad Boil cauliflower in salt water. Drain thoroughly, and when cold, pour French dressing over and serve with mayonnaise. Cabbage Slaw Chop half head of cabbage very fine; sprinkle with salt; then beat the yolks of two eggs; add salt and pepper, one-half cup of sugar, one-half teaspoon dry mustard, one-half cup vinegar, one-quarter tablespoon rich milk. Stir all together and put on the stove. Stir until it boils. Take off and let cool, then add two more tablespoons milk; pour over cabbage and mix well. Chicken Salad One cup (large) chicken cut into dice; let stand with a little vinegar and oil on for two hours before mixing; one cup celery (or use tender cabbage with celery salt and seed instead), four tablespoons mayonnaise; rub a little garlic on the mixing bowl, one-half level teaspoon mustard, one scant teaspoon salt, little white and cayenne pepper, olives cut fine, and capers. When ready to serve, add two tablespoons whipped cream or white of one egg, well beaten. Celery Victor Boil the hearts of celery in soup stock until quite tender. Leave in long pieces. When thoroughly cold, add dressing. Dressing for Above Three tablespoons of olive oil to one of tarragon vinegar; season with pepper and salt to taste; sprinkle with finely chopped chives or parsley. Dream Salad Soak two tablespoons gelatine in one-half cup cold water fifteen minutes, then add one cup boiling tomato juice, stirring until dissolved. To this, add one onion, one dill pickle, and a cup pimentos, chopped fine. Pour into molds and place on ice to harden. Serve on lettuce or parsley leaves, with mayonnaise dressing. Combination Salad Cut hard boiled eggs lengthwise; take out the yolks and mash; add a little celery, few pimolas and parsley cut fine; season with salt and red pepper; mix to a smooth paste with salad dressing and fill the white shells. Arrange crisp lettuce leaves on individual serving dishes. Place a thick slice of tomato on, then a stuffed half egg. Decorate with a few sprays of curled celery and a little dressing. Egg Salad Cut hard boiled eggs in two, making the cut one-third from the pointed end. Remove the yolks without breaking the whites. Mash them, and mix with chicken, chopped fine, and enough mayonnaise to bind them. Fill the large half of the egg with the mixture, rounding it on top like a whole yolk. Invert the small pieces of white, cut the pointed ends of both pieces flat, and stitch them together with raw white of egg. Place the vase-shaped eggs on a flat dish, and fill the spaces with shredded lettuce. Pass or rather serve additional mayonnaise, as that put in the yolks will not be sufficient. English Walnuts and Lettuce in Tomato Jelly Three cups strained tomato juice, one head shredded lettuce, two tablespoons gelatine, twenty-four half walnuts. Let tomato juice simmer one hour; flavor with onion, celery, salt and pepper to taste. Dissolve gelatine in two tablespoons of cold water and pour in juice; strain and then pour in mold as directed. Serve with mayonnaise or plain salad dressing. Fruit Salad I Combine grape fruit, oranges, pineapple, dried figs cut in narrow slices, bananas and sliced apples. Cover with mayonnaise dressing, to which whipped cream has been added. Fruit Salad II Cut into cubes apples, pineapples, oranges, maraschino cherries, and pour over a dressing made of one egg beaten with the juice of the pineapple, one orange, one lemon and sugar to taste, and butter size of a walnut; boil like custard, and when cool add whipped cream. Fruit Salad III One banana, one orange, one small can pineapple, one tart apple, one small cup chopped celery, one small cup chopped walnuts. Cut fruit in neat pieces. Serve on lettuce leaves with salad dressing. Grape Fruit Salad Peel grape fruit with a sharp knife; remove the pulp in sections, and serve on lettuce leaves with French dressing. Fish Salad Boil whitefish in salt water; season with all kinds of vegetables; skin and bone; when cold, pour French dressing over and occasionally turn in same. When ready to serve, put potato salad around fish. Next put vegetables sliced around the edge; put lettuce and hard boiled eggs cut in quarters on top. Pimentos cut in strips may also be added as decorations. Herring Salad Take six milchner herring, soak them in water long enough to draw out the salt, and then chop the herring very fine, retaining the milchner for dressing. To the herring add the following, each of which must be finely chopped: A piece of veal (the size of an apple), a boiled potato, an apple, a dill pickle, one-half cup walnuts, and over all the ingredients, which have been thoroughly mixed, pour a dressing made of the milchner, stirred with two or three spoonfuls of oil, enough vinegar to thin it, and pepper. After arranging the salad on a platter, decorate according to taste, with chopped beets, two hard boiled eggs ( whites and yolks chopped separately), and chopped parsley. Italian Salad Use peas, string beans, beets, celery root, cauliflower, asparagus tips. Boil vegetables in a little salt water, then drain and pour over French dressing. Arrange vegetables on platter; add a cup of picked shrimps, and cover all with mayonnaise. Decorate platter with lettuce leaves, hard boiled eggs, and olives. Liver Aspic Boil about two pounds of calves ' liver and save the gravy. When the liver is cold, grate it, and beat a good slice of butter to a cream and add to the liver. Take two or three hard boiled eggs, mash fine, and add them, with pepper, salt, a dash of paprika, a bit of Worcestershire sauce and salad oil. Make into a regular pate paste.  Strain gravy of the liver, and add seasoning and sherry wine. Mix with one-half a box of gelatine to one pint of the liquid. Wash timbale forms, but do not dry them. Fill each form one-half full of liquid. When it begins to thicken, drop a little ball of liver paste that has been previously moulded into each form. Serve on a bed of lettuce leaves that have been thoroughly dipped in French dressing. On top of each timbale put a little mayonnaise or pour thin mayonnaise over each. Neufchatel Salad Cream one cheese with a pimento; add enough mayonnaise to make it creamy; add one-half teaspoon onion juice; scoop out carefully bell peppers, and fill with mixture, then set on ice until ready to serve; then cut into round slices; place first on plate a lettuce leaf, then a slice of tomato, then one slice pepper mixture; place a teaspoon of mayonnaise on top; garnish with asparagus tips and strips of pimento. Nut and Celery Salad Two cups celery, one cup shredded cabbage, one and one-half cups pecan nuts chopped, one-half teaspoon salt; moisten with cream dressing and serve. Nut or Apple Salad A salad suitable for the season is made of nuts, apples and celery. Cut the apples into thin slices; shell and boil the chestnuts fifteen minutes, or until soft; drain, and when cool cut nuts and celery in slices; moisten with a part of the dressing, and put into salad bowl with the remainder of the dressing on top; garnish with celery tips. The dressing is made by creaming one-quarter cup of butter, seasoning it with one-half teaspoon of paprika; add the beaten yolks of two eggs and one-quarter of a cup of vinegar, which must be hot; cook this over boiling water until very thick, stirring constantly. Whip one-half pint of cream and add it to the cold dressing just before serving. Oyster Salad Boil fifty oysters in their own liquor; drain and put in the ice box. Before using, pour over them French dressing, and serve on shredded celery or lettuce leaves. Oyster Salad Parboil small oysters in their own liquor; drain; when cold, add some French peas; dress with mayonnaise. Decorate with capers and peas. Pineapple Celery Salad Scoop out a fresh pineapple, reserving the shell; cut the fruit into small pieces and chill; cut celery into small pieces, mix with pineapple; add mayonnaise. Just before serving, fill the shell, and garnish with mint leaves. Potato Salad I Put potatoes on to boil in salt water; peel and slice them while warm; season with salt, pepper, a little celery salt, parsley chopped fine, and one-half grated onion, then add one cup vinegar and one-half cup heated oil, and pour over potatoes . Potato Salad II Slice cold boiled potatoes ; salt and pepper to taste; chop two small onions very fine and add to potatoes . Put one-half cup vinegar and one teaspoon butter into pan, and let it heat gently. Beat yolks of two eggs well; pour into cup, and fill cup with thick sweet cream. Beat well together, and stir in hot vinegar. Stir constantly until it reaches boiling point, then pour it immediately over potatoes and mix together. Potato Salad III Three quarts potatoes , two bunches celery, twelve hard boiled eggs, two pints (heavy) mayonnaise dressing. Boil potatoes , and while still warm slice (or dice); season between each few layers with fresh butter, salt, and white pepper; moisten whole with vinegar, and place in oven to heat through thoroughly. A bit of cayenne or paprika may be used. When nearly cool mix with part of the dressing eight of the eggs and celery cut fine. Serve on lettuce with the remainder of eggs sliced for decoration, and the rest of dressing. Parsley or onion may be added if desired. Enough for twenty people. Poinsettia Salad Peel small tomatoes and cut in eighths lengthwise, but do not separate parts at one end; open like flower on a bed of lettuce; in the center of each put a tablespoon of cream cheese that has been put through a coarse strainer. Serve with salad dressing, to which has been added one teaspoon each fine parsley, green peppers and chives. Russian Salad I Make a French dressing; thicken with Chili sauce; season with paprika and Worcestershire sauce, and then with a little cream. Pour over hearts of lettuce. Russian Salad II One can of beans, one can peas, one-half cup cooked carrots cut in dice. Cut one head celery, add one cup walnuts; slice one cucumber very fine. Serve with mayonnaise, to which a few spoons of whipped cream have been added. Serve on lettuce leaves. Slaw Salad Slice cabbage very fine; wash lightly; sprinkle with salt, pepper and dry mustard, and allow to stand awhile; put a heaping teaspoon of butter, three-quarters cup vinegar, and three well beaten eggs into a pan on the stove, and let come to a boil, stirring to keep smooth; then add one-half cup cream, and a little vinegar; pour over slaw and let cool; mix well. Add sliced shrimps if desired. Stuffed Beets Boil large, even-sized beets until tender; scoop center, and fill with chopped sardellen and hard boiled eggs, mixed with mayonnaise; put mayonnaise on top and serve on lettuce leaf. Shrimp and Vegetable Aspic Boil peas, carrots, beans, turnips and cauliflower, and cut in small pieces. Fill timbale molds with alternate layers of vegetables and shrimps. Cover with aspic, set on ice until firm, and serve with mayonnaise. For the aspic, use chicken stock and gelatine. Sweetbread Salad Soak sweetbreads in cold water until white and clean, then simmer on back of stove for about thirty minutes; skin and break in pieces, and add a little grated onion and cucumbers cut in dice and the following salad dressing: One cup vinegar, one tablespoon flour, and butter the size of an egg, one-half teaspoon salt, cayenne pepper, two level teaspoons mustard, four eggs beaten lightly, one-half pint whipped cream and a little sugar, the cream to be added just before serving. Excellent dressing for potato salad, also. Strawberry Salad Wash and stem one quart strawberries; sugar with powdered sugar, and put in a glass bowl. Pour over them the strained juice of two oranges, and one-half cup claret. Let stand on ice until ready to serve. Tomato Jelly One can tomatoes , six cloves, one bay leaf, two slices onion, one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon sugar, lemon peel, five whole peppers, one-quarter box gelantine soaked in water. Boil tomatoes with spices and onion until soft, then add gelantine ; stir until dissolved. Pour in mold and place in refrigerator to cool. When hard, scrape out center and fill with celery cut in small pieces, mixed with mayonnaise. Tomato Salad Take tomatoes and scoop out the inside, then add hearts of artichokes, asparagus tips and mayonnaise, together with the tomato that has been scooped out, and replace in the tomato shells. Serve on lettuce leaves, and put mayonnaise on top of tomatoes . Whole Tomato Salad Scald and skin tomatoes ; set on ice until wanted; then hollow out center, and fill with finely cut celery, olives and pepper, and some of the tomato, after seasoning with a little salt, pepper, and mayonnaise. Serve on lettuce leaves, and cover with mayonnaise. This can also be done with a green pepper, lemon or cucumber, cutting slice off the latter lengthwise. Tomato and Chicken Aspic Boil juice of one can tomatoes with seasoning and one tablespoon gelantine . Boil chicken and cut in cubes. Fill timbale forms with tomato jelly and chicken; put away to harden. When firm, turn out on lettuce leaves, and garnish with sardellen, caviar, mayonnaise and a sprinkle of finely chopped parsley. Tomato Salad Tomatoes, cucumber, celery salad dressing. Place tomatoes in pan, cover with boiling water, and let stand three minutes; drain off water and cover with cold water; peel tomatoes , remove thin slice from stem end of tomatoes ; remove seeds and part of pulp; sprinkle inside with a little salt; invert and let stand in ice box one-half hour. Fill tomatoes with thin slices of cucumber, and cut up celery, mixed with salad dressing. Arrange on lettuce leaves, and put dressing on top. You may use crab instead of cucumber. SALAD DRESSINGS A suggestion of sugar improves most salad dressings. A tablespoon of onion juice or juice of a section of garlic improves French dressing. Vegetable salads, after being cooked, should be well drained, and are improved if prepared with French dressing, even though served with mayonnaise. This applies to canned vegetables also. Boiled Dressing Without Oil Beat the yolks of two eggs, add a little salt and pepper, about one-quarter teaspoon of each; one-half cup sugar, one-half teaspoon dry mustard, one cup vinegar, four tablespoons rich sweet milk. Mix all together and put on the stove, stirring constantly until it boils. Take off and let cool, then add two more tablespoons of milk. Will keep in a cool place, in a covered jar, for several days. Cream Dressing One-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon sugar, two and one-half teaspoons melted butter, three-quarters cup of cream, one-quarter cup hot vinegar, one egg. First, mix dry ingredients; second, add egg slightly beaten, then add cream and melted butter; then cook in double boiler until thickened. When a little warm, add vinegar very slowly. Sour cream may be used, but in that case use no vinegar. Good for potato salad also. Cream Dressing for Cucumber Salad Take five tablespoons of sour cream, two of vinegar, one-half teaspoon of paprika, a pinch of salt and one-half teaspoon of finely cut chives; mix well; add to cucumbers. French Dressing One-half teaspoon salt, one-quarter teaspoon white pepper add three tablespoons olive oil, and stir for a moment until salt is dissolved. Gradually drop in one tablespoon vinegar, stirring rapidly until mixture is slightly opaque and somewhat thickened. Add a few drops of onion juice if liked. Use at once, as it separates quickly. Lettuce Dressing Yolk of a hard boiled egg, one teaspoon Gulden's prepared mustard, mixed to a cream, with paprika and salt to taste; two tablespoons olive oil, one tablespoon Worcestershire sauce, juice of one lemon, sugar to taste; add cut up white of egg, after all is mixed. Use a small piece of ice in bowl when mixing ingredients. Mayonnaise Put two yolks in bowl, stir, then add, stirring constantly, two tablespoons boiling water, one-half teaspoon sugar, one-fourth teaspoon salt, one-fourth teaspoon mustard, and a dash of cayenne pepper; then add gradually, using a Dover egg whip, a cup of olive oil. When stiff, put in lemon juice or vinegar. Mayonnaise Dressing (Boiled) Two teaspoons salt, two teaspoons sugar, two teaspoons Colman's mustard, four teaspoons flour, one large cup vinegar, a piece of butter size of large egg, yolks of four eggs, one-half pint of whipped cream. Mix all the dry ingredients together, and then stir with the beaten yolks and vinegar; put on to boil, and stir constantly for three minutes. When cold, add the whipped cream. Will keep for some time if kept on ice. Mayonnaise Without Oil Take two heaping tablespoons of flour, one-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon mustard, dash paprika and white pepper, two eggs, one and one-half cups water and one-half cup vinegar. Put this all in a double boiler, mixing it carefully, and let cook until it thickens. This can be improved by using an equal portion of the mayonnaise made with oil. Mayonnaise Dressing A few grains of cayenne pepper or paprika, one-half teaspoon salt, yolks of two raw eggs, two cups olive oil, two tablespoons lemon juice, two tablespoons tarragon or cider vinegar, one-fourth teaspoon powdered sugar, one-half teaspoon dry mustard, a few drops of Worcestershire sauce, and a few drops of onion juice, if desired. Mix the salt, paprika, yolks of eggs and mustard, with a wooden spoon or silver fork, until the eggs become slightly thickened; add a teaspoon of lemon juice or vinegar, and when well blended with ingredients, add the oil, drop by drop, beating constantly with a small Dover egg beater; as it thickens, the oil may be used faster. When the mixture becomes too thick to beat well, add a little acid, then more oil, and so on alternately, until all the ingredients are used. Taste and add more seasoning if liked. If salad dressing is too thick for some purposes, add thick sweet cream whipped to a solid froth, or the white of an egg beaten stiff and dry. Salad Dressing One pint of cream (sour or sweet), one-half tablespoon of butter, one-half teaspoon dry mustard, teaspoon point full of soda, one cup of vinegar, scant teaspoon of corn starch, three well beaten eggs. Put cream in double boiler, and heat cream, mustard and butter. When hot, not boiling, put in soda, add mustard and butter; keep stirring; then add vinegar, then add three well beaten eggs, with two tablespoons of sugar, then corn starch moistened with water. Keep stirring constantly. Quick Mayonnaise In a bowl break one whole egg, juice of half a lemon, one-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon dry mustard, two tablespoons oil. Use a Dover egg beater, and beat a few minutes, then add two or more tablespoons oil, and beat again. In a very few minutes, it will thicken, and you can then add the oil by the cupful. Put away, and thin a little at a time as required, by adding vinegar and a little Worcestershire sauce. Lemon juice is even better than vinegar. M.J.B. Coffee Why? NO BETTER COFFEE AT ANY PRICE The Place to Order Refreshments When Entertaining FANCY ICES CANDIES SALTED NUTS HOME-MADE PASTRY FAVORS Dine at the Hazlewood Next to home, it is the best place for BREAKFASTS LUCHEONS AFTERNOON TEAS DINNERS AFTER THEATRE SUPPERS MUSIC THE HAZLEWOOD 388-90 Washington Street Phones Main 798 A 4553 In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. PUDDINGS AND DESSERTS "The proof of the pudding lies in the eating." Boiled Almond Pudding One-fourth pound blanched and grated almonds, four tablespoons sugar, three eggs, three tablespoons grated bread, one large tablespoon melted butter, a few large raisins. Boil in pudding mold one and one-half hours. Serve with wine sauce. Amber Pudding Eight tablespoons orange marmalade, two cups brown bread crumbs, six tablespoons melted butter, one cup sugar, four eggs, well beaten, but not separated. Steam three hours. Half of this recipe will serve five or six persons. Angel Food Pudding Whites of three eggs, one cup sugar, one tablespoon Knox gelantine . Put gelantine to soak in cup with a little cold water; when dissolved, fill cup with boiling water and let cool; beat eggs to stiff froth, and add sugar, then gelantine , and beat until stiff; flavor and put in molds. Serve with custard sauce, or whipped cream. Apple Charlotte Soak a couple of matzos; press out every drop of water; add one-half pound finely chopped suet and about six apples, cut in very thin slices, sugar, raisins, cinnamon, almonds, yolks of seven eggs, whites beaten to a stiff froth; butter your baking dish; pour in the mixture, and bake about one hour. Apple Pudding One egg beaten well with two tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon flour, one-half teaspoon baking powder; grease form and bake quickly; let cool. Peel and grate six nice apples, five yolks of eggs, sugar to taste; beat whites to snow and mix in lightly. Spread on sponge and bake twenty-five minutes in hot oven. Put a pan under pudding dish to keep from burning. Serve cold. Put whipped cream on top before serving. Grated Apple Pudding Seven apples, three-fourths cup sugar, one dozen lady fingers, seven eggs, one-half cup chopped almonds. Beat yolks of eggs with sugar until very light, adding the crumbled lady fingers, grated apples, and grated rind of a lemon; then fold in the beaten whites and sprinkle top with the almonds, baking three-fourths of an hour. Always use as many eggs as apples. Serve with whipped cream. Apple Cracker Pudding Cut and pare about five or six apples, according to size; stew with sugar, just enough to sweeten; add raisins and cinnamon; when tender, set away to cool. Beat the yolks of six eggs and one cup sugar until thick like a batter; add grated peel of lemon, four crackers, rolled very fine; add last the stiff beaten whites. Grease a pudding dish; pour in the apples, then the custard, and bake. Serve cold with whipped cream. Blackberry Dumplings One cup of flour, mixed with one-half cup of sugar and one-half teaspoon of Crescent baking powder; add about one-half cup of milk, but do not have the batter too thin; then stir the yolk of an egg into mixture; grease the cups in which the dumplings are to be steamed very well, and have them warm. Into each cup put a large spoonful of berries and cover with a spoonful of the batter. Put into a steamer for half an hour, without raising the lid. Serve with cream. This quantity will make six dumplings. Bread Pudding One quart milk, two cups bread crumbs (stale and dry), four eggs, two tablespoons melted butter, nutmeg to taste, one-fourth teaspoon soda, dissolved in hot water. Beat the yolks very light, and having soaked the bread crumbs thoroughly in the milk, stir these together, then the butter, and seasoning with the soda, lastly the whites beaten stiff. Bake to a fine brown, and eat hot with pudding sauce. Any sauce that is quite sweet will answer, there being no sugar in the pudding. Rye Bread Pudding Three eggs, one cup sugar, one cup grated rye bread crumbs, one teaspoon each cinnamon and cloves. Beat yolks of eggs and sugar together; add crumbs and spices, then add whites of eggs. Butter the dish well, and bake in oven about twenty minutes. When done, pour over one cup red wine. Serve with cream. Carrot Pudding One cup sugar, one-third cup butter, one cup grated carrots, one cup grated potatoes , one-half teaspoon soda stirred into the potatoes , one cup raisins, one cup currants, two cups bread crumbs, one teaspoon each cinnamon, cloves and allspice. A little syrup may be added and four tablespoons whiskey. Steam three hours. Serve with hard sauce. Chocolate Pudding I Three-fourths cup grated chocolate, one cup grated zweibach, boiled with one pint milk until stiff. If not stiff enough, add more zweibach. Beat the yolks of six eggs with six tablespoons sugar, light; add to the mixture when cool. Lastly, beat the whites of the eggs and add to it. Boil in a form three-fourths of an hour. Serve with beaten cream. Chocolate Pudding II Four eggs, one small cup sugar, one and one-half cups flour, one-half cup milk, one large cup grated chocolate, one-half teaspoon soda, one-half teaspoon cream of tartar. Bake in buttered "bund" form slowly over one-half hour, and serve with whipped cream. Individual Chocolate Pudding Yolks of five eggs, five tablespoons chocolate, five tablespoons sugar; whites beaten stiff. Place mixture in muffin tins; bake in moderate oven twenty-five minutes. Serve with whipped cream. Sour Cream Pudding Mix three tablespoons flour with one and one-half glasses sour cream, six yolks of eggs, three ounces sugar, rind of one lemon, whites beaten stiff. Bake in a cool oven one-half hour. Cream Pudding Whites of four eggs, beaten very stiff; add three-fourths of a cup sugar; add this to a pint cream which has been beaten a little; flavor with vanilla; lastly, add seven leaves of gelantine , which have been dissolved in a little hot water. Put in a mold and let freeze. Cream and Banana Pudding Beat the yolks of three eggs and three heaping teaspoons sugar very light; then add one pint of rich, sweet cream; pour into a pudding dish and sprinkle over lightly with bread crumbs. Put in a large pan of boiling water and bake in oven from twenty to thirty minutes. When done, cover with a layer of thinly sliced bananas, and spread over the top a meringue made of the whites of three eggs, beaten stiff, with five level tablespoons of sugar. Put in the oven to brown, and serve cold. Cracker Pudding One-half cup of butter, one heaping pint cracker crumbs rolled fine and softened with boiling milk, one quart fruit ( currants and raisins ), one-half cup sugar, one-half cup molasses, four eggs, one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon cinnamon, one large wine glass brandy. Put in a mold and steam two to three hours. Serve with hard sauce. Date Pudding One cup sugar, mixed with yolks of three eggs, one cup chopped nuts, one cup chopped dates, mixed with one tablespoon flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. To the above, add whites beaten stiff. Bake in shallow pan in slow oven over twenty-five minutes. Bake day before using. Cut in slices and serve with whipped cream. Dainty Pudding Take two ounces of citron and one orange; grate two large cups of stale bread and soften it with a cup of water; grate the rind and squeeze the juice of the orange; cut the citron in small bits and mix with the bread, together with the yolks of three eggs and enough sugar to sweeten the mixture. Butter six small cups. Just before putting the pudding into the oven, beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth. Quickly mix with the bread and fruit. Distribute in the buttered cups, and bake slowly for twenty minutes. Serve hot with cream sauce. Sauce: Bring pint of cream slowly to boil; set stewpan in boiling water; when cream reaches boiling point, add sugar to taste, then pour slowly on whipped whites of two eggs; add one teaspoon of extract of vanilla. French Pudding One cup suet, one cup molasses, one cup sour milk, one and one-half teaspoons soda, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon each cloves and salt, one cup chopped raisins, one-half cup currants, two and one-half cups flour. Steam four hours. Delmonico Pudding Two heaping teaspoons gelantine , dissolved in one-half cup cold water for one-half hour; mix this with two cups milk and a pinch of baking soda, to keep from curdling; let boil a few minutes and remove from fire; stir in the yolks of four eggs, one cup sugar; boil again, stirring constantly until thick. When cool, add the beaten whites and one-half wine glass sherry. Line mold with crystallized fruits and macaroons; put on one-half quantity, then add more fruit, and then the macaroons. Set away until formed. Fruit Pudding One-half box gelantine soaked in one-half cup water. Make a custard of five egg yolks, three-fourths cup sugar, two and one-half cups milk. Pour boiling custard into gelantine , add three-fourths cup raisins, six or more stale macaroons, rolled, one-half cup nuts, two teaspoons brandy, vanilla; last, the beaten whites of eggs. Serve with whipped cream. Add some maraschino cherry juice, and a few of the cherries, cut fine, to cream. Make day before serving. Fig Pudding One-half pound figs, chopped well, six ounces almonds chopped, six yolks of eggs, one-half pound butter ( salt worked out), one heaping cup sugar. Take sugar and butter, beat well, then add yolks, figs, and almonds, one teaspoon lemon juice, six cardamon seeds, pounded, fifteen ounces grated stale cake, one tablespoon brandy; lastly, the whites, beaten stiff. Grease form well, and put in pot with water and boil two hours. Serve with lemon sauce. Grimslich One-half loaf bread which has been soaked and pressed, four eggs, one cup sugar, raisins, cinnamon, almonds, chopped fine. Beat the whites to a stiff froth and add last. Fry in hot fat. Lemon Pudding Six yolks of eggs, five tablespoons sugar, beat fifteen minutes, then add three tablespoons flour, juice of one lemon, and beaten whites last. Boil one hour. Nut Cream Pudding Two and one-third teaspoons gelantine , two tablespoons cold water, one cup milk, one cup cream, one-half cup sugar, pinch of salt, one teaspoon vanilla or three tablespoons wine, whites of two eggs, one-half cup chopped nuts. Soak gelantine in cold water; scald the milk and cream; add sugar and gelantine . Let stand until beginning to set. Add nuts and beaten whites. Place in a cold dish. Serve with whipped cream. Nut, Potato, or Bread Pudding Five or six yolks of eggs, one-fourth pound sugar; stir well, then put in one-fourth pound grated nuts or sifted bread crumbs or grated boiled potatoes ; flavor. Add the stiffly beaten whites. Bake or boil one hour in a medium oven. If it falls, it is not baked enough. Serve hot or cold, with wine sauce. Peach Cobbler Line a well-buttered pudding dish with a rich biscuit dough; fill with cut-up peaches; add sugar and bits of butter; cover with the rest of the biscuit dough; brush over with melted butter. Prick the dough with a fork and bake twenty-five minutes or more, according to size. Serve with hard sauce. Peach Pudding Fill pudding dish with whole peeled peaches; pour over one and one-half pints of water; cover, and bake until the peaches are tender; drain off juice and let cool; add to it, two cups of milk, four well-beaten eggs, one scant cup of flour, mixed with one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one cup sugar, one heaping tablespoon creamed butter, and pinch of salt. Beat well for five minutes; pour over peaches in dish. Bake to rich brown, and serve slightly warm, with whipped cream. Sweet Potato Pudding Mash two cups of cold sweet potatoes through a sieve; beat one-half pound sugar, one-half pound butter, and yolks of six eggs to a cream; add two tablespoons brandy, two tablespoons sherry, juice and rind of one orange or lemon, one-half teaspoon each cinnamon, allspice and ginger, a grating of nutmeg. Stir into the potato pulp. Fold in the whites of the eggs, beaten to a froth. Pour into a buttered pudding dish. Bake in a moderate oven about three-fourths of an hour. Pineapple Pudding Cook together one-half cup sherry wine, juice of one can pineapple, one cup sugar. Soak one-half box gelantine in one-half cup water. Add gelantine to above mixture and let cool. Beat two whites of eggs with one pint of whipping cream; add wine mixture, and beat all together; cut in slices of pineapple. Line mold with slices of pineapple. Place mixture in mold to harden. Serve with vanilla sauce. Rice Pudding (Frequently called "Poor Man's Pudding.") One coffee cup rice, two quarts milk, eight tablespoons sugar, one teaspoon salt, butter the size of an egg, melted; nutmeg to taste, cinnamon also if liked. Wash and pick over the rice and soak in one pint of the milk two hours; then add the rest of the milk, the sugar, salt, butter, spices and also some raisins. Bake two hours, and eat cold. Suet Pudding One cup seeded raisins, one cup brown sugar, one and one-half cups molasses, one and one-half cups suet, chopped fine, five cups flour, one and one-half cups cold water, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one and one-half teaspoons allspice, one and one-half teaspoons cinnamon, one teaspoon cloves, a little salt, also a little chopped citron. Steam three or four hours. Serve with hard sauce. English Plum Pudding Take two cups stoned raisins, two cups currants, two cups brown sugar, one-half cup citron, cut fine, two cups finely chopped suet, one grated lemon rind and juice, two tablespoons of ground cinnamon, one tablespoon of grated nutmeg, one-half teaspoonful of ground cloves, one-half teaspoonful ground allspice, one wine glass brandy. Prepare all first; put into a large bowl, with the sugar and suet on top; press down tight so as to keep the flavors from escaping, and leave covered until the next day. Next morning take three-fourths of a loaf of square white bread, soaked in water; squeeze out as dry as possible; add to the ingredients in the bowl; then beat in, one at a time, eight eggs; add one and one-half cups of flour with one teaspoon of Crescent baking powder. Prepare large pot of boiling water with a little salt, and place a small china plate on the bottom of pot to keep the cloth from burning; wring out your pudding cloth in boiling water, place over bowl, put pudding in, tie up securely, allowing just enough room for swelling. Place in pot.  Water must be boiling, and kept boiling, covered, four hours, always adding boiling water as it boils down. Eat with hard sauce or brandy sauce. Pour four tablespoons of brandy over top and light at table. Plum Pudding Three cups bread crumbs, three eggs, one cup raisins, three-fourths cup currants, one-half cup chopped citron, one-half cup chopped suet, one-half cup flour, one heaping teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon each of cinnamon, cloves, allspice and salt, rind and juice of one lemon, one orange, chopped, one apple, one-half cup molasses, one-half cup sugar, one glass brandy. Boil three hours. Serve with hard sauce. Soak the fruit in the brandy a few hours before using. Sherry Pudding (For Six.) Three eggs, one-half cup sugar, three fourths cup sherry, one-fourth cup cold water, three fourths tablespoons gelantine , ten macaroons, ten maraschino cherries. Let gelantine and water stand one hour. Stir yolks, sugar and sherry together; put on stove and stir constantly until it boils; take from stove and pour gelantine into mixture; add stiffly beaten whites, the crumbed macaroons and the cherries, which have been cut into pieces; turn into mold; let stand until firm. Whipped cream may be served with it. Tapioca Pudding One-half cup tapioca. Soak over night; pour water off in morning, and boil with three-fourths quart milk; add yolks of two eggs, well beaten, two tablespoons sugar. When cooked, stir in a little milk, then whites of eggs; salt. Boil in double kettle. Apple Fritters Make a batter with one cup sweet milk, one tablespoon sugar, two eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, two cups flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, mixed and sifted with the flour. Mix all to a smooth batter; add the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs gently through the batter. Chop some good tart apples; mix in the batter; fry a nice brown in some hot, deep fat or butter, taking a tablespoonful at a time. Drain, and sift powdered sugar over them. Apple Tart Cookie Dough for Apple Tart.--One and one-half cups butter, creamed with three-fourths cup sugar; drop in two eggs, rind of one lemon; add enough flour to roll. Then line form with the crust. Filling for Apple Tart.--Peel and quarter eight large apples. Put in kettle with a little water, sugar to taste; let stew until half done. When cool add a few nuts, a little rum, vanilla and cinnamon. Apricot Cream Tart Line spring form with pie dough. Put in a layer of halved apricots (canned), sprinkled with sugar. Custard: Beat yolks of five eggs, three-fourths cup sugar, one spoonful flour, a little juice of the apricots, one cup sour cream; lastly, the beaten whites. Pour this on the cake. Bake in slow oven one hour. Caramel Custard One cup granulated sugar, two tablespoons water, three eggs, three tablespoons sugar, vanilla to taste, one pint milk. Mix a cup of granulated sugar with two tablespoons water; stir over a small flame until melted. Take half of this caramel, and put in a well-buttered pudding dish; the other half caramel put back on stove. Add a little water to it and use as a sauce. Custard.--Into a bowl break three eggs; beat lightly, then add three tablespoons sugar, vanilla to taste; add one pint milk. Bake in a moderate oven in a pan of hot water, about thirty minutes. Cherry Blanc-Mange One quart can cherries, one-half box gelantine . Soak in one-half glass sherry wine. Heat the cherries and gelantine together; sugar to taste; flavor with a few drops of lemon juice and some of the rind. Pour in a mold which has been previously rinsed in cold water. When cold, serve with whipped cream and cake. Chocolate Soufflé Three tablespoons each of butter and flour; add one cup milk, two-thirds cup chocolate, one-half teaspoon cinnamon. Remove from fire. Add pinch of salt, vanilla, yolks of three eggs, one-half cup sugar. Fold in well-beaten whites; set baking dish in water; bake about twenty-five minutes. Serve with cream, hard or chocolate sauce. Bake until it is firm. Serve as soon as baked. Lemon Sponge Soufflé Four eggs, four tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon flour, juice and grated peel of lemon. Stir yolks and sugar very carefully. Add lemon juice and grated rind and flour. Fold in stiffly beaten whites and put in buttered mold. Boil three-fourths of an hour, the water almost covering the mold. Serve with wine or jelly sauce. Macaroon Soufflé One dozen macaroons, one cup milk, three eggs, French fruits chopped fine, whipped cream. Scald macaroons in the milk and pour over the beaten yolks of eggs, cooking in double boiler until slightly thickened. Remove from fire and fold in beaten whites, grease mold well, and bake twenty minutes in a pan of water. When taken from mold decorate with chopped fruits, and serve with whipped cream. Marshmallow Whip One-half pound of marshmallows cut into small pieces, mixed with one-half pint of cream beaten stiff. Sweeten to taste and flavor with sherry. Serve in tall glasses and garnish with candied cherries or violets. Orange Soufflé Peel and slice six oranges. Place in bowl a layer of oranges, and cover with sugar. Continue so, until oranges are used. Let stand two hours. Make a soft boiled custard of yolks of three eggs, one pint milk, sugar to taste. Use the grated rind of orange for flavoring. When the custard is cold, pour over the sliced oranges. Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth. Add a little sugar and spread over the top. Pineapple Whip One cup sugar, one cup water, one can grated pineapple. Boil eighteen minutes. Remove from fire. Then add two teaspoons gelantine which have been dissolved in one-half cup boiling water. Whip one pint cream, and add a little vanilla flavoring. Prune Whip One cup of pitted boiled prunes, without juice. Chop very fine and mix with one-fourth cup sugar, one teaspoon vanilla. Whip the whites of four eggs to a very stiff froth. Mix in the prunes. Bake in moderate oven about twenty minutes. Baking dish must be placed in a pan of water. Serve with whipped cream. Rice Cream Two ounces rice, pour boiling water over, let stand, then pour water off. Boil slowly in one pint milk with pinch of salt and one-fourth stick of vanilla bean (cut down the center) until done. Soak four leaves of gelantine and when rice is done, mix in the yolk of one egg, beaten with two ounces sugar and the gelantine , stirring constantly. When stiff add one pint of whipped cream and when cool, put in ice chest until ready to serve. Russian Cream One small cup milk or cream, three-fourths cup granulated sugar, two tablespoons gelantine . Put into sauce pan on stove and heat. Then add the yolks of two eggs beaten separately, and set in cool place. Fold the whites of eggs beaten stiff in the sauce, add two cups of whipped cream. Put in mold. Serve with Maraschino sauce. Nudelfransen Make noodles of three eggs, roll out thin and cut about one-fourth inch wide, boil in salt water, mix butter through and set to cool. Take three whole eggs, then the yolks of three more, one cup sugar, juice and rind of one lemon. Stir well. Mix with noodles. Add the three whites, beaten stiff. Take a pudding dish, butter well and sprinkle with bread crumbs. Put in a layer of noodles, then a layer of filling, which consists of chopped almonds, sugar, raisins and cinnamon. Continue until all is used. Bake to a golden brown. Macaroon Paste Twenty-five macaroons, crushed fine. Beat whites of two eggs to a stiff froth, add yolks, beat light, add a little cream and sugar. Put the crushed macaroons into this mixture. Let stew long enough to soften. Line form with the crust. Spread the macaroon paste on the bottom of the crust. Add a layer of apples and so on until all is used. Have paste on top. Loganberry Dumplings One quart loganberries cooked until soft and sweetened to taste, (or the same quantity of canned fruit ). Dumplings. Two cups flour, one-half teaspoon salt, two heaping teaspoons Crescent baking powder sifted together twice. Add one beaten egg mixed with enough milk to absorb flour. Drop by tablespoonful on boiling fruit. Cover closely and cook gently for fifteen or twenty minutes. Serve in individual dishes with whipped cream. Wine Jelly Soak a package of gelantine in one-half pint of cold water for one hour. Pour one pint boiling water over it. Add grated rind and slices of one lemon, one-half pint or more of wine, and one cup granulated sugar. Stir until dissolved. Strain and set aside to cool. White Wine Custard I To each person measure: One wineglass full of white wine, yolk of one egg, one tablespoon sugar. Boil until thick, and then fill fancy glasses and put on ice when cool. When ready to serve, put a portion of beaten cream on top. White Wine Custard II One-fourth cup of sugar, wine, water, eggs. Heat one-fourth cup of sugar and wine to taste, to which have been added a little water. Beat yolks, two, for every three cups of custard. Gradually pour wine mixture into eggs, and bake in custard cups in pan of boiling water. Stewed Prunes (Dried) To one cup of sugar add one cup of claret. Soak the prunes in sugar and claret a week or longer. Before serving, boil the liquid in which the prunes were soaked. Remove the pit carefully, and insert a blanched almond. Pour liquid, hot, over fruit. Use at once or serve cold. Strawberry Charlotte One quart fresh strawberries, strained through a sieve; soak one-half box of gelantine in one-fourth cup of cold water. When soft, add one-fourth cup of hot water, strain, and add to fruit. Also three-fourths cup sugar, one pint whipped cream, (measure before whipping). Beat all until thick. Put in a mold and set on ice until firm. Serve with a garnish of whipped cream, and whole berries. An illustration of a bottle of tea on the left bottom side of the page. Tea Garden Preserves The Delightful Dessert Order from your grocer. Ideal for the afternoon tea, dinner and lunch Pacific Coast Syrup Co. Portland, Oregon In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. Tipsy Charlotte One pint cream, one cup strawberries, sugar to taste, one tablespoon sherry, one tablespoon brandy. Whip the cream stiff. Add sugar, then brandy and sherry. Last, the berries. Serve in glasses. Matzo Charlotte I Four soaked matzos, six eggs, one cup granulated sugar, one cup seeded raisins, one tablespoon ground cinnamon, grated rind and juice of one lemon, one handful pounded almonds, one-fourth pound rendered fat. Beat the yolks of the eggs, the sugar and cinnamon together until very light; then add the raisins, almonds, lemon and well drained matzos, and a little white wine; and last, the whites of the eggs, well beaten. Melt the rendered fat in the dish in which the pudding is to be baked; then pour one-half of it over the mixture, and return the whole mass of ingredients to the dish. Bake one hour, serve hot with lemon or wine sauce. Matzo Charlotte II Soak about three matzos, press out every drop of water; stir the matzos in a bowl with one tablespoon of fat and salt spoon of salt; stir at least ten minutes, or until it looks like a mass of cream; then add gradually the yolks of six eggs, the grated peel of one lemon and juice, a little white wine, one-half pound of sifted sugar, and last, the beaten whites of the eggs. Have the pudding form well greased, and bake immediately. Time required for baking, about one-half hour. Serve as soon as taken from the oven, with wine sauce. The Delicious Dessert JELL-O Delicate, Delightful, Dainty, Pure Fruit Flavor. THE GENESEE PURE FOOD CO. LE ROY, N.Y. In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. Rolly Poly Flour the baking board, and roll out a rich pie crust, very thin and as large as for a pudding. Strew all over the dough rather finely chopped apples, raisins, currants, citron cut fine, brown sugar, cinnamon, a little lemon juice, some grated rind. Dot with bits of butter or melted chicken grease. Roll, pressing the ends together. Bring the corners to the center. Place over this a pudding dish which has been well buttered or greased. Place one hand firmly on top of the dish, with the other hand raise the board and turn so that the board is on top of the pudding dish. If the pudding is somewhat broken, mend with pieces of dough. Grease the top of the pudding well before placing in the oven. Bake in a hot oven at least one-half hour. ADDITIONAL RECIPES SAUCES FOR PUDDINGS, ICES, ETC. "Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite." Caramel Sauce Melt two cups of white granulated sugar in skillet on the stove and when liquid, stir in one-half cup of cold water. Dissolve all lumps; then add one cup of sweet milk, stirring briskly to prevent curdling. Let boil, remove from fire; then pour boiling sauce on one raw yolk. Mix, then add beaten white. Pour in sauceboat and keep in a warm place until ready to serve, but do not put back on fire. Flavor with vanilla. Chocolate Sauce Dissolve one-eighth pound chocolate in one cup of water; add sugar to taste; boil somewhat thick, and flavor with vanilla. To make it very rich, the yolks of two eggs may be added. Cream Sauce Boil one pint of milk, with sugar to taste. Beat light two whole eggs, then stir boiling milk in eggs. Put whole back on the stove, and add two teaspoons corn starch, dissolved in a little cold milk. When sufficiently thick, remove from fire; let cool, and flavor with teaspoon of vanilla. Foam Sauce Cream one-fourth cup butter with one cup powdered sugar, until very light. Add one by one unbeaten whites of two eggs, stirring briskly and beat again. Add one teaspoon vanilla and one-half cup hot water. Pour in a sauce -boat, and place in a pan of boiling water on stove until it becomes frothy, then serve. Fruit Sauces Take the juice of any fruit by boiling and pressing through a sieve, sweeten to taste, adding wine or lemon juice, and thicken with a little corn starch, previously dampened with water. Hard Sauce One-half cup soft butter, one cup powdered sugar. Stir to a cream. Flavor with vanilla. Make into any shape desired. If for small apples, color a small portion of the cream with green and red fruit coloring. First take some of the white cream and shape into a small round ball. Then cover with some of the green and red cream; press into shape, and use whole cloves for the stem and core. Jelly Sauce Take thin jelly; add a little water, brandy or wine; add a little more sugar, and thicken with egg or corn starch. Lemon Sauce Boil one cup sugar with one-half cup water, rind of one lemon, juice of two, and one-half teaspoon of butter. When boiling, stir in scant teaspoon of corn starch, dissolved in cold water. Serve hot. Molasses Sauce Boil together for ten minutes, one cup molasses, one tablespoon vinegar, one tablespoon butter, pinch of salt. For apple puddings. Orange Sauce Whip whites of three eggs very stiff, then add one cup powdered sugar. When smooth and thick, add strained juice of one lemon and two oranges. Serve as soon as possible. Roman Sauce Boil one cup brandy, with one-half cup sugar, and grated peel of one lemon. Beat four yolks light and stir in the boiling brandy. Keep in warm place until ready to serve. If not quite thick, when stirring in eggs, it can be placed for a minute on the stove, to boil. Vanilla Sauce Take as much milk as you desire sauce. Break one egg into a sauce -pan; add a pinch of corn starch, sugar to taste, and milk; put on stove and stir constantly until it thickens. When finished, flavor with vanilla. The corn starch prevents curdling. Wine Sauce I One cup Madeira wine, three-fourths cup water. Sugar to taste. Thicken with one teaspoon corn starch, dissolved in a little warm water. When the sauce has thickened, add the lightly beaten yolks of two eggs. Remove from stove, and fold in the stiffly beaten whites of the two eggs. Wine Sauce II Put on stove to boil three-fourths cup of white wine and one-fourth cup of water. Add two or three pieces of cinnamon bark, and two slices of lemon, and one-half cup of sugar. While boiling, add one teaspoon corn starch, which has first been dissolved in a tiny bit of cold water. Boil a few minutes, then pour over the well-beaten yolks of two eggs. Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Add one teaspoon sugar; beat again, then pour over sauce; served cold. Wine Sauce III One cup of wine, a little water, three-fourths of a cup of sugar, the grated peel of a lemon and a little of the juice. Add the yolks of four eggs; stir until this comes to a boil, and add the beaten whites and remove from the fire at once. Crown Flour UNBLEACHED PURITY AND FLAVOR Not Sacrificed for Artificial Color The Bank of California NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SAN FRANCISCO Capital Paid in Gold Coin . . . . $8,500,000 Surplus and Undivided Profits . . 8,295,664 GENERAL BANKING Interest Paid on Savings Deposits PORTLAND BRANCH Third and Stark Streets WM.A. MacRAE, Manager JAS.T. BURTCHAELL, Asst. Manager In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. PASTRY AND PIES "Who'll dare deny the truth, there is poetry in pie?" Under the term "pastry," may be included the countless dishes from the well known apple and mince pies of our grandmothers, to the the fancy French concoctions displayed in the shops. While some of the latter have a sponge cake foundation, the former and its many varieties, have a crust consisting of flour, salt, shortening and liquid. In making such a crust a few fundamental rules should be borne in mind. The materials should be of the best; room, hands, and materials should be cold; paste should be handled as little, and as lightly, as possible; the oven should be well regulated and moderately hot. For the best results, use pastry flour, that is, one made from soft wheat, rich in starch and lacking in gluten. Butter gives the best flavored crust; lard, cottolene, etc., give whiter, flakier crust; beef suet also gives good results. As cold air will expand more in the oven than warm air, and as the lightness of the pastry depends largely on the air that is enclosed, it is important that room and materials be very cold. Then, too, heat softens the shortening, making it harder to keep the paste from sticking to the board. To insure firm, easily rolled paste, it may be mixed several hours, or even a day before it is needed. A "light hand" is absolutely essential to good pastry. If not lightly mixed and rolled, the gluten in the flour will be developed, toughening the crust, the paste will stick to the board, the fine flakes will be broken, and the carefully enclosed air will escape. A moderately hot oven is required. The greatest heat should come from below, at first, to prevent soggy undercrust in pies, and to make puff paste rise well, before browning. Lack of attention to the oven often causes overboiling of juice and burned crusts. From the manner of introducing the shortening into the crusts, three typical crusts result. In a plain "short" or pie crust, the shortening is mixed into the flour and salt, the liquid is added, and the paste is ready for rolling. In puff paste, all the shortening is rolled into a paste made of the flour, salt and water. A flaky pastry, less indigestible than the latter, but riches than the former is made by a combination of the two methods. Short crust requires for each cup of flour, one-fourth to one-half teaspoon of salt, three to four tablespoons of shortening, and one-fourth cup or less of water. One-fourth teaspoon of baking powder is sometimes added to plain pastry. Puff paste requires equal weights of shortening and flour, or one-half cup of shortening to one cup of flour. Flaky pastry requires from four to six tablespoons of shortening to the cup of flour. The dry ingredients should be sifted into a bowl, the butter washed to free it from salt and buttermilk; and the water put on ice, or allowed to run for some little time. For a medium sized pie allow from one to one and one-half cups of flour for two crusts. Cut the shortening in the flour with a spatula until like fine bread crumbs. (The tips of the fingers may be used) Add the liquid gradually, using as little as possible. Put one-half the paste on a slightly floured board, and pat and roll to one-eighth inch in thickness and somewhat larger than the tin. Fit in tin smoothly and carefully without stretching. The tin need not be greased. Roll the remaining paste for an upper crust, cutting openings for the steam to escape. The under crust may now be brushed with white of egg to prevent soaking in of filling. Fill. Moisten edge of undercrust with milk or water, and put top crust on. Press edges together lightly and trim. If edges are not well sealed, juices may boil out. Brush top of pie with milk and egg yolk to glaze. The trimmings may be carefully laid together and used for tarts, rolls, turnovers, etc. For puff paste, mix the sifted flour and salt in a bowl with just enough water to moisten. Toss on lightly floured board, pat and roll into one-third inch thickness, and rectangular shape. Put the washed butter in the center and fold paste in thirds, completely covering and enclosing the butter. Turn. Pat and roll to one-third inch thickness. Fold in thirds again, turn and roll. Each folding and rolling is known as one "turn." Puff paste may be given six turns. It usually needs a twenty or thirty minutes' chilling between each two or three turns. It is then cut in various shapes for patty shells, or vol-au-vents, chilled again and baked in a hot oven with the greatest heat from below. For the simpler or flaky pastry, proceed as for short crust, mixing in one-half of the shortening, roll in a rectangle, and fold and roll in the remaining shortening, giving it three "turns." This is excellent for lemon and cream puff shells, which are baked over an inverted tin, between two tins, or with a "dummy" filling of rice or beans, and filled after baking. Pie Crust One tablespoon clear suet, one tablespoon butter, stirred to cream, one tablespoon granulated sugar, one egg. As much cold water as the one egg shell will hold, just enough flour to roll out with, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder in the flour. Use hands as little as possible. Do not use more flour than just necessary to roll the pastry. Pastry Cakes One pound flour, sifted, one whole egg, enough cold water to make a dry dough. Roll out on board well floured, and spread over one pound butter. Fold and roll out seven times. Put on ice and use next day. When ready to use, roll out and then cut into squares or triangles, putting jelly or jam on top and folding over into shape. Brush with egg and bake in a hot oven. Apple Charlotte Mrs. Nettie Koch Make a pie crust, using about two cups of flour, mixed with a half teaspoon of Crescent baking powder, a pinch of salt and a tablespoon of sugar. For shortening, use half butter and half goose fat, about six tablespoons. Mix the shortening with the flour, using enough ice water to make a firm paste. Roll out half of the paste, and cover a deep granite dish with same, adding the following ingredients for a filling: Apples, chopped fine, plenty of raisins, chopped walnuts, sugar, cinnamon, and a pinch of salt, which have been thoroughly mixed. Cover with an upper layer of the pie crust, flake the top with butter or fat, and bake with a very slow fire until brown on top and bottom. Banana Pie Slice three bananas, mash them thoroughly, one tablespoon butter, pinch of salt, one-half cup sugar, yolks of two eggs. Put all on stove and boil until thick like custard. Spread in baked pie crust. Add whites of two eggs beaten with two tablespoons of sugar. Spread and bake until brown. Blackberry Cream Pie Line deep pie plate with stiff paste, then pour into it the following, after stirring together: One cup blackberries, one cup cream, one well beaten egg, and one cup sugar. Bake in moderate oven until cream is set. Be careful not to bake too long as it will not be creamy. Canned berries are just as good. When you use canned berries, drain off all the juice. Cocoanut Pie One pint milk, one grated cocoanut, one teacup sugar, three eggs. Mix cocoanut, yolks of eggs and sugar together. Stir milk in slowly, put all on crust and bake. Beat whites of eggs to which add three tablespoons powdered sugar. Bake until light brown. German Cheese Pie, No. I One pint cottage cheese, one-half grated rind of lemon, two tablespoons butter, three eggs, one pinch salt, one-half lemon, one-half pint cream, one and one-half tablespoons flour, one cup sugar. Put the cottage cheese in mixing bowl. Add the melted butter, cream, lemon juice, sugar, grated rind of lemon, and salt. Mix all together thoroughly; then add the eggs separated and beaten; then the flour. Line the form with dough made as follows: One cup flour, one pinch salt, four tablespoons cold water, two tablespoons butter, one-fourth teaspoon sugar, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Add the baking powder, salt and sugar to flour; then the butter, and mix thoroughly. Add the ice water and roll dough, handling as little as possible. Line form. Add the cheese preparation and bake in moderate oven. Cheese Pie, No. II One quart cottage cheese run through a colander. Then stir in one cup granulated sugar, pinch of salt, one tablespoon flour, six yolks of eggs, one pint whipping cream. Lastly, the whites beaten stiff. Line a spring form with rich pastry or coffee cake dough. Bake in moderate oven about one hour and ten minutes. Cream Pie Beat stiff the whites of two eggs, one-half cup sugar, one tablespoon flour, one pint sweet cream. Bake in bottom crust only. Flavor to suit. Custard Pie One and one-half cups scalded milk, two well beaten eggs, salt, nutmeg as flavoring, three tablespoons sugar. To the well beaten eggs, add the sugar, salt and nutmeg. Then stir in the scalded milk which has been allowed to cool. Bake in moderate oven until custard is set. Macaroon Paste Twenty-five macaroons, crushed fine. Beat whites of two eggs; add yolks, beat light; add a little cream and sugar. Put the crushed macaroons into this mixture. Let stew long enough to soften. Line form with the crust. Spread the macaroon paste on the bottom of the crust. Add a layer of apples and so on until all are used. Have top covering of the paste. Lemon Pie Line a spring form with a rich puff paste, putting the paste well over the edge of the form. Bake until brown. Five eggs, juice of two large lemons, four tablespoons powdered sugar. Beat the yolks and sugar until thick. Add lemon juice slowly. Boil until thick in double boiler, stirring constantly. When cool, add whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Place custard into the pastry and bake in moderate oven for fifteen minutes or until set. Pineapple Pie One pound sliced pineapple, yolks of four eggs, white of one egg, (save three whites for meringue), one small cup sugar, one cup sweet milk, one-half cup butter (scant), one good tablespoon flour. Cream butter and sugar together. Add beaten yolks, then chopped pineapple with most of the juice, then milk and flour. Stir well. Line large pie plate with fine pie pastry and fill with mixture. Bake in moderate oven. When filling is set, cover top with meringue made of three whites of eggs beaten stiff, with powdered sugar and flavoring to taste. Sweet Potato Pie Boil or bake sufficient sweet potatoes to make a pint of the pulp when rubbed through a colander. Add one pint milk, small cup sugar, pinch of salt, yolks of two eggs, one teaspoon vanilla extract. Bake in shallow pan lined with rich pie crust. When done beat the whites of the eggs with two tablespoons powdered sugar. Spread over top of the pie. Brown slightly in the oven. Mince Pie Mixture Three pounds lean beef, cooked and chopped fine, ( tongue may be used), one and one-half pounds finely chopped suet, three quarts of chopped apples, two cups cleaned currants, four cups raisins, one-fourth pound finely cut citron, one cup finely cut orange and lemon peel, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon each cloves and allspice, juice and grated rind of two oranges and two lemons, two nutmegs, grated, one tablespoon salt, one cup molasses, three cups sugar, three cups brandy, one cup sherry, one cup cider. Mix meat and suet, add the dry ingredients and a little of the stock in which the meat was cooked. Cook slowly about two hours. Add the liquors and pack in jars. Use in a two crust pie. The upper crust may be of flaky or puff paste. Pumpkin Pie One and one-half cups steamed and strained pumpkin, two-thirds cup brown sugar, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon ginger, one-half teaspoon salt, two eggs, one and one-half cups milk, one-half cup cream. Mix ingredients and bake in one crust. A little molasses may be added for additional flavor and color. Other spices may be used. More eggs and less pulp may be used. Nut Pie Filling One-half cup sugar, mixed with one tablespoon flour, one cup milk, one cup chopped walnuts, three eggs (save whites for icing top of pie). Cook in double boiler. An Illustration of a can of Crescent Baking Powder on the upper left side of the page. Bake your DAINTY CAKES, BISCUITS AND PASTRY WITH CRESCENT BAKING POWDER and make light, fine tex- tured, wholesome food. It Raises the Dough 25c a lb. At Your Grocer's An Illustration of a bottle of Mapleine on the upper right side. USE MAPLEINE for dainty flavor in cakes, icings, candies, puddings, pies and all dainty desserts. You'll find it delicious. Makes splendid syrup. 1-oz. bottle 20c 2-oz. botle 35c GROCERS SELL IT. STATEMENT On account of the general interest of housewives and their desire to obtain the best Baking Powder, we, the Committee, sincerely recommend CRESCENT BAKING POWDER. This is the powder that has stood the critical test of two United States District Courts, those of Oregon and Idaho, and we therefore do not hesitate to fully endorse Crescent Baking Powder as to its purity, wholesomeness and efficiency. Cook Book Committee In answering these ads, please mention Neighborhood Cook Book. The M ost Evenly and Perfectly Baked Cakes are Those Baked By GAS CAKES "With weights and measures just and true, Oven of even heat, Well buttered tins and quiet nerves, Success will be complete." For success in cake making, it is necessary that all ingredients be carefully measured and prepared, before the mixing process begins. Have the oven ready to receive the cake, the baking being as important as the mixing. An earthen dish, and wooden spoon, are best for mixing. Care should be taken that the eggs are fresh, and the butter sweet. It is well to line cake tins with buttered paper, to prevent burning at the bottom. Never move a cake in the oven until it is set in the center. When looking at it, do so quickly, leaving the door open as short a time as possible. Never remove a cake from the oven until satisfied that it is baked. If in doubt, try it with a clean broom-straw, and if no dough adheres to the straw, it is done. Some people put their ear to the cake and listen if it ticks. If it ticks loudly it is not baked, and should be returned to the oven, whereas, if the ticking is very faint or absent, it is done. When a cake cracks open in the center, too much flour has been used. Do not put anything else in the oven while the cake is baking. In baking layer cakes, dredge the bottom of the tin with flour--to prevent sticking. Layer cakes require a quick fire. Sponge cakes require a slow fire. Loaf cakes with butter a moderate fire. Almond Cake No. I One pound blanched almonds cut very fine, one pound sugar, three-fourths pound butter, one pound flour, ten eggs, one-half pound citron, one-half pound raisins, one nutmeg, rind and juice of one lemon. Butter paper for the bottom of the pan and bake in a moderate oven about one hour. It can be kept for months. Almond Cake, No. II One-half pound almonds, grated, ten eggs. Mix yolks with one large cup powdered sugar until very light, one tablespoon sifted flour, juice and rind of one lemon, pinch of salt. Beat whites stiff and fold in. Bake about three-fourths of an hour in moderate oven. Angel Cake One and one-half tumblers granulated sugar sifted seven times, one tumbler flour sifted with one level teaspoon cream tartar, four or five times, whites of twelve eggs, one teaspoon vanilla. Beat the whites to a stiff froth in a large mixing bowl; add the sugar gradually, beating constantly, then fold in the flour and add vanilla. Pour into pan at once and bake in a slow oven fifty or sixty minutes. Cover while baking with brown paper. See that your cream of tartar and eggs are fresh. Do not grease pan. Invert to cool. Bremen Apple Torte Seven apples, peeled and cored, six tablespoons sugar, two tablespoons butter, six eggs, one pint sour cream, one tablespoon of vanilla extract, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, three cups grated zweibach. Cook apples with sugar and butter until soft. Cream the eggs, add the pint of sour cream, vanilla, and cinnamon, with a little sugar to taste. Pour this into the cooked apples, and let all boil together until thick (to a firm consistency). Remove from the stove.  Butter a spring form well, sprinkle sides and bottom with two cups of zweibach, then put on a layer of the apple mixture, then the remaining cup of zweibach, and scatter lumps of butter over the top. Bake one hour. Brod Torte Ten eggs, two cups granulated sugar, one cup rye bread crumbs --toasted rye bread, until dry, one glass Rhine wine, two teaspoons cinnamon, one-half teaspoon allspice, one-half teaspoon cloves, six ounces almonds, juice and rind of one lemon, juice of one orange. Bake from one to one and one-fourth hours. Apple Sauce Cake One-half cup butter (scant) creamed with one cup granulated sugar. Stir into one cup of apple sauce, one teaspoon soda, dissolved in hot water. Add one cup of raisins or currants, spices to taste such as cloves, cinnamon, ginger, etc. Last of all, stir in two cups of flour, and one egg beaten. Bake in slow oven. Bungalow Cake One piece butter about one-fourth inch thick, three eggs separated, one and one-half cups sugar, one and one-half cups flour, three-fourths cup milk; one full tablespoon sherry wine, one-half cup walnuts, chopped or rolled, not grated, two flat teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Rub butter and sugar. Add yolks, milk, and part of flour, with rest of flour dredge nuts, and add to above, baking in moderate oven three-fourths of an hour. Burnt Leather Cake Caramel: Two-thirds cup of sugar; put on stove and let cook until dark brown; add one-half cup water and cook thick like molasses. Be careful of burning. Cake: One and one-half cups sugar, one-half cup butter, three eggs, separated, one-half cup water, three tablespoons caramel, two teaspoons vanilla, three flat teaspoons Crescent baking powder, mixed in two and one-half cups flour. Beat whites to a froth, and bake in layers. Filling: One and one-half cups of sugar, two-thirds cup water. Boil until it threads. Pour over beaten whites of two eggs. Add one tablespoon caramel and one teaspoon vanilla, and beat until creamy. Caramel Cake No. I Yolks of twelve eggs, one-half pound ground sweet  almonds, twelve tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon flour, small pinch of Crescent yeast powder, one teaspoon vanilla, one teaspoon almond extract, fifteen whites of eggs beaten stiff, add last. Bake slowly one hour. Filling: One and one-half cups sugar, put on stove and dissolve slowly until brown. Add one and one-half cups cold water. Add slowly until dissolved one and one-half cups ground walnuts, one cup hazelnuts, one-half vanilla bean. Boil half an hour and take out vanilla bean. Take three yolks of eggs, beat well; take filling off of stove and beat in eggs. Frosting: One cup sugar dissolved on stove, three tablespoons cold water, boil ten minutes; have white of one egg beaten stiff, add boiled syrup. Beat until smooth. Caramel Cake II Dissolve four tablespoons chocolate in four tablespoons boiling water. Let stand until cool. One-half cup butter, creamed with one and one-half cups sugar; beat yolks of four eggs; add to chocolate one-half cup milk, one and three-fourths cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon vanilla. Beaten whites last. Icing: Two cups brown sugar, two large tablespoons butter, seven tablespoons milk. Boil above together until thick and then beat until creamy. Carrot Cake One-half pound sugar, one-half pound almonds, blanched and chopped, one-half pound carrots, boiled only till they can be grated, juice and grated  rind of one lemon, four eggs. Cream the yolks and sugar; whites beaten to snow, added last; add three or four bitter almonds; beat for one-half hour before adding whites of eggs. Butter spring form and sprinkle with grated zweibach. Bake in a moderate oven one and one-quarter hours, till loosened from pan. Cherry Torte Line spring form with a rich pie crust and fill with the following: Two cups sugar stirred with yolks of four eggs, one cake sweet chocolate, grated, pinch of cinnamon, one-half cup of grated zweibach. Add beaten white of eggs. Add three pints of pitted sour cherries. Sift a little flour over cherries before mixing with other ingredients. Chess Cake Two and one-quarter cups sugar, three-quarters cup melted butter, five eggs, keeping out the whites of three eggs, one and one-half cups raisins and nuts, three tablespoons milk, flavor with vanilla. Mix a rich pie dough and fill muffin tin for 12 cases. Fill the cases and bake. Beat remaining whites very stiff and add two tablespoons powdered sugar. When cakes are baked, put a little on each one and return to oven one minute to brown. Chocolate Sponge Cake I Four eggs, scant one-quarter pound chocolate, one cup milk, two cups sugar, one and one-quarter cups flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Boil chocolate and milk, and cool; cream yolks of eggs and sugar well, as for sponge cake; add mixture of milk and chocolate; then add flour and baking powder, and last the stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Filling: One-half cup milk, one tablespoon sugar, one-half square chocolate; thicken with corn starch, and add vanilla. Icing: One cup granulated sugar, one-half cup water, two squares chocolate, a little vanilla, butter size of a walnut, white of one egg. Boil sugar, chocolate and water until it threads; then add vanilla, and butter. Beat into stiffly beaten white, until ready to spread on cake. Chocolate Cake With Cream and Chocolate Filling One-half cup butter, one and one-half cups granulated sugar, four eggs, white and yolks beaten separately, one-half cup milk, two cups sifted flour, one heaping teaspoon of Crescent baking powder. Dissolve three ounces of unsweetened chocolate in half cup hot water and add to above. Vanilla to taste. Bake in two deep pans. Filling: Two cups granulated sugar, ten tablespoons of milk. Boil exactly five minutes, pour into platter, and beat with silver fork until it creams, spread at once quickly, and then cover with the melted chocolate. Melt three ounces of unsweetened chocolate, and spread quickly over the cream filling. Chocolate Layer Cake Piece of butter size of an egg. To the yolks of four eggs, add one cup sugar. Beat well. Then add one teaspoon vanilla, one teaspoon each cinnamon, cloves, and allspice, three-fourths cup chocolate, five tablespoons boiling water, one cup flour, one and one-half teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Chop small pieces of citron, orange and lemon peel, and a handful of walnuts. Beat whites of eggs stiff, and add last. Bake in two layers. Put jelly or jam between, and chocolate frosting on top. Chocolate Cake I One-half cup butter, one cup granulated sugar, one-half cup milk, three-fourths cup chocolate, dissolved in five tablespoons boiling water; cool; beat four eggs light; add a little at a time to above mass, two cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Moderate oven for baking. Chocolate Cake II Four eggs, two cups pulverized sugar, one-eighth pound chocolate which has been boiled in one cup sweet milk, one cup flour, two scant teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon vanilla. First, cream yolks of eggs with sugar; then add chocolate, flour, baking powder, and lastly, stiff beaten whites of the eggs. Filling: Boil one cup of milk with square of chocolate, enough water to taste, and corn starch to thicken. Boil to a custard, and put between layers with chocolate frosting on top. Chocolate Cake III Cream well one-half cup butter, three-fourths cup brown sugar, three-fourths cup granulated sugar. Add yolks of four eggs, two tablespoons brandy, one cup chopped walnuts, a pinch of salt, one teaspoon vanilla, one-half teaspoon cloves, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon allspice, one cup milk, two cups flour sifted three times, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, three level tablespoons of ground chocolate. Last, add the well beaten whites of four eggs. This makes either a loaf cake, or a three layer cake with any kind of filling. Chocolate Sponge Cake II Mix five yolks of eggs with one cup sugar. Dissolve one-half cup chocolate with four tablespoons boiling water. Cool a little, and add to above; also one cup flour, and one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Beat whites stiff and fold in last. Dutch Chocolate Cake One-half cup butter, one and one-half cups sugar, beaten to a cream. Add yolks of four eggs, one-half cup milk, two and one-half cups flour, two heaping teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Dissolve one cup grated chocolate in one-half cup boiling water and add to the above; whites of the four eggs, stiffly beaten. Bake 40 minutes. Sprinkle top with pulverized sugar. Chocolate Walnut Cake One-third cup butter, one cup sugar, two eggs, one-half cup chocolate, two tablespoons hot water, one and one-half cups flour, one and one-half teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one-half cup milk, one teaspoon vanilla, one-half cup walnuts. Cream the butter, and add sugar gradually, yolks of eggs, milk, and flour mixed and sifted with baking powder. Melt chocolate in hot water, and add to first mixture; beat whites of eggs until stiff and add to first mixture, then add vanilla, and walnuts mixed in a little flour. Bake twenty to thirty minutes, in round layer cake pans. Put between layers and on top of cake, one-half pint whipped cream, sprinkled with walnuts. Chocolate and Fig Layer Cake Beat about four ounces of butter to a cream, adding gradually one cup of granulated sugar; also the well beaten yolks of three eggs, and one-half cup of milk; beat all thoroughly, and add one and three-fourths cups of sifted flour, one-half teaspoon vanilla, and one ounce of melted chocolate. Put the chocolate over boiling water in a cup, and when melted, add it to the cake, and beat thoroughly until the whole is thoroughly mixed and smooth. Now stir in the well beaten whites of the eggs, and one heaping teaspoon of Crescent baking powder. Bake in three jelly cake pans. Bake in quick oven for about twelve minutes. While these are baking prepare the filling: Put one ounce of chocolate, two teaspoons granulated sugar, one-half teaspoon vanilla, and two teaspoons water over the fire to melt. Stir constantly. Beat the whites of two eggs to a stiff froth; add the mixture gradually to the whites of the eggs. Beat continuously for ten minutes. Stand aside until cold. Chop six good sized figs rather fine. Add this to the mixture. When cake is cold, divide the filling into two parts, and spread between the layers. Chocolate Torte Ten eggs, beat whites to a froth; add one cup grated chocolate, one cup sugar, one-half cup bread crumbs soaked in wine, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon each cloves and allspice, one cup almonds grated, small piece citron chopped fine, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon whiskey. Bake one hour in a slow oven. Chocolate Puff Cakes Stir a cup of flour into a cup of water, and half a cup of butter, boiling together. Remove from the fire; beat in an ounce of melted chocolate, and, one at a time, three large eggs. Shape with forcing bag and soft tube. Bake, cut off the tops, and put into each cake a teaspoon of strawberry preserves. Cover with whipped cream, sweetened and flavored. Quick Cinnamon Cake Three-fourths cup sugar, butter size of an egg, two eggs, one cup milk, two cups sifted flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, sugar and cinnamon on top. Stir sugar and butter. Beat eggs together, then add gradually milk and flour. Cocoa Roll Five eggs, five tablespoons granulated sugar, five teaspoons cocoa; beat whites of eggs ten minutes; bake in a flat pan. When done, roll up in a napkin, and let cool, rolled up. When cool, unroll and take napkin off and let roll back. When ready to fill, spread inside with whipped cream and roll up like jelly roll. Put chocolate icing on top and serve cold. Cream Puffs Take one cup of water, one-half cup of butter, and let come to a boil. Add to this one cup of flour, being careful to mix all at one time, to the above. Then take immediately from the stove, and beat five minutes. Now add three eggs, one at a time. Drop in buttered pan, and bake twenty-five minutes. First Filling Beat one-half pint of whipping cream, very stiff; add to this one tablespoon of pulverized sugar, and a few drops of vanilla. Dust top with pulverized sugar. Second Cream Filling Boil two cups milk, adding after beating together two eggs with one cup of sugar. Take a scant cup of flour rubbed to a smooth batter with a little cold water and add, stirring briskly. Add one teaspoon of butter, and a pinch of salt. Boil a few minutes. When cold, flavor with vanilla. Open the cakes at the side with a sharp knife. Put in some of the custard and sprinkle with powdered sugar. Cup Cake One-half cup butter, two cups sugar, beaten very light, five eggs beaten separately, one cup milk, three cups flour, one and one-half teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Flavor to taste. Cream Torte Cake Take whites of twelve eggs, beat until stiff. Beat twelve ounces of sugar into the whites. Take one-half pound of nuts, finely chopped or ground, and the twelve yolks, and beat the two together. Mix yolks in the whites until smooth. Take ten ounces of flour and mix well with the rest; add lemon flavor and mace, and bake from forty-five minutes to one hour. Date Cake No. I One cup dates, stoned and cut in pieces, one teaspoon (scant) of soda, dissolved in a cup of boiling water. Pour water and soda over dates and let stand while mixing the cake. One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, two eggs, one and one-half cups flour. Spices to taste (about one small teaspoon cinnamon, and one-fourth teaspoon cloves. ) Bake forty-five to fifty minutes. Keeps like fruit cake. Date Cake No. II Five eggs separated, one cup granulated sugar, three-fourths cups dates cut fine (rolled in one-half cup flour ), three-fourths cup walnuts, chopped, one-half cup flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, one-fourth teaspoon cloves, one tablespoon lemon juice, one tablespoon hot water. Beat whites stiff and add last. Delicious Cake One and one-half cups sugar, one-half cup butter (heaping), one-half cup milk, two cups flour, two level teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one level teaspoon lemon extract, three eggs. Cream the butter, then add the sugar. Add the whole eggs, one at a time, until all are in; then milk and flour, with the baking powder. Beat well, and bake in moderate oven for one hour. Devil Layer Cake Dark Part: One cup brown sugar, one-half cup milk, one cup chocolate, yolk of one egg. Boil slowly until thick, then let cool, stirring all the time. Cake Part: One cup brown sugar, one-half cup butter, two eggs, two cups flour, one teaspoon soda which is dissolved in a little warm water, one-half cup milk. Cream the sugar and butter; add yolks of eggs, milk, flour, and then whites. Beat together, and stir in dark part. Last, add soda. Filling: One cup granulated sugar, one-half cup water. Boil until it threads. Add one-half pound marshmallows. When dissolved, beat into stiffened white of egg, until smooth. Devil's Cake Piece of butter size of an egg, yolks of three eggs, one cup brown sugar, four tablespoons chocolate, one-half cup milk. Mix well; then add two teaspoons of Crescent baking powder, with one and one-half cups flour; add the whites of three eggs, and bake in three layers. Eggless Cake One tablespoon butter, one cup sugar, one cup sour milk, one scant teaspoon soda, dissolved in a little hot water, one and one-half cups flour, one cup raisins chopped, one teaspoon each of cloves, cinnamon, and allspice; one-half cup chopped walnuts may be added, and improves the cake very much. Bake in a slow oven. Fig Cake Nine eggs, one cup sugar, one cup cracker meal, one-half pound figs, one cup grated chocolate, one teaspoon allspice, one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon cinnamon. Beat yolks of eggs with sugar, very light; add chocolate, then chopped figs, then spices and cracker meal. Lastly, whites of eggs, beaten stiff. Bake forty-five minutes in moderate oven. Foundation Cake Take up lightly two cups of flour, one and one-half cups sugar, and two rounded teaspoons Crescent baking powder, sift three times, make hole in middle, breaking in three eggs, pour over eggs three-fourths cup milk; commence to stir from center; when partially stirred, drop in hot butter the size of a large egg; when thoroughly stirred, add flavoring to taste; then beat hard for five minutes or until creamy. Can be used for either loaf or layer cake. A delicious nut cake may be made by folding one and one-half cups of finely chopped nuts, or a chocolate cake, by adding four tablespoons of grated chocolate just before placing in oven. Fruit Cake No. I Two pounds stoned raisins, two pounds cleaned currants, one pound citron, one-half pound figs, one-half pound dates. Pour over fruit one pint of brandy and let stand over night. Mix one pound butter, two pounds sugar, yolks of twelve eggs, two tablespoons of mace, two tablespoons cinnamon, two tablespoons allspice, two tablespoons nutmeg, one pound browned flour, whites of eggs, one tablespoon soda, dissolved. Bake three hours. Fruit Cake No. II Nine eggs, three and one-half cups flour, two cups sugar, one and one-half cups butter, three-fourths cup whiskey, three-fourths cup blackberry cordial, one-quarter pound chocolate, one-half cup molasses, one tablespoon cinnamon, small tablespoon allspice, a pinch of salt, two level teaspoons Crescent baking powder, four pounds seedless raisins, one pound shelled almonds, one pound shelled walnuts, three slices of crystallized pineapple, some crystallized cherries, one-quarter pound citron, one-half pound figs. Cut fruit not too fine and flour it, using an extra scant cup of flour. This makes two cakes. Before putting cake in oven have the oven very hot, then turn out one burner. After it is in ten minutes, turn the burner low and bake for three hours. Fruit and Nut Ginger Cake One-half cup butter and one-half cup sugar creamed, two eggs, one cup black molasses, pour over this one cup boiling water and stir until cool. One level teaspoon soda in two cups flour, three-fourths of a teaspoon each of allspice, ginger, cloves, cinnamon, and nutmeg, one cup seeded raisins, one cup chopped walnuts. Bake in an oblong pan for thirty minutes. Hazel Nut Torte One pound filberts, one-fourth pound almonds, three tablespoons of grated bread, one lemon, juice and rind, one and one-half cups granulated sugar, eight eggs; beat whites to a froth, stir one-half hour. Moderate oven for baking. German Doughnuts Scald one pint of milk, pour over one pint of flour and let cool. Add the beaten yolks of four eggs, one tablespoon of melted butter, a little cinnamon, one-half cup sugar, the beaten whites of eggs and one cup of flour mixed with two teaspoons Crescent baking powder and more flour if necessary, to make a soft dough. Roll, cut out and fry in hot drippings. One-half the quantity makes quite a lot. Sprinkle with powdered sugar. Infallible Cake Flour two tumblers, sugar one and one-half tumblers, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Sift these all together three times. Make hole in center, break in three eggs, pour in three-fourths of a tumbler of milk, stir a few minutes, take piece of butter size of an egg, melt and pour into above. Also one teaspoon vanilla, beat to a cream. Bake in a moderate oven three-fourths of an hour. Should not brown the first twenty minutes. Krullers Two eggs, one cup sugar, one cup milk, butter size of a walnut, one quart flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, pinch of salt, spices. Roll and cut like a doughnut. Float in boiling butter. Turn when brown and remove as soon as cooked. Lady's Cake One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup sweet milk, yolks of four eggs, one and one-half cups flour, add a little more flour with a heaping teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Bake in a slow oven. Layer Cake I One-half pound sweet butter, one-half pound granulated sugar, eight eggs, one-half pound sweet chocolate melted, one-half pound chopped almonds or nuts, two tablespoons bread crumbs. Cream butter and add sugar and mix well. Add egg yolks, the melted chocolate, the almonds and the beaten whites of eggs. Take a little more than half of this mixture and bake in three layers, using the remaining quantity as a filling. Ice with chocolate. Bake on wax paper. Layer Cake II One-half cup butter, one cup sugar, two eggs, three-fourths cup milk, two cups flour, two level teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon flavoring. Seven Layer Cake Four eggs beaten together very light, one cup sugar, one scant cup flour, one and one-half teaspoons Crescent baking powder, two tablespoons hot water, vanilla and salt to taste. Bake in layers, butter and  flour pans very well. A very hot oven is required for baking. Filling: Make a rich chocolate filling with one and one-half cups milk, two tablespoons chocolate and three of sugar. When this is boiled, pour it over the yolks of four eggs, stirring all the time and adding it gradually; a piece of butter the size of a walnut, a little vanilla. Boil a minute or so, remove from stove and stir in the four whites beaten stiff. Frosting: Three-fourths cup powdered sugar, two tablespoons chocolate and a little boiling water. Lord Baltimore Cake Cream one-half cup butter; add gradually, while beating constantly, one cup sugar. Then add yolks of eight eggs, beaten until thick. Mix and sift one and three-fourths cups bread flour, with three level teaspoons of Crescent baking powder. Add to the first mixture alternately with one-half cup milk. Flavor with two teaspoons vanilla, and beat two minutes. Turn in three buttered tins and bake in a moderate oven. All measurements level. Filling Lord Baltimore Cake For the filling (when ready to spread) one-half cup macaroons powdered, ( macaroons dried in the oven, pounded or rolled), one-fourth cup blanched and chopped almonds, one-fourth cup chopped pecans, twelve candied cherries cut in small pieces, two teaspoons lemon juice, one and one-half teaspoons vanilla, one teaspoon orange extract. This is to be added to a boiled frosting between the layers. For the top decorate in any manner desired, after spreading with plain frosting, candied cherries and angelica. Marble Cake One-half cup butter and one cup powdered sugar, beaten to a cream; then add one-half cup sweet milk, one and one-half cups flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, and lastly, whites of four eggs beaten stiff. Take five tablespoons of grated chocolate, wet with warm milk and flavor with vanilla. Add to this one cup of the batter. Also add to the white batter a little vanilla. Butter your cake form and put in a layer of white batter, and put here and there some of the dark batter, then cover with the white, dot with the dark until all the batter is used up. Bake in a slow oven one hour. Frost with chocolate icing. Icing: Take one cup of sugar, one-fourth cake chocolate, grated, two tablespoons hot water, the white of one egg. Cook a little more than one-fourth of the sugar together with the chocolate, and water, until smooth. Have the egg and remainder of the sugar beaten together, and pour the hot mixture into them. Beat well, and spread over the cake at once. Marshmallow Cake One cup chocolate, one cup brown sugar, one-half cup milk, yolk of one egg, one teaspoon vanilla. Cook slowly ten minutes, in double boiler; set away to cool. One cup brown sugar, one-half cup butter, two eggs (beat separately), one-half cup milk, two cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Beat all together and stir in above mixture. Bake in three layers. Filling: Two cups white sugar, ten tablespoons hot water, one-half teaspoon cream of tartar. Boil till very thick; then drop in thirty-two marshmallows, and let boil again very slowly for a few minutes. Beat the whites of three eggs very stiff. Pour in the syrup and beat well, then add half a cup chopped nuts and beat well. Set away until cold. Let cake and filling stand several hours before filling. Pour melted unsweetened chocolate over top. Matzo Almond Cake Beat yolks of eight eggs light with two small teacups of sugar. Pinch of salt, grated rind of one lemon. Beat till a thick batter. Sift one large cup matzo meal as fine as possible with one-half teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Add the juice of one lemon, one cup grated almonds, three tablespoons cold water, and add beaten whites. Moderate oven. Matzo Sponge Cake Eight eggs, one cup sugar, three-fourth cup matzos flour, juice of one lemon. Beat yolks of eggs and sugar first. Add beaten whites last. Macaroon Torte Yolks of five eggs and one cup sugar, beaten well. Roll five large soda crackers to a powder, and add to it three-fourths cup chopped walnuts and one-half teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Beat the above well, and add the beaten whites of the five eggs. Bake in a spring form half an hour, in a slow oven. Cover top with strawberry jam; then one-quarter of a pound macaroons broken up, and over all a half pint of unsweetened whipped cream. Orange Layer Cake One-half cup butter, one and one-half cups sugar, one cup milk, whites four eggs, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon vanilla, two cups (or a little over) of flour; it depends upon the size of the whites of the eggs. Use the whites and yolks of the eggs separately, beating the whites very stiff, and adding last of all. Bake in a rather quick oven. Filling: Grated rind of an orange, also the juice, juice of half a lemon, whites of three eggs, one and one-fourth cups sugar. Beat the whites very stiff; then add the sugar, juices and rind. Thicken on the stove, in a double boiler, and when partly cool spread on the cake. Mocha Cake Five yolks beaten with one cup sugar, one and one-half teaspoons mocha extract, one cup flour with one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Beat whites stiff. Bake in a moderate oven in two layers. Filling: Beat a half pint of cream stiff, and add one tablespoon mocha extract. Sugar to taste. Icing: One cup confectioners' sugar, one and one-half tablespoons mocha extract, one tablespoon cream, or a little more to make it smooth. Spread on cake. Nut Torte Yolks of six eggs beaten light with one cup sugar. Add one cup toasted bread crumbs, which have been soaked in a wine glass full of wine for one hour. To this add three-fourths cup chopped almonds, a little citron, one lemon rind, and lastly the beaten whites. Either bake in two layers or in a spring form, and if the latter, cool well before cutting in two. Cream Filling: Boil one-half cup milk. Add the beaten yolks of two eggs, one-half cup sugar, a pinch of corn starch, and when cold, add about a half cup of chopped walnuts. Icing: One-half pound powdered sugar, grated rind of one orange, one tablespoon boiling water and sufficient orange juice to make right consistency for spreading. Mocha Cream Cake One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, creamed; whites of five or six eggs, three-fourths cup milk, two cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, and flavor with vanilla. Filling: Cream one-fourth cup of sweet butter with three-fourth cup of powdered sugar; then add yolks of three eggs, and cream with the rest one-half cup strong black coffee. Potato Layer Cake One-half cup granulated sugar beaten with yolks of four eggs, one-half cup sugar beaten with whites of eggs. Then fold whites with the yolks. Add one-half cup potato flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon of essence of vanilla, a pinch of salt. Sift the flour, after it has been measured. Bake in layers and fill with Charlotte russe, or bake as a whole cake. Potato Cake One cup butter, two cups sugar, one-half cup milk, one-half cup chocolate, one-half cup walnuts (chopped), two cups sifted flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, four eggs, one cup mashed potatoes , one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon cinnamon, a little nutmeg. Bake slowly for one hour. Potato Caramel Cake Two cups white sugar, two-thirds cup butter, two cups flour, one cup hot mashed potatoes , one-half cup sweet milk, one-half cup chocolate, one cup chopped walnuts, four eggs, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon each of cloves, cinnamon, and a little nutmeg. Cream the butter, sugar, and yolks of eggs. Add milk, mashed potatoes , spices, and chocolate. Sift baking powder with flour, and add to the mixture; and last, the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs. This makes two brick-shaped loaves. Pistachio Cake One dozen eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately. Add to the yolks, beating all the time, twelve tablespoons sugar, one teaspoon pistachio flavoring, three-fourths pound or two cups walnut, grated. Add tablespoon at a time (beating well), one cup pistachio nuts grated; add whites last. Bake slowly. Bake in spring form, and cut in three layers. Filling: Beat a pint of cream stiff, sweeten, flavor with pistachio essence, and color green. Pistachio Cake No. II Make a layer cake with whites of nine eggs, two cups of granulated sugar, three heaping cups of flour, sifted four times, one cup butter, one cup milk, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon lemon juice. Filling: Between the layers, put a cream filling made of yolk of five eggs, one-half cup sugar, one tablespoon corn starch, two cups boiling milk. Stir over the fire until thick; then flavor with a little orange water and a few drops of bitter almonds to give it a pistachio flavor, and color a delicate green with confectioners' color. Tint the icing green also and cover with chopped pistachio nuts. Chocolate Potato Cake Two-thirds cup butter, two cups sugar, cream. Add one cup hot mashed potatoes (don't stir), one-half cup milk, four eggs, beaten; one cup grated chocolate, one cup chopped walnuts, one cup flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Bake in a moderate oven for an hour or more. Pound Cake Three-fourths pound butter, beaten to a cream with three-fourths pound granulated sugar, for one-half hour; nine eggs, whites beaten to snow; three-fourths pound flour, dried in the oven, sifted and mixed with one teaspoon of Crescent baking powder; one small glass of brandy, a few drops of bitter almond, and essence of lemon. Bake in moderate oven for one hour. French Pound Cake One cup butter, two cups sugar, beaten to a cream. Add yolks of four eggs, one cup milk; stir in well three even cups flour, three even teaspoons Crescent baking powder, a little lemon rind grated, one teaspoon vanilla. Add well beaten whites of eggs last. Bake in a slow oven from three-fourths to one hour. Prune Cake Mix well, one cup granulated sugar, two-thirds cup butter. Mix two cups boiled dry prunes cut fine, one and one-half cups flour. Add to butter and sugar, one whole egg and two yolks, keeping two whites for icing. Add one teaspoon soda, dissolved in four tablespoons sour milk, one teaspoon allspice, one teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon nutmeg. Mix all together and bake in two layers. Icing: Beat whites a little, and mix with powdered sugar. Put between layers and on top. Rich Cake Five eggs, one and one-fourth cups butter, one-half cup cold water, two and one-half even cups flour, sifted with two even teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Butter and sugar, creamed well. Eggs beaten together and slowly added to creamed butter and sugar; then add a cup of flour, then the water, and lastly the other cup and a half of flour, and vanilla essence to taste. A little salt. Bake in a slow oven. Rum Cake Nine yolks of eggs beaten with one cup of sugar (powdered) very stiff, one teaspoon each of cloves and cinnamon, rind of one lemon grated, one cooking spoon rum, a pinch of salt, and beat. Add one cup of honey-cake, grated. (Stale Lebkuchen may be used), one-half cup crackers (grated). Beat whites very stiff and fold in slowly. Bake for half an hour. Frosting: One cup of sifted powdered sugar, two whites of eggs, well beaten; adding sugar gradually and one large tablespoon grated chocolate, one large tablespoon of rum. Cook in double boiler until thickened. Put on cake, ornamenting with blanched almonds. Southern Pound Cake Rub one and one-half cups of flour with three-fourths cup of butter and one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Cream yolks of five eggs with one and one-half cups powdered sugar. Beat the above until a smooth mixture. Add the stiffly beaten whites of the five eggs, and one teaspoon vanilla. Bake in a moderate oven. Spanish Bun One cup butter, two cups brown sugar, yolks of four eggs, whites of two (other whites to be used for frosting), one cup sour milk, one teaspoon each vanilla, cloves, and cinnamon, one half teaspoon nutmeg, two cups flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Sprinkle one cup of chopped nuts on top of cake. Cake to be baked in long pan. Frosting: One cup brown sugar, two whites of eggs, vanilla, cinnamon, allspice and cloves. Put on cake before baking. Bake in slow oven. Sponge Cake No. I To the well beaten whites of five eggs, add one cup of granulated sugar. Then add the beaten yolks to that. Add gradually, one heaping cup of sifted flour, one small teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Pinch of salt. Vanilla if desired. Sponge Cake No. 2 Separate three eggs, take beaten yolks and gradually add one cup granulated sugar. Beat well. Add three tablespoons water to above. Add slowly, one cup sifted flour to which one teaspoon Crescent baking powder has been added. Add teaspoon vanilla. Lastly, fold in the well-beaten egg whites, and a pinch of salt. Bake in a slow oven from twenty-five to thirty-five minutes. Simple Cake One-half cup butter, one and one-half cups sugar, cream well, one-half cup milk, beaten yolks of four eggs, two cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon each of lemon and vanilla extract, and the beaten whites. Sunshine Cake Whites of seven eggs, yolks of five, one cup fine granulated sugar, one cup flour, measured after sifting five times. Scant one-third teaspoon cream of tartar. Flavor to taste. Beat yolks till thick, and set aside; add a pinch of salt to the whites, and whip to a foam; add the cream of tartar and whip until very stiff; then sugar and mix well; next the yolks, and beat in; then flavoring, and lastly, the flour, and fold lightly through. Bake in tube pan in a moderate oven from forty to sixty minutes. Invert to cool. Walnut Cake No. 1 One cup of butter, creamed with two cups of sugar. Add gradually four yolks, and one whole egg, one cup of milk, three cups of flour with three teaspoons of Crescent baking powder, one cup walnuts (chopped), one cup raisins (seeded and chopped), then the whites of the four eggs, whipped to a stiff froth. Flavor. Bake one hour or a little longer. Walnut Cake No. 2 One-half cup butter, one cup sugar, stirred to a cream; three eggs, separated, one and one-half cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one-half cup milk, one cup chopped walnuts, and stiffly beaten whites. Bake in a moderate oven. Walnut Cake No. 3 One and one-half pounds walnuts weighed in shell, chop or grind fine; ten yolks well beaten with one cup sugar; one-half lemon, juice and rind; one tablespoon cracker flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Beat whites stiff and add. White Cake No. 1 One-half cup butter, two cups sugar, one cup milk, three cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, whites of six eggs, beaten well, three tablespoons whiskey or brandy. White Cake No. 2 One-half cup butter, one and one-half cups sugar, two teaspoons of Crescent baking powder mixed with two cups flour, one-half cup milk, one-fourth cup corn starch, whites of six eggs, vanilla. Beat butter and sugar to a cream; add corn starch, dissolved in a little of the milk. Then the flour. Lastly the whites. Beat well after whites have been added. Easily Made White Cake No. 3 Three cups sifted flour, one and one-half cups sugar, three-fourths cup sweet milk (scant), one-half cup butter, two rounded teaspoons of Crescent baking powder, whites of six eggs, well beaten. Flavor with lemon or almond to taste. Bake one hour in slow oven. Cream sugar and butter, then add milk and flour gradually, beating well all the time. With the last of the flour add baking powder, and fold in the whites of the eggs, after everything else is in. Be sure eggs are well mixed. ADDITIONAL RECIPES We recommend the use of Fleischmann's yeast exclusively. COFFEE CAKE OR KUCHEN Coffee Cake Put one quart of flour in a large bowl. Mix yeast cake with about a cup of warm milk. Make a hole in center of flour and stir above in. Let rise. Have kitchen slightly warm. Meanwhile beat one-half cup sugar and one-half cup butter very light. Add two eggs, one at a time and lemon rind, if a flavor is desired. When flour and yeast are raised enough, add above mixture, and enough warm milk to make a consistency that can be rolled in the morning. Beat very well until dough blisters. Then cover to keep warm, and let rise until next morning. Schnecken Take part of dough, roll out on board, put small flakes of butter over it; then sprinkle granulated sugar, raisins, a little cinnamon and chopped walnuts. Roll dough up carefully, and cut in pieces about an inch thick, or larger if so desired. Put brown sugar and butter in the bottom of gem pans. Put one schnecken in each. Put a little melted butter on top and set away, and when light enough, bake. Filled Coffee Cake Take a piece of dough, roll out, flake with butter and sprinkle a little granulated sugar. Fold over, back and forth and roll out again. Flake with butter in the same way. Fold over and roll again. Flake again with butter, adding walnuts beside the sugar. Roll out one-half inch thick. Paint with butter, sprinkle with sugar, walnuts and cinnamon. Cut in square pieces and put in pan to rise. Plain Bund Kuchen Butter size of an egg, stirred with a half cup of sugar; two whole eggs, vanilla essence, or lemon rind; then add about two cups of coffee cake dough. Beat light. Put in bund form, which has been well greased, and some almonds placed around it. Let rise until light and then bake. Doughnuts Roll dough about a half inch thick. Cut out with doughnut cutter, and let rise till light enough on floured board, and then fry in swimming fat. Berliners Roll dough about half an inch thick, cut round. Place preserves in the center of one-half, brush edges with white of egg, and cover with the other half. Press edges neatly. Place on floured board. Let rise until light, and fry brown in swimming  fat. Turn Overs Roll dough thin, cut in squares, put jelly in center, paint edges with white of an egg, fold over well like an envelope,  press down well so jelly remains inside. Paint with butter or egg. Put in pan, and when light, bake. German Fruit Cakes Apple, peach, apricot or other German fruit cakes, can be easily made by using the raised dough. Roll out thin and allow it to rise. Then arrange the fruit on it, dust well with sugar and cinnamon, and just before baking use an egg, well beaten, with a little cream, and flavored with vanilla, and pour over the top. For apple  cake, currants may be scattered over. Black Coffee Cake Cream a slice of butter one-half inch thick with one cup of sugar. Drop in two eggs, one at a time. Add one-half cup black coffee, one and one-half cups of flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Put in square pan, cover with chopped nuts, sugar, and cinnamon. Rum Bund One cake yeast, one-half pound flour, five ounces butter, four eggs, one tablespoon sugar. Soak yeast in one-fourth cup warm milk with one-half cup of the sifted flour. Set aside to rise. Meanwhile beat four eggs for about ten minutes; then add sugar, beat again; then add butter which has been slightly melted, beat again; then add rind of one lemon, raised yeast and flour. Butter ring form, put blanched almonds on the bottom, and put in dough; let rise until light, and bake between thirty and forty minutes in oven, moderate at first. Syrup to Pour Over Boil one cup granulated sugar with one-half cup water. When cool, add rum and sherry to taste. When cake is baked, pour part of the above over it, and before sending to the table, pour the rest. Excellent Coffee Cake One-half cup butter creamed with one cup sugar, two eggs, one cup milk, two heaping cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Filling: One cup sugar (brown preferred), one tablespoon butter, two tablespoons flour, one-half cup chopped walnuts, one teaspoon cinnamon. Put about two-thirds of the mixture in a tube pan; then place filling over it, and then, the rest of the mixture, and bake. ADDITIONAL RECIPES FILLINGS AND ICINGS FOR CAKES Boiled Icing One cup powdered sugar, whites of two eggs, three tablespoons boiling water. Boil sugar and water, without stirring, till it hairs; then pour very slowly on to the beaten whites, stirring all the time until it creams. Add flavoring. Maple Sugar Frosting One-half pound maple sugar, one cup granulated sugar, and enough water to melt. Boil the sugar until it strings from the spoon; then pour it over the beaten whites, and beat with a Dover beater. Do not stir the sugar while cooking. Caramel Frosting One cup powdered sugar, one cup of cream, one-half cup butter, one teaspoon vanilla. Boil sugar, cream and butter together until it hairs, stirring only as much as will keep it from sticking; take from the fire, and beat until it is thick and creamy, and will spread without running. Add vanilla, and spread on cake. Lemon Filling One cup sugar, three teaspoons corn starch, juice of one orange, grated rind and juice of one lemon. Grate the rind of the lemon and add the juice, also the orange juice; stir with this the corn starch and sugar, and lastly add one cup of boiling water. Boil until thick enough to spread, stirring constantly to prevent burning. When cool, spread on cake. Chocolate Filling No. 1 Eight tablespoons chocolate, one-half cup milk, one and one-half cups sugar. Melt chocolate, and stir sugar and milk together. Boil ten minutes, then put on large platter and stir until cool enough to put on cake. Flavor. Chocolate Filling No. 2 Five tablespoons chocolate, one cup sugar, one egg. Mix five tablespoons of grated chocolate, with enough cream or milk to moisten; add the sugar and beaten egg, and boil until thick. Remove from stove, beat until cool; add one teaspoon of vanilla flavoring, and spread on cake. Fig Filling Chop eight figs into small pieces, cover with water and two tablespoons sugar; let simmer until thick like jelly. Then use in cake. Orange Filling Juice of one orange, grated peel of one-half, one teaspoon corn starch, and sugar to taste. Put juice, grated peel, and sugar on the stove to boil. Then stir in the corn starch, thinned with water; after it has thickened let cool, and spread on cake. Apple and Lemon Filling One apple (grated), one lemon, one cup sugar, one egg. Boil five minutes. If the apples are small use two. Marshmallow Filling Boil one cup of sugar and two tablespoons of water until it ropes. Have marshmallows heating in a double boiler; add the syrup to them, then the well beaten whites of two eggs. If a thick filling is desired, use one pound of marshmallows. If a thinner one, use less. COOKIES Almond Rings Three-fourths pound butter, one-half pound sugar, four whole eggs, one-half pound almonds blanched, essence. Flour enough to hold together. Use one-half of the almonds in dough, grated. The other half cut in pieces and mix with the sugar that has been rolled out. Paint cakes and strew with almonds and sugar. Take small pieces of the dough, roll in rings or any shape desired, and bake. Aniseed Cookies Four whole eggs, one-half pound sugar, boiled to a light custard. When cold, add one-half pound flour, and some aniseed. Drop from spoon on pan. Let stand four hours or more, then bake in very moderate oven. Baltimore Sand Tarts Two pounds flour sifted three times, two pounds granulated sugar, one pound of butter, six or eight eggs, one pound almonds, blanched and cut in pieces. Cream, butter, and sugar together; beat the eggs well, reserve the whites of one or two eggs for the top of the cakes. Add the beaten eggs to the creamed butter and sugar, and add the flour gradually. If the dough is too stiff to roll well, add a little milk. Flour the board, and roll the dough very thin. Cut out in any shape desired and place in buttered pans to bake. Then put a little white of an egg, broken, not beaten, on the top of each cake, together with three almonds, and a little sprinkle of granulated sugar. Bake in a quick oven, first at the bottom and then on top to brown them. Bow Knots Beat two eggs very light, one-half cup sugar, one tablespoon of cream, one tablespoon melted butter, one-eighth teaspoon soda, one-half teaspoon cream of tartar, one-fourth teaspoon each of salt and cinnamon. Flour to stiffen. Roll out in shape of a pencil, and tie in knot. Dust with powdered sugar and fry in deep pan. Cinnamon Stars One and one-half pounds powdered sugar, whites of eight eggs, one-half pound shelled almonds, one lemon, cinnamon, cloves. Beat whites of eggs very stiff. Add one and one-half cups sugar, juice of lemon; beat until very thick. Add grated almonds with one-half teaspoon of cloves, two tablespoons cinnamon, one tablespoon kirschwasser. Dust board with powdered sugar, roll out one-half inch thick. Cut out with mold. Let stand over night in a cold place. Bake a little slower than bread heat. Ice them after baking. Cocoanut Biscuit One-half pound sugar (powdered), one-half pound cocoanut, three whites of eggs. Cook altogether for five minutes; when cool, form in small cakes. Bake in moderate oven. Cookies I One-fourth pound sugar, one-fourth pound butter, one-half pound flour, lemon rind, one whole egg, two yolks. Stir butter and sugar well; add eggs, beating the one white; then flour. Dip cookies first in white of egg, then in granulated sugar. Bake in buttered pans. Cookies II Two eggs, not separated (beat light), one cup dark brown sugar, one-half glass brandy, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, a little allspice, about four tablespoons chocolate, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one-half cup flour, salt, raisins, nuts, and citron, about a cup. Bake about twenty minutes. Cookies III Seven heaping cups of flour sifted with two level teaspoons Crescent baking powder. Rub into this one pound of butter and a good pinch of salt, two cups sugar, a little grated nutmeg, fine chopped rind of lemon, the well-beaten yolks of five eggs, and last the whites of five eggs. Mix all this with the hands to a stiff dough. Roll out and cut, not too thick, and brush with an egg, and sprinkle with chopped nuts or cinnamon and sugar mixed. Cookies IV One and one-fourth pounds butter, three-fourths pound sugar, one egg beaten with one teaspoon milk, two pounds flour well sifted; roll out and cut in shapes. Brush with egg and sprinkle sugar and chopped almonds on top. Cheese Straws Six ounces flour, two tablespoons cream, three ounces grated cheese, two tablespoons butter, salt and a dash of cayenne pepper. Sift flour on pastry board, and make a hole in the center. Into this put the cream, cheese, butter, salt, and pepper. Mix all these, with the tips of the fingers, to a firm paste. Knead well, and roll out one-eighth of an inch thick. With a sharp knife or jagger, cut six inches long and one-quarter of an inch wide. Lay the strips carefully on a well buttered tin, and bake them straw color, in a moderate oven. Chocolate Cookies One cup brown sugar, one cup white sugar, three sticks chocolate, one tablespoon whiskey, four eggs, three cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon each of all kinds of spices. Beat the yolks of the eggs with the sugar. Add chocolate, syrup, whiskey, spices, and then the flour, and last the beaten whites over which the baking powder has been sifted. When stiff enough to roll, brush tops of cookies with beaten egg. Drop Cookies Three eggs, two cups brown sugar, one cup butter, level teaspoon soda, dissolved in two tablespoons boiling water, one cup walnuts chopped, three cups flour. Date Cookies One-fourth pound dates pitted and cut in half, one-fourth pound almonds blanched and cut lengthwise, one-fourth pound granulated sugar. Whites of two eggs, beaten very stiff. Put dates, almonds, and sugar in bowl together and mix well. Then add beaten whites. Grease tins very well. Sprinkle with cracker dust to prevent sticking. Bake in hot oven. Ginger Snaps One cup molasses (black), one cup granulated sugar, one cup butter, one-half cup water, one and one-half teaspoons ginger, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon cloves; one level teaspoon soda, mix in the water; little nutmeg, salt. Flour enough to roll very thin. German Cookies Yolks of one dozen hard boiled eggs, one and one-half pounds butter, one-half pound granulated sugar. Enough flour to make a nice soft dough, two teaspoons of ammonia powder (mix with flour ), one teaspoon lemon extract. Cream the butter and sugar; then add the grated yolks of the eggs; then two raw eggs, and lastly, flour, and flavoring. Roll out quite thin. Cut into different forms, and bake in moderate oven until golden brown. Hermits Two cups brown sugar, one-half pound butter, three eggs, one teaspoon each of cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, one-half teaspoon soda, three tablespoons of sweet milk, one cup washed raisins, one cup of chopped nuts, about two and one-half cups of flour. Fine Cookies One-half roll butter, cut up and rub with the hand till all the water runs off, then grate in three yolks of hard boiled eggs, then beat up four whole eggs with a cup and one-fourth of sugar; beat it like cream or sponge cake, then pour all of this in the butter. Take a couple of bitter almonds, and two or three cardamon seeds; pound all fine, and put it in. Then take two cups of flour or more, if needed, with one heaping teaspoon of Crescent baking powder, work all together; then take one drop of lemon oil, bring to a nice soft dough, not too stiff. Brush top with the yolks of eggs, chopped almonds, cinnamon, and sugar. Individual Cup Cakes Three-fourths cup butter, one and one-half cups sugar (creamed together), four egg yolks, three-fourths cup milk, two cups flour (added alternately), two level teaspoons Crescent baking powder, rind of one lemon, one teaspoon vanilla. Whites, beaten to snow, added last. Bake in muffin pans. Also nice scooped out and filled with fresh berries and whipped cream. Kisses Four whites of eggs beaten very stiff, one-half pound sugar, a little vanilla essence. Mix quickly and bake from twenty to thirty minutes, in a quite moderate oven. Lebkuchen Two cups brown sugar, four eggs (beaten), three tablespoons chocolate, one-half teaspoon cloves, one-fourth teaspoon allspice, one teaspoon cinnamon, one wine glass honey or syrup, one-half cup almonds or walnuts (chopped), salt, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, two and one-half cups flour, sifted twice. Icing: One cup sugar, one-half cup water. Boil till it threads. Spread on cake while hot. Little Walnut Cakes Two cups grated walnuts, one cup granulated sugar, whites of three eggs, beaten stiff. Mix well, and drop on buttered tins. Bake slowly. Little Cakes One-half pound almonds chopped and mixed with one cup granulated sugar on stove till brown. Mix five whites of eggs with one cup powdered sugar for a half hour. Add nuts when cool, and stir in. Bake in a moderate oven. Drop on sugared papers and bake slowly. Chocolate Macaroons Three whites of eggs, beaten stiff; add slowly three-fourths cup sugar, and one cup grated chocolate; one cup walnuts, chopped. Drop from a spoon on buttered pan, and bake slowly about twenty minutes. Linze Torte One-fourth pound butter, one-fourth pound sugar, three-fourths pound flour, one-half teaspoon Crescent baking powder, one egg, three or four tablespoons cream, four tablespoons grated chocolate, four tablespoons chopped walnuts, one-half teaspoon allspice and cinnamon, grated rind of one lemon, pinch of salt. Beat butter to a cream. Add sugar, egg, chocolate, walnuts, spices, cream and flour. Roll about one-half inch thick, line a couple of pans with the paste on which spread any kind of jam. Cut the remainder of the  paste in strips and form a netting over the jam. Bake in a moderate oven about one-half hour. When warm, cut into small squares. Macaroons One pound granulated sugar, one pound grated almonds, five whites of eggs, one level teaspoon each cloves, allspice, and cinnamon. Beat whites stiff; add sugar slowly, spices and almonds. If whites are large, take all the almonds; if small, a little less. Paste is quite stiff. Shape with a teaspoon. Bake in a moderate oven, until hard on top. Meringues Whites of three eggs, beaten stiff, after which fold in carefully a large cup granulated sugar. Then bake on the bottom of a bread pan, which has been covered with paper dusted with sugar. Nut Bar Beat one egg with one cup brown sugar. Pinch of salt; then add one cup of chopped walnuts, one tablespoon grated chocolate, six tablespoons sifted flour with a little, very little, baking soda. Bake for twenty minutes. When cold, cut in squares. Oatmeal Cookies Three cups raw rolled oats, two cups flour, three-fourths cup sugar, three-fourths cup melted butter, three-fourths cup molasses, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon soda. Pfeffer Nusse Sift together one pound each of flour and powdered sugar, half a grated nutmeg, one tablespoon of cinnamon, half a teaspoon each of mace and cloves, two level teaspoons Crescent baking powder, a few grains of salt. Add a grated lemon rind and fine chopped citron. Mix with five beaten eggs. Shape into balls and bake in a quick oven. Plain Cookies One slice butter about one-half inch thick (melted), two eggs, one cup sugar, three cups flour, two teaspoons Crescent baking powder, one teaspoon extract. Beat light the eggs and sugar, to which add the melted butter, extract, three cups of flour into which put the baking powder. Brush top of cookies with beaten egg and sprinkle with sugar, cinnamon, and chopped almonds. Raisin Drops Three eggs, one cup butter, one and one-half cups granulated sugar, four cups flour, one cup raisins, and four teaspoons cinnamon. Mix the cinnamon with the flour, and beat into the creamed butter. Beat the sugar with the eggs and then put all together, beating as little as possible. Drop by the teaspoonful in rough cakes a little apart on a buttered baking pan. Sponge Drops Yolks of three eggs beaten light with scant cup of granulated sugar, then add a pinch of salt, then the whites of the eggs beaten to a froth, two teaspoons of vanilla, and one cup of flour, one teaspoon Crescent baking powder. Drop from teaspoon on bottom of a well buttered pan, and bake in good oven. S's Three-fourths pound butter, creamed, and add three-fourths cup sugar, nine yolks of eggs; stir well; one and one-fourth pounds flour, rind of lemon, one tablespoon kirschwasser. Let stand over night. Roll a little at a time. Cut a strip and form an S. White of one egg, a little sugar and chopped almonds for top. Walnut Wafers One pint of shelled walnuts, one pint of brown sugar, four eggs, six heaping tablespoons of flour, and a pinch of salt. Beat the four eggs well; add the sugar, and beat again; then mix in the flour, and lastly the walnuts which have been chopped in medium sized pieces. Drop from a spoon and bake. Should the batter be too thin, add a little more flour. ICE CREAM AND FROZEN DAINTIES "I always thought cold victuals nice, my choice would be vanilla ice." To have a successful ice cream one must be careful in packing. Care should be taken that the pieces of ice are not too large, small pieces making a smoother and more velvety cream. The proportions usually used are three (3) parts of ice, to one (1) of salt. Equal portions of ice and salt are used for freezing frappes. Freezing usually increases the bulk, the can should never be more than three-fourths (3/4) full. Begin by turning the crank slowly in freezing, and increase the motion as the mixture freezes. As the ice melts, more should be added, also salt. The water should never be drawn until after the mixture is frozen solid. Then remove the dasher, and pack solidly with a spoon. Cover with a waxpaper, and cork well. Draw off the water, re-pack with ice and salt, and cover well to protect from the air, and stand away for at least two hours to ripen. When frozen mixtures are to be bricked or molded avoid freezing too hard. Pack mixtures solidly in molds, cover with waxed paper. Re-pack in ice and salt four parts of ice to one of salt. Biscuit Tortoni One pint whipped cream, sweeten and flavor, one half pound macaroons pounded and mixed with yolk of one egg; mix lightly together. Pour into mold and pack in ice. Caramel Ice Cream One pint boiling milk, yolks of four eggs, one small cup granulated sugar, one teaspoon corn starch. Cook until thick as custard. Melt three-fourths cup caramel sugar in skillet, pour in custard. Then let stand and cool. When cool, add one quart cream and beaten whites of four eggs. Freeze. Three of a Kind Three lemons, three bananas, three oranges, three cups sugar, three pints water. Strain orange and lemon juice, put bananas through sieve, boil water and sugar; add all together and freeze. Delmonico Pudding Soak one box gelantine in one-fourth cup water for one-half hour. Mix this with two cups milk and add a pinch of baking soda to keep from curdling. Let boil a few minutes and remove from fire. Stir in yolks of four eggs, one cup sugar, and boil again, stirring constantly until thick. When cool add beaten whites, and one-half wine glass sherry. Line buttered mold with crystallized fruit and macaroons. Put on ice to freeze, and serve with beaten cream. Frozen Pudding One pint cream, one-quarter of a pound macaroons, one-half cup almonds, one-half cup candied cherries, one-half cup candied pineapple. Beat cream stiff, blanch nuts, chop fruit, toast and roll fine the macaroons, add all to the cream, sugar to taste; flavor with pistachio. Freeze three hours in mold. Frozen Cream Pudding Whip one quart cream until half thick. Roll twelve stale lady fingers, twelve macaroons, and add these to the cream; sweeten to taste. Add one  wine glass of sherry and a little Maraschino wine. Freeze three hours. Jag Pudding Chop fine one-half pound raisins, one-half pound blanched almonds, one-fourth pound citron. Boil until smooth the following: One quart milk, three eggs, three tablespoons flour, five tablespoons sugar. Add four tablespoons of brandy (when taken off the stove.) Pour hot custard over chopped fruits and let stand over night. Next day, pour into freezer and when partly frozen, add one quart very rich cream beaten light. Nesselrode Pudding Put one-half pound of shelled and skinned chestnuts in cold water and let boil until very tender. Then press through a sieve. Beat yolks of five eggs with one-half pound sugar until light, add mashed chestnuts, and stir in one pint sweet cream. Put on to boil in double boiler. Add few grains salt and stir until mixture begins to boil. Remove from fire and set aside to cool. When cool, put chestnut cream in freezer and freeze ten minutes; then add one pint stiffly whipped cream with two tablespoons powdered sugar; then add one-half pound crystallized fruit that has been previously cut into pieces. Flavor with vanilla. Freeze a little longer; pack in pudding form in ice and rock salt for two hours. Orange Frappe One quart water, one pint orange juice, one pint sugar, juice of two lemons. Make a syrup by boiling water and sugar twenty minutes; add fruit juice, cool, strain and freeze. For freezing, use equal parts of rock salt and ice. Strawberry Frozen Pudding Juice of two baskets of strawberries which have been well sugared. To one pint of Charlotte Russe cream add the beaten whites of two eggs; add lady fingers and macaroon crumbs; sugar to taste, and freeze three hours. Chestnut Pudding Candied fruits, Maraschino cherries, marrons (preserved in brandy ), three eggs, sugar, cream. Soak a half cup of the candied fruits and a few Maraschino cherries over night: Puree half cup of the chestnuts --marrons--and cut up the other half small. Beat yolks of three eggs with one-quarter cup sugar and a pinch of salt. Add brandy from the bottle of chestnuts, and put all this in a double boiler until thick; let cool, then add the pureed chestnuts to this. Whip three-fourths cup of cream very thick, add egg mixture and the candied fruits -- fruits drained--pack in ice and salt about four hours. Only use the French marrons and the finest Maraschino cherries. Macaroon Pudding One quarter of a pound macaroons, one quarter of a pound of almonds, both rolled fine; yolks of three eggs. Beat yolks with one cup sugar; add one pint cream, beaten stiff; vanilla to flavor one-half package Knox gelantine dissolved; lastly, the beaten whites. Stir well and mold, pack in ice and salt from four to six hours. Serve with chocolate sauce. Chocolate Sauce: Melt two ounces Baker's chocolate over teakettle; add to it half cup sugar; half cup milk, piece of butter size of walnut, a little vanilla. Boil all together few minutes. Then add small glass of brandy. Pineapple Mousse One can sliced pineapple, one box gelantine , one-half pint cold water, one pint whipped cream. Cover gelantine with the water; let soak one-half hour, then stir over boiling water until dissolved. Whip cream very stiff; sweeten to taste. Cut pineapple in small pieces; add to gelantine . Stir this over a bowl of ice until it begins to congeal. Add to the cream and put into molds; pack in ice; when ready to serve, decorate with whipped cream. Maple Mousse Four eggs, one pint cream, one cup maple syrup. Beat yolks of eggs, then add the syrup, put in double boiler and heat thoroughly. When cold, add beaten whites. Then the whipped cream. Pour into mold and pack for three or four hours. Cafe Parfait One pint cream, one cup sugar, one-half cup strong clear coffee. Mix, chill and whip with a whip churn. Take the froth off and put into mold. Pack in ice and freeze two hours. Chocolate Parfait Beat yolks of five eggs until very light. Add two tablespoons sugar. Put in a double boiler and stir until thick. Turn into bowl and add three tablespoons melted chocolate. Beat well and then add one pint stiffly beaten cream. Pack in ice three hours. Pineapple Parfait I One cup cream, whipped stiff with one-half cup granulated sugar, one and one-quarter cups grated pineapple; sweeten to taste; add juice of one lemon; add to cream until it is well blended. Turn mixture into mold and freeze for three hours. Pineapple Parfait II One-half cup water, one-half cup sugar, three eggs. Allow water and sugar to come to a boil, and then cool. Beat yolks of eggs well; mix with the cold syrup, and put on to cook in the double boiler until it thickens. When cold, beat one pint of whipped cream, stir in one small can shredded pineapple and one cup finely chopped walnuts. Pack in ice to freeze about five hours. Sufficient for twelve persons. Lemon Sherbet One quart milk, juice of three lemons, one and one-half cups sugar. Add sugar to milk and freeze until it becomes hard. Then add lemon juice, and freeze a little more. Cranberry Sherbet Put one cup of cranberries on to boil with a little water. When thoroughly soft, rub through a strainer; add one quart water, two cups sugar and freeze. When nearly frozen, add the stiffly beaten white of an egg. Chilled Peaches Six full sized peaches, cut in half; fill cavity with six English walnuts, twelve almonds chopped fine, two tablespoons brandy, two tablespoons sugar. Keep peaches on ice for from one to two hours. Sauce--One pint thick cream beaten stiff, sweeten; one egg, white  beaten stiff; stir egg white and cream thoroughly together; pack in ice and salt, four to six hours. Serve over peaches. French Macaroon Cream Soak one tablespoon gelantine in three tablespoons of cold water ten minutes; add to two cups of milk; add one square unsweetened chocolate; cook in double boiler until chocolate melts. Beat yolks of three eggs slightly; add one and one-half cups sugar, one-quarter teaspoon salt; add to first mixture, stirring constantly until mixture thickens. Remove from stove, and add beaten whites of three eggs, two-thirds cup of dried and pounded or rolled macaroons, and one teaspoon vanilla. Turn into mold and chill. Serve with whipped cream, sweetened and flavored. Garnish with macaroon drops. Frozen Pudding One quart cream, beaten stiff; flavor with sugar, add one cup chopped candied fruits; separate cream into three parts, add chocolate to one, colored sugar to another, and leave the third vanilla. Between each layer add lady fingers dipped in rum. Put into mold and freeze for four hours. Pineapple Ice One can grated pineapple, juice of six lemons, five pints of water poured over four teacups sugar. Freeze to consistency of mush. Then stir in the beaten whites of two eggs, and finish freezing. Orange Cream Juice of six oranges, one-half pound white sugar, one pint boiling water, six eggs. Beat the yolks, add the juice, sugar, and water. Pour in double boiler and cook until it thickens. When cold, put into glasses and add beaten whites on top of each. Chill. Strawberry Pudding One-quarter pound sugar stirred together with a quart of cream, ten eggs, ten ounces gelantine . Strain enough strawberries to color the cream, and add a few whole berries. Put in cold, and pack in ice to freeze. Tutti Frutti Ice Cream Make a custard with the yolks of four eggs, one pint of milk, and one and one-half cups of sugar. While this is cooling, chop up one pound of crystallized fruits covered with one-half cup sugar, one wine glass of sherry, juice of one lemon. When custard is cold, add one quart cream and partly freeze, then add fruit. Chocolate Sauce for Ice Cream Four cups chocolate (unsweetened), two cups granulated sugar, two cups water, a small piece of butter, a very little corn starch; boil very slowly until smooth and creamy. Add chopped nuts over ice cream before the sauce is added. Maple Bavarian Cream Beat yolks of four eggs until very light; add slowly, while beating constantly, one cup of thick hot maple syrup. Turn mixture into double boiler, stir and cook until thick enough to coat blade of a silver knife; have one-quarter box gelantine soaked in cold water dissolved over boiling water, and stir into custard. When thoroughly mixed, turn into bowl over cracked ice or very cold water. Stir constantly until it begins to congeal, then fold in lightly three cups of whipped cream. Turn into fancy mold and put into ice box to harden. Coffee Sponge Mix one and one-half cups fresh coffee, one-half cup milk, one-third cup sugar, one tablespoon gelantine ; heat in double boiler. Beat the yolks of three eggs slightly and add one-third cup sugar, one-quarter teaspoon salt; add gradually while stirring constantly to first mixture, and cook until it thickens, when a slight coating will be found on spoon. Remove from stove and add whites of three eggs, beaten stiff, and one-half teaspoon vanilla. Turn into mold and chill. Serve with thin or whipped cream, sweetened, and flavored. Maple Nougat Sauce for Ice Cream One and one-half pounds sugar melted in pan on stove till thin as syrup. Add one cup cream that has been heated lukewarm, to melted sugar, and butter, the size of an egg, and let cook in double boiler until thick. Add one cup English walnuts or pecans. Serve hot over vanilla ice cream. Frozen Rice Pudding Three tablespoons of rice, one quart milk, one-half cup sugar, and one vanilla bean cooked in a double boiler for one hour. When cold mix well with one pint of whipped cream and four leaves of dissolved isinglass. Put this mixture into a freezer and freeze three hours. Sauce--One glass jelly, two large tablespoons of sherry and the vanilla bean from the rice. Thicken with a little corn starch. CONFECTIONERY "Sweetmeats, messengers of strong prevailment in unhardened youth." Butter Scotch Two cups brown sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup water. Boil all together until a little poured in cold water will form a hard ball. Stir constantly to prevent burning. Pour into buttered pans one-quarter inch thick. When cool mark in squares. Chopped Date Candy Dates, figs and nuts make an excellent candy if put through a food chopper, then kneaded like dough until the ingredients are well mixed ( figs may be omitted). Roll into any desired shape, dip in confectioner's chocolate, place on paraffin paper to dry. Each candy should be decorated with a little cocoanut, nut meat or a bit of glazed fruit. To prepare confectioner's chocolate shave it in rather small pieces and allow to steam until melted in a double boiler. Pour on a cold platter or a marble slab and work constantly with a spoon until cool, then dip the candies. Cocoanut Squares One and one-half cups sugar, two teaspoons butter, one-half cup milk, one-third cup cocoanut, one-half teaspoon vanilla. Put butter in saucepan; when melted, add sugar and milk. Stir until sugar is dissolved; boil twelve minutes, remove from fire; add cocoanut and vanilla and beat till creamy. Pour into buttered pans and cut in squares. Candied Orange or Grape Fruit Straws Cut peels into narrow strips with a pair of scissors or sharp knife; cover with cold water; put on the stove to boil and let boil twenty minutes; throw off the water, cover with fresh cold water and let boil again for twenty minutes; drain off the water, and to every cupful of straws use two-thirds of a cup of granulated sugar; let come to a boil slowly, then allow to simmer gently until all the syrup is absorbed, turning and watching carefully that they do not burn. Remove one at a time with a fork, dipping each straw into sugar and turning it until well covered. Let cool, and you will have a most dainty dish for afternoon teas, etc. Chocolate Caramels One pound vanilla chocolate (Ghirardelli's Monarch), one pound dark brown sugar, one pound salt butter, two cups milk, one cup Karo syrup, one vanilla bean. Break chocolate and melt in a little cold water over a moderate fire. When melted add all other ingredients save vanilla bean and cook over an even fire, stirring only one way. When this begins to boil hard and thicken add vanilla bean, which must be split down the center. Test in cold water before removing from fire, and when it snaps pour into buttered pans and do not cut until the bottom of the pan is cold. The air should be permitted to circulate all around the pan. Be sure not to get too hard. Chocolate Creams I Two cups granulated sugar, one-half cup syrup (Target brand), one-quarter cup water. Boil until it will spin a thread, take from fire and add one teaspoon vanilla. Beat whites of two eggs very stiff. Slowly pour the boiled mixture into them, beating all the while. Beat until stiff enough to mold on oil paper. Add one cup broken nut meats. When cool roll into small balls. Melt unsweetened chocolate over hot water and dip each ball of cream. If the chocolate is not kept in constant motion while cooling, the finished candy will probably be gray and streaked. Chocolate Creams II Two cups granulated sugar, one cup water. Boil without stirring until it forms a soft ball. When cool, pour into bowl (do not scrape pan), stir with wooden spoon and add a few drops of peppermint. When thick enough to handle, shape and dip into melted Baker's unsweetened chocolate. Place on wax paper and let cool. Cream Candy Four cups granulated sugar, one cup hot water, one-half teaspoon cream of tartar. Cover the kettle and let steam well; then remove cover and cook to 238 degrees. Pour into a bowl and when it is cool beat until creamy. Then coat with chocolate or roll into balls, putting half of a walnut on either side. Divinity Three cups sugar, one cup Karo corn syrup, three-quarters cup water, three well beaten whites of eggs, two cups of chopped walnuts, one tablespoon vanilla. Boil first three ingredients until quite brittle in cold water, then pour slowly and gradually into the eggs and beat until it stiffens. Add vanilla and nuts and pour onto a buttered platter. When cold cut in squares. Fudge Two cups granulated sugar, one cup cream, two ounces unsweetened chocolate. Cook until it forms a soft ball when dropped in cold water. Take from fire and add piece of butter as large as two walnuts, beat until nearly cold, then pour in buttered dish and when cold cut in squares. Chopped walnuts, dates or marshmallows may be added before beating. This candy must be stirred constantly while cooking. Loaf A thick dice of nougat and date candy may be pressed together to form a loaf, which may be dipped in confectioner's chocolate, decorated with pecan nuts and glazed fruits. When cold, slice with a sharp knife. Fondant Two cups sugar, one cup water, one tablespoon glucose. Let cook until it will form a cold ball in water. Take from fire and set in kettle of cold water; flavor with vanilla when cool. Stir quickly with a wooden spoon, always in the same direction, until creamy. Then turn out on a cake board and knead as you would dough. When smooth put in earthen jar, cover with damp cloth and cover tight. In this way it will keep for several weeks. Molasses Taffy One cup brown sugar, one and one-quarter cups corn syrup, for heaping tablespoons of butter. Put these ingredients on to boil and just before it forms a hard ball in cold water add vanilla and a pinch of soda. Pour onto buttered platters and pull when almost cold. Be careful not to get the mixture too hard. Marshmallows Dissolve two tablespoons of gelantine in six tablespoons of cold water; boil two cups of sugar in six tablespoons of water until it makes a soft ball when dropped in cold water. Take off the stove and stir this slowly into the gelantine , flavor with vanilla and beat the mixture twenty-five minutes. Turn into a buttered tin sprinkled with powdered sugar. When cold cut in squares and roll in sugar. Nougat I Five cups granulated sugar, one cup glucose, one cup water. Boil to 258 degrees and then pour into the stiffly beaten whites of five eggs. Beat until stiff, add the flavoring required and stir in a generous bowl of chopped nuts. Nougat II Four cups sugar, three-quarters cup cold water, one cup syrup ( white syrup preferred). Boil until firm when tested in cold water, then add the stiffly beaten whites of four eggs. Beat all vigorously with an egg beater until the mixture looks well blended and creamy. Add nut meats, glazed pineapple and cherries cut in small pieces. Pour into buttered pans. When cold cut in squares. Popcorn Balls One cup of molasses, one cup of brown sugar, one tablespoon of vinegar, butter size of an egg. Boil all ingredients until brittle. Pour this over two quarts of popcorn and mold into balls. Pinoche Two cups brown sugar, two cups maple syrup, one cup rich cream. Boil these until it starts to harden in cold water. Then put in piece of butter size of a walnut, vanilla extract and then take off fire and put into this one cup of chopped walnuts, and beat until it can be poured on to a buttered platter. Peppermint Wafers Six drops oil of peppermint, one and one-half cups sugar, one-half cup boiling water. Put sugar and water in pan and stir until sugar is dissolved. Then boil until it spins a thread. Take from fire, add peppermint and beat until it thickens and looks cloudy. Drop from tip of spoon on slightly buttered paper. Peanut Brittle Take one cup of white sugar, three-fourths of a cup of molasses, three-fourths of a cup of Saratoga drips, one cup of water and one teaspoon of butter. Boil this together until very brittle when tried in cold water. Then take from the fire and add one-half a teaspoon of soda which has been dissolved in boiling water. Mix quickly, and also add a quart of peanuts measured after shelling. Turn on a buttered platter and mark into squares. Toffee Three cups brown sugar, one-quarter cup butter, one-half cup cold water. Allow the sugar and water to boil a few minutes before adding butter, then let cook until it is brittle when tested in cold water. Pour on buttered pan and cut when cold. Tutti-Frutti Four pounds sugar, one pound sliced figs, one pound seeded raisins, one-half pound walnuts, one-half pound blanched almonds, one and one-half cups milk. Melt sugar with milk, and when it boils put in chopped nuts, then the fruit, stirring all the time till it grains. Pour on a wet cloth and roll. Set aside for a day or two. This candy takes about twenty minutes to make. Sugared Almonds Put a cup of granulated sugar in a saucepan with a little water; stir until it is dissolved, then let it cook to the ball stage, without touching except to test. Turn in a half cup of blanched almonds and stir off the fire until the nuts are well covered, but turn them out before they become one mass. Boil another cup of sugar to the ball stage and stir again in the same way, giving them another coat, but not leaving them in the pan until they are all stuck together. For pink almonds add a little carmine to the sugar, just before putting in the almonds for the last coating. Any flavoring desired may be added at this time. JELLIES AND JAMS "He's keeping a corner for something that's nice." General Directions --Wash fruit and remove stems and imperfections. Cut large fruit into pieces. With watery fruits (grapes, currants, plums, raspberries, blackberries) use no water; with apple and quince use enough water to cover them. Cook fruit until juice flows, crushing with spoon, remove from fire and strain through a pointed bag. Do not squeeze bag at first; when nearly all is strained through, the bag may be squeezed; keep the last juice by itself, as the juice will not be clear, but can be used for jelly cakes and sauces. Measure juice (cook one quart juice and two pounds of sugar at a time). Put juice on to cook and boil twenty minutes, then add the sugar, which has been heated in the oven, and boil five minutes longer, or until it will thicken slightly when dropped on a cold plate. Skim all jellies before putting them in glasses. Keep jellies in cool, dry place. Apple Jelly One dozen sour apples, large; wash and cut into pieces without coring, remove imperfections. Cover with water and boil slowly until tender, then let juice drip through bag. Boil one quart juice twenty minutes then add two pounds hot sugar and stir until dissolved. Boil until a little dropped on a cold plate will jell. Put in hot glasses. Cover next morning. Crab Apple Jelly Same as apple jelly. Quince Jelly Same as apple jelly. Apple and Mint Jelly (Very good served with lamb ) Make same as apple jelly, adding enough mint leaves to the apples to give a decided mint flavor, before straining. To color a delicate green use Burnett's paste (a very small amount on the point of a knife); put in before adding sugar. Concord Grape and Cranberry Jelly Ten pounds grapes (under ripe), remove from stems, four pounds cranberries. Put grapes on to cook slowly, and draw out juice; add cranberries and cook slowly; mash and pour in jelly bag and let drip, then squeeze out remainder of juice (this to be used for jelly cake and sauces). To one quart of juice use two pounds sugar; cook juice twenty minutes, add heated sugar slowly, stir until dissolved, try jelly on saucer and fill sterilized, hot glasses. Cover with paraffin next morning. Concord Grape and Apple Jelly Same as Concord grape and cranberry. Concord Grape Jelly Same as grape and cranberry. Currant Jelly Same as raspberry and currant. Loganberry Jelly Select berries that are not too ripe; crush them, heat slowly and put in a bag and let drip. To one quart of juice add two pounds of sugar. Boil the juice twenty minutes, add the heated sugar and boil five minutes longer. Test before taking off the stove. Loganberry and Blackberry Jelly Made same as above, using equal parts of loganberries and blackberries. The flavor is the same as wild blackberry jelly. Raspberry and Currant Jelly To two parts red raspberries or "black-caps" put one of red currants and proceed as with other jelly. The flavor is exquisite. This jelly is especially nice for cake. JAMS Gooseberry Jam Equal measure of picked green berries and sugar, one-half the measure of water; put water on to boil, add sugar, boil five minutes, skim, then add fruit; when fruit and juice boils turn down the fire, boil slowly for fifteen minutes; do not stir. Raspberry Jam Three-quarters pound sugar to every pound fruit. Put the fruit on alone or with the addition of a pint of currant juice to every four pounds of fruit. Boil one-half hour, mashing and stirring well. Add sugar and cook twenty minutes or more. Blackberry jam is very nice made the same way as above, leaving out currant juice. Strawberry Jam For every pound of fruit use three-quarters pound sugar and one-quarter pint red currant juice. Boil the juice of the currants with the strawberries one-half hour, stirring all the time; add sugar and boil up rapidly for about twenty minutes, skimming carefully. Put in small jars and cover. Strawberry and Pineapple Jam Ten pounds berries, seven and one-half pounds sugar, two cans or one large fresh pineapple. Use more sugar if you use fresh pineapple. Cook berries thirty minutes, add sugar and pineapple, canned (if fresh pineapple is used cook it with berries). Cook until thick like jelly, put in glasses and let cool; cover with paraffin the next day. PRESERVES Ground Cherry Preserves Make syrup of one cup sugar, one-half cup water for every pound of husked ground cherries. Flavor syrup strongly with lemon juice and grated rind, also ground ginger. Heat to boiling point and skim, then add ground cherries and cook until clear; skim out cherries and put in jars; boil syrup until thick, fill jars and seal at once. Very nice for ice cream sauce. Crab Apple Preserves Use fine, nice, ripe fruit; wipe and take off black heads (blossom). Put in jars and cover with syrup made as follows: One pint water, two pints sugar, two tablespoons vinegar, two pieces whole cinnamon. Close jars air tight, put the jars in wash boiler with water enough to reach the neck, placing cloths between to prevent breaking. Boil one-half hour from time it begins to boil. Peach Preserves Pare, stone and weigh the fruit; heat slowly to draw out the juice, stirring often from the bottom with a wooden spoon. When hot boil quickly, still stirring, three-quarters hour. Add sugar, allowing three-quarters pound to each pound of fruit. Boil well for five minutes, taking off all skum. Add juice of one lemon and one can pineapple or one fresh pineapple for every three pounds of fruit and the water in which one-quarter of the kernels have been boiled and steeped. Stew all five minutes, stirring to a smooth paste, and take from the fire. Put up hot in air-tight cans. Pear and Nut Conserve One-half peck Seckel pears, one-half pound shelled almonds, one-half pound pecans, sugar and water. Pare and dice pears. For each pound of fruit allow three-quarters pound of sugar, one cup water; add water to sugar, let boil well, add the pears and boil one hour slowly or until clear, then add the nuts and boil twenty minutes longer. Place in jars or cans, cover well. Pear Preserves Peel and cut into small dice-shaped pieces enough pears to make four quarts. Cover with two pounds sugar and two tablespoons of ground ginger and let stand twelve hours. Put on stove and cook slowly for fifteen minutes, counting from the time it commences to boil. Add one-half can of sliced pineapple cut into small dice, cut rind of one lemon in thin slices, one-half pound almonds blanched and quartered, and boil fifteen minutes. Pear Conserve One peck pears, four pounds sugar, one pound raisins, one and one-half pounds shelled English walnuts, juice three lemons, juice two oranges. Pare and slice the pears in large pieces, crosswise; add sugar and let stand over night. Drain off liquid and let boil to a syrup, about twelve minutes, then add pears and the rest of the ingredients, breaking the walnuts into pieces about the size of the raisins. Let cook slowly until thick and clear, one hour or more. Place in jars and cover well. Plum Conserve Three pounds blue plums, one pound seeded raisins, three oranges (cut small), grated skin one orange, juice two lemons, three pounds sugar, one pound English walnuts (broken). Wash plums, cut into small pieces. Add other ingredients. Place in preserving kettle on stove, let come slowly to boiling point and cook steadily until the fruit is clear and thick. Put in glasses or jars. Strawberry Preserves I Select large, firm strawberries (Clark's seedlings); to each pound of fruit use one pound sugar. Mix sugar and berries and let stand from six to twelve hours. Put in granite saucepan and let boil ten minutes; do not stir. (Cook one pound berries at a time.) Put in Economy jars (pints). Strawberry Preserves II Firm, large, clean berries. Do not wash berries. Three-quarters pound sugar to one pound fruit. Arrange sugar and berries in layers in deep preserving kettle, cover and let stand twelve hours (over night). Cook slowly fifteen minutes, skim and cover with cloth and set aside over night, next morning simmer ten minutes, take from fire and pour off the juice and boil it down rapidly five minutes. Add fruit as you take from fire and put in hot jars air-tight. Used with ice cream Ripe Tomato Preserves Seven pounds round yellow tomatoes (peel), seven pounds sugar and juice of three lemons. Let stand together over night. Drain off syrup and boil it. Put in tomatoes and boil gently twenty minutes. Take out the fruit and spread on dishes. Boil the syrup down until it is thick, adding, just before taking up, the juice of lemons. Put the fruit in jars and fill up with hot syrup; when cool seal. MARMALADES Apricot and Pineapple Marmalade One basket apricots washed (not peeled), one can pineapple or one fresh pineapple, three-quarters pound sugar to one pound apricots. Cook apricots without water slowly for thirty minutes, add sugar and cook until thick and smooth. If fresh pineapple is used cook with the apricots. Orange Marmalade I One dozen oranges, four grapefruit, four lemons. Peel six oranges and four grapefruit, and boil the orange peel until you can run a wisp through it. Peel the others and cut small. Grate rinds of two lemons and use juice of all the lemons, add to the orange pulp. When orange peel is tender, shred fine with scissors, add this to the mixture and weigh (allow equal weight of sugar ), boil pulp alone ten minutes, add sugar and boil thirty minutes, stirring constantly. Orange Marmalade II Six thick-skinned, seedless oranges; wash and weigh them. To one pound oranges allow one quart of water and two pounds granulated sugar, four tablespoons lemon juice. Quarter the oranges and slice them (peel and pulp together) as thin as possible, cover the cut-up fruit with water, stand over night, boil gently until the peel is tender and transparent looking, add sugar and lemon juice and cook until the peel no longer floats on the surface, and juice poured on cold saucer shows a wrinkled, jellied film when tilted. Put in glasses and cover. Grapefruit Marmalade Make like orange marmalade No. 1, using grapefruit in place of oranges. Brandied Peaches One pound fruit, one teacup brandy to one quart fruit, one pound sugar. Freestone strawberry peaches or clingstone peaches. Peel peaches, put in jars; make heavy syrup of sugar and water (very little), fill jars of peaches with hot syrup, add one teacup brandy, seal and put in jars in boiler of warm water; cook thirty minutes after water begins to boil. Pears or cherries may be cooked as above. ADDITIONAL RECIPES CANNING For canning fruit only sound and fresh fruit should be selected. It may be canned with or without sugar, the sugar taking no part in the preservation. Cook in porcelain lined kettle. The jars should be thoroughly cleaned in boiling water and filled with very hot water ready for use. The fruit should not be boiled too long, as it will destroy the natural flavor, and should be put into the jars boiling hot. It is a good plan to use a silver fork and run it around the outside of the fruit in the jar to remove any air bubbles therefrom, and then fill the jar to overflowing, sealing quickly. The covers should be immersed in boiling water for a minute to aid the sealing process. Watch the fruit carefully for a day or two and be sure the jars are well sealed, then wipe them carefully and put them away in a dry, cool place until wanted for use. In canning the smaller fruits and berries, select under-ripe fruit in preference to the over-ripe. Look them over carefully, removing stems, etc. Wash them in a colander placed in a large pan of water, handling them lightly as possible, not to crush the fruit, and let the water drain off. For the syrup allow one cup of sugar to one cup of water and make but a few jars at a time. When the syrup boils, add the fruit and allow it to come to a boil again, then pour into the jars and seal at once. Canned Apricots Wipe fruit, cut in halves and remove the pits. Weigh, allowing one-quarter pound sugar to each pound of fruit. Make a syrup with as little water as possible, and when boiling skim well, put in the fruit and let it boil up once. Lift carefully into the jars, cover with hot syrup and seal. The skin need not be pared. Canned Pears Use Bartlett pears, remove the peel, cut in halves or quarters, removing the cores. Make a thin syrup of one-half pound of sugar to one pint of water. Boil the pears in the syrup until soft enough to easily pierce with a broom straw. Carefully arrange in jars and cover with hot syrup and seal. Peaches Peel the fruit and cut into halves, throwing them into cold water to prevent discoloration. In making the syrup allow one quart of water to one pint of sugar, and prepare enough fruit at a time to fill about three jars. When the syrup boils add the fruit and let it boil until it becomes clear and tender. Then fill jars carefully with fruit, and cover to overflowing with syrup, and seal. Canned Plums Sweet plums require about one-half pound of sugar to one pound of fruit, and sour plums from twelve to fourteen ounces. Wash the plums and prick each in several places to keep the skin from bursting. Let the syrup come to a boil, skim it, and drop the fruit in carefully. Cook until tender and seal immediately. Canned Rhubarb Peel the rhubarb and cut into three-quarter inch lengths; weigh, and to every pound allow one-half pound sugar. Make a syrup of one-half pint of water to two pounds sugar, let it boil and skim. Put in the rhubarb and boil hard five minutes. Put in jars and seal. The following recipe will be useful to any woman during the canning season or whenever her hands become stained from fruits or vegetables : Put in the palm of one hand a very small pinch of bicarbonate of potassium and the same amount of oxalic acid. Add a few drops of water, enough to moisten it. It will soon begin to ferment and heat, but it will not injure the hands. Now rub all over the hands as if washing them; then wash in cold water and then in warm water and soap. This will leave the hands free from stain and very soft and white. SANDWICHES In making sandwiches, use bread one day old. Always cream the butter and spread the butter on the loaf before cutting the slice from the loaf. Cut as thin as possible. Keep sandwiches in cheese cloth or napkins which have been thoroughly dampened in cold water, and pack in a closed box until ready for use. Anchovy Sandwiches Remove bones from one dozen anchovies. Add the yolks of three hard boiled eggs and cream to a paste. Mix this with a soft cream cheese, and mayonnaise to soften. Season with cayenne. Arena Sandwiches Same as Club sandwich, instead of using bacon use ham; both sandwiches should be served warm. Asparagus Sandwiches Use crisp lettuce leaf on buttered white bread with asparagus tips pureed with mayonnaise , and slice of buttered bread on top. Caviar and Rye Bread Sandwiches Toast thin slices of rye bread, spread with butter and spread caviar over, with chopped hard boiled egg sprinkled on top, and a little lemon juice. Caviar Sandwiches Mix three tablespoons lemon juice, three tablespoons olive oil and a can of caviar. Cream it well before spreading it on bread. Cucumber Sandwiches Round slices of bread edged with very thin strips of green pepper; in the center place slice of cucumber, with mayonnaise and grated yolks of hard boiled eggs sprinkled on top. Club House Sandwiches Toast thin slices of white bread, butter lightly and place on them thin slices of crisp fried bacon. Lay on another slice of buttered toast, then slices of chicken well seasoned, another slice of toast and then cucumbers, pickles sliced crosswise and another  slice of toast. Celery Sandwiches Mix one cup of finely chopped celery, one-quarter cup of chopped nuts, one-quarter cup chopped olives. Moisten with mayonnaise and spread on bread. Chicken Sandwiches I Mix one cup chopped chicken with one-fourth cup of mayonnaise and spread on bread. Chicken Sandwiches II Mince cold chicken, season with salt and pepper, and place on a lettuce leaf between thinly sliced and buttered bread. Club Sandwiches Two slices of Pullman bread toasted, buttered on one side; upon one slice of the buttered side place some sliced white meat of either turkey or chicken; upon this place two or three slices of fried crisp bacon; upon this a crisp lettuce leaf spread with some mayonnaise ; place the other slice of the buttered toast evenly on top and set into the oven for one or two minutes, then trim the crust from all four sides and cut through diagonally; place on warm plate or small platter, upon which has been placed a small napkin or doily. Cheese Paste Grate one-half pound of American or Swiss cheese; mix with one heaping teaspoon of mustard, salt, pepper and cayenne, a slice of butter melted, and spread on dainty chip crackers. Melted Cheese Sandwiches One pound of American cheese creamed very soft and mixed with a small piece of butter and a dash of red pepper. Spread the paste very thin between slices of bread, press tightly together and toast quickly in a very hot oven. Egg Sandwiches Slice bread thin, and butter, cover with a lettuce leaf and slices of hard boiled egg. Cover this with mayonnaise and another slice of bread, and cut into shape. Horseradish Sandwich Fresh grated horseradish mixed with sweet cream, spread on buttered rye bread. Jelly Sandwiches Spread thin slices of bread with jelly or jam, and roll. Li Hung Chang Sandwiches One slice of white bread, one slice of rye bread; butter each slice, place on the white bread the sliced white meat of either chicken or turkey, on top of this two slices of smoked beef tongue; if desired one or two pieces of bacon may be placed between the white meat and the tongue; cover with the rye bread, trim away the crust and cut through diagonally. Lettuce and Pimento Sandwich Cut crust off of thinly sliced bread, butter and put on strip of lettuce, then a strip of pimento and between put mayonnaise and around the edge grated hard boiled egg. Lettuce, Water Cress, Sardines, Shrimps and Oysters Sandwiches The above may be mixed with French dressing and used for filling sandwiches. Nut Sandwiches Mix one cup chopped peanuts, one cup chopped walnuts, a tablespoon mayonnaise and spread on bread. Paté Sandwich Round slices of white bread which have been spread with pate de foie gras, and a border of small oysters. Pimento Paste Sandwiches Chop pimentos and Queen olives not too fine, also two hard boiled eggs; mix and season to taste. Spread on buttered bread and cut in fancy shapes, with chopped egg and parsley around the edges. Raw Meat Sandwiches Use finely chopped beef, well seasoned with salt pepper, Worcestershire sauce and onion juice. Cover thinly buttered slices of bread with lettuce leaves, or which spread the chopped meat and cover with a second slice of bread, cutting the sandwiches into any shape desired. Russian Sandwiches Spread thin slices of Boston brown bread and lightly buttered with Neufchatel or any other cream cheese; spread an equal number with finely chopped olives and pimentos mixed with mayonnaise ; press together in pairs, placing a lettuce leaf between each pair. Cut into shapes to suit. Ribbon Sandwiches Make an equal number of brown and white bread sandwiches, place sandwiches together in alternating colors, wrap in damp cheese cloth and press; cut in thin slices and then in strips. Sardine Paste Sandwiches Take one can of sardines, mash well with a fork, season with salt, pepper and cayenne. Add one heaping teaspoon of French mustard, juice of half a lemon and slice of melted butter; spread on slices of bread cut in heart, diamond or round shapes and put chopped hard boiled egg and parsley around the edge. Sardine Sandwiches Mix sardines with chopped pimolas, season with lemon juice, and spread on bread. Tuna Sandwiches Shred the contents of one can of Pierce's brand of Tuna fish, add finely chopped celery, green pepper, olives and nuts; mix with mayonnaise , placing crisp lettuce leaves between thin slices of bread and spreading the mixture upon them. Walnut Picnic Sandwiches Chop rather fine a pound of English walnuts, mix with sufficient mayonnaise to make a soft paste, butter thin slices of bread, lay upon one slice of bread a crisp lettuce leaf and spread the other slice with the walnut paste, press together and cut into any shape. Place in ice box for at least one hour, as they lose their shape if not kept very cold. ADDITIONAL RECIPES PICKLES "Pickles get and salads both, Let them each be fresh and green." Pickled Red Cabbage Remove the outer leaves of three small heads of red cabbage cut fine, add three handfuls of salt, mix well with the cabbage and allow to stand twenty-four hours. Boil one-half gallon vinegar with one cup of sugar, two large onions minced, one tablespoon of whole peppers, one scant teaspoon each of whole cloves, allspice and celery seed, dash of cayenne pepper. Boil for one hour, strain, allow to cool, then pour over the cabbage, which has been drained in the meantime in the colander. Catsup Use enough tomatoes to make two gallons when strained. Wipe clean, cut up into small pieces with onion and a little garlic, boil all together until tomatoes are thoroughly cooked, then strain; add one large spoonful of salt, one teaspoon of red pepper, two and one-half tablespoons of black pepper, one and one-half tablespoons of allspice, one and one-half tablespoons of cloves, one tablespoon of sugar, one teaspoon of celery seed, one-half teaspoon of nutmeg, one pint of vinegar. Tie mixed spices in a cloth and boil three or four hours. Put in bottles and seal. Spiced Royal Ann Cherries Seven pounds pitted cherries, one pint vinegar, three and one-half pounds granulated sugar, five sticks cinnamon, a few cloves. Boil cherries until tender, then bottle. Chow Chow I Take one gallon of pickles, cauliflower and onions and cut in small pieces and salt over night. In the morning put in fresh water and wipe dry. Have crock ready and scatter at the bottom a few whole peppers, mustard seed and a little cayenne pepper, and continue this between the layers, with ten cents' worth of tumeric powder. Then make a paste of one-half cup of Coleman's mustard mixed with enough sweet oil to make a smooth  paste; cover with vinegar and let stand six weeks, then add a small bottle of French mustard and it is ready for use. Chow Chow II One large head cabbage, two dozen cucumbers, one gallon green tomatoes , one-half dozen onions (chop onions, pour hot water over them and let stand ten minutes). Chop other ingredients fine and add onions. Sprinkle salt over all and let stand over night, then drain two hours, add six green peppers, one cup white mustard seed, two tablespoons of tumeric powder, one bunch of celery, two tablespoons celery seed, one tablespoon ground cinnamon. Mix well together. Put vinegar on fire (enough to cover all) and let it come to a boil, then pour over the Chow Chow. To every gallon vinegar add one-half pound sugar. Cook about three-fourths of an hour and bottle. Sweet Pickled Crabapples Allow three and one-half pounds sugar to one quart vinegar, two ounces whole cloves, two ounces stick cinnamon. Boil five minutes after the sugar is dissolved, wipe the crabapples and stick a clove into the blossom end of each one, then place a few at a time in the boiling syrup and cook until tender, but not too soft; when all are cooked and the syrup is not thick enough, cook a little longer. By that time it ought to be reduced to half; pour over the fruit and put into a big stone crock. Chili Sauce Forty-five large ripe tomatoes (skinned), twenty red peppers, twenty green peppers, two cups of white sugar, six small cups of vinegar, four tablespoons salt, six large onions, one tablespoon each of ginger, allspice, cinnamon and cloves. Chop onions and peppers fine, mix all together and boil for two hours. Bottle and seal. Chutney Twelve medium sized tomatoes , one pound of apples (peeled), six medium sized onions, one large bunch of celery, one pound of light brown sugar, five tablespoons of salt, two tablespoons of white mustard, three-fourths pound raisins, six red peppers ( seeds removed). Grind all together. Boil one quart vinegar with the sugar, let it get cold and pour over the ground mixture. Put in stone crock, but do not seal. Sliced Cucumbers Twelve cucumbers, one-half cup black mustard seed, same of white, two tablespoons celery seed, one quart vinegar, one cup oil, piece of alum, one dozen onions (sliced small). Slice cucumbers, sprinkle with salt, let stand over night; in morning drain well and mix. Cucumber Pickle One hundred cucumbers washed and sliced as for cucumber salad (not peeled). Mix with one and one-fourth pints salt. Put a plate and heavy weight over night; drain off water in the morning. Add two pints sliced onions, four heaping tablespoons white mustard seeds, four tablespoons of black mustard seed and powdered alum dissolved in a little warm water, one-half pint best olive oil. Stir all together. Add enough white wine vinegar to cover, after stirring thoroughly. Good for use in three weeks. Stuffed Cucumbers Take cucumbers, lay in brine four or five days, cut open one side and scrape out the inner part; if the inside is very salty let them lay in cold water until the next day; if not, two or three hours will do. Stuffing for the cucumbers made as follows: American mustard, cloves, black pepper, pepper pods, small onions, celery seed and horseradish chopped very fine. After being stuffed put the cucumbers in sharp vinegar and sugar. Senf Gurken About two dozen ripe cucumbers (large), peel, take out seed, cut in thin strips, sprinkle lightly with salt, let stand over night in china bowl; the following morning wipe each piece dry and put into a stone jar a layer of cucumbers, small onions and mustard seed; continue until all are used. Boil vinegar and considerable sugar, and when cold pour over pickles; in a few days boil again, cool again before pouring over pickles. Make a mustard plaster, spread on cloth, put on top of pickles. Cover jar. Takes about a month to mature. Dill Pickles Wash cucumbers and let stand in cold water a few hours. Then wipe well and arrange in layers in a crock or barrel, sprinkle each layer with a few whole black peppers and plenty of dill. When the crock is almost full, cover with the following proportion of water and ingredients: To nineteen cups of cold water add one cup of salt, one-half cup of vinegar and a little cayenne pepper. The pickles must be well covered with brine. Cover with a cloth and put on a weight to keep the cucumbers well covered. The scum must be washed off twice a week. Oil Pickles Cut thirty cucumbers in one-inch pieces, sprinkle with salt and let stand three hours, then drain well. Mix with cucumbers two cups of oil, one tablespoon of mustard seed, one tablespoon celery seed and one of black pepper corns and small onions. Put in a jar and cover with vinegar, adding a piece of alum on top. India Relish Six large cucumbers, six large onions, one-half head of cabbage, one head of cauliflower, eight quarts green tomatoes , one red pepper with the seeds removed. Chop all together very fine and salt over night. The next morning drain. Use a large kettle and put in all the ingredients with one teaspoon of mustard seed, two teaspoons celery seed, two cups white sugar and vinegar enough to cover. Boil one-half hour, then bottle and seal. Mixed Pickles and Onions To five pounds onions take ten pounds small cucumbers; peel the onions and cover all with salt water over night. Next day drain them off well and put into half-gallon jars. Take as much strong vinegar as will cover the pickles and let it boil a few minutes with granulated sugar to taste, about half cup to a quart of vinegar. Throw into the vinegar whole mixed spices, a little red pepper and mustard seeds. Cover the pickles with the spiced vinegar while hot and seal. Mustard Pickles One box small pickles, ten pounds small onions, one dozen green peppers, one dozen green tomatoes . Soak in salt water for three days, then drain well. Take two gallons wine vinegar, small bag of mixed spices, some Chili pepper, five cents' worth mustard seed, and sweeten to taste. Let this boil well, then take four bottles French mustard, one-half pound dry mustard, three-fourths cup flour, one teaspoon powdered alum. Mix all of this with hot liquid and let boil for a few minutes, pour over vegetables, mix thoroughly and put in air-tight jars. Will be ready for use in four weeks. Pickled Pears To seven pounds of fruit add four pounds of sugar, one pint of good vinegar, a few whole spices. Boil fruit until tender; remove from the syrup, place in bottles, then let syrup boil longer, and cover fruit with syrup and seal. Peach Pickle Pare free-stone peaches, place in stone jar, pour over them hot syrup made in the proportion of one quart best cider vinegar to three pints granulated sugar. Boil, skim and pour over the fruit hot, repeating each day until fruit is the same color to the center (this will take from three to four days, and the syrup is like a thin molasses ); if fruit is not sufficiently cooked, scald fruit with syrup the last time. To one gallon of fruit, two teaspoons whole cloves, four tablespoons stick cinnamon. Put spices in bag made of thin cloth, and place in jar with fruit. Pickled Prunes Seven pounds German prunes, four pounds granulated sugar, two ounces stick cinnamon, two ounces whole cloves, a little mace, one quart vinegar. Place in jar first a layer of prunes, then spices, then continue until the jar is full, scald the vinegar and sugar together, and while hot throw over the prunes, fill the jar with more prunes. Scald the vinegar for three days, then store away for use. Pickle Chips Put one gallon of medium sized cucumbers in a stone crock; add about a handful of salt into enough boiling water to cover them, turn it over the cucumbers and cover closely; do this three mornings, making fresh brine; the third morning repeat the same and pour over. Then take the cucumbers out and slice thin and wipe dry. Allow one cup of white sugar and one pint of cider vinegar to one quart of sliced cucumbers. Boil vinegar and sugar with a small lump of alum, small spices, white mustard seed, a little cayenne pepper and a few small red peppers. Pour over the cucumbers, boiling hot, cover closely and let stand twenty-four hours; reheat the vinegar and pour over the chips for three mornings, and on the fourth morning reheat the vinegar, put in chips and boil together. Then take it off and seal in glass jars. Preserved Watermelon Rind Pare all of the green skin and take out all the inner soft part so as to leave nothing but the hard white rind; cut into strips of finger length, pour about a pint of vinegar over all and let it remain so until the next day, then drain off all the vinegar and dry each piece. Allow one lemon to two pounds of rind, and add stick cinnamon and cloves, removing the heads of the latter, add also a very small quantity of blanched ginger root; allow three-fourths of a pound of sugar to every pound of rind. Boil all together about three hours, remove the citron with a perforated skimmer and boil the syrup until thick; throw over the rind, boil over once more next day for about fifteen minutes; be careful to remove all seeds of the lemon, cut the lemon into thick dice. Tie the spices in a bag. Boil the citron first in grape leaves and a little alum, which makes them green and glossy; throw them in cold water before preserving. Watermelon Rind Pickle Peel and cut rind in any desired shapes (finger lengths very nice), place in bowl of cold water with small piece of alum, let stand over night. Use three pints vinegar and three pounds sugar, stick cinnamon, few cloves and allspice. Let boil well, then place rind in same, boiling until clear; lift with perforated spoon, then let syrup boil until slightly thickened, then pour over rind. Tomato Soy One dozen large ripe tomatoes , two large onions, four green or red peppers, one tablespoon salt, ground spices to taste, two cups vinegar, one teacup sugar. Chop vegetables fine, cook slowly until rather thick, bottle air-tight. ADDITIONAL RECIPES INVALID COOKERY "'Tis a little thing to give a cup of water; yet its draught of cool refreshment, drained by fevered lips, may give a shock of pleasure to the frame." Dishes for invalids should be served in the daintiest and most attractive way. Flesh of young animals is more tender but less digestible than that of animals of middle age. Oysters are nutritious; milk and eggs are very valuable foods. Soups For convalescents, the most favored soups without meat, are cream of tomato, cream of celery, cream of potatoes , and oyster stew. Beef Tea Cut the meat of a rump steak into very small pieces (having first removed all skin, fat and gristle) put into a Mason fruit jar, partly screw on lid, add a little salt, put it in a saucepan of cold water, let it boil for six hours, then skim, strain and serve hot. Clam Broth Take half a dozen razor clams, clean well and chop fine; add water enough to cover well, a pinch of salt and a small piece of butter, simmer thirty minutes, add a little milk, strain well, and serve. This is an excellent broth  for weak stomachs. Wine Soup For one person, use one glass of wine, and after it has come to a boil, add sugar to taste, a pinch of cinnamon, a whole clove, and butter the size of an almond. Have some cubes of dry, hard toast in a bowl, over which break an egg; then add the boiled wine, stirring well. Serve hot. Mutton Broth One-half pound mutton (from neck ), one quart cold water, one-half teaspoon salt, a little pepper, three tablespoons rice or barley. Wipe meat, remove skin and fat and cut in small pieces. Put into kettle with bones, and cover with cold water. Heat gradually to boiling point, skim, then season with salt and pepper. Cook slowly until meat is tender, strain and remove fat. Reheat to boiling point, add rice or barley and cook until rice or barley is tender. Cereals A double boiler is the best utensil for cooking cereals. Boil the water, add salt and cereal slowly, place directly over the heat, and cook from ten to fifteen minutes, stirring to prevent burning; place over boiling water and steam until cooked. All cereal preparations, grains, meals, or flour, may be used for gruels; also plain crackers, powdered. Gruels must be thoroughly cooked, strained, seasoned and served very hot. Gruels made with meal are made by pouring the meal into boiling water. They should be cooked for three hours over boiling water. When gruels are made from flour, the flour must be first mixed to a smooth paste, with one-eighth cup cold water or milk, then stirred into the hot liquid. They should be cooked at least one hour. Sugar, nutmeg, raisins, lemon rind, fruit juice, meat extracts or stimulants, may be used to flavor gruels. Gruel One cup liquid, one tablespoon flour or meal, one-fourth teaspoon salt. Fried Cornmeal Mush Cold corn meal mush is often fried. Slice the mush about one-third of an inch thick. Dip in flour and brown in hot butter. Gluten Mush Three cups boiling water, two-thirds cup gluten flour, one cup cold water, one teaspoon salt. Add cold water gradually to the flour, then pour through a strainer into the boiling salted water; cook thirty minutes, then strain. Eggs Soft eggs, hard cooked, poached, omelets or creamy eggs, form an important part of an invalid's diet. Creamy Eggs Two eggs, one-fourth cup milk, one-fourth teaspoon salt, a pinch of pepper. Beat eggs slightly, enough to blend the yolks and whites, add milk and seasoning, put into a double boiler, and cook until the whole is of a creamy consistency, stirring constantly. Serve on toast. Coddled Eggs A fresh egg (shell on), is placed in boiling water which is immediately after removed from the fire. The egg then cooks slowly in the water for about twelve minutes, when the white should be about the consistency of jelly. Bird's Nest on Toast One large slice of toast, one egg. Beat the white of egg very stiff with a little salt. Put on toast. Place the whole yolk in center of beaten white. Add a piece of butter. Put in oven and brown slightly, and serve hot. Egg With Tomato Cut up a good sized tomato, put it in an individual baking dish, put in oven and cook soft, add one tablespoon cooked rice. When nearly ready to serve, break an egg on top of mixture, return to oven and allow egg to poach. Pasteurized Milk Fill sterile bottles or jars nearly full of milk, cork them, stand on pie pan in a deep pan filled with cold water so that the water may be as high outside the jars as the milk is inside. Place the pan over the fire and heat until small bubbles appear around the top of the milk, remove to back of fire and allow the bottles to stand there fifteen minutes. Reduce the temperature as quickly as possible, and when milk is cold remove the bottles and keep in a cool place. Milk Vessels used for milk must be thoroughly cleansed. Cover milk with muslin and keep in a cool place. Milk may be pasteurized to destroy disease germs. Kumiss One quart skim milk, one-fifth cake yeast, two tablespoons sugar. Heat the milk, dissolve the yeast in a little water, and mix it with the sugar and lukewarm milk. Put the mixture into strong bottles, cork them tightly, and tie down corks with stout twine. Shake the bottles thoroughly and place in a refrigerator to allow mixture to ferment slowly. After three days lay bottles on their sides, turn occasionally. Five days are required to perfect the fermentation and then the Kumiss is at its best. French Toast One or two eggs, one cup milk, one-fourth teaspoon salt, six or eight slices of stale bread. Beat the eggs lightly, add salt and milk, dip the bread in the mixture. Have a griddle hot and well buttered; brown the bread on one side, place a small piece of butter on top of each slice, turn and brown on the other side. Serve hot with cinnamon and sugar, or a sauce. Cream Toast Two tablespoons butter, two tablespoons flour, six or eight slices of toast, one teaspoon salt, two cups milk or cream. Heat the butter, add flour and salt, add gradually hot milk, stirring constantly and allowing mixture to thicken each time. Pour this sauce over slices of dry toast. Zwieback Cut baker's or other light bread into one-inch slices and brown in a moderate oven. Scraped Beef A piece of round or sirloin steak is scraped or shredded with a knife; season with salt and pepper, shape in small flat cakes, and broil on greased broiler or in frying pan. Spread a little butter on top. In forming cakes, handle as little as possible. Sweetbreads Plunge sweetbreads into cold water and allow to stand one hour; drain and put into salted boiling water, to which has been added a few drops of vinegar, cook slowly twenty minutes, drain again and put into cold water that they may be kept white and firm. Split the sweetbreads, sprinkle with salt and pepper, dip in crumbs, egg, and crumbs again, and fry in butter. Sweetbreads in Cream Sauce Two tablespoons butter, one cup heated cream, one and one-half tablespoons flour, one-fourth teaspoon salt. Put butter in saucepan, stir until melted, add flour and seasoning, and stir until well blended. Pour on gradually the cream, adding only a little at a time. Vegetables Baked, boiled or mashed potatoes are frequently served to convalescents. Beets, stewed onions, cauliflower, spinach, stewed tomatoes , stewed celery served with a cream sauce, and maccaroni are the vegetables most often used in the sick room. Boiled Rice One-half cup rice, one quart boiling water, one-half tablespoon salt. Pick over and wash the rice well, add slowly to boiling salted water. Boil thirty minutes, or until soft. Drain in coarse strainer and pour over one-half quart hot water. Return to kettle in which it was cooked. Cover, let stand to dry off, when kernels are distinct. Fruit Cranberry jelly, baked apples, steamed apples, apple sauce and stewed prunes are among the favorite cooked fruit for convalescents. Fruit Whip One white of egg, one-fourth cup powdered sugar, one cup fruit (cut in fine pieces). Beat the white of egg, add the sugar and then the fruit, beat until thick and smooth. Chill before serving. Grated or stewed apple, ripe peaches or strawberries, stewed prunes or canned fruit may be used. DESSERTS Blanc Mange One-eighth box of gelantine , one-fourth cup cold water, one pint milk or cream, one inch stick of cinnamon, one whole clove, one-eighth teaspoon salt, one-fourth cup sugar, one tablespoon brandy, two tablespoons sherry wine, one-half teaspoon vanilla, one-half teaspoon lemon. Soak the gelantine in cold water. Heat the milk with cinnamon, clove and salt. Add hot milk to softened gelantine , then the sugar. When partially cooled, add remaining ingredients and strain into glasses. Cup Custard Break into a coffee cup an egg. Put in one and one-half tablespoons of sugar, beat it up thoroughly, with a pinch of salt and a pinch of grated nutmeg; fill up the cup with good sweet milk, turn it into another cup well buttered, and set it in a pan of boiling water, reaching nearly to the top of the cup. Place in oven and when custard is set, it is done. Gluten Wafers Three-eighths cup cream, one cup gluten flour, three-eighths teaspoon salt. Add the salt to the cream, and then enough flour to make a stiff dough. Knead until smooth, then roll until it is extremely thin. Cut in desired shape, prick with fork, and bake in a hot oven until brown. Wine Jelly One-half box gelantine or two tablespoons granulated gelantine , one-half cup cold water, one and two-thirds cups boiling water, one cup sugar, one cup sherry or Madeira wine, one-third cup orange juice, three tablespoons lemon juice. Soak gelantine twenty minutes in cold water; dissolve in boiling water, add sugar, wine, orange  and lemon juice, strain and chill. If stronger jelly is desired, use additional wine in place of orange juice. Wine Whey Cook together one cup milk and one-half cup sherry wine. As soon as the whey separates, strain and sweeten. This may be taken hot or cold. Gum Gluten Drop Biscuits For three or four biscuits take one cup ground gum gluten, one teaspoon butter, one-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon baking powder, milk or water as needed. Mix and sift dry ingredients, rub in butter, and add milk or water to make a drop batter. Drop from a spoon into buttered muffin pans and bake very quickly. Gluten Muffins One cup gum gluten, one cup milk, one whole egg, three-fourths teaspoon baking powder, one-half teaspoon salt, three tablespoons finely ground blanched almonds. Mix to a smooth batter with the milk. Add the egg very well beaten. Bake in a well greased, very hot muffin pan. More salt may be needed for some tastes. A little "Sweetina" may be used if a sweet flavor is desired. Gluten Cheese Wafer One cup gum gluten ground, three tablespoons cream, four tablespoons grated cheese (very dry), yolks of two eggs, one teaspoon salt, a little mace or nutmeg if desired. Mix in order given, roll thin, prick over and bake in a slow oven. Gluten Puffs (For use when ground gum gluten is not available.) Mix one cup strong bread flour to a stiff dough with cold water. Knead thoroughly, then wash and knead under the cold water faucet and over a very fine sieve until as much starch as possible is washed away, and only a grayish rubber -like mass remains. Work into this one-fourth teaspoon salt. Divide in three or four parts and bake in a quick oven. They should puff from four to six times the original size. These are not particularly "good eating," but are sometimes useful when bread is strictly forbidden and when good gluten flour cannot be obtained. Gluten Wafers One-half cup sweet cream, one-half teaspoon salt, ground gum gluten to make a stiff dough. Toss on a board floured with gluten flour. Roll as thin as possible, cut in strips and prick over and bake in a slow oven until delicately browned. For sweet wafers flavor with "Sweetina" and grated lemon or orange rind. For plain cheese wafers add two tablespoons very dry grated cheese, and increase the amount of salt slightly. Gluten Almond Wafers One-half cup gum gluten, one-half cup almond meal, two egg yolks, "Sweetina" if liked, a few drops of almond essence, a few drops of cream, if necessary, to make a stiff dough. Roll thin, prick over and bake in slow oven. If spices are allowed, the flavoring may be varied by the use of a little cinnamon, nutmeg or mace. Another variation may be made where cocoa is allowed by adding one or two tablespoons cocoa to the dry ingredients, and using vanilla and a few grains of allspice in place of the almond flavoring. BEVERAGES "'Well,' murmur'd one, 'let who so make or buy, My Clay with long Oblivion is gone dry; But fill me with the old familiar Juice, Methinks, I might recover by and by.'" A beverage is any drink. Water is the beverage provided by Nature for man, and is an essential to life. All beverages contain a large percentage of water, therefore their use should be considered. To quench thirst. To introduce water into the circulating system. To regulate the body temperature. To assist in carrying off waste. To nourish. To stimulate the nervous system and various organs. For medical purposes--freshly boiled water should be used for making beverages. Fresh drawn water for cold beverages. Chocolate One and one-half squares chocolate, four tablespoons sugar, few grains salt, one cup boiling water, three cups milk. Scald milk, melt chocolate in double boiler, add sugar, salt and gradually boiling water; when smooth, place on range and boil one minute; add to the scalded milk and cook for several minutes. Beat well before serving. Iced Chocolate Fill glasses one-half full of chopped ice. Pour over them thin hot chocolate, add sugar to taste and whipped cream. Cocoa Two teaspoons cocoa dissolved on stove in cold water enough to make thin paste, and let boil one minute. Add one cup hot milk and just let come to a boil. Sweeten to taste. Brandy Cocoa Three tablespoons cocoa, one-fourth cup sugar, one and one-half cups boiling water, four cups milk, three teaspoons brandy. Heat milk, mix with cocoa, sugar and water. Boil one minute. Pour into milk, add brandy. Beat all two minutes with Dover egg-beater. One teaspoon vanilla may be used instead of brandy. To Make Coffee To have coffee right is one of the difficulties of the household. The making of coffee is a very simple operation, but the nicety and care with which it is prepared, mark the good and bad decoction. Coffee readily absorbs foreign flavors. If the pot is wiped out with a soiled cloth or the coffee is strained through a flannel not perfectly sweet, the coffee betrays it. If the spout is allowed to collect a film of stale coffee it will ruin all the fresh coffee put into the pot. The results will not be right if the water is allowed to fall below the boiling point before it is used. Have the coffee ground to a fine powder in order to get its full flavor as well as strength. Black coffee is usually made by dripping. Drip Coffee One heaping tablespoon of coffee to a cup of water will make black coffee. Put the coffee powder in a felt bag or on a thick flannel laid on a strainer and pour the boiling water over it. Have the pot hot before beginning, and stand it in a pan of hot water while dripping. Serve the coffee at once. Coffee should be freshly ground and kept in air-tight cans. A favorite coffee is two-thirds Java and one-third Mocha. Boiled Coffee One tablespoon coffee to one cup of boiling water. Mix coffee with a clean egg shell and a little cold water. Add the water and boil one minute. Let stand on back of stove ten minutes to draw. Chilled Coffee Make as much coffee as you need, but instead of using water, use milk and cream, then sweeten it and put it on the ice for a few hours, serve with whipped cream. Prepare in the morning if you wish to serve it about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. Tea Scald the pot and immediately put into it the tea leaves. When the water boils hard, pour upon the leaves. Shut down the cover of the teapot and let it stand just five minutes before serving. To give the proportions of tea and water is impossible, as such different degrees of strength are demanded. One teaspoon of tea to a pint of water, steeped five minutes, makes a weak tea. Two teaspoons gives the color of mahogany, if an English breakfast tea is used. Oolong tea does not color the water very much. The Russians, who are reputed to have the best tea, prepare it first very strong, getting almost an essence of tea; this they dilute to the strength desired, using water which is kept boiling in the samovar. The Tea Ball Silver balls are convenient to use where one or two cups at a time only are to be made. The ball holding the tea is placed in the cup; water from the boiling kettle poured over it, and the ball removed when the water has attained the right color. The Tea Bag Where a quantity of tea is to be used, as at receptions, it is well to put it into muslin bag, using enough to make a strong impression. Place the bag in the scalded pot; add the boiling water; after five minutes remove the bag. Keep the kettle of water boiling over an alcohol flame, and use it to dilute the tea as needed. The tea will then be as good as though freshly made. If, however, the leaves are allowed to remain in the pot the tea will not be fit to use after a short time, and no matter how much it may be diluted, it will still have an astringent taste. Southern Tea (Cold) Make tea in usual fashion except that you add two whole cloves to each cup of tea before brewing. Strain and while still hot add sugar and lemon to taste. Pour through cheese cloth. Before serving put in each glass crushed ice, two or three sprigs of mint, which should be slightly bruised, and a Maraschino cherry, also a very thin slice of lemon with rind left on. Iced Tea Chill a pitcher of freshly made tea of the desired strength. Sweeten with orange syrup instead of sugar, being careful not to get it too sweet. Then squeeze in enough lemon juice to give it a little twang, and set on ice again to get thoroughly chilled. Have ready a bowl of chipped ice, a bowl of vanilla ice  cream and pitcher of cold tea. Fill a dainty glass one-third full of ice, pour on tea until it is two-thirds full, and then drop a spoon of ice cream on top and pass at once on a plate with a nut wafer or delicate cake. Schwarzwald Mai Bohle Wash and pick strawberries (the wild ones are best), and put into a punch bowl, slice a few peaches to this and stew with sugar, let stand an hour. Pour over this a bottle of Rhine wine and a bottle of champagne; serve in thin glasses. Have wine well chilled. Sherry Cobbler Place in glasses one-half teaspoon of sugar, three teaspoons fruit syrup ( pineapple syrup is best), one and one-half wine glasses sherry wine, then fill the glass with fine ice. Stir thoroughly and dress with fruit. Pour a little Port on top and serve with a straw. Claret Cup One quart bottle claret, one quart bottle mineral water, five lemons, sugar to taste, a sherry glass of sweet liquor, small bunch of mint, rind of a cucumber. Do not leave mint in too long for fear of its becoming bitter. Clover Leaf Cocktail Three parts, measure in cocktail glasses. One part grenadine, one part absinthe, and one part anisette, a little lemon juice, white of one egg. Shake well with pieces of ice. Vermouth Cocktail Fill glasses one-fourth full of ice; add two dashes of Angostura Bitters, two dashes of Marschino, one wine glass of Vermouth, one quarter slice lemon. Stir or shake well and strain into cool glasses. Summer Beverage A refreshing summer beverage which brings an involuntary grace to one's lips as it is quaffed, is a fruit punch in which the pineapple plays an important part. Put into a bowl the juice of three lemons, two oranges sliced and seeded, one grated pineapple and one cup sugar. Let stand for one hour to extract the juice, then press and strain. Add to this juice two quarts of iced water and two slices of shredded pineapple, and serve. Reisling Cup Pour twelve bottles Reisling into a large punch bowl. Add from one-half to one bottle of rum, the juice of one-half dozen lemons, some of the rind cut thin, one pineapple shredded, and sugar to taste. Serve with a block of ice. Claret can be used instead of Reisling. Egg Milk Punch One egg, two tablespoons sugar, little brandy, fill glasses with milk, grate nutmeg on top. Egg Nog Stir the yolks of six eggs with three-fourths cup of sugar until thick; add gradually one quart of rich sweet milk and one-half pint best brandy, little nutmeg. Beat the whites to a stiff froth and add, mixing well. Egg Nog (Improved) Put into a glass a teaspoon of powdered sugar, one fresh egg, one wine  glass of Silver Rock, a little ice. Fill the glass with rich milk and shake until ingredients are thoroughly mixed, then strain into goblets, excluding the ice, and grate a little nutmeg on top. To this may be added a teaspoon of rum. This is refreshing between meals; also very valuable for invalids and convalescents. Grape Juice Remove grapes from stems. Let boil until soft. Let drip over night. In morning measure grape juice and add one-half cup sugar to every two cups grape juice. Boil four minutes, bottle and seal. Whip Gluhwein Take a quart bottle of white wine, one-half pound sugar in which you have grated the peel of one lemon, adding its juice, a pinch of ground cinnamon and six eggs. Beat all together over the fire until it reaches boiling point, remove from fire and serve in glasses, hot. Grenadine Fizz Put a tablespoon of grenadine in a glass, add mineral water and cream not whipped. Lemonade Wash lemons, then with a sharp knife peel very thin (so as not to remove any  white pulp), likewise one or two oranges; take these peelings and put on to boil with enough water to cover them well; when they are tender remove and add as much sugar as your judgment would suggest; boil until a rich syrup, remove from fire and let cool. Extract juice from lemons and oranges, add as much water as required, and the syrup; if desired, rum and Maraschino cherries may be added. Strain and add ice. Maraschino Lemonade The juice of four lemons, twelve tablespoons sugar, eight cups water, one cup Maraschino liquor and a few cherries. Indian Milk Punch Remove the thin yellow part from the rinds of six lemons, steep in one-half bottle of rum for twenty-four hours. Take five bottles rum, two pounds sugar, the juice of the lemons already used with that of six more. Mix in a large vessel, add two quart bottles of water, one-fourth ounce each of ground nutmeg, cloves, cinnamon and one-half ounce ginger. Mix well, pouring over all two quarts boiling milk. Let stand a moment, then stir well, cover closely until next day, then strain through a four-folded flannel bag. Fill in clear bottles. The longer it is kept the better it is. If the spices are not perfectly fresh and strong, use a slightly larger quantity. Milk Shake Fill a glass two-thirds full of milk, sweeten to taste with any fruit syrup or with sugar and then flavor with vanilla. Fill up glass with cracked ice and shake well together until thoroughly mixed. Orangeade To every six oranges take two lemons. Squeeze out every drop of juice from the oranges. Sweeten to taste, strain until clear. About one-half hour before serving put in a big piece of ice. Use no water. Punch Juice of nine lemons and three large oranges. Take all the rinds and put in a bowl with one cup of sugar over them, let stand a couple of hours, then stir and mash it. Strain this juice through into the rest of the liquid. Add one can of cut-up pineapple, add water and sugar to taste, and one-half glass rum. Claret Punch One quart California claret, one-half pound sugar, one-half finger length cinnamon stick. Strain juice of two lemons and three oranges. Cook to the boiling point. Put in pitcher and add two thin slices of lemon and three thin slices of orange. Serve in glasses, and put a mint leaf in each glass and sprinkle with powdered sugar. Carolina Pineapple Punch Pull to pieces with a fork one pineapple, and soak in one quart French brandy for twenty-four hours in a covered bowl, then strain. Make a rich syrup of one pound sugar and one cup water. Mix with the brandy and dilute it with one quart of freshly drawn cold tea. When ready to serve, add one syphon of soda water, a few cubes of pineapple, a large handful of wild rose leaves on top. Pour over a block of ice. Fruit Punch Make a syrup by boiling two cups sugar and one cup water for ten minutes. Let stand one-half hour; add one cup cold tea, juice of five lemons and five oranges, one can grated pineapple and one pint strawberry syrup; strain, add ice water to make one and one-half gallons of liquid, turn this into a large punch bowl over a piece of ice and add one-half pint Maraschino cherries and one quart bottle Apollinaris water. This amount will serve fifty people. Tea Punch One quart tea, one pint whisky or brandy, six lemons, three oranges, one pineapple cut in cubes, Maraschino cherries and liquor, sugar to taste, large piece of ice, one quart bottle either of White Rock, Apollinaris or Syphon. A most delicious punch. Mint Punch To the juice of twelve large lemons add one pint of mixed fruit juices (juices left from preserving peaches, cherries or any berries are excellent), one can grated pineapple and two cups of any good white wine (not sherry). Add a bottle of mineral water, sweeten and add water to taste. Raspberry Syrup I To seven boxes of raspberries take twenty-five cents' worth of tartaric acid and two quarts of water, let stand over night, then put in a bag and let drip over night, then add eleven pounds of granulated sugar; stir every day until clear, then bottle it; let stand two or three days before corking. Raspberry Syrup II Put berries in a stone jar, mash well and stand in a cool place for about ten days. Then remove mildew and press through a bag. To five pints of fruit juice use nine pounds of sugar and let boil five minutes; skim and stir. Fill bottles while hot; cork well. Hot Spiced Rum One teaspoon powdered white sugar, one wine glass of Jamaica rum, one teaspoon of spices (unground allspice and cloves ), one piece fresh butter the size of one-half walnut. Dissolve the sugar in a little boiling water, then add the rum, spices and butter. Fill the glass two-thirds full of boiling water and serve. White Wine Cup One quart white wine, one pint White Rock, two pony glasses Maraschino, one pony St. Croix rum, one pony soft rum, three pieces cube sugar dissolved in warm water and a little lemon juice. Throw in sliced oranges, strawberries, pineapple, cherries, bananas and apple. Wild Irish Rose Cocktail (Hotel Portland) Three-fourths gill Rhine wine, one pony Grenadine, one-half pony Orange Curacoa, one-half pony Peach Cordial, juice of one lime. Mix ingredients well with cracked ice, and serve in ten ounce glasses well fruited. ADDITIONAL RECIPES DIRECTIONS FOR SERVING A DINNER Simplicity should mark the arrangement of the dinner table, with the decorations low, so as not to obstruct the view of the table. In laying the table, set a plate for each person, and at the right of the plate place a knife, bouillon spoon and oyster fork, in the order of use. The first one used to be farthest from the plate. At the left of the plate lay the forks in order of use, the first used, farthest from the plate. The tines of the forks and bowls of the spoons should be turned upwards, the cutting edges of the knives be toward the plate. Place the napkin at the left of the forks. Set the glass for water above the knife, near the center of the "cover" (the space occupied by the plate) and the wine glasses to the right in a half circle, the one to be used first the farthest from the hand. In serving dinners, three important things are to be remembered by the maid, who should be self-possessed and serve as quietly as possible. First, that food should always be set down before the guest from the right. Second, that when a dish is presented, from which a guest should help himself, it should be passed to his left. Third, that when a course is finished, plates should be removed from the left. The oysters or grape fruit are in place before the guests are seated. When these are removed, the service plate is left and the soup plate set upon this. After the soup plates are removed, the service plates are left for the different courses and are removed before the meat course is served. The entree now follows. After that the roast course. The salad course next. The table is then freed from condiments, relishes and stray crumbs. The plates are removed for dessert, and when this course is finished, the finger-bowls, on a doily -covered plate, are brought in. The black coffee is served last. WINE, AND HOW TO SERVE The wine glasses should be grouped together, being placed in order in which they are to be used, the first near the points of knives and the others extending in a curved line to the water glass at the left. Sherry, Madeira and Port, when served in the home, should be poured from decanters. Order in Which to Serve Wines In order that the different wines may be thoroughly enjoyed, they must be served with proper dishes that harmonize with their distinctive taste. Appetizer Madeira Dry Sherry Cal. Vermouth Oysters Chablis Sauterne Haut Sauterne Fish Tipo White Riesling Entree Tipo Red Zinfandel Cabernet Roast Tipo Red Burgundy Dessert Sparkling Burgundy Malaga Sparkling White Wine and Champagne Coffee Grape Brandy Sparkling wines should be served cold as possible without absolutely freezing. Red Wines --Claret, Tipo and Burgundy should be drunk moderately warm. White Wines --Tipo, Sauterne, Riesling, Chablis and others should be drunk comparatively cool. While a chilling temperature destroys the flavor of claret, it seemingly has the contrary effect on white wine, bringing out their bouquet and giving them an agreeable, fresh, spicy taste. Port, Sherry and Madeira are usually termed hot wines. They should be served after meals rather than during meals, though Sherry and Madeira are often taken with oysters or immediately after soup. If used in winter they should be gently heated. In summer they are about right if stored in a cool place. These wines lose in body and flavor by being chilled. The Proper Glasses There is much gratification and satisfaction in drinking wine out of a proper glass. Champagne should be drunk out of thin glasses of pure crystal, with a hollow stem that best show the sparkling qualities. Claret and Burgundy glasses, like those of Champagne, should be very thin, of medium size. They should be perfectly clear. Riesling and Sauterne should be served in thin glasses of greenish or yellowish tint. Sherry and Madeira are drunk out of small conic glasses. Port should be in glasses of thicker material, clear and colorless. No glasses, no matter how fine or beautiful in color, should ever be used that are blue, deep red or yellow. HOUSEHOLD HINTS Paste your oilcloth onto the kitchen table with ordinary flour paste, and you will find that it wears twice as long as when tacked on. The oilcloth does not move and wrinkle when wiping it, and so does not crack and soak up water. To remove discolorations from porcelain bathtubs and bowls , saturate a flannel cloth with kerosene and wash all over. Rinse in hot water. To clean sinks and remove grease which collects in the pipes , pour into them a small bucketful of boiling water, into which a handful or two of washing soda has been dissolved. A silver spoon, knife or fork put into a glass jar will temper it so it can be filled with anything hot, even to the boiling point. To remove iron rust : Dissolve one ounce of oxalic acid in one quart of water. Wet the rust spot in this and place in the sun, and the rust will disappear in from three to twenty minutes. In winter clean windows with a sponge dipped in alcohol. If lemon juice is added to the water in which glassware is washed, in place of soap, it will clean it and make it sparkle. Your long-closed house will doubtless smell close and musty when you return from your summer vacation. Throw some fresh apple peelings on the hot kitchen range or put them in a pan over the gas stove. Let these peelings remain until they turn brown and shrivel. They will give out a delicious fragrance of roasted apple, and this sweet-scented air will rise and float up through all the open rooms and drive out and away every bit of the unpleasant stuffy odor. Toast that is put in a glass jar with the lid screwed on tightly will keep fresh for hours. This is a good thing to know when a sick person has to be fed during the night. To Render Butter Buy in spring of year when cheap. Put in porcelain-lined kettle, set on stove and let boil very slowly until it becomes quite clear and you can see the reflection of a spoon in it, just like a mirror. Do not let it boil too long or it will become brown. Do not stir or skim until done. Remove from stove, strain through a fine cloth or sieve into a stone jar. Cover carefully and remove to a dry, cool place, where it will keep for months. Beef Drippings Save all chicken fat or drippings and at the end of each week put in a pot on the back of the stove to boil out all the moisture. When it stops bubbling it is done. Strain into stone jar. This will keep and is fine for pie crusts and frying. Do not use  mutton or corn-beef drippings. A teaspoon of water added to whites of eggs before beating will hasten the beating and increase the quantity. When stuffing dates for a confection, instead of rolling each one separately in powdered sugar put a tablespoon of the sugar in a glass jar. Then put in the jar about a cupful of the stuffed dates, seal the jar and shake well. You will be surprised to see how evenly the dates are dusted with the sugar, and how much time is saved in doing them. Hot vinegar will remove paint from glass windows and doors. To Try the Oven A French authority on cooking gives these rules for testing the heat of an oven. Try it with a piece of white paper. If it is too hot, the paper will blacken or blaze up; If it becomes light brown, it is fit for pastry; If it turns dark yellow, it is fit for bread and the heaviest kind of cake; If light yellow, the oven is ready for sponge cake and the lighter kinds of dessert. A wooden spoon is preferable for cooking, as it will not mar the dishes nor jar sensitive nerves, nor is it so apt to burn the hands if forgotten on the stove nor will it discolor food stirred with it, as a metal spoon would. An easy way to remove the skin from a whole tomato is to hold it over a gas flame with a fork. To remove old tea and coffee stains , wet spot with cold water, cover with glycerine and let stand two or three hours. Then wash in cold water. To remove grass stains from cotton goods , wash in alcohol. To clean piano keys , rub over with alcohol. Japanese baskets are now very popular for flowers and ferns. As the tin linings often leak, it may help some one to know that if you melt paraffin wax and fill the entire inside of the tin well it will not leak or rust. This treatment also applies to some of the present-day potteries which hold water. For a burn apply equal parts of white of egg and olive oil mixed together. Then cover with piece of linen. If applied at once, no blister will form. To wash carafes , half fill with hot soap suds, to which is added a teaspoon of washing soda. Put in some newspaper torn in small pieces. Let stand half an hour, occasionally shaking. Empty and rinse with hot water. To remove stains of claret from table linens, as soon as it is split cover spot with salt. Let stand a few minutes. Rinse in cold water. To remove glass stoppers , apply hot water to the neck of bottle. This causes the glass to expand. If the water in a can of ripe olives is drained off and the olives are put in a glass jar with one or more cloves of garlic, and the whole is covered with olive oil, the olives will be much richer and better. The oil can be used indefinitely.
