RATIONAL COOKERY. No 1. A good pickle for Hams. One ounce of salt petre, one pint of salt, half pint of molasses to each ham; put your salt petre into the molasses and rub your hams in it, then put your hams into a sweet cask, put your salt into water enough to cover your hams, turn it on to them and turn them often for six weeks. If the hams are large, add more salt, then smoke them ten days. Beef for drying, done in the same way, also Beef tongues. No 2. To corn Beef. To one hundred pounds of beef, three ounces salt petre, five pints of salt, a small quantity of molasses will improve it, but good without. No 3. To pickle one hundred pounds of Beef to keep a year. Put together three quarts salt, six ounces salt petre, one and a half pints of molasses, and water sufficient to cover your meat after laid into the barrel. Sprinkle the bottom of the barrel with salt, and also slightly sprinkle between the layers of meat as you pack, when done, pour in your pickle and lay on a stone or board to keep the whole down. Beef salted after this method during the fall or winter may be kept nice and tender through the summer by taking it up about the first of May, scald and skim the brine, add three quarts of salt, when cold pour back upon the beef. No 4. To salt Pork. Sprinkle salt in the bottom of the barrel, and take care to sprinkle the same plentifully between each layer afterwards. Let the layers be packed very snug by having the pork cut as large as can be handled conveniently, and laid in rind downwards, and the interstices snugly filled up with smaller pieces. Pork will only take a proper quantity of salt, be there ever so much in the barrel. The surplus answers for another time. Caution. --Although the same brine will answer for pickling beef, as that for hams, and pork generally, yet the two kinds of meat should never be in the brine at the same time. A small piece of beef placed in a barrel where there is pork, would spoil the latter quickly. A beef barrel, likewise, should never be used for pork, no matter how thoroughly scalded or cleansed. No 5. To roast Beef. The general rules are, to have a brisk hot fire, to be placed on a spit, to baste with salt and water, and one quarter of an hour to every pound of beef, though tender beef will require more roasting; pricking with a fork will determine whether done or not: rare done is the healthiest, and the taste of this age. No 6. Roast Mutton. If a breast, let it be cauled, if a leg, stuffed or not, let it be done more gently than beef, and done more; the chine, saddle or leg requires more fire and longer time than the breast, &c. Serve with potatoes, beans, or boiled onions, caper sauce, mashed turnip, or lettuce. No 7. Roast Veal. As it is more tender than beef or mutton, and easily scorched, paper it, especially the fat parts, let there be a brisk fire, baste it well: a loin weighing fifteen pounds requires two hours and a half roasting; garnish with green parsley and sliced lemon. No 8. Roast Lamb. Lay down to a clear good fire that will not want too much stirring or altering, baste with butter, dust on flour, and before you take it up add more butter, sprinkle on a little salt and parsley shred fine; send to table with an elegant sallad, green peas, fresh beans or asparagus. No 9. Alamode Beef. Take a round of beef, and stuff it with half pound pork, half pound butter, the soft of half a loaf of wheat bread, boil four eggs very hard, chop them up; add sweet marjoram, sage, parsley, summer savory, and one ounce cloves pounded, chop them all together with two eggs very fine, and add a gill of wine, season very high with salt and pepper, cut holes in your beef to put your stuffing in, then stick whole cloves into the beef, then put it into a two pail pot, with sticks at the bottom; if you wish to have the beef round when done, put it into a cloth and bind it tight by winding several times with twine; put it into your pot with two or three quarts of water and one gill of wine, if the round be large, it will take three or four hours to bake it. No 10. To stuff a leg of Veal. Take one pound of veal, half pound of pork, salted, one pound grated bread, chop all very fine, with a handful of green parsley, pepper it, add three ounces butter and three eggs, and sweet herbs if you like them, cut the leg round like a ham, and stab it full of holes, and fill in all the stuffing; then salt and pepper the leg and dust on some flour; if baked in an oven, put it into a sauce pan with a little water; if potted, lay some skewers at the bottom of the pot, put in a little water and lay the leg on the skewers, with a gentle fire render it tender, frequently adding water, when done, take out the leg, put butter in the pot and brown the leg, the gravy in a separate vessel must be thickened and buttered, and a spoonful of ketchup added, and wine if agreeable. No 11. To stuff a Pig, to roast or bake. Boil the inwards tender, mince fine, add half loaf bread, half pound butter, four eggs, salt, pepper, sweet marjoram, sage, summer savory, thyme, mix the whole well together; stuff and sew up; if the pig be large let it be doing two and a half hours; baste with salt and water. Gravy for the same. --Half pound butter, work in two spoonfuls of flour, one gill water, one gill wine if agreeable. No 12. To stuff a leg of Pork, to bake or roast. Corn the leg forty-eight hours and stuff with sausage meat and bake it in an oven two hours and a half, or roast it. No 13. To stuff a Turkey. Grate a wheat loaf, one quarter of a pound of butter, one quarter of a pound salt pork, finely chopped, two eggs, a little sweet marjoram, summer savory, parsley, pepper and salt, if the pork be not sufficient, fill the bird and sew up. The same will answer for all wild fowls. Waterfowls require onions. The same ingredients stuff a leg of veal, fresh pork, or a loin of veal. No 14. To stuff and roast a Turkey or Fowl. One pound soft wheat bread, three ounces beef suet, three eggs, a little sweet thyme, marjoram, pepper and salt, and some add a gill of wine; fill the bird therewith, and sew up; hang down to a steady solid fire, basting frequently with butter and water, and roast until a steam emits from the breast; put one third of a pound of butter into the gravy, dust flour over the bird, and baste with the gravy; served up with boiled onions and cranberry sauce, mangoes, pickles or celery. 2. Others omit the sweet herbs, and add parsley done with potatoes. 3. Boil and marsh three pints potatoes, moisten them with butter, add sweet herbs, pepper, salt, fill and roast as above. No 15. To stuff and roast a Gosling. Boil the inwards tender, chop them fine, put double quantity of grated bread, four ounces butter, pepper, salt and sweet herbs if you like, and two eggs into the stuffing, add wine, and roast the bird. The above is a good stuffing for every kind of waterfowl, which requires onion sauce. No 16. To stuff and roast four Chickens. Six ounces salt pork, half loaf bread, six ounces butter, three eggs, a handful of parsley shreded fine, summer savory, sweet marjoram, mix the whole well together, fill and sew up; roast one hour, baste with butter, and dust on flour. Gravy for the same. --Half pint of water, half pound butter, three spoonfuls flour, a little salt, and wine if you like. The same composition will answer for six pigeons, roasted in a pot. The pigeons must be kept from burning by laying skewers on the bottom of the pot, adding three pints water; cover close, let them do one hour and a quarter; when done pour on a quart of stewed oysters, well seasoned with butter and pepper No 17. To broil Chickens. Take those that are young and tender, break the breast bone, season high with pepper and salt, broil half an hour on hot coals. Six ounces butter, three spoonfuls water, and a little flour will make a gravy. Pigeons may be broiled in the same way in twenty minutes. No 18. To smother a fowl in Oysters. Fill the bird with dry oysters and sew up and boil in water just sufficient to cover the bird, salt and season to your taste; when done tender, put it into a deep dish and pour over it a pint of stewed oysters, well buttered and peppered, if a turkey, garnish with sprigs of parsley or leaves of celery; a fowl is best with a parsley sauce. No 19. To dress a Calf's Head-Turtle fashion. The head and feet being well scalded and cleaned, open the head, take out the brains, wash, pick and cleanse, add salt, pepper and parsley, and put them in a cloth, boil the head, feet and heartslet about one and a half hour, sever out the bones, cut the skin and meat in slices, strain the liquor in which boiled and put by; make the pot very clean or it will burn on, make a layer of the slices, which dust with a composition made of black pepper and one spoonful of sweet herbs pulverised, (two spoonfuls sweet marjoram and thyme are most approved,) a tea spoonful of cayenne, one pound butter; then dust with flour, then a layer of slices, with slices of veal and seasoning till completed, cover with the liquor, stew gently three quarters of an hour. To make forcemeat balls--take one pound and a half of veal, one pound grated bread, four ounces raw salt pork; mince and season with above, and work with three whites of eggs into balls, one or one and a half inches diameter, roll in flour, and fry in very hot butter till brown; then chop the brains fine and stir into the whole mess in the pot, put thereto one third part of the fried balls and a pint of wine or less; when all is heated through, take off and serve in tureens, laying the residue of the balls and hard peeled eggs into a dish; garnish with slices of lemon, put in cloves to your taste. No 20. Calf's head turtle fashion--another way. Head and entrails boiled the day before, the liquor of which is to be preserved; then slice the head, feet, &c. in the bottom of the pot, and season with pepper, salt and spices, pounded fine, and mixed together, then another layer of the meat,--then put in as much of the liquor they were boiled in as will cover the whole; let it be done over a small fire--the dish is to be garnished with forcemeat balls made of veal. See No 19. No 21. To clarify Drippings. Put your drippings into a clean sauce-pan over a stove or slow fire; when it is just going to boil, skim it well, let it boil, and then let it stand till it is a little cooled; then pour it through a sieve into a pan. Obs. --Well-cleansed drippings, and the fat skimmings of the broth-pot, when fresh and sweet, will baste every thing as well as butter, except game and poultry, and should supply the place of butter for common fries, &c.; for which they are equal to lard, especially if you repeat the clarifying twice over. N. B. If you keep it in a cool place, you may preserve it a fortnight in summer, and longer in winter. When you have done frying, let the drippings stand a few minutes to settle, and then pour it through a sieve into a clean basin or stone pan, and it will do a second and third time as well as it did the first; only the fat you have fried fish in must not be used for any other purpose. No 22. To clarify Suet to fry with. Cut beef or mutton suet into thin slices, pick out all the veins and skins, &c. put it into a thick and well tinned sauce pan, and set it over a very slow stove, or in an oven, till it be melted; you must not hurry it; if not done very slowly it will acquire a burnt taste, which you cannot get rid of; then strain it through a hair sieve into a clean pan: when quite cold, tie a paper over it, and keep it for use. Hog's lard is prepared in the same way. No 23. Veal Cutlets. Let your cutlets be about half an inch thick; trim and flatten them with a knife or cleaver; you may fry them in fresh butter, or good drippings; when brown on one side, turn them and do the other; if the fire is very fierce, they must change sides oftener. No 24. To broil Beef Steak. Have your steak about an inch thick, if tender it is spoiled by being pounded, but if tough pound it well, lay it on your gridiron, broil it quick, have plenty of butter in your dish, pepper, salt and serve it immediately whilst hot. No 25. To broil shad. Take fresh shad, salt and pepper it well, broil half an hour; make a smoke with small chips while broiling, when done add butter, and wine if agreeable.-- SALMON or any kind of fresh fish may be prepared in the same manner. No 26. To stew Oysters. To a quart of oysters put two ounces of butter, if too salt, add some water, pepper to your taste; stew them from fifteen to twenty minutes, by keeping them at a good scalding heat, without boiling; toast a slice of bread, or use crackers, and lay them in a dish, turn your oysters on, and they are ready to serve. No 27. Oysters fried. Simmer them in their own liquor for a couple of minutes, take them out and lay them on a cloth to drain, and then flour them, egg and bread crumb them, put them into boiling fat, and fry them a delicate brown. No 28. Clarified Butter. Put the butter in a nice, clean stew pan, over a very clear, slow fire; watch it, and when it is melted, carefully skim off the buttermilk, &c. which will swim on the top; let it stand a minute or two for the impurities to sink to the bottom; then pour the clear butter thro' a sieve into a clean basin, leaving the sediment at the bottom of the stew pan. N. B. Butter thus purified will be as sweet as marrow, a very useful covering for potted meats &c. and for frying fish. No 29. Burnt Butter. Put two ounces of fresh butter into a frying pan; when it becomes a dark brown colour, add to it a table spoonful and a half of good vinegar, and a little pepper and salt. N. B. This is used as sauce for boiled fish, or poached eggs. No 30. Parsley and Butter. Wash some parsley very clean, and pick it carefully leaf by leaf; put a teaspoonful of salt into half a pint of boiling water: boil the parsley about ten minutes; drain it on a sieve; mince it quite fine, and then bruise it to a pulp. Put it into a sauceboat, and mix with it, by degrees, about half a pint of good melted butter; do not put much flour to it. No 31. Egg Sauce. This agreeable accompaniment to roasted poultry, or salted fish, is made by putting three eggs into boiling water, and boiling them for about twelve minutes, when they will be hard; put them into cold water till you want them. This will make the yelks firmer, and prevent their surface turning black, and you can cut them much neater: use only two of the whites; cut the whites into small dice, the yelks into bits about a quarter of an inch square; put them into a sauce boat; pour to them half a pint of melted butter, and stir them together. The melted butter for egg sauce need not be made very thick. If you are for superlative egg sauce, pound the yelks of a couple of eggs, and rub them with the melted butter to thicken it. N. B. Some cooks garnish salt fish with hard boiled eggs cut in half. No 32. Lemon Sauce. Pare a lemon, and cut it into slices twice as thick as a half dollar; divide these into dice, and put them into a gill of melted butter. Some cooks mince a bit of the lemon peel, (parted very thin,) very fine, and add it to the above. No 33. Sage and Onion, or Goose stuffing Sauce. Chop very fine an ounce of onion and half an ounce of green sage leaves; put them into a stewpan with four spoonfuls of water; simmer gently for ten minutes; then put in a tea spoonful of pepper and salt, and one ounce of fine bread crumbs; mix well together; then pour to it a gill of melted butter, (or broth, or gravy, ) stir well together, and simmer it a few minutes longer. No 34. Soup made of a Beef's Hock. Let the bones be well broken, boil five hours in eight quarts water, one gill rice to be added, salt sufficiently; after three hours boiling, add twelve potatoes pared, some small carrots, and two onions; a little summer savory will make it grateful. No 35. Veal Soup. Take a shoulder of veal, boil in five quarts water three hours, with two spoons rice, four onions, six potatoes, and a few carrots, sweet marjoram, parsley and summer-savory, salt and pepper sufficiently; half a pound butter worked into four spoons flour to be stirred in while hot. No 36. Soup of Lamb's head and pluck. Put the head, heart and lights, with one pound pork into five quarts of water; after boiling one hour, add the liver, continue boiling half an hour more, which will be sufficient; potatoes, carrots, onions, parsley, summer-savory and sweet marjoram, may be added in the midst of the boiling; take half pound of butter, work it into one pound flour, also a small quantity summer-savory, pepper and two eggs, work the whole well together--drop this in small balls into the soup while hot, it is then fit for the table. No 37. General rules to be observed in boiling. The first necessary caution is that your pots and covers are always kept clean--be careful that your pot is constantly boiling, by this means you may determine with precision the time necessary to accomplish any dish you may wish to prepare in this way--put fresh meat into boiling water, and salt into cold--never crowd your pot with meat, but leave sufficient room for a plenty of water--allow a quarter of an hour to every pound of meat. No 38. To boil Ham. This is an important article, and requires particular attention, in order to render it elegant and grateful. It should be boiled in a large quantity of water, and that for a long time, one quarter of an hour for each pound; the rind to be taken off when warm. It is most palatable when cold, and should be sent to the table with eggs, horse radish or mustard. This affords a sweet repast at any time of day. No 39. To boil a Turkey, fowl or Goose. Poultry boiled by themselves are generally esteemed best, and require a large quantity of water; scum often and they will be of a good colour. A large turkey with forced meat in his craw will require two hours; one without, an hour and a half; a large fowl one hour and a quarter; a full grown goose two hours, if young, one hour and a half --and other fowls in proportion; serve up with potatoes, beets, marshed turnips, stewed oysters with butter. No 40. To dress Bass, and many other kinds of fish. Season high with salt, pepper and cayenne, one slice salt pork, one of bread, one egg, sweet marjoram, summer-savory and parsley, minced fine and well mixed, one gill wine, four ounces butter; stuff the fish --bake in the oven one hour; thin slices of pork laid on the fish as it goes into the oven; when done pour over dissolved butter; serve up with stewed oysters, cranberries, boiled onions or potatoes. The same method may be observed with fresh Shad, Codfish, Blackfish and Salmon. No 41. To dress a Sturgeon. Clean your sturgeon well, parboil it in a large quantity of water, till it is quite tender, then change the water, and boil it till sufficiently done, then hash it as you would beef, adding the usual articles for seasoning. Some prefer it done in the form of veal cutlet, which is by taking slices of sturgeon, dipping them in the yelks of eggs well beat, then rolled in flour and fried in butter. No 42. For dressing Codfish. Put the fish first into cold water and wash it, then hang it over the fire and soak it six hours in scalding water, then shift it into clean warm water and let it scald for one hour, it will be much better than to boil. No 43. Chowder. Take a bass weighing four pounds, boil half an hour; take six slices raw salt pork, fry them till the lard is nearly extracted, one doz. crackers soaked in cold water five minutes; put the bass into the lard, also the pieces of pork and and crackers, add two onions chopped fine, cover close and fry for twenty minutes; serve with potatoes, pickles, apple sauce or mangoes; garnish with green parsley. No 44. How to keep green peas till winter. Take young peas, shell and put them in a cullender to drain, then lay a cloth four or five times double on a table, and spread them on, dry them very well, and have your bottles ready, fill them, cover over with mutton suet fat when it is a little soft; fill the necks almost to the top, cork up, tie a bladder and leather over them and set away in a dry cool place. No 45. Beef steak Pie. Take slices of beef steak half an inch thick, lay them three deep in paste No. 8, adding salt, pepper, and slices raw onion between each layer, dusting on flour at the same time, together with a sufficient quantity of butter --add half pint water; bake one and a half hour.--This must be put in an earthen vessel and covered with a crust, as for a chicken pie. No 46. A lamb Pie. Take a shoulder and cut it into small pieces, parboil it till tender, then place it in paste, No. 8, in a deep dish; add salt, pepper, butter and flour to each layer of lamb, till your dish be full; fill with water, and cover over with paste, put in a hot oven, bake one hour and a half. No 47. A stew Pie. Take a shoulder of veal, cut it up, and boil an hour, then add salt and pepper, a sufficient quantity, butter half a pound, add slices raw salt pork, cover the meat with biscuit dough; cover close and stew half an hour in three quarts of water only. No 48. A sea Pie. Four pounds flour, one pound and a half butter rolled in paste, wet with cold water, line the pot therewith, lay in one dozen split pigeons, with slices of pork, salt, pepper, and dust on flour, doing thus till the pot is full, or your ingredients expended, add three pints water, cover tight with paste, and stew moderately two hours and a half. No 49. Chicken Pie. Take two chickens, joint and put them in a pot with four ounces of pork cut in slices, add pepper and salt, boil until tender, turn them out and set away to cool; make a rich paste, with which line the dish half an inch thick, then a layer of chicken with pieces of butter, and sprinkle on pepper and flour; put on your gravy from the chickens, and continue to do so until filled up; roll out a thick crust, bake an hour in a hot oven; serve it up with melted butter and any seasoning you like. No 50. Save-all Pie. In every family there are pieces of fresh meat left of roasted meats: these take from the bones, boil and season, put in butter and flour; make a paste and place in a deep dish, put your meat in, cover it and bake one hour. All meats can be used in this way and with good paste and seasoning make a clever dinner. No 51. Mince Meat Never hash your meat, it is a poor way of cooking, and is hard of digestion--but take the corned beef that you wish to make use of in this way, put it into a bowl, chop FINE with a chopping knife, then add your potatoe and chop fine with it. Add turnip, beet, or cabbage if you like, and put all into a spider with the addition of butter or drippings; salt, pepper and a little water, warm moderately. Another way. --Cold fresh meat boiled or roasted, chop it fine, make a batter with a couple of eggs, season your meat, do it up in balls, dip them in your batter, make ready hot drippings, butter or lard, fry them a fine brown. No 52. A good way to cook Codfish. Soak your codfish an hour and a half and let it get scalding hot, but not to boil, it will harden the fish, boil your potatoes and make a gravy of butter, serve it up immediately. No 53. Another way to cook Codfish After soaked as above directed, and cold, chop your fish, to which add three times the quantity of potatoes chopped fine with the fish, put in pepper and salt to season it, do it up in balls, roll them in dry flour, make ready hot lard or butter in a fryingpan, and fry them until a nice brown, turn them that they be brown on every side. No 54. A Tongue Pie. One pound neat's tongue, one pound of apple, one quarter of a pound of butter, one pint of wine, one pound of raisins, or currants, or half of each, half ounce cinnamon and mace --bake in paste No. 1, in proportion to size. No 55. Minced pie of Beef. Four pounds boiled beef, chopped fine, salted; six pounds of raw apples chopped, also, one pound beef suet, one quart wine or rich sweet cider, mace and cinnamon, of each one ounce, two pounds sugar, a nutmeg, two pounds raisins, bake in paste No. 3, three fourths of an hour. All meat pies require a hotter and brisker oven than fruit pies; in good cookeries all raisins should be stoned. As people differ in their tastes, they may alter to their wishes.--And as it is difficult to ascertain with precision the small articles of spicery, every one may relish as they like and suit their taste. No 56. Apple Pie. Stew and strain the apples, to every three pints grate the peel of a fresh lemon, add rose water and sugar to your taste, and bake in paste No. 3. Every species of fruit, such as pears, raspberries, blackberries, &c. may be only sweetened, without spice, and bake in No. 3. No 57. Dried Apple Pie. Take two quarts dried apples, put them into an earthern pot that contains one gallon, fill it with water and set it in a hot oven, adding one handful of cranberries; after baking one hour fill up the pot again with water; when done and the apple cold, strain it and add thereto the juice of three or four limes, raisins, sugar, orange peel and cinnamon to your tase, lay in paste No. 3. No 58. A buttered Apple Pie. Pare, quarter and core tart apples, lay in paste No. 3, cover with the same; bake half an hour; when drawn, gently raise the top crust, add sugar, butter, orange peel and a sufficient quantity of rose water. No 59. Currant Pie. Take green, full grown currants, and one third their quantity of sugar and raisins, to every quart of currants, add half pint water, pro- as above. No 60. Potatoe Pie. Scald one quart milk, grate in four large potatoes while the milk is hot, when cold add four eggs well beaten, four ounces butter, spice and sweeten to your taste, lay in paste No. 7 bake half an hour. N. B. A bowl containing two quarts, filled with water, and set into the oven prevents any article from being scorched, such as cakes, pies and the like. No 61. Custards. 1. One quart milk scalded, six eggs, six ounces sugar, two spoonfuls rose water, half a nutmeg --bake. 2. Sweeten a quart of milk, add nutmeg, rose water and six eggs; bake in tea cups or dishes, or boil in water, taking care that it don't boil into the cups. No 62. Boiled Custards. One pint of milk, two ounces of almonds, two spoons rose water, or orange flower water, some mace, boil, then stir in sweetening, when cold add four eggs, and lade off into china cups, bake, and serve up. No 63. Rice Custard. Boil two spoonfuls of ground rice, with a quarter of a nutmeg grated in one quart milk, when cold add five eggs, and four ounces sugar, flavour with orange or rose water. No 64. Common baked Custard. Four eggs beat and put to one quart of cream, sweetened to your taste, half a nutmeg, and a little cinnamon --bake. No 65. A sick bed Custard. Scald a quart of milk, sweeten and salt a little, whip three eggs, and stir in, bake on coals in a pewter vessel. No 66. Apple Tarts. Stew and strain the apples, add cinnamon, rose water, wine and sugar to your taste, lay in paste, No. 3, squeeze thereon orange juice --bake gently. No 67. Apple Tarts. Pare thin two oranges, boil the peel tender, and shred it fine, pare and core twenty apples, put them in a stewpan with as little water as possible; when half done add half a pound of sugar, the orange peel and juice, boil till pretty thick; when cold put in a shallow dish, or pans lined with paste, turn out, to be eaten cold. No 68. Raspberry Tarts with Cream. Roll out some thin puff paste and lay it in a pan of what size you choose; put in raspberries, strew over them fine sugar, cover with a thin lid, then bake, cut it open and have ready the following mixture: warm half a pint of cream, the yelks of two or three eggs well beaten, and a little sugar, and when this is added to the tarts return the whole to the oven for five or six minutes. No 69. Currant and Raspberry Tarts. For a tart, line the dish, put in sugar and fruit, lay bars across and bake. No 70. Cranberries. Stewed, strained and sweetened, put into paste No. 9, add spices till grateful, and baked gently. No 71. Gooseberry Tarts. Lay clean berries and sift over them sugar, then berries, and sugar, till a deep dish be filled, intermingling a handful of raisins, and one gill of water; cover with paste No. 9, and bake somewhat more than other tarts. No 72. Grapes, Must be cut in two and stoned and done like a gooseberry. No 73. Rice Pudding with Fruit. Swell the rice with milk and water over the fire, mix fruit of any kind, apples, black currants, or raisins, one egg, boil it well; serve it with sugar. No 74. Baked Rice Pudding. Swell the rice as above, add more milk, two eggs, sugar and lemon peel, bake in a deep dish. No 75. A cheap Rice Pudding. Half a pint of rice, six ounces sugar, two quarts milk, salt, butter and allspice, put cold into a hot oven, bake two hours and a half. No 76. A tasty Indian Pudding. Three pints scalded milk, seven spoonfuls fine indian meal, stir well together while hot, let it stand till cooled: and four eggs, half pound butter, spice and sugar; bake four hours. No 77. Another. Three pints scalded milk to one pint meal salted; cool, add two eggs, four ounces butter, sugar or molasses, and spice sufficient; it will requir two hours and a half baking. No 78. Another. Salt a pint of meal, wet with one quart of milk, sweeten and put them into a strong cloth, brass or bell metal vessel, stone or earthen pot, secure from wet and boil twelve hours. No 79. A Sunderland Pudding. Whip six eggs, half the whites, take half a nutmeg, one pint of milk and a little fat, four spoonfuls fine flour, oil or butter the pans, cups or bowls; bake in a quick oven one hour.--Eat with sweet sauce. No 80. A Whitpot Pudding. Cut half a loaf of bread in slices, pour thereon two quarts of milk, six eggs, rose water, nutmeg and half a pound of sugar; put into a dish, cover with paste No 1, bake slow one hour. No 81. Bread Pudding. One pound of bread, scald milk and turn on when cut in pieces, four ounces of butter, the same of sugar, four eggs, cinnamon and nutmeg, bake without paste. No 82. A Flour Pudding. One quart of milk scalded, add five spoonfuls of flour to the milk while hot: when cool add seven eggs well beaten, six ounces sugar, salt, cinnamon and nutmeg, to your taste, bake one hour, serve up with sweet sauce. No 83. A boiled flour Pudding. One quart of milk, four to six eggs, nine spoonfuls of flour, a little salt, put into a strong cloth and boiled one hour and a half. No 84. An apple pudding Dumplin. Put into paste, quartered apples, lay in a cloth boil one hour, serve with sweet sauce. No 85. Pears, plums, &c. Are done in the same way. No 86. Cottage potatoe Pudding or Cake. Boil and pare and mash two pounds of potatoes, beat them fine with a pint of milk, two ounces of sugar, three eggs, bake three quarters of an hour. A quarter of a pound of raisins or currants may be added, or leave out the milk and add a quarter of butter, it will make a good cake. No 87. Apple Pudding. A pint of stewed sifted apple, six eggs, half pint of milk, four ounces of butter, mix the apples and eggs before the milk is put in; add rose water, spice and sugar to your taste, bake it in a rich crust. No 88. Carrot Pudding. A coffee cup full of boiled and strained carrots, five eggs, sugar and butter of each two ounces, cinnamon and rose water to your taste, bake in a deep dish without paste, one hour. No 89. A crookneck or winter squash Pudding. Core, boil and skin a good squash, and bruise it well; take six large apples, pared, cored and stewed tender, mix together; add six or seven spoonfuls of dry bread or biscuit, rendered fine as meal, one pint milk or cream, two spoons rose water, two of wine, five or six eggs beaten and strained, nutmeg, salt and sugar to your taste, one spoonful flour, beat all smartly together, bake one hour. No 90. Pumpion Pudding. No 1. One quart stewed and strained, three pints milk, six beaten eggs, sugar, mace, nutmeg and ginger, laid into paste No 7, or 3, cross and checker it, and bake in dishes three quarters of an hour. No 2. One quart of milk, one pint pumpion, four eggs, molasses, allspice, and ginger in a crust, bake one hour. No 91. Orange Pudding. Grate the rind of an orange, put to it six ounces of butter, six of sugar, eight eggs, scrape raw apple and mix with it; put a paste into the dish and bars of paste over the mixture. No 92. Lemon Pudding. Four eggs, four ounces of sugar, one lemon grated with the juice, mix with four ounces of butter, one cup of cream baked in a paste. No 93. Marlborough Pudding. Take twelve spoons of stewed apples, twelve of wine, twelve of sugar, twelve of melted butter, and twelve of beaten eggs, a little cream, spice to your taste; lay in paste, No. 3, in a deep dish; bake one hour and a quarter. No 94. A plum Pudding boiled. Three pints flour, a little salt, six eggs, one pound plums, half pound beef suet, half pound sugar, one pint milk; mix the whole together; put it into a strong cloth floured, boil three hours, serve with sweet sauce. No 95. Sago Pudding, for sickness. Boil a pint and a half of new milk with four spoonfuls of sago washed and picked, lemon peel, cinnamon and nutmeg, mix four eggs, put paste around the dish, and bake slowly. No 96. Bread and butter Pudding. Slice bread and spread with butter, lay in a dish a layer of bread, with currants between each layer, citron, orange peel or lemon, pour on an unboiled custard. No 97. Arrow root Pudding, for sickness. Three table spoonfuls of arrow root mixed with a little cold milk, then stir it into a quart of boiling milk, stir it until cold, add four eggs beaten, sugar and nutmeg, bake half an hour. No 98. Quince Pudding. Boil four quinces soft and sift them, add half a pound of butter, six eggs, half a pound of sugar, one pint of milk or cream, spice any kind which you like, bake it in paste. No 99. Eve's Pudding Grate twelve ounces of bread, mix with it the same quantity of suet, the same of apples made fine, the same of currants, mix with these four eggs, a little nutmeg and lemon, boil three hours; serve with pudding sauce. No 100. Batter Pudding. Six ounces of flour, salt, three eggs, beat up well with milk thick as cream either to boil or bake. No 101. Nottingham Pudding. Pare six good apples, take out the cores with the point of a small knife, leave your apples otherwise whole, fill up where you take out the core with sugar, place them in a dish and pour over them batter prepared as batter pudding, bake one hour. General Rule. --Observe, always to rub your butter and sugar into every thing that is made hard, and mix it quickly, for if slowly done the cake is apt to be heavy. No 102. Good Rye and Indian, or Wheat and Indian Bread. From two thirds to three fourths Indian, ground rather coarse, (do not scald your Indian, ) one fourth to one third rye or wheat, if rye, do not have it bolted, but merely ground to be sifted; good yeast, made rather soft, more like batter than dough, put it into pans to rise; baked one and a half hours in a hot oven. No 103. To make common Wheat Bread. To eight quarts of flour put a pint of distiller's yeast, wet up the flour with warmed milk and set it by to rise or ferment. If you use brewer's yeast, put half a teacupful into a pint of warmed milk, thicken it up a litle with flour and let it ferment ten or twelve hours, when it is ready to go into your bread; wet up the flour as before directed with warmed milk and set the dough by to rise or ferment. Bake one and a quarter hours; all over that time does injury. N. B. Should dough intended for bread ferment so much as to become sour, put two teaspoonfuls of pearlash into a tea cup of warm water, and work it thoroughly in, just before going into the oven. No 104. Nice Cookies that will keep good three months. Nine cups flour, three and a half of butter, five of sugar, large coffee cup of water, with a heaping teaspoonful of pearlash dissolved in it; rub your butter and sugar into the flour, great spoonful of caraway. SIX RECEIPTS FOR MAKING No 105. Puff paste for Tarts. In the following a whole or part of the eggs may be dispensed with. No 1. Rub one pound of butter into two pounds of flour, whip two whites and add with cold water, make into paste, roll in six or seven times one pound of butter, flouring it each roll. This is good for any small thing. No 2. Rub six pounds of butter into fourteen pounds flour, eight whites of eggs, add cold water, make a stiff paste. No 3. To any quantity of flour, rub in three fourths of its weight of butter, whites of eggs; if a large quantity of flour, rub in one third or half of the butter, and roll in the rest. No 4. Into two quarts flour, salted, and wet stiff with cold water, roll in, in nine or ten times, one and a half pounds butter. No 5. One pound flour, three fourths of a pound of butter, beat well. No 6. To one pound of flour rub in one quarter of a pound of butter, wet with three eggs and rolled in half a pound of butter. A paste for Sweet Meats. No 7. Rub one third of one pound of butter, and one pound of lard into two pounds of flour, wet with four whites, well beaten; water as much as necessary; to make a paste, roll in the residue of shortening in ten or twelve rollings--bake quick. No 8. Rub in one and a half pounds of suet to six pounds of flour, and a spoonful of salt, wet with cream, roll in, in six or eight times, two and a half pounds of butter --good for a chicken or meat pie. Royal Paste. No 9. Rub half a pound of butter into one pound of flour, four whites beat to a foam, two ounces fine sugar; roll often, rubbing one third, and rolling two thirds of the butter is best; excellent for tarts. No 106. Johnny cake, or hoe cake. Scald one pint of milk and put three pints of Indian meal, and a half a pint of flour; bake before the fire. Or scald with milk two thirds of the Indian meal, or wet two thirds with boiling water, add salt, molasses and shortening, work up with cold water pretty stiff, and bake as above. No 107. Indian Slapjack. One quart milk, one pint Indian meal, four eggs, four spoons of flour, little salt, beat together, baked on griddles, or fry in a dry pan or baked in a pan which has been rubbed with suet, lard or butter. No 108. Loaf Cake. Four pounds of flour, two of butter, more yeast put in than for bread, and made rather soft with milk, let it stand over night, when risen beat twelve eggs, add two pounds and a quarter of sugar, one pound of raisins one of currants, spice, ginger and nutmeg, and beat it all together; let it rise a second time, bake about an hour and a quarter. No 109. To make puff paste rich. Half a pound of lard, rubbed into a pound of flour, wet with as little water as possible, and done quick, add half a pound of butter in the course of rolling out four diferent times, sprinkling flour between each time; roll it up and lay by to make up. Three quarters of a pound, half each of lard and butter for more common paste and for meat pies, and half a pound in all for invalids and those that wish to be very economical. No 110. To make fruit Cake. To one pound and four ounces of flour, put one pound of butter, one of sugar, ten eggs, one pound of currants, half pound citron, spice to your taste. No 111. Soft Wafers. One tea cup of yeast, one quart of milk, two pounds of flour, one of butter, ten eggs, one half to remain until risen. No 112. Hard Wafers. Two pounds of flour, half pound of butter, half pound of sugar, four eggs. No 113. Cup Cake Four cups of flour, three of sugar, two of butter, one of milk, small tea spoonful of pearlash, spoonful of ginger, essence of lemon. No 114. Washington Cake. One pound of sugar, one of flour, half pound butter, four eggs, one pound of raisins, one of currants, one gill of brandy, tea cup of cream, spice to your taste. No 115. Jumbles. Two cups of butter, two of sugar, three eggs, as much flour as will make it thin, and any good spice you like. No 116. Wedding Cake. Eighteen pounds of flour, twelve of butter, twelve of sugar, six of raisins, six of currants, three of citron, twelve dozen eggs, half pound of cloves, one quart of brandy, and as much other spice as you like. No 117. Rusk. One tea cup of yeast, seven pounds of flour, one and a half of sugar, one of butter, one quart of milk, eight eggs. No 118. Crullers, sometimes called Miracles or Wonders. Six ounces of butter, twelve ounces sugar, one pound twelve ounces of flour, six eggs, one nutmeg; fry in hot lard. No 119. Fruit Cake. Three pounds of flour, one of butter, one of sugar, one quart of molasses, six eggs, one pint of milk, three tea spoonfuls of pearlash, one tea cup of ginger, one of raisins or currants, spice to your taste. No 120. To make Doughnuts. One quart of milk, three eggs, one pound and a quarter of sugar, three quarters of butter, a little ginger, one tea cup of yeast, let it rise, then fry in hot lard. No 121. Dough Cake. Two pounds light dough, one pound and a half of sugar, three quarters of a pound of butter, four eggs, cloves and cinnamon, one pound of raisins, one tea spoonful of pearlash dissolved in milk. No 122. Good common Cake. Four pounds of flour, one and a half of sugar, one of butter, two cups of milk, two tea spoonfuls of pearlash, spice as you like. No 123. Biscuit. A quart of milk, one pound of butter, gill of yeast, made sufficiently hard to rise with flour. No 124. Cake. One pound of flour, one pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, half a pint of cream, one pound of raisins, five eggs, one nutmeg. No 125. Muffins. One quart of milk, four eggs, small cup of butter, some yeast, to be made stiffer than pound cake, bake it on a griddle in drops. No 126. Soft Gingerbread. Three eggs, three teacups of molasses, one teacup of butter, one teaspoonful of pearlash, one pound of flour, one large spoonful of ginger. No 127. Sugar Gingerbread. One pound and a half of flour, half a pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, one pint of molasses, four eggs, one tea cup of milk, two tea spoons of pearlash, one ounce of ginger, one of cinnamon, one nutmeg, one pound of currants. No 128. Sugar Gingerbread. One pound of flour, one pound of sugar, six ounces of butter, four eggs, add pearlash and ginger, made hard and rolled out. No 129. Hard Gingerbread. One pound of butter, one of sugar, one pint of molasses, one tea cup of ginger, three teaspoons of pearlash, flour enough to make a stiff dough, spice to your taste. No 130. Orange Gingerbread. Two pounds and a quarter fine flour, a pound and 3 quarters molasses, 12 ounces of sugar, 3 ounces undried orange peel chopped fine, 1 ounce each of ginger and allspice, melt twelve ounces of butter, mix the whole together, lay it by for twelve hours, roll it out with as little flour as possible, cut it in pieces three inches wide, mark them in the form of checkers with the back of a knife, rub them over with the yelk of an egg, beat with a tea cup of milk, when done wash them again with the egg. No 131. Sponge Cake. Ten eggs, the weight of them in sugar, the whites of five in flour, beat the yelk and sugar together, the whites of the other five eggs separately, do not add the flour untill ready to bake, add essence of lemon and nutmeg. No 132. Composition Cake. One pound and twelve ounces of flour, one pound of butter, one pound and a half of sugar, one pound and twelve ounces of fruit, put into a pint of milk, one tea spoon of pearlash, two nutmegs, one glass of wine. No 133. Whigs, or Wigs. One pound flour, four ounces of butter, four ounces of sugar, half a pint of milk, three eggs, tea cup of yeast. No 134. Queen's Cake. One pound of flour, three fourths of butter, one of sugar, one of currants, two eggs, whites beaten separately and put in just as the cake goes into the oven; butter little tins, fill half full, sift on white sugar. No 135. Another Queen's Cake One pound of flour, pound of sugar, pound of butter, eight eggs, beat separately whites and yelks, rose water, or essence of lemon. N. B. Let it be observed and understood that all cake is better to beat yelks and whites of eggs separately, and adding the whites just before going into the oven; the butter and sugar to be worked together to a cream, before any addition is made to them. No 136. Shrewsbury Cake. Half a pound of butter, three fourths of sugar, one pound flour, four eggs, spice and wine. No 137. Federal Cake. Three pounds and a quarter of flour, one pound and three quarters of sugar, quarter of butter, six eggs, two cups of milk, one pint of yeast, half a pint of wine, raisins and spice. No 138. Jumbles. One pound and a half of flour, one pound sugar, three quarters of a pound of butter, half an ounce of caraway seed, roll them in sugar. No 139. Pound Cake. One pound of flour, one of sugar, ten eggs, ten ounces of butter. No 140. Minute Cake. Five tea cups of flour, three of sugar, two of butter, one of milk, two eggs, tea spoon of pearlash, fruit and spice. No 141. Thanksgiving Cake. Six pounds of flour, one pint of good yeast, made over night with warm milk, that it may rise by morning, add three pounds of sugar, two and a half pounds of butter, six eggs, three pounds of currants or raisins, one ounce cinnamon, two of cloves, gill of brandy, bake one hour and a half. No 142. Pearlash Cake. One pound and a quarter of flour, ten ounces sugar, six ounces butter, a gill of water, one teaspoonful of pearlash. No 143. Cream Cake. One pound of flour, three quarters of a pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, four eggs, one glass of wine, one of brandy, one pint of cream. No 144. Mineral Cake. Two cups of flour, one pound and a half of sugar, one of butter, half cup of cream, a little pearlash, four eggs, one glass of wine, nutmeg. No 145. Pumpion Pie One quart of milk or cream, one pint of strained pumpion, six eggs, add ginger and sweeten to your taste. N. B. We have seen excellent pumpion pie made by nicely paring the pumpion before stewing, and straining it through a colender in lieu of a sieve. No 146. An Excellent Cake. Two pounds of flour, one of butter, one tea cup of yeast with warm milk, set it to rise, then add two pounds of currants, one pound of sugar, one quarter of a pound of almonds, half pound stoned raisins chopped fine, one nutmeg, cinnamon, allspice, cloves and a peel of lemon chopped fine, a glass of wine, one of brandy, twelve eggs, yelks and whites beaten separately and thoroughly, orange and citron, a quick bake. No 147. Tunbridge Cake. Rub six ounces of butter into one pound of flour, then mix six ounces of sugar, beat two eggs and make with the above into a paste, roll it very thin, and cut with the top of a tumbler, prick them and cover with caraway, and sift on sugar. No 148. Route drop Cake. Mix two pounds of flour, one of butter, one of sugar, one of currants, then wet into a stiff paste with two eggs, rose water and brandy, drop them on tins floured; a short time bakes them. No 149. Clove Cake. Three pounds of flour, one of butter, one of sugar, three eggs, two spoonfuls cloves, mixed with molasses. No 150. Common pancakes. Make a light batter of eggs, flour and milk; fry in a small pan in hot dripping or lard, salt, nutmeg and ginger, may be added; or when eggs are scarce make the batter with flour, milk and pearlash. These are most frequently eaten without any trimmings; but sugar grated on, or sweet, or lemon and sugar sauce may be served with them. No 151. Rice Pancakes. Boil half a pound of rice to a jelly in a small quantity of water, when cold mix it with a pint of cream, four eggs, a little salt and nutmeg, stir in eight ounces of butter just warmed, and add as much flour as will make the batter thick enough; fry in as little lard or dripping as possible. No 152. Fritters. Make them of any of the batters directed for pancakes by dropping a small quantity into the pan, or to make the plainer sort put pared apples or lemons sliced, or currants into the batter, any sweetmeats or ripe fruit may be made into fritters. No 153. Spanish Fritters. Cut biscuits into lengths as thick as your finger, in what shape you please, soak in some cream, nutmeg, sugar, pounded cinnamon and one egg; when well soaked, fry of a brown and served with butter wine and sugar sauce. No 154. Baked Custard Pie. Boil one pint of cream and a half pint of milk with mace, cinnamon, lemon peel, a little of each; when cold mix three eggs, sweeten, and fill your cups or paste nearly full. N. B. Custard pies require a hot oven, but custards in cups are best when put in after the bread is drawn, and receive a slow baking. No 155. To make Floating Islands. Scald any sharp apples before they are ripe, pulp them through a sieve, beat the whites of two eggs with sugar, a spoonful of orange flower water, mix it by degrees with the pulp and beat all together, serve it on a raspberry cream, or you may colour the froth with beet root, raspberry, or currant jelly, and set it on a white cream, having given it the flavour of lemon, sugar and wine; or put the froth on a custard. No 156. Ice Cream. Mix the juice of the fruits with as much sugar as will be wanted before you add cream which should be of a middling richness. No 157. Icing for Cakes. For a large one, beat and sift half a pound of fine sugar with four spoonfuls of rose water, and the whites of two eggs beaten and strained, whisk it well, and when the cake is almost cold, dip a feather in the icing and cover the cake well; set it in the oven to harden, but do not let it stay long enough to get discolourd; set the cake in a dry place. No 158. Apple Jelly. Prepare twenty apples, boil them in a pint and a half of water, till quite tender, then strain the liquor through a colander; to every pint put a pound of fine sugar, add grated orange or lemon, then boil to a jelly. No 159. Raspberry Jam. Rub fresh gathered raspberries through a sieve, to every pint of the pulp put one pound of loaf sugar broken small, put it into a preserving pan over a brisk fire, when it begins to boil skim it well, stir it twenty minutes, put it into small pots, cut white paper to the size of the top of the pot dip them in brandy, put them over the jam when cold, with double paper tied over the pot. Strawpberry jam is made the same way. No 160. Quince Sweetmeats. One pint of water, three quarters of a pound of sugar to one af quinces, put the sugar with the water, and clarify it with an egg, then put in your quinces and boil till tender, then take out your quinces, put them into pots, boil the sirup to a jelly, on a slow fire, try it occasionally with a spoon. No 161. Heart Cakes. One pound of fine sugar, one of butter, eight eggs, one pound and a quarter flour, two ounces of currants, and half a nutmeg grated, to be baked in small tins in the shape of hearts or otherwise. No 162. Queen's Drops. One pound flour, one pound of sifted sugar, one of butter, quater of a pouud of currants, any agreeable spice, put drops on a tin about as large as a dollar, sift on sugar, to be baked quickly. No 163. Danbury Cakes. Set a sponge with two spoonfuls of good yeast, a gill of warm milk, and a pound of flour; when it is worked a little, mix with it half a pound of currants, half a pound of citron, cloves, cinnamon and other spices pounded fine, prepare paste by rolling it out in small rounds, lay on some of this mixture, cover it with paste, pinch it together and bake it. No 164. Plain Buns. Four pounds of flour, one of sugar, a gill of good yeast, a pint of milk with enough of the flour to make it the thickness of cream, let it stand two hours to rise, then melt one pound of butter, stir it into the other ingredients to make it a soft paste, let it lie an hour, mould it into buns about as large as an egg, lay them in rows three inches apart on tins, set them to rise until their size is doubled, then bake them a good colour. By adding seed they are called seed buns, or plums, plum buns. No 165. Derby, or Short Cakes. Rub one pound of butter into two pounds of sifted flour, put one pound of currants, one pound of sugar, mix all together with half a pint of milk, one egg, two tea spoonfuls of pearlash, roll it out thin, cut it in round cakes and bake them. No 166, Jackson Jumbles. One cup of butter, one of cream, three of sugar, tea spoonful of pearlash, two eggs, five cups of flour, to be dropped on a tin with a spoon to bake, No 167. Cream Cake. One pound of flour, three quarters of a pound of sugar, half a pound of butter, four eggs, one glass of wine, one of brandy, half a pint of cream, bake. No 168. Jumbles. Half a pound of butter, half a pound of sugar, three quarters of a pound of flour, two eggs, rolled in sugar and nutmeg; to be dropped on tins to bake. No 169. To make Crackers. Take a piece of bread dough as large as a pint bowl; after it has risen, take one tea cup of butter and work in with flour as hard as you can make it, roll and cut it out and bake it in an oven not very hot; then take them out, cool, then put them in a pan and set back into the oven to dry over night. No 170. To preserve Beets, Carrots &c. Boil good brittle beets or carrots, cut and put them in good vinegar, and then partly dry them, make a sirup, pound for pound, and preserve them as other sweetmeats. No 171. Apple Jelly. Pare and boil your apples to a pulp, strain, to a pint put a pound of sugar. No 172. Buckwheat Cakes. Stir up your buckweat about as thick as cream, put good yeast to it, let it rise, then add a little wheat flour, dissolve a little pearlash and stir it up, add salt then it is ready to fry. No 173. Rice Snow Balls. Put half a pound of rice in a saucepan, boil it ten minutes, drain it on a sieve dry, pare six apples, divide the rice into six parts, spread it on six different cloths, put one apple in each, tie it up loose, boil it one hour, serve it with butter and sugar, or wine sauce. No 174. Federal Pancake. Take one quart of bolted rye flour, one quart of bolted Indian meal, mix it well, and stir it with a little salt into three pints of milk, to the proper consistency of pancakes; fry in lard, and serve up warm. No 175. Tea Cakes. One pound of sugar, half pound butter, two pounds flour, three eggs, one gill yeast, a little cinnamon and orange peel; bake fifteen minutes. No 176. Tea Biscuit. Two pounds of flour, two spoonfuls of yeast in a little warm milk, mix them together adding one quarter of a pound melted butter with milk, to make it into a stiff paste; bake it in a quick oven, in any shape you please. No 177. Butter Biscuit. One pint each milk and emptins, laid into flour, in sponge; next morning add one pound of butter melted, not hot, and knead into as much flour as will, with another pint of warmed milk, be of sufficient consistency to make it soft--some melt the butter in the milk. No 178. Soft Cakes in little pans. One pound and a half of sugar, half a pound of butter rubbed into two pounds of flour, add one glass of wine, one of rose water, eight eggs and half a nutmeg. No 179. A butter Drop. Four eggs, one pound of flour, a quarter of a pound of butter, one pound of sugar, two spoonfuls of rose water, a little mace, baked in tin pans. No 180. To make Bread with grown flour. Take eight quarts of flour, six ounces of butter, one pint of the best of yeast, (this article must be good,) three tea spoonfuls of pearlash dissolved in half a pint of warm milk, add this to the yeast, and after working the butter into the flour, add the yeast, and work up the whole with milk into stiff bread, more so than of other flour: the oven must be heat with light dry wood, but not hotter than for other bread.--This method, particularly attended to, will demonstrate that good bread may be made with grown flour. N. B. In all cases where spices are named, it is supposed that they be pounded fine and sifted; sugar must be dried and rolled fine; flour dried in an oven; eggs well beaten or whipped into a raging foam. No 181. American Citron Preserves. Take the rind of a large water mellon, cut it in small pieces, allow loaf sugar pound for pound, make a sirup of the sugar, boil two hours slowly, put into pots for use. No 182. For preserving Quinces. Take a peck of quinces, pare them, take out the core with a sharp knife, if you wish to have them whole; boil parings and cores with two pounds of frost grapes, in three quarts of water, boil the liquor an hour and a half, or till it is thick, strain it through a coarse hair sieve, add a pound and a quarter of sugar to every pound of quince, put the sugar into the sirup, scald and skim it till it is clear, put the quinces into the sirup, cut up two oranges and mix with the quinces, hang them over a gentle fire five hours, then put them in a stone pot for use, set them in a cool dry place. No 183. For preserving Quinces in loaf sugar. Take a peck of quinces, put them into a kettle of cold water, hanging them over the fire, boil them till they are soft, then take them out with a fork when cold, pare them, quarter or halve them if you like; take their weight of loaf sugar, put it into a bell metal kettle or saucepan, with one quart of water, scald and skim it till it is very clear, then put in your quinces, let them boil in the sirup for half an hour, add oranges as before if you like, then put them in stone pots for use. No 184. For preserving Strawberries. Take two quarts of strawberries, squeeze them through a cloth, add half a pint of water and two pounds of sugar, put it into a saucepan scald and skim it, take two pounds of strawberries with stems on, set your saucepan on a chafing dish, put as many strawberries into the dish as you can with the stem up without bruising them, let them boil for about ten minutes, then take them out gently with a fork, and put them into a stone pot for use; when you have done the whole, turn the sirup into the pot, when hot; set them in a cool place for use. Currants and Cherries may be done in the same way, by adding a little more sugar. No 185. To keep white bullace, pears, plums, or damsons, &c. for tarts or pies. Gather them when full grown, and just as they begin to turn, pick all the largest out, save about two thirds of the fruit, to the other third put as much water as you think will cover them, boil and skim them; when the fruit is boiled very soft, strain it through a coarse hair sieve; and to every quart of this liquor put a pound and a half of sugar, boil it, and skim it very well; then throw in your fruit, just give them a scald; take them off the fire, and when cold, put them into bottles with wide mouths, pour your sirup over them, cover with a piece of white paper. No 186. To make Marmalade. To two pounds of quinces put one and a half pounds of sugar and a pint of spring water; put them over the fire, and boil them till they are tender; take them up and bruise them; put them into the liquor, let it boil three quarters of an hour, and then put it into your pots or saucers. No 187. To preserve Gooseberries, Damsons or Plums. Gather them when dry, full grown, and not ripe; pick them one by one, put them into glass bottles, that are very clean and dry, and cork them close with new corks; then put a kettle of water on the fire, and put in the bottles with care; wet not the corks; but let the water come up to the necks; make a gentle fire till they are a little codled and turn white; do not take them up till cold, then pitch the corks all over, or wax them close and thick; then set them in a cold dry cellar. No 188. To preserve Peaches. Put your peaches in boiling water just give them a scald, but don't let them boil, take them out and put them in cold water, then dry them in a sieve, and put them in long wide mouthed bottles; to half a dozen peaches take a quarter of a pound of sugar, clarify it, pour it over your peaches, and fill the bottles with brandy, stop them close and keep them in a close place. No 189. To preserve Cherries. Take two pounds of cherries, one pound and a half of sugar, half a pint of fair water, melt some sugar in it; when it is melted, put in your other sugar and your cherries; then boil them softly till all the sugar be melted; then boil them fast, and skim them: take them off two or three times and shake them, put them on again, and let them boil fast; and when they are of a good colour, and the sirup will stand, they are boiled enough. No 190. To preserve Raspberries. Choose raspberries that are not too ripe, and take the weight of them in sugar, wet your sugar with a little water, and put in your berries, and let them boil softly; take heed of breaking them; when they are clear, take them up, and boil the sirup till it be thick enough, then put them in again; and when they are cold put them up in glasses. No 191. To preserve Currants. Take the weight of the currants in sugar, pick out the seeds; take to a pound of sugar, half a pint of water, let it melt; then put in your currants and let them do very leisurely, skim them and take them up, let the sirup boil; then put them on again; and when they are clear, and the sirup thick enough, take them off: and when they are cold, put them up in glasses. No 192. To preserve Plums. Take your plums before they have stones in them, which you may know by puttlng a pin through them, then codle them in many waters till they are as green as grass, peel and codle them again; you must take the weight of them in sugar, a pint of water, then put them in, set them on the fire, to boil slowly till they be clear, skimming them often, and they will be very green; put them up in glasses and keep them for use. No 193. Strawberry preserve. Take three pounds large fair strawberries, free from stems or hulls, four pounds sugar, one pound raisins, place these in an earthen pot, first a sprinkling of sugar, then a laying of strawberries, another of raisins, and so alternatenly till the whole are placed in the pot, set it away in a cool place; if the weather should be warm, frequently sprinkle sugar upon them, by which they will be preserved fresh and good. No 194. Apple Preserve. Take half a peck of large russet sweetings, otherwise a fair sweet apple, pare and core them; take two quarts of frost grapes, boil them in one pint water till soft, squeeze out the juice, add to this the juice of one quart currants well squeezed; to this add three pounds of sugar, also four whites of eggs and the shells, beat fine, scald and scum clean, then add one pint brandy, strain it through a piece of flannel, then add the apples, and one fresh orange cut fine; boil gently half an hour over a moderate fire, put them in a stone or earthen jar, set in a cool palce, and keep for use. No 195. Damson Preserve. Take four pounds sugar and one quart of water, boil and scum clean, then run through a jelly bag, to which add one fresh orange cut fine, and half pint brandy; to this sirup put the damsons, let them do over a gentle fire fifteen minutes; put away for use. Cherris and Grapes may be preserved in the same way. No 196. A new method of keeping apples fresh and good, through the winter and into summer. Take a quatity of pippins, or other good winter apples: take them from the trees carefully when ripe, and before frost, make a hole thro' each one with a goose quill from stem to eye, fill this with sugar, lay in this position two weeks, till they are a little wilted, then put them in a tight cask, and keep them from freezing. No 197. To preseve bush beans fresh and good until winter. Take half a bushel of beans, of a suitable size and age for eating green, string and break them, then put them into a cask, first sprinkling in salt, then a layer of beans, and so alternately till the cask is full, then add a weak brine so as to cover them; take out for use, and freshen twenty four hours in water, often changing it; boil three hours in fresh water. No 198. To preserve Cucumbers. Take large cucumbers lay them in salt and water that will bear an egg, three days, set them on the fire with cold water and a small lump of alum; boil them a few minutes, make a thin sirup with sugar and turn on them, stand two days, then make a rich sirup, lay them in a jar and turn it on them; put it into the kettle again, simmer five or ten minutes, set it by until the next day, then boil again, put it in glasses, and set away for use. No 199. To preserve Parsley fresh and green, to garnish viands in the winter Put any quantity of green parsley into a strong pickle of salt and water boiling hot, and keep for use. No 200. To keep damsons. Take damsons when they are first ripe, pick them off carefully, wipe them clean, put them into snuff bottles, stop them up tight so that no air can get to them, nor water; put nothing into the bottles but plums; but put the bottles into cold water, hang them over the fire, let them heat sloly, let the water boil slowly, for half an hour, when the water is cold take out the bottles and set them in a cold place, they will keep twelve months if the bottles are stopped tight so as no air nor water can get to them. They will not keep long after the bottles are opened; the plums must be hard. No 201. Currant Jelly. Having stripped the currants from the stalks, put them in a stone jar, stop it close, set it in a kettle of boiling water, half way the jar, let it boil half an hour, take it out and strain the juice through a coarse hair sieve, to a pint of juice put a pound of sugar, set it over a quick fire in a preserving pan or bell metal skillet, keep stirring it all the time till the sugar be melted, when skim the scum off as fast as it rises. When the jelly is very clear and fine, pour it into earthen or china cups, when cold cut white papers just the bigness of the pot and lay on the jelly, dip those papers in brandy, then cover the top of the pot and prick it full of holes, set it in a dry place: you may put some into glasses for present use. No 202. To preserve Plums and Cherries, six months or a year, retaining all that bloom and agreeable flavour, during the whole of that period, of which they are possessed when taken from the tree. Take any quantity of plums or cherries a little before they are fully ripe with the stems on; take them directly from the tree, when perfectly dry, and with the greatest care, so that they are not in the least bruised--put them with great care into a large stone jug, which must be dry, fill it full, and immediately make it proof against air and water, then sink it in a living spring of water, there let it remain for a year if you like, and when opened they will exhibit every beauty and charm, both as to the appearance and taste, as when taken from the tree. No 203. Peach Preserve. Take half a peck of clingstone peachs, wipe them with a flannel cloth, put them into an earthen pot sufficient to contain them, fill it up with brandy, let them stand two days covered, then pour off the brandy, to which add half a pint of the same liquor and four pounds sugar; cut two oranges very fine, which add to the sirup, and when boiling hot pour over the peaches; the next day set them in a hot oven, let them stand half an hour, then set them away in a cool place. If the weather should be warm, the sirup must be scalded again in six or eight days, adding thereto another half pint of brandy and one pound sugar, pouring it boiling hot upon the peaches, then set them again in a cool place. This method of procedure will give them a more fresh and agreeable flavour than any mode yet discovered. Pears, taking out the seeds, may be preserved in the same manner. No 204. To dry Peaches. Take the fairest and ripest peaches, pare them into fair water; take their weight in double refined sugar; of one half make a very thin sirup; then put in your peaches, boiling them till they look clear, then split and stone them, boil them till they are very tender, lay them a draining, take the other half of the sugar, and boil it almost to a candy; then put in your peaches and let them lay all night, then lay them on a glass, and set them in a stove till they are dry; if they are sugared too much, wipe them with a wet cloth a little; let the first sirup be very thin, a quart of water to a pound of sugar. No 205. For brewing Spruce Beer. Take four ounces of hops, boil half an hour, in one gallon water, strain it, then add sixteen gallons warm water, two gallons of molasses, eight ounces essence of spruce dissolved in one quart water, put it in a clean cask, shake it well together, add half pint emptins, let it stand and work one week, if very warm weather less time will do; when drawn off, add one spoonful molasses to each bottle. No 206. To preserve Eggs from May until May again. Take a piece of unslacked lime as large as a pint bowl, slack it by degrees, when well slacked put ten quarts of water to it and add salt till your eggs will rise, then put them in with care that none get cracked, and lay a cloth on the eggs that will keep them wet on the top. No 207. To make Souse. Boil the souse until it will come from the bone with ease, cut it in slices, lay it in a jar, pour on vinegar and tie your pepper in a cloth and throw it in; it is then ready to fry when you wish, and will keep all winter. No 208. To make Coffee. A large spoonful of coffee for each person is sufficient when you make for as many as eight, if less, more. To make good coffee twenty minutes is sufficient to boil, and less will do; the yelk of an egg beat and stirred in before boiling water is turned to it, will enrich the coffee; put in codfish skin as large as to clear it; let it stand five minutes after taking from the coals. No 209. A good substitute for Cream to put in Coffee. Boil a pint of milk and let it cool, beat the yelks of three eggs and stir in, it will make the coffee much richer. No 210. To burn Coffee. Burn your coffee slowly when you commence, but let the burning increase, burn it a good brown, put it away in a close vessel for future use. No 211. To try Lard. In a pailful pot put a pint of water, a large handful of salt, put your lard in and try it fast until the water is boiled out, then let there be a slow and steady fire until the scraps are of a light brown, then strain the lard and set it away, it will be white as snow, and never hurt. No 212. To keep clear of Bedbugs. Take the white of four eggs, ten cents worth of quicksilver, put them into a bowl, beat them until a perfect froth, take a feather and dip in and apply it to every part of your bedstead where bugs ever conceal themselves, do this early in the spring, and but once a year, and you will never see a bedbug in your house.--Never wet your bedsteads. No 213. To make Yeast Cakes for Yeast. Take a quart of distiller's yeast if you can get it, if not the best you can get, add a quart of strong hop water, warm, but not scald your yeast; put as much Indian meal into it as you can conveniently mix, let it stand half an hour, make it into little flat cakes and lay them on a clean board, set them in the sun and dry until perfectly dry, put them in a dry place. When you wish to use yeast, take one cake and put it into a quart of warm water and dissolve it, stir in flour and make it as thick as thick cream, let it stand by a warm fire over night, it is then ready to make your bread in the morning. No 214. To keep Cheese in the winter. Take a clean dry barrel, put a little hay at the bottom, and then a cheese and put hay between each cheese and around it, and keep it covered tight, and in the driest part of the cellar, or in an upper room not subject to frost. No 215. To preserve Butter. Put your butter in stone jars, first sprinkle a little fine salt at the bottom, have it free from buttermilk, then put a layer of butter as thick as you wish to cut a slice, and continue to sprinkle a little salt between each layer, this will enable you to cut it smooth and not have it adhere to the under layer, cover it tight. No 216. To preserve Soapgrease. Make your cask clean, when you throw in fresh rinds or any thing of the kind, sprinkle on salt enough to preserve it, the same when you put down hog's inwards, and be as careful to keep it tight as any other meat, and you will have no disagreeable smell nor waste of grease by vermin. No 217. To make boiled Soap. For a barrel take thirty-five pounds of scraps or other grease that is made daily in a family, put half the quantity into a five pail kettle, a pailful of strong lie, boil it thoroughly with a moderate fire or it will run over, then keep adding strong lie until full, put it it in a barrel and add weak lie. Then take the other half of the grease and proceed as before. No 218. Cold Soap. Twenty-five pounds of clear grease, heat it, turn it into the barrel, heat strong lie and turn in, let it stand through the summer. Strong lie and good grease will insure you good soap, cold or hot. No 219. To put up a Leach, say a large tierce. Lay sticks across the bottom, then a covering of straw, one peck of lime should come next, after which the ashes, these to be well beaten down several times in the course of filling up, pouring in a pail of water each time after pounding. If you are in no hurry for your lie, water your leech occasionally until it shows a disposition to run at the bottom, then stop until you are ready to commence making soap. It will make two barrels. No 220. Barley Water. Upon one ounce of pearl barley, after it has been well washed in cold water, pour half a pint of boiling water, and then boil it a few minutes; the water must then be strained off and thrown away; afterwards a quart of boiling water must be poured over the barley, and which should then be boiled down to one pint and a quarter, and strained off. The barley water thus made is clear and mucilaginous; and when mixed with an equal quantity of good milk and a small portion of sugar, is an excellent substitute for a mother's milk, when infants are, unfortunately, to be brought up by hand. Without milk, it is one of the best beverages for all acute diseases, and may have lemon juice, raspberry vinegar, apple tea, infusion of tamarinds, or any other acidulous substance that is agreeable to the palate of the patient, mixed with it. No 221. Gruel. This farinaceous nutriment may be made either with grits, oatmeal or Indian meal. When grits are used, three ounces of them, after being very well washed, should be put into two quarts of water and boiled very slowly, until the water be reduced to one half of the original quantity. During the boiling it should be stirred frequently; and, when finished, it should be strained though a hair sieve. For oatmeal gruel, three ounces of meal must be put into a basin, and bruised with the back of the spoon; small quantities of water being successively mixed with it, and each quantity poured off into another basin, before more be mixed; and this must be continued until about a quart of water be mixed with the oatmeal. The remains of the oatmeal should then be thrown away, and the water in which it was bruised is to be boiled for twenty minutes, stirring it the whole of the time. Sifted Indian meal may be used like oatmeal, only that it needs not so much ceremony. Simply mixing and cooking for a few minutes over the fire does the business. No 222. Prepared Arrow Root for sickness. Arrow root forms an excellent nutritive mucilage. Put two tea spoonsful of the powder into a half pint basin; mix them smooth with a few tea spoonfuls of cold water, and then pour boiling water over the mixture while you continue to stir it, until it forms a kind of starchy looking substance. Sago and Tapioca form a similar mucilaginous substance, and are equally useful for children or as articles of diet for a sick person. As they are both hard, they require considerable boiling before they are completely dissolved. The person who makes a decoction of either must determine by trial if it be too thick or too thin. For a convalescent sick person they may be sweetened and seasoned with a little wine; for a child sweetened only. Arrow root, thus prepared, may be used in the same manner as gruel. It is well adapted for the food of infants, because it is less liable to ferment than either gruel or barley water; and for the same reason, it is the best fluid nourishment for those who are afflicted with diseases of indigestion. As it is very insipid, it requires either milk, or wine, or acids, to be mixed with it whichever may suit the taste and state of habit of the person for whom it is intended. It forms an excellent pudding, when prepared like rice, for children who are a little beyond the age of infancy. No 223. White Wine Whey. To make this whey, put half a pint of milk diluted with a gill of water into a saucepan, which must be placed on the fire uncovered.--Watch the moment when the milk boils, which may be known by the frothing and rising up of the milk to the top of the pan; pour into it, at that instant, two glasses of white wine, and a tea spoonful of powdered sugar, which should previously be mixed with the wine. The curd will immediately form; and, after boiling the mixture for a few minutes, may be separated from the whey, either by letting it settle at the bottom, and then pouring off the whey clear from it, or by straining it through a fine sieve. White wine whey, when drank warm, promotes perspiration; but as it is a stimulant, it cannot be given in inflammatory complaints. When cold, it is a very agreeable beverage in low fevers, and in convalescence, when stimulants are admissible. No 224. Balm, Mint, and other Teas. These are simple infusions, the strength of which can only be regulated by the taste.--- They are made by putting either the fresh or the dried plants into boiling water in a covered vessel which should be placed near the fire for an hour. The young shoots both of balm and of mint are to be preferred, on account of their stronger aromatick qualities. These infusions may be drunk freely in feverish and in various other complaints, in which diluents are recommended. Mint tea, made with the fresh leaves, is useful in allaying nausea and vomiting. No 225. Beef Tea, Is too frequently prepared, by simply boiling a piece of beef in a given quantity of water; but by this method it generally resembles gravy soup more than beef tea, and is then unfit for the use of the sick. To make it properly, cut half a pound of good lean beef into very thin slices; spread the slices in a hollow dish, and having poured over them a pint and a half of boiling water cover up the dish, and place it near the fire for half an hour, and then boil it over a quick fire for about eight minutes. The tea, after having the skum taken off, should stand for ten minutes, after which it is to be poured off clean, and seasoned with a little salt. Beef tea thus made is a light and pleasant diluent, and very useful when the bowels and stomach are in a weak and irritable state.--when used as food for infants, it should always be prepared in this manner; and nothing answers better as a breakfast, for those who are habitually sick in a morning, either from a redundance of bile, intemperance, or other causes. No 226. Veal Tea, Is prepared in the same manner as beef tea; and may be used under similar cirumstances. No 227. Chicken Tea, Is prepared by cutting, in small pieces, a chicken, from which the skin and fat have been removed; and then boiling the pieces, for twenty minutes, in a quart of water, with the addition of a little salt. The tea should be poured from the meat before it is quite cold. It is useful in the same cases as beef and veal tea. No 228. Toast and Water, May be made by pouring over toasted bread either a pint of cold or boiling water In the latter mode it should be made some hours before it is wanted, that it may have time to become perfectly cool. In some cases of extreme debility, ising-glass is sometimes ordered to be taken in small quantities. An ounce, when dissolved in a pint of boiling water, forms, when cold, a light jelly, a tea spoonful of which may be mixed with tea, or milk and water. A very pleasant beverage may, also, be made of orange juice and water, with the addition of the ising-glass jelly. No 229. To preserve Grapes and other delicate fruits. Bunches of grapes may be preserved for some time in jars; but each bunch should be wrapped up in soft paper, and every layer of these bunches in the jar covered with well dried bran. The mouth of the jar should be covered with a bladder, or the lid be cemented on with a cement composed of two parts of the curd of skimmed milk and one of lime. But the best method of preserving grapes, is to gather the bunches on the branch to which they are attached, which should be cut about six inches from the bunch, and have both ends of it sealed with common sealingwax. These should then be hung across lines in the fruit-room, taking care, occasionally, to examine them, and clip out, with a pair of scissors, any berries that appear mouldy. If grapes that are not over-ripe be preserved in this manner, they will keep until February. Other and more delicate fruits may also be preserved by wiping them dry to clear away the moisture which they yield after gathering, and then placing them in earthern jars, and covering them with layers of dry sand about an inch in thickness. Each jar should be well filled, closed with cement, and placed in the fruit-room or a cool place, but where it cannot be affected by the frost. No 230. Proper place for preserving Roots and Fruit. The cellar or room where roots and fruits are to be kept should be a dry one if possible, and not subject to freezing. Small double or treble sash windows, and a double door, prevent materially the ingress of frost from these places. A plentiful supply of shelves, and hooks overhead to attach lines are desirable. Shelves fixed up in common cellars will do. No 231. To keep Onions and other Bulbous roots. Spread them thinly on the shelves of such a room as is recommended in receipt No 230. Potatoes should be kept high and dry from the bottom of the cellar or they will rot, especially as the weather moderates towards spring. No 232. To preserve Cabbages, Lettuce, and other similar Plants. These plants may be preserved throughout the winter, in a state fit for use, if they be taken out of the ground with their main roots entire in perfectly dry weather, at the end of the season, and partially immersed in dry sand. If these and the potatoes be not put into the fruit-cellar, which might be inconvenient, they should be kept in a close dry cellar, of a cold, but not freezing temperature. See No 230. No 233. For preserving Fruit. There are various methods of preserving fruit. Pears and apples, the most useful fruit in a family, are best preserved in glazed, cylindrical, earthen vessels, large enough to hold a gallon, and closely fitted with covers. One kind of apple or of pear only should be put into the same jar, which should be labelled, to prevent the necessity of opening it to ascertain the kind of fruit it contains. Each apple or pear should be wiped dry, then rolled in soft spongy paper, and placed carefully in the jar, on which when it is full, the cover should be cemented, by means of a cement composed of two parts of the curd of skimmed milk and one of lime. These jars may be kept either in the cellar or the room, but the former is the preferable situation. Pears thus preserved, will keep until February or March; but they should be taken from the jars about ten days before they are wanted for the table, and placed on the shelves of the fruit-room, and ultimately removed into a warmer room for the last three days. Baking apples after they have been gathered a few days, and have, as the gardener would say, perspired, should be wiped and laid on a dry floor or shelf, and covered over with a linnen cloth, which secures them from damp and frost. A woollen cloth will not answer the same purpose; and straw, which is commonly placed over them, gives them a musty and disagreeable taste. Baking pears may be kept in the same manner; but when they are of a large kind, with a strong stalk, they keep much better if they are tied to a string across the ceiling. Apples and pears for baking may also be preserved in hampers or baskets lined with thick paper; and when this method is adopted, the fruit should not be allowed to perspire, but carried directly from the tree, and packed, carefully avoiding all sorts of bruising, and rejecting every bruised fruit. One sort of fruit only should be put into each hamper, which should be labelled. Apples are preserved in barrels, and kept in rooms where they will not freeze. No 234. To take grease spots out of clothes. Rub on spirits turpentine, then take alcohol, rub with a sponge, it will leave the cloth unsoiled. No 235. Drying and preserving Flowers and Plants. Provide yourself with a few sheets of blotting paper, the number to be regulated by the juiciness of the plants; having stretched one half the paper on a table, arrange the parts of the flower or plant to be dried in a manner you think it will afterwards look the best; lay the other half of the paper over the flower or plant as harmlessly as possible; then with a smoothing iron, well heated, you may easily extract all the moisture. Keep moving the paper as often as it becomes wet; continue the operation until no moisture comes. The advantage of this method is, that the flowers so prepared, retain the original colour. If you intend the specimen for a malange, moisten one side of the flower with a strong mucilage of gum, when it will readily adhere to paper. If you wish to preserve it still farther, wash the whole repeatedly with a solution of ising-glass, preparatory to its receiving a wash of copal varnish. In this way the plant may be preserved in full colour to an indefinite period. Sea-weeds preserved in the same way, look exceedingly beautiful, as their variety is endless. No 236. Preserving Potatoes. Wash them, cut them in pieces, steep them forty-eight hours in lime water, then forty-eight hours in fresh water; dry them in an oven. One hundred parts of fresh potatoes will give thirty so prepared and dried. In this state they may be kept for years, or ground at once into flour. This flour mixed with a third part of that of rye, is said to make an excellent bread. It is likewise proposed to moisten potatoes dried as above, with olive oil, and then to grind them, and use them as coffee. No 237. Preservative against Insects and Blight. A correspondent in a German Agricultural Journal, says, "bore a hole in the branch attacked, drop therein two drops of quicksilver, and at the end of two days, all the insects will be found dead." No 238. Extracting Grease. If a silk or cotton dress have been stained with grease a very excellent method of removing the spots, without taking out the colour, is to grate raw potatoes to a pulp, in clean water, and pass the liquid through a coarse sieve, into another vessel of water; let the mixture stand till the fine white particles of the potatoes have fallen to the bottom; then pour the liquor off clear and bottle it for use. Dip a sponge in the liquor and apply it to the spot till it disappear; then wash it in clean water several times. Two middle sized potatoes will be enough for a pint of water. Be very careful not to wet more of a dress than is necessary, as some delicate colours will look slightly marked even with clean water. No 239. Preparing Coffee. In order to roast coffee properly, the uses of roasting must not be lost sight of, namely, to destroy the hornlike tenacity of the green bean, and to develope its fine scent. Too much heat would destroy the chemical elements which ought to be preserved, and would substitute in their place others which are entirely different in quality. That fine scent which pleases so greatly the admirer of good coffee, is succeeded, when the coffee is over- roasted, by a bitter taste and burnt smell, which is far from pleasant, and even disagreeable.--If on the other hand, the roasting process is under-done, and the heat to which the beans have been exposed, has not been sufficient, then the raw smell of the coffee remains, and of course diminishes the aroma, which requires a certain heat to devlope it. There is of course a just medium to be observed. Well roasted coffee ought to have a pale chocolate colour equally spread over it, which is well known to those who are in the use of performing this operation; but it is never necessary to look at the roasted beans, the scent is sufficient; for when the true aroma is developed, and fills the surrounding atmosphere with its delicious scent, then is the time to stop the roasting. After this period, the oil acquires a burnt flavour, a scent somewhat resembling that exhaled by smokers of tobacco is perceived, and instead of good roasted coffee, there is obtained a bad kind of charcoal. Good raw coffee loses from sixteen to twenty per cent of its weight by roasting; if it loses more it is certainly over-roasted. Many different modes are used, and each has its admirers; but there is in fact only a single rule to be observed, namely, to use the proper degree of heat, and keep it up at the same point until the roasting is finished. Whether the roasting is performed in close or open vessels; whether the coffee is left to cool in the roaster, or is turned out, or even laid between cloths, appears indifferent. If, indeed, the roasting is carried by accident too far, the coffee should be immediately spread out thin on the floor, to cool as soon as possible. In all cases, when cold, the roasted coffee should be put up into tin-plate boxes, and kept from any moisture. It being well known that the chemical action of solvents is hastened, in general by reducing the solvent to powder; it is necessary to grind the roasted coffee more or less fine, as it is intended to use the water less or more heated. To reduce coffee to too fine a powder, although it it would require only slightly warm water to extract its soluble parts, yet it would be inconvenient in other respects, for the powder would pass through the strainers of the coffee pot, and by also remaining suspended in the water, would render the clearing of the drink difficult. At all events, roasted coffee should never be ground but the moment before it is used, as otherwise it loses much of its fine scent. It now remains only to say a few words respecting the making of the ground roasted coffee into drink--and here the grand points are, not to lose the fine aroma, and not to extract the bitter, acrid, resinous element of the coffee.--To avoid both these inconveniencies, it is necessary that the coffee drink should not be made with too much heat; as this would dissipate the aroma in vapours, and cause the water to dissolve the resin. The coffee, therefore, must not be boiled in the water, and still less is it proper to boil the grounds over again with fresh water, as is done by some persons. Coffee drink made from the grounds, when it is added to that made from fresh ground coffee, gives it indeed a fine deep colour, but the taste of the drink is very bad. It is not even necessary to pour boiling or even warm water on the ground coffee; cold water, if sufficient time is allowed, makes equally good coffee drink, for the elements to be extracted from the roasted coffee are extremely soluble in water. But if the coffee drink is required to be prepared in haste, hot water must be used. It is uiversally agreed on by the French amateurs of coffee, that coffee drink is never so good as when, after being made with cold water, or with hot water and cooled, it is heated over again, carefully avoiding a boiling heat. This heating over again is supposed to cause the various elements which produce the fine flavour of this drink, to unite more intimately; and this may be the real fact. The excellence of the coffee sold at Paris is well known; and this is always made one day and heated over again the next day, when wanted. A further advantage attends this knowledge, of consequence to single persons who, in summer time, do not keep a fire in their chambers, that by merely pouring cold water on the ground coffee over night, and straining it in the morning, the strained liquor may while they are dressing, be heated sufficiently for drinking, over a lamp; and this gives coffee a superiority over tea for the breakfast of such persons; as tea requires the water to be boiling hot, in order to extract its virtues; and of course reqnires a fire to be lighted. No 240. Washing Cottons and Linen. Never wash muslins, or any kind of white cotton goods, with linen; for the latter deposits or discharges a gum and colouring matter every time it is washed, which discolours and dies the cotton. Wash them by themselves. No 241. New method of making Jelly. Press the juice from the fruit; add the proper proportion of sugar, and stir the juice and sugar until the sugar is completely melted; put it into jars, and, in twenty-four hours, it will become of a proper consistence. By this means, the trouble of boiling is avoided, and the jelly retains more completely the flavour of the fruit. Care should be taken to stir the mixture until the sugar is completely melted, and fine sugar should be used. No 242. Yeast. To ten pounds of flour add two gallons of boiling water; stir it well into a paste; let this mixture stand for seven hours, and then add about a quart of yeast. In about six or eight hours this mixture, if kept in a warm place, ferments, and produces as much yeast as will bake an hundred and twenty quartern loaves. No 243. A good Bread. A mixture of two parts flour, and one potatoe, makes an agreeable bread, which cannot be distinguished from wheaten bread. It is said not less than three hundred tons of potatoes are consumed for this purpose in London every week. No 244. Cottage Beer. Take a peck of good sweet wheat bran, and put it into ten gallons of water with three handfuls of good hops. Boil the whole together in an iron, brass, or copper kettle, until the bran and hops sink to the bottom. Then strain it through a hair sieve or a thin sheet, into a cooler, and when it is about lukewarm, add two quarts of molasses. As soon as the molasses is melted, pour the whole into a nine or ten gallon cask, with two table spoonfuls of yeast. When the fermentation has subsided, bung up the cask, and in four days it will be fit for use. No 245. Foul air in Wells. The following simple, but certain preservative, is recommended to all persons who follow subterraneous occupations. When a well, vault or drain has been enclosed a considerable time, in order to disperse and rectify the suffocating air, at first opening throw down six or more pails of water, and after waiting a quarter of an hour, any one may venture down; the like method should be observed in sinking new wells, especially if the works have been discontinued any length of time. No 246. To wash printed Calicoes. Use as little soap as possible, and not with hot water; put in a little pot-ashes, lie or pearlash, and gently swill them, taking care not to rub the cloth too much; wring it out in cold water, and dry it in the open air. By this means many colours are improved--all indeed but such as are mere water colours, and of this kind good cloths are seldom printed. No 247. To prevent Moths. In the month of April beat your fur garments well with a small cane or elastick stick, then lap them up in a linen without pressing the fur too hard, and put between the folds some camphor in small lumps; then put your furs in this state in boxes well closed. When the furs are wanted for use, beat them well as before, and expose them for twenty-four hours to the air, which will take away the smell of the camphor. If the fur has long hair, as bear or fox, add to the camphor an equal quantity of black pepper in the powder. No 248. To prevent bad smells in sinks, &c. There is generally a close conductor attached to the spout of a sink. In this conductor let a well fitted trap door, or damper, made of tin, sheet iron or wood be inserted, having the arbours or bearings so far on one side of the centre as to cause it to shut of itself after letting the liquid pass through. Checks should be placed under the heavy end of the trap so as to keep it horizontal to the pitch of the conductor when in a quiescent state. Any common house joiner or similar mechanick would sufficiently understand from this description how to put one in. No 249. To make sticking paste. Every good housewife should know how to make paste, but few do, however. Take wheat or rye flour and stir into cold water until a middling thick batter, having all the lumps broken fine; pour on at once as much boiling hot water as to thin it up to the right consistency. Stir it well, set the kettle over just fire enough to keep up the heat produced by the hot water, and a few moments swell the flour so as to produce good paste.--N. B. A small quantity can be made in a spoon over a lamp or candle almost instantaneously. No 250. To transplant Trees. Let the trees be taken up with as little injury to the roots, and retaining as much of the earth as possible. Saw off the main trunk at such height as you please, also all the limbs, some close to the trunk, others three or four inches from it. Cover where sawed off with tallow, tar and rosin, melted and partly cold. Do not be afraid of this operation; the top will again grow out, in handsome shape too, as soon as the roots will bear one. In setting out the tree, if any thing more than a mere shrub, let a circular hole as much as four feet across and one and a half feet deep be dug, throwing the turf and top soil in one place and the hardpan in another; throw into the centre a little mound composed of the turf and top soil until high enough to bring your tree up to where you wish it, let it be held upright whilst the roots are carefully laid in their natural position and more of the top soil dashed in around with a shovel. Finish filling up with your hardpan dirt mixed with old foul grass or straw from horse manure with the manure partly shaken out beforehand. After having nearly filled up, tread down the earth, observing to keep the tree perpendicular. The earth thrown into this excavation operates as a sponge upon the adjacent ground, drawing sufficient moisture let the summer be ever so dry. N. B. All shrubbery thrives infinitely better by having the excavation made very large. No 251. To clean and renew the appearance of painted Wood-Work. Dissolve pearlash and water until it becomes slippery; with a sponge or cloth try it on the paint to see if it pretty readily removes fly specks &c., if you judge it too weak add more pearlash till right. Then as with water freely wash your paint, but immediately, say in three or four minutes, follow with water, wiping dry as you can, and end the process by rubbing the parts entirely dry with a dry woollen cloth. N. B. Be careful not to scatter the pearlash water where it will lay any considerable length of time for it will dissolve or cut thro' the paint to the wood. No 252. To kill grass that springs up in seams of flagging or gravel walks. Meat brine, or strong salt and water, poured into the seams of flagging or sprinkled freely on gravel walks, for a few times, with three or four days' interval, will completely kill the roots of grass or weeds. Some people employ a man for a whole day, say twice in the summer to cut out with a case knife, what brine would destroy with a fiftieth part of the trouble. No 253. To make a white wash that will preserve its whiteness and not rub off. Bruise or scrape raw potatoes and wash the same until you have procured potatoe starch enough for your purpose, (or take common starch, ) make it up as common starch for starching clothes and add it to whiting and water made of the right consistence for white-wash, and mix the whole well together. Let the water be a little warm that the starch may more readily mix with the wash. No 254. The only sure way to stop the blaze of a female's dress when accidentally caught on fire. If children or adults, let them prostrate themselves on the floor as soon as the clothes are discovered to be on fire and commence rolling in such a manner as to smother the flames, and let blankets, water, or any thing else at hand, be applied as soon as assistance comes. Many fatal accidents might be prevented by observing the above. To stand upright or run is sure destruction. No 255. To remove spots or stains from linen or cotton. Put a small quantity of brimstone into a skillet or some such iron vessel and drop in a live coal of fire; having first wet the stained spot with water, lay the cloth over the vessel so as to let the fumes have full access to the stained spot; it will soon disappear or become loose so as to wash out. N. B. As iron rust spots are pretty obstinate the better way to serve these, is to take, say one part muriatick acid, three parts water, wet the spot and lay the same over a teapot containing boiling water; repeat the operation if necessary. No 256. To remove glass stopples when fast. Take a cloth dipped in warm water, (if in cold weather see that the frost is out of your bottle,) wrap around the neck several folds and let it stand a short time, trying the stopple occasionally until it comes out. No 257. To prevent wooden ware from cracking. After washing wooden bowls, trays &c. lean them up against something in the pantry, or any where in the shade to dry, and they seldom crack. The fire or sun inevitably ruins them. No 258. To sweeten musty tubs or casks. After scalding and otherwise washing the cask clean, capsize it over a portable furnace or kettle, containing charcoal newly set on fire, and let it stand eight or ten minutes, or until partially dried. Let the cask be raised a little so as not to smother the fire. If several casks are to be rectified, throw some small bits of coal on to the furnace each time. No 259. To preserve Parsnips, Carrots and Beets, all the winter. A little before the frost sets in, draw your beets or parsnips out of the ground, and lay them in the house, burying their roots in sand to the neck of the plant, and ranging them one by another in a shelving position; then another bed of sand, and another of beets, and continue this order to the last. By pursuing this method, they will keep very fresh. When they are wanted for use, draw them as they stand, not out of the middle or sides. No 260. To take mildew out of linen. Take soap, and rub it well; then scrape some fine chalk, and rub that also in the linen; lay it on the grass; as it dries, wet it a little, and it will come out at twice doing. No 261. Necessity of taking off superfluous suckers from shrubs. Many flowering shrubs put out strong suckers from the root, such as lilacks, syringa, and some of the kinds of roses, which take greatly from the strength of the mother plant; and which, if not wanted for the purpose of planting the next season, should be twisted off, or otherwise destroyed. No 262. Eggs, to keep. Lest some may think the receipt No 206 page 56, not particular enough we give what may be considered the father of it, which a Mr. Jayne, of Sheffield, England, obtained a patent for in 1791. His receipt is on a large scale to be sure, but a rule below it, to reduce in the same ratio, accommodates it to family use. "Put into a tub or vessel one bushel of unslacked lime, thirty-two ounces of salt, eight ounces of cream of tartar, and mix the same together with as much water as will reduce the composition, or mixture, to that consistence, that it will cause an egg put into it to swim with its top just above the liquid: then put, and keep the eggs therein, which will preserve them perfectly sound for the space of two years at the least." It will be seen that one ounce of salt, and a quarter ounce of cream of tarter, to every quart of lime before slackened, are the proportions. The quantity of water is well enough described above. For more particulars see No. 206. No 263. Another manner of preserving Eggs perfectly fresh, for twelve months. An easy way of preserving eggs is to rub the out side of the shell as soon as gathered from the nest, with a little butter, or any other grease that is not fetid. By filling up the pores of the shell, the evaporation of the liquid part of the egg is prevented; and either by that means, or by excluding the external air, the milkiness, which most people are fond of in new laid eggs, will be preserved for months, as perfect as when the egg was taken from the nest. No 264. To wash Woollens so as not to shrink or full. Never rub soap on to woollen, but previously make your suds, wash, throw them into another tub and pour on clean hot water, and let them lie until cool enough to wring out. No 265. Yeasts. Many people are not aware of the difference between brewer's and other yeasts, such as distiller's. A wedding day was set; to make a wedding cake the cookery book said, "take one pint of yeast," when unluckily brewer's was used; the cake was spoiled and the wedding postponed. Half a teacupful of brewer's yeast is as much in effect as a pint or even a quart of distiller's. For the manner of using both see No 103. --Distiller's yeast is always meant if not contradicted. No 266. To expel nameless intruders from children's heads. Steep larkspur seed in water, rub the liquor a few times into the child's hair, and the business of destruction is done. This is an effectual remedy. Does it not make your head itch? No 267. To wash white Marino Shawls. Wash the shawl in fair suds made before hand; rub no soap on to the shawl, rinse in fair warm water, with two changes if you please; then take a solution of gum Arabick and add to warm water till you think it will produce a little stiffness like starch when dry. Press with a moderately hot iron, before quite dry, laying a clean cotton or linen cloth between the iron and the shawl. No 268. To manage Feather Beds. As often as a bed is thought to need airing, lay it exposed to the out door air, high and dry from the ground, and in the shade. Do not lay out until the sun has been up long enough to drive away the morning moisture, and take in before evening. It is an erroneous notion that beds should be exposed to the sun. The warmth extracts the oily matter in the quill end of the feathers and makes them rancid. By being always aired in the shade, this oily substance in time becomes concrete and inodorous. No 269. To clean Brass. Take a rag wet with spirits turpentine, and dabble in rotten stone and rub your ornaments; after which finish with a dry rag and rotten stone. No 270. To preserve Furs from Moths. Sprinkle in Scotch snuff plentifully to the roots of the furs, tie in a pillow case and hang up or lay away where they will not be likely to have other things thrown on them. When wanted, let them lie one day in the sun, whipping them first, and they are ready for use. No 271. Dried Beef. Beef is always corned and dried in the course of the winter months; the method of pickling which, has already been spoken of in No's 1, 2, 3, and the caution under No 4. --Before fly time in the spring, make flannel bags into which put and tie up closely your dried beef and hang up in a dry cool place. No 272. To keep Hams in the summer. There are various methods, but the most sure is, before fly time, to roll each ham in a cloth or wrap faithfully in swingle tow, and lay down in a barrel packed in charcoal some broken, so as to pack close, or common house ashes. Let them be completely covered and enclosed on all sides, to guard against the ingress of flies, and you have nothing else to fear. There is another way which we have known to succeed for several years in succession, and the philosophy of the process is good: Before fly time in the spring make a bag for each ham out of good thick factory cloth, dip it in strong salt and water and dry, alternately, for three or four times. The cloth by this means becomes saturated with salt, which on drying, chrystalizes, and forms an impervious barrier to flies and is quite air tight. Put in your hams, tie close, and hang up in a dry cool place. No 273. Observations on Puddings and Pies. The quality of the various articles employed in the composition of puddings and pies varies so much, that two puddings, made exactly according to the same receipt, will be so different one would hardly suppose they were made by the same person, and certainly not with precisely the same quantities of the (appparently) same ingredients. Flour fresh ground, pure new milk, fresh laid eggs, fresh butter, fresh suet, &c. will make a very different composition, than when kept till each article is half spoiled. Plum puddings, when boiled, if hung up in a cool place in the cloth they are boiled in, will keep good some months; when wanted, take them out of the cloth, and put them into a clean cloth, and as soon as warmed through, they are ready. MEM.--In composing these receipts, the quantities of eggs, butter, &c. are considerably less than are ordered in other cookery books; but quite sufficient for the purpose of making the puddings light and wholesome;--we have diminished the expense, without impoverishing the preparations; and the rational epicure will be as well pleased with them as the rational economist. Milk, in its genuine state, varies considerably in the quantity of cream it will throw up, depending on the material with which the cow is fed. The cow that gives the most milk does not always produce the most cream, which varies fifteen or twenty per cent. Break eggs one by one into a basin, and not all into a bowl together; because then, if you meet with a bad one, that will spoil all the rest: strain them through a sieve to take out the treddles. Flour varies in quality as much as anything. Butter also varies much in quality. Salt butter may be washed from the salt, and then it will make very good pastry. Lard varies extremely from the time it is kept, &c. When you purchase it, ascertain that it be sweet and good. Suet. Beef is the best, then mutton and veal; when this is used in very hot weather, while you chop it, dredge or sprinkle it lightly with a little flour. Beef-marrow is excellent for most of the purposes for which suet is employed. Drippings, especially from beef, when very clean and nice, are frequently used for everyday crusts and pies, and for such purposes are a satisfactory substitute for butter, lard, &c. Currants, previous to putting them into the pudding, should be swelled or plumped: this is done by pouring some boiling water upon them: wash them well, and lay them on a sieve or cloth before the fire, pick them clean from the stones;--this not only makes them look better, but cleanses them from all dirt. Raisins, figs, dried cherries, candified orange and lemon peel, citron, and preserves of all kinds, fresh fruits, gooseberries, currants, plums, damsons, &c. are added to batter and suet puddings, or enclosed in the crust intended for apple dumplings, and make all the various puddings called by those names. Batter puddings must be quite smooth and free from lumps; to ensure this, first mix the flour with a little milk, add the remainder by degrees and then the other ingredients. If it is a plain pudding, put it through a hair sieve; this will take out all lumps effectually. Batter puddings should be tied up tight; if boiled in a mould, butter it first; if baked, also butter the pan. Be sure the water boils before you put in the pudding, and keep it steadily boiling all the time;--if your pot or vessel sets in contact with the coals the pudding often burns. Be scrupulously careful that your pudding cloth is perfectly sweet and clean; wash it without any soap, unless very greasy; then rinse it thoroughly in clean water after. Immediately before you use it, dip it in boiling water; squeeze it dry, and dredge it with flour. If your fire is very fierce, mind and stir the puddings every now and then to keep them from sticking to the bottom of the saucepan; if in a mould, this care is not so much required, but keep plenty of water in the saucepean. When puddings are boiled in a cloth, it should be just dipped in a basin of cold water before you untie the pudding cloth, as that will prevent it from sticking; but when boiled in a mould, if it is well buttered, they will turn out without. Custard or bread puddings require to stand five minutes before they are turned out. They should always be boiled in a mould or cups. Keep your paste board, rolling pin, cutters, and tins very clean: the least dust on the tins and cutters, or the least hard paste on the rolling pin, will spoil the whole of your labour. Things used for pastry or cakes should not be used for any other purpose; be very careful that your flour is dried at the fire before you use it, for puff pastes or cakes; if damp it will make them heavy. In using butter for puff paste, you should take the greatest care to previously work it well on the paste board or slab, to get out all the water and buttermilk, which very often remains in; when you have worked it well with a clean knife, dab it over with a soft cloth, and it is then ready to lay on your paste; do not make your paste over stiff before you put in your butter. For those who do not understand making puff paste, it is by far the best way to work the butter in at two separate times, divide it in half and break the half in little bits, and cover your paste all over: dredge it lightly with flour, then fold it over each side and ends, roll it out quite thin, and then put in the rest of the butter, fold it, and roll it again. Remember almays to roll puff paste from you.--The best made paste, if not properly baked, will not do the cook any credit. Those who use iron ovens do not alway succeed in baking puff paste, fruit pies, &c. Puff paste is often spoiled by baking it after fruit pies in an iron oven. This may be easily avoided, by putting two or three bricks that are quite even into the oven before it is first set to get hot. This will not only prevent the sirup from boiling out of the pies, but also prevent a very disagreeable smell in the kitchen and house, and almost answers the same purpose as a brick oven. No 274. An excellent Ketchup which will keep good more than twenty years. Take two gallons of stale strong beer, or ale, the stronger and staler the better; one pound of anchovies, cleansed from the intestines and washed, half an ounce each of cloves and mace, one quarter ounce of pepper, six large roots of ginger, one pound of eschalots, and two quarts or more of flap mushrooms, well rubbed and picked. Boil these ingredients over a slow fire for one hour; then strain the liquor through a flannel bag, and let it stand till quite cold, when it must be bottled and stopped very close with cork and bladder, or leather. One spoonful of this ketchup to a pint of melted butter, gives an admirable taste and colour, as a fish sauce, and is by many preferred to the best Indian soy. No 275. To die Cotton Yarn of a deep blue. Take one pound of logwood chipped fine or pounded, boil it in sufficient quantity of water until the whole colouring matter is extracted; then take about one half gallon of this liquor, and dissolve in it one ounce of verdigris and about the like quantity of alum; boil your yarn meantime in the logwood water for one hour, stirring it well and keeping it loose. Take out your yarn, and mix the half gallon containing the verdigris and alum with the other; then put your yarn into the mixture and boil it four hours; stirring it, and keeping it loose all the time, and taking it out once every hour, to give it air, after which dry it, then boil it in soap and water, and it is done. The foregoing preparation will die six pounds of cotton yarn an elegant deep blue. After which put as much yarn into the same liquor and boil it for three hours, stirring it as before, and you will have a good pale blue, or if you wish for an elegant green, boil hickory bark in the liquor and it will produce it. This receipt has been proved satisfactorily from experience, and it is a cheap mode of obtaining the above mentioned colours. No 276. Dutch Beef. Take the lean part of a round of beef, rub it well, all over with brown sugar, and let it remain so five or six hours, turning it as many times in the pan or tray where it is placed; then, salting it well with common salt and saltpetre, let it remain a fortnight, only turning it once a day. At the end of that time, roll it up very tightly in a coarse cloth, set it in a cheese or other press for a day and a night, and hang it to dry in the smoke of a chimney where a wood fire is kept. It should be boiled in a cloth; and when cold, is to be cut off in thin slices for use. No 277. A cheap and excellent Custard. Boil in a quart of milk, a little lemon peel, a small stick of cinnamon, and a couple of peach-leaves, sweeten it with a few lumps of sugar, and rubbing down smoothly two tablespoonfuls of rice flour in a small basin of cold milk, mix it with the beaten yelk of a single egg, then take a basin of the boiling milk, and well mixing it with the contents of the other basin, pour the whole into the remainder of the boiling milk, and keep stirring it all one way, till it begins to thicken, and is about to boil; it must then instantly be taken off and put into a pan, stirred a little together, and it may be served up either together in a dish, or in custard-cups, to be eaten hot or cold. No 278. Curious and simple manner of keeping Apricots, Peaches, Plums, &c. fresh all the year. Beat well up together equal quantities of honey and spring water; pour it into an earthen vessel, put in the fruits all freshly gathered and cover them up quite close. When any of the fruit is taken out, wash it in cold water, and it is fit for immediate use. No 279. Art of Dying or staining leather Gloves, to resemble the beautiful York Tan, Limerick die, &c. These different hues of yellow brown, or tan colour, are readily given to leather gloves by the following simple process. Steep saffron in boiling hot soft water for about twelve hours; then, having slightly sewed up the tops of the gloves, to prevent the die from staining the insides, wet them over with a sponge or soft brush, dipped into the liquid.--The quantity of saffron, as well as of water, will of course depend on how much die may be wanted; and their relative proportions, on the depth of colour required. A common tea cup will contain a sufficient quantity for a single pair of gloves. No 280. Cheap and excellent Blue for Ceilings, &c. Boil slowly, for three hours, a pound of blue vitriol, and half a pound of the best whiting, in about three quarts of water; stir it frequently while boiling, and also on taking it off the fire. When it has stood till quite cold, pour off the blue liquor; then mix the cake of colour with good size, and use it with a plasterer's brush in the same manner as whitewash, either for walls or ceilings. No 281. Ready mode of mending cracks in Stoves, Pipes, and Iron Ovens. When a crack is discovered in a stove, through which the fire or smoke penetrates, the aperture may be completely closed in a moment with a composition consisting of wood ashes and common salt, made up into a paste with a little water, and plastered over the crack. The good effect is equally certain, whether the stove, &c. be cold or hot. No 282. Dairy secret for increasing the quantity of Cream. Have ready two pans in boiling water; and on the new milk's coming, take out the hot pans, put the milk into one of them, and cover it over with the other. This will occasion, in the usual time, a great augmentation of the thickness and quantity of the cream. No 283. Tincture for the Teeth and Gums. Mix six ounces of the Peruvian bark with half an ounce of sal ammoniac. Shake them well a few minutes every time before the tincture is used. The method of using it is, to take a tea spoonful and hold it near the teeth; then with a finger dipped in it rub the teeth and gums, which are afterwards to be washed with warm water. This tincture not only allays the toothache, but preserves both the teeth and gums, and makes them adhere to each other. No 284. An admirable beverage for a weak constitution. Boil as much pearl, or Scotch barley, in pure water, as will make about three pints, then straining it off, and, having in the meantime dissolved an ounce of gum Arabick in a little water, mix them, and just boil the whole up together. The barley water need not be thick, as the gum will give it sufficient consistence. It must be used milk warm, and substituted as a common drink in place of beer, &c. at meals No 285. French method of purifying rancid or tainted Butter. Let the butter be melted and scummed as for clarifying, then put into it a piece of bread well toasted all over. In a minute or two the butter will lose its offensive taste and smell, but the bread will become perfectly fetid. No 286. Permanent Red Ink for marking Linen. Take half an ounce of vermillion, and a drachm of salt of steel, or copperas, let them be finely levigated with linseed oil, to the degree of limpidity required for the occasion. This ink, it is said, will perfectly resist the effects of acids, as well as of all alkaline lies. It may be made of other colours, by substituting the proper articles instead of vermillion, and may be used with either type, a hair pencil, or even a pen, but in the latter case it will be necessary to thin it still more than it can be done by oil, by the addition of spirits of turpentine, so as to enable it to flow. No 287. Mode of whitening Straw for Bonnets. In 1806 a new method of whitening straw was discovered in Germany. This consists of steeping it in muriatick acid saturated with potash. The straw thus prepared never turns yellow, is of a shining white, and acquires great flexibility. No 288. For the cure of Corns, Callous Heels, &c. Melt any quantity of common soap, by putting it in small pieces into any vessel, placed in a saucepan of hot water over the fire.--When melted, add to it an equal quantity of coarse sea sand, sifted, however, from the very coarsest particles, still keeping it over the fire, until the sand becomes equally hot with the soap. Then pour it into a cup or glass, to serve as a mould, keeping the mould hot by means of hot water, or otherwise, until the mixture is completely pressed into a solid mass. When it becomes hard, this washball, rubbed occasionally with warm water, against corns, or callous heels, will render them quite soft and easy. No 289. Preserved Apples. Make a sirup of sugar and water, into which put a stick of cinnamon and some orange peel, clarify it with the white of an egg, boil it and strain it, then put in the apples whole, pared or otherwise, as you like, and stew them over a moderate fire till they look clear. No 290. An excellent way to preserve Pumpions. Boil and strain them through a sieve fit for pies, put them into dishes and dry them in the oven or sun till hard and dry--lay them up for use and they will keep for years. When to be used, dissolve it in milk and it is as good as when first boiled. No 291. Arrow root jelly for sickness, If genuine, is very nourishing, especially for weak bowels. Put into a saucepan half a pint of water, a glass of sherry, or a spoonful of brandy, grated nutmeg and fine sugar; boil once up, then mix it by degrees into a desert spoonful of arrow root, previously rubbed smooth with two spoonfuls of cold water; then return the whole into the saucepan; stir and boil it three minutes. No 292. Eggs for sickness. An egg divided, and the yelk and white beaten separately, then mixed with a glass of wine, will afford two very wholesome draughts, and prove lighter than when taken together. Eggs very little boiled or poached, taken in small quantity, convey much nourishment; the yelk only, when dressed, should be eaten by invalids. No 293. Caudle for sickness. Into a pint of fine gruel, not thick, put, while it is boiling hot, the yelk of an egg beaten with sugar, and mixed with a large spoonful of cold water, a glass of wine and nutmeg. Mix by degrees. It is very agreeable and nourishing. Some like gruel, with a glass of table beer, sugar &c. with or without a teaspoonful of brandy. No 294. A flour Caudle for sickness. Into five large spoonfuls of the purest water, rub smooth one desert spoonful of fine flour. Set over the fire five spoonfuls of new milk, and put two bits of sugar into it: the moment it boils, pour into it the flour and water; and stir it over a slow fire twenty minutes. It is a nourishing and gently astringent food. This is an excellent food for babies who have weak bowels. No 295. To mull Wine. Boil some spice in a little water till the flavour is gained, then add an equal quantity of port, Maderia, or sherry, some sugar and nutmeg; boil together, and serve with toast. No 296. Coffee milk for sickness. Boil a desert spoonful of ground coffee, in nearly a pint of milk, a quarter of an hour; then put into it a shaving or two of isinglass, and clear it; let it boil a few minutes, and set it on the side of the fire to grow fine. This is a very fine breakfast; it should be sweetened with sugar of a good quality. No 297. Apple water for sickness. Cut two large apples in slices, and pour a quart of boiling water on them; or on roasted apples; strain in two or three hours, and sweeten lightly. No 298. A Moorish method of cooking beef, as described by Captain Riley, the shipwrecked mariner. "Mr. Willshire's cook had by this time prepared a repast, which consisted of beef cut into square pieces, just large enough for a mouthful before it was cooked; these were then rolled in onions, cut up fine, and mixed with salt and pepper; they were in the next place put on iron skewers and laid horizontally across a pot of burning charcoal, and turned over occasionally, until perfectly roasted:" [ Query. --Does he mean that the skewers be run through the pieces of meat? we think he must, as it would be difficult to make such small pieces lie on the skewers, without falling through into the fire; especially when the meat came to be turned.] "This dish," continues Captain Riley, "is called cubbub, and in my opinion far surpasses in flavour the so much admired beef steak; as it is eaten hot from the skewers, and is indeed an excellent mode of cooking beef." Remark. --How would it do to cut up flakes here and there on our common steak pieces, and put under pieces of raw onion, pepper and salt, and fasten the flap down by means of little wooden pins or pegs, to be pulled out after cooking? No 299. To pickle Peppers. Take out the insides, put them into a brass kettle of water, let them scald, but not boil, for four days in succession, afterwards put them into cold vinegar. No 300. Cucumbers, to preserve for Pickles. Have a cask or tub to be called a pickle tub, never to be used for any other purpose. Cut your cucumbers from the vines with a sharp knife, leaving a short piece of the stem attached to each cucumber. Pour water on them and handle very carefully in the water for a few minutes, and then it may be turned off. Cover the bottom of your tub with salt, then put in a layer of cucumbers, then salt again, and so alternately cucumbers and salt until you have finished picking. The juice of the cucumbers, added to the dissolving salt, will generally give brine enough to keep the pickles covered; but if not, a very little water may be added. A cloth should always be laid in contact with the pickles so as to keep the top ones wet, thus preventing them getting soft and disposed to rot. Remember to use salt freely--you cannot get in too much. Cucumbers put down in this manner will keep for years. When you wish to add vinegar to your cucumbers, take up such number as you please from the salt pickle above described, freshen them and put on vinegar. The following course is recommended: The water in which they are put to freshen should be changed every day; and if it be in the winter time let the vessel stand in the cellar where the water will not freeze. A week or ten days are required to freshen--tasting will determine when fresh enough. In one or two of the last changes, hot water may be used; this will make the cucumbers green, and more effectually remove any remains of saltish taste. Prepare your vinegar by putting in allspice and pepper, and if you please add cloves and cinnamon, boil it, and pour on hot; the next day you have pickles. N. B. Save your old brine until cucumber time again, scald and scum, in a brass kettle, and when cold it is ready to receive cucumbers. After your tub is filled add salt. This old brine is said to be better than new, and the repetition can be continued from year to year. No 301. To give meat a red colour, and impregnate it with agreeable vegetable flavours. If you wish it red, or if you want to keep it a long time, rub it first with salt petre and moist sugar; the salt petre must be pounded fine, and the sugar mixed with it, and the mixture made warm before the fire; mix one ounce of this mixture with one pound of common salt, rub this well into the meat as before directed. You can if you wish, impregnate the meat with a very agreeable vegetable flavour, by pounding some sweet herbs and an onion with the salts, and if you choose, you can add a quarter of an ounce of black pepper and some alspice with the sweet herbs and salts; incorporate these ingredients by pounding them together in a mortar, then rub the meat well with the above mixture, turning it and rubbing it every day for a fortnight. This you will find will keep any length of time. No 302. To preserve fish by sugar. Fish may be preserved in a dried state, and perfectly fresh, by means of sugar alone, and even with a very small quantity of it. Fresh fish may be kept in that state for some days, so as to be as good when boiled, as if just caught. If dried and kept free from mouldiness, there seems no limit to their preservation; and they are much better in this way than when salted. The sugar gives no disagreeable taste. This process is particularly valuable in making what is called kippered salmon; and the fish preserved in this manner are far superior in quality and flavour, to those which are salted or smoked. If desired, as much salt may be used as to give the taste required; but this substance does not conduce to their preservation. In the preparation, it is barely necessary to open the fish, and to apply the sugar to the muscular parts, placing it in a horizontal position for two or three days, that this substance may penetrate. After this it may be dried; and it is only further necessary to wipe and ventilate it occasionally, to prevent mouldiness. A table spoonful of brown sugar is sufficient in this manner, for a salmon of five or six pounds weight, and if salt is desired, a teaspoonful or more may be added; salt petre may be used instead, in the same proportion, if it is desired to make the kipper hard. No 303. Easy method of preserving animal food sweet for several days, in the height of summer. Veal, mutton, beef, or venison, may be kept for nine or ten days, perfectly sweet and good, in the heat of summer, by lightly covering the same with bran, and hanging it up in a high and windy room; therefore, a cupboard full of small holes, or a wire safe, so as the wind may have a passage through, is recommended to be placed in such a room, to keep away the flies. No 304. How to use Nutmegs. In grating a nutmeg, if you begin at the end next to the stem, it will generally be hollow all the way through, and will be apt to break. If you begin at the other end, it will be solid all the way through. No 305. Castor oil made palatable. The papers say, boil castor oil a few minutes in an equal quantity of milk, and sweeten it. When cool, stir it well, and the taste of it is remarkably pleasant. Whether this preparation impairs the quality or efficacy of the oil, is not mentioned. No 306. The Peach Tree, how to guard against insects. It is generally known that worms, near the surface of the earth, destroy them by eating the bark; the object is therefore to find a preventive, in order that the trees may become aged in a healthy state. It is evident that these worms pass through the common change, and assume the form of millers, early in the summer, and deposite their eggs in the bark as low as they can find access to it; and that the worms proceeding from them, begin to operate in the latter part of the summer, when they have been found the size of a common pin. If suffered to remain they grow to the thickness of a rye straw; each of them girdles the tree about an inch, and the wood from the wound to the heart dies. Hence it is, that a single wound impairs the vigor of the tree, and a number of them kill it. The point to be gained, is to protect the tree from the millers, and by a simple method, we have succeeded for several years, which is recommended with full confidence. About the first of May remove the earth from the body of the tree, and shirt it to the height of 15 or 16 inches, in such manner as to exclude the millers, burying the lower part of it in the earth. We have used straw cut to the length and about half an inch in thickness, bound on with twine. This should be removed about the first of September, as we have sometimes found the young worms in the upper part of the straw, being then readily discovered on the surface of the bark, covered by a little gum. The process should be commenced when the tree is young--they have been found in a rapid growth the first fall after it sprouted. Thus a few minutes in a year devoted to a tree, will protect it against this cause of decay--a very trifling expense compared with the value of this healthy and delicious fruit. No 307. Useful remarks on Heat, &c. All who know any thing of a thermometer, must have learned that it is an instrument for measuring heat. The point at which thermometers are graduated is called zero, that is, a cipher, 0, or nothing; it is a point at which mercury stands when immersed in a mixture of snow and common salt A glass tube containing mercury or quicksilver is placed against a scale having lines to note the rise and fall of the mercury as it swells or shrinks by greater or less degrees of heat. These lines are called degrees, beginning at 0, (zero,) and counting each way. No one ever saw a thing so cold, as it is called, but that there was heat in it. Farenheit's thermometer runs no farther than 40 degrees below zero, (where mercury freezes,) and which is a greater intensity of cold than was ever known in the atmosphere, still it is supposed that 1500 degrees below would only be about the degree to indicate the total absence of heat. This is latent or hidden heat in contradistinction to that brought about by artificial means, as by fire, &c. At 32 degrees above zero it is called the freezing point, 55 temperate, 76 summer heat, 98 blood heat, 102 fever heat, 176 spirits boil, 212 water boils. This is as far as it is useful to understand the scale of a thermometer in common concerns. Now with regard to water; at 212 degrees it boils, and it can be made no hotter let there be ever so much fire added. If the fire is made larger, the water will boil away faster; but remains just so hot till it flies away in steam and turns to air.--This should furnish a useful hint to economists in fuel. A very small fire keeps water boiling after brought to a boiling heat, and unless evaporating the water at a great rate be an object, it is an utter waste of wood beyond what is sufficient to keep the water at this temperature. From the freezing point, 32 degrees, up to 40, and then from 40 to48 degrees, the expansion of water is just alike; that is, 39 and 41 degrees would fill similar spaces, and so on down to 32and up to 48; but beyond these points there is not this similarity. Expansion continues to a certain extent either from heat or cold; care should be taken therefore in filling kettles too full to heat, or in leaving water in vessels exposed to a very great degree of cold. Heat would overrun, cold would burst. No 308, To preserve Plants from the effects of Frost. Before the plant has been exposed to the sun, or thawed, after a night's frost, sprinkle it well with spring water, in which sal-ammoniack or common salt has been infused. No 309. Remedy for a cough. The following medicine for a cough has performed such extraordinary cures in private practice, that the possessor is induced to publish it for the benefit of society--Take six ounces of Italian or roll liquorice cut into small pieces, and put into an earthen jar with about one gill of the best vinegar; simmer together until the liquorice is dissolved; then add two ounces of the oil of almonds, and half an ounce of the tincture of opium, stir the whole well together, and it is fit for use.--Take two tea spoonfuls when going to bed, and the same quantity whenever the cough is troublesome in the day time. No 310. How to prepare Molasses for preserving fruits, &c. Take eight pounds molasses, of good quality, eight pounds pure water, one pound coarsely powdered charcoal. Boil them together for twenty minutes, then strain the mixture through fine flannel double; put it again in the kettle with the white of an egg, boil it gently till it forms a sirup of proper consistence, then strain it again. DYING. N. B. The few following receipts are taken in full or in substance from "The Family Directory in the Art of Dying, by J & R. Bronson," printed at Utica, 1826 a valuable and cheap work which every curious house-wife should have. It is for sale generally by the booksellers. Let it be observed that brass, copper, or well tinned vessels should always be used in dying; iron would destroy most colours. No 311 To die a Scarlet Red or Woollen Cloth, Yarn, Shawls, Fringe, or any kind of Woollen articles. Before the directions are given to die this beautiful colour, it will not be improper to state that a strict attention to neatness, and a careful observance of the rules laid down will be necessary; which, if followed, there will not be the least difficulty to accomplish the dying of this colour in families. To die one pound of woollen, it will require the following articles, which, when procured at the druggist's, each kind should be written upon to prevent any mistake in using them. Two ounces of spirits of nitre, half a drachm of salt petre, pounded, two drachms of salammonack, pounded, one quarter of an ounce of grained tin, also, one ounce of cochineal, pounded fine, half a ounce of starch, four drachms of tumerick, pounded. Use the same proportions to die any number of pounds. In the first place, prepare the compound of aqua fortis, which should be made at least two days before you colour the scarlet. It is prepared in the following manner, and the quantity of which is calculated to die one pound of woollen. Take a clean glass bottle of a suitable size, put in two ounces of spirits of nitre, add to it as much clean rain water, also two drachms of salammoniack, which is pounded fine, and half a drachm of fine salt petre. Shake them together until they are dissolved; then add one quarter of an ounce of grained tin; these small pieces of tin are to be put in one at a time, letting it dissolve before putting in any more; so proceed until the whole is dissolved. After the compound is made, then stop the bottle close with a wax or glass stopper. In using it be careful to take the clear liquor only. Directions to grain the tin. Melt block tin over a fire, then pour it from a distance above of four or five feet slowly into a basin of cold water. By this process, the tin will be cast into thin and loose parts, and is then fit to be dissolved as before mentioned. Tin is sometimes procured at the druggists already grained; in that case, it is ready to be dissolved in the spirits of nitre or aqua fortis. Dying the Scarlet. 1. Prepare a tin, brass, or copper kettle with about five gallons of clean soft water; bring it nearly to a scalding heat, then add one ounce of cream of tartar, one third of an ounce of cochineal which is finely pounded and sifted through gauze, and four drachms of pounded turmeric. Make a quick fire, and when the liquor almost boils add nearly half of the clear compound already prepared, and mix it well with the die. 2. The liquor is now brought to a boil.--The cloth, yarn, or woollen articles being before well cleansed, wet and drained, is now to be entered: dip it while boiling for one hour and a half. If it is yarn or garments, they are to be continually moved or stirred with a stick, and if cloth, where it is a sufficient quantity, it is to be run briskly on the reel. 3. The woollen is now to be taken out, drained, cooled, and rinsed in cold water. --Empty out the die, and add as much clean soft water as before; then dissolve half an ounce of starch in a little warm water, and add to the water in the kettle. 4. Bring the water to a scalding heat and skim it; then add two thirds of an ounce of cochineal, being the remainder, also add a little before it boils the remainder of the prepared tin composition, of which you must be careful to use only the clear part, and when put in the die, it is to be well mixed. 5. The die is now brought to a boil, and the woollen entered, which is to be stirred about as before. Boil it about an hour and a half; it is then to be taken out and aired, then rinsed and dried. N. B. Fulled cloth must be napped and sheared before it is died scarlet. After it is died and rinsed, then tenter it, and lay the nap with a clean brush. Press it in clean papers, not very hot, as that would tarnish the colour. No 312. To die a Crimson Colour on Woollen Cloth, Yarn, Flannel, Shawls, Network, Fringe, &c. For one pound of woollen it will require the following articles, viz: one ounce of cream of tartar, two ounces of alum, one ounce of cochineal, two drachms of salammoniack, one quarter of an ounce of pearlash, six ounces of wheat bran. Use the same proportions to die any number of pounds. 1. Prepare a brass or copper kettle with about four gallons of rain water or soft spring water; bring it to a scalding heat, then add one ounce of fine cream of tartar, and two ounces of alum, pounded fine. The liquor is now brought to a boil, and the woollen entered and stirred about in the die, while boiling, for one hour and a half. 2. In the next place, take out the woollen and air it; then rinse it slightly in clean water. Empty away the liquor, and add as much clean soft water as before. When the water has become blood warm, add about six ounces of wheat bran, tied up in a bag. 3. Now bring the liquor to a moderate heat, and take off the scum as it rises to the top; then take out the bag and add one ounce cochineal that is pounded fine and sifted. The die is now brought to a boil, and the woollen put in and stirred or turned round while boiling for one hour, then take it out and rinse it in clear cold water. 4. The die is now to be emptied away, and as much water added as before. When the liquor is as warm as the hand can be endured in it, dissolve therein two drachms of salammoniack which is pounded fine: then enter the woollen, and move it about hastily for five minutes; it is then to be taken out and drained. 5. Now add one quarter of an ounce of pearlash, or about two spoonfuls; mix it well with the liquor, and when the die is almost scalding hot put in the woollen and move it round for about ten minutes; it is then to be taken out, aired and rinsed; which completes a crimson that is permanent and beautiful. No 313. For a Rose Colour, or Pink on Woollen. For one pound of woollen. Two ounces of alum, one ounce of cream of tartar, one ounce of tin composition, one third of an ounce of cochineal. Take two ounces of alum, pounded, and one ounce of cream of tartar, dissolve these in a small quantity of hot water, then add to this about one ounce of tin composition, and stir it well Next put a suitable quantity of soft, clean water into a very clean brass kettle, bring it to a scalding heat, then add one third of an ounce of best bright cochineal, pounded fine, and sifted through a piece of gauze. Boil fifteen minutes, stir it and add the alum liquor and stir again; now enter the woollen, and work it one hour and a half at a gentle boil. For a very full pink it will require half an ounce of cochineal, per pound of woollen: dry in the shade. N. B. The woollen must be equally moist when put in the die. No 314. Green on Woollen. To die one pound of cloth, yarn, flannel, or any kind of woollen articles, it will require the following ingredients: One ounce and a quarter of oil of vitriol, one quarter of an ounce of indigo, one ounce cream of tartar, two ounces of alum, eight ounces of fustic. In the first place prepare the chymic or compound of oil of vitriol and indigo, which is made in the following manner. Take a glazed earthen cup or pot of a suitable size, and put in one ounce and a quarter of oil of vitriol, then add to it one quarter of an ounce of Spanish flote or best Bengal indigo, which is to be pounded fine and sifted; then stir the mixture hastily with a stick, which is necessary in order to mix it well and produce a regular fermentation; this should be done until it has done working; then add half a table spoonful of water, and mix it together and it will be fit for use in one day. Should the compound not work or ferment after stirring it, you may conclude the oil of vitriol is not good, and had better not be used. Dying the Green. 1. Prepare either an iron, brass or copper kettle, with three gallons of water, which is sufficient for one pound of Woollen. When the water is scalding hot, add one ounce of cream of tartar, and two ounces of alum; then bring it to a boil and put in the woollen; boil it about one hour and a half, stirring it in the liquor occasionally during that time. It is then to be taken out, drained and aired. 2. You will now add some water to the kettle to make up the deficiency caused by boiling; then add to the liquor two thirds of the compound of oil of vitriol and indigo; mix it well with the liquor, then put in the woollen, keeping the liquor at only a scalding heat, and often moving it about in the die. When the woollen has been in the die half an hour, it is to be taken out, aired and rinsed. 3. In the next place add eight ounces of fustick chips to the liquor, which are to be put loosely in a thin coarse bag, and boiled about an hour and a half. The bag is then to be taken out, and the woollen put in and boild gently little more than an hour, airing the woollen once in that time. It is then to be taken out and aired. 4. You will find at this time you have produced a green. Should it be found to bear too much on the yellow, then add a little more of the compound to the die, and put in the woollen again; or if it is too much on the blue shade, boil up a little more fustick in the liquor. In this way you may vary the shade according to your fancy. If you want a light green, use the less fustick and compound. After it is died, air and rinse it. No 315. To die a common Black on Woollen. For twenty yards, or sixteen pounds of cloth or yarn, it will require two pounds and a half of copperas, two ounces of blue vitriol, eight pounds of logwood, two pounds of fustick. Use the same proportions to die any number of pounds. 1. Prepare a kettle with a sufficient quantity of water to admit your woollen to be worked in the die without being crowded; bring the water to a scalding heat, then put in the cloth or yarn for a few minutes. When it is wet thoroughly, take it out and drain it. 2. In the next place put in two ounces of blue vitriol. When both are entirely dissolved, bring the liquor to a gentle boil, stir up the die and put in the cloth or yarn. (In dying woollen yarn, observe that it should often be stirred about in the die with a stick: the same way also should be practiced in dying small quantities of flannel cloth; but it will be found necessary to use a reel to die cloth in large quantities;) run the cloth for one hour, and air it once in that time; it is then to be taken out, aired, and rinsed well. 3. The copperas liquor is now to be emptied away and the kettle rinsed and filled nearly full of water; then add eight pounds of logwood chips and two pounds of fustick chips, which are to be boiled about two hours, then add some water and take out the chips. 4. The cloth is now to be put in and run while boiling for half an hour; then take it out and air it. Add half a pound of copperas to the die, and when it is dissolved, enter the woollen and run it for half an hour longer; then air; rinse and scour it well. No 316. To die Madder Red on Woollen. To die one pound of goods, take three ounces alum, one ounce cream of tartar, eight ounces madder, half an ounce of stone lime, (and the same proportions for a larger quantity.)--There are three processes to obtain this colour. The 1st. Is to communicate the mordant or set to the goods, as follows: Take the three ounces alum, break fine, and the one ounce cream of tartar, put the same into five gallons of soft water, in a brass or copper kettle, and after bringing up to a boil, put in the goods and boil two hours, when they are taken out, aired and rinsed and the liquor thrown away. 2ndly. Take the eight ounces of (good) madder, break fine, put into same kind of kettle and same quantity of water as aforesaid, bring the die up to a scalding heat, but not to boil, put in the goods and let them remain in one hour at the same heat; stir about the goods well whilst in the die, take them out, air and rinse as before. 3dly. Add to the die just described half a pint clean lime water made by slacking the half ounce of stone lime, and after settling pour off the clean part into the die. The die being again at the scalding heat put in the goods for about ten minutes take out and rinse immediately. No 317. Yellow on woollen. To die one pound; three ounces alum, one ounce cream of tartar, one pound of fustick; --proceed exactly as with madder red, except as varied, see below, by 1stly. Using the alum and cream of tartar, four gallons water, boil an hour and a half. 2ndly. Tie the fustick chips in a coarse cloth bag, and put to four gallons water, boil two hours, when the goods are to go in for one hour, boiling the while. No 318. Nicaragua Red on Woollen. To die one pound, three ounces alum, one ounce cream of tartar, eight ounces nicaragua; proceed as with madder red, except as follows, by 1stly. Two pails water, scalding heat, add alum pounded, cream of tartar, boil, put in goods, boil one hour and a half. 2ndly. Two pails water, nicaragua chips in a coarse bag, boil one and a half hours, take out the chips put in the goods, boil gently one hour, keep stirring, take out &c. No 319. Orange colour on Woollen. To die one pound of goods, one ounce annatto or otter, two ounces pearlash, proceed exactly as with madder red, except as varied, see below, by 1stly. Proper kettle, two and a half gallons water, add the annatto cut fine, tied in a thin cloth bag, add the pearlash, boil one hour. 2dly. Take out the annatto bag, and put in your goods, stir around, scalding heat, one hour, take out rinse, &c. No 320. Some of the most probable methods of preventing damage to trees &c. by sundry insects. Some vegetables are offensive to all insects; such as the elder, especially the dwarf kind, the onion, tansy, and tobacco, except to the worm that preys upon that plant. The juice of these may therefore be applied, with effect in repelling insects; and sometimes the plants themselves, while green, or when reduced to powder, particularly the latter when made into snuff. Set an onion in the centre of a hill of cucumbers, squashes, melons, &c. and it will effectually keep off the yellow striped bug, that preys upon those plants while young. Perhaps to sow a few tobacco or onion seeds in the hill, when planting, would have the same effect; and the growing plants from these seeds could be taken away, when no longer wanted as protectors. Of other substances, sulpher is perhaps the most effectual, as every kind of insect has an utter aversion to it. Powdered quicklime is deadly to many insects, and perhaps offensive to all. Whitewash, with a little sulpher added; urine kept until quite offensive added to soap suds and cowdung; a strip of sheepskin with the wool outwards, combed loose, bound tight; a ring of tar and oil; a strip of oiled paper with the lower edge standing out like the rim of a hat, well greased with soft grease or oil; all are said to be good preventives by forming rings or bandages around the bodies of trees, from three to four inches wide. A strong decoction of tobacco, or onions, old urine, soapsuds, either of these applied boiling hot to the roots of trees, after first taking the earth away so as to give free access to the parts where the insect lies which is to come up and do the mischief, is said to be effectual. All to be done early in the spring. It is said that caterpillars will take shelter under woollen rags, when put on trees where they resort; from which they can be easily taken and destroyed. Gardens that are infested year after year with worms and vermin of every kind are much benefitted by sowing over with salt at the time they are spaded in the spring, some days before seeds are put in. QUERY.--How would a solution of Gum Arabick answer, made pretty slippery, with sulpher enough added to give colour, applied with a feather to plants? Let the composition be applied to the under sides of the leaves as well as all other parts above ground, and even close down into the dirt. The gum would tend to keep the sulpher where it was put; and the night air and evaporation would keep the gum soft enough not to injure the plant by stopping the pores. The hint might be carried farther, by putting any thing that is said to be most offensive to insects with gum, and apply as aforesaid; dissolve the gum in old urine --mix soot -- powdered quicklime --a dose of calomel, one or all of these. CANKERWORM. --The female of this insect comes out of the ground very early in the spring, and ascends the tree to deposit her eggs, which she does in suitable places in the bark; where they are brought forth, and the young brood live on the leaves of the tree. The only effectual remedy is, to prevent the insect from ascending the tree; and this may be done in various ways; but the easiest perhaps, is as follows: First scape off the shaggy bark round the body of the tree, to the width of two or three inches; then make up a mixture of lamp, tanner's, or blubber oil, with suitable proportions of sulpher and scotch snuff; and with a brush lay this on the scraped part forming a ring round the tree an inch or two wide; and no insect will ever attempt to pass this barrier, as long as the composition has any considerable moisture left in it. Let it be repeated when it inclines to harden; though perhaps this is not necessary.--Let it be done early in the spring before the insect comes from the ground.
