PRACTICALCOOKING, AND DINNER GIVING. SETTING THE TABLE AND SERVING THE DINNER. AN animated controversy for a long time existed as to the best mode ofserving a dinner. Two distinct and clearly defined styles, known as the Englishand Russian, each having its advantages and disadvantages, were the subject ofcontention. It is perhaps fortunate that a compromise between them has been sogenerally adopted by the fashionable classes in England, France, and America asto constitute a new style, which supersedes, in a measure, the other two. In serving a dinner á la Russe, the table is decorated by placingthe dessert in a tasteful manner around a centre-piece of flowers. Thisfurnishes a happy mode of gratifying other senses than that of taste; for whilethe appetite is being satisfied, the flowers exhale their fragrance, and giveto the eye what never fails to please the refined and cultivated guest. In this style the dishes are brought to the table already carved, and readyfor serving, thus depriving the cook of the power to display his decorativeart, and the host of his skill in carving. Each dish is served as a separatecourse, only one vegetable being allowed for a course, unless used merely forthe purpose of garnishing. The English mode is to set the whole of each course, often containing manydishes, at once upon the table. Such dishes asrequire carving, after having been once placed on the dinner-table, are removedto a side-table, and there carved by an expert servant. Serving several dishesat one time, of course, impairs the quality of many, on account of theimpossibility of keeping them hot. This might, in fact, render some dishesquite worthless. And now, before giving the details of serving a dinner on the newercompromise plan, I will describe the "setting" or arranging of the table, whichmay be advantageously adopted, whatever the mode of serving. In the first place, a round table five feet in diameter is the bestcalculated to show off a dinner. If of this size, it may be decorated to greatadvantage, and conveniently used for six or eight persons, withoutenlargement. Put a thick baize under the table-cloth. This isquite indispensable. It prevents noise, and the finest and handsomesttable-linen looks comparatively thin and sleazy on a bare table. Do not put starch in the napkins, as it renders them stiff and disagreeable,and only a very little in the table-cloth. They should be thick enough, and, atthe same time, of fine enough texture, to have firmness without starch. Toomuch can not be said as to the pleasant effect of a dinner, when thetable-linen is of spotless purity, and the dishes and silver are perfectlybright. Although many ornaments may be used in decorating the table, yet nothing isso pretty and so indicative of a refined taste as flowers. If you have no épergne for them, use a compotier or raised dish, with a plateupon the top, to hold cut flowers; or place flower-pots with blossoming plantson the table. A net-work of wire, painted green, or of wood or crochet work,may be used to conceal the roughness of the flower-pot. A still prettierarrangement is to set the pot in a jardinière vase. At a dinner party, place a little bouquet by the side of the plate of eachlady, in a small glass or silver bouquet-holder. At thegentlemen's plates put a little bunch of three or four flowers, called a boutonntère; in the folds of the napkin. As soon as the gentlemen are seated at table, theymay attach them to the left lapel of the coat. Place the dessert in two or four fancy dessert-dishes around the centre-piece, which,by-the-way, should not be high enough to obstruct the view of persons sittingat opposite sides of the table. The dessert will consist of fruits, fresh orcandied, preserved ginger, or preserves of any kind, fancy cakes, candies,nuts, raisins, etc. Put as many knives, forks, and spoons by the side of the plate of eachperson as will be necessary to use in all the different courses. Place theknives and spoons on the right side, and the forks on the left side, of theplates. This saves the trouble of replacing a knife and fork or spoon as eachcourse is brought on. Many prefer the latter arrangement, as they object to theappearance of so many knives, etc., by the sides of a plate. This is, ofcourse, a matter of taste. I concede the preferable appearance of the latterplan, but confess a great liking for any arrangement which saves extra work andconfusion. Place the napkin, neatly folded, on the plate, with a piece of bread an inchthick, and three inches long, or a small cold bread roll, in the folds or onthe top of the napkin. Put a glass for water, and as many wine-glasses as are necessary at eachplate. Fill the water-glass just before the dinner is announced, unlesscaraffes are used. These are kept on the table all the time, well filled withwater, one caraffe being sufficient for two or three persons. All the wineintended to be served decanted should be placed on the table, convenientlyarranged at different points. At opposite sides of the table place salt and pepperstands, together with the different fancy spoons, crossed by theirside, which may be necessary at private dinners, for serving dishes. Select as many plates as will be necessary for all the different courses.Those intended for cold dishes, such as salad, dessert, etc., place on thesideboard, or at any convenient place. Have those plates intended for dessertalready prepared, with a finger-bowl on each plate. The finger-glasses should be half filled with water, with aslice of lemon in each, or a geranium leaf and oneflower, or a little boutonnière: a sprig of lemon-verbena ispretty, and leaves a pleasant odor on the fingers after pressing it in thebowl. In Paris, the water is generally warm, and scented with peppermint. Some place folded fruit-napkins under each finger-bowl; others have little fancy net-work mats,made of thread or crochet cotton, which are intended to protect handsomepainted dessert-plates from scratches which the finger-bowls might possibly make. The warm dishes--not hot dishes--keep in a tin closet or on the top shelfof the range until the moment of serving. A plate of bread should also be onthe sideboard. Place the soup-tureen (with soup that has beenbrought to the boiling-point just before serving) and the soup-plates before the seat of the hostess. Dinner being now ready, it should be announced by the butler or dinning-roommaid. Never ring a bell for a meal. Bells do very well for country inns andsteamboats, but in private houses the ménage should be conducted with as littlenoise as possible. With these preliminaries, one can see that it requires very little troubleto serve the dinner. There should be no confusion or anxiety about it. It is asimple routine. Each dish is served as a separate course. The butler firstplaces the pile of plates necessary for the course before the host or hostess.He next sets the dish to be served before the host or hostess, just beyond thepile of plates. The soup, salad, and dessert should be placed invariably beforethe hostess, and every other dish before the host. As each plate is ready, thehost puts it upon the small salver held by the butler,who then with his own hand places this and the other plates in a similar manneron the table before each of the guests. If a second dish is served in thecourse, the butler, putting in it a spoon, presents it on the left side of eachperson, allowing him to help himself. As soon as any one has finished with hisplate, the butler should remove it immediately, without waiting for others tofinish. This would take too much time. When all the plates are removed, thebutler should bring on the next course. It is not necessary to use the crumb-scraper to cleanthe cloth until just before the dessert is served. He should proceed in thesame manner to distribute and take off the plates until the dessert is served,when he can leave the room. This is little enough every-day ceremony for families of the most moderatepretensions, and it is also enough for the finest dinner party, with the simpleaddition of more waiters, and distribution of the work among them. It is wellthat this simple ceremony should be daily observed, for many reasons. Thedishes themselves taste better; moreover, the cook takes more pride, and ismore particular to have his articles well cooked, and to present a betterappearance, when each dish is in the way subjected to a special regard: and isit not always preferable to have a few well-cooked dishes to many indifferentlyand carelessly prepared? At the same time, each dish is in its perfection, hotfrom the fire, and ready to be eaten at once; then, again, one has the benefitof the full flavor of the dish, without mingling it with that of a multiplicityof others. There is really very little extra work in being absolutelymethodical in every-day living. With his habit, there ceases to be any anxietyin entertaining. There is nothing more distressing at a dinner company than tosee a hostess ill at ease, or to detect an interchange of nervous glancesbetween her and the servants. A host and hostess seem insensibly to control thefeelings of all the guests, it matters not how many there may be. Inwell-appointed houses, a word is not spoken at the dinner between the hostessand attendants. What necessity, when the servants are in the daily practice oftheir duties? If one has nothing for dinner but soup, hash, and lettuce, put them on thetable in style: serve them in three courses, and one will imagine it a muchbetter dinner than if carelessly served. Let it be remembered that the above is the rule prescribed for every-dayliving. With large dinner parties, the plan might be changed, in one respect, i.e., in having the dishes, in courses, put on thetable for exhibition, and then taken off, to be carved quickly and delicatelyat a side-table by an experienced butler. This gives the host time to entertainhis guests at his ease, instead of being absorbedin the fatiguing occupation of carving for twelve or fourteen people. These rules in France constitute an invariable and daily custom for privatedinners, as well as for those of greater pretensions. Every thing is servedthere also as a separate course, even each vegetable, unless used as a garnish.In America and England this plan is not generally liked, although in both thesecountries it is adopted by many. Americans like, at least, one vegetable witheach substantial, a taste, it is to be hoped, that will not be changed by thedictates of fashion. Then, if dishes are to be carved at a side-table, theone-vegetable plan causes the placing of the principal dish on the table beforecarving to appear more sensible. When the butler places a dish on the table, and tarries a moment or so forevery one to look at it, if it does not happen to be so very attractive inappearance the performance seems very absurd; but when, after putting on thesubstantial dish, he places a vegetable dish at the other end of the table, histaking the substantial to carve seems a more rational proceeding. I would suggest, when there is only one dish for a course, which it to betaken off the table to be carved, that the dish should be put on first; then,that the butler should return for the plates, instead of placing the plates onfirst, as should be done in all other cases. At small dinners, I would not have the butler to be carver. It is a gracefuland useful accomplishment for a gentleman to know how to carve well. At smalldinners, where the dishes can not be large, the attendant labor must be light;and, in this case, does it not seem more hospitable and home-like for thegentleman to carve himself? Does it not disarm restraint, and mark the onlydifference there is between home and hotel dinners? In "Gastronomie," M. M. believes in a compromise on the carving question. Hesay, "There were professional carvers, and this important art was ancientlyperformed at the sound of music, and with appropriate gesticulations. We wishour modern gourmands would follow the very good example of Trimalchio in this respect, and, if they must have theirviands carved on the sideboard by servants, take care that, like his carvers,they are trained to his art. We shall take the opportunity of entering ourprotest against an innovation which is going too far. That some of the morebulky pieces, the pièces de résistance, should be placedon the sideboard, well and good, though even to this Addison objected, and notwithout reason; but that the fish and the game should be both bestowed anddistributed, like rations to paupers, by attendants, who, for the most part,can not distinguish between the head and the tail of a mullet, the flesh andfin of a turbot, etc., is enough to disturb the digestion of the most tolerantgastronome. We must say that we like to see our dinner, especially the fish,and to see every part of it, in good hands." Then, again, without paying a high price, one can not secure a waiter who isa good carver. I am almost inclined to say one must possess the luxury of aFrench waiter for carving at the side-table. English waiters are good. TheIrish are generally too awkward. Negroes are too slow. The French are bothgraceful and expeditious. Well, what can be done, then, when one has a dinner party, with no expertcarver, and the dishes are too large for the host to attempt? I would advise inthis case that the dinner should be served from the side. A very great majorityof large and even small dinners are served in this manner. The table, as usual, is decorated with flowers, fruits, etc., but thedishes( plats ) are not placed upon it; consequentlythe host has no more duty to perform in the serving of the dinner than theguest. A plate is placed on the table before each person, then the dish,prettily decorated or neatly carved, if necessary, is presented to the leftside, so that each person may help himself from the dish. When these plates aretaken off, they are replaced by clean ones, and the dish of the next course ispresented in like manner. Many prefer to serve every course from the side, as Ihave just indicated; others make an exception of the dessert, which the hostessmay consider a pretty acquisition to the table, while the dish should not be anawkward one to serve. Some proper person should be stationed in the kitchen or butler's pantry tocarve and to see that the dishes are properly decorated. If the hostess shouldapprehend unskillfulness in carving, the dinner might be composed of chops,ribs, birds, etc., which require no cutting. There are several hints about serving the table, which I will now specifyseparately, in order to give them the prominence they deserve. 1st. The waiters should be expeditious without seeming to be in a hurry. Adragging dinner is most tiresome. In France, the dishes and plates seem to bechanged almost by magic. An American senator told me that at a dinner at theTuileries, at which he was present, twenty-five courses were served in an hourand a half. The whole entertainment, with the after-dinner coffee, etc., lastedthree hours. Upon this occasion, a broken dish was never presented to the viewof a guest. One waiter would present a dish, beautifully garnished ordecorated; and if the guest signified assent, a plate with some of the samekind of food was served him immediately from the broken dish at theside-table. Much complaint has been made by persons accustomed to dinners abroad of thetediousness of those given in Washington and New York, lasting, as they oftendo, from three to five hours. It is an absolute affliction to be obliged to sitfor so long a time at table. 2d. Never overload a plate nor oversupply a table. It is a vulgarhospitality. At a small dinner, no one should hesitate to ask for more, if hedesires it; it would only be considered a flattering tribute to the dish. At large companies, where there is necessarily a greater variety of dishes,the most voracious appetite must be satisfied with a little of each. Then, donot supply more than is absolutely needed; it is a foolish and unfashionablewaste. "Hospitality is not to be measured by the square inch and calculated bycubic feet of beef or mutton." At a fashionable dinner party, if there are twelve or fourteen guests, thereshould be twelve or fourteen birds, etc., served on the table--one for eachperson. If uninvited persons should call, theservant could mention at the door that madam has company at dinner. A sensibleperson would immediately understand that the general machinery would be upsetby making an appearance. At small or private dinners, it would be, of course,quite a different thing. The French understand better than the people of any other nation how tosupply a table. "Their small family dinners are simply gems of perfection.There is plenty for every person, yet every morsel is eaten. The flowers orplants are fresh and odoriferous; the linen is a marvel of whiteness; thedishes are few, but perfect of their kind." When you invite a person to a family dinner, do not attempt too much. It isreally more elegant to have the dinner appear as if it were an every-day affairthan to impress the guest, by an ostentatious variety, that it is quite anespecial event to ask a friend to dinner. Many Americans are deterred fromentertaining, because they think they can not have company without a vulgarabundance, which is, of course, as expensive and troublesome as it is coarseand unrefined. For reasonable and sensible people, there is no dinner more satisfactorythan one consisting first of a soup, then a fish, garnished with boiledpotatoes, followed by a roast, also garnished with one vegetable; perhaps an entrée, always a salad, some cheese, and adessert. This, well cooked and neatly and quietly served, is a stylish and goodenough dinner for any one, and is within the power of a gentleman or lady ofmoderate means to give. "It is the exquisite quality of a dinner or a wine thatpleases us, not the multiplicity of dishes or vintages." 3d. Never attempt a new dish with company--one that you are not entirelysure of having cooked in the very best manner. 4th. Care must be taken about selecting a company for a dinner party, forupon this depends the success of the entertainment. Always put the question toyourself, when making up a dinner party, Why do I ask him or her? And unlessthe answer be satisfactory, leave him or her out. Invite them on some otheroccasion. If they are not sensible, social, unaffected, and clever people, theywill not only not contribute to the agreeability of the dinner, but willpositively be a serious impediment toconversational inspiration and the general feeling of ease. Consequently, onemay consider it a compliment to be invited to a dinner party. 5th. Have the distribution of seats at table so managed, using some tact inthe arrangement, that there need be no confusion, when the guests enter thedining-room, about their being seated. If the guest of honor be a lady, placeher at the right of the host; if a gentleman, at the right of the hostess. If the dinner company be so large that the hostess can not easily place herguests without confusion, have a little card on each plate bearing the name ofthe person who is to occupy the place. Plain cards are well enough; but theFrench design (they are designed in this country also) beautiful cards for thepurpose, illustrated with varieties of devices: some are rollicking cherubswith capricious antics, who present different tempting viands; autumn leavesand delicate flowers in chromo form pretty surroundings for the names onothers; yet the designs are so various on these and the bill-of-fare cards thateach hostess may seek to find new ones, while frequent dinner-goers may haveinteresting collections of these mementoes, which may serve to recall theoccasions in after-years. 6th. If the dinner is intended to be particularly fine, have bills of fare,one for each person, written on little sheets of paper smoothly cut in half, oron French bill-of-fare cards, which come for the purpose. If expense is noobject, and you entertain enough to justify it, have cards for your own useespecially engraved. Have your crest, or perhaps a monogram, at the top of thecard, and forms for different courses following, so headed that you have onlyto fill out the space with the special dishes for the occasion. I will give theexample of a form. The forms are often seen on the dinner-cards; yet, perhaps,they are as often omitted, when the bills of fare are written, like those givenat the end of the book. Bills of fare are generally written in French. It is a pity that our ownrich language is inadequate to the duties of a fashionable bill of fare,especially when, perhaps, all the guests do not understand the Gallic tongue,and the bill of fare( menu ) for their accommodationmight as well be written in Choctaw. I willarrange a table with French names of dishes for the aid of those preferring theFrench bills of fare. I would say that some tact might be displayed in choosingwhich language to employ. An illustration of amenu printed with the following text (in list format): MENU. Diner du 15Févrior. Potages. Poissons. Hors-d'æuvres. Relevés.Entrées. Rôtis. Entremêts. Glaces.Dessert. If you are entertaining a ceremonious company, with tastes for thefrivolities of the world, or, perhaps, foreign embassadors, use unhesitatinglythe French bills of fare; but practical uncles and substantial persons oflearning and wit, who, perhaps, do not appreciate the merits of languages whichthey do not understand, might consider you demented to place one of theseeffusions before them. I would advise the English bills of fare on theseoccasions. 7th. The attendants at table should make no noise. They should wear slippersor light boots. "Nothing so distinguishes the style of perfectly appointedhouses from vulgar imitations as the quiet, self-possessed movements of theattendants." No word should be spoken among them during dinner, nor should theyeven seem to notice the conversation of the company at table. 8th. The waiter should wear a dress-coat, white vest, black trousers, andwhite necktie; the waiting-maid, a neat black alpaca or a clean calico dress,with a white apron. 9th. Although I would advise these rules to be generally followed, yet it is as pleasant a change to see anindividuality of a characteristic taste displayed in the setting of the tableand the choice of dishes as in the appointments of our houses or in matters oftoilet. At different seasons the table might be changed to wear a moreappropriate garb. It may be solid, rich, and showy, or simple, light, andfresh. 10th. Aim to have a variety or change in dishes. It is as necessary to thestomach and to the enjoyment of the table as is change of scene for the mind.Even large and expensive state dinners become very monotonous when one findseverywhere the same choice of dishes. Mr. Walker, in his "Original," says: "Toorder dinner is a matter of invention and combination. It involves novelty,simplicity, and taste; whereas, in the generality of dinners, there is nocharacter but that of routine, according to the season." 11th. Although many fashionable dinners are of from three or four hours'duration, I think every minute over two hours is a "stately durance vile."After that time, one can have no appetite; conversation must be forced. It ispreferable to have the dinner a short one than a minute too long. If one risesfrom a fine dinner wearied and satiated, the memory of the whole occasion mustbe tinged with this last impression. 12th. There is a variety of opinions as to who should be first served attable. Many of the haut monde insist that the hostess should be firstattended to. Once, when visiting a family with an elegant establishment, who,with cultivated tastes and years of traveling experience, prided themselves ontheir savoir faire, one of the members said, "Yes, ifQueen Victoria were our guest, our sister, who presides at table, should alwaysbe served first." The custom originated in ancient times, when the hospitablefashion of poisoning was in vogue. Then the guests preferred to see the hostesspartake of each dish before venturing themselves. Poisoning is not now theorder of the day, beyond what is accomplished by rich pastry and plum puddings.If there be but one attendant, the lady guest sitting at the right of the hostor the oldest lady should be first served. There are certain natural instinctsof propriety which fashion or custom can not regulate. As soon as the second person is helped, there should be no furtherwaiting before eating. 13th. Have chairs of equal height at table. Perhaps every one may know byexperience the trial to his good humor in finding himself perched above or sunkbelow the general level. 14th. The selection of china for the table offers an elegant field in whichto display one's taste. The most economical choice for durability is this: putyour extra money in a handsome dessert set, all (except the plates) of whichare displayed on the table all the time during dinner; then select theremainder of the service in plain white, or white and gilt, china. When anydish is broken, it can be easily matched and replaced. A set of china decorated in color to match the color of the dining-room isexceedingly tasteful. This choice is not an economical one, as it is necessaryto replace broken pieces by having new ones manufactured--an expense quiteequal to the extra trouble required to imitate a dish made in anothercountry. By far the most elegant arrangement consists in having different sets ofplates, each set of a different pattern, for every course. Here is an unlimitedfield for exquisite taste. Let the meat and vegetabledishes be of plated silver. Let the épergne or centre-peice (holding flowers orfruit) be of silver, or perhaps it might be preferred of majolica, of bisque,or of glass. The majolica ware is very fashionable now,and dessert, oyster, and salad sets of it are exceedingly pretty. A set ofmajolica plates, imitating pink shells, with a large pink-shell platter, isvery pretty, and appropriate for almost any course. Oyster-plates in French ware imitate five oyster-shells,with a miniature cup in the centre for holding the lemon. There are otherpatterns of oyster-plates in majolica of the mostgorgeous colors, where each rim is concaved in six shells to hold as manyoysters. The harlequin dessert sets are interesting, where every plate is notonly different in design and color, but is a specimen of different kinds ofware as well. In these sets the Dresden, French, and painted plates of any warethat suits the fancy are combined. A set of plates for a course at dinner is unique in the Chinese or Japanese patterns. Dessert sets of Bohemianglass or of cut-glass are a novelty; however, the painted sets seem moreappropriate for the dessert (fruit, etc.), white glass sets are tasteful forjellies, cold puddings, etc., or what are called the cold entremêts served just before the dessertproper. But it seems difficult, in entering the Colamores' and other large places ofthe kind in New York, to know what to select, there are such myriads ofexquisite plates, table ornaments, and fairy-lands of glass. I consider the table ornaments in silver much less attractive than those infancy ware. There are lovely maidens in bisque, reclining, while they holdpainted oval dishes for a jelly, a Bavarian cream, or for flowers or fruit;cherub boys in majolica, tugging away with wheelbarrows, which should be loadedwith flowers; antique water-jugs; cheese-plates inVenetian glass; clusters of lilies from mirror bases to hold flowers of bonbons; tripods of dolphins, with great pinkmouths, to hold salt and pepper. If a lady, with tastes to cultivate in her family, can afford elegancies indress, let her retrench in that, and bid farewell to all her ugly and insipidwhite china; let wedding presents consist more of these ornaments (which mayserve to decorate any room), and less of silver salt-cellars, pepper-stands, and pickle-forks. Senator Sumner was a lover of the ceramic art. His table presented adelightful study to the connoisseur, with its different courses of plates, alldifferent and recherché in design. Nothing aroused thisinimitable host at a dinner party from his literacy labors more effectuallythan a special announcement to him by Marley of the arrival from Europe of anew set of quaint and elegant specimens of China ware. He would repair to NewYork on the next train. 15th. I will close these suggestions by copying from an English book apractical drill exercise for serving at table. The dishes are served from theside-table. "Let us suppose a table laid for eight persons, dressed in its best; asattendants, only two persons--a butler and a footman, or one of these, with apage or neat waiting-maid; and let us suppose someone stationed outside the door in the butler's pantry to do nothing but fetchup, or hand, or carry off dishes, one by one: While guests are being seated, person fromoutside brings up soup; Footman receives soup atdoor; Butler serves it out; Footman hands it; Both changeplates. Footman takes out soup, and receives fish atdoor; while butler hands wine; Butler serves outfish; Footman hands it (plate in one hand, and saucein the other); Both change plates. Footman bringsin entrée, while butler handswine; Butler hands entrée; Footmanhands vegetables; Both change plates, Etc., etc. "The carving of the joint seems the only difficulty. However, it will nottake long for an expert carver to cut eight pieces." THE DINNER PARTY. IT is very essential, in giving a dinner party, to know precisely how manyguests one is to entertain. It is a serious inconvenience to have any doubt onthis subject. Consequently, it is well to send an invitation, which may be inthe following form: An illustration of aninvitation card printed with the following text: Mrs. Smith requests thepleasure of Mr. Jones's company at dinner, on Thursday, January 5th, at seveno'clock. R. S. V. P. 12 New York Avenue, January 2d,1576. The capital letters constitute the initials of four French words, meaning,"Answer, if you please" ( Répondez s'il vousplait ). The person thus invited must not fail to reply at once, sending a messenger to the door with the note. Itis considered impolite to send it by post. If the person invited has any doubt about being able to attend the dinner atthe time stated, he should decline the invitation at once. He should bepositive one way or the other, not delaying the question for consideration morethan a day at the utmost. If Mr. Jones should then decline, he might reply asfollows: An illustration of a reply card printedwith the following text: Mr. Jones regrets that he is unable to accept Mrs.Smith's polite invitation for Thursday evening. 8 Thirty-seventh Street,January 3d. Or, An illustration of a reply card printedwith the following text: Mr. Jones regrets that a previous engagement preventshis acceptance of Mrs. Smith's polite invitation for Thursday evening.Thirty-seventh Street, January 3d. A prompt and decided answer of this character enables Mrs. Smith to supplythe place with some other person, thereby preventing that most disagreeablething, a vacant chair at table. If the invitation be accepted, Mr. Jones might say in hisnote: An illustration of a reply card printedwith the following text: Mr. Jones accepts, with pleasure, Mrs. Smith'sinvitation for Thursday evening. Thirty-seventh Street, January2d. The more simple the invitation or reply, the better. Do not attempt anyhigh-flown or original modes. Originality is most charming on most occasions;this is not one of them. In New York, many, I notice, seem to think it elegant to use the Frenchconstruction of sentences in formal notes: for instance, they are particular tosay, "the invitation of Mrs. Smith," instead of "Mrs. Smith's invitation;" and"2d January," instead of "January 2d." In writingin the French language, the French construction of sentences would seememinently proper. One might be pardoned for laughing at an Englishconstruction, if ignorance were not the cause. So, when one writes in English,let the sentences be concise, and according to the rules of the language. On the appointed day, the guest should endeavor to arrive at the house notexceeding ten minutes before the time fixed for dinner; and while he avoids atoo early arrival, he should be equally careful about being tardy. It is enough to disturb the serenity and good temper of the most amiablehostess during the whole evening for a guest to delay her dinner, impairing it,of course, to a great extent. She should not be expected to wait over fifteenminutes for any one. Perhaps it would be as well for her to order dinner tenminutes after the appointed hour in her invitation, to meet the possiblecontingency of delay on the part of some guest. When the guests are assembled in the drawing-room, if the company be large,the host or hostess can quietly intimate to the gentleman what ladies they willrespectively accompany to the dining-room. After a few moments of conversationand introductions, the dinner is to be announced, when the host should offerhis arm to the lady guest of honor, the hostess taking the arm of the gentlemanguest of honor; and now, the host leading the way, all should follow; thehostess, with her escort, being the last to leave the drawing-room. They shouldfind their places at table with as little confusion as possible, not sittingdown until the hostess is seated. After dinner is over, the hostess giving thesignal by moving back her chair, all should leave the dining-room. The host maythen invite the gentleman to the smoking-room or library. The ladies shouldrepair to the drawing-room. A short time thereafter (perhaps in half an hour),the butler should bring to the drawing-room the tea-service on a salver, with a cake-basket filledwith fancy biscuits, or rather crackers or little cakes. Placing them on the table, he may then announce to the host that tea isserved. The gentlemen join the ladies; and, after a chat of a few minutes overthe tea, all of the guests may take theirdeparture. If the attendant is a waiting-maid, and the tea-service ratherheavy, she might bring two or three cups filled with tea, and a small sugar-bowl and cream-pitcher, alsothe cake-basket, on a small salver; and when the cups are passed, return formore. I do not like the English fashion, which requires the ladies to retire fromthe table, leaving the gentlemen to drink more wine, and smoke. Enough wine isdrunk during dinner. English customs are admirable, generally, and onenaturally inclines to adopt them; but in this instance I do not hesitate tocondemn and reject a custom in which I see no good, but, on the contrary, atemptation to positive evil. The French reject it; let Americans do thesame. COOKING AS ANACCOMPLISHMENT. THE reason why cooking in America is, as a rule, so inferior is not becauseAmerican women are less able and apt than the women of France, and not becausethe American men do not discuss and appreciate the merits of good cooking andthe pleasure of entertaining friends at their own table; it is merely becauseAmerican women seem possessed with the idea that it is not the fashion to knowhow to cook; that, as an accomplishment, the art of cooking is not asornamental as that of needle-work or piano-playing. I do not undervalue theselast accomplishments. A young lady of esprit should understand them; but she shouldunderstand, also, the accomplishment of cooking. A young lady can scarcely havetoo many accomplishments, for they serve to adorn her home, and are attractiveand charming, generally. But of them all--painting, music, fancy work, orforeign language--is there one more fascinating and useful, or one which arguesmore intelligence in its acquisition than the accomplishment of cooking? What would more delight Adolphus than to discover that his pretty fiancée, Julia, was an accomplished cook;that with her dainty fingers she could gracefully dash off a creamy omelet, andby miraculous manæuvres could produce to his astonished view a dozen different kaleidoscopic omelets, aux fines herbes, aux huîtres, aux petits pois, auxtomates, etc.; and not only that, but scientific croquettes, mysterioussoups, delicious salads, marvelous sauces, and the hundred and one savoryresults of a little artistic skill? Delighted Adolphus--if a sensible man, andsuch a woman should have no other than a sensible man--would consider this asthe chef-d'æuvre of all her accomplishments, as heregarded her the charming assurance of so many future comforts. From innate coquetry alone the French women appreciate the powers of theirdainty table. Cooking is an art they cultivate. Any of the haut monde are proud to originate a new dish, manyfamous ones doing them credit in bearing their names. One thing is quite evident in America--that the want of this ornamental anduseful information is most deplorable. The inefficiency, in this respect, ofWestern and Southern women, brought up under the system of slavery, is somewhatgreater than that of the women of the Northern and Eastern States; however, asa nation, there is little to praise in this regard in any locality. ProfessorBlot endeavored to come to the rescue. Every man applauded his enterprise; yet I can myselftestify to the indifference of the women--his classes for the study of cookerynumbering by units where they should have numbered by hundreds. He soondiscontinued his instructive endeavors, and at last died a poor man. There is little difficulty abroad in obtaining good cooks at reasonableprices, who have pursued regular courses of instruction in their trade: not soin America. Hospitality demands the entertaining of friends at the socialboard; yet it is almost impossible to do so in this country in an acceptablemanner, unless the hostess herself not only has a proper idea of the serving ofa table, but of the art of cooking the dishes themselves as well. In some ofthe larger cities, satisfactory dinners and trained waiters may be provided atan enormous cost at the famous restaurants, where the meal may appear home-likeand elegant. But unfortunate is the woman, generally, who wants to do "thecorrect thing," and, wishing to entertain at dinner, relies upon the sense, good taste, and management ofthe proprietor of a restaurant. She may confidently rely upon one thing--anextortionate bill; and, generally, as well, upon a vulgar display, which poorlyimitates the manner of refined private establishments. However, "living for the world" seems very contemptible in comparison withthe importance of that wholesome, satisfactory, every-day living which sovitally concerns the health and pleasure of the family circle. But why waste time in asserting these self-evident facts? They areacknowledged and proclaimed every day by suffering humanity; yet the difficultyis not remedied. Is there a remedy, then? Yes. This is a free country, yet DameFashion is the Queen. Make it the fashion, then, that the art and science ofcookery shall be classed among the necessary accomplishments of everywell-educated lady. This is a manifest duty on the part of ladies of influenceand position, even if the object be only for the benefit of the country atlarge. Let these ladies be accomplished artists in cookery. The rest will soonfollow. There will be plenty of imitators. Many ladies of rank in England have written valuable books on cookery, andon the effects resulting from the want of the knowledge. None wrote better thanLady Morgan. Speaking of clubs, she says: "The social want of the times, however, brought its remedy along with it,and the reaction was astounding.... Then it was that clubs arose--homes ofrefuge to destitute celibacy, chapels of ease to discontented husbands. There,men could dine, like gentlemen and Christians, upon all the friandises of the French kitchen, much cheaper andfar more wholesomely than at their own tables upon the tough, half-soddenfibres of the national roast and boiled, or on the hazardous resources of hash;gravy soup, and marrow puddings. "Moral England gave in. The English 'home'--that temple of the heart, thatcentre of all the virtues--was left to the solitary enjoyment of the Englishwives. "To your casseroles, then, women of Britain! Would you, witha falconer's voice, lure your faithless tassels back again? Apply to the practical remedy of your wrongs;proceed to the reform of your domestic government, and turn your thoughts tothat art which, coming into action every day in the year during the longestlife, includes within its circles the whole philosophy of economy and order,the preservation of good health, and the tone of good society--and allpeculiarly within your province." BREAKFAST. AFTER a fast of twelve or thirteen hours, the system requires somethingsubstantial as preparation for the labors of the day; consequently, I considerthe American breakfasts more desirable for an active people than those ofFrance or England. In France, the first breakfast consists merely of a cup of coffee and aroll. A second breakfast, at eleven o'clock, is more substantial, dishes beingserved which may be eaten with a fork ( déjeunerà la fourchette ), as a chop with a potato soufflé. No wonder there are cafés in Paris where American breakfasts areadvertised, for it takes one of our nationality a very short time to becomedissatisfied with this meagre first meal. In England, breakfast is a very informal meal. After some fatiguingoccasion, if one should desire the luxury of an extra nap, he is notmercilessly expected at the table simply because it is the breakfast-hour; forthere the breakfast-hour is any time one chances to be ready for it. Gentlemenand ladies read their papers and letters in the breakfast-room--a practicewhich, of course, is more agreeable for guests than convenient for servants.However, if one can afford it, why not? This habit requires a little differentsetting of the table. It is decorated with flowers or plants, and upon it areplaced several kinds of breads, fruits, melons, potted meats, and freshest ofboiled eggs. But the substantial dishes must be served from the sideboard,where they are kept in silver chafing-dishes over spirit-lamps. As members of the family or guests enter,the servant helps them each once, then leaves the room. If they have furtherwants, they help themselves or ring a bell. The American breakfast is all placed upon the table, unless oatmeal porridgeshould be served as a first course. Changes of plates are also necessary whencakes requiring sirup or when melons or fruits are served. Let us now set the American breakfast-table. The coffee-urn and silver service necessary areplaced in a straight line before the hostess. The one or two kinds ofsubstantials are set before the host; vegetables or entrées are placed on the sides. Do not havethem askew. It is quite as easy for an attendant to place a dish in a straightline as in an oblique angle with every other dish on the table. I advocate the general use of oatmeal porridge for breakfast. Nothing ismore wholesome, and nothing more relished after a little use. If not natural,the taste should be acquired. It is invaluable for children, and of no lessbenefit for persons of mature years. Nearly all the little Scotch and Irishchildren are brought up on it. When Queen Victoria first visited Scotland, shenoticed the particularly ruddy and healthy appearance of the children, and,after inquiry about their diet and habits, became at once a great advocate forthe use of porridge. She used it for her own children, and it was at onceintroduced very generally into England. Another of its advantages is thatserving it as a first course enables the cook to prepare many dishes, such assteaks, omelets, etc., just as the family sit down to breakfast; and when theporridge is eaten, she is ready with the other dishes "smoking hot." It would be well if more attention were given to breakfasts than is usuallybestowed. The table might have a fresher look with flowers or a flowering plantin the centre. The breakfast napery is very pretty now, with colored borders tosuit the color of the room, the table-cloth and napkins matching. The beefsteaks should be varied, for instance, one morning with a tomatosauce, another à la maître d'hôtel, or with abrown sauce, or garnished with water-cresses, green pease, fried potatoes,potato-balls, etc., instead of being always the same beefsteak, too frequentlyovercooked or undercooked, and often floating in butter. Melons, oranges, compotes, any and all kinds of fruits, should be served at breakfast. In the season, slicedtomatoes, with a French or Mayonnaise dressing, is a most refreshing breakfastdish. A great resource is in the variety of omelets, and with a littlepractice, nothing is so easily made. One morning it may be a plain omelet;another, with macaroni and cheese; another, with fine herbs; another, withlittle strips of ham or with oysters. The English receipt on page 148 makes apleasant change for a veal cutlet. When chickens are no longer very young, thereceipt on page 175 (deviled chicken), with a Cunard sauce or a white sauce, isanother change. The different arrangements of meat-balls are croquettes, withtomato, cream, apple, or brown sauces, are delicious when they are freshly andcarefully made. As there are hundreds of delicious breakfast dishes, which only require alittle attention and interest to understand, how unfortunate it must be for aman to have a wife who has nothing for breakfast but an alternation ofjuiceless beefsteak, greasy and ragged mutton-chops, and swimming hash, withunwholesome hot breads to make up deficiencies! Breakfast parties are very fashionable, being less expensive than dinners,and just as satisfactory to guests. They are served generally about teno'clock, although any time from ten to twelve o'clock may be chosen for thepurpose. It seems to me that ten o'clock, or even nine o'clock (it depends uponthe persons invited), is the preferable hours. Guests might prefer to retaintheir strength by a repast at home if the breakfast-hour were at twelveo'clock, and then the fine breakfast would be less appreciated. At breakfastparties, with the exception of the silver service being on the table all thetime for tea and coffee, the dishes are served in courses precisely as fordinner. In England, breakfast parties are perhaps more in favor than lunch parties,especially among the literati. Macaulay said, when extolling the meritsof breakfast parties as compared with all other entertainments, "Dinner partiesare mere formalities; but you invite a man to breakfast because you want tosee him. " There bills of fare are given for breakfast parties, which will show theorder of different courses: Winter Breakfast. 1st Course.--Broiledsardines on toast, garnished with slices of lemon. Tea, coffee, orchocolate. 2d Course.--Larded sweet-breads,garnished with French pease. Cold French rolls or petits pains.Sauterne. 3d Course.--Small fillets or the tendercuts from porter-house-steaks, served on little square slices of toast, withmushrooms. 4th Course.--Fried oysters; breakfastpuffs. 5th Course.--Fillets of grouse (each filletcut in two), on little thin slices of fried mush, garnished with potatoesà la Parisienne. 6th Course.--Sliced oranges,with sugar. 7th Course.--Waffles, with maplesirup. Early Spring Breakfast. 1st Course.--An Havana orange for eachperson, dressed on a fork (page 338). 2dCourse.--Boiled shad, maître d'hôtel sauce; Saratoga potatoes. Teaor coffee. 3d Course.--Lamb-chops, tomato sauce.Château Yquem. 4th Course.--Omelet, with greenpease, or garnished with parsley and thin diamonds of ham, or with shrimps,etc., etc. 5th Course.--Fillets of beef, garnishedwith water-cresses and little round radishes; muffins. 6th Course.--Rice pancakes, with maplesirup. Summer Breakfast. 1st Course.--Melons. 2dCourse.--Little fried perch, smelts, or trout, with a sauce Tartare, the dishgarnished with shrimps and olives. Coffee, tea, or chocolate. 3dCourse.--Young chickens, sautéd, with cream-gravy, surrounded withpotatoes à la neige. Claret. 4thCourse.--Poached eggs on anchovy-toast. 5thCourse.--Little fillets of porter-house-steaks, wit tomatoes à laMayonnaise. 6th Course.--Peaches, quartered,sweetened, and half-frozen. LUNCH. THIS is more especially a ladies' meal. If one gives a lunch party, ladiesalone are generally invited. It is an informal meal on ordinary occasions, whenevery thing is placed upon the table at once. Aservant remains in the room only long enough to serve the first round ofdishes, then leaves, supposing that confidential conversation may be desired.Familiar friends often "happen in" to lunch, and are always to be expected. Some fashionable ladies have the reputation of having every finelunches--chops, chickens, oysters, salads, chocolate, and many other goodthings being provided; and others, just as fashionable, have nothing but a cupof tea or chocolate, some thin slices of bread and butter, and cold meat; or,if of Teutonic taste, nothing but cheese, crackers, and ale, thus reserving theappetite for dinner. In entertaining at lunch, the dishes are served in the same manners as fordinner. Each dish is served as a separate course. It may be placed on the tablebefore the hostess, if the lunch party is not very large; but it is generallyserved from the side. The table is also decorated in the same manner as fordinner, with a centre-piece of flowers or of fruit, and with various compotiers around the centre, containingfruits, bonbons, little fancy cakes, Indian or otherpreserves, etc. Other ornaments, in Dresden china, majolicaware, Venetian or French glass, etc., filled with flowers, areoften seen. Little dishes of common glass in different shapes, as crosses,quarter-moons, etc., about an inch high (see cuts, page 58), are also filledwith flowers, and placed at symmetrical distances. As the last-mentioneddecorations are very cheap, every one may indulge in them, and consider thatthere are no more beautiful ornaments, after all. The lunch-table is generally covered with a colored table-cloth. The principal dishes served are patés, croquettes, shell-fish, game,salads--in fact, all kinds of entrées, and cold desserts, or I may saydishes are preferred which do not require carving. Bouillon is generally served as a first course in bouillon cups, which are quite like largecoffee-cups, or coffee or tea cups may be used, althoughany dinner soup served in soup-plates is en regle. A cup of chocolate, with whipped cream onthe top, is often served as an another course. I will give five bills of fare, reserved from five very nice little lunchparties: Mrs. Collier's Lunch (February2d). Bouillon;sherry. Roast oysters on half-shell;Sauterne. Little vols-au-vent ofoysters. Thin scollops, or cuts of fillet of beef,braised; French pease; Champagne. Chickencroquettes, garnished with fried parsley; potato croquettes. Cups of chocolate, with whipped cream. Salad--lettuce dressed with tarragon. Biscuits glaceés; fruit-ices. Fruit. Bonbons. Mrs. Sprague's Lunch (March10th). Raw oysterson half-shell. Bouillon; sherry. Little vols-au-vent of sweet-breads. Lamb-chops; tomato sauce; Champagne. Chicken croquettes; French pease. Snipe; potatoes à la Parisienne. Salad of lettuce. Neuchâtelcheese; milk wafers, toasted. Chocolate Bavariancream, molded in little cups, with a spoonful of peach marmalade on eachplate. Vanilla ice-cream; fancy cakes. Fruit. Mrs. Miller's Lunch (January6th). Bouillon. Deviled crabs; olives;claret punch. Sweet-breads à laMilanaise. Fillets of grouse, currant jelly;Saratoga potatoes. Roman punch. Fried oysters, garnished with chow-chow. Chicken salad, or, rather, Mayonnaise of chicken. Ramikins. Wine jelly, and whippedcream. Napolitaine ice-cream. Fruit. Bonbons. Mrs. Well's Lunch. Bouillon;sherry. Fried frog's legs; French pease. Smelts, sauce Tartare; potatoes à laParisienne. Chicken in scallop-shells; Champagne. Sweet-bread croquettes; tomato sauce. Fried cream. Salad;Romaine. Welsh rare-bit. Peaches and cream, frozen; fancy cakes. Fruits. Mrs. Filley's Lunch. Mock-turtle soup; Englishmilk-punch. Lobster-chops; claret. Mushrooms incrust. Lamb-chops, en papillote. Chetney of slices of baked fillet of beef. Chocolate, with whipped cream. Spinach on tongue slices (page 145), sauce Tartare. Roast quail, bread sauce (page 185). Cheese; lettuce, garnished with slices of radishes andnasturtium blossoms, French dressing. Mince-meatpatties; Champagne. Ices and fancycakes. Fruit. GENTLEMEN'SSUPPERS. As ladies have exclusive lunches, gentlemen have exclusive suppers. Nearlythe same dishes are served for suppers as for lunches, although gentlemengenerally prefer more game and wine. Sometimes they like fish suppers, with twoor three or more varieties of fish, when nightmare might be written at the endof the bill of fare. If one has not a reliable cook, it is very convenient to give theseentertainments, as the hostess has a chance to station herself in the cuisine, and personally superintend the supper. One bill of fare is given for a fish supper: 1st Course.--Raw oysters served in ablock of ice (page 113). [The ice has a pretty effect in thegas-light.] 2d Course.--Shad, maître d'hôtel sauce,garnished with smelts. 3d Course.--Sweet-breads and tomatosauce. 4th Course.--Boiled sardines, on toast. 5thCourse.--Deviled chicken, Cunard sauce. 6th Course.--Fillets ofduck, with salad of lettuce. 7th Course.--Mayonnaise of salmon,garnished with shrimps. 8th Course.--Welshrare-bit. 9th Course.--Charlotte Russe. 10thCourse.--Ice-cream and cake. EVENINGPARTIES. IF people can afford to give large evening parties, it is less trouble andmore satisfactory to place the supper in the hands of the confectioner. For card parties or small companies of thirty or forty persons, to meet someparticular stranger, or for literary reunions, the trouble need not be great.People would entertain more if the trouble were less. If one has a regular reception-evening, ices, cake, and chocolate are quiteenough; or for chocolate might be substituted sherry or a bowl of punch. For especial occasions for a company of thirty or forty, a table prettilyset with some flowers, fruit, chicken salad, croquettes or sweet-breads andpease, one or two or more kinds of ice-cream and cakes, is quite sufficient.Either coffee and tea, Champagne, a bowl of punch or of eggnog, would besufficient in the way of beverage. SOMETHING ABOUT ECONOMY. I AM indebted to a French girl living in our family for the substance ofthis chapter. Her parents being obliged to live in a most economical way in St.Louis, still had an uncommonly good table. Oneresource was a little garden, in which small compass were raised enough onions,tomatoes, carrots, and a few other vegetables, to nearly supply the family. Asmall bed of four feet square, surrounded by a pretty border of lettuce, waslarge enough for raising all necessary herbs, such as sage, summer savory,thyme, etc. Little boxes in the kitchen windows contained growing parsley, everready for use. I give receipts for three of their soups--the onion, vegetable Purée, and potato soups being most excellent,and costing not over from five to ten cents each. One of their dinner disheswas a heart (10 cents) stuffed, baked two or three hours, and served with abrown gravy and an onion garnish (see receipt). Still another was a two-poundround-steak (20 cents), spread with a bread and sage stuffing, then rolled,tied, floured, seasoned on top, then baked, basting it often. It was a prettydish, with tomato sauce around it. Sometimes a cheap fish was cut in slices,egged and bread-crumbed, fried, and garnished with fried potatoes. They hadalways a salad for dinner, prepared from their border of lettuce, some coldpotatoes, cold beans, or other vegetable. A fine breakfast dish was of kidneys(5 cents). Few Americans know how to cook kidneys, and butchers often throwthem away; yet in France they are considered a great delicacy. Their répertoire of cheap dishes was large; sothere was always a change for, at least, each day of the week. A crumb of breadwas never wasted. All odd morsels were dried in the oven, pounded, and put awayin a tin-box, ready for breading cutlets cut from any pieces of mutton or veal,and for many other purposes. Any pieces of suet or drippings were clarified and put one side, to be usedfor frying. Remains of cooked vegetables of any kind were saved for soups andsauces. Not a slice of a tomato nor leaf of a cabbage was thrown away. If they had butter that was not entirely sweet, they added more salt, alittle soda, brought it to a boil on the stove, and then put it away in alittle crock. By allowing the settlings to remain at thebottom, the butter became entirely sweet, and not too salt for cookingpurposes. Chickens, cutlets, etc., were larded at this table. Now, just to mention theword "larding" is to overwhelm a common cook; and to require it, is to rivet inthe minds of most housewives the entire impracticability of a whole receipt inwhich it is an item. Pieces of salt pork or breakfast bacon should always bekept in the house. A pound of it, which is not expensive, may last a long time,as it requires very little for flavoring many things; then, if one has any ideaof sewing, or what it is to push a needle through any thing, one can lard. Itonly requires a larding-needle, which costs fifteencents, and which should last a century. By placing little cut strips of pork inthe end of the needle, as is explained among "directions," then drawing theneedle through parts of the meat, leaving the pork midway, this wonderfullydifficult operation is accomplished. It is only a few minutes' pastime to lardturkeys, chickens, birds, cutlets, sweet-breads, etc., which gives to themflavor and style. Limited in fortune as were this family, they were never without stock athand. Their meat for croquettes, patties, etc., had served a duty to the soup-kettle. If a chicken was to be boiled for thetable, it was thrown into the stock-pot while the soupwas simmering, and thus it and the chicken were both benefited. Their meat dishes were often garnished with little potato-balls, cooked à la Parisienne, or simply boiled. Thisseemed extravagant; but as a French vegetable-cutter only costs twenty-five cents, and the balls can be cut very rapidly--all theparings boiled and mashed serving another time as potato-cakes--there wasnothing wasted, and little time lost. In short, this household (and it is a sample of nearly all French familiesof limited means) lived well on little more than many an American family wouldthrow away. Let me give five bills of fare of their dinners, the second of which ispartly prepared from the remains of the first day: Beefsoup (soup bone), 10 cents. Veal blanquitte andboiled potatoes (knuckle of veal), 15 cents. Saladof sliced tomatoes, 2 or 3 cents. Boiled rice, witha border of stewed small pears (green, or of common variety), 10cents. Onion or bean soup, 5 cents. Fish (enmatelote), 15 cents. Croquettes (made of the remainsof the cold beef-soup meat, and rice), with a tomato sauce. Salad of cold boiled potatoes. Friedbread-pudding. Potato soup. Round steak, rolled (page 140), with baked, parboiled onions, 25cents. Salad of lettuce. Apple-fritters, with sirup. Beefà la mode, with spinach, 40 cents (enough for two dinners). Salad of potatoes and parsley. Rice-pudding. Noodlesoup. Mutton ragout, with potatoes, 25cents. Noodles and stuffed tomatoes. Cheese omelet. DIRECTIONS ANDEXPLANATIONS. BOILING. FOWLS or joints should be tied or well skewered into shape beforeboiling. Every thing should be gently simmered, rather than fast boiled, in orderto be tender. The water should never be allowed to stop simmering before thearticle is quite done. A pudding is thus entirely ruined. The kettle should be kept covered, merely raising the cover at times toremove the scum. Boiled fowl, with a white sauce, is a favorite English dish,and very nice it is if properly prepared. FRYING. Frying means cooking by immersion in hot fat, butter, or oil. There is noEnglish word for what is called frying in a spoonful of fat, first on one side, and then on the other. Sauté is the French word, and should beAnglicized. Ordinary cooks, instead of frying, invariably sauté every thing. Almost every article thatis usually sautéd is much better and more economical fried; as, for instance, oysters, fish, birds,cutlets, crabs, etc. The fat should always be tested before the article is immersed. A littlepiece of bread may be thrown in, and if it colors quickly, the fat is ready,and not before. The temperature of hot grease, it will be remembered, is muchgreater than that of boiling water, which can not exceed a certain degree ofheat, whether it boil slow or fast. Hot grease reaches a very high degree ofheat, and consequently the surface of any thing is almost instantaneouslyhardened or crisped when thrown into it. The inside is thus kept free fromgrease, and is quickly cooked. An article first dipped in egg and bread-crumbsshould be entirely free from grease when thus cooked, as theegg is hardened the instant it touches the hot grease, and the oyster,croquette, cutlet, or sweet-bread is perfectly protected. The same fat can beused repeatedly for frying the same thing. The fat in which fish is friedshould not be again used for any thing except fish. Professional cooks haveseveral frying-kettles, in which fat is kept for frying different things. Alittle kettle for frying potatoes exclusively should always be at hand. One will see that this style of cooking is economical, as there is verylittle waste of fat; and then fried articles need no other dressing. After frying fish, meat, or vegetables, let the fat stand about fiveminutes; strain, and then return it to the kettle, which should always be keptcovered, after it is once cold. Beef suet, salted, is quite as good for frying as lard, and is much cheaper.It is well to purchase it by the pound, and have it rendered in thekitchen. TO PREPARE GREASE FORFRYING ( ProfessorBlot ). Take beef suet, the part around the kidneys, or anykind of fat, raw or cooked, and free of fibres,nerves, thin skin, or bones; chop it fine; add to it whatever you may have of fat skimmed off the topof meat soup; put it in a cast-iron or crockery kettle; set it on a moderatefire; boil gently for fifteen minutes; skim it well during the process; takefrom the fire, leave it five minutes, and then strain it; after which, put itin pots, and keep them in a dry and cool place; cover the pots well every timeyou have occasion to use, but never cover them while the grease is warm. Thisgrease is as good, if not better than any other to fry fish, fritters, andother similar things, which require to be entirely covered with grease. * BROILING. I did not appreciate the nicety of boiling until, upon an occasion, agentleman invited a dinner company to a private dining-room of one of our largerestaurants, to eat a certain kind of fish, which he considered especiallyfine. The host was quite out of humor to see the fish come to the table baked,when he had ordered it broiled. The proprietor afterward explained that, forsome reason, his French cook was absent for that day, and he had no other whocould broil so large a fish. I at once realized that, after all, it must be adelicate and difficult thing to broil a large fish, so that the centre would bewell done, and the surface not burned. The smaller and thinner the article, thehotter should be the fire; the larger the article, the more temperate the fire,or, rather, the greater distance it should at first be placed from it. Thefish, in this case, should have been wrapped in oiled or buttered paper. Itshould have been placed rather near the fire for the first few minutes; thenremoved farther away, or placed on another more moderate fire. A large baking-pan should have covered the top of the fish, tohold the heat. When nearly done, the paper should have been removed, to allowthe surface to brown. The following note appears at the bottom ofpage 45 in the original text. *The author would add a small proportion of water tothe pieces of fat. It facilitates the melting process, preserves the color, andwill all evaporate in cooking. Always grease the gridiron well, and have it hot, before the meat is placed on it. Any thingegged and bread-crumbed should be buttered before it is broiled. Fish should bebuttered and sprinkled with flour, which will prevent the skin from adhering to the gridiron. Cutlets, and in fact every thing, are moredelicate buttered before boiling. A little lemon-juice is also often a niceaddition. Birds, and other things which need to be halved, should be broiled, inside first. Remember that a hot, clear fire is necessary for cooking all small articles.They should be turned often, to be cooked evenly, without being burned. Never put a fork in the lean part of meat on the gridiron, as it allows the juice to escape. Always cover the gridiron with a tin pan or a baking-pan. The sooner the meat is cooked withoutburning, the better. The pans holds the heat, and often prevents a stray lineof smoke from touching the meat. If the fire should be too hot, sprinkle salt over it. ROASTING. There is little use to talk about roasting, as but few will attempt it,always considering it easier to bake instead. Indeed, there is so little demandin many sections for stoves and ranges suited to the purpose that they aredifficult to obtain. Of course, there is no comparison between these modes ofcooking. Beef, mutton, turkeys, ducks, or birds--in fact, any kind of meat istenfold better roasted than baked. In Europe, all these articles are roasted;and people there would have great contempt for a piece of beef or a turkeybaked. In New York and Philadelphia, also, at the finer establishments, themeats are generally roasted. The trouble is little greater than to bake. It isonly necessary to have the range or stove constructed for roasting, and a tinscreen, with a spit and jack, to place before the coals.Some of the roasters are arranged with a spring-jack. The meat is placed on the spit, and thespring wound up, which sets the meat to revolving slowly before the fire. In roasting, the meat should at first be placed near the coals, so as toquickly harden the surface; then it should be removed back a little distance,to be cooked through, without burning. The oftener it is basted, the better itis. If the roast of meat is very large, it should be surrounded with a butteredpaper. Just before the meat is done, it should be basted with a little butter or drippings, then sprinkled with flour,and placed nearer the fire, to brown nicely, when it will take a frothyappearance. Much depends upon the management of the fire. It should be made some timebefore the meat is placed for roasting, so that the coals may be bright andhot. It should also be strong enough to last, with only the addition of anoccasional coal at the top. In fine establishments abroad, a grate for burningcoal, charcoal, or wood is made in the kitchen, for the purpose of roastingonly. This is convenient, but more expensive than roasting in ranges or stoves,where the same fire may serve for cooking every thing. SAUTéING. As I have already said, frying implies immersing in fat or oil; but sautéing means to cook in a spider or sauté pan, with just enough hot fat tokeep the article, while being cooked, from sticking. The fat should always bequite hot before placing on it any thing to cook. BRAISING. A braising-kettle has a deep cover, which holdscoals; consequently, the cooking is done from above as well as below. It isalmost air-tight, thus preventing evaporation, and the article to be cookedimbibes whatever flavor one may wish to give it. The article is generally cooked in stock or broth (water may be used also),with slices of bacon, onion, carrot, etc., placed around the meat. It is afavorite mode of cooking pigeons. An ordinary cut of beef may be made verysavory cooked in this manner, and the juice left makes a good gravy when freedfrom fat. If a braising-pan is not at hand, a common,tight-covered saucepan answers very well without the upper coals. Except forcoloring larding on the top of the article to be braised, I do not appreciatethe value of the upper coals, anyway; and the coloring may be accomplished withthe salamander or hot shovel aswell. LARDING. Cut the firmest bacon fat, with a heated or verysharp knife, into square lengths of equal size. Placing one end in a larding-needle, draw it through the skin and a small bitof the meat, leaving the strip of pork, or lardoon, as it iscalled, in the meat. The two ends left exposed shouldbe of equal length. The punctures for the lardoons should be in rows, of equaldistance apart, arranged in any fanciful way that may suit the cook. The usualform for larding, however, is as shown in cut (page 57). BONING. Boning is not a difficult operation. It only requirestime, a thin, sharp knife, and a little care. Cut off the neck, and also thelegs at the first joint. Cut the skin in a line down the middle of the back.Now, taking first one side and then the other of the cut in the fingers,carefully separate the flesh from the bones, sliding the knife close to thebone. When you come to the wings and legs, it is easier to break or unjoint thebones at the body-joint; cutting close by the bone, draw it, turning the fleshof the legs and wings inside out. When all the bones are out, the skin andflesh can be re-adjusted and stuffed into shape. As the leg and wing bonesrequire considerable time to remove, they may be left in, and the body stuffedwith lamb or veal force-meat. See receipt for boned chicken (page 174). It is a very pretty and deliciousdish. EGG ANDBREAD CRUMBING. Always sift the bread orcracker crumbs. Whenever there are spare pieces or trimmings of bread or brokencrackers, dry them at once in the oven, and after pounding andsifting, put them away in a tin can, for future use. In preparing for use, beatthe eggs a little. If they are to be used for sweetdishes, such as rice croquettes, sweeten them slightly. If they are to be usedfor meats, sweet-breads, oysters, etc., always salt and pepper them, and for a change, finely chopped parsley may be added. Add a small proportion of milk to the eggs, say ahalf-cupful for two of them, or for one of them, if intended for fish or cutlets. Have the eggs in one plate, and the bread-crumbs in another; roll the article first in thecrumbs, then in the eggs, then in the crumbs again. Inthe case of articles very soft, like croquettes, it will be more convenient forone person to shape and roll them in the eggs, andanother, with dry hands, to roll them in the bread-crumbs. Pounded and sifted cracker-crumbs can be purchased by the pound, at bakeriesand large groceries, for the same price as whole crackers. However, it willnever be necessary to purchase cracker-crumbs, if all scraps of bread are savedand dried. It is deplorable for a cook to throw them away. It shows that she iseither too indolent to ever learn to cook, or too ignorant of the uses ofscraps of bread to be tolerated. If she saves them for purposes of charity, lether give fresh bread, which will be more acceptable, and save the scraps, whichare equally useful to her. Yet if the bread-crumbs when pounded and sifted arenot very fine, they are not as good as the cracker-dust. TO COOK PUDDING IN BOILINGWATER. Wet and flour the cloth before adding the pudding. In tyingin the pudding, leave room enough for it to swell. Ifcooked in a mold, do not fill the mold quite full. Never let the water stop boiling. As it wastes away in boiling,replenish the kettle from another containing boilingwater. It is better to cook these puddings ( plum-puddings as well) in a steamer than in boiling water. The principle is really the same, and there is no water soaked. DRIED CELERY, PARSLEY, ETC., FORWINTER USE. Celery, parsley, thyme, summer savory, sage, etc., should all be preparedfor winter use. After drying and pulverizing, put them in tin cans or glassjars. Celery and parsley are especially valuable for soups andgravies. SEEDS FORSOUPS. If the fresh or dried vegetables are not at hand, seeds, such as celery,carrot-seed, etc., can be substituted for a flavoring. TO FLAVOR WITH LEMONZEST. Never use the white part of the peel of alemon for flavoring. It is bitter. The little globules of oil inthe surface of the rind contain all the pleasantflavor of the peel. It may be thinly pared off, avoiding the white pulp.Professional cooks, however, rub loaf-sugar over thesurface. The friction breaks the oil-ducts, and the sugar absorbs the oil. It is called zest. The sugar is afterward pounded fine for certain dishes,such as creams, meringues, etc.; or it can be simply melted incustards and beverages. THE COOK'S TABLEOF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 1 quart of sifted flour = 1pound. 1 quart of powdered sugar = 1 pound and 7ounces. 1 quart of granulated sugar = 1 pound and 9ounces. 1 pint of closely packed butter = 1pound. Butter, size of egg = about 2 ounces. 10 eggs =1 pound. 3 cupfuls of sugar = 1 pound. 5 cupfuls ofsifted flour = 1/6th of a gill. 1 heaping table-spoonfuls = 1quart; 4 quarts = 1 gallon. In my receipts, I prefer, generally, the use of terms of measure to those ofweight, because the former are more convenient for the majority ofhousekeepers. TO CHOP SUET. Sprinkle flour over it while chopping, whch will prevent thepieces from adhering. RISING POWDERPROPORTIONS. To 1 quart of flour, use 2 and 1/2 tea-spoonfuls of baking-powder; or, To 1 quart of flour, use 1 tea-spoonful of soda, and 2 tea-spoonfuls ofcream of tartar; or, To 1 quart of flour, use 1 cupful of sour milk, and 1 tea-spoonful ofsoda. TO MAKE ROUX. A roux is a mixture of butter and flour cooked. It is generally added, uncooked, to thickena sauce or a soup; but the flavor is much better if it is first cooked, and thesauce or soup is added to it. Professional French cooks always mange it inthis way. When the butter is first brought to theboiling-point, in a small stew-pan or cup, the sifted flour is sprinkled in, and both are mixed welltogether over the fire with an egg-whisk, until the flour is well cooked; a part of the sauce or soup isthen stirred in until it becomes smooth and thin enough to add to the mainsauce or soup. If the roux is intended for a white sauce, it is notallowed to color; if for a brown sauce, it may color a little, or browned flour may be used. COOKINGUTENSILS. The BainMarie. --This is an open vessel, to be kept at the back of the rangeor in some warm place, to be filled with hot (not boiling) water. Severalstew- A bain marie containing five smallerpots. pans, or large tin cups with covers andhandles, are fitted in, which are intended to hold all these cooked dishesdesired to be kept hot. If there are delays in serving the dinner, there is nobetter means of preserving the flavor of dishes. The bain marie is especially convenient at any time forkeeping sauces, or vegetables for garnish, which can not always be prepared atthe last minute. An illustration of abraising-pan. The Braising-pan. --The use of this pan will be found byreferring to the article on "braising." The Fish-kettle. --The fish is placed on the perforatedtin sheet, which is then put into the An illustration of a fish-kettle,with the perforated tin sheet lying next to the mainpan. kettle of water. The fish is thus taken outof the water at will, without breaking. When done, it is placed for a minuteover an empty iron kettle on the fire, to drain well and steam. It is thencarefully slipped on a napkin in the hot platter in which it is to beserved. The Custard-kettle. --This is an iron utensil, the insidekettle being lined with block-tin. Although Anillustration of a custard-kettle. there arecheaper custard-kettles made of tin, it is bettereconomy to purchase those of iron, which are more durable. The inside kettlecontaining the custard is placed in the larger one, which is partly filled withboiling water. An illustration of asauté-pan. The Sauté-pan. --This pan may either be used forsautéing, or for an omelet pan. Sieve for Purées. --This is a substantialarrangement, the sides being made of tin. It is Anillustration of a purée sieve. invaluablefor bean, pea, or any of the Purée soups, which should be forced throughthe sieve. It is also used for bread or cracker crumbs--in fact, for any thingwhich requires sifting. An illustration of thelid, perforated basket, and large main pot of the steaming-kettle, arrangedvertically in the order in which they would bestacked. The Steaming-kettle. --The article to be cooked isplaced in the pan perforated with holes. It is put in the long kettle, which ispartly filled with boiling water, then covered with the close-fitting cover.This is an invaluable kettle for cooking vegetables, puddings, and, in fact, almost any thing that isusually immersed in boiling water. A cabbage, with salt sprinkled among theleaves, is cooked much quicker in this way than when immersed, and is much moredelicate. It is especially nice for plum-puddings, which then can not becomewater-soaked. Cooks generally manage to let the water stop boiling for someminutes when boiling puddings, which is just long enough to ruin them. Thiskettle is no less valuable for cooking chickens or rice. The SaratogaPotato-cutter. --The screws at the sides adjust a sharp knife, sothat, by rubbing the Two illustrations of theSaratoga potato-cutter, one showing the cutter from the back and the other fromthe front. potato over the plane, it may be cut asfine or as coarse as may be desired. The plane is also used for cuttingcabbage, or for onions to serve with cucumbers. Cabbage, however, should not becut too thin, as it is thereby less crisp. Cost, 50 cents. The can-opener. --This is the best and cheapestpattern. An illustration of a canopener. The handle, knife, and square piece areall made together of pressed iron. Cost, 25 cents. The Cream-whipper. --The handle A is placed inside the tube B. The tube is dipped into a bowlof An illustration of the two parts of thecream-whipper, labeled A and B. sweetened andflavored cream. By churning and pressing it through the perforated holes, thecream becomes a light froth, which is skimmed off the top, and put on a sieve,as soon as a few table-spoonfuls of it are formed. Cost, 25 cents. The Wire-basket, for Frying. --Articles tobe An illustration of a wire fryingbasket. fried are placed in the basket, which isimmersed in boiling fat. It facilitates frying, as the articles are all cooked,lifted out, and well drained at the same time. It is especially nice for fryingsmelts or for boiling eggs. The Egg-poacher. --The eggs are carefully broken into thelittle cups, and placed in the stand. The stand isthen dipped into well-salted An illustration of anegg-poacher. water, which is merely simmering.When done, each cup (formed like a shell) is taken out from the stand, andcarefully tipped over a piece of buttered toast, leaving the egg with thepretty form of the cup on top. An illustration ofa fish-stand. The Fish-stand. --Fried smelts are hung by catching themto the sharp points of the stand. The intervening places are filled withparsley or leaves, and the whole served in form of a pyramid. The Butter-roller. Anillustration of two wooden paddles, a ball of butter, and a stack of butterballs in a round dish with three legs. --Thewooden squares are dipped into cold water. A small piece of butter (enough forone person at table) is placed on one square, then rolled around with the otherone held in the other land. A little ball is formed with a net-work surface. Anumber of balls are thus formed of the same size, and piled on the butter-dish,as is cut. Butter or Mashed-potato Syringe. --Thebutter is placed in the tube, and pressed through the round holes in the end onto the butter-dishes. It forms a pretty effect of fillets of butter, resemblingvermicelli. Potatoes boiled, seasoned, Anillustration of the butter or mashed-potato syringe, separated into twoparts. and mashed may also be pressed through thetube around the beef, venison, or almost any meat or fish dish, making a prettydecoration. French Vegetable-cutters. --The littlecups of figures A and B are pressed into potatoes, or any bulbousvegetable, then turned around. The cutter A will make little potato-balls, say an inch in diameter, which are fried, and called"potatoes à la Parisienne." The figure B will cut oblong forms.Smaller- An illustration of two vegetable cutters,labeled A and B, accompanied by the shapes that they cut from thevegetable. sized cutters are preferable forcutting potatoes, carrots, turnips, etc., for garnishing à lajardinière. An illustration ofthree tin cutters in the shape of a heart, club, and flower. Each cutter isaccompanied by an example of the shape that it willcut. Tin Cutters, for cutting Slices of Bread to fry for decoratingDishes(croûtons), or to serve in Soups. --They may also be used forcutting slices of vegetables for decorations or for soups. Potato, Carrot, or Turnip Cutter. --Thissimple little instrument cuts the vegetables mentioned into curls. When thecurl is cut, the vegetable is afterward cut from the outside to meet it, whenit easily slips out. The handle is separate from the iron wire, and has to betaken off in order to remove the curl. Anillustration of a potato/carrot/turnip cutter, accompanied by a spiralrepresenting the shape that it cuts from thevegetables. The curls can be boiled in saltedwater, if of carrots; if of turnips, they are better cooked after the Frenchreceipt given; if of potatoes, they are generally fried in boiling lard, andsprinkled with a little salt as soon as done. They make a pretty garnish, ormay be served alone. Fluted Knife, for cutting Vegetables into various fancy Forms forDecorations, or for Salads. --Some cut mushrooms with this knife, to givethem a scolloped surface. An illustration of afluted knife accompanied by three shapes (a cone, a sphere, and a cube) withgrooved surfaces. French Cook's Knife. --Made of beststeel. It can easily be kept very sharp, and made of almost constant use inpreparing An illustration of a French Cook'sKnife. dishes. It is especially useful for boning.It costs seventy-five cents, yet, with proper care, should last a life-time.These knives are so light, sharp, and easily handled, that, when once used, aperson would consider it very awkward to cook without once. A Knife for Peeling. --The wire prevents thecutting of more than the skins of fruits or vegetables. The wire may beattached or detached at will, for cleaning it. Anilllustration of the paring knife described in the previousparagraph. Wire Skewers (Fig. A).--They are aboutthree inches long, and may be of silver or plain wire. Fig. B is a skewer run An illustration oftwo plain skewers, labeled A; a skewer run through three fish and two otherpieces of food between them, labeled B; and a skewer run through two large andtwo small pieces of food. through three smelts,with thin slices of bacon between. They are fried in boiling lard, and oneskewerful is served to each person at table. The fishdish is garnished with lemon slices, one of which is placed on thetop of each skewerful of fish when on the plate (see page 112). Fig. C, a skewer of alternate slices of egged and bread-crumbedsweet-breads and bacon, managed in the same manner as the smelts (see page155). Knife for carving Poultry and Game. --Besidescutting the flesh, this knife disjoints or cutsthe An illustration of the knife for carving poultryand game. bones, which are often embarrassing,especially in ducks and geese. An illustration ofa meat-squeezer. Meat-squeezer, for pressing out the Juice of Beef for Invalids. --Apiece of round-steak (which yields more juice than other cuts) is barely heatedthrough, when it is cut, and the juice pressed out at the angle A into a warm cup, placed in a basin of hot water. The juice should be servedimmediately, and taken while still warm. Pancake-lifter. --This form, having morebreadth than the ordinary square lifter, has the Anillustration of a pancake-lifter. advantage ofturning the pancakes with greater facility. Brush, for rubbingwhites A small brush, with its bristles tied onto itshandle in the manner of a broom. of eggs overrusks, crullers, etc., or for glazing meats with clear stock, reduced byboiling to a stiff jelly. Larding-needles, Lardoons, and Manner of Larding. --See article on Larding, page 48. Alarding needle, a larding needle fitted with a lardoon, two plain lardoons, anda larger illustration showing lardoons that have already been larded into apiece of meat as well as a larding needle being pushed through the meat toinsert another lardoon. The lardoons in the latter illustration have beenlabeled with the numbers 1-10. Apple-corer. --The larger tube is forcoring An illustration of two apple corers, one largeand one small. apples; the smaller one for coringSiberian crab-apples, for preserving. Jelly-stand. --This is simply andcheaply An illustration of ajelly-stand. made. Rings can be fastened to theends of the cords, and slipped over the four top rounds, to hold the jelly-bag on the stand; or it may be tied. The jelly-bag should be made of flannel, or of Cantonflannel. This arrangement is not only convenient for jellies, but for clearsoups as well. Meat-pie Mold. --Fig. A represents themold closed, the wires at each end fastening the two sides together. It is hereready to be buttered, the crust to be laid in, and pressed into the decorationsat the sides, filled, the top crust to be fitted over, and baked. Fig. B, thewire is drawn out one side, the mold opened, and removed from the pie. Fig. C,the pie ready to be served at table. Threeillustrations labeled A, B, and C. Illustration A depicts a round mold withdecorated sides; illustration B depicts the same mold, swung open into twosemi-circles on its hinge; and illustration C is a fancy dish that has beenshaped with the mold depicted in A and B, served on a roundplatter. Paste-jagger. --Fig. A represents a paste-jagger, for cutting and ornamenting the edges ofpie-crust. Fig. B is a plain circle of pie-curst cut with the jagger, to fitthe pie-dish. Fig. C is part of a strip of pie-paste,which is cut with the jagger to lay around the edge of the pie. Fig. D, thestrip Five illustrations labeled A, B, C, D, and E.Illustration A depicts a paste-jagger; B is a circle of paste with jaggededges; C is a thin strip of pastry with jagged edges; D is a pie crust withjagged edges in a pie plate; and E is a finished pie with strips of crust laidin a diagonal pattern across the top served on a roundplatter. laid around the edge. Fig. E, the pieplaced upon a plate, ready to serve at table. Glass or Tin Flower Forms. --These areflat forms for decorating An illustration of threeflower forms; one is U-shaped, another is L-shaped, and the third is shapedlike a cross. thetable with flowers. They are filled with water or wet sand. The flowers areplaced in, and may, or may not, conceal the tin form. Molds. --Fig. A, a circular tin mold for blanc-manges, jellies, etc. Fig. B, supposed to bea blanc-mange filled withstrawberries. Two illustrations, labeled A and B,depicting a ring-shaped mold and a fancy dessert shaped with the mold,respectively. These centres may be filled with anykind of berries, compotes, fresh fruits, creams, etc., and makeexceedingly pretty dishes. With a small mold ofthis An illustration, labeled C, of a circular moldwith patterned edges. kind one can prepare a verydainty-looking dish for an invalid. It may be filled with blanc-mange, tapiocajelly, An illustration of a fancy dessert, labeled D,formed in the mold depicted in illustrationC. Irish moss, wine, or chicken jellies, etc., andfilled with a compote, a whipped cream, beaten eggs, or anyallowable relish. Fig. C, a circular mold, of more elaborate pattern, yet quiteas easy to manage as the simple one. Fig. D, wine jelly, filled with whippedcream. Fig. E, a casserole mold. Fig. F, a casserole ofrice or mashed potatoes, Two illustrations labeled Eand F. Illustration E depicts a casserole mold; illustration F is a casseroleserved in the casserole mold, which is standing on a round platter andsurrounded by leafy garnishes. filled with fried ( sautéd ) spring chickens, with cream sauce, andsurrounded with cauliflower blossoms. A pretty course for dinner, tea, orsupper. Little Silver-plated Chafing-dish. --It is about four and a half inchessquare, for serving Welsh rare-bits, or for small Anillustration of a chafing-dish on a roundplate. pieces of venison-steak, with currant jelly.One is served to each person at table. The lower part is a reservoir forboiling-hot water. I have seen them also made with little alcohol-lampsunderneath, when the thin slices of venison-steak can be partly or entirelycooked at table, in the currant jelly. At least, the preparation served is keptnicely hot. An Instrument for drawing Champagne, Soda, and otherEffervescing Liquids at pleasure, leaving the last Glass as sparkling as thefirst. --The instrument D is driven through thecork An illustration of the instrument described inthe previous paragraph. The illustration is in three parts: the illustrationslabeled A and B are the two parts of the instrument, which are fitted togetherin the uppermost illustration, which is labeled with a C (indicating a buttonon the bottom of the instrument) and D (indicating the entireinstrument). in the bottle, the wire A iswithdrawn, the button C turned; when the Champagne is drawn through the tube B.When enough is drawn, the button is again turned, and the wire replaced beforethe bottle is raised. The bottle should then be kept bottom side up. Theinstrument is a perfect success, and can be obtained of H. B. Platt & Co.,1211 Broadway, New York. It costs $1.85. Arectangular piece of paper, labeled A, with dotted lines indicatingfolds. Paper Cases for Soufflés, Chickens à la Bechamel, or foranything that can be served scolloped, or en coquille. --These cases areeasily and quickly made. They furnish a pretty variety at table, filled withany of the materials described among the receipts for articles to be served in paper cases or in shells. To make the paper cases, choosewriting-paper: fold and crease it at the dotted lines in Fig.A, A rectangular piece of paper, labeled B, withdotted lines indicating folds, solid lines indicating cuts, and a triangularnotch in the center of each side. then cut thepaper at the dark lines in Fig. B. By turning the corner squares, so that theymay lap over the sides, the box is formed. Sew the sides together, all aroundthe box, hiding the stitches under the small piece of paper at the top, lappedover the outside. They should An illustration of abox, labeled C, which was folded from the paper depicted in the two previousillustrations. A second illustration, labeled D, shows the same box filled withfood and set on a plate. be buttered just beforefilling. Fig. D is a case filled with a rice soufflé. Figs. E and F aresmall cases made of round pieces of paper (four inches in diameter), creasedwith a penknife. The top may be left unturned, as Fig. F, or turned twice, asFig. E. These cases may be purchased already made; however, it is a pleasantdiversion to make them. Two round paper cases,one (labeled E) with a curved lip and the other (labeled F) with a jaggedlip. Paper Handles for Lamb-chops, Cutlets, etc. --Along strip of thin writing- Three illustrations,labeled A, B, and C, showing how to make a paper handle. The illustrationlabeled A depicts a piece of paper folded in half and cut partially throughinto strips from the folded edge; B depicts the same piece of paper, rolled upa bit at the folded end; and C depicts the paper coiled into a paperhandle. paper is doubled, and cut half-way downwith scissors, in as thin cuts as can be easily made (Fig. A, a fragment of thepaper). One edge of the paper is then slipped a little distance farther thanthe corresponding edge, which gives the fine cuts a round shape, as in Fig. B. The edges can be held inthis position, with the aid of a very little mucilage. Now roll the paperspirally over a little stick, about the size of a cutlet bone. Fasten the endwith a little mucilage, and the paper handle is quite ready to slip over cutletbones, just as they are about to be sent to the table. Larger-sized paperhandles can be made in the same manner for boiled hams. Silver-plated Scallop Shell, for any thing served encoquille. --Articles served en coquille make a pretty course for lunchor An illustration of a dish shaped like a scallopshell. dinner. The shells in plated silver arequite expensive, costing sixty dollars a dozen at Tiffany's. I imagine theycould be made as well of block-tin, with a single coating of silver, and withthe little feet riveted, so as to stand the heat of the oven. A Méringue Decorator. --The little tin tubeA (one-third of an inch in diameter), or B, is put in the bottom of the bag. Méringue (whipped whites of eggs, sweetenedand flavored), or frosting for cakes, is put in the bag, and squeezed throughthe tube on puddings, lemon or méringue pies, or on cakes, forming anydesign that may suit the fancy. If it is squeezed through the tube A, the lineof frosting A méringue decorator in threeparts: a cone-shaped bag with a small hole at its apex and two small tips thatcan be fitted into the bag. will be round; ifthrough tube B, it will be scalloped, when leaves and flowers can easily beformed. The lady-fingers are shaped by pressing the cake batter though a tubehalf an inch in diameter. The bag is easily made with tightly woven twilledcloth. The little tin tubes can be made at the tinsmith's, or at home, with apiece of tin, a large pair of scissors, and a little solder. With this littleconvenience, the trouble of decorating dishes is very slight, and theirappearance is very much improved. An illustrationof a gravy and sauce strainer. Gravy and Sauce Strainer. --Asauce-strainer made of wire gaze of the form of cut presents so much surface for straining that the operationis much quicker accomplished than when using tin cups with a small circle ofgauze or perforated holes at the bottom. An Egg-whisk. --Decidedly the best form for anegg-whisk is the one given in the cut. Anillustration of an egg-whisk. It is equally usefulfor making roux and sauces. By holding the whiskperpendicularly, and vigorously passing it in the bottom of a saucepan, a smallquantity of butter and flour or sauce can be thoroughlymixed. BREAD, ANDBREAKFAST CAKES. IT requires experience to make good bread. One must know, first, how long tolet the bread rise, as it takes a longer time in cold than in warm weather;second, when the oven is just of proper temperature to bake it. Bread should beput in a rather hot oven. It is nearly light enough to bake when put in; so therule for baking bread differs from that of baking cake, which should be putinto a moderate oven at first, to become equally heated through before rising.As bread requires a brisk heat, it is well to have the loaves small, theFrench-bread loaves being well adapted to a hot oven. After the bread is baked,the loaves should be placed on end (covered) at the back of the table untilthey become cool. TO MAKEYEAST. Ingredients: A cupful of baker'syeast; four cupfuls of flour; two large potatoes, boiled; one cupful of sugar, and six cupfuls of boilingwater. Mix the warm mashed potatoes and sugar together; then add the flour; next, add the six cupfuls of boiling water, poured on slowly: this cooks the flour a little. It will be of the consistency ofbatter. Let the mixture get almost cold, stirring it well, that the bottom maybecome cool also. It will spoil the yeast if the batter be too hot. Whenlukewarm, add the tea-cupfuls of yeast. Leave thismixture in the kitchen, or in some warm place,perhaps on the kitchen-table (do not put it too near the stove), for five orsix hours, until it gets perfectly light. Do not touch it until it getssomewhat light; then stir it down two or three times during the six hours. Thisprocess makes it stronger. Keep it in a cool place until needed. This yeast will last perpetually, if a tea-cupfulof it be always kept; when making bread, to make new yeast at the next baking. Keep it in a stone jar,scalding the jar every time fresh yeast is made. In summer, it is well to mix corn-meal with the yeast, and dry it in cakes, in some shady, dry place,turning the cakes often, that they may become thoroughly dry. It requires aboutone and a half cakes ( biscuit-cutter ) to make a fourmedium-sized loaves of bread. Crumb them, and let them soak in lukewarm water about a quarter or half an hour beforeusing. TO MAKE THEBREAD. Ingredients: Flour, one and a halfcupfuls of yeast, lukewarmwater, a table-spoonful of lard, a little salt. Put two quarts of flour into the bread-bowl; sprinkle a little salt over it; add one and a half cupfuls of yeast, and enough lukewarmwater to make it a rather soft dough. Set it one side to rise. Inwinter, it will take overnight; in summer, about three hours. After it hasrisen, mix well into it one table-spoonful of lard; then add flour (not toomuch), and knead it half an hour. The more it is kneaded, the whiter and finerit becomes. Leave this in the bread-bowl for a shorttime to rise; then make it into loaves. Let it rise again for the third time.Bake. MRS. BONNER'SBREAD. This is a delicious bread, which saves the trouble of makingyeast. Twenty-five cents' worth of Twin Brothers'yeast will last a small family in six weeks. I would recommendMrs. Bonner's bread in preference to that of the last receipt. It is cheaperand better, at last, to always have good bread, which is insured by using fresh yeast each time. For four loaves: At noon, boil three potatoes; mashthem well; add a little salt; and two and a halfcupfuls of flour; also enough boiling water (that in whichthe potatoes were boiled) to make rather a thinbatter. Let it cool, and when it is at about blood-heat, add a TwinBrothers' yeast-cake, soaked in half a tea-cupful of lukewarm water. One yeast-cake will be sufficient for four loaves of breadin summer; but use one and a half yeast-cakes inwinter. Stir well, and put it in a warm place. At night it will be light, whenstir in enough flour to make the sponge. Do not makeit too stiff. If you should happen to want a little more bread than usual, adda little warm water to the batter. Let it remain in awarm place until morning, when it should be well kneaded for at least twentyminutes. Half an hour or more would be better. Return the dough to the pan, andlet it rise again. When light, take it out; add half a tea-spoonful of soda, dissolved in a table-spoonful of water; separate it into four loaves; put them in thepans, and let it rise again. When light, bake it an hour. FRENCH BREAD ( Grace Melaine Lourant ). Put a heaping table-spoonful of hops and a quart of hot water over the fire to boil. Have ready five orsix large boiled potatoes, which mash fine. Strain the hops. Now put a pint of boilingwater (that in which the potatoes wereboiled) over three cupfuls of flour; mix in the mashed potatoes, then the quart of strained hot hop-water, a heaping tea-spoonful of sugar, and the same of salt. When this is lukewarm, mix in one and a half Twin Brothers' yeast-cakes (softened). Let this standovernight in a warm place. In the morning, a new process is in order: First, pour over the yeast a table-spoonful of warmwater, in which is dissolved half a spoonful of soda; mix in lightly about ten and a half heapingtea-cupfuls of sifted flour. No more flour is added to the bread during its kneading.Instead, the hands are wet in lukewarm water. Nowknead the dough, giving it about eight or ten strokes; then taking it from theside next to you, pull it up into a long length, then double it, throwing itdown snappishly and heavily. Wetting the hands again,give it the same number of strokes, or kneads, pulling the end toward you again, andthrowing it over the part left in the pan. Continue this process until large bubbles are formed in thedough. It will take half an hour or longer. The hands should be wet enough atfirst to make the dough rather supple. If dexterously managed, it will notstick to the hands after a few minutes; and when it is kneaded enough, it willbe very elastic, full of bubbles, and will not stick to the pan. When this timearrives, put the dough away again in a warm place to rise. This will take oneor two hours. Now comes another new process. Sprinkle plenty of flour on the board, and take out lightly enough doughto make one loaf of bread, remembering that the French loaves are not large,nor or the same shape as the usual home-made ones. Withthe An illustration of an oval-shaped lump ofdough. thumb and forefinger gather up the sidescarefully (to prevent doubling the meshes or grain of the dough) to make itround in shape. Flour the rolling-pin, press it in the centre, rolling a littleto give the dough the form of cut. Now give each puffed end a roll toward the centre, lapping well the ends.Turn the bread entirely over, pulling out the ends a little, to give the loaf along form, as in cut. An illustration of a longloaf of bread. Sprinkle plenty of flour on large baking-pans turned bottom side up, upon which lay thisand the other loaves, a little distance apart, if there is room for two of themon one pan. Sprinkle plenty of flour on the tops, andset the pans by the side of the fire to again rise a little. It will taketwenty-five or thirty minutes longer. Then bake. Kneading bread in the manner just described causes the grain of the bread to run in one direction, so thatit may be pealed off in layers. Kneading with water instead of flour makethe bread moist and elastic, rather than solid and in crumbs. PETITS PAINS are madeas in last receipt, by lightly gathering a little handful of dough, picking up the sides, and turning it over inthe form of a ball or a biscuit. They are baked asdescribed for French bread, placing them a little distance apart, so that theymay be separate little breads, each one enough for one person at breakfast. TOAST. I have remarkedbefore that not one person in a thousand knows how to make good toast. Thesimplest dishes seem to be the ones oftenest spoiled. If the cook sends to thetable a properly made piece of toast, one may judge that she is a scientific cook, and may entertain, at the sametime, exalted hopes of her. The bread should not be too fresh. It should becut thin, evenly, and in good shape. The crust edgesshould be cut off. The pieces shaved off can be dried and put in thebread-crumb can. The object of toasting bread is toextract all its moisture--to convert the dough into pure farina of wheat, whichis very digestible. Present each side of the bread tothe fire for a few moments to warm, without attempting to toast it; then turnabout the first side at some distance from the fire, so that it may slowly andevenly receive a golden color all over the surface. Now turn it tothe other side, moving it in the same way, until it is perfectly toasted. Thecoals should be clear and hot. Serve it the moment it is done, on a warm plate,or, what is better, a toast-rack; consequently, do nothave a piece of bread toasted until the one for whomit is intended is ready to eat it. "If, as is generally done, a thick slice of bread ishurriedly exposed to a hot fire, and the exterior of the bread is toasted nearly black, the intention ofextracting the moisture is defeated, as the heat will then produce no effect onthe interior of the slice, which remains as moist as ever. Charcoal is a badconductor of heat. The overtoasted surface is nothing more or less than a thinlayer of charcoal, which prevents the heat form penetrating through the bread. Neither will butter pass through the hard surface: it will remain onit, and if exposed to heat, to melt it in, it will dissolve, and run over it inthe form of rancid oil. This is why buttered toast is so oftenunwholesome." DIXIE BISCUIT ( Mrs. Blair ). Mix one tea-spoonful of salt into three pints of flour; put one tea-cupful of milk, with two table-spoonfuls of lard, on the fire to warm. Pour this on two eggs, well beaten; add the flour, with one tea-cupful of home-madeyeast. When well mixed, set it in a warm place for about fivehours to rise; then form into biscuit; let them rise again. Bake. GRAHAM BREAD. Make the sponge as for white bread; then knead in Graham flour, only sifting part of it. Add, also, twoor three table-spoonfuls of molasses. RUSKS. Add to about aquart of bread dough the beaten yolks ofthree eggs, half a cupful of butter, andone cupful of sugar: mix all well together. Whenformed into little cakes (rather high and slender, and placed very near eachother), rub the tops with sugar and water mixed; then sprinkle over dry sugar. This should fill two pans. PARKER HOUSE ROLLS ( Mrs. Samuel Treat ). Ingredients: Two quarts of flour, one pint of milk (measured after boiling), butter the size of an egg, one table-spoonful of sugar, one tea-cupful of home-madeyeast, and a little salt. Make a hole in the flour. Put in the otheringredients, in the following order: sugar, butter, milk, and yeast. Do not stir the ingredients after putting themtogether. Arrange this at ten o'clock at night; set it in a cool place untilten o'clock the next morning, when mix all together, and knead it fifteenminutes by the clock. Put it in a cool place again until four o'clock P.M.,when cut out the rolls, and set each one apart from its neighbor in the pan.Set it for half an hour in a warm place. Bake fifteen minutes. BEATEN BISCUIT. Rub onequarter of a pound of lard into one and a half pounds of flour, addinga pinch of salt. Mix enough milk or water with it to makea stiff dough. Beat the dough well with a rolling-pinfor half an hour or more, or until the dough will break when pulled. Little machines come for thepurpose of making beaten biscuit, which facilitate the operation. Form intolittle biscuit, prick them on top several times with a fork, and bake. SODA AND CREAM OF TARTARBISCUIT. Ingredients: One quart of flour, onetea-spoonful of soda, two tea-spoonfuls cream of tartar, one even tea-spoonful of salt, lard or butter the size of a small egg, and milk. Put the soda, cream oftartar, and salt on the table; mash themsmoothly with a knife, and mix well together; mix them as evenly in the flour as possible; then pass it all through the sievetwo or three times. The success of the biscuits depends upon the equaldistribution of these ingredients. Mix in the lard or butter (melted) as evenly as possible, taking time torub it between the open hands, to break any little lumps. Now pour in enough milk to make the dough consistent enough to roll out,mixing it lightly with the ends of the fingers. The quicker it is rolled out,cut, and baked, the better will be the biscuits. The biscuits are cheaper made with cream oftartar and soda than with baking-powder,yet many make the BISCUITS WITHBAKING-POWDER. They are made as in the last receipt, merelysubstituting two heaping tea-spoonfuls of baking-powder for the cream of tartar and soda, andtaking the same care to mix evenly. These biscuits are nice rolled quite thin (half an inch), and cut with asmall cutter two inches in diameter. They may be served hot or cold, and areoften used at evening companies, cold, split in two, buttered, and with chopped ham (as for sandwiches) placed between them. They arepreferable to bread sandwiches, as they do not dry as quickly, and are,perhaps, neater to handle. These biscuits are especially nice when made with Professor Horsford's self-raising flour of course, the raising powders are omitted. The appreciationof hot biscuits is quite a Southern and Western American fancy. They are rarelyseen abroad, and are generally considered unwholesome in the EasternStates. MUFFINS. Ingredients:Two eggs, one pint of flour, one tea-cupful of milk or cream, butter half thesize of an egg, a little salt, and one tea-spoonful of baking-powder. Mix the baking-powder and salt in the flour. Beat the eggs; add tothe yolks, first, milk, then butter (melted), then flour, then the whites. Beatwell after it is all mixed, and bake them immediately in a hot oven, in gem-pans or rings. Take them out of the pans or ringsthe moment they are done, and send them to the table. The self-raising flour is very nice for making muffins. Inusing this, of course, the baking-powder should be omitted. WAFFLES. Ingredients:Two eggs, one pint of flour, one and a quarter cupfuls of milk or cream, one eventea-spoonful of yeast-powder, butter or lard the size of awalnut, and salt. Mix the baking-powder and salt well in the flour, then rub in evenly the butter; next add the beaten yolks and milk mixed, thenthe beaten whites of the eggs. Bake immediately. RICE WAFFLES ( Mrs. Gratz Brown ). Ingredients: One and a half pints of boiledrice, one and a half pints of flour, halfa tea-cupful of sour milk, half a tea-cupful of sweet milk, one tea-spoonful of soda, salt, three eggs, and butter size of awalnut. RICE PANCAKES are madeas in the last receipt, by adding an extra half-cupful of milk. HOMINY CAKE ( Mrs. Watts Sherman ). Add a spoonful of butter to two cupfuls of whole hominy (boiled an hour with milk ) while it is still hot. Beat three eggs very light, which add to the hominy. Stir in gradually a pint of milk, and, lastly, a pint of corn-meal. Bake in a pan. This is a very nice breakfast cake. Serve it, with a large napkin under it,on a plate. The sides of the napkin may cover the top of the cake until themoment of serving, which will keep it moist. BAKED HOMINY GRITS ( Mrs. Pope ). Ingredients: One quart of milk, one cupful of hominy grits, two eggs, and salt. When the milk is salted and boiling, stir in the hominy grits, and boil for twenty minutes. Set itaside to cool thoroughly. Beat the eggs to a stifffroth, and then beat them well and hard into the hominy. Bake half an hour. BREAKFAST PUFFS, OR POP-OVERS ( Mrs. Hopkins ). Ingredients: Two cupfuls of milk, two cupfuls of flour, two eggs, and an eventea-spoonful of salt. Beat the eggs separately and well, add the whites last, and then beat all well together. They maybe baked in roll-pans, or deep gem-pans, which should be heated on the range, andgreased before the batter is put in: they should be filled half full with thebatter. Or they may be baked in tea-cups, of which eightwould be required for this quantity of batter. When baked, serve immediately. For Graham gems use half Grahamflour. HENRIETTES FOR TEA ( French Cook ), No. 1. Ingredients: Three eggs beaten separately,three-fourths of a cupful of cream or milk, a scant tea-spoonful of baking-powder, salt, onetable-spoonful of brandy, a pinch of cinnamon, enough flour tomake them just stiff enough to roll out easily. Roll them thin as a wafer, cut them into about two-inch squares, or intodiamonds, with the paste-jagger, fry them in boiling lard, and sprinkle over pulverizedsugar. HENRIETTES FOR BREAKFAST ORTEA ( French Cook ), No. 2. Ingredients: Three eggs beaten separately, onecupful of milk, a scanttea-spoonful of baking-powder, salt, one table-spoonful of brandy, and flour enough tomake a little thicker than for pancakes. Pass the batter through a funnel (one-third or one-half inch diameter atend) into hot boiling lard, making rings, or anyfigures preferred. Do not fry too much at one time. When done and drained,sprinkle over pulverized sugar, and lay them on aplate on a folded napkin. Serve. WAFER BISCUITS. Rub apiece of butter the size of a large hickory-nut into apint of sifted flour; sprinkle over a little salt. Mix it into a stiff, smooth paste, with the white of an egg beaten to a froth, and warm milk. Beat the paste with a rolling-pin for halfan hour, or longer; the more the dough is beaten, the better are the biscuits.Form the dough into little round balls about the size of a pigeon's egg; thenroll each of them to the size of a saucer. They should be mere wafers inthickness; they can not be too thin. Sprinkle a little flour over the tins. Bake. These wafers are exceedingly nice to serve with a cheese course, or forinvalids to eat with their tea. CORNBREAD. Ingredients: One cupful of sourmilk, one cupful of sweet milk, onetable-spoonful of sugar or molasses, one tea-cupful of flour, two heaping tea-cupfuls of corn-meal, one tea-spoonful of salt, one tea-spoonful (not heaping) of soda, one and a half table-spoonfuls of melted lard or butter, andthree eggs. Beat the eggs separately; add the melted butter to the milk; then the sugar, salt, yolks, soda (dissolved in a table-spoonful of warm water ); and, lastly, the whites, flour, and corn-meal. Beat it all quickly and well together. Putit immediately in the oven, to bake half an hour. HOE CAKE. Pour enoughscalding water, or milk, on corn-meal (salted), to make it rather moist. Let itstand an hour, or longer. Put two or three heaping table-spoonfuls on a hotgriddle, greased with pork or lard. Smooth over thesurface, making the cake about half an inch thick, and of round shape. Whenbrowned on one side, turn and brown it on the other. Serve very hot. These are very nice breakfast, cakes, with a savory crust. CORN CAKE ( Mrs.Lackland ). Ingredients: One pint of milk, half a pint of Indian meal. four eggs, a scant table-spoonful of butter, salt, and onetea-spoonful of sugar. Pour the milk boiling on the sifted meal. When cold, add the butter (melted), the salt, the sugar, the yolks of the eggs, and, lastly, the whites, well beaten separately. Bakehalf an hour in a hot oven. It is very nice baked in iron or tin gempans, the cups an inch and a half deep. FRIED CORN MUSH FORBREAKFAST. Many slice the mush when cold, and simply sauté it in a little hot lard. But as some cooks seem to have as great successin simple dishes as in elaborate ones, I shall consider this as at least one ofthe little successes taught me by a French cook. Of course, the mush is made bysprinkling the corn-meal into boiling salted water, or after themanner of Harriet Plater, given in the next receipt. It is thoroughly cooked,and made the day before wanted. When cold, it is sliced, each slice dipped inbeaten eggs (salted) and bread or crackercrumbs, and fried in boiling-hot lard. Oneshould try this, to know the superiority in the manner of cooking. CORN MUSH is usuallymade by sprinkling corn-meal into well-salted boiling water (a pint of corn-meal to three pints of water ), and cooking it well. But Harriet Plater (Mrs.Filley's most skillful cook) says that corn-meal mush is much lighter, and whenfried for breakfast, browns better by cooking it as follows: "Put a quart of water on the fire to boil. Stir apint of cold milk, with one pint of corn-meal and one tea-spoonful of salt. When the water boils,pour in the mixture gradually, stirring all well together. Let it boil for halfan hour, stirring often, to prevent it from burning." OATMEAL PORRIDGE. Itseems very simple to make oatmeal porridge, yet it is a very different dishmade by different cooks. The ingredients are: One heaping cupful of oatmeal to one quart of boilingwater and one tea-spoonful of salt. Boiltwenty minutes. The water should be salted and boiling when themeal is sprinkled in with one hand, while it is lightly stirred in with theother. When all mixed, it should boil without afterward being stirred more thanis necessary to keep it from burning at the bottom, and to mingle the grainstwo or three times, so that they may all be evenly cooked. If much stirred, theporridge will be starchy or waxy, and poor in flavor. But the puffing of thesteam through the grains without much stirring swells each one separately, and,when done, the porridge is light, and quite consistent. This same manner ofcooking is applicable as well to all other grains. MOTHER JOHNSON'S PANCAKES ( Adirondacks ). These are famous pancakes, and, like every other good thing, there is alittle secret in the preparation. Enough flour is added to a quart of sour milk to make a rather thick batter. The secret isthat it is left to stand over-night, instead of being finished at once. It mayeven stand to advantage for twenty-four hours. However, if it is mixed atnight, the next morning two well-beaten eggs and salt are to be added at the same time with half atea-spoonful of soda, dissolved in a table-spoonful of warm water. Cook immediately. SIRUP. Mix twotable-spoonfuls of water to two cupfuls of brown sugar and one even table-spoonful of butter. Let it boil about five minutes. BUCKWHEAT CAKES. Scaldtwo gills of Indian meal in one quart of boiling water. Add a little salt. When cool, add one gill of yeast, and stir in enough buckwheatflour to make a thin batter. Let it rise over-night. If by chanceit is a little sour, just before cooking add one-fourth of a tea-spoonful of soda, dissolved in half a cupful of boiling water. Or, They may be made in the same manner without the Indian meal,merely adding the yeast to a quart of lukewarm water, and making the batter with buckwheat flour alone. PANCAKES, WITH FLOUR ORCORN-MEAL. Stir one or two cupfuls of cream or milk into two beaten eggs; add flour or corn-meal enough tomake a thin batter. If the milk is sweet, add onetea-spoonful of yeast-powder; if it is sour, add,instead of the yeast-powder, half a tea-spoonful of soda, dissolved in a little warmwater. PANCAKES, WITHBREAD-CRUMBS. Soak the bread-crumbs, thedrain them. To two cupfuls of bread-crumbs add onecupful of flour or corn-meal, one egg, and milk enough to make a thin batter. If the milk is sweet, add a tea-spoonful of yeast-powder; if sour, half a tea-spoonful of soda, dissolved in a table-spoonful of warmwater. STRAWBERRY SHORT-CAKE ( Mrs. Pope ). Ingredients: One quart of flour, two heapingtea-spoonfuls of yeast-powder, half a tea-spoonful of salt, butter size of an egg, milk, two quarts of strawberries. Mix the baking-powder into the flour, then rub in the butter (in the same manner as described for biscuits, page 72). Add enough milk to make a soft dough--rather softer than forbiscuits. Spread this on two pie-tins. Bake in a quick oven. When the cakes are done, let them partly cool. Cut around the edges, andsplit them. Spread them with butter, then with onequart of mashed strawberries, with plenty of sugar; then put between them the other quart of whole strawberries, sprinkled with sugar. Serve a pitcher of cream with a strawberry short-cake. The cake in thisform can be cut like a pie. It is a good summer breakfast as well as tea dish.Or, It can be made with sour milk, viz.: totwo tea-cupfuls of sour milk add a tea-spoonful of soda, then three-fourths of a tea-cupful of butter or lard, partlymelted, and enough flour to make a soft dough. Roll it into thin cakes largeenough to fill the pan in which they are to be baked. When baked, split, and butter them while hot. Lay on a plate half of thecake, put on a layer of well-sugared strawberries, thenthe other half, then more strawberries, and so on,until there are several layers. Or, These cakes canbe made in the same way with currants, blackberries, cut peaches, chopped pine-apples, raspberries, etc. TEA. TWO things are necessary to insure good tea: first, thatthe water should be at the boiling-point when pouredon the leaves, water simply hot not answering thepurpose at all; and, second, that it should be served freshly made. Tea should never be boiled. So particular are theEnglish to preserve its first aroma, that it is sometimes made on the table twoor three times during a meal. In France, little silver canisters of tea are placed on the table, where it is invariablymade. One tea-spoonful of the leaves is a fair portionfor each person. Tea is better made in an earthentea-pot, which tea connoisseurs are particular tohave. They also drink the beverage without milk, and with loaf-sugar merely. Water at the first boiling-point is generallyconsidered better for tea or coffee, and, in fact, anykind of cooking which requires boiling water. COFFEE. THE best coffee is made by mixing two-thirds Java and one-third Mocha. TheJava gives strength, the Mocha flavor and aroma. Coffee should be evenly and carefully roasted. Muchdepends upon this. If even a few of the berries are burned, the coffee will taste burned and bitter, instead of beingfine-flavored and aromatic. To have the perfectionof coffee, it should be fresh-roasted each day. Few,however, will take that trouble. As soon as it is roasted, and while still hot,stir into it one or two eggs, together with theirshells (about one egg to a pint ofroasted coffee-beans ). This will help to preserve the coffee, as well as to make it clear. Put it away in aclose-covered tin-case, and grind it only just before using. Allow two heaping table-spoonfuls of ground coffee to a pint of water. Letthe water be boiling when it is poured on the coffee. Cover it as tightly as possible, and boil itone minute; then let it remain a few moments at the side of the range tosettle. Delmonico allows one and a half pounds of coffee to one gallon of water. The coffee-pot, with adouble base, is placed on the range in a vessel of hotwater ( bain-marie ). The boiling water is poured over the coffee, which is contained in a felt strainer in the coffee-pot. It is not boiled. Of course, much depends upon the care in preparing the coffee to insure a delicious beverage; but equally asmuch depends upon serving with it good thick cream. Milk, or even boiled milk, isnot to be compared with cream. In cities, a gill, atleast, might be purchased each morning for coffee, ora few table-spoonfuls might be saved from the evening's milk for at least one cup. Fill the cup two-thirds full, then, withhot, clear coffee, pour in one or two table-spoonfulsof cream, and use loaf-sugar. Professor Blot, in his lectures, was very emphatic as to the impropriety of boiling coffee. He said bythis means the aroma and flavor were carried into the attic, and a bitterdecoction was left to be drunk. He preferred decidedly the coffee made in the French filtercoffee-pot. I have experimented upon coffee, and prefer itboiled for one minute in the ordinary coffee-pot. Thatmade in the French filter is also most excellent. It is not boiled, andrequires a greater proportion of coffee. But to beexplicit, put the coffee in the filter. At the firstboil of the water, pour one or two coffee-cupfuls ofit on the coffee. Put back the water on the fire. When boiling again, pour on as muchmore, and repeat the process until the desired quantity is made. CHOCOLATE ( Miss Sallie Schenck ). ALLOW two sticks of chocolate to one pint of new milk. After the chocolate is scraped, either let it soak an hour or so,with a table-spoonful of milk to soften it, or boil ita few moments in two or three table-spoonfuls of water. Then, in either case, mash it to a smoothpaste. When the milk, sweetened to taste with loaf-sugar, is boiling, stir in the chocolate-paste,adding a little of the boiling milk to it first, todilute it evenly. Let it boil half a minute. Stir it well, or mill it, andserve immediately. Maillard's chocolate is flavored with a little vanilla. The commoner brands, such as Baker's, will benearly as good by adding a little vanilla whenmaking. Miss Schenck (noted for her chocolate ) adds a very little flavoring of brandy. A very good addition, and one universally seen, when chocolate is served at lunch parties, is a heapingtable-spoonful of whipped-cream, sweetened andflavored with a little vanilla before it is whipped,placed on the top of the chocolate in each cup, thecup being only three-quarters filled with the chocolate. COCOA. MANY use cocoa rather than chocolate. It has the sameflavor, but it has more body, and is richer and more oily. It is made in thesame way as chocolate, but a few drops of the essence ofvanilla should be invariably added. SOUP. THE meat should be fresh, lean (all fat possible being removed), and juicyto make the best soup. It is put into cold, clear water, which should be heatedonly moderately for the first half-hour. The object is to extract the juices ofthe meat, and if it be boiled too soon, the surface will become coagulated,thereby imprisoning the juice within. After the first half-hour the pot should be placed at the back of thestove, allowing the soup to simmer for four or five hours. Nothing is more disagreeable at table than greasy soup. As all particles offat are taken off hot liquor with some difficulty, soup should be made the daybefore it is to be used, when the fat will rise to the top and harden. It canthen be easily removed. When vegetables are used, they should be added only in time to becomethoroughly done: afterward they absorb a portion of the richness of thesoup. When onions are used, they impart better flavor by being fried or sautéd in a little hot butter or othergrease, before they are added to the soup. In fact, many professional cooks fryother vegetables also, such as carrots and turnips. Sometimes they even fryslightly the chickens, beef, etc., and then cut them into smaller pieces forboiling. Potatoes and cabbage should be boiled in separate water before theyare added to a soup. Amateur cooks seem to have a great aversion to making stock. They think itmust be something troublesome, and too scientific to undertake; whereas, intruth, it saves the trouble of going through the process of soup-boiling everyday, and it is as easy to make as any simple soup. One has only to increase thequantity of meat and bones to any desired proportion, adding pepper and salt,and also vegetables, if preferred. The stock should be kept in a stone jar. It will form a jelly, and in coolweather will last at least a week. Just before dinner each day, in order to prepare soup, it is only necessaryto cut off some of the jelly and heat it. It is very good with nothingadditional; but one can have a change of soup each day by adding differentflavorings, such as onion, macaroni, vermicelli, tomato, tapioca, springvegetables (which will make a julienne ), poached eggs, fried bread, asparagus,celery, green pease, etc. I will be explicit about these additions in thereceipts. Stock is also valuable for gravies, sauces, and stews, and forboiling many things, such as pigeons, chickens, etc. STOCK, OR POT AU FEU. In ordinary circumstances, beef alone, with some vegetables, will make agood broth or stock, in the proportion of two and a half pints of cold water to each pound of bones and meat; the bones and meat should be ofabout equal weight. It makes the soup more delicate to add chicken or veal. Chicken and veal togethermake a good soup, called blond deveau. Good soup can be made, also, by using the trimmings of fresh meat, bits of cold cooked beef, or the bones of any meat orfowl. In the choice of vegetables, onions (first fried or sautéd, and a clove stuck in), parsley, and carrots are oftenest used: turnips, parsnips, and celery should be employed more sparingly. The soupbunch at market is generally a very good distribution of vegetables. Nothing ismore simple than the process of making stock or broth. Remember not to let itboil for the first half-hour; then it should simmer slowly and steadily, partlycovered, for four or five hours. In royal kitchens the stock is cooked by gas.Skim frequently; as scum, if allowed to remain, gives an unpleasant flavor tothe soup. Use salt sparingly, putting in a little atfirst, and seasoning at the last moment. Many a good soup is spoiled by aninjudicious use of seasoning. Some add a few drops of lemon-juice to a broth. If wine or catsup is added, itshould only be done at the last moment. Always strain the soup through a sieveor soup-strainer. Small scraps of meat or sediment look slovenly in a soup. Or, A SIMPLE STOCK. If youhave no vegetables (you should always have them, especially onions and carrots,as they will keep), a very good stock can be made by employing the meat and bones alone,seasoned with pepper and salt. If rich enough, it might be served in thismanner. However, it is a simple thing, about fifteen minutes before dinner,each day, to add a little boiled macaroni, fried onions, etc., to vary the soup. GOUFFé'S RECEIPT FORSTOCK, OR BOUILLON. Three pounds of beef; onepound of bone (about the quantity in that weight of meat ); five and a half quarts of clear cold water; two ounces of salt; two carrots, say tenounces; two large onions, say ten ounces, with two cloves stuck in them; six leeks, say fourteen ounces; one head of celery, say one ounce; two turnips, say ten ounces; one parsnip, say two ounces. BOUILLON SERVED AT LUCHEONS,GERMANS, ETC. Purchase about six pounds of beef and bone ( soup bones ) for ten persons. Cut up the meat and break the bones; addtwo quarts of cold water, and simmer slowly until allthe strength is extracted from the meat. It will takeabout five hours. Strain it though a fine sieve, removing every particle offat; and if there is more than ten cupfuls, reduce it by boiling to thatquantity. Season only with pepper and salt. It is served in bouillon cups at luncheons, atevening companies, Germans, etc. Sometimes it is served clear and transparent, after the receipt for AmberSoup. AMBER SOUP, OR CLEARBROTH. This soup is served at almost all company dinners. There can beno better choice, as a heavy soup is not then desirable. Ingredients: A large soup bone (say two pounds), a chicken, a small slice of ham, a soup bunch (or an onion, two sprigs of parsley, half a small carrot, half a small parsnip, half a stick of celery ), three cloves, pepper, salt, a gallon of cold water, whites and shells of twoeggs, and caramel for coloring. Let the beef, chicken, and ham boil slowly for five hours; add the vegetables and cloves, to cook the last hour, having first fried the onion in a little hot fat, andthen in it stuck the cloves. Strain the soup into anearthen bowl, and let it remain overnight. Next day remove the cake of fat onthe top; take out the jelly, avoiding the settlings, and mix into it the beaten whites of the eggs with the shells. Boil quickly forhalf a minute; then, placing the kettle on the hearth, skim off carefully allthe scum and whites of the eggs from the top, notstirring the soup itself. Pass this through the jellybag, when it should be quite clear. The soup may then be put aside,and reheated just before serving. Add then a large table-spoonful of caramel, as it givesit a richer color, and also a slight flavor. Of course, the brightest and cleanest of kettles should be used. I once sawthis transparent soup served in Paris, without color, but made quite thick with tapioca. It looked very clear, and was exceedinglynice. This soup may be made in one day. After it is strained, add the eggs and proceed as in receipt. However, if it is tobe served at a company dinner, it is more convenient to make it the daybefore. TO MAKE CARAMEL, OR BURNEDSUGAR, FOR COLORING BROTH. The appearance of broth is improved bybeing of a rich amber color. The most innocent coloring substance, which doesnot impair the flavor of the broth, is caramel, prepared as follows: Put into a porcelain saucepan, say half a pound of sugar, and a table-spoonful of water. Stir it constantly over the fire until it has abright, dark-brown color, being very careful not to let it burn or blacken.Then add a tea-cupful of water and a little salt; let it boil a few moments longer; cool andstrain it. Put it away in a close-corked bottle, and it is always ready forcoloring soups. THICKENING FOR SOUP. Ihave before recommended the making of soup the day before it is served, as thisis the best means of having it entirely free from fat and settlings. Justbefore it is served, it may be thickened with cornstarch, sago, tapioca, pearl barley, rice, etc. If a thickening of flour is used, let it be a roux, mixed according to directions, page 51.However, a rich stock jelly needs no thickening. ADDITIONS TO BEEF STOCK, TO FORMOTHER KINDS OF SOUP. It is well, just before the beefsoup is sent to table, to drop into the tureen poached eggs, which havebeen cooked in salted water, and neatly trimmed. Theremay be an egg for each person at table. This is afavorite soup in Havana. Or, Put into the tureen, just before the soupis sent to table, slices of lemon --one slice for eachplate. Or, Yolks of hard-boiled eggs, one for eachperson. Or, Put into the tureen croûtons or dice ofbread, say three quarters of an inch square, fried in a little butter. When frying, or rather sautéing, turn them, that all sides may bebrowned. They may be prepared several hours, if more convenient, before dinner;then left near the fire, to become crisp and dry. This makes a very good soup,and is also an excellent means of using dry bread. Itis a favorite French soup, called potage auxcroûtons. Or, Drop into the tureen force-meat balls. RECEIPT FOR FORCE-MEATBALLS. Take any kind of meat or chicken, or both (that used for making the soup willanswer); chop it very fine; season it with pepper, salt, a little chopped parsley and thyme, or alittle parsley and fried onion, or with thyme, or parsley alone, a little lemon-juice, and grated peel. Break in a raw egg, and sprinkle over some flour. roll them in balls the size of a pigeon's egg.Fry or sauté them in a little butter, or they may be cooked in boilingwater; or they may be egged and bread-crumbed, and fried inboiling lard. This is the most simple receipt. TheFrench take much trouble in making quenelles, etc., for soup. Or, A simple and delicious addition is that of four or fivetable-spoonfuls of stewed tomatoes. MACARONI SOUP is onlyan addition of macaroni to the stock-jelly. However, boil the macaroni first in saltedwater. When done, drain it, and cut it into about two or threeinch lengths. Put these pieces into the soup when it is simmering on the fire,then serve it a few minutes after. Many send, at the same time, a plate of grated cheese. This is passed, a spoon with it, afterthe plates of soup are served, each person adding a spoonful of it to theirsoup, if they choose. They probably will not choose it a second time. VERMICELLI SOUP is madeexactly as macaroni soup, only the vermicelli is notcut, and, if very little of it is used, it may be boiled in thesoup. Often the stock for vermicelli is preferred made of veal and chicken, instead of beef; however, either is very good. Gratedcheese may also be served with it. NOODLES ( Eleanore Bouillotat ). Three delicious dishes may be made from this simple and economical receiptfor noodles: To three eggs (slightly beaten), twotable-spoonfuls of water, and a little salt, add enough flour tomake a rather stiff dough; work it well for fifteen or twenty minutes, as youwould dough for crackers, adding flour when necessary.When pliable, cut off a portion at a time, roll it thin as a wafer, sprinkleover flour, and, beginning at one side, roll it into arather tight roll. With a sharp knife, cut it, from the end, into very thinslices (one-eighth inch), forming little wheels or curls. Let them dry an houror so. Part may be used to serve as a vegetable, part for a noodle soup, andthe rest should be dried, to put one side to use at any time for a beefsoup. TO SERVE AS AVEGETABLE. Three cupfuls of fresh noodles, three quarts of salted boiledwater, bread-crumbs, butter size of an egg. Throw a few of the noodles at a time into the boiling saltedwater, and boil them until they are done, separating and shakingthem with a large fork to prevent them from matting together. Skin them outwhen done, and keep them on a warm dish in a warm place until enough are cookedin a similar manner. Now mix the butter (in which thebread-crumbs were fried) evenly in them; put them on the platter on which theyare to be served, and sprinkle over the top bread-crumbs fried or sautéd in some hot butter until they are of a light-brown color. This isa very good dish to serve with a fish, or with almost any meat, or it can beserved as a course by itself; or the noodles can be cooked as macaroni, with cheese. NOODLE SOUP. Add to the water in which noodles were boiled, as in lastreceipt, part of the butter in which the bread-crumbswere sautéd, a table-spoonful of chopped parsley, and two or three table-spoonfuls of thecooked noodles. Season with more salt, if necessary. Serve. BEEF NOODLE SOUP. Addto a beef stock a small handful of fresh or dried noodles about twenty minutes before serving, whichwill be long enough time to cook them. Many varieties of soups may be made by adding different kinds of vegetablesto beef soup or stock. Cauliflower, cabbage, potatoes, and asparagus are better boiled in separate water, and added to the soup-tureen at the last moment. Onions, leeks, turnips, and carrots arebetter fried to a light color in a sauté pan with a little butter or clarifiedgrease, and added to the soup. In frying, it is better to accompanythe vegetable or vegetables with a little onion. If you add more onion, more turnip, or more carrot thanany other vegetable, you have onion, turnip, or carrotsoup. I will specify a few combinations of vegetables. SPRING SOUP. A stock with any springvegetables added which have first been parboiled in other water. Those generally used are pease, asparagus-tops, or afew young onions or leeks. This soup is often colored with caramel. Or, Here is Francatelli's receipt forspring soup, a little simplified: Cut with a vegetable-cutter two carrots andtwo turnips into little round shapes; add the whitepart of a head of celery; twelve small young onions, sliced, without the green stalks; and one headof cauliflower, cut into flowerets. Parboil thesevegetables for three minutes in boiling water. Drain,and add them to two quarts of stock, made of chicken or beef ( chicken is better). Let the whole simmer gently forhalf an hour, then add the whiteleaves of a head-lettuce (cut the size of a half-dollar, with acutter). As soon as tender, and when about to send the soup to the table, addhalf a gill of small green pease, and an equalquantity of asparagus-heads, which have beenpreviously boiled in other water. JULIENNE SOUP, WITH POACHEDEGGS ( Dubois ). Take two medium-sized carrots, a medium-sized turnip, a piece of celery, the core of a lettuce, and an onion. Cut them into thin fillets about an inch long.Fry the onion in butter overa moderate fire, without allowing it to take color; add the carrots, turnips, and celery --raw, if tender; if not, boil them separatelyfor a few minutes. After frying all slowly for a few moments, season with apinch of salt and a tea-spoonful of powdered-sugar. Then moisten them with a gill of broth, and boil until reduced to a glaze. Now addnearly two quarts of good stock, which has beenskimmed and passed through a sieve, and remove the stew-pan to the back of the stove, so that the soup mayboil only partially. A quarter of an hour after add the lettuce (which has been boiled in other water ), and a few raw sorrelleaves, if they can be procured. This soup is quite good enoughwithout eggs, yet they are a pleasant addition. Poachthem in salted water, trim them, and drop into the soup-tureen just as it is ready to send to the table.Many color this soup with caramel. In that case, the sugar should be omitted. ASPARAGUSSOUP. Ingredients: Three pints of beef soup orstock, thirty heads of asparagus, alittle cream, butter, flour, and a little spinach. Cut the tops off the asparagus, about half an inchlong, and boil the rest. Cut off all the tender portions, and rub them througha sieve, adding a little salt. Warm three pints of stock, add a roux made of a small piece of butter and a heaping tea-spoonful of flour; then add the asparaguspulp. Boil it slowly a quarter of an hour, stirring in two orthree table-spoonfuls of cream. Color the soup with atea-spoonful of spinach green, and, just beforeserving it, add the asparagus-tops, which have beenseparately boiled. Many like this soup, but I prefer simply boiled asparagus-points added to stock or beef soup, justbefore serving. SPINACH GREEN. Poundsome spinach well, adding a few drops of water; squeeze the juice through a cloth, and put iton a strong fire. As soon as it looks curdy, take it off, and strain the liquorthrough a sieve. What remains on the sieve will be coloring matter. OX-TAIL SOUP. Ox-tails make an especially good soup, on account ofthe gelatinous matter they contain. Ingredients: Two ox-tails, a soupbunch, or a good-sized onion, two carrots, one stalk of celery, a little parsley, anda small cut of pork. Cut the ox-tails at the joints, slice thevegetables, and mince the pork. Put the pork into a stew-pan. When hot,add first the onions; when they begin to color, addthe ox-tails. Let them fry or sauté aa very short time. Now cut them to thebone, that the juice may run out in boiling. Put both the ox-tails and fried onions intoa soup kettle, with four quarts of coldwater. Let them simmer for about four hours; then add the othervegetables, with three cloves stuck in a little pieceof onion, and pepper and salt. As soon as the vegetables are well cooked, thesoup is done. Strain it. Select some of the joints (one for each plate), trimthem, and serve them with the soup. Or, if preferred, the joints may be leftout. CHICKEN SOUP ( Potage à laReine ). -- Francatelli. Roast a large chicken. Clear all the meat from the bones, chop, and pound it thoroughlywith a quarter of a pound of boiled rice. Put the bones (broken) and the skin into two quarts of coldwater. Let it simmer for some time, when it will make a weakbroth. Strain it, and add it to the chicken and rice. Now press this all through a sieve, and put itaway until dinner-time. Take off the grease on top; heat it without boiling,and, just before sending to table, mix into it a gill of boiling cream. Season carefully with pepper and salt. PURée OF CHICKEN ( Giuseppe Romantii ). Chef de Cuisine of the Cooking-school in NewYork. Ingredients: One and a half pounds of chicken, oneand a half quarts of white stock (made with veal ), half a sprig of thyme, two sprigs of parsley, half a blade of mace, one shallot, a quarter of a pound of rice, and half a pint of cream. Roast the chicken, and when cold cut off all theflesh; put the bones into the whitestock, together with the thyme, mace, parsley, shallot, and washed rice; boilit until the rice is very thoroughly cooked. In themean time, chop the chicken; pound it in a mortar; then pass it though a sieve or colander, helping the operation by moistening it with alittle of the stock. Strain the balance of the stock, allowing the rice topass through the sieve. Half an hour before dinner, add the chicken to the stock and heat it without boiling. Just before serving, add to it halfa pint of boiling cream. Season with pepper an salt. PLAIN CHICKEN SOUP. Cutup the chicken, and break all the bones; put it in a gallon of coldwater; let it simmer for five hours, skimming it well. The lasthour add, to cook with the soup, a cupful of rice anda sprig of parsley. When done, let the kettle remainquiet a few moments on the kitchen table, when skim off every particle of fatwith a spoon. Then pour all on a sieve placed over some deep dish. Take out allthe bones, pieces of meat, and parsley. Press the rice through the sieve. Now mix the rice, by stirring it with the soup, until it resemblesa smooth purée. Season with pepper and salt. GIBLET SOUP. This soupis a great success. It is very inexpensive, a plate of giblets only costing at market five cents. It is avery good imitation of mock-turtle soup, and, after the first experience inmaking, it will found very easy to manage. Ingredients: The giblets of four chickens or twoturkeys, one medium-sized onion, onesmall carrot, half a turnip, two sprigs of parsley, a leaf of sage, eggs, a little lemon-juice, Port or Madeira wine, and one or two cupfuls of chicken or beef stock, quite strong. Cut up the vegetables. Put a piece of butter thesize of a small egg into a stew-pan. When quite hot,throw in the sliced onion. When they begin to brown,add the carrot and turnip, atable-spoonful of flour, and the giblets. Fry them all quickly for a minute, watchingthem constantly, that the flour may brown, and notburn. Now cut the giblets (that the juice may escape),and put all into the soup-kettle, with a little pepper and salt, and threequarts of water --of course, stock would be much better, and for extra occasions Iwould recommend it; or without stock, one could addany fresh bones or scraps of leanmeat one might happen to have. Pieces of chicken are especially well adapted to this soup; yet,for ordinary occasions, giblets alone answer verywell. Let the soup simmer for five hours; then strain it. Thicken it a little with roux (page 51), letting the flour brown, and add to it also one of the livers mashed. Season with the additional pepper and salt it needs, alittle lemon-juice, and two table-spoonfuls of Port or Madeira wine. Put into the souptureen yolks of hard-boiled eggs, one foreach person at table. Pour over the soup, and serve. MOCK-TURTLE SOUP ( New York Cooking-school ). Let some one beside yourself remove the flesh from a calf'shead, viz., cut from between the ears to the nose, touching thebone; then, cutting close to it, take off all the flesh. Turn over the head, cut open the jaw-bones from underneath, and takeout the tongue whole. Turn the head back again, crack the top of the skull betweenthe ears, and take out the brains whole; they may be saved for a separate dish.Soak all separately for a few moments in salt andwater. Cut the skull all to pieces, wash it quickly, and put it onthe fire in four quarts of cold water, together withthe flesh, tongue, half a bunch of parsley, half a stalk of celery, one large bay-leaf, three cloves, halfan inch of a stick of cinnamon, six whole allspice, six pepper-corns, half of a large carrot, and one turnip. When the tongue istender, take it out, to be served as a separatedish (with spinach or with sauce Tartare ). Leave in the flesh for about twohours, when it will be perfectly tender. Let the bones, etc., simmer for six hours, then strain, andput it away until the next day. At the same time that the calf's head is cooking inone vessel, make a stock in another, with a beef or veal soup-bone (two or three pounds), and any scraps of poultry (it would be improved with a chicken added; and one might take this opportunity tohave a boiled chicken for dinner, cooking it in the stock ), put into two or three quarts of water, and simmered until reduced to a pint. The next day, remove the fat and settlings from the two stocks. Put into a two-quart stew-pan two ounces of butter (size of an egg), and, when it bubbles, stir inan ounce of ham cut in strips, and one heapingtable-spoonful of flour (one and a half ounces). Stirit constantly until it gets quite brown, pour the reduced stock over it, mix it well, and strain it. Now to half a pound of the calf's head cut in diceadd one quart of the calf's-head stock boiling hot andthe pint of reduced and thickened stock, the juice of half a lemon, and one glassful of sherry. When it is about to boil, set it one side, andskim it very carefully. Add the flesh cut from the head, cut in dice, and two hard-boiledeggs cut in dice, and salt. Or, Receipt for Egg-balls. --If,instead of the egg-dice, egg-balls should be preferred, add to the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs the raw yolkof one egg, one table-spoonful of meltedbutter, a little salt and pepper, and enough sifted flour to make it consistent enough to handle. Sprinkle flour on the board, roll it out about half an inchthick, cut it into dice, and roll each one into little balls in the palm of thehand. Put these into the soup five minutes before it is served, to cook.Or, Receipt for Meat-balls. --If,instead of meat-dice, meat-balls should be preferred, to three-fourths of acupful of the head-meat, chopped very fine, add apinch of thyme, the grated peel of half alemon, one raw egg, and flour enough to bind all together. Form into littleballs the size of a hickory-nut; sauté them in a little hot butter. Or, It is very nice to add, instead of egg-balls, whole yolks ofhard-boiled eggs, one for each plate. The brains may be used for making croquettes (page 176), or as in receipt(page 151). A SIMPLE MOCK-TURTLESOUP. Put four pig's feet, or calf's head, and one pound of veal into four quarts of coldwater, and let it simmer for five hours, reducing it to twoquarts. Strain it, and let it remain overnight. The next day skim off the fatfrom the top, and remove the settlings from the bottom. About half an hour before dinner put the soup on the fire, and season itwith half a tea-spoonful of powdered thyme, asalt-spoonful of mace, a salt-spoonful of ground cloves. Simmer it for ten minutes. Now take a roux in a saucepan, viz.; put in oneounce of butter (size of a walnut), and, when itbubbles, sprinkle in one and a half ounces of flour (one table-spoonful). Stir it until the flour assumes a light-brown color; add the soup, andstir all together with the egg-whisk. Make force-meat balls as follows: Chop some of the veal (used to make the soup), and about a quarter asmuch suet, very fine; season it with salt and pepper, and a fewdrops of lemon-juice; bind all together with some raw yolks of eggs and some cracker orbread crumbs; mold them into little balls about the size of apigeon's egg, or smaller, if preferred. Fry them in boiling lard, or boil them two or three minutes in water. Cut up also some of the meat, or rather skin and cartilaginous substance, from the cold feet, which resembles turtle meat. Now put into the soup-tureen these meat-balls, pieces of calf'sfeet, and some yolks entire, or slices of hard-boiled eggs. Season the soup the last minute witha little lemon-juice and one or two table-spoonfuls of sherry. For a small family, this will make soup enough for two dinners. GUMBOSOUP. Ingredients: One large chicken; one anda half pints of green gumbo, or one pint of dried gumbo; three pints of water; pepper and salt. Cut the chickens into joints, roll them in flour, and fry or sauté them in a little lard. Take out the pieces of chicken, and put in the sliced gumbo (either the green or the dried), and sauté that also until it is brown. Drain wellthe chickens and gumbo. Thereshould be about a table-spoonful of brown fat left inthe sauté pan; to thisadd a large table-spoonful of browned flour; and addthe three pints of water, the chicken, cut into small pieces, and the gumbo. Simmer all together two hours. Strain through a colander. Serve boiled rice inanother dish by the side of the soup-tureen. Having puta ladleful of the soup in the soup-plate, place atable-spoonful of rice in the centre. GUMBO AND TOMATOSOUP. If canned gumbo and tomatoes mixed are used, merely add to them a pint ormore of stock or strong beefbroth. Bring them to the boiling-point, and season with pepper and salt. If the fresh vegetables are used, boil the tomatoes and gumbo togetherfor about half an hour, first frying the gumbo in alittle hot lard. Many, however, boil the gumbo without frying. MULLAGATAWAY SOUP ( an Indian soup ). Cut up a chicken; put it into a soup-kettle, with a little sliced onion, carrot, celery, parsley, and three orfour cloves. Cover it with four quarts of water. Add any pieces of veal, with the bones, you mayhave; of course, a knuckle of veal would be the properthing. When the pieces of chicken are nearly done,take them out, and trim them neatly, to serve with the soup. Let the veal continue to simmer for three hours. Now fry an onion, a small carrot, and a stick of celery sliced, in a little butter. When they are a light brown, throw in atable-spoonful of flour; stir it on the fire one ortwo minutes; then add a good tea-spoonful of currypowder, and the chicken and vealbroth. Place this on the fire to simmer the usual way for an hour.Half an hour before dinner, strain the soup, skim off all the fat, return it tothe fire with the pieces of chicken, and two or threetable-spoonfuls of boiled rice. This will give timeenough to cook the chickens thoroughly. OYSTER SOUP. To onequart, or twenty-five oysters, add a half pint of water. Put the oysters on thefire in the liquor. The moment it begins to simmer (not boil, for that would shrivel the oysters ), pour it through a colander into a hot dish, leaving the oysters in the colander. Nowput into the saucepan two ounces of butter (size of anegg); when it bubbles, sprinkle in a table-spoonful (one ounce) of sifted flour; let the roux cook a few moments, stirring it well with the egg-whisk; then add to it gradually the oyster-juice, and half a pint of good cream (which has been brought to boil in anothervessel); season carefully with Cayenne pepper and salt; skim well, then add the oysters. Do not let it boil, but serve immediately. Anoyster soup is made with thickening; an oyster stew ismade without it (see receipt). Oyster crackers and pickles are often served with an oyster soup. CLAM SOUP. To extractthe clams from the shells, wash them in cold water, and put them all into a large pot over thefire, containing half a cupful of boiling water; coverclosely, and the steam will cause the clams to open;pour all into a colander over a pan, and extract the meat from the shells. Put a quart of the clams with their liquor on thefire, with a pint of water; boil them about threeminutes, during which time skim them well, then strain them. Beard them, andreturn the liquor to the fire, with the hard portions of the clams (keeping the soft portions aside in a warmplace), half an onion (one ounce), a sprig of thyme, three or four sprigs of parsley, and one large blade of mace; cover it, and let it simmer for half anhour. In the mean time make a roux, i.e., put three ounces of butter (size of an egg) into a stew-pan, and when it bubbles sprinkle in two ounces of flour (one heaping table-spoonful); stir it on thefire until cooked, and then stir in gradually a pint of hot cream; add this to the clamliquor (strained), with a seasoning of salt and a little Cayennepepper; also the soft clams, without chopping them. When well mixed, and thoroughlyhot (without boiling), serve immediately. BEAN SOUP. Soak a quartof navy beans overnight. Then put them on the fire,with three quarts of water; three onions, fried or sautéd in a little butter; one little carrot; two potatoes, partly boiled in other butter; a small cut of pork; alittle red pepper, and salt. Let it all boil slowly for five or six hours. Pass it then through a colander or sieve. Return the pulp to the fire; seasonproperly with salt and Cayennepepper. Put into the tureen croûtons, or bread, cut in half-inch squares, and fried brown on allsides in a little butter or in boiling fat. Professor Blot adds broth, bacon, onions, celery, one or two cloves, and carrot to his beansoup. A French cook I once had added a little mustard to her bean soup, which made a pleasant change. Another cook adds cream at the last moment. Or, A very good bean soup can be made from the remains of baked beans; the brown bakedbeans giving it a good color. Merely add water and a bit of onion; boilit to a pulp, and pass it through the colander. If a little stock, or some bones or pieces of fresh meat are at hand, they add also to the flavor of beansoup. BEAN AND TOMATO SOUP. Apint of canned tomatoes, boiled, and passed throughthe sieve, with a quart of bean soup, makes a verypleasant change. ONION SOUP ( Soupe à l'Ognon ). A soup without meat, anddelicious. I was taught how to make this soup by a Frenchwoman; and it will be found avaluable addition to one's culinary knowledge. It is a good Friday soup. Put into a saucepan butter size of a pigeon's egg. Clarified grease, or the cakes of fat saved from the top of stock, or soup (I always usethe latter), answer about as well. When very hot, add two or three large onions, sliced thin; stir, and cook them well until they are red; then add a fullhalf-tea-cupful of flour. Stir this also until it isred, watching it constantly, that it does not burn. Now pour in about a pint of boiling water, and add pepper and salt. Mix it well,and let it boil a minute; then pour it into the soup-kettle, and place it at the back of the range untilalmost ready to serve. Add then one and a half pints or a quart of boiling milk, and two or three well-mashed boiled potatoes. Add to the potatoes a little of the soup at first, then more, until they are smooth, and thinenough to put into the soup-kettle. Stir all well andsmoothly together; taste, to see if the soup is properly seasoned with pepper and salt, as itrequires plenty, especially of the latter. Let it simmer a few moments. Putpieces of toasted bread (a good way of using dry bread ), cut in diamond shape, in the bottom of the tureen. Pour over the soup, and serve very hot. Or, This soup might be made without potatoes, if more convenient,using more flour, and all milk instead of a little water. However, it is better with the potato addition;or it is much improved by adding stock instead of water; or, if one should chance to have a boiled chicken, the water in whichit was boiled might be saved to make this soup. VEGETABLE SOUP WITHOUT MEAT( Purée aux Légumes ). Cut up alarge plateful of any and all kinds of vegetables one happens to have; forexample, onions, carrots, potatoes (boiled in other water ), beans (of any kind), parsnips, celery, pease, parsley, leeks, turnips, cauliflower, spinach, cabbage, etc., always having either potatoes or beans for athickening. First put into a saucepan half a tea-cupful of butter ( clarified suet or stock-pot fat is just as good). When it is very hot,put in first the cut-up onions. Stir them well, toprevent from burning. When they assume a fine red color, stir in a largetable-spoonful of flour until it has the same color.Now stir in a pint of hot water, and some pepper and salt. Mind not toadd pepper and salt at first,as the onions and flour wouldthen more readily burn. Add, also, all the other vegetables. Let them simmer(adding more hot water when necessary) for two hours;then press them through a colander. Return them to the range in a soup-kettle, and let them simmer until the moment ofserving. CORN SOUP. This is avery good soup, made with either fresh or cannedcorn. When it is fresh, cut the corn fromthe cob, and scrape off well all that sweetest part of the corn which remains on the cob. To a pint of corn add a quart of hotwater. Boil it for an hour or longer; then press it through the colander. Put into the saucepan butter the size of a small egg, and when it bubblessprinkle in a heaping table-spoonful of sifted flour, which cook a minute, stirring it well. Now add half of the cornpulp, and, when smoothly mixed, stir in the remainder of the corn: add Cayenne pepper, salt, a scant pint of boiling milk, and a cupful of cream. This soup is very nice with no more addition, as it will have the pure tasteof the corn; yet many add the yolks of twoeggs just before serving, mixed with a little milk or cream, and notallowed to boil. Others add a table-spoonful of tomatocatsup. TOMATO SOUP, WITHRICE. Cut half a small onion into rathercoarse slices, and fry them in a little hot butter ina sauté pan. Add tothem then a quart can, or ten or eleven large tomatoes cut in pieces, after having skinned them, and also two sprigs of parsley. Let it cook about ten minutes, when removethe pieces of onion and parsley. Pass the tomato through a sieve. Put into the stew-pan butter the size of apigeon's egg, and when it bubbles sprinkle in a tea-spoonful of flour; when it has cooked a minute, stir in the tomato-pulp: season with pepper and salt. It is animprovement to add a cupful or more of stock; however,if it is not at hand, it may be omitted. Return the soup to the fire, and, when quite hot, add a cupful offresh-boiled rice and half a tea-spoonful of soda. TOMATO SOUP ( Purée auxTomatoes ). -- Mrs.Crobett. Boil a dozen or a can of tomatoes until they arevery thoroughly cooked, and press them through a sieve. To a quart of tomato pulp add atea-spoonful of soda. Put into a saucepan butter the size of a pigeon's egg, and when it bubblessprinkle and stir in a heaping tea-spoonful of flour. When it is cooked, stir into this a pint of hot milk, a little Cayenne pepper, salt, and a handful of crackercrumbs. When it boils, add the tomatopulp. Heat it well without boiling, and serve immediately. The soda mixed with the tomatoes prevents the milk from curdling. SORREL SOUP ( Soupe à la Bonne Femme ). This is a mostwholesome soup, which would be popular in America if it were better known. Itis much used in France. Sorrel can be obtained, inseason, at all the French markets in America. For four quarts of soup, put into a saucepan a piece of butter the size of an egg, two or three sprigs of parsley, two or three leaves of lettuce, one onion, and apint of sorrel (all finely chopped), a little nutmeg, pepper, and salt. Cover, and let them cook or sweat ten minutes;then add about two table-spoonfuls of flour. Mix well,and gradually add three quarts of boiling water ( stock would be better). Make a liaison, i.e., beat the yolks of foureggs (one egg to a quart of soup), andmix with them a cupful of cream or richmilk. Add a little chevril (if you have it) to the soup; letit boil ten minutes; then stir in the eggs, or liaison, when the soup is quite ready. POTATO SOUP (No.1). Fry seven or eight potatoes and a smallsliced onion in a sauté pan in some butter or drippings -- stock-pot fat is most excellent for this purpose. Whenthey are a little colored, put them into two or three pints of hotwater ( stock would, of course, be better;yet hot water is oftenest used); add also a largeheaping table-spoonful of chopped parsley. Let it boiluntil the potatoes are quite soft. Put all through the colander. Return the Purée to the fire, and let it simmer two orthree minutes. When just ready to serve, take the kettle off the fire; addplenty of salt and pepper, andthe beaten yolks of two or three eggs. Do not let thesoup boil when the eggs are in, as they wouldcurdle. POTATO SOUP (No. 2). Avery good soup for one which seems to have nothing in it. Peel and cut up four rather large potatoes. Whenthey are nearly done, pour off the water, and add onequart of hot water. Boil two hours, or until the potatoes are thoroughly dissolved in the water. Add fresh boilingwater as it boils away. When done, run it through the colander, adding three-fourths of a cupful of hot cream, a large table-spoonful of finely cut parsley, salt, and pepper. Bring it to the boiling point, and serve. PURéE OFSTRING-BEANS. Make a strong stock as follows:Add to a knuckle of veal three quarts of water, a generous slice of saltpork, and two or three slices of onion. Let it simmer for five hours, the pour itthrough a sieve or colander into a jar. It is better tomake this stock the day before it is served, as thenevery particle of fat may be easily scraped off the jelly. Ten minutes before dinner, put into a saucepan two ounces of butter, and when it bubbles sprinkle in four ounces of flour (two heaping table-spoonfuls); let it cookwithout taking color; then add a cupful of hot cream, apint of the heated stock, and about a pint of green string-bean pulp, i.e., either fresh or cannedstring-beans boiled tender with a little pork, then pressed through a colander, and freed from juice. After mixing alltogether, do not let the soup boil, or it will curdle and spoil. Stir itconstantly while it is on the fire. Just before it is sent to table, sprinkle over the top a handful of littlefried fritter-beans. They are made by dropping drops of fritterbatter into boiling lard. They willresemble navy-beans, and give a very pleasant flavorand appearance to the soup. If this pretty addition be considered too much trouble, little dice of fried bread ( croûtons ) may be added instead. The soupshould be rather thick, and served quite hot. BISQUE OFLOBSTERS. This soup is made exactly like the Purée of string beans, with the veal stock and thickened cream, except that, in place of the string-bean pulp, the soup is now flavored andcolored with the coral of lobster, dried in the oven,and pounded fine. This gives it a beautiful pink color. Little dice of theboiled lobster are then to be added. The lobster-dice may or may not be marinated before theyare added to the soup, i.e., sprinkled with a mixture of one table-spoonfulof oil, three table-spoonfuls of vinegar, pepper, and salt, and left for two or three hours in the marinade.Season the soup with pepper and salt. FISH. IF a fish is not perfectly fresh, perfectly cleaned, and thoroughly cooked,it is not eatable. It should be cleaned or drawn as soon as it comes frommarket, then put on the ice until the time of cooking. It should not be soaked,for it impairs the flavor, unless it is frozen, when it should be put intoice-cold water to thaw; or unless it is a salted fish, when it may be soakedovernight. The greatest merit of a fish is freshness. The secret of the excellence ofthe fish at the Saratoga Lake House, where they have famous trout dinners, isthat, as they are raised on the premises, they go almost immediately from thepond to the fish-kettle. One is to be pitied who has nottasted fish at the sea-shore, where fishermen come in just before dinner, withbaskets filled with blue-fish, flounders, etc., fresh from the water. A long, oval fish-kettle (page 52) is very convenientfor frying or boiling fish. It has a strainer to fit, in which the fish isplaced, enabling it to be taken from the kettle without breaking. A fish issufficiently cooked when the meat separates easily from the bones. When thefish is quite done, it should be left no longer in the kettle; it will lose itsflavor. It makes a pleasant change to cook fish " augratin. " It is a simple operation, but little attempted in America. Iwould recommend this mode of cooking for eels, or the Western white-fish. A fish is most delicious fried in olive-oil. A friend told me he purchasedolive-oil by the keg, for cooking purposes. It is, of course, expensive, and lard or beef drippingsanswer very well. I would recommend, also, frying fish by immersion. If a fish is to be served whole, do not cut off the head and tail. It alsopresents a better appearance to stand the fish on its belly rather than lay iton it side. TO BOIL FISH. All fish but salmon (which is put into warm water topreserve its color) should be placed in salted cold water, with a little vinegar or lemon-juice in it,to boil. It should then boil very, very gently, or the outside will break beforethe inside is done. It requires a little experience to know exactly how long toboil a fish. It must never be underdone; yet it mustbe taken from the water as soon as it is thoroughlydone, or it will become insipid, watery, and colorless. It will require abouteight minutes to the pound for large, thick fish, andabout five minutes to the pound for thin fish, afterthe water begins to simmer, using only enough water to cover it. When done, drain it well before thefire. The fresh-water, or any kind of fish which haveno decided flavor, are much better boiled, au court bouillon, or with onions and carrots (sliced), parsley, two or three cloves, pepper, salt, vinegar, or wine --any or allof these added to the water. The sea-fish, or such as have a flavor prononcé, can be boiled in simple salted and acidulated water. If you have no fish-kettle, and wish to boil a fish, arrange it in a circle on a plate, with an oldnapkin around it: when it is done, it can be carefully lifted from the kettleby the cloth, so that it will not be broken. When cuts of fish are boiled, you allow the water to just come to a boil; then remove the kettleto the back of the range, so that it will only simmer. Always serve a sauce with a boiled fish, such as drawn butter, egg, caper,pickle, shrimp, oyster, Hollandaise, or piquante sauce. TO BOIL AU COURTBOUILLON. Among professional cooks, a favorite way of boiling a fish is in water saturatedwith vegetables, called court bouillon; consequently a fish cooked in this manner would be called, for instance, "Pike, au court bouillon. " It is rather a pity this way ofcooking has a French name; however, if one is not unduly scared at that, onecan see how simple it is. Dubois's Receipt. --Mince a carrot, an onion, and a smallpiece of celery; fry them in a little butter, in a stew-pan; add some parsley, some pepper-corns, and three or four cloves. Now pour on two quarts of hotwater and a pint of vinegar. Let it boila quarter of an hour; skim it, salt it, and use it forboiling the fish. It is improved by using white or red wine insteadof vinegar; only use then three parts of wine to oneof water. These stocks are easily preserved, and maybe used several times. To boil the fish: Rub the fish with lemon-juice and salt, put it in a kettle, and cover it with court bouillon. Let it only simmer, not boil hard,until thoroughly done. Serve the fish on a napkin,surrounded with parsley. Serve a caper,pickle, or any kind of fish sauce, in a sauce-boat. TO FRY FISH. By frying fish I mean that it is to be immersed in hot lard, beef drippings, or olive-oil. Let there be a little more fat than will cover the fish; otherwise it is liable to stick to the bottom and burn. Do not put in the fish until the fat is tested,and found to be quite hot. If the fat were not hotenough, the fish would absorb some of it, making itgreasy and unwholesome. If it is hot enough, the fish will absorb nothing at all. To prepare fish for frying, dredge them first with flour; then brush them with beaten egg, and roll them in fine or siftedbread, or cracker crumbs. When they are browned on one side, turnthem over in the hot fat. When done, let them drainquite dry. Cutlets of any large fish are particularly niceegged and bread-crumbed, fried, and served with tomatosauce or slices of lemon. FISH FRIED INBATTER. Cut almost any kind of fish infillets or pieces one-fourth of an inch thick, and one or two inches square;only be careful to have them all of the same shape and size. Sprinkle them with pepper and salt, and roll each one in batter (No. 2, page Slicesof fried fish arranged in a circle on a roundplatter. 98). Fry them in boiling lard. Arrange them tastefully in a circle, oneoverlapping the other. Garnish with fresh or fried parsley. Potatoes à la Parisienne may be piled inthe centre, and sauce Tartare (see page128) served separately in a sauce-boat. TO BROIL FISH. The samerule applies to broiling fish as to every thing else.If the fish is small, it requires a clear, hot fire.If the fish is large, the fire must be moderate;otherwise the outside of the fish would be burnedbefore the inside is cooked. Many rub the fish overwith olive-oil; others split a large fish; still others broil it whole, and cut notches atequal distances across its sides. When you wish to turn the fish, separate carefully with a knife any part of itwhich sticks to the gridiron; then, holding a platterover the fish with one hand, turn the gridiron over with the other, leaving the fish on the platter: it will now be a more easy matterto turn it without breaking. As soon as the fish isdone, sprinkle over pepper and salt, and spread butter allover it with a knife. Set it in the oven a moment, so that the butter may soak in the fish. This is the most common way of seasoning it. Itis almost as easy to first sprinkle pepper and salt, then a few drops of lemon-juice, over the fish; then a table-spoonful of parsley, chopped fine; thensome melted butter over all. Put it a moment in theoven to soak. They call this a maître-d'hôtel sauce. Quite simple, it is not? It is especiallynice for a broiled shad. TO BAKE FISH. Whencleaning the fish, do not cut off the head and tail.Stuff it. Two or three receipts are given for the stuffing. Sew it, or confine the stuffing by winding the cord several times around the fish. Lay several pieces of pork, cut in strings, across the top; sprinkle over water, pepper, salt, and bread-crumbs; put some hot water intothe pan; bake in a hot oven, basting very often. When done (the top should benicely browned), serve a sauce with it. The bestfishes to bake are white-fish, blue-fish, shad, etc. If notbasted very often, a baked fish will be very dry. Forthis reason, an ordinary cook should never bake a fish. I believe, however, they never cook them in anyother way. STUFFINGS FORFISH. BREAD STUFFING. Soakhalf a pound of bread-crumbs in water; when the bread issoft, press out all the water. Fry two table-spoonfulsof minced onion in some butter; add the bread, somechopped parsley, a table-spoonful of chopped suet, and pepper and salt. Let it cook a moment; take it off the fire, andadd an egg. MEAT STUFFING. Thisstuffing is best made with veal, and almost an equalquantity of bacon chopped fine. Put in a quarter ofits volume of white softened bread-crumbs, pressed outwell; add a little chopped onion, parsley, or mushrooms; seasonhighly. If the fish should be baked with wine, this dressing can be used, viz.: Soak about three slices of bread. When the water is well pressed out, season it with salt, a little cayenne, alittle mace, and moisten it with port-wine or sherry; add the juice and the grated rind of half a lemon. TO BAKE A FISH WITH WINE ( Mrs. Samuel Treat ). Stuff a fish with the following dressing. Soak some bread in water, squeeze itdry, and add an egg well beaten. Season it with pepper, salt, and a little parsley or thyme; grease the baking-pan (one just the right size for holding the fish ) with butter; season the fish on top, and put it into the pan with about twocups of boiling water; baste it well, adding more boiling water when necessary. About twenty minutesbefore serving, pour over it a cup of sour wine, and asmall piece of butter (Mrs. Treat adds also two or three table-spoonfuls of Worcestershire sauce mixed with the wine --of course, this may be left out if moreconvenient); put half a lemon, sliced, into the gravy; baste the fish againwell. When it is thoroughly baked, remove it from the pan; garnish the top withthe slices of lemon; finish the sauce in the baking-dish byadding a little butter rubbed to a paste in some flour; strain, skim, and serve it in a sauce-boat. TO STEW FISH, OR FISH ENMATELOTE. Cut the fish transversely intopieces about an inch or an inch and a half long; sprinkle salt on them, and let them remain while you boil twoor three onions (sliced) in a very little water; pour off this water when the onions arecooked, and add to them pepper, about a tea-cupful of hot water, and a tea-cupful of wine if it is claret or whitewine, and two or three table-spoonfuls if it is sherry or port: now add the fish. When it begins to simmer, throw in some littleballs of butter which have been rolled in flour. When the fish isthoroughly cooked, serve it very hot. This is a very good manner of cooking any fresh-water fish. Fish is much better stewed with some wine. Of course, it is quite possible to stew fish without it, in which case add a little parsley. TO COOK FISH AUGRATIN. This is a favorite manner with the French of cooking fish. The fish is served inthe same dish in which it is cooked. It is Anillustration of fish served in a gratindish. called a gratin dish--generally an oval silver-platedplatter, or it may be of block-tin. A fish au gratin is rather expensive, on account of the mushrooms; however, the French canned mushrooms ( champignons ) are almost as good as fresh ones, andare much cheaper. Receipt. --First put into a saucepan butter size of an egg, then a handful of shallots, or one large onion minced fine; let it cook ten minutes, when mix inhalf a cupful of flour; then mince three-fourths of a cupful of mushrooms. Add a tea-cupful of hotwater (or better, stock ) to the saucepan,then a glass of white or red wine, salt, and pepper. Aftermixing them well, add the minced mushrooms and alittle minced parsley. Skin the fish, cut off the head and tail, split it in two,laying bare the middle bone; slip the knife under the bone, removing itsmoothly. Now cut the fish in pieces about an inchlong. Moisten the gratin dish with butter, arrange the cuts of fish tastefully on it, pour over the sauce, then sprinkle the whole with bread-crumbs which have been dried and grated. Putlittle pieces of butter over all, and bake. The dishmay be garnished with little diamonds of fried or toasted andbuttered bread around the edge. Or, This is a pretty dish au gratin: Put mashedpotatoes (which must be still hot when arranged) in a circle onthe outside of the gratin dish, then a row of the pieces of fish (which have been cooked as just described) aroundthe middle of the dish, or just inside the potatoes. Put some mashed potatoes also in the middle of thedish. Garnish here and there with mushrooms. Pour the sauce just described and breadcrumbs over the fish, and bake five orten minutes. FISH à LA CRèME ( Mrs. Audenreid ). Boil a fish weighing four pounds in salted water. When done, remove the skin, and flakeit, leaving out the bones. Boil one quart of richmilk. Mix butter size of a small egg withthree table-spoonfuls of flour, and stir it smoothlyin the milk, adding also two or three sprigs of parsley and half an onion chopped fine, a little Cayennepepper, and salt. Stir it over the fireuntil it has thickened. Butter a gratin dish. Putin first a layer of fish, then of dressing, and continue in alternation until all the fish is used, with dressing on top. Sprinkle sifted bread-crumbs over the top. Bake half an hour. Garnishwith parsley and slices of hard-boiledegg. As the rules for boiling, broiling, frying, cooking au gratin, and stewing are the same for nearly allkinds of fish, I will not repeat the receipts for each particular one. I will onlysuggest the best manner for cooking certain kinds, and will add certainreceipts not under the general rule: SALMON is undoubtedly best boiled. The only exception to the rule of boiling fish is in the case of salmon, which must be put in hot instead of cold water, to preserver its color. A favorite way of boiling a whole salmon is in the form of a letter S, as inplate. A large fish, formed into an S-shape andserved on a round platter. It is done as follows:Thread a trussing-needle with some twine; tie the end ofthe string around the head, fastening it tight; then pass the needle throughthe centre part of the body, draw the string tight, and fasten it around thetail. The fish will assume the desired form. For parties or evening companies, salmon boiled inthis form (middle cuts are also used), served cold, with a Mayonnaise sauce poured over, is a favoritedish. It is then generally mounted in style, on an oval or square blockpedestal, three or four inches high, made of bread (twoor three days old), called a croustade, carved in any form with a sharp knife. It is then fried a light-brown inboiling lard. Oftener these croustades are made of wood, which are covered with white pepper, and brushed over with a little half-set aspic jelly. The salmon isthen decorated with squares of aspic jelly. Adecoration of quartered hard-boiled eggs or of cold cauliflower-blossoms is very pretty, and is palatablealso with the Mayonnaise sauce. The best sauces for a boiled salmon served hot are the sauce Hollandaise, lobster, shrimp, oroyster sauces --the sauceHollandaise being the favorite. If lobster sauce is used, the coral ofthe lobster is dried, and sprinkledover the fish, reserving some with which to color the sauce, as in receipt for lobstersauce (see page 122). If shrimp sauce is used, some whole shrimps should be saved for decorating the dish. Indecorating salmon, as well as any other kind of fish, potatoes cut in little balls, and placed like littlepiles of cannon-balls around the dish, A fish on around plate garnished with potato balls. arepretty. The potatoes should be simply boiled in salted water. An alternate pile of buttonmushrooms are pretty, and good also. Parsley or any pretty leaves around a dish always givea fresh and tasteful appearance. Or, An exceedingly pretty garnish for a largefish is one of smelts (in rings, see receipt,page 111) fried in boiling lard. In this case, addslices of lemon. Still another pretty garnish is offried oysters or fried parsley, or both. It is quite appropriate to serve a middle cut of salmon ata A middle cut of salmon served on a roundplatter. dinner: 1st, because it is the best cut;2d, because it is easier and cheaper to serve; and, 3d, because one never caresto supply more than is necessary. This cut is better slowly boiled, also, inthe acidulated salted water. TO BROIL SALMON. Taketwo slices of salmon cut from the middle of the fish, sprinkle over a little lemon-juice, Cayenne pepper, salt, and salad-oil. Let itthen remain for half an hour. Rub the gridiron well with beef-suet or pork. As it is anice matter to broil salmon without burning, it wouldbe well to wrap it in buttered or oiled paper just before broiling. Serve a maître-d'hôtel, pickle,caper, anchovy, or a horse-radish sauce. SALMON CUTLETS. Removethe skin and bone from some slices of salmon one-thirdof an inch thick; trim them into cutlet shape; sprinkle on pepper, salt, and flour, and dip them into beaten eggs mixed with a little chopped parsley or onion; then bread-crumb them. Fry them in boiling lard. This is the better way, or they may be fried or sautéd in butter ina sauté pan. Arrangethe pieces one over the other in a circle. Pour a pickle, or Tartare sauce, in the centre. SLICES OF SALMONBOILED. If a family is small, and it should not be advisable to buy alarge middle cut of salmon, it would be preferable tobuy, for instance, two slices. Boil them very slowly in acidulatedsalted water, or in the courtbouillon with wine. Serve them with parsley between, and a napkin underneath. Serve a sauce Hollandaise in the sauce-boat. CANNED SALMON. TheCalifornia canned salmon is undoubtedly one of thegreatest successes in canning. By keeping a few cans in the house, one isalways ready in any emergency to produce a fine dish of salmon in a few minutes. It is particularly nice for abreakfast-dish, heated, seasoned with pepper and salt, placed on thin slices of butteredtoast, with a cream dressing poured overall, i.e., milk thickened on thefire, by stirring it into a roux (seepage 51) of butter and flour, and seasoned with pepper, salt, and a fewpieces of fresh butter just before serving. For dinnerit is excellent served with any of the fish sauces. Salmon is also nice served in shells, as for trout(see page 109). SHAD. This delicious fish is undoubtedly best broiled, with a maître-d'hôtel sauce; but it isgood also cut in slices, and sautéd. TROUT. If large, they may be broiled, boiled, or baked. If boiled or broiled, servethe sauce Hollandaise with them.Professional cooks generally boil it in the court bouillon. Smaller trout are better egged, rolled in saltedcorn-meal, and thrown into boiling lard. The trout is a very nice fish for an au gratin, or stewed, called then en matelote. TROUT IN CASES OR IN SHELLS( en Coquilles ). Parboil little trout; cut the fish intopieces about an inch long, or into dice; place them in papercases (which have been buttered or oiled, and placed in the oven afew moments to harden the paper so as to enable it to hold the sauce ). After partly filling the cases with the piecesof fish, pour over them some fine herbsauce (see page 128), and sprinkle over bread-crumbs; put them into the oven twenty minutesbefore dinner to bake. If shells are used, little plated-silver ones ( scallopshells ) are preferable. In that case, it would be better to fry the fish (seasoned with pepper, salt, and a little lemon-juice ) in a sauté pan; cut them in dice afterward,and put them in the shells; pour over a fine herb or a Bechamelsauce; strew the top with grated bread-crumbs; place them a few moments in the oven tobrown the tops, and serve. COD-FISH. Fresh cod-fish is better boiled. The fish is so largethat it is generally boiled in slices. After it is well salted, horse-radish and vinegar inthe boiling water will improve the fish. Oyster-sauce is the favorite sauce for a boiled cod-fish. Capers might bemixed with the oyster-sauce. Some serve the fish with fresh cod-fish. Theseslices may also be broiled an served with a maître-d'hôtel sauce, or theymay be egged and bread-crumbed, and fried in boilinglard. CRIMPED COD-FISH ( Rudmanii ). Soak two slices of cod-fish one inch thick for two hours in ice-water; put them into stew-pan, and, pouring over enough saltedboiling water to cover them, let them simmer for about ten minutes; place them neatly on a platter on a folded napkin,garnish with parsley, and pour into the two cavities a Tartare or a picklesauce. SALT COD-FISH. Soakthis in water overnight; parboil it, changing the water once or twice; separate the flakes. Serve themon thin slices of toast, with an eggsauce poured over. Or, Mince it when boiled in very little water, which should be changed once; thicken it with butter and flour mixed; cookabout two minutes, then break in several eggs. Whenthe eggs are cooked and mixed with the fish, pour all thin slices of butteredtoast. COD-FISH BALLS. Cut the cod-fish in pieces; soak them about an hour in lukewarm water, when the bones and skin may be easilyremoved; pull the fish then into fine shreds, and putit on the stove in some cold water. As soon as itbegins to boil, change the water, and repeat thisprocess a second time. It is not proper to boil it, as it renders it tough. Assoon as the fish is ready, some potatoes must be cooked at the same time, i.e., boiled tender, and well-mashed while stillhot, with a little butter added. Mix half as much cod-fish as potatoes whileboth are still hot. Form them into little balls or thick flatcakes. Fry them in a little hot butter in a sauté pan, or immersethem in boiling-hot lard. It makes all the differencein the flavor of the balls if the fish and potatoes are mixed while both are hot. Of course, they are better fried at once, butmay be made the night before serving (at breakfast), if they are only properly mixed. FISH CHOWDER. Cut threepounds of any kind of fresh fish ( cod-fish is especially good), one and a half pounds of potatoes, and one large onion (three ounces) into slices; also, half a pound of salt pork into half-inch squares or dice. Put the pork and onions into a saucepan, and fry them a light brown; then add a cupful of claret; and when it boils take it from the fire. Butter a large stew-pan, and put in first a layer of potatoes, then a layer of fish, then a sprinkle of onions and pork (strainedfrom the claret), pepper and salt, and continue these alternations until it is allin, having the potatoes on top. Now pour the claretover the top, and barely cover the whole with boilingwater. Cover closely, and let it simmer for fifteen minuteswithout disturbing it. In the mean time, bring a pint of milk (or, better, cream ) to a boil, take it from the fire, and cut intoit three ounces of butter, and break in three ship-crackers. Arrange the slices of fish and potatoes in theshape of a dome in the centre of a hot platter. Place the softened crackers (skimmed from the milk ) over the top, and pour over the milk. Serve very hot. SMALL PAN-FISH ( Perch, Sun-fish, etc. ) They are generallypreferred peppered, salted, then rolled in saltedcorn-meal, and fried either in a sauté pan with a little lard and some slices of pork, or in boiling lard. They make also a good stew en matelote, or a good au gratin. Their chief excellence consists in theirbeing perfectly fresh, and served hot. MACKEREL should be broiled, and served à lamaître-d'hôtel. SMELTS are good salted, peppered, and rolled in saltedcorn-meal or flour, and fried inboiling-hot lard, but better egged and bread-crumbedbefore frying. They should be served immediately, or they will lose their crispness andflavor. When served as a garnish for a large fish, they should be fried in theshape of rings. This is easily done by putting the tail of the fish into itsmouth, and holding it with a pin. After it is fried, the pin is withdrawn, asthe fried fish will hold it shape. Place these rings around the fish, with anadditional garnish of parsley and lemon slices; or the rings may be servedalone in a circle around the side of a platter, with a tomato or a Tartare sauce in the centre. There can be no prettier manner of serving them alone than one often seen inParis. They are fried in the usual manner; then a little silver orsilver-plated skewer four inches long is drawn throughtwo or three of the smelts, running it carefully through theeyes. One skewerful, with a slice of lemon on top, is served for each person attable. If the silver-plated skewers are too extravagant,little ones of polished wire will answer. FRIED SLICES OF FISH, WITHTOMATO SAUCE ( Fish à l'Orlay ). Boneand skin the fish, and cut it into even slices; or ifa flounder or any flat fish isused, begin at the tail, and, keeping the knife close to the bone, separateeach side of the fish neatly from it; then cut eachside in two, lengthwise, leaving the fish in four longpieces. Remove the skin carefully. After having sprinkled pepper and salt over them,roll each piece first in sifted cracker or breadcrumbs, then in half a cupful of milk mixed with an egg, andthen in crumbs again. They are better fried in a sauté pan in a little hot butter; yet they may be sautéd in a little hot lard, with some neat slices of pork, or fried in boiling lard. Pour tomato sauce No. 2 (see page 125) on a hotplatter, arrange the pieces of fish symmetrically onit, and serve immediately. TO FRY EELS. Skin them,cut them into four-inch lengths, season them with salt and pepper, roll them in flour or salted corn-meal, andfry them in boiling lard. Some parboil eels and bull-heads, sayingit removes a muddy taste. I do not think it is necessary. Fried eels are generally served with a tomato, apickle, or a Tartare sauce. EELS STEWED ( London Cooking-school ). Put three-quarters of a cupful of butter into a stew-pan; when hot, add four small onions minced fine, which cook to a light-brown color;add then a table-spoonful of flour; when well mixedand cooked, add two cupfuls of stock, a wine-glassfulof port-wine, and two bayleaves (the bay leaves may be omitted).Now put in the eels (two small ones or one large one),cut into pieces one inch long. Cover tightly. They will be ready to send to the table in about fifteen minutes, served ona hot platter, with a circle around them of toasted or fried slicesof bread ( croûtons ),cut diamond-shaped. SHELL-FISH. OYSTERS. RAW OYSTERS. DRAIN themwell in a colander, marinate them, i.e., sprinkle over plenty of pepper and salt, and let themremain in a cold place for at least half an hour before serving. This makes agreat difference in their flavor. They may be served in the half-shell withquarters or halves of lemons in the same dish. I thinka prettier arrangement is to serve them in a block of ice. Select a ten-pound block; melt with a hot flat-iron a symmetrical-shaped cavity in the top to holdthe oysters; chip also from the sides at the base, sothat the ice-block may stand in a large platter on the napkin. When the oysters are well salted and peppered, place them inthe ice, and let them remain in some place where the ice will not melt untilthe time of serving. The salt will help to make the oysters very cold. The ice may be decorated with leaves or smilax vines, and arow of lemon quarters or halves may be placed aroundthe platter at the base of the ice. It has an especially pretty effect servedon a table by gas-light. The English often serve little thin squares of buttered brown bread (like Boston brownbread ) with oysters. FRIED OYSTERS. Drainthe oysters in the colander; sprinkle over pepper and salt, which mix well with them, and put them in acold place for fifteen or twenty minutes before cooking. This is marinatingthem. When ready to cook, roll each one first in sifted cracker-crumbs, then in beaten egg mixed with a little milk and seasoned with pepper and salt, then in the cracker-crumbs again. You will please remember theroutine: first, the crumbs before the egg, as the egg will not adhere well to the oyster without the crumbs; now throw them intoboiling-hot lard (as you would fry doughnuts), firsttesting to see if it is hot enough. As soon as they assume a light-brown colorthey should be drained, and served immediately on a hot platter. Oysters should not be fried until the persons attable are ready to eat them, as it takes only a few moments to fry them, andthey are not good unless very hot. The platter of oysters may be garnished with atable-spoonful of chopped pickles or chowchow placed at the four opposite sides; or the oysters may be served as a border around cold slaw (see receipt, page 224), when they are anespecially nice course for dinner; or they may be served with celery, either plain or in salad. As the platter forthe fried oysters is hot, the celerysalad or cold slaw might be piled on a folded napkin in thecentre. SCALLOPED OYSTERS INSHELLS. They may be served cooked in their shells, or in silver scallop shells, when they present a betterappearance than when cooked and served all in one dish. If cooked in an oyster or clam shell, one large, ortwo or three little oysters are placed in it, with afew drops of the oyster liquor. It is sprinkled with pepper and salt, and cracker or bread crumbs. Little pieces of butter are placed over the top. When all are ready,they are put into the oven. When they are plump and hot, they are done. Brownthe tops with a salamander, or with a red-hot kitchen shovel. If they are cooked in the silver scallop shells, whichare larger, several oysters are served in the oneshell; one or two are put in, peppered, salted, strewed with cracker-crumbs and small pieces of butter; then more layers, until the shell is full, oruntil enough are used for one person. Moisten them with the oyster-juice, and strew little pieces of butter over the top. They are merely kept in the ovenuntil they are thoroughly hot, then browned with a salamander. Serve one shell for each person at table,placed on a small plate. The oyster may be bearded ornot. SCALLOPEDOYSTERS. Ingredients: Three dozen oysters, alarge tea-spoonful of bread or cracker crumbs, twoounces of fresh butter, pepper and salt, half atea-cupful of oyster-juice. Make layers of these ingredients, as described in the last article, in thetop of a chafing-dish, or in any kind of pudding or gratin dish; bake in a quickoven about fifteen minutes; brown with a salamander. OYSTER STEW. Put aquart of oysters on the fire in their own liquor. The moment they begin to boil, skim them out, and add to the liquora half-pint of hot cream, salt, and Cayenne pepper totaste. Skim it well, take it off the fire, add to the oysters an ounce and a half of butter broken into small pieces. Serveimmediately. OYSTER SOUP (see page 93). OYSTER OR CLAMFRITTERS. Oysters served on buttered toast for breakfast, or in vols-au-vent, silverscallop-shells, or in paper boxes, are very nice made after thereceipts on page 241). They or the fricasseedoysters may be served in either of the above ways. FRICASSEE OF OYSTERS ( Oyster àla Boulette ). Put one quart, or twenty-five, oysters on the fire in their own liquor. The moment itbegins to boil, turn it into a hot dish through a colander, leaving the oysters inthe colander. Put into the saucepan two ounces of butter (size of an egg), and when it bubbles sprinklein one ounce (a table-spoonful) of sifted flour; letit cook a minute without taking color, stirring it well with a wireegg-whisk; then add, mixing well, a cupful of the oyster liquor. Take it from the fire and mix in the yolks of two eggs, a little salt, a very little Cayennepepper, one tea-spoonful of lemon-juice, and one grating of nutmeg. Beat it well; then return it to the fire toset the eggs, without allowing it to boil. Put in the oysters. These oysters may be served on thin slices of toast for breakfast or tea, or in papers ( en papillote ), or as filling for patties for dinner. TO ROAST CANNEDOYSTERS. Drain them. Put them in a spider whichis very hot; turn them in a moment, so that they may cook on both sides. Itonly takes a few seconds to cook them. Put them on a hot plate in which thereare pepper, salt, and alittle hot melted butter. They should be servedimmediately. They have the flavor of the oyster roastedin the shell. Some cook them in this manner at table on a chafing-dish by means of the spirit-lamp. SPICED OYSTERS ( Miss Lestlie ). Ingredients: Two hundred oysters, one pint of vinegar, a nutmeg grated,eight blades of whole mace, three dozen whole cloves, one tea-spoonful of salt, two tea-spoonfuls of whole allspice, and as much Cayennepepper as will lie on the point of a knife. Put the oysters with their liquor into a largeearthen vessel; add to them the vinegar and all theother ingredients. Stir all well together and set them over a slow fire,keeping them covered. Stir them to the bottom several times. As soon as theyare well scalded, they are done. To be eaten cold. CLAMS. CLAMS COOKED WITH CREAM ( Mrs. Audenreid ). Chop fifty small clams not too fine, and seasonthem with pepper and salt. Putinto a stew-pan butter the sizeof an egg, and when it bubbles sprinkle in a tea-spoonful of flour, which cook a few minutes; stir gradually intoit the clam liquor, then the clams, which stew about two or three minutes; then adda cupful of boiling cream, and serve immediately. The clams may or may not be bearded. CLAM CHOWDER. Put fifty clams on the fire in their own liquor, with a little salt. When they haveboiled about three minutes, strain them, and return the liquor to the fire.Chop a medium-sized onion (two ounces) into smallpieces, and cut six ounces of pork into dice. Fry botha light color in two ounces (size of an egg) of butter; then stir in three ounces of flour (two table-spoonfuls). When thoroughly cooked,add the clam liquor, half a pint of good stock or milk, the samequantity of cream, a salt-spoonful of mace, a salt-spoonful of thyme, salt to taste, andeight ounces of potatoes cut into dice. When these arecooked, and the chowder is about to be sent to table, add the clams cut in dice, and four ounces of ship-bread or crackers brokenin pieces. TUNISON CLAMCHOWDER. Ingredients: Two hundred soft clams, one large onion, twentylarge crackers, can of tomatoes, parsley (choppedfine), half a pound of butter, one large tea-spoonfulof sweet marjoram, thyme, sage, savory, half atea-spoonful of ground cloves, and half a tea-spoonfulof curry. Boil well; then add half a pint of milk and half apint of sherry wine. CLAM FRITTER (see page 230). CLAM SOUP (see page 93). CRABS AND LOBSTERS. SOFT-SHELL CRABS. Drythem; sprinkle them with pepper and salt; roll them, first in flour, then in egg (half acupful of milk mixed in one egg ), then in cracker-dust, and fry them in boiling lard. DEVILED CRAB. When the crabs are boiled, take out the meat and cut it into small pieces (dice); clean wellthe shells. To six ounces of crab meat, mix two ounces of bread-crumbs, two hard-boiledeggs chopped, the juice of half a lemon, Cayenne pepper and salt. Mixall with cream or creamsauce, or, what is still better, a Bechamelsauce (see page 127). Fill the shellswith the mixture, smooth the tops, sprinkle over sifted bread-crumbs, and color it in a quick oven. DEVILED LOSTER. is madein the same way as deviled crab, merely substituting the lobster for the crab, and adding a grating of nutmeg to the seasoning. Inboiling lobsters and crabs, they are sufficientlycooked when they assume a bright-red color. Too much boiling renders themtough. LOBSTER CHOPS. Cut halfa pound of the flesh of a boiled lobster into smalldice. Put two ounces of butter into a stew-pan, and when it bubbles sprinkle in two ounces of flour (one table-spoonful). Cook it; then pour in acupful of boiling cream and the lobsterdice. Stir it until it is scalding hot; then take it from thefire, and, when slightly cooled, stir in the beaten yolks of threeeggs, a grating of nutmeg, a little Cayenne pepper, and salt totaste. Return the mixture to the fire, and stir it long enough to well set the eggs. Butter a platter, on which spread the lobster mixture half an inch deep. When cold, form itinto the shape of chops, pointed at one end; bread-crumb, egg, and crumbthem again, and fry them in boiling lard. Stick a claw into the end of each lobsterchop after it is cooked. Place the chops in a circle, overlapping each other, on a napkin. Decoratethe dish by putting the tail of the lobster in thecentre, and its head, with the long horns, on thetail. Around the outside of the circle of chops arrange the legs, cut an inch each side of the middle joints, sothat they will form two equal sides of a triangle. A GOOD WAY TO PREPARE ALOBSTER. Put into a saucepan butter the sizeof a small egg, and a tea-spoonful of minced onion. When it has cooked, sprinkle in a tea-spoonfulof flour, which cook also; then stir in one cupful ofthe water in which the lobster was boiled, one cupful of milk, one cupful of strong veal or beefstock, pepper, and salt: add the meat of the boiled lobster, and when quite hot pour all in the centre of ahot platter. Decorate the dish with the lobster's head in the centre, fried-bread diamonds ( croûtons ) around the outside; orin any prettier way you choose, with the abundant resources of lobster legs and trimmings. FROGS. Frogs are such a delicacy that it is a pity not to prepare them withcare. The hind legs only are used. They may be made into a broth the same aschicken broth, and are considered a very advantageous diet for those sufferingwith pulmonary affections. FROGS FRIED. Put themin salted boiling water, with a little lemon-juice, and boil them three minutes; wipe them;dip them first in cracker-dust, then in eggs (half a cupful of milk mixed in two eggs andseasoned with pepper and salt ), then again in cracker-crumbs. When they are all breaded, clean offthe bone at the end with a dry cloth. Put them in a wire basket and dip them inboiling lard, to fry. Put a little paper (see page 61)on the end of each bone; place them on a hot platter, in the form of a circle,one overlapping the other, with French pease in thecentre. Serve immediately, while they are still crisp and hot. SAUCES. THE French say the English only know how to make one kind of sauce, and apoor one at that. Notwithstanding the French understand the sauce question, itis very convenient to make the drawn butter, and, by adding differentflavorings, make just so many kinds of sauce. For instance, by adding capers,shrimps, chopped pickles, anchovy paste, chopped boiled eggs, lobster, oysters,parsley, cauliflower, etc., one has caper, shrimp, pickle, anchovy, egg, andthe other sauces. The drawn-butter sauce is simple, yet few make it properly,managing generally to have it insipid, and withflour uncooked. If a housekeeper has any pride about having a good table, shewill be amply repaid for learning some of the French sauces, which are, atlast, simple enough. We are often frightened to see many items in a receipt; weshake our heads dubiously at the trouble and extravagance of one receiptmentioning thyme, nutmeg, bay-leaf, mace, shallot, capers, pepper-corns,parsley, and last of all the horrors, stock. As far as the herbs are concerned,an investment of twenty-five cents will purchase enough mace, thyme,bay-leaves, and pepper-corns for a year's supply of abundant sauces, to saynothing of their uses for braising, blanquettes, etc. Five cents' worth of shallotsshould last a long time; they are sold in all city markets, being only youngforced onions. Capers would be extravagant if a bottleful, costing sixty cents,would not last a year in a small-sized family. I have already said enough aboutstock to show that one must be very incompetent if a little of it can not be athand, made of trimmings and cheap pieces of meat and bones. The use of mushrooms and truffles, which are comparatively cheap in France,can not be extensively introduced here. A little tin can, holding about a gillof tasteless truffles, costs three or four dollars; however, mushrooms are muchless expensive, and infinitely better. A can of mushrooms costs forty cents,and is sufficient for several sauces and entrées. Some persons raise mushrooms in their cellars. A small, rich bed in a darkplace where the soil will not freeze, planted with mushroom spawn, will yieldenough mushrooms for the family, and the neighbors besides, with very littletrouble and expense. The French white sauces differ from the English white sauce, as they aremade with strong white stock, prepared with veal, or chickens, or both, andsome vegetables for a basis. If one would learn to make the sauce Bechamel, it will be found an easy affair toprepare many delicious entrées, such as chicken in shells ( en coquille ), or in papers ( enpapillote ), and mushrooms in crust ( croûte auxchampignons ). For boiled fish the sauce Hollandaise is a decided success. In Parisevery one speaks of the delicious sauce, and bribes the chef de cuisine for the receipt. It is made withoutstock, and is very simple. For fried fish the perfection of accompaniments is the sauce Tartare --a mere addition of some capers,shallots, parsley, and pickles to the sauce Mayonnaise. When tomatoes are so abundant, it is unpardonable that one should neverserve a tomato sauce with a beefsteak, and a score of other meat dishes. For a chicken or a lobster salad, learn unquestionably the sauce Mayonnaise. In the thickening of sauces, let it be remembered that butter and flourshould be well cooked together before the sauce is added, to prevent the flourfrom tasting uncooked. In butter sauces, however, only enough butter should beused to cook the flour, the remainder added, cut in pieces, after the sauce istaken from the fire. This preserves it flavor. DRAWN-BUTTERSAUCE. Ingredients: Three ounces of butter, one ounce of flour, half a pint of water (or, better, whitestock ), and a pinch of salt and pepper. Put two ounces of the butter into a stew-pan, and when it bubbles, sprinkle in the flour; stir it well with a wireegg-whisk until the flour is thoroughlycooked without taking color, and then mix in well the half-pint of water or stock. Take it offthe fire, pass it through a sieve or gravy-strainer, andstir in the other ounce of butter cut in pieces. Whenproperly mixed and melted, it is ready for use. This makes a pint of sauce. Some persons like drawn-butter sauce slightly acid, in which case add a fewdrops of vinegar or lemon-juice just before serving. PICKLE SAUCE. Make a drawn-butter sauce; just before serving add two orthree table-spoonfuls of pickled cucumbers chopped orminced very fine. BOILED-EGG SAUCE. Addto half a pint of drawn-butter sauce three hard-boiled eggs, chopped not too fine. CAPER SAUCE. Make a drawn-butter sauce --or, say, melt two ounces of butter in a saucepan; add a table-spoonful of flour; when the two are well mixed, add pepper and salt, and a littleless than a pint of boiling water. Stir the sauce onthe fire until it thickens, then add three table-spoonfuls of French capers. Removing the saucepan from the fire,stir into the sauce the yolk of an egg beaten with the juice of half a lemon. ANCHOVY SAUCE. Add tohalf a pint of drawn-butter sauce two tea-spoonfuls of anchovy extract, or anchovypaste. SHRIMP SAUCE. To half apint of drawn-butter sauce add one-third of a pint of pickled boiled shrimps, whole, or chopped a little.Add at last moment a few drops of lemon-juice, and avery little Cayenne pepper. Let the sauce simmer, not boil. Some add a tea-spoonful of anchovy paste; more, perhaps, prefer it without the anchovy flavor. Shrimps are generally sold at market already boiled. If they are not boiled,throw them into salted boiling water, and boil themuntil they are quite red. When cold, pick off the heads, and peel off theshells. Always have a few of the shrimps whole for garnishing the dish. LOBSTER SAUCE. Beforeproceeding to make this sauce, break up the coral of thelobster, and put it on a paper in a slow oven for half an hour;then pound it in a mortar, and sprinkle it over theboiled fish when it is served. To prepare the sauceitself, chop the meat of the tail and claws of a good-sizedlobster into pieces, not too small. Half an hour before dinner,make half a pint of drawn-butter sauce. Add to it thechopped lobster, a pinch of coral, a small pinch of Cayenne, and a little salt. AnEnglish lady says: "This process seems simple, yet nothing is rarer in cookerythan good lobster sauce. The means of spoiling itare chiefly by chopping the lobster too small, or,worse, pounding it, inserting contents of the head, or using milk, or anchovy,or any sauces. It should not be a half-solid mass, or thin liquid, but the lobster should be distinct in a creamy bed." OYSTER SAUCE. Make a drawn-butter or white sauce; add a few drops of lemon or a table-spoonful of capers, or, if neither be at hand, a few drops of vinegar; add oysters strainedfrom their liquor, and let them just come to a boil in the sauce. This sauce is much better made with part cream, i.e., used when making the drawn-buttersauce, instead of all water. In thiscase, do not add the lemon-juice or vinegar. Some make the white sauce of the oyster liquor, instead of water. This sauce may be served in a sauce-boat, but it isnicer to pour it over the fish, boiled turkey, or chicken. PARSLEY SAUCE ( for Boiled Fish or Fowls ). To half a pint of hot drawn-butter sauce add two table-spoonfuls of chopped parsley. The appearance of the sauce is improved bycoloring it with a little spinach-green (see page87). CAULIFLOWER SAUCE ( for Boiled Poultry ). Add boiled cauliflowers, cut into little flowerets, to a drawn-butter sauce made with part cream. LEMON SAUCE ( for Boiled Fowls ). To half a pint of drawn-butter sauce add the inside of a lemon, chopped (seeds taken out), and the chicken liver boiled and mashed fine. CHICKEN SAUCE ( to serve with Boiled or Stewed Fowls ). Put butter the size of an egg into a bright saucepan, andwhen it bubbles add a table-spoonful of flour; cookit, and add a pint, or rather less, of boilingwater; when smooth, take it from the fire, and add the beaten yolks of two or three eggs, and a few drops of lemon-juice, pepper, and salt. Or, Stock can be used instead of boilingwater, when two or three small slices of onion areplaced in the butter after it begins to bubble, andthen allowed to cook yellow; after the flour iscooked, stock is added instead of water, and whensmooth, it is taken from the fire, a few drops of lemon-juice, pepper, and salt are added, and the sauce is strained through the gravy strainer or sieve, to remove the pieces of onion. MAîTRE-D'HôTELBUTTER ( for Beefsteak, Broiled Meat, orFish ). Mix butter the size of an egg,the juice of half a lemon, and two or three sprigs of parsley, chopped very fine; pepper and salt all together.Spread this over any broiled meat or fish when hot; then put the dish into theoven a few moments, to allow the butter to penetratethe meat. MINT SAUCE ( for Roast Lamb ). Put four table-spoonfuls ofchopped mint, two table-spoonfuls of sugar, and a quarter of a pint of vinegar into the sauce-boat. Letit remain an hour or two before dinner, that the vinegar may become impregnated with the mint. CURRANT-JELLY SAUCE ( for Venison ). A simple sauce made of currant jelly melted with a little water is very nice;yet Francatelli's receipt is much better, viz.: "Bruise half a stick of cinnamon and six cloves; put them into a stew-pan with one ounce of sugar and the peel of half alemon, pared off very thin, and perfectly free from any portion ofwhite pulp; moisten this with one and a half sherry-glassfuls of port-wine, and set the whole to gently simmer or heaton the stove for half an hour; then strain it into a small stew-pan containing half a glassful of currant jelly. Just before sending the sauce to thetable, set it on the fire to boil, in order to melt the currantjelly, and so that it may mix with the essence of spice,etc." TOMATO SAUCE (No.1). Stew six tomatoes half an hour with two cloves, a sprig of parsley, pepper, and salt; press thisthrough a sieve; put a little butter into a saucepanover the fire, and when it bubbles and a heapingtea-spoonful of flour; mix and cook it well, and addthe tomato-pulp, stirring until it is smooth andconsistent. Some add one or two slices of onion at first. It isa decided improvement to add three or four table-spoonfuls of stock; however, the sauce is very good without it, andpeople are generally too careless to have stock athand. TOMATO SAUCE (No.2). Ingredients: One-quart can of tomatoes, two cloves, onesmall sprig of thyme, two sprigs of parsley, half a small bay-leaf, three pepper-corns, three allspice, two slices of carrot (one and a half ounces), one-ounce onion (one small onion ), oneand a half ounces of butter (size of a pigeon's egg),one and a half ounces of flour (onetable-spoonful). Put the tomatoes over the fire with all the aboveingredients but the butter and flour, and when they have boiled about twenty minutesstrain them through a sieve. Make a roux by putting the butter into a stew-pan, and when it bubbles sprinkle in the flour, which let cook, stirring it well; then pour inthe tomato-pulp; when it is well mixed, it is readyfor use. SAUCE HOLLANDAISE, OR DUTCHSAUCE. As this is one of the best sauces ever made for boiled fish,asparagus, or cauliflower, I will give two receipts. The firstis Dubois'; the second is fromthe Cooking-school in New York. None should callthemselves cooks unless they know how to make the sauce Hollandaise, and simple enough it is. 1st. "Pour four table-spoonfuls of good vinegar intoa small stew-pan, and add some pepper-corns and salt; letthe liquid boil until it is reduced to half; let it cool; then add to it thewell-beaten yolks of four or five eggs, also fourounces (size of an egg) of good butter, more salt, if necessary, and a very little nutmeg. Set the stew-pan on avery slow fire, and stir the liquid until it is about as thick as cream;immediately remove it. Now put this stew-pan or cup intoanother pan containing a little warm water kept at theside of the fire. Work the sauce briskly with a spoon, or with a little whisk, so as to get it frothy, but adding little bits of butter, in all about three ounces" ( I would saythe size of half an egg). "When the sauces has become light and smooth, it isready for use." 2d. "Put a piece of butter the size of apigeon's egg into a saucepan, and when it bubbles stir in with an egg-whisk an even table-spoonful of flour; let it continue to bubble until the flour is thoroughly cooked, when stir in half a pintof boiling water, or, better, of vealstock; when it boils, take it from the fire, and stir into itgradually the beaten yolks of four eggs; return thesauce to the fire for a minute, to set the eggs, without allowing it to boil; again remove thesauce, stir in the juice of half a small lemon, andfresh butter the size of a walnut, cut into smallpieces, to facilitate its melting, and stir all well with the whisk. " MUSHROOMS, FOR GARNISH ( Gouffé ) Separate the button part from thestalk; then peel them with a sharp knife, cutting off merely the skin. Put theminto a stew-pan with a table-spoonful of lemon-juice and two table-spoonfuls of water. Toss them well, to impregnate them with theliquid. The object of the lemon-juice is to keep themwhite. Then put them on a sharp fire in boilingwater, with some butter added. When theyare boiled tender they are ready for use, i.e., for garnishing and for sauces. MUSHROOM SAUCE ( to serve with Beefsteaks, Fillets of Beef,etc. ). Having prepared the mushrooms bycutting off the stalks, and if they are large, by cutting them in halves orquarters, throw them into a little boiling water, or,what is much better, stock. Do not use more than isnecessary to cover them. This must be seasoned with salt, pepper, and a little butter. Boil the mushrooms until they are tender, then thicken the gravy slightly with a roux of butter and flour. Add a few drops of lemon-juice. It is now ready to pour over the meat. MUSHROOM WHITE SAUCE ( to serve withBoiled Fowls or with Cutlets. ) Prepare the mushrooms as for garnishing; boil them tender in rich white stock, made of veal or chicken; thicken with a roux of butter and flour, and add oneor two table-spoonfuls of cream. MUSHROOM SAUCE ( made with Canned Mushrooms ). Put a piece of butter the size of a walnut into a small stew-pan or tin basin, and when it bubbles add atea-spoonful (not heaping) of flour; when well cooked,stir in a cupful of stock (reduced and strong), andhalf a tea-cupful of the mushroom-juice from the can;let it simmer for a minute or two; then, after straining it, add half or threequarters of a can of mushrooms, pepper, salt, and a few dropsof lemon-juice. When thoroughly hot it is ready topour over the meat. A SIMPLE BECHAMELSAUCE. Put butter the size of a walnut into a stew-pan, and when it bubbles stir in an eventable-spoonful of flour, which cook thoroughly withoutletting it take color. Mix into the roux a cupful of strong hot vealstock ( i.e., veal put into cold water andboiled four or five hours), a cupful of boiling steam, and one grating of nutmeg; let it simmer, stirring itwell for a few minutes, then strain, and it is ready for use. The sauce wouldbe improved if the usual soup-bunch vegetables wereadded to the stock while it is being made. BECHAMEL SAUCE. Ingredients: One pint of veal stock (a knuckle ofveal put into one gallon of cold water, boiled five hours, skimmed and strained), half an ounce of onion (quarter of a rather small one), quarter of anounce of turnip (quarter of a turnip ), one ounce of carrot (quarter of a good-sized carrot ), half an ounce of parsley (two sprigs), quarter of a bay-leaf, half a sprig of thyme, three pepper-corns, half a lump of sugar, a small blade of mace. Put one ounce (size of a walnut) of butter into a stew-pan, and when hot add to it all the aboveingredients but the stock and the mace; fry this slowly until it assumes a yellow color;do not let it brown, as the sauce should be white whendone; stir in now a table-spoonful (one ounce) of flour, which let cook a minute, and add the blade of mace and the stock (boiling)from another stew-pan. After it has all simmered about five minutes, strain it through a sieve withoutallowing the vegetables to pass through; return the strained sauce to the fire,reduce it by boiling about one-third, when add three or four table-spoonfuls ofgood thick cream, and the sauce is ready. SAUCE AUX FINESHERBS. Ingredients: Half a pint of good stock, three table-spoonfuls of mushrooms, one table-spoonful of onions, two table-spoonfuls of parsley, and one shallot, allchopped fine. Fry the shallot and onion in a little butter untilthey assume a light-yellow color, then add a tea-spoonful of flour and cook it a minute; stir in the stock, mushrooms, and parsley, and salt to taste.If no Worcestershire sauce is at hand, add pepper to taste in its place. SAUCE TARTARE ( a Cold Sauce ). To a scant half pint of Mayonnaise sauce (made withthe mustard added) mix in two table-spoonfuls of capers, one small shallot (quarter of a rather small onion, a poor substitute), two gerkins (or two ounces of cucumberpickle ), and one table-spoonful of parsley, all chopped very fine. This sauce willkeep a long time, and is delicious for fried fish, fried oysters, boiledcod-fish, boiled tongue, or as dressing for a salad. By making the following simple sauce, one can produce several by a littlevariation. A SIMPLE BROWNSAUCE. Put into a saucepan a table-spoonful of minced onion and a little butter. When it has taken color, sprinkle in a heapingtea-spoonful of flour; stir well, and when brown addhalf a pint of stock. Cook it a few minutes, andstrain. Now, by adding a cupful of claret, two cloves, a sprig of parsley, and one of thyme, a bay-leaf, pepper, and salt, and by boiling two or three minutes andstraining it, one has the saucepoivrade. If, instead of the claret, one should add to the poivrade sauce atable-spoonful each of minced cucumber pickles, vinegar, and capers, one hasthe sauce piquante. By adding one tea-spoonful of mademustard, the juice of half a lemon, and alittle vinegar to the poivrade, instead of the claret, one has the sauce Robert. BEEF. FOR a roast of beef, the sirloin and tenderloin cuts are considered thebest. They are more expensive, and are no better than the best cuts of a ribroast: the sixth, seventh, and eighth ribs are the choicest cuts. The latterroasts are served to better advantage by requesting the butcher to remove thebones and roll the meat. Always have him send the bones also, as they arevaluable acquisition to the soup-pot. As the rolled ribsroasts are shaved evenly off and across the top when carved (the roasts are tobe cooked rare, of course), they present an equally good appearance for asecond cooking. I have really served a roast a third time to good advantage,serving it the last time à la jardinière. Of course, in summerlarge cuts should not be purchased. If the animal is young and large, and the meat is of clear, bright-redcolor, and the fat white, the meat is sure to be tender and juicy. There is no better sauce for a good, juicy roast of beef than the simplejuice of the meat. Horse-radish sauce may be served if the beef is notparticularly good. If a sauce is made by adding hot water, flour, pepper, and salt to thecontents of the baking-pan after the beef is cooked, donot serve it with a half-inch depth of pure grease on top in the sauce-boat. This is as absurd, when it can be allowed tostand a moment and simply poured off, or taken off with a spoon, as to servewet salt at table, which can easily be placed in the oven a few moments to dry,before sifting. Also, this kind of baking-pan saucewould not be so very objectionable, if cooks generally knew that it does notrequire a scientific education, nor a herculean effort, to strain it through a gravy-strainer. TO ROAST OR BAKEBEEF. A few rules for roasting and baking beef: Allow nine minutes to the pound for baking a rolledrib-roast; for roasting it, allow ten minutes to the pound. Sirloin roasts requireeight An illustration of a roast served on a roundplatter and garnished with leafyvegetables. minutes to the pound for baking, nineminutes for roasting. To bake, have the oven very hot. Before putting in the meat, sprinkle over pepper and salt, and dredge with flour. Pour a little boiling water into the pan beforebaking. Baste frequently. To roast, have a bright fire. Hang the joint about eighteen inches from itat first, put a little clarified dripping into the dripping-pan, baste the meat with it when first prepared to cook, and everyfifteen minutes afterward. Twenty minutes before the beef is done, sprinkle with pepper and salt, dredge with flour, baste with a little butter or dripping. Keep the fire bright, and turn the meat before it. It should be well browned and frothed.The cut, a rolled rib roast, with mashedpotatoes. YORKSHIREPUDDING. Ingredients: Six large table-spoonfuls of flour, three eggs (wellbeaten), one salt-spoonful of salt, enough milk to make it of the consistency of soft custard(about one and a half pints). Add enough milk to the flour and salt to make asmooth, stiff batter; add the eggs, and enough more milk to make it of the proper consistency. Beat allwell together, pour it into a shallow pan (buttered); bake three-quarters of anhour. Some empty the dripping-pan three-quarters of an hourbefore baked beef is done, and put the pudding into the empty pan, the beef on a three-cornered stand over it, that its juice may drop on the pudding. If beef is roasted, the pudding may be first baked in theoven, then placed under the beef for fifteen or twentyminutes, to catch any stray drops. It is as often served, though, baked in theoven in the ordinary way. It is cut into squares and served on a hot plate, to be eaten with roast beef. It is favorite English dish. BEEF à LAMODE. Six or seven pounds from a round ofbeef are generally selected; however, there is a cut from the shoulder which answers very well for an à-la mode beef. If the round is used, extractthe bone. Make several deep incisions into the meat with a thin sharp knife; press into most of them lardoons of pork about half an inch square, and two orthree inches long; in the other cuts, and especially the one from whence thebone was extracted, stuff almost any kind of force-meat, the simplest being as follows: Mix somesoaked bread with a little chopped beef-suet, onion, any herbs, such as parsley, thyme, or summer savory; alittle egg, Cayenne pepper, salt, and cloves. Press the beef into shape, round or oval, and tie itsecurely. Put trimmings of pork into the bottom of a largesaucepan or iron pot, and when hot put over the meat; brown it all over by turning all sides to thebottom of the pot, which should now be uncovered. This will take about half anhour. Next sprinkle over a heaping table-spoonful of flour, and brown that also. Put a small plate underthe beef, to prevent burning, and fill the pot withenough boiling water to half cover the meat; throw over a saucerful of sliced onions, carrots, some turnips, if you like, and some parsley. There are iron pots, with tight iron covers,which are made expressly for this kind of cooking; but if you have none of thisdescription, you will now have to cover the one used with enough covers,towels, etc., to make it tight as possible, so that the meat may be cooked in the steam. Let it cook for fouror five hours, never allowing the water to stopboiling. Watch it, that it may not get too low, and replenish it with boiling water. When the meat is done, put it on a hot platter; strain the gravy, skim off every particle of fat, add two or three table-spoonfuls of port or sherry wine, also pepper and salt, ifnecessary, and pour this gravy and selected pieces ofthe vegetables over the meat. Baked onions (see page 201), placed around the beef as a garnish, complete the dish for a course atdinner. BRAISED BEEF (No. 1). -- New York Cooking-school. Ingredients: Six-pounds loin of beef, half a poundof pork, three-fourths of a cupful of flour, two-ounce onion (onesmall onion ), three-ounce carrot (half a large carrot ),one-ounce turnip, one-third of a bunch of parsley, one sprig of thyme, two cloves, three allspice, six pepper-corns, half of a bay-leaf. Trim the beef into a shapely piece; stick a knifequite through different portions of it, in which apertures press slices or lardoons of pork, half an inch square, and three orfour inches long. Tie the beef into shape with twine.Lay scraps of pork on the bottom of a saucepan, placeit on a brisk fire, and when hot put in the beef; brownit all over by turning the different sides to the bottom of the uncoveredsaucepan. It will take about half an hour to brown it. Now sprinkle over the beef three-fourths of a cupful of flour (three ounces), also the vegetables and spices; and brown all this by again turning the meat over the fire. When they are of fine color, pourover a tumblerful of claret, which reduce to half;then fill the saucepan with boiling stock or water; cover it tightly, and place it in a hot ovenfor two and a half hours. When done, put the beef on ahot platter. Strain the sauce in which the beef was cooked, takeoff every particle of fat, season with more salt, ifnecessary; pour about half a cupful of it over the beef in the platter, and serve the remainder in a sauce-boat. The beef may be surrounded with greenpease, prepared as follows: Wash a can of Americanpease in cold water, then put them overthe fire with half a cupful of boiling water, salt, pepper, one ounce of butter, and one salt-spoonful of sugar. When the pease havesimmered a minute, strain them from their liquor, and place them in the platteraround the beef. BRAISED BEEF (No.2). The same cut which is used for an à-la-mode beef may be braised in the samemanner as is described for a fillet of beef braised.This may be served with the gravy, as it theredescribed, or with the addition of the jardinière of vegetables. BRAISED BEEF, WITH HORSE-RADISHSAUCE. Braise five pounds of fresh beef (nottoo lean), with an onion and a carrot sliced, two or three sprigs of parsley, four or five cloves, a little celery, ifyou have it, pepper, salt, and about a quart of boiling water. Cover it tightly,and let it cook about three hours, replenishing with a little boiling water, if the steam escapes too much. Sauce. --Simmer together for quarterof an hour half a cupful of grated cracker, half acupful of grated horse-radish, one cupful of cream, a table-spoonful of the fat fromthe top of the water in which the beef is cooked, salt, and pepper. Place the beef on the platter in which it is to beserved, and pour the sauce around it. Garnish with parsley. FILLET OF BEEF. I willbe very specific about the fillet of beef, as it iseasily managed at home, and is very expensive ordered from the restaurateur. His price is generally ten dollars fora dressed and cooked fillet of beef for a dinner forten or twelve persons. To buy it from the butcher costs a dollar a pound whendressed; three pounds are quite sufficient for ten or twelve persons. To lardit (an affair of ten minutes) would cost ten cents more; a box of French canned mushrooms, an additional forty cents; alittle stock, five cents. One sees a fillet of beef at almost every dinnerparty. "That same fillet, with mushrooms," a frequent diner-out will say. Ihope to see it continued, for among the substantials there is nothing moresatisfactory. A good butcherw ill always deliver a fillet ofbeef already dressed; if, however, it is necessary to have itdressed at home, the modus operandi is as follows: TO TRIM A FILLET OFBEEF. The fillet is the under side of the loin ofbeef. The steaks cut from this part arecalled porter-house-steaks. This under side, orfillet, is covered with skin and fat. "All the skin and fat must be removedfrom the top of the fillet, from one end to the other; then the rib-bones are disengaged. The fat adhering tothe side opposite the ribs is only partially removed. Now the sinewy skincovering the upper meat of the fillet must be removedin strips, proceeding by slipping the blade of the knife between the skin andthe meat. This operation is very simple; yet itrequires great precision. The upper part of a trimmed fillet must be smooth, i.e., must not be furrowed by hollows occasioned bywrong movements of the knife. The skin being removed, both extremities of thefillet are rounded. The fat inside the rib is the only portion of fat allowedto adhere to the meat. The larding of the meat is applied to its upper surface." TO COOK A FILLET OFBEEF. After it is trimmed and larded, put it into a small baking-pan, in the bottom of which are some choppedpieces of pork and beef-suet; sprinkle some salt and pepper over it, and put a large ladleful of hot stock into the bottom of the pan, or it may be simplybasted with boiling water. Half an hour (if the ovenis very hot, as it should be) before dinner, put it into the oven. Baste itoften, supplying a little hot stock, if necessary. French cooks often braise a fillet of beef. I donot like it as well as baking or roasting, as the vegetables and wine destroythe beef's own flavor. TO MAKE THE MUSHROOMSAUCE. Take a ladleful of stock, free fromgrease, from the stock-pot; add to it part of the juice from the can of mushrooms; thicken it with alittle flour and butter mixed( roux ); add pepper, salt, and a few dropsof lemon-juice; now add the mushrooms --let them simmer a few minutes. Pour the sauce over the fillet ofbeef, and serve. A larded fillet ofbeef divided into three sections. The middle section has been removed andplaced a space away from the two ends of the fillets, which remain furtherback. At small dinner companies, where the host carves, or has a good carver, thefillet can be served entire, decorated as elaborately as one wishes. If,however, the dinner is served from the side, itis convenient to have it carved as shown in cut on preceding page. The centreof the fillet is disengaged, then carved, and returned to its place. It hasthen the appearance of being whole. TO GARNISH A FILLET OFBEEF. As I have mentioned before, a fillet ofbeef is generally served with mushrooms; sometimes with different vegetables à la jardinière; sometimes with French pease; sometimes with potatoes cut into little round balls, and fried inboiling lard, called potatoes à la Parisienne on a French billof fare, sometimes A larded fillet of beef served ona large oval platter. A ring of garnishes surrounds thebeef. with stuffedtomatoes; sometimes skewers are put instuck through a turnip carved into a cup, and this cupholds horse-radish. But some people say skewers remind them of steamboat cooking; then somepeople are not easily pleased, anyway; and who remembers of having seen so many skewers on steamboats, after all? Not that I amparticularly advocating skewers, but I think dishes taste better, as a general thing, when they aredecorated in almost any manner. I once saw at a dinner in Paris hot slices ofroast or baked fillet of beef, tastefully arranged ona platter, with sauce Hollandaise (ratherthick) poured over each slice in the form of a ring. It was a success. The manner of garnishing a fillet of beef à la Godard and à la Provençale, etc., with truffles, quenelles, livers, olives, etc., all stewed with wines, stocks, etc., I willnot explain. It is enough to make one groan to think of learning to make them,and more than ever to eat them. TO ROAST A FILLET OFBEEF. Lard it, and bind it carefully to the skewer with a small wire;cover the fillet with sweet salad-oil and a little lemon-juice. Do not place it too near the fire atfirst, as it would scorch the larding. Baste it frequently. A professional cook would glaze the fillet two or three times with a glazing-brush, beginning the first time about fiveminutes before taking it away from the fire, then glazing it again when it ison the dish to be served. Glaze is merely strong stock boiled down until itis almost a thick jelly. When the fillet is carved at table, the little juice which falls into the dish should be poured overeach of the slices. TO BRAISE A FILLET OFBEEF. Put the larded fillet into a braising-pan or stew-pan; put intrimmings of pork, onions (with some cloves stuck in), carrots, a little celery (allcut in thick slices), and a bunch of parsley. Salt the meat slightly. Pourin stock and white wine, sothat it may reach to half the height of the beef. If a braising-pan is used, cover the meat with a well-buttered paper, as in that case livecoals are put on top of the pan. If you use a stew-pan, simply cover it as tight as possible. Let itsimmer, replenishing it, when necessary, with more boiling stock. It will require an hour or and hour and a halfto cook. When done, drain it; a professional cook would glaze it. Put it intothe oven a moment to dry the larding. Pass the cooking-stock through a sieve; skim off the fat; addsome tomato sauce; let it boil until it is reduced tothe degree requisite. Serve the fillet whole, orcarved in slices ready to serve. Generally only the middle part of the filletis used, as the whole fillet it quite large--weighing from eight to tenpounds. TO TRIM WITH VEGETABLES ( à la Jardinière ). Every kind ofvegetable is used, such as potatoes, carrots, turnips, beets, small onions, cauliflower blossoms, asparagus-heads, Frenchbeans, pease, etc. The larger vegetablesare cut into little fancy shapes with a vegetable-cutter or a flutedknife, or with a little plain knife, into little balls, olives,squares, diamonds, or into any form to suit the taste. Each kind of vegetablebe boiled separately in salted water or stock. The Slices of larded beef served on alarge oval platter, surrounded with vegetablegarnishes. vegetables are piled into little groups,each pile being of one kind of vegetable. FILLET OF BEEF CUT INTO SLICESOR SCOLLOPS. This is a good way of managing the beef that is left from the roast or baked fillet of beef to be served the second day. Cut thefillet, after reheating it in the oven, into slices about three-fourths of aninch thick, and two inches wide. Form a circle in a dish lapping each of thesescollops partly over the other. Fill the centre with a tomatosauce, or potatoes à la Parisienne, or mushrooms, or with any of the small vegetables, suchas pease, beans, little ballsof carrots, potatoes, etc.,in different little piles; or with truffles (they canbe procured canned) sliced, with Madeira sauce; orwith mushrooms and truffles mixed, with Madeirasauce. BEEFSTEAK. The porter-house and tenderloin steaks are best. Ofcourse, there is great difference in the different cuts of these steaks. For a cheap steak, agood cut of what it called chuck-steak is best. It hasmore flavor and juice, and is more tender than the round-steak, costing the same price. Have the choice steaks cut half an inch thick atleast; they are even better three-quarters of an inch thick. Grease the gridiron well with pork orbeef-suet. Have it quite hot. Put on the steak over a hot, clear fire; cover it with a baking-pan. In a moment, when the steak is colored, turn it over. Watch it constantly,turning it whenever it gets a little brown. Do not stick the fork into themiddle of the steak, only into the sides, where it will do least harm by letting out thejuice. It should be quite rare or pink in the centre, though not raw. When cooked enough, put it on a hot platter;sprinkle over plenty of salt and pepper --mind not to put on the salt and pepper before the steak is cooked; then spread over the top some sweet,fresh butter. Set the platter in the oven a fewmoments, to let the butter soak a little in the steak; then serve it immediately. Do not use too much butter; there should be none at all, or at least onlya few stray drops, in the bottom of the platter. There should be no gravy. Thejuice of a properly cooked steak is supposed to be inthe inside of the steak, and not swimming in thedish. A steak is much improved by a simple addition,called by professional cooks à la maître d'hôtel. When the steak is cooked, it is placed on the hotplatter. First, then, salt and pepper are sprinkled over; then comes a sprinkling ofvery finely chopped parsley; then some drops of lemon-juice; lastly, small pieces of butter are carefully spread over. Place the steak into the oven for a few moments until the butter is well melted and soaked into the steak. For extra-company breakfasts, only the fillets, i.e., the tender parts of the porter-house or tenderloin steaks, are used. They arecut into little even shapes, round or oval, one for each plate. They arecooked, then served in a hot dish, surrounded with Saratogapotatoes, or fried potatoes in any form,or with water-cresses, or with mushrooms, or stuffedtomatoes, or green pease, etc. CORNED BEEF. A goodpiece of beef well corned, then well boiled, is a mostexcellent dish. Put it into the pot with enough cold water to justcover it. When it comes to a boil, set it on the back of the range, so that itwill boil moderately. Too fast boiling renders meat tough, yet the water should never be allowed to cease boiling until the meat is done; skim often. Let it boil at least four orfive hours, according to its size. It must be thoroughly done. In England,where this dish is an especial favorite, carrots arealways boiled and served with the beef. The carrot flavor improvesthe meat, and the meat improves the carrot. A pieceof corned beef served on a round platter and garnished withvegetables. Do not put the carrots into the pot, however, until there is onlytime for them to become thoroughly cooked before serving (about three-quartersof an hour). Serve the carrots around the beef. In America, cabbage is oftener boiledwith corned beef. This is very nice also. If cabbage is used, add at the same time one or twolittle red peppers. When about to serve, press out allthe water from the cabbage, adding little pieces of butter. Serve the meat placedin the centre of the cabbage. Little pickles are a pretty garnish for corned beef, with or without the vegetables. CORNED BEEF TO SERVE COLD ( Mrs. Gratz Brown ). If it is too salt, soak it for an hour in coldwater, then put it over the fire, covered with fresh cold water, four or five cloves (for about six pounds of beef ), and three table-spoonfuls of molasses. Boil it slowly. In an hour change the water, adding five more cloves and three more table-spoonfuls of molasses. In two hours more, press the beef, after removing the bones, into a basin rathersmall for it; then, turning it over, place a flat-iron ontop. When entirely cold, the beef is to be sliced forlunch or tea. BEEFSTEAK STEWED. Neveruse a choice steak for a stew. Stewing is only a goodway of cooking an inferior steak. The meatfrom a soup-bone would make a very good stew. Put ripe tomatoes (peeled and cut) into a stew-pan; sprinkle over pepper and salt. Let them cooka little to make some juice; put in the pieces of beef, some little pieces of butter mixed with flour, twoor three cloves, and no water. Let it stew until the meat is quite done. Then press the tomatoes through a sieve. Serve all on the samedish. BEEFSTEAKROLLED. Procure a round steak, spread over ita layer of almost any kind of force-meat. An ordinary bread, onion, thyme, or parsley dressing, used tostuff turkeys, is very good. Begin, then, at one end of the steak, and roll it carefully; tie the roll to keep itin shape. Bake it in the oven as you would a turkey, basting very often. Make a gravy of the drippings, adding water, flour, and a little butter mixed; season with pepper and salt, strain, skimoff the fat, and pour it around the meat when served.Slice it neatly off the end when carving. BEEF ROLL ( Cannelon de Bœuf ). Chop two pounds of lean beef very fine; chop and pound in a mortar half a pound of fatbacon, and mix it with the beef. Seasonit with pepper and salt (itwill not require much salt ), a small nutmeg, the grated rind of alemon, the juice of a quarter of it, aheaping table-spoonful of parsley minced fine; or itcan be seasoned with an additional table-spoonful of onion; or, if no onion or parsley is at hand, with summersavory An illustration of a beefroll. and thyme. Bind allthese together with two eggs. Form them into a roll;surround the roll with buttered paper, which tie securely around it. Then coverit with a paste made of flour and water. Bake twohours. Remove the paper and crust. Serve it hot, with tomato-sauce or brown gravy. This may be made with raw or under-dressed meat. Ifthe meat is not raw, but under-dressed, surround theroll with pie-crust. Bake, and serve with tomato-sauce, or any of the brownsauces, poured in the bottom of the dish. Potato croquettes may be served around it. WHAT TO DO WITH COLDCOOKED BEEF. There is a good-sized book written on this subject. When there are about twohundred ways of utilizing cold cooked beef, oneshould not regard it contemptuously. I studied this treatise, and practicedfrom it, but soon considered the few old ways the best, after all. Croquettes are very good, and there arebeef-sausages, or cakes, seasoned in different ways; beef rolls, meat pies, andmince-pies, made from a few scraps of cold cooked beef, are all exceedinglynice when properly made. BEEFHASH. Notwithstanding this distinguished dish is so much abused, Iparticularly like it; not swimming hash, nor onion hash, nor Southern orWestern hash, nor yet hash half cooked, but New York hash. I know a New Yorkfamily who set a most expensive and elaborate table, which table is especiallynoted for its good hash. Large joints are purchased with special reference tothis dish. Cold corned beef is generally consideredbest. The hash to which I have referred, however, is generally made of cold roast beef. Chop the cold cooked meat rather fine; use half asmuch meat as of boiled potatoes (chopped when cold). Put a little boiling water and butter intoan iron saucepan; when it boils again, put in the meat and potatoes well saltedand peppered. Let it cook well, stirring it occasionally--not enough to make a Purée or mush of it. It is not done beforethere is a coating at the bottom of the saucepan, from which the hash will freeitself without sticking. The hash must not be at all watery, nor yet too dry,but so that it will stand quite firm on well-trimmed and buttered slices of toast, and to be thus served on a platter. Voilà! Chicken or turkey hash should be made in thesame way. MEAT PIE ( French Cook ). Cut cold cooked meat into quite small dice; add pepper, salt, a little nutmeg, and two or three sprigs of chopped parsley; also a little thyme and a piece of bay-leaf, if you have them, but the two latter herbs may beomitted. Put a little butter into a saucepan, and whenhot throw in a table-spoonful of flour, which browncarefully; pour in then several table-spoonfuls of hotwater, or, better, stock; mix well; thenintroduce the meat dice; stir all well over the fire, cooking it thoroughly. Just before taking it up,mix in one or two eggs. It should be quite moist, yetconsistent. Put a thin pie-crust into a pudding-dish. Fill in a few table-spoonfuls of themixture; then lay on it a thin strip of bacon; continuethese layers until the dish is filled. Now fit a piece of crust over the top;turn the edges in a fancy manner, and make a cut in the centre. Take a strip of pie-paste, form it into a tie or knot, wet the bottom,and place it over the cut in the centre of the pie, so as not to obstruct theopening. The proper way to make a meat pie is with a pie-mold (see page 58). Butter the mold, press the crustneatly around in the inside and bottom, and continue, as explained for the pudding-dish. When baked, the wire holding the sides ofthe mold is drawn out, and the mold removed from the pie. This pie canbe made with veal or lamb, inthe same manner. MEAT RISSOLES. For rissoles, cold beef, chicken, veal, tongue, or lamb may be used,separately or mixed. The meat should not be chopped,but cut into quite small dice. It is well to add to it a slight flavoring ofchopped pork, and a little finely chopped parsley. As the meat can beprepared in different ways, the addition of a superfluous mushroom or two, cut into dice, would not beamiss. Put a small piece of butter, size of a pigeon'segg, into a saucepan, and when it begins to boil add a heaping tea-spoonful of flour; stir for a minute to cook the flour, then add three or four table-spoonfuls of boiling water, or, what is much better, stock, gravy, or brown or white sauce if you happen to have it; whenwell mixed, add about two cupfuls of the meatdice, heat well, and just before taking from the fire stir in an egg. The scraps of puff-paste are generally preferred,yet any kind of pie-paste may be used for rissoles. Roll the paste quite thin (one-sixth of an inch); wet it aboutthree inches from the edge, and place upon it little balls (a generoustea-spoonful in each one) of the prepared meat, atdistances of four inches apart; now lap over theedge of the paste, quite covering the balls of meat; press the side of the hand between each one,and, with the edge of a tumbler or muffin-ring, press the paste close to the meat; witha biscuit-cutter (scolloped one prettier) cut out eachenveloped ball of meat into half circles. Now cut offthe rough edges of the remaining paste, and proceed tomake other rows of the rissoles in the same manner. With a brush wet allthe tops with the yolk of an egg. Bake the rissoles in a hot oven, and serve them hot on afolded napkin. If they get cold, they may be reheated just before serving. BEEF OR ANY COLD-MEATSAUSAGES. Chop cold cooked beef very fine;add a fifth as much pork, also chopped fine; pepper, salt, a little sage, or any herbs preferred, lemon-juice, and a few sprinkles of flour; mix all together with an egg, or eggs; form intolittle balls, fry in butter or lard in a sauté pan. These sausages are good forbreakfast served around a centre of apple-sauce. Or, FOR RICE AND MEATCAKES, make as in last receipt, adding a very little butter. Stir in a quarter or half of its quantity ofboiled rice; or, on another occasion, bread-crumbs may be substituted for rice. BEEF CROQUETTES. Thereis no more satisfactory manner of using cold cooked Astack of cylindrical croquettes served on a round platter and garnished withleafy vegetables. beef thanfor croquettes, which may be served with tomato or any of the brown sauces, or may be servedwithout sauce at all, as is generally the case. Theyare made in the same manner as is described for chicken croquettes (see page 175), merely substituting thesame amount of beef for the chicken, and of rice for the brains. A CHEAP ARRANGEMENT. Purchasetwo soup bones (twenty cents). Boil them four or fivehours with a few vegetables (as described for stock,see page 79). The stock will make two or three soups.Cut up the meat for croquettes. Of course the croquettes are better made with the best of meat, yet may be excellent when made of the soup meat. MINCE-PIES ( made from Remnants of Cold Beef ). A gooddisposition in winter of cold roast beef is to makewith it two or three mince-pies, as by the following receipt: One cupful ofchopped meat (quarter of it fat ), two cupfuls of apple, one tea-spoonful of salt, one table-spoonful of ground allspice, half a table-spoonful of ground cinnamon, half a table-spoonful of ground cloves, one cupful of sugar, half a cupful of raisins, half a cupful of currants, one cupful of cider; or, if one has no cider, use the same amount of cider-vinegar and water mixed--say half of each. A COMMON POT-PIE OF VEAL, BEEF,OR CHICKEN. Cut the meat into pieces, and putthem into enough boiling water to cover them well; addalso two or three strips of pork. Cover the potclosely. Boil an hour, then season with pepper and salt to taste, and a little piece of butter. Just before taking out the ingredients of the pot to send to table, put intoit, when the water is boiling, separate spoonfuls ofbatter made with two eggs well beaten, two and a halfor three cupfuls of buttermilk, one tea-spoonful of soda, and sufficient flour. The batter should be made just before it iscooked. It takes about three or four minutes to cook it, the water not to be allowed to stop boiling. The dishshould then be served immediately, or the dumplings will become heavy. CALF'S HEART. If peoplegenerally knew how nice a calf's heart is, if properlycooked, the butchers would never charge so little as ten cents fo it. InFrance, the calf's heart and kidneys are considered great delicacies. In America they areoften thrown away. Merely wash off the blood. One could, by soaking, extract all the flavorfrom the heart. Stuff it with a vealforce-meat stuffing, or a common stuffing, often used for turkeys, of bread-crumbs, onion, a little thyme or sage, egg, pepper, and An illustrationof a calf's heart served on a round platter. salt. Tie a buttered paper over the mouth of the heart to keep the stuffing inplace. Put it into a small baking-pan with a little hot water, pepper, and salt. Bake nearly two hours, basting it veryfrequently. When done, thicken the gravy with flour; strain, skim, and season it, and pour it on thedish around the heart. Garnish the plate with onions, first boiled until nearly done, then seasonedwith pepper, salt, and alittle butter, and browned in the oven. TONGUE, WITH MUSTARD PICKLESAUCE. Cut boiled tongue into slices; frythem in a little hot butter, with a sprinkle of minced onion thrown in. Then, for the sauce, take out the slices of tongue; put in a tea-spoonful of flour, and when brown, a tea-cupful of hotwater. When done, strain, and season with salt and pepper; add atable-spoonful of chopped pickles ( piccalilli is best); however, common cucumber pickles may be used, with a little mustard added; or the sauce may be flavored with capers, or with both capers and pickles. Let the slices of tongue soak in the sauce until ready to serve, then arrange the slices of tongue on a platter, one lapped over the other, and pour over the sauce. A beef tongue may bebraised, and served with spinach or sauce Tartare, as described for sheep's tongues. TONGUE SLICES, WITH SPINACH ANDSAUCE TARTARE. Braise the tongue as describedfor sheep's tongues (see page 158): arrange acircle of the slices around a platter, and on each slices smooth a little hill(enough for one person) of spinach prepared asdescribed in the same receipt for "sheep's tongues with spinach." Put either aspoonful of sauce Tartare or a slice of lemon into or on the top of each spinach mold. This makes a nice lunch or dinnerdish. VEAL. THE best pieces of veal are the loin and the fillet. A variety of dishes canbe made with veal cutlets and their different accompaniments. Veal is alwaysbetter cooked with pork or ham. Professional cooks generally trim and lardtheir veal cutlets, serving them with tomato sauce, pease, beans, breakfastbacon, lemon-slices, cucumbers, etc. For a cheap dish, one of the mostsatisfactory is a knuckle of veal made into a ragout, or pot-pie. Any of theinferior cuts may be made into a blanquette. A fricandeau of veal is perhaps considered the mostdistinguished veal dish. I would always advise the trimming of veal cutlets. Itgives little trouble, but the appearance is much improved, and the trimmingsshould be thrown into the stock-pot. Veal should alwaysbe thoroughly cooked. ROAST OF VEAL--THEFILLET. Take out the bone of the joint; make a deep incision betweenthe fillet and the flap; then fill it with stuffing made as follows: Two cupfuls of bread-crumbs, half a cupful of chopped pork, half a lemon-peel grated, a little sauce, thyme, summer savory, or any herbs to taste; or it may be filled with a veal stuffing (see page 167). Bind the veal into a round form, fasten it with skewers and twine, sprinkle over pepper and salt, and cover itwith buttered paper. Be careful not to put the meat toonear the fire at first. Baste well and often. Just before it is done, removethe paper, sprinkle over a little flour, and rub overit a little butter. This will give a frothy appearance to the surface of the meat. When done, put the pan of gravy on the fire; add a little flour, some boilingwater, and, when cooked, some lemon-juice. Strain it, remove the grease, and pour it around the roast. Fry some pieces of ham cut in diamond shape; place these in a circlearound the roast, each piece alternated with a slice of lemon. A FRICANDEAU OFVEAL. What is called a fricandeau of veal issimply a cushion of veal trimmed into shape, larded,and braised. Cut a thick slice (three or four pounds) from a filletof veal, trim it around as in cut for "blind hare" (see page 150),and lard it on top. Put some pieces of pork into a braising-kettle, or saucepan, if you have no braising-kettle; also slices of carrot, an onion with cloves stuck in, a stick of celery, and some parsley. Putin the meat, sprinkle over pepper and salt, and cover itwith well-buttered paper. Now fill the pan with boiling stock, or water enough tojust cover the meat. Put on a tight lid. If it is a braising-pan, set it upon the fire, with live coals on top. If a common saucepan, cover it, and putit into a hot oven. It will take about two hours, or two hours and a half, to cook it. Aprofessional cook would boil down the stock in whichthe fricandeau was cooked until reduced to a glaze, thenwith a brush would glaze all the top of the meat, placing it in the oven a moment to dry. However,it tastes as well without this extra trouble. The best sauce for a fricandeau is tomato-sauce. It is often garnished with green pease, spinach, or sorrel; or a little wine (Madeira, port,or sherry) and roux (seepage 51) may be added to the braising-stock for a gravy. The gravy should bestrained, of course. VEAL CUTLETS,BROILED. The rib cutlets should always beneatly trimmed, the bone scraped at the end, so that it will look smooth andwhite. Broil them on a moderate fire, basting them occasionally with butter, and turning them often. Dish them in a circlewith tomato-sauce. VEAL CUTLETS, SAUTéD ANDFRIED. These are cutlets cut from theround, although any veal cutlets may becooked in the same way. Cut them into equal-sized pieces, beat them a littlewith a knife to get them into shape; season, egg, and bread-crumb them. Now, fry in a sauté pan, or rather sauté some thin slices of ham in a little hot lard, andwhen done take them out on a hot dish; fry slowly the cutlets in the same fat, and when done pour out some of the fat, if there is more than a tea-spoonful; add alittle flour, then a little hotwater, and, when cooked a few moments, season it well with lemon-juice, adding pepper and salt to taste; then strain it. Serve the cutlets inthe centre of a dish, with the gravy poured over; andplace alternate slices of the ham and lemon in a circle around them. They are also very good sautéd in a little lard, and served with a creamgravy poured over; or they are nice egged(with a little chopped parsley and onion mixed with the egg ),and bread-crumbed, and fried in hot lard. VEAL CUTLETS,BRAISED. Professional cooks usually braise vealcutlets. They lard them (an easy matter) all on the same side, theflavor of pork particularly well suiting veal. To proceed then: Mince some onions and carrots; put themin the bottom of a stew-pan; put the cutlets on thislayer; cover well with stock (add wine if you choose), and let them cook untilthoroughly done. If you wish to be particular, boil down the stock and glaze them; or make a gravy of the stock with flour, roux, pepper and salt, and strainit; or serve them with tomato-sauce; or make a littleround hill of mashed potatoes, and put the cutletsaround; or serve with them, instead, beans, pease, or flowerets of cauliflowers. MUTTON OR VEAL CHOPS ( enpapillote ). Trim the chops; broil themin the usual way over the coals, and when done, place each one in a paper (wellbuttered) cut in the form of Fig. 1; pour over each chop a sauce made as follows: For three cutlets thicken a cupful of strong broth with equal quantities of either cold cooked chicken, lamb, or veal, Two illustrations of aveal chop. In the first illustration, the chop is placed on one half of anoblong paper which has been folded down the center. In the second illustration,the paper has been folded in half to completely cover the chop, then folded inat the outer edges to seal the chop in. and mushrooms (the mushrooms area great improvement to the dish, yet they may be omitted if more convenient)with a quarter proportion of cold boiled ham added,and also one or two springs of parsley, all choppedvery fine. Pour this hot over the hot cutlets; place a very thin slice of fat saltpork over each cutlet; * fasten the paper as in Fig. 2, and place them in a hot ovenfor about ten minutes. Serve immediately while the chops are steaming hot. The following note appears at the bottom of page 149 in theoriginal text. *The addition of the slice of pork is quiteindispensable for veal chops en papillote, but it is often omitted when the chopsare of mutton. BLANQUETTE OF VEAL ( French Cook ). Cut any kind of veal (say two pounds) into pieces;put it into boiling water, with a little bulb of garlic or slice of onion, andwhen done throw the meat from the boilingwater into cold water, to whiten it. Thisis the rule, but I usually dispense with it. Make a drawn buttersauce, i.e., put butter the sizeof an egg into a saucepan, and when it bubbles mix in a table-spoonful of flour, which cook a minute, without letting it color;add then two cupfuls of boiling water and a little nutmeg. When the veal isdone, drain it from the water, and let it simmerseveral minutes in the sauce, adding at the same timea sprig of parsley chopped fine. When just ready toserve, place the pieces of meat on a hot platter; stirthe yolks of three eggs into the sauce without allowing themto boil; also several drops, or a seasoning, of lemon-juice. Pour the sauce over the veal, and serve. BLIND HARE ( Mrs. Charles Parsons ). Ingredients: Three pounds of minced veal, threepounds of minced beef, eight eggs well beaten, three stalerolls, or the same amount of bread-crumbs, pepper, salt, two grated nutmegs, aheaping table-spoonful of ground cinnamon. An illustration ofblind hare served on a round platter and garnished with leafyvegetables. Mix all well together. From it into anoval-shaped loaf, smooth it, and sprinkle bread or crackercrumbs over the top. Bake it in a moderate oven about three hours.It is to be sliced when cold. BEWITCHED VEAL ( Mrs. Judge Embry ). Ingredients: Three pounds of lean veal, half apound of fat salt pork, one nutmeg grated, one small onion, butter the size of anegg, a little red pepper, and salt. Chop all very fine, and mix them together, with three eggs well beaten, and a tea-cupful of milk; form it into a small loaf, pressing it veryfirmly; cover it with fine bread-crumbs; bake twohours and a half. It is intended to be eaten cold, yet is very good hot. Theslices may be served in a circle around salad. PLAIN VEAL STEW ORPOT-PIE. Cut the meat from a knuckle of veal into pieces not too small; put theminto a pot with some small pieces of salt pork, andplenty of pepper and salt; pour over enough hotwater to cover it well, and let it boil until the meat is thoroughly done; then, while the water is still boiling, drop in (by the spoonful) abatter made with the following ingredients: Two eggs well beaten, two and a half or three cupfuls of buttermilk, one even tea-spoonful of soda, and flour enough tomake a thick batter. Cover the pot, and as soon as the batter is well cooked,serve it. By standing, it becomes heavy. TO COOK LIVER ( Melanie Lourant ), No. 1. Put a little lard into a saucepan, and when hotthrow in half an onion minced fine, one or two sprigsof parsley, chopped, and the slices of calf's liver. Turn the liver several times, allowing it to cook well andimbibe the taste of the onion and parsley. When cooked, place it at the side of thefire. In another saucepan make a sauce as follows: Put in a piece of butter size of a large hickory-nut, and when itbubbles sprinkle in a heaping tea-spoonful of flour; stir it until it assumes a fine brown color, then pour in a cupful of boiling water, stirring it well with the egg-whisk; add pepper, salt, a table-spoonful of vinegar, and a heaping table-spoonful of capers. The sauce is verynice without the capers, but very much improved withthem. Drain out the slices of liver, which put intothe sauce, and let them remain at the side of the fireuntil ready to serve. Chopped pickle may besubstituted for the capers, and stock may be used instead of the boilingwater. TO COOK LIVER (No.2). Fry in a sauté pan some thin slices of breakfast bacon, and when done put them on a hot dish;fry then thin slices of liver in the same fat, which have previously been thrown into boiling water for only a moment, and then been sprinkled with flour. When well done on both sides, serve them andthe bacon on the same dish, and garnish them withslices of lemon. CALF'S BRAINS. Beforecooking, remove the fibrous membranes around them. Throw them into a pint of cold water, in which are mixed half a tea-spoonful of salt and one tea-spoonful of vinegar; boil the three minutes, then plunge them into cold water. When cold and about to be served, cut theminto scollops; and when seasoned with pepper and salt, egged, and bread-crumbed, sauté them in a little hot butter. Serve with tomato-sauce. Or they may be served with spighetti (a small macaroni ) cooked with tomato-sauce (see page 210), and placed around them,when they are called brains à la Milanaise. SWEET-BREADS. VEAL sweet-breads are best. They spoil very soon. The moment they come frommarket, they should be put into cold water, to soak for about an hour; lardthem, or rather draw a lardoon of pork through the centre of each sweet-bread,and put them into salted boiling water, or, better, stock, and let them boilabout twenty minutes, or until they are thoroughly done; throw them then intocold water for only a few moments. They will now be firm and white. Removecarefully the skin and little pipes, and put them in the coolest place untilready to cook again. The simplest way to cook them is the best one, asfollows: FRIEDSWEET-BREADS. Parboil them as just explained. Just before serving, cutthem in even-sized pieces, sprinkle over pepper and salt, egg and bread-crumb them, and fry them in hot lard. They are often immersed in boiling lard, yet oftener fried in the sauté pan. If An illustration of friedsweetbreads served in a ring around a mound ofpeas. sautéd, when done put them on a hot dish, turn out part of the lard from the sauté pan, leaving about half atea-spoonful; pour in a cupful of milk thickened witha little flour; let it cook, stirring it constantly,and season it with pepper and salt; strain, and pour over the sweet-breads. With greenpease, serve without sauce. This is the usual combination atdinner or breakfast companies, the pease in the centreof the dish, and the sweet-breads around (see cutabove). Or they are often served whole with cauliflower or asparagusheads, when the cream-sauce is pouredover both; or they are also nice piled in the centre of a dish, with macaroni (cooked with cheese )placed around them like a nest, and browned a little with a salamander (see cut on next page), or with a tomato-sauce in the centre of the dish, and the sweet-breads around, or with stuffedtomatoes alternating with the sweet-breads on the dish,or with mushrooms in the centre, or served on a dishmade of boiled rice, called rice casserole (see page 205), or in little rice molds called cassolettes. To make the latter, boil the rice well, then work it toa An illustration of fried sweetbreads served on abed of macaroni. a smooth paste with a spoon; fillsome little buttered patty-pans with the rice, and when it is quite cold take it out, brushthe cassolettes with butter on the outside, and color them a little in a hot oven; scoop out the inside,leaving the rice crust a quarter of an inch thick. Fill the cassolettes with the sweet-breads cut into pieces, and pour over each aspoonful of cream dressing; or they may be sautéd as described, and served with a maître-d'hôtel sauce pouredover. SWEET-BREADS à LAMILANAISE. Sweet-breads fried as in precedingreceipt are placed in the centre of a hot platter. Small piped macaroni broken into two or three inch lengths iscooked with tomatoes as in receipt (see page 210), andneatly arranged in a circle around them. SWEET-BREADS LARDED ANDBRAISED ( English Lady ). Trim all the skin and cartilage very carefully from two fine sweet-breads; lay them in coldwater for an hour, and lard them; lay some slices of bacon in the bottom of a braising-pan, or any pan with a good cover( Francatelli would add also minced onions, carrots, celery, and parsley; however,they are quite good enough without); then put in sweet-breads, with slices of bacon between the pan and the sweet-breads; pour over all some stock, just high enough not to touch the larding,which must stand up free; let it simmer very gently for half or three-quartersof an hour. Look at it occasionally to see that the stock does not waste; add a little if it does. Whendone, hold a salamander or a hot kitchenshovel over the sweet-breads until theyare a pale-yellow color on top. Serve these with tomato-sauce poured in the centre of the dish. Thewhole dish around look moist, the sweet-breads nearlywhite, and the larding transparent, standing updistinct and firm, like glass, white at the bottom, and pale-yellow on top. BAKED SWEET-BREAD ( New York Cooking-school ). Put a pair of sweet-breads on the fire in one quartof cold water, in which are mixed one tea-spoonful of salt and one table-spoonful of vinegar. When the water boils,take them off, and throw them into cold water, leavingthem until they get cold; now lard them with lardoons about one-eighth of an inch square and two inches long. Chop rather fineone-third of a medium-sized onion (one ounce), four orfive slices of carrot (one and a half ounces), half astalk of celery, and one sprig of parsley. Put in the bottom of a baking-dish trimmings ofpork; on this place the sweet-breads, andsprinkle the chopped vegetables over the top; bake them twenty minutes in a hotoven. Cut a slice of bread into an oval or any fancyshape, and fry it in a sauté pan in a little hot butter, coloring itwell; put this croûton in thecentre of a hot platter, on which place the sweet-breads. Serve pease or tomato-sauce around. SWEET-BREADFRITTERS. Parboil the sweet-breads as beforeexplained, and cut them into slices about half an inch thick; then sprinkleover them pepper and salt, alittle grated nutmeg, some finely chopped parsley, and a few drops of lemon-juice; dip them each into Frenchfritter batter (see page 229); fry them a moment in boiling-hot lard. Always test the lard before frying by putting in a piece of bread or a bit of the batter; if it turns yellowreadily, it is hot enough. Drain them well; pile them on a napkin neatlyarranged on a platter; garnish them with fried parsley, i.e., parsley thrown intothe lard, and skimmed out almost immediately. SWEET-BREAD CROQUETTES ( New York Cooking-school ). After two pairs of sweet-breads are blanched(boiled in salted water as described), cut them intodice; cut also half a box (four ounces) of mushrooms into dice. Make a roux by putting one and a half ounces of butter into a saucepan, and when it bubbles sprinklein two ounces of flour; mix and cook it well; then pour in a gill of strong stock or cream; when this isalso Eight cylindrical croquettes served on a roundplatter. mixed, add the dice, which stir over thefire until they are thoroughly heated; take them from the fire, add the beaten yolks of two eggs, which return to the fire a momentto set, without allowing to boil. When cool, form into croquettes; roll them first in cracker-crumbs, then in egg, then in cracker-crumbs again, and fry them in boiling lard. The croquettes may be cone-shaped, with a stick of parsley or celery pressed inthe top for a stem just before serving; or the sweet-bread croquettes may be made in the same manner aschicken croquettes (French cook receipt),substituting sweet-breads for the chickens. They maybe served alone, or with pease, or with tomato or Bechamel sauce, etc. SKEWER OFSWEET-BREADS. Parboil the sweet-breads asbefore described; cut them into slices or scollops about half an inch or morethick; sprinkle An illustration of skeweredsweetbreads served in a ring on a roundplatter. them with pepper and salt, and egg and bread-crumb them; nowrun a little skewer (see page 56) through two of theseslices, alternating with two thin; square slices of bacon; fry in boiling lard; serve a tomato or cream sauce in the centre, andgarnish with parsley. Serve one skewerful to eachperson at table. MUTTON. THE best roasts are the leg, the saddle, and the shoulder of mutton. Theyare all roasted according to the regular rules for roasting. In England, muttonis hung some time before cooking. There must besomething in the air of England quite different from that of America inreference to the hanging of meats and game; there, it is to be confessed, themutton, after having hung a certain length of time, certainly is moredelicious; here it would be unwholesome, simply not fit to eat. These joints ofwhich I speak are also good braised. Serve currant-jelly-sauce with the roast,or garnish it with stuffed baked tomatoes. BOILED LEG OFMUTTON. This should be quite fresh. Put it into well-salted boiling water, which do not let stopboiling until the meat is thoroughly done. The rule isto boil it a quarter of an hour for each pound of meat. Caper-sauce should beserved with this dish, either in sauce-boat or pouredover the mutton; garnish with parsley. MUTTON CUTLETS. Trimthem well, scraping the bones; roll them in a little meltedbutter or oil, season, and broil them; orthey are nice egged, bread-crumbed, and fried. They are especially nice whenbroiled, served around a bed of mashed boiledpotatoes: the cutlets help to season the potatoes, which in turnwell A ring of mutton chops served around a bed ofmashed potatoes on a round platter. suit the meat. Tomato-sauce is also afavorite companion to the cutlets. They may, however, be served with almost anykind of vegetables, such as pease or string-beans, in the centre of the dish, and thecutlets arranged in a circle around. RAGOUTS ( made of pieces of Mutton, Veal, Beef, orRabbits ). Cut the upper parts, or the neck, from a fore-quarter ofmutton (or take inferior cuts from any part) into pieces for aragout; heat a heaping table-spoonful of drippings, or lard, in a saucepan and when hot sauté in it the pieces of mutton (say two pounds) until they are almost done;take them out, put in a table-spoonful of flour, brown it, add at first a little cold or lukewarm water, mix it well, then add a quart of boiling water; now add also salt, Cayenne pepper, two cloves, the pieces of sautéd meat, threeor four onions (not large), and six or seven peeled potatoes. Some prefer to boil the potatoes a few minutes in other water first, as the water inwhich potatoes are boiled is considered unwholesome;cover the stew-pan well. When the vegetables are cooked,take them and the meat out, skim off every particle offat from the gravy, taste to see if it is properlyseasoned, pour it over the ragout, and serve. These ragouts can be made with the neck, or anypieces of veal, in the same manner, or with pieces of beef, in which case carrots might be substituted for the potatoes. A ragoutof rabbits is most excellent made in the same way,adding a glassful of red wine when it is almostdone. In buying a fore quarter of mutton, there areenough trimmings for a good ragout, with a shapely roast besides. ANOTHER RAGOUT ( of Pieces of Mutton, Veal, Beef, etc. ). Make rich pie-paste about the size of an egg (for four persons);roll it a quarter of an inch thick; cut it into diamonds, say an inch long andhalf an inch broad. Bake them, and put them aside until five minutes beforeserving the ragout. Take mutton, veal, beef, or almost anykind of meat. Any cheap cut of meat will make a good ragout, and choice cuts hadbetter to be cooked in other ways. In this instance, I will say cut two poundsfrom the side of mutton. Put a table-spoonful of lard or drippings into asaucepan, and when hot sauté in it the pieces of mutton; when half done, place them in a kettle. Add aheaping table-spoonful of flour to the drippings in the saucepan; stir it constantly severalminutes to brown, then add gradually a pint of hotwater; now pour this over the meat in thekettle, adding three small onions, two sprigs of parsley, three cloves, and aclove or bulb of garlic, if you have it; pepper and salt. Cover itclosely, and let it simmer slowly for an hour, occasionally turning the kettleto one side to skim off all the fat. Five minutesbefore serving, add the diamonds of crust. At the moment of serving, take out the meat, crust,and three onions, and arrange them on a hot platter.Pass the gravy through a sieve, and skim off everyremaining particle of fat; taste to see if it is properly seasoned with pepper and salt, and pour itover the meat. SHEEP'S TONGUES, WITH SPINACH. Braise anumber of sheep's-tongues with saltpork, parsley, onion, some whole peppers, atea-spoonful of sugar, and enough stock to cover them. Let them simmer one and a halfhours. An illustration of sheep's tongues served in aring around a mold of spinach. Serve with spinach in the centre of the dish, and seasoned with lemon-juice, a little of the tonguestock, some Cayenne pepper, salt, and butter. Serve the tongues around it, and diamonds or fancy cuts of fried bread ( croûtons ) around the outside circle. SHEEP'S TONGUES à LAMAYONNAISE. Boil half a dozen sheep'stongues with one or two slices of bacon, one carrot, one onion, two cloves, two or three sprigs of parsley, salt and pepper (some add two table-spoonfuls of sherry or port wine, but thismay be omitted), and enough boiling water (or, better, stock ) to cover them. Let them simmer about one and ahalf hours, replenishing the boiling water or the stock when necessary. When thoroughly done, skin andtrim them neatly; lay them between two plates, to flatten them. A professionalcook would glaze them with the stock boiled down inwhich they were cooked; however, this is only for the sake of appearance.Arrange them in a circle around a dish, with a Mayonnaise sauce poured in the centre. SHEEP'S TONGUES, WITH SAUCETARTARE. Boil the tongues in salted water into which has been squeezed the juice of half a lemon (for six tongues ). Serve with sauceTartare (see page 128). LAMB. THE best roasts are the fore and hind quarters. ROAST LEG OFLAMB. Professional cooks serve a roast or baked hindquarter of lamb rather rare, or well done on the outside and pinkwithin. It is really better, although it must be served steaming hot. Serve a caper, pickle, or mint sauce with it. If it is neatlycarved though the centre, it will present a good appearance served again thenext day, by stuffing the cut-out space with boiled mashedpotatoes, smoothing it evenly around, and placing it long enoughin the oven to become thoroughly hot. ROAST FORE QUARTER OFLAMB. This may or may not be partly stuffed, a common vealstuffing answering the purpose very well. It should be wellseasoned with pepper and salt, thoroughly cooked, and often basted. LAMB CHOPS. This is afavorite dinner-company dish, generally arranged in a circle around green pease. They should be neatly trimmed, the bonesscraped, then rolled in a little melted butter, andcarefully broiled. When done, rub more butter overthem, and season them with pepper and salt. Slip little paper ruffles (see page 61) over theends of the bones. They may be served with a centre Around platter containing lamb chops served in a ring around a bed ofvegetables. of almost any kind of vegetable, suchas a smooth hemisphere of mashed potatoes or spinach, or with beans, cauliflowers or stuffed bakedtomatoes, or with a tomato-sauce. SADDLE OF LAMB ORMUTTON. This is considered a delicate roast. Roast it in the usualmanner. Serve caper, mint, or any of the sauces or vegetables that are used with other dishes of lamb or mutton. LAMB CROQUETTES aremade the same as chicken croquettes, only substituting coldlamb for the chicken. Many prefer the lamb to the chicken croquette, even for dinner or lunch parties. SHEEP'S KIDNEYS. Thebest manner of cooking is to sauté them. They must be perfectly fresh(they spoil soon), sautéd on a quick fire, never allowed to boilin the sauce (this would spoil the gravy), and servedwith a little wine in the sauce. First cut them into slices; season, and sauté them in a little hot suet, clarified drippings, or butter. When done, put them on a hot plate. Now take asecond stew-pan, put in a piece of butter the size of a large hickory-nut; when it ishot, throw in a tea-spoonful of minced onion, twosprigs of parsley, minced also, and a tea-spoonful of flour; when they become red, pour in one and a halfcupfuls of hot water or stock. Let it simmer a few moments, then season with pepper and salt, and strainit; now add a table-spoonful of sherry or port wine, and the pieces of kidney. Let the kidney remaina few moments in the sauce without boiling, and serve.Professional cooks generally add minced mushrooms; butthe dish is quite good enough without them. PORK. A LITTLE salted pork or bacon should always be kept in the house. I confessto having a decided prejudice against this meat, considering it unwholesome anddangerous, especially in cities, unless used in the smallest quantities. Yetpork makes a delicious flavoring for cooking other meats, and thin, smallslices of breakfast bacon are a relishing garnish for beefsteak, veal, cutlets,liver, etc. In the country, perhaps, there is less cause for doubt about ituse, where the animal is raised with corn, and where much outdoor life willpermit the taking of stronger food. TO CURE BACON. Forevery three hundred pounds of pork use fourteen poundsof common salt, and one pound each of brown sugar and saltpetre. Rubthem into the meat, and let it lie for three weeks,rubbing and turning it occasionally. Then wipe dry, rub again with dry fine salt, wrap it in a thick cloth (canvas) or paper,and hang it in a cool, dry place. ROAST LITTLE PIG. I trust entirely to the following receipt. Any one whofancies can cook a little pig, not I. The pig should be three weeks old, well cleaned,and stuffed with a dressing of this proportion: Two large onions, four times the quantity of bread-crumbs, three tea-spoonfuls of chopped sage, two ounces of butter, half a salt-spoonful of pepper, one salt-spoonful of salt, and one egg. Or it maybe filled with a veal force-meat stuffing, ifpreferred; or, it may be stuffed with hot mashedpotatoes. Sew it together with a strong thread, trussing its forelegs forward and its hind legs backward. Rub the pig with butter, flour, pepper, and salt. Roast it at first before a very slow fire, as itshould be thoroughly done; or, if it is baked, the oven should not be too hotat first. Baste it very often. When done (in about three hours), place a cob or a potato in the mouth,having put something in at first to keep it open. Serve it with apple-sauce or tomato-sauce. ROAST PORK. Theroasting pieces are the spare rib, the leg, the loin, the saddle, the fillet, and the shoulder. They may be stuffed with a commonwell-seasoned sage stuffing. The skin, if left on,should be cut in lines forming little squares; if the skin is taken off, sprinkle a little pounded sage over all, and put over it a buttered paper. Becareful, in roasting pork, to put the meat far enough from the fire at first, as it must bethoroughly done. The rule for the time of roasting pork is twenty minutes for each pound. Baste it atfirst with butter, and afterward with its own drippings. A roast loin ofpork is very nice (allowing it toremain well sprinkled with salt an hour or two beforeroasting) served with cabbage cooked with a little vinegar, or served with sauer-krout. BROILED PORK CUTLETS ( Dubois ). Take a fresh neck of pork (free from fat); shortenthe bones of the ribs, and remove those of the chine; cut six cutlets off each neck, taking them a little obliquely; trim them,season, and roll them in melted butter and bread-crumbs. Broil them. Pour into a stew-pan four or five table-spoonfuls of vinegar, and double its volume of stock or gravy, let it boil,and thicken it with a little flour. Pass it through asieve, and add to it pepper and some spoonfuls ofchopped pickles. Dish the cutlets in a circle, andpour over them the sauce; or porkcutlets may be fried or sautéd in a stew-pan, in a little hot lard, and served with the same sauce. PORK AND BEANS. Soak aquart of beans overnight. The next day boil them witha sliced onion, one large onion to a quart of beans (they will not taste of the onion ), and when they are almost done, put them into a baking-dish, taking out the onions. Almost bury in the centre of the beans a quarter of a pound of saltpork; pour in some of the water in whichthe beans were boiled, and bake about an hour. Another way is to omit the onions, andafter parboiling the beans put them into the bake-pan with one large spoonful of molasses and a quarter of a pound of pork, and bake them two hours. BOSTON BAKED BEANS. Putone and one-half pints of medium-sized navy beans intoa quart bean-pot; fill it with water, and let it stand overnight. In the morning,pour off the water, and cover the beans with fresh water inwhich is mixed one table-spoonful of molasses. Put aquarter of a pound of pickled pork in the centre,leaving a quarter of an inch of pork above the beans. Bake them eight hours with a steady fire, and,without stirring the beans, add a cupful of hot water every hour but the last two. Earthen pots with narrow mouths are made expressly forbaking beans. Cooking them in this manner, withoutfirst boiling them, renders each bean perfectly wholeand at the same time thoroughly cooked. When done, place the pork in the centre of a platter, with the beans around it. ENTRéE OF APPLES ANDPORK. Cut sour apples ( pippins ) into slices without skinning them; fry or sauté them with small strips of pork. Serve both, tastefully arranged, on the samedish. SAUSAGES ( Warne ). "Two pounds and a half of pork, fat and lean mixed (three times as much lean as fat ), one ounce of finesalt, a quarter of a pound of pepper, twotea-spoonfuls of powdered sage, a quarter of atea-spoonful of allspice, and a quarter of atea-spoonful of cloves. Chop the meat as fine as possible: there are machines for thepurpose. Mix the seasoning well through the whole;pack the sausage-meat down hard in stone jars, whichshould be kept in a cool place, well covered. When wanted for use, form theminto little cakes, dip them in beaten egg, then in wheat flour, and fry them in hot lard. " Always serve apple-sauce with pork sausages. Twodishes never suited better. For breakfast, it would be well to have a centre of apple-sauce on a platter, with sausages around, or vice versâ. They are a fine garnish for aroast turkey. It is said that sausages will keep forever, by frying them and putting themin little jars, with a cover of hot lard. TO CURE HAMS ( Mrs. Lestlie ). For one hundred pounds of fine pork take sevenpounds of coarse salt, five pounds of brown sugar, two ounces of saltpetre, half an ounce of soda, and four gallons of water. Boil all together, and skim the pickle when cold. Pour it on the meat, which should first be rubbed all over with red pepper. Let ham and tongues remain in the pickle eight weeks. Before they are smoked, hang themup, and dry them two or three days. Then sew the hams in cases. TO BOIL HAM. If it isquite salt, let it soak twenty-four hours. Cut off the end of the knuckle-bone; put it into a pot with coldwater at the back of the range to simmer slowly for eight hours;then take it off the fire, and let it remain in the water until nearly cold; then peel off the skincarefully, make spots at uniform distances with pepper, and wind fringed paper around the bone. Mrs.Lestlie boils her hams with a bed of hay in the bottom of the pot. Some sprinkle grated bread or crackers over the ham when trimmed, and brown it in the oven; othersbrush it thickly over with glaze. However well cooked,it would be utterly ruined if it were not cut into thin, neat slices foreating. HAM AND EGGS. The ham, cut into thin slices, can be broiled or sautéd. If broiled, spread over a little butter when cooked. The eggs can be fried; but they are more wholesome poachedin salted water. In both cases they should becarefully cooked, neatly trimmed, and an egg served oneach slice of ham. TO FRY OR SAUTéHAM. The ham should be cut into thin, neatslices, and sautéd only for a minute in a hot sauté pan. If it ismuch more than thoroughly heated, it will become tough and dry. PORK FRIED IN BATTER, OR EGGEDAND BREAD-CRUMBED. Roll very thin slices of breakfast bacon or fat pork in fritter batter, or egg and bread-crumb them, and fry them in boiling lard. Serve on toast or fried mush as a dish by itself, or as a garnish forbeefsteak, fried chickens, breaded chops, etc. MRS. TROWBRIDGE'S BREAKFAST-BACONDISH. Soak slices of bacon or pork in milk for fifteenminutes; then dip them into flour, and fry them in the sauté pan. When done, sauté some slices of potato in the same hot fat, and serve them in the centre of a hot dish, with acircle of the slices of pork around them. RASHERS OF PORK ( to serve with Beefsteak, Roast Beef, etc. ). Breakfast bacon should be cut very thin (one-eighth ofan inch thick), and in strips three or four inches long. It should be fired inthe sauté pan onlylong enough to become transparent, or thoroughly hot; if cooked crisp, it isruined. The French usually serve these strips of bacon laid over beefsteak, roast beef, game, etc. SANDWICHES ( Mrs. Geo. H. Williams ), No. 1. Cut some fresh bread very thin, and of square equalshapes. Chop some cold boiled ham very fine, and mixwit it the yolks of one or two uncooked eggs, a little pepper and mustard. Spreadsome of this mixture over the buttered slices of bread; roll them, pinching each roll at the end tokeep it in shape. If there is difficulty in cutting fresh bread, usethat which is a day old, then cut it in very thin slices, buttering it on theloaf before it is cut; cut the slices into little even squares or diamonds (thecrust being all removed), spread with the chopped ham mixture before mentioned, and fit two squarestogether. SANDWICHES ( New York Cooking-school ), No. 2. Chop fine half a pound of boiled ham, and season itwith one table-spoonful of olive-oil, onetable-spoonful of lemon-juice, a little cayenne or mustard, and rubit through a sieve. Butter the bread on the loaf before cutting it, and spread the ham between the slices. SMALL ROLLS, WITH SALADFILLING. Cut off a little piece of the top of a Frenchroll, and remove carefully the crumb from the inside. Prepare a stuffing of cold chicken, tongue, and celery (cut indice), mixed in Mayonnaise dressing, and fill the roll,covering the top with the small piece cut off. This makes a very nice lunch dish, or a lunch for traveling. Therolls may be filled with cold cooked lobster, cut intolittle dice, and covered with a Mayonnaise dressing. POULTRY. IF care is taken in picking and dressing fowls or birds, there is no need ofwashing them. In France it is never done, unless there is absolutely somethingto wash off; then it is done as delicately as possible. In expostulating oncewith an old negro auntie for soaking all the blood and flavor out of a fowl,she quickly replied, "Bless my soul, child! haven't I cooked chickens for fiftyyears?" When you buy a goose or a duck, be sure that it is young. Never buy an oldduck. The first I ever bought were from a penful at market. I thought myselfvery clever in choosing the largest, all being price; not so clever at dinner,when my husband tried to carve those tough and aged drakes. ROAST TURKEY. Thesecret in having a good roast turkey is to baste itoften, and to cook it long enough. A small turkey ofseven or eight pounds (the best selection if fat) should be roasted or bakedthree hours at least. A very large turkey should notbe cooked a minute less than four hours; an extra hour is preferable to aminute less. If properly basted, they will not become dry. With much experience in hotel life, where turkeys are ruined by the wholesale, I have never seena piece of turkey that was fit to eat. Besides beingtasteless, they are almost invariably undercooked. First, then, after the turkey is dressed, season it well, sprinkling pepper and salt on theinside; stuff it, and tie it well in shape; either lard the top or lay slicesof bacon over it; wet the skin, and sprinkle it wellwith pepper, salt, and flour. It is well to allow a turkey to remain some time stuffed before cooking.Pour a little boiling water into the bottom of the dripping-pan. If it is to be roasted, do not put it toonear the coals at first, until it gets well heated through; then gradually drawit nearer. The excellence of the turkey depends muchupon the frequency of basting it; occasionally baste it with a little butter, oftener with its own drippings. Just before taking it from the fire or outof the oven, put on more melted butter, and sprinkleover more flour; this will make the skin more crisp and brown. While the turkey is cooking, boil the giblets well; chop them fine, and mash the liver. When the turkey isdone, put it on a hot platter. Put the baking-pan on thefire, dredge in a little flour, and when cooked stirin a little boiling water or stock; strain it, skim off every particle of fat; addthe giblets; season with salt and pepper. If chestnut stuffing is used,add A whole roast turkey served on a roundplatter. some boiled chestnuts to the gravy; thisis decidedly the best sauce for a turkey. Besides the gravy, always serve cranberry (see receipt,page 204), currant, or plum jelly with turkey. These are more attractive molded the daybefore they are served. The currant or plum jelly ismelted and remolded in a pretty form. Roast turkeys are often garnished with little sausage-balls. STUFFING FOR BAKED TURKEY, CHICKEN, VEAL, ANDLAMB ( New YorkCooking-school ). Soak half a pound of bread (with the crust cut off)in tepid water, then squeeze it dry. Put three ouncesof butter into a stew-pan, andwhen hot stir in a small onion minced (one and a halfounces), which color slightly; then add the bread, withthree table-spoonfuls of parsley (half an ounce)chopped fine, half a tea-spoonful of powdered thyme, alittle grated nutmeg, pepper, salt, and a gill of stock. Stir it over the fire until it leaves the bottomand sides; then mix in two eggs. STUFFING FOR ROAST TURKEYS,CHICKENS, DUCKS, AND GEESE. The commonest stuffing is this: Two onions, five ounces of soaked and squeezed bread, eight sage leaves, anounce of butter, pepper, salt, one egg, a little pieceof pork minced. Mince the onions, and fry them in the sauté pan before adding them to the other ingredients. Some chopped celery is always a good addition. CHESNUT, POTATO, VEAL, ANDOYSTER STUFFINGS. The chestnut stuffing ismade by adding chestnuts to the ordinary stuffing. They are put on the fire in a saucepan or spider to burst the skins; they are then boiled in very salted water or stock; someare also put into the sauce. Or turkeys, etc., may bestuffed with boiled, mashed, and seasonedsweet-potatoes or Irish potatoes. The great cooks make extra trouble and expense in preparing a force-meat stuffing of coldveal, cold ham, bacon, and a few bread-crumbs, mixed and seasoned with cayenne, salt, lemon-juice, summer savory, parsley, or any sweetherbs. Then they often add truffles cutinto little balls; or, an oyster stuffing is made bymerely adding plenty of whole oysters (not chopped) tothe ordinary turkey bread stuffing. It should be wellseasoned, or the oysters will taste insipid. BOILED TURKEY. If aboiled turkey is not well managed, it will be quitetasteless. Choose a hen turkey. If not well trussedand tied, the legs and wings of a boiled fowl will be found pointing to all thedirections of the compass. Cut the legs at the first joint and draw them intothe body. Fasten the small ends of the wings under the back, and tie themsecurely with strong twine. Sprinkle over plenty of salt, pepper, and lemon-juice, and put it into boiling water. Boil itslowly two hours, or until quite tender. It is generally served in a bed of rice, with oyster, caper, cauliflower,parsley, or Hollandaise sauce. Pour part of the sauce over the turkey. Reservethe giblets for giblet soup. It can be stuffed or not, the same as forroasting. TURKEY OR CHICKENHASH is made like beef hash, only substituting turkey or chicken forbeef. TURKEY BRAISED. If youhave an old turkey unfit for roasting or boiling,braise it for four or five hours, adding a little wine (toward the last) to the stock, if you choose. TURKEY GALANTINE, OR BONEDTURKEY. Choose a fat hen turkey. Whendressing it, leave the crop skin (the skin over the breast) whole; cut off thelegs, wings, and neck. Now slit the skin at the back, and carefully remove itall around. Cut out the breasts carefully; cut theminto little elongated pieces, about a quarter of an inch square and an inchlong (parallelograms); or cut them any way you like. Season them with pepper, salt, a little nutmeg, mace, pounded cloves, sweet basil, and alittle chopped parsley, all mixed. Now make a force-meat, A longcylindrical package tied with string at each end and at two places in themiddle. with a pound and a quarter of lean veal or fresh pork, wellfreed from skin and gristle. Mix this with the meat ofthe turkey (all but the breasts ); chop it well. Then chop an equal volume offresh bacon, which mix with the other chopped meat: season this with the condiments last mentioned.Now pound it in a mortar to a paste. Cut one pound of truffles, half a pound of cooked pickled tongue, and half a pound of cooked fatbacon, into three-quarter-inch dice. Season these also. Spread the turkey skin on a board. Make alternatelayers on it, first of half of the force-meat, thenhalf of the turkey breasts, then half of the dice of tongue, truffles, and bacon, then turkey fillets anddice again: save some of the force-meat to put on thelast layer. Now begin at one side and roll it over, giving it a round and longshape; sew up the skin; wrap it, pressing it closelyin a napkin; tie it at the extremities, and also tie it across in two places,to keep it in an oval shape with round ends. Boil the galantine gently for four hours in boilingwater (or, better, in stock ), with the bones of the turkey thrownin. At the end of that time, take the stew-pan off thefire. Let the galantine cool in the liquor one hour; then drain it, and put iton a dish with a seven-pound weight on it. When cold, take the galantine out of the napkin; put it at the end of anopen oven for some minutes to melt the fat, which wipeoff with a cloth; glaze it, or sprinkle it with a little egg and fine bread-crumbs, andbake it a few minutes. It is, of course, to be sliced when eaten. It isgenerally served placed on a wooden standard, as described for a Mayonnaise of salmon. A boned turkey, or galantine, is seen at almost alllarge parties. It is convenient to have one in the house, as it will keep for along time, and is very nice for lunch or tea. It costs ten dollars to buy one,and about half of the amount to make it. Of course, it is some trouble to make;yet if one's time is worth less than one's money, there is plenty of time forthe purpose, as it can be made three or four days before an entertainment. Chicken and game galantines are made in the sameway. The figure on page 169 is a boned turkey or chicken prepared for boiling. MIXED SPICES FORSEASONING. In cities, mixed spices can be purchased, which areprepared by professional cooks, and which save much trouble to inexperiencedcompounders. This is one of their receipts: "Take of nutmegs and mace, one ounceeach; of cloves and whitepepper-corns, two ounces each; of sweetbasil, marjoram, and thyme, one ounce each, and half an ounce of bay leaves: these herbs shouldbe previously dried for the purpose. Roughly pound the spices, then place the whole of the above ingredientsbetween two sheets of white paper, and after the sides have been folded overtightly, to prevent the evaporation of the volatile properties of the herbs and spices, place themin a warm place to become perfectly dry. They must then be pounded quickly putthough a sieve, corked up tightly in bottles, and kept for use. A SIMPLE WAY OF PREPARING BONEDTURKEY OR CHICKEN. Boil a turkey or chicken in as little water aspossible, until the bones can easily be separated from the meat. Remove all of the skin; slice and mix togetherthe light and dark parts; season with pepper and salt. Boil downthe liquid in which the turkey or chicken was boiled; then pour it on the meat. Shape it like a loaf of bread; wrap it tightlyin a cloth; press it with a heavy weight for a few hours. When served, it iscut into thin slices. CHICKENS. One is absolutely bewildered at the hundred dishes which are made ofchickens. Most of the entrées are prepared with the breasts alone,called fillets. There are boudins and quenelles of fowls, and fillets of fowls à la Toulouse, à la maréchale, etc., etc., and supreme of fillets of fowls à Iécarlate, etc., and aspics offowls; then, chickens à la Marengo, à la Lyonnaise, à lareine; then, marinades and capitolades of chickens, and fricassees of chickensof scores of names. I would explain some of these long-sounding terms if thisbook were not already too long, and if at last they were any better than whencooked in the more simple ways. SPRING CHICKENS. Theexcellence of spring chickens depends as much onfeeding as on cooking them. If there are conveniences for building a coop, sayfive feet square, on the ground, where some spring chickens can be kept for a few weeks, feeding themwith the scraps from the kitchen, and grain, they will be found plump, the meatwhite, and the flavor quite different from the thin, poorly fed chickens just from market. The Southern negro cooks have certainly the best way of cooking spring chickens, and the manner is very simple. Cut them intopieces, dip each piece hastily in water, then sprinkleit with pepper and salt, androll it in plenty of flour. Have some lard in a sauté pan very hot, in which fry, orrather sauté, the chickens, covering them well, and watching that theymay not burn. When done, arrange them on a hot dish; pour out the lard from the spider, if thereis more than a tea-spoonful; throw in a cupful or more of milk, or, better, cream thickened with a little flour; stir it constantly,seasoning it with pepper and salt; pour it over the chickens. It makes a pleasant change to add chopped parsley to the gravy. A nice dish is made by serving cauliflower in thesame platter with the dressing poured over both; or with potatoes cut out in little balls, and boiled in very salt water, served in the same way; or they may besurrounded with water-cresses. SPRING CHICKENS,BAKED. Cut them open at the back, spread them out in a baking-pan, sprinkle on plenty of pepper, salt, and a little flour. Baste them well with hotwater, which should be in the bottom of the pan, also at differenttimes with a little butter. When done, rub butter over them, as you would beefsteak, and set themin the oven for a moment before serving. ROAST AND BOILEDCHICKENS. Chickens are roasted and boiled asare turkeys. In winter there is no better way of cooking chickens than to boil them whole, and pour over them agood caper or pickle sauce just before serving. Alarge tough chicken is very good managed in thismanner. Of course, the chicken should be putinto A round platter containing a whole chickenserved on a bed of rice. boiling water, which should notstop boiling until the chicken is entirely done. Withthis management it will retain its flavor, yet the water in which it is boiled should always be saved forsoup. It is a valuable addition to any kind of soup. The cut represents a chicken in a bed of rice. BAKED CHICKENS OR FISH ( for Camping Parties ). Dress the chickens or fish, making assmall incisions as possible, and without removing the skin, feathers, orscales. Fill them with the usual bread stuffing, wellseasoned with chopped pork, onion, pepper, and salt. Sew the cut quite firmly. Cover the chicken or fish entirely with wet clay, spreading it half an inchto an inch thick. Bury it in a bed of hot ashes, with coals on top, and let itbake about an hour and a quarter if it weighs two pounds. The skin, feathers,or scales will peel off when removing the cake of clay, leaving the objectquite clean, and especially delicious with that "best of sauces, a goodappetite;" however, there is no reason why a camping party should not indulgein other sauces at the same time. A chicken may be surrounded in the sameway with a paste of flour and water, and baked in the oven. A FRICASSEE OFCHICKEN. Cut two chickens into pieces.Reserve all the white meat and the best pieces for thefricassee. The trimmings and the inferior pieces use to make the gravy. Put these pieces into a porcelain kettle, witha quart of cold water, one clove, pepper, salt, a small onion, a littlebunch of parsley, and a small piece of pork; let it simmer for half an hour, and then put inthe pieces for the fricassee; let them boil slowly until theyare A fricassee of chicken served on a roundplatter. quite done; take them out then, and keepthem in a hot place. Now strain the gravy, take offall the fat, and add it to a roux ofhalf a cupful of flour and a small piece of butter. Let this boil; take it off the stove and stirin three yolks of eggs mixed with two or threetable-spoonfuls of cream; also the juiceof half a lemon. Do not let it boil after the eggs are in, or they will curdle. Stir it well,keeping it hot a moment; then pour it over the chicken, and serve. Some of the fricassees with longand formidable names are not much more than wine or mushrooms, or both, added to this receipt. FRICASSEE OF CHICKEN ( Mrs. Gratz Brown ). Sauté a chicken (cut into pieces) with a little minced onion, in hot lard. When thepieces are brown, add a table-spoonful of flour, andlet it cook a minute, stirring it constantly. Add then one and a half of boiling water or stock, atable-spoonful of vinegar, a table-spoonful of sherry, a tea-spoonful of Worcestershiresauce, salt, and pepper. When it is taken off the fire, strain the sauce, taking off any particles of fat; mix in the yolk of an egg. Pour it over the chicken, and serve. RANAQUE CHICKENS. Afterthe first experience in making this chicken dish, itis not difficult to prepare, and it makes an exceedingly nice course fordinner. With a sharp penknife, silt the chicken down the back; then, keeping the knife closeto the bones, scrape down the sides, and the bones will come out. Break them atthe joints when coming to the drumsticks and wing-bones. These bones are leftin. Now chop fine, cold cooked lamb enough to stuffthe chicken; season it with pepper, salt, one eventea-spoonful An illustration of ranaque chickenserved on a round platter. of summersavory, two heaping table-spoonfuls of chopped pork, and plenty of lemon-juice, or juice of one lemon. Stuff the chicken, and sew it, giving it a good shape; turn theends of the wings under the back, and tie them there firmly, also the legs ofthe chicken down close to the back, so that the topmay present a plump surface, to carve in slices across, without having bones inthe way. Now lard the chicken two or three rows ontop. If you have no larding-needle, cut open the skinwith the penknife, and insert the little pieces of pork, all of equallength and size. Bake this until it is thoroughly done, basting it very often(once or twice with a little butter ). Pour a tomato-sauce (see page 125) around it in the bottom ofthe dish in which it is served. CHICKEN BREASTS. Trimthe breasts of some chickens to resemble trimmed lambchops. Stick a leg bone (the joints cut off at eachend) into the end of each cutlet; pepper and salt them, roll them in flour, and fry them in a sauté pan with butter. Serve them in a circle in a dish with pease, mashed potatoes, cauliflowers, beans, or tomatoes, or almost any kind of vegetable, in thecentre. They are still nicer larded on one side, choosing the same side for allof them. When larded, they should not be rolled in flour. This is a very nice course for a dinnercompany. These fillets are also nice served in a circle, with the same sauce poured in the centre as is served with deviledchicken. DEVILED CHICKEN, WITH SAUCE ( Cunard Steamer ). The chicken is boiled tender in a little salted water. When cold, it is cut into pieces; thesepieces are basted with butter, and broiled. Sauce. --One tea-spoonful of made mustard, two table-spoonfuls of Worcestershire sauce, three table-spoonfuls of vinegar; boil all together, and pour over the chicken. This dish is generally served on the Cunardsteamers for supper. Or, boil the chickens, cut them into pieces, pepper and salt them, rollthem in flour, sauté them in a little hot lard, and serve cream-sauce, the same as for fried spring chickens.This makes a good winter breakfast. CHICKEN CROQUETTES ( French Cook ). Boil one chicken, with an onion and a clove of garlic (if you have it) thrown into the water, add some bones andpieces of beef also; this will make a stock, if you have not some already saved. Cut the chicken, when cooked, into small dice; mince half of alarge onion, or one small one, and two sprigs of parsley together. Put into a saucepan a piece of butter the size of asmall egg; when hot, put in the minced onion and parsley and half a cupful of flour; stir well until it is wellcooked A ring of chicken croquettes served on a roundplatter. and of a light-brown color; then add acupful and a half of stock, or of the stock in the kettle, boiled down or reduced until itis quite strong, then freed of fat; the stronger the stock, the better of course. Stir it into a smoothpaste, add pepper, salt, notquite half of a grated nutmeg, the juiceof about a quarter of a lemon, and two table-spoonfuls of sherry, Madeira, or port wine. When all is well stirred, mix in the piecesof chicken. Mold into the ordinary croquette shape, or into the form of pears. Whenthey are egged and cracker-crumbed, fry them in boiling hot lard. If they are molded into pear shape, a littlestem of parsley may be stuck into each pear after itis cooked to represent the pear stem. CHICKEN CROQUETTES ( Mrs. Chauncey I. Filley ). Ingredients: Two chickens and two sets of brains, both boiled; one tea-cupful of suet, chopped fine; two sprigs of parsley, chopped; one nutmeg, grated; an even table-spoonful of onion, after it is chopped as fine as possible; the juice and grated rind of one lemon; salt and black and redpepper, to taste. Chop the meat veryfine; mix all well together; add cream until it isquite moist, or just right for molding. This quantity will make two dozen croquettes. Now mold them as in cut (see above); dipthem into beaten egg, and roll them in pounded cracker or bread-crumbs; fry in boiling-hot lard. Cold meat of any kindcan be made into croquettes following this receipt, only substitutingan equal amount of meat for the chicken, and of boiled rice for the brains. Cold lamb or veal isespecially good in croquettes. Cold beef isvery good also. Many prefer two cupfuls of boiled rice (fresh boiled and still hot when mixed with the chicken ) for the chicken croquettes, instead of brains. CHICKEN CUTLETS. Thesecutlets are only chicken croquettes in a different form. Prepare them like trimmed lamb chops, in thefollowing manner: Make a shape pointed at one end and round at the other; thenpress it with the blade of a knife, giving it the shape of a cutlet. Egg and bread-crumb thesecutlets, and fry them in boiling lard; then stick in apaper ruffle at the pointed end. Serve them, one cutlet overlapping the other, in a circle, with a tomato-sauce in the centre of it, or around a pile of mushrooms or of pease. Thisis considered a very palatable dish for a dinner company. CHICKEN, WITH MACARONI OR WITHRICE ( French Cook ). Cut the chicken into pieces; fry or sauté them in a little hot drippings, or in butter thesize of an egg; when nearly done, put the pieces into another saucepan; add aheaping tea-spoonful of flour to the hot drippings, and brown it. Mix a little cold or lukewarm water to the roux; when smooth, add a pint or more of boiling water; pour this over the chicken in the saucepan, add a chopped sprig of parsley, a clove of garlic, pepper, and salt. Let the chicken boil half or three-quarters of an hour, oruntil it is thoroughly done; then take out the pieces of chicken. Pass the sauce through a sieve, and remove all the fat. Have ready some macaroni which has been boiled in salted water, and let it boilin this sauce. Arrange the pieces of chicken tastefully on a dish; pour the macaroni and sauce over them,and serve; or, instead of macaroni, use boiled rice, which may be managed in the same way as the macaroni. CHETNEY OF CHICKEN ( Mrs. E. L. Youmans ). Ingredients: One large or two small chickens, one-quart can of tomatoes, butter the size ofa pigeon's egg, one table-spoonful of flour, oneheaping tea-spoonful of minced onion, one tea-spoonfulof minced pork, one small bottle of chetney (one gill). Press the tomatoes through a sieve. Put the butter (one and a half ounces) into a stew-pan, and when hot throw in the minced onions; cook them a few minutes, then add the flour, which cook thoroughly; now pour in the tomato pulp, seasoned with pepper, salt, and the minced pork, and stir it thoroughly with an egg-whisk until quite smooth, and then mix well into it the chetney, and next the cooked chicken cut into pieces. The chicken may be sautéd (if young) in a little hot fat, or it may be roasted or boiled as for africassee. The chicken is neatly arranged on a hotplatter, with the sauce poured over. Slicesof beef (the filletpreferable) may be served in the same way with the chetneysauce. This chetney is an Indian sauce, and can be procured at the first-classgroceries. CURRY OF CHICKEN ( Mrs. Youmans ). Cut the chicken into pieces, leaving out the bodybones; season them with pepper and salt; fry them in a sauté pan in butter; cut an onion intosmall slices, which fry in the butter until quite red;now add a tea-cupful of stock freed from fat, an eventea-spoonful of sugar, and a table-spoonful of curry-powder, mixed with a little flour; rub the curry-powder and flour smoothwith a little stock before adding it to the saucepan;put in the chicken pieces, and let them boil two orthree minutes; add then the juice of half a lemon. Serve this in the centre of a bed of boiled rice. Veal,lamb, rabbits, or turkey may be cooked in the sameway. The addition of half a cocoa-nut, grated, is an improvement. CHICKENS FOR SUPPER. ( Mrs. Roberts, of Utica ). After having boiled a chicken or chickens in as little water aspossible until the meat falls from the bones, pick offthe meat, chop it rather fine, and season it well with pepper and salt. Now put intothe bottom of a mold some slices of hard- A fancymolded dish garnished with vegetables and served on a roundplatter. boiled eggs, nexta layer of chopped chicken, then more slices of eggs and layers of chicken until the mold is nearly full; boil down the water in which the chicken was boiled until there is about a cupful left,season it well, and pour it over the chicken; it willsink through, forming a jelly around it. Let it stand overnight or all day onthe ice. It is to be sliced at table. If there is anyfear about the jelly not being stiff enough, a little gelatine may be soaked and added to the cupful of stock. Garnish the dish with light-colored celery leaves, or with fringed celery. TO FRINGE CELERY FORGARNISHING. Cut the stalks into two-inch lengths; stick plenty ofcoarse needles into the top of a cork; draw half of the stalk of each piece of celery through the needles. When all the fibrous partsare separated, lay the celery in some cold place tocurl and crisp. CHICKEN LIVERS. Chop alittle onion, and fry it in butter without allowing it to color; put in the liver and some parsley, andfry or sauté them until they are done; take out the livers, add a little hotwater to stock to the onions and parsley, thickenit with some flour ( roux, page 51); strain, season, and pour it over the livers. If stale bread is cut into the shape ofa small vase or cup, then fried to a good color in boiling lard, it is called a croustade. One of these is often used with chicken livers. Part of the livers are put in the top of the croustade in the centre of the dish, and theremainder are placed around it at the base. The dish is called " croustade of livers." TURKISH PILAU. Trussone chicken (two and a half pounds) for boiling, andcut five pounds of shoulder of mutton (boned) into twopieces, which roll into shape; put some trimmings ofpork (enough to keep the meat fromsticking) into a large saucepan, and when hot place in the chicken and the rolls of mutton, and brown them completely by turning them overthe fire. Now make what is called a bouquet, viz.: Put a bayleaf on the table; on this place three of four sprigs of parsley, one sprig of thyme, half of a shallot, four cloves, and one table-spoonful of saffron (five cents'worth), and tie all together, leaving one end of the string long, to hang overthe top of the saucepan for convenience in taking out the bouquet. Put the chicken, the mutton, thebouquet, and pinch of salt and pepper into three quarts of boilingwater; twenty minutes before they are done (it will require ashort hour to cook them), put in five ounces of rice (soaked an hour in coldwater ); when done, take out the bouquet; put the chicken in the centre of a warm platter; cut the mutton into slices or scollops about half an inchthick, and form them in a circle by lapping one over the other around the chicken. Pour the hot soup (freed from grease) overthe chicken; or the chicken may be cut into joints (seven pieces), and the circle around the platter may beformed of the chicken pieces and mutton scollops alternating, with the soup poured inthe centre. GEESE, DUCKS, AND GAME. ROAST GOOSE. THE goose should be absolutely young. Green geese are best, i.e., when they are about four months old. Intrussing, cut the neck close to the back, leaving the skin long enough to turnover the back; beat the breast-bone flat with the rolling-pin; tie or skewerthe legs and wing securely. Stuff the goose with thefollowing mixture: Four large onions (chopped), ten sage leaves, quarter of a pound of bread-crumbs, one and a half ounces of butter, salt and pepper, one egg, a slice of pork (chopped). Now sprinkle the top of the goose well with salt, pepper, and flour. Reservethe giblets to boil and chop for the gravy, as you would for a turkey. Baste the goose repeatedly. If it is a green one, roast it atleast an hour and a half; if an older one, it would be preferable to bake it inan oven, with plenty of hot water in the baking-pan. It should be basted very often with this water, and when it is nearly done baste it with butter and a little flour. Bake it three or four hours. Decorate the goose with water-cresses, andserve it with the brown giblet gravy in the sauce-boat. Always serve an apple-sauce with this dish. GOOSE STUFFING ( Soyer's Receipt ). Take four apples peeled and cored, four onions, four leaves of sage, and four of thyme. Boilthem with sufficient water to cover them; when done,pulp them through a sieve, removing the sage and thyme; then add enough pulp of mealy potatoes to cause the stuffing to be sufficiently dry,without sticking to the hand. Add pepper and salt, and stuff the bird. DUCKS. Truss and stuffthem with sage and onions asyou would a goose. If they are ducklings, roast themfrom twenty-five to thirty minutes. Epicures say they like them quiteunder-done, yet, at the same time, very hot. Full-grown ducks should be roasted an hour, and frequentlybasted. Serve with them the brown giblet gravy or apple-sauce, or both. Greenpease should accompany the dish. Many parboil ducks before roasting or baking them. If there is asuspicion of advanced age, parboil them. WILD DUCKS. Wild ducks should be cooked rare, with or without stuffing. Baste them a few minutes at first with hot water to which have been added an onion and salt. Then takeaway the pan, and baste with butter, and a little flour to froth and brown them. The fire should bequite hot, and twenty to twenty-five minutes are considered the outside limitfor cooking them. A brown gravy made with the giblets should be served in the bottom of the dish.Serve also a currant-jelly. Garnish the dish withslices of lemons. DUCK AND PEASE STEWED ( Warne ). Remains of cold roast duck, with peelof half a lemon, one quart of greenpease, a piece of butter rolled in flour, three-quarters of a pint of gravy, pepper, salt, and cayenne to taste.Cut the duck into joints; season it with a very little Cayenne pepper and salt, andthe yellow peel of half a lemon minced fine. Put itinto a stew-pan, pour the gravy over, and place the pan over a clear fire tobecome very hot; but do not let the stewboil. * Boil a quart of green young pease; when they are done, drain off the water, add some butter, pepper, and salt. Warm thisagain over the fire. Pile the pease in the centre of ahot dish; arrange the pieces of duck around them, andserve. STEWED DUCK. Cut the duck into joints. Put the giblets into a stew-pan, adding water enough to cover them for the purpose of making a gravy. Add two onions, choppedfine, two sprigs of parsley, three cloves, a sage leaf, pepper, and salt. Let the gravy simmer until it is strong enough, then add thepieces of duck. Cover, and let them stew slowly fortwo hours, adding a little boiling water whennecessary. Just before they are done, add a small glassful of port-wine and a few drops of lemon-juice. Put the duck ona warm platter, pour the gravy around, and serve itwith little diamonds of fried bread ( croûtons ) placed around thedish. FILLETS OF DUCK. Roastthe ducks, remove the breasts or fillets, and dishthem in a circle. Pour over a poivrade sauce, and fill the circle with olives. POIVRADE SAUCE. Mincean onion; fry it a yellow color, with butter, in a stew-pan; pour agill of vinegar; let it remain on the fire until athird of it is boiled away; then add a pint of gravy or stock, a bunch of parsley, twoor three cloves, pepper, and salt; let it boil a minute; thicken it with a little butter and flour ( roux ); strain it, and remove anyparticles of fat. The following note appears at the bottom of page 182 in theoriginal text. *If the fowls are not tender, add a little water, andstew them slowly until they are--ED. PIGEONS STEWED INBROTH. Unless pigeons are quite young, theyare better braised or stewed in broth than cooked inany other manner. In fact, I consider it always the best way of cooking them.Tie them in shape; place slices of bacon at the bottomof a stew-pan; lay in the pigeons, side by side, all their breasts uppermost;add a sliced carrot, add onion, with a clove stuck in,a tea-spoonful of sugar, and some parsley, and pour over enough stock to cover them. If you haveno An illlustration of seven cooked pigeons arrangedon a round platter. stock, use boiling water. Nowput some thin slices of bacon over the tops of the pigeons; cover them as closely as possible, adding boiling water or stock whennecessary. Let them simmer until they are very tender. Serve each pigeon on a thin piece of butteredtoast, with a border of spinach, or makelittle nests of spinach on pieces of toast, putting a pigeon intoeach nest. ROAST PIGEONS. Neverroast pigeons unless they are young and tender. Afterthey are well tied in shape, drawing the skin over the back, tie thin slices of bacon over the breasts, and put a little piece of butter inside each pigeon. File them on a skewer, and roast them before a brisk fire until thoroughly done, basting them with butter. PIGEONS BROILED. Splitthe pigeons at the back, and flatten them with the cutlet bat; season, roll them in meltedbutter and bread-crumbs, and broil them,basting them with butter. Or, cut out the breasts (fillets), and broil them alone. Serve them onthin pieces of toast. Make a gravy of the remaining portions of the pigeons, and pour it over them. PRAIRIE-CHICKEN ORGROUSE. They are generally split open at the back and broiled,rubbing A ring of prairie chickens surrounding a bedof leafy vegetables on a round platter. them with butter; yet as all but the breast is generally tough, it is better to fillet the chicken, or cut out the breast. The remainder of the chicken is cut into joints and parboiled. These piecesare then broiled withthe breasts (which, please remember, are notparboiled) after rubbing butter over them all. As soonas they are broiled, sprinkle pepper and salt, and put a little lump of butter, on top of each piece, which then place for afew moments in the oven to soak the butter. Serve with currant-jelly. For fine entertainments the breasts alone are served. Each breast is cut into two pieces, so that one chicken is sufficient for four persons. If the dish isintended for breakfast, serve each piece of breast ona small square piece of fried mush (see receipt, page73). If for dinner, serve each piece on a square of hot butteredtoast, with a little currant-jelly on topof each piece of chicken. Garnish the plate with anykind of leaves, or with water-cresses. At a breakfast party I once saw thisdish surrounded with Saratoga potatoes. The white potatoes, dark meat, and red jelly formed a pretty contrast. TO CHOOSE A YOUNGPRAIRIE-CHICKEN. Bend the under bill. If it is tender, the chicken is young. PRAIRIE-CHICKEN OR GROUSEROASTED. Epicures think that grouse (in fact,all game) should not be too fresh. Do not wash them. Do not wash any kind ofgame or meat. If proper care be taken in dressing themthey will be quite clean, and one could easily wash out all their blood andflavor. Put plenty of butter inside each chicken: this is necessary to keep it moist. Roast thegrouse half an hour and longer, if liked thoroughly done; baste them constantlywith butter. When nearly done, sprinkle over a little flour and plenty of butter tofroth them. After having boiled the liver of thegrouse, mince and pound it, with a little butter, pepper, and salt, until it islike a paste; then spread it over hot butteredtoast. Serve the grouse on the toast, surrounded with water-cresses. QUAILS PARBOILED ANDBAKED. Tie a thin slice of bacon over thebreast of each bird; put the quails into a baking-dish, with a little boilingwater; cover it closely and set it on top of the range, lettingthe birds steam ten or fifteen minutes. Thisplumps them. Then take off the cover and the pork, andput the birds into the oven, basting them often with butter. Brown them, and serve with currant-jelly. QUAILS ROASTED. Coverthe breasts with very thin slices of bacon, or rub them well with butter; roast them before a good fire, basting themoften with butter. Fifteen minutes will cook themsufficiently, if they are served very hot, although twenty minutes would be myrule, not being an epicure. Salt and pepper them. Serve on a hot dish the moment they arecooked. They are very good with a bread-sauce made asfollows: BREAD-SAUCE, FOR GAME ( Mrs. Crane ). First roll a pint of dry bread-crumbs, and passhalf of them through a sieve. Put a small onion into apint of milk, and when it boils remove the onion, and thicken the milk with the half-pint of sifted crumbs; take it fromthe the fire, and stir in a heaping tea-spoonful of butter, a grating of nutmeg, pepper and salt. Put a little butter into a sauté pan, and when hot throw in thehalf-pint of coarser crumbs which remained in the sieve; stir them over thefire until they assume a light-brown color, taking care that they do not burn,and stir into them a small pinch of Cayenne pepper. They should be rather dry. For serving, put a plump roast quail on a plate, pour over a table-spoonful of the white sauce, and on this place a table-spoonful of thecrumbs. The sauce-boat and plate of crumbs may be passedseparately, or the host may arrange them at table before the birds are passed.This makes a dish often seen in England. CUTLETS OF QUAILS OR OFPIGEONS. With a sharp-pointed knife carefully cut the breasts from quails or pigeons; or, as professional cooks say, fillet them.At the small end of each breast stick in a bone taken from the leg, and trimmed. The breasts should now resemble cutlets. Sprinkle a little pepper and salt over eachone, dip it in melted butter, and roll it in flour or sifted cracker-crumbs. Put the cutlets one side until ready to cook, as they should becooked only just before sending them to the table. They should then be fried ina sauté pan in hot butter. They may be served without further trouble ina circle with a centre of green pease, which makes amost delicate dish for a company dinner course. However, there is a moreelaborate way of finishing them, as follows: Put the carcasses into some cold water with very small pieces of pork and onion, sufficientonly to produce the slightest flavoring. Simmer this about an hour; strain,thicken with a little browned roux, andseason it with a little pepper and salt. As soon as the livers are done, take them out, mash, and moisten them with a little of the sauce. Prepare little thin pieces of toast, one for each breast; butter, and spread them with the mashed livers. Turn the cutlets over in this sauce, and use the little of it that remains fordipping in the pieces of toast. Serve the cutlets onthe toast Quail or pigeoncutlets served in a ring around a mound of peas. ina circle, with a centre of pease, Frenchstring-beans ( haricots verts ), potatoes à la Parisienne, or mushrooms; or cut the pieces of toast into the form of a long triangle, so that thepoints may meet in the centre, and place the bones of the cutlets to meet inthe centre also. Put then a row of vegetables on theoutside. SCOLLOPS OF QUAILS, WITHTRUFFLES ( Gouffé ). Remove the fillets or breasts of six quails. Cuteach fillet in two, and trim the parts to a round shape. Cook half a pound of truffles in Madeira, and cutthem into slices. Put the scollops of quails into a sauté pan with some butter; fry them until they are done, then mix themwith the truffles. Put a nice border on a dish; pilethe centre with the scollops and truffles; pour insome Espagnole or brown sauce, flavored with a little Madeira, and serve. Truffles can be procured canned. ESPAGNOLE SAUCE. Melt butter the size of an egg; when hot, add to it two or three table-spoonfuls of flour. Stir this carefully over a slow fire until ithas taken a clear, light-brown color. Mix in this one half pint of stock, broth, or gravy; then put it to the side of the fire to simmeruntil wanted, skimming it carefully, and not allowing it to stick to the bottomof the pan. Strain it. Just before serving it with the quails, add one or twotea-spoonfuls of Madeira. QUAILS BROILED. Splitthem at the back. Broil, basting them often with butter, over a hot fire. As soon as the quails are done, add a little more butter, with pepper and salt, and place them for a moment into the oven tosoak the butter. Serve them on thin slices of buttered toast, with a little currant-jelly on top of each quail. QUAILS BRAISED. Quails are sometimes braised in the same manner aspigeons. (See receipt). SNIPE AND WOODCOCKFRIED. Dress and wipe them clean. Tie the legs close to the body; skinthe heads and necks, and tie An illustration of atrussed bird on a skewer. the beaks under the wing;tie, also, a very thin piece of bacon around thebreast of each bird, and fry in boiling lard. It only requires a few moments--say twominutes--to cook them. Season and serve them on toast. Some pierce the legs with the beak of the bird,as in the cut. SNIPE AND WOODCOCKROASTED. The following is the epicure's manner of cooking them, notmine. Carefully pluck them, and take the skin off the heads and necks. Trussthem with the head under the wing. Twist the legs at the first joint, pressingthe feet against the thigh. Do not draw them. Now tie a thin slice of bacon around each; run a small iron skewer through the birds, and tie it to a spit at both ends. Roast them at a good fire, placing a dripping-pan, with buttered slices of toast under them, to catch the trail as it falls.Baste the snipe often with a paste-brush dipped in A lineof five trussed birds on a skewer. melted butter. Let them roast twenty minutes; then salt the birds, and serve them immediately on thepieces of toast. REED-BIRDS ( Henry Ward Beecher's Receipt ). Cut sweet-potatoes lengthwise; scoop out in thecentre of each a place that will fit the bird. Now putin the birds, after seasoning them with butter, pepper, and salt, tying thetwo pieces of potato around each of them. Bake them.Serve them in the potatoes. Or, they can beroasted or fried in boiling lard like otherbirds. PLOVERS are cooked inthe same way as quails or partridges. PHEASANTS are cooked inthe same way as prairie-chicken or grouse. VENSION. THE SADDLE OFVENSION. This is, perhaps, the most distinguished venison dish. Make rather deep incisions, followingthe grain of the meat from the top, and insert piecesof pork about one-third of an inch square, and oneinch and a half or two inches long; sprinkle over pepper, salt, and a little flour. Roast or bake the venison before a hot fire or in a hot oven, about two hours for an eight-pound roast.Baste often. Serve a currant-jelly sauce in the sauce-boat. A good accompaniment at table for a roast of venison is a dish of potatoes à la neige (see page 192), thedark meat and white potatoes forming a pretty contrast. ROAST OR BAKED HAUNCH OFVENISON. Cut off part of the knuckle-bone, round it at the other extremity, sprinkleover pepper and salt, andcover the whole with a paste of flour and water or coarse corn-meal; tie firmly a thick paper around. Place it near the fire at first to harden thepaste, basting well the paper to keep it from burning; then remove it a littlefarther from the fire. Have a strong, clear fire. It will take about threehours to roast this joint, at the end of which time remove the paste. Carême would glaze it. This is, after all, asimple operation. It is a stock boiled down to a firmjelly, the jelly melted, and spread upon the meat witha brush. Put some frills of paper around the bone, and serve currant-jelly with it. If it be baked, the pasteshould cover it in the same way. It would also take the same length of time tocook. The neck ofvenison makes a good roast also. TO BROIL VENISONSTEAKS. Have the gridiron hot; broil, and putthem on a hot dish; rub over them butter, pepper, salt, and a littlemelted currant-jelly. Some cooks add a table-spoonfulof Madeira, sherry, or port to the melted currant-jelly. If one does not wish to serve the jelly, simplygarnish the dish with lemon-slices. STEWED VENISON. Cut itinto steaks; spread over them a thin layer of stuffing with bread-crumbs, minced onion, parsley, pepper, salt, and a little pork chopped fine; now roll them separately, and tie them each with a cord; stewthem in boiling water or stock. Thicken the gravy with flour and butter mixed (see roux, page 51), and add one or twospoonfuls of sherry or portwine. RABBITS ROASTED. Skinand dress the rabbits as soon as possible, and hangthem overnight. Roast them before a moderatefire, basting them with butter and a little flour when nearly done. RABBITS BAKED. Afterthey are skinned, dressed, and hung overnight, put them into a baking-pan; sprinkle over pepper and salt, and put alsoa thin paste of bacon on the top of each rabbit. Now pour some boilingwater into the bottom of the pan, and cover it with another pan ofequal size, letting the rabbits steam about fifteen ortwenty minutes; then take off the cover, baste them with a little butter, and let them brown. Rabbits are much improved by larding. VEGETABLES. TO PRESERVE THE COLOR OFVEGETABLES. THE French cooks very generally use carbonateof ammonia to preserve the color of vegetables. What would lay onthe point of a penknife is mixed in the water in which the vegetables (such as pease, spinach, string-beans, and asparagus ) are boiled. The ammonia all evaporates in boiling, leaving no illeffects. They say also that it prevents the odor of boiling cabbage. It may be obtained at the drug-stores. POTATOES BOILED. Choosethose of equal size. They look better when thinly peeled before they areboiled; but it is more economical to boil them before skinning, as carelesscooks generally pare away half of the potato in theoperation, and the best part of the potato is thatwhich lies nearest the skin. Put them into an iron pot or saucepan in justenough well-saltedcold water to cover them. Let them boil until they are nearly done; then pour off all but about half acupful of the water in the bottom of the pot; returnthe potatoes to the fire, put on a close cover, andlet them steam until quite done; then remove the lid, sprinkle salt over them, and let them remain a few moments on the fire to evaporate the water. Remove them carefully, and serve immediately.They should be dry and flaky. If one has a cook too heedless to steam the potatoes properly, it should be remembered that potatoes should never be allowed to soak in the water a momentafter they are done; the water should be immediatelypoured off, and the steam evaporated. It is important that potatoes should be done just at the moment of serving.It requires about thirty-five minutes to boil the medium-sized. TO BOIL POTATOES ( Captain Kater to Mrs. Acton ). Pare the potatoes; cover them with coldwater; boil them gently until they are done. Pour off the water, and sprinkle salt overthem; then with a spoon take each potato and lay itinto a clean, warm cloth; twist this so as to press all themoisture from the vegetable, and render it quite round; turn it carefully intodish placed before the fire; throw a cloth over; and when all are done, sendthem to the table immediately. Potatoes dressed inthis way are mashed without the slightest trouble. MASHED POTATOES. Everyone thinks she can make so simple a dish as that of mashed potatoes; but it is the excellence of art to producegood mashed as well as good boiled potatoes. In fact,I believe there is nothing so difficult in cookery as to properly boil a potato. To mash them, then, first boil them properly. Put into a hot crock basin, which can be placed at the side of thefire, half a cupful or more of cream, a piece of butter the size of an egg, plenty of salt and pepper, and let themget hot. One of the secrets of good mashed potatoes ismixing of the ingredients all hot. Now add six or seven potatoes the moment they are done, and mash themwithout stopping until they are as smooth as possible; then work them a veryfew moments with a fork, and serve them immediately. Do not rub egg over, andbake them; that ruins them. Much depends upon mashed potatoes being served at table hot, and freshly made. They are very nice prepared à la neige. POTATOES à LANEIGE. These are mashed potatoes made as inthe preceding receipt, pressed through a colander into adish in which they are to be served. The potatoes thenresemble rice or vermicelli, and are very light and nice. They make apretty dish, and must be served very hot. They make a favorite accompaniment tovenison, and are often served around a rolled rib roast of beef. TO BAKE POTATOES The potatoes must be of equal size. Put them into a hotoven and bake until tender. The excellence of baked potatoes depends upon their being served immediatelywhen they are just baked enough. A moment underdone, and they are indigestibleand worthless; a moment overdone, and they have begun to dry. It requires aboutan our to bake a large potato. This is a favorite wayof cooking potatoes for lunch or tea. POTATOES IN CASES. Thefollowing is an exceedingly nice way of serving baked potatoes. Bake potatoes ofequal size, and when done, and still hot, cut off a small piece from each potato; scoop out carefully the inside, leaving theskin unbroken; mash the potato Four potatoes incases served in a fancy bowl. well, seasoning itwith plenty of butter, pepper, and salt; return itwith a spoon to the potato skin, allowing it toprotrude about an inch above the skin. When enough skins are filled, use a fork or knife to make roughthe potato which projects above the skin; put all into the oven a minute to color thetops. It is better, perhaps, to color them with a salamander. They will have the appearance of baked potatoes burst open. POTATOES BAKED WITHBEEF. Pare potatoes of equal size, and putthem into the oven in the same pan in which the beef is baked. Every time the beef is basted, the potatoes should be basted also. Serve them around the beef. POTATOES à LAPARISIENNE. Peel the potatoes, and with a vegetable-cutter (three-fourths of an inch in diameter)cut as many little balls as you can from each potato; throw these balls into boiling-hot lard, and fry (about five minutes) until done, whenthey must be skimmed out immediately. It is more convenient to fry them in awire-basket (see page 53). Sprinkle salt over them assoon as done. It is a very good way of cooking potatoes as a garnish for beefsteak or game. Thecuttings of the potatoes left after taking out theballs can be boiled and mashed. These potatoes must beserved when done, or the cutlets will lose their crispness. SARATOGA POTATOES. Itrequires a little plane, or potato or cabbage cutter, tocut these potatoes. Two or three fine, large potatoes (ripe new ones are preferable) are selectedand pared. They are cut, by rubbing them over the plane, into slices as thin orthinner than a wafer. These are placed for a few moments in ice, or very cold water, tobecome chilled. Boiling lard is now tested, to see ifit is of the proper temperature. The slices must color quickly; but the fat must not be so hot as to give them a darkcolor. Place a salt-box on the hearth; also a dish to receive the cooked potatoes at the side; a tin plate and perforated ladle should be at hand also. Now throw,separately, five or six slices of the cold potato intothe hot lard; keep them separated by means of theladle until they are of a delicate yellow color; skim them out into the tinplate; sprinkle over some salt, and push them on thedish. Now pour back any grease that is on the tinplate into the kettle, and fry five or six slices at a time until enough arecooked. Two potatoes fried will make a largedishful. It is a convenient dish for a company dinner, as it may be made early in theday; and by being kept in a dry, warm place (for instance, a kitchen-closet),the potato-slices will be crisp and nice five orsix hours afterward. They are eaten cold, and are a pretty garnish around game,or, in fact, any other kind of meat. FRIED POTATOES. Fried potatoes must absolutely be served the moment theycome from the fire. Nothing deteriorates more by getting cold or keeping thanfried potatoes (with the exception of Saratoga fried potatoes, which are served cold). They may be slicedrather thin, and sautéd in a little hot butter, pepper, and salt. The French usually cut potatoes into little rhomboidal lengths, and throwthem into boiling lard, or clarifiedgrease (see page 44). The fat should be quite hot, and the pieces of potato skimmed out the moment they receive a delicatecolor, and placed on a sieve by the side of the fire. Sprinkle over salt, and serve them in a hot dish. LYONNAISEPOTATOES. Ingredients: Half a pound of cold boiledpotatoes, two ounces of onion, a heapingtea-spoonful of minced parsley, butter the size of an egg. Slice the cold boiled potatoes. Put the butter into a saucepan, and when hot throw in the onion (minced), which fry to a light color; add thesliced potatoes, which turn until they are thoroughlyhot, and of light color also; then mix in the minced parsley, and serve immediately while they are quitehot. The potato-slices should be merely moistened with the butterdressing. POTATO CROQUETTES. Addto four or five mashed potatoes (made according toreceipt, see page 191) a little nutmeg, Cayenne pepper, and the beaten yolk of oneegg. Beat the potatoes with a fork; rollthem into little balls, which roll in egg and cracker-crumbs, and fry them in a wire-basket inboiling lard. For a change, a little minced parsley might be added. At the New York Cooking-school the teacher passedthe seasoned potatoes through a sieve, and thenreturned them to the fire, stirring them with a wooden spoon until they leftthe sides and bottom of the pan. He said thisprevented them from cracking when frying. POTATO ROSES. Parecarefully with a thin penknife some peeled potatoes, round and round, until all of each potato is pared to the centre. Do not attempt to cutthe slices too thin, or they will break. Place them in a wire-basket, and dipinto boiling lard. These potatoes are a pretty garnish around a roast, and aresupposed to resemble roses. POTATOES FORBREAKFAST. Slice a generous pint of cold boiledpotatoes. Put into the brightest of saucepans butter the size of a pigeon's egg, and when it bubblesadd an even tea-spoonful of flour (the sauce not to be thick), which cook a moment, and thenpour in a cupful of milk (or, better, cream ), salt, and pepper; stir with an egg-whisk until it boils, then mix in the potato-slices.When they are thoroughly hot they are ready to be served. POTATO PUFF. Stir twocupfuls of mashed potatoes, two table-spoonfuls of melted butter, and some salt to a fine, light, and creamy condition; then addtwo eggs well beaten separately, and sixtable-spoonfuls of cream; beat it all well and lightlytogether; pile it in rocky form on a dish; bake it in a quick oven until nicelycolored. It will become quite light. SHOO-FLYPOTATOES. There is a machine which comes for the purpose of cuttingshoo-fly potatoes; it costs two dollars and a half.The potatoes are cut into long strips like macaroni, excepting that the sides are square insteadof round. They are thrown into boiling lard, sprinkledwith salt as soon as done, and served as a vegetablealone, or as a garnish around meat. TURNIPS. The ruta-baga turnips are sweetest and best. Pare and cut them in pieces of equal size; put them into well-salted boiling water, and, when perfectly tender,drain them dry; let them remain a moment on the fire to evaporate the water, then mash them in a stew-pan, in which is hot butter, pepper and salt to taste. Stir them over the fire until they arethoroughly mixed and keep them in the stew-pan untiljust before serving, as turnips should be served veryhot. TURNIPS IN SAUCE ( French Cook ). Cut three good-sized turnips into slices, orparallelograms, as long as the turnip, and about halfan inch thick. If they are not young and tender, they should be boiled untilhalf done; but they should not be boiled at first if young. Put a piece of butter the size of an egg into a saucepan; when hot,put in the pieces of turnips, and fry them to alight-brown color. When done, add a heaping tea-spoonful of sugar; mix, and then pour in a tea-cupful of stock ( boiling water wouldanswer, but not so well); put this at the side of the fire to simmer until theyare done, adding a little pepper and salt. Now put a little more butter, the size of a walnut, into a saucepan, addinga heaping tea-spoonful of flour; mix, and add a little lukewarm water. When smoothly mixed, add the sauce of the turnips; when both are well mixed, addthe turnip slices; they are then ready to serve. PARSNIPSSAUTéD. Parboil them; then, after cutting lengthwise, sauté them to a light-brown in a little hot butter or drippings. PARSNIP FRITTERS. Thisis undoubtedly the best manner of cooking parsnips: Scrape, and, if large, cut them; put theminto well-salted boiling water, and boil until tender;then mash them, adding to four or five parsnips aheaping tea-spoonful of flour, one or two eggs well beaten, pepper and salt to taste. Form the mixture into small cakesthree-quarters of an inch thick and two and a half inches in diameter, and frythem on both sides to a delicate brown in a sauté pan, with a little hot butter. Serve hot. OYSTER-PLANTFRITTERS are best made into little cakes, as described for parsnipfritters. They may, however, be made smaller, in order to imitate friedoysters. OYSTER-PLANTSSTEWED. As you scrape them, throw them into a bowl of coldwater, in which is mixed a table-spoonful of vinegar. When all are scraped, cut them either intohalf-inch lengths, or lengthwise into four pieces, which again cut intothree-inch lengths; throw them into boiling water, inwhich are half a tea-spoonful of salt and one-third ofa tea-spoonful of sugar to one quart of water. When done, drain, and mix them with white sauce, either drawnbutter or simple Bechamel. CARROTS. The best modeof cooking carrots is to boil them with corned beef, and then serve them as a garnish aroundthe meat. Carrots require alonger time to boil than almost any other vegetable. If large, boil them anhour and a half. It improves their appearance to cut them into shapes of ballsor pears before boiling; or they may be cut into half-inch slices, and thenshaped with the tin cutters (see page 55). These come indifferent sizes. BEETS. If they arewinter beets, soak them overnight; in any case, bevery careful not to prick or cut the skin before boiling, as they will thenlose their color; put them into boiling water, andboil until tender. If they are served hot, pour a little meltedbutter, pepper, and salt over them. They are often served cold, cut intoslices, with some vinegar over them, or cut intolittle dice and mixed with other cold vegetables, for a winter salad. CAULIFLOWER, WITH WHITESAUCE. Trim off the outside leaves, and put the cauliflower into well-salted boilingwater. Be careful to take it out as soon as tender, to prevent itdropping into pieces. Make, in a saucepan, a whitesauce as follows: Put butter the size ofan egg into the saucepan, and when it bubblesstir in a scant half tea-cupful of flour; stir wellwith an egg-whisk until cooked;then Two heads of cauliflower served on a roundplatter and covered with sauce. add two tea-cupfulsof thin cream, some pepper and salt. Stir it over the fire until perfectly smooth.Pour the sauce over the cauliflower, and serve. Many let the cauliflower simmer in the sauce a few moments before serving. The sauce Hollandaise is very fine for cauliflower. Cauliflower is delicious served as agarnish around fried spring chickens, or with fried sweet-breads, when the white sauce should be poured over both. In this case,it should be made by adding the cream, flour, and seasoning to thelittle grease (half a tea-spoonful) that is leftafter sautéing the chickens or sweet-breads. Timeto cook, fifteen minutes, if small; twenty minutes, if large. CAULIFLOWERS, WITHCHEESE. Add plenty of grated cheese (say acupful to a pint of sauce ) to the usual white sauce made for cauliflowers. Heat the sauce well, to melt the cheese thoroughly, and pour it over the cauliflowers. cauliflower is valuable as a salad, with the Mayonnaise dressing, or,mixed with other cold vegetables, with the Frenchdressing. See Salads. ASPARAGUS. Tie thestalks in bundles, keeping the heads one way, and cut off the stalks, so thatthey may be of equal length. Put them intowell-salted A line of asparagus stalks served on anoval platter. boilingwater, and cook until they are tender (no longer). While boiling,prepare some thin slices of toast; arrange the asparagus, when well drained, neatly upon it, and pour over a whitesauce, as for cauliflower. The sauceHollandaise is especially nice for asparagus. Time to cook asparagus, about eighteen minutes. PEASE. American mode: First boil the pods, which are sweet and full of flavor, in a little water; skim them out, and add the pease, which boil until tender; add then a little butter, cream, pepper, and salt. If they areserved as a garnish, do not add the juice; but, if served alone, the juice is a savory addition. Time to cook, about halfan hour. The American canned pease should be rinsed beforecooking, as the juice is generally thick. The pease are then thrown into a little boiling water seasoned with salt, and a little sugar; butter is added when done. English mode: Throw the pease into boiling water, withsome lettuce leaves and a sprig of mint in the bottom of the stew-pan. To each quart of pease allow two table-spoonfuls of butter and a lump of loafsugar; cover the stew-pan closely, and boiluntil they are tender--thoroughly done; then separate the pease from the other ingredients, sending them only tothe table. This cooking of pease with mint (universally done in England) is a good way ofutterly destroying the delicious natural flavor of the pea. SPINACH. Having washedit thoroughly, put it into just enough salted boilingwater to cover it. When it is tender, squeeze out all the water, and press it through a colander; then sauté it a few minutes, witha Six mounds of asparagus topped with hard boiledeggs served on an oval platter. little butter, pepper, and salt. Serve with sliced, hard-boiledeggs on top; or, if it is used as a garnish for lamb, add a little lemon-juice and a spoonful of stock. Or, it is nice served as a course by itself,arranged on a platter as follows: Put a circle of thin slices of butteredtoast (one slice for each person at table) around the dish, and oneach slice put a cupful of spinach, neatly smoothed inshape. Press the half of a hard-boiled egg into thetop of each pile of spinach, leaving the cut part ofthe egg uppermost. TOMATOES STEWED. Pour boiling water over six or eight large tomatoes to remove the skin, and then cut them into asaucepan. When they begin to boil, pour away a little of the juice; add a smallpiece of butter, pepper, salt, and a very little sugar. Let them cook for about fifteen minutes,stirring in well the seasoning. Some add a few bread or cracker crumbs. TOMATOES, WITH MAYONNAISE DRESSING (see Salads, p. 226). STUFFED TOMATOESBAKED. Choose large tomatoes. Do not skinthem, but scoop out a small place at the top, which fill with a stuffing. The simplest is made of bread-crumbs, minced onion, cayenne, and salt. First frythe onions in a little butter, add the bread-crumbs, moistened with a little water (or, better, stock ) andseasoned with a very little Cayenne pepper and enough salt. Fry them a moment; then fill the cavities,allowing the stuffing to project half an inch abovethe tomato, and smooth it over the top. Bake. A better stuffing is this: Chop veryfine some cold cooked chicken, lamb, beef, or pork. Each of these may be used, or they may be mixed.However, a very little pork mixed with any kind of meat makes a pleasant seasoning. Now fry a littlechopped onion in butter, and,when just colored, throw in the chopped meat, a few bread-crumbs, very little stock, and season the whole with salt, pepper, and some parsley, When hot, and well mixed, take it off thefire; add the yolk of a raw egg to bind it together.Fill the tomatoes with this preparation, sprinkle bread-crumbs over the tops, and bake. The tomatoes are a pretty garnish around any kind of meat. If served as a course alone, pour into thebottom of the dish a tomato-sauce flavored with alittle sherry. ONIONS. There is nobetter manner of cooking onions than as follows: Putthem into salted boiling water, with a little milk added, and boil them until tender (no longer).Then place them in a baking-pan with a little pepper, salt, and butter over the top of each, and a very little of the water in which they were boiled in the bottom of thepan. Brown them quickly in the oven, and serve very hot. They may be servedalone in a vegetable-dish, or as a garnish around beef,calf's heart, etc. ONIONS, WITHCREAM. Boil the onions, putting them intoboiling salted water, with a little milk added, until tender; drain, and put them into a stew-pan, with a whitesauce made as directed for cauliflowers. Let them simmer a fewmoments. Serve with the sauce poured over. STRING-BEANS. String,and cut each bean crosswise into two or three pieces.Put them, with a little pork, into boiling water, and whenboiled tender drain them. Put into a stew-pan a cupfulof cream, a small piece of butter rubbed in an even tea-spoonful of flour, pepper, and salt. When hot, add the beans (say one pint), and stew them a few momentsbefore serving. STRING-BEANS IN SALAD (see Salads, page 226). LIMA BEANS ( London Cooking-teacher ). Put a pint of the shelled beans into boiling water slightly salted, adding two or three slices of onion. When tender, drain them. Put butter the size of an egg into a heated saucepan, andwhen it is hot add an even table-spoonful of minced onions, which cook well; then put in the beans; add enough water (or,better, stock ) to keep them moist. Keep them at theside of the fire about a quarter of an hour, as it takes them some time tosoak; just before taking them out, add a small handful of minced parsley. Do not cook them much after adding the parsley, as the spoils it color. LIMA BEANS, WITHCREAM. Put a pint of the shelled beans intojust enough boiling salted water to cover them, andboil them tender; then drain off the water; add acupful of boiling milk (or, better, cream ), a little piece of butter, pepper, and salt. Let the beans simmer aminute in the milk before serving. CELERY FRIED. Cut the celery into pieces three or four inches long; boilthem tender in salted water; drain them. Make a batterin the proportion of two eggs to a cupful of rich milk; mix flour, or fine bread or cracker crumbs, enough to give itconsistence; roll the pieces of celery in it, and frythem to a light-brown in hot lard. Serve very hot. Celery can also be cooked as asparagus,boiled tender, and served with a whitesauce. EGG-PLANT. Cut theplant into slices less than half an inch thick, without paring off the skin;then sprinkle pepper and salt between the parts, and cover with a plate; letthem remain an hour, then dip each slice separately first into beaten egg, then into fine bread or crackercrumbs. Sauté them to a light-brown in hot lard or butter. CABBAGE TO BOIL. Cabbage is best boiled and served with corned beef; otherwise boil a small piece of pork with it. Always boil with it a piece of a red pepper. A little bunch of small redpepper, costing five cents, will last a long time for cooking cabbage, making pickles, etc. Remove the outside damaged leaves, and cut the cabbage into halves (or, if very large, intoquarters), so as to better cook the inside stalk; put it into the boiling water, with the cornedbeef or pork and the small red pepper. It will take the cabbage from half to three quarters of an hour to bewell cooked. Drain the cabbage well, serving it withthe meat in the centre of the dish. CABBAGE STEWED. Shredtwo small cabbages coarser than for cold slaw; parboilthem with a small piece of red pepper added to the boiling water; then pour off the water, and add three or four table-spoonfuls of vinegar, a small piece of butter, and a large-sized ladleful of stock from the stock-pot; coverthe saucepan closely, and let the cabbage simmergently for half an hour; season with a little redpepper, if it needs more, and salt. TO BOIL CORN ON THECOB. At the Saratoga Lake House there is a third specialty of goodthings. The first is the fried potato, the second is the fresh trout, the thirdis boiled corn, which is served as a course by itself.The corn Six cobs of cornserved on a round platter. is boiled in the husk. The latter imparts sweetness and flavor to the corn, besides keeping it moist and tender. Theunhusked corn is put into salted boilingwater, and when done, and well drained, some of the outside husks are removed, and the corn is served, with the remaining husks about it; or, the cobs may be broken from the husks just before sending them to table, which wouldsave this trouble afterward. CORN MOCK OYSTERS. Mixinto a pint of grated green corn three table-spoonfulsof milk, one tea-cupful of flour, a piece of butter thesize of a hickory-nut, one tea-spoonful of salt, halfa tea-spoonful of pepper, and one egg. Drop it by dessert-spoonfuls into a little hot butter, and sauté it on both sides. It resembles, and hasmuch the flavor of fried oysters. It is a good tea orlunch dish. Serve it hot, on a warm platter. CORN CUSTARD, TO BE SERVED AS AVEGETABLE. Cut corn from the cob, mix it nottoo thin with milk, two or three beaten eggs, pepper and salt; bake half anhour. It is very nice. CORN PUDDING FORTEA. Ingredients: One dozen ears of sweetcorn, three eggs, one pint of milk, three table-spoonfuls of sugar, a small tea-spoonful of salt, a little butter, alittle flour if the corn isquite young, with a little less milk; if the corn is older, omit it; grate half of the corn, and cut the other half. Bake. GRATED CORNSAUTéD. Mix grated corn with salt and pepper; sauté it in a little hot butter. TO COOKCRANBERRIES. Add one tea-cupful of water to aquart of cranberries, and put them over the fire.After cooking ten minutes, add two heaping cupfuls of sugar, and cook about ten minutes longer, stirringthem often. Pour them into a bowl or mold, and when cold they can be removed asa jelly. The berries will seem very dry before the sugar is added, but if more water is used they will not form a jelly. ARTICHOKES. Cut off theoutside tough leaves, and trim the bottom; throw them into boiling salted water, with a few drops of vinegar. When quite done, drain, and serve with drawn butter, or, what is still better, a sauce Hollandaise. FRIED APPLES FORBREAKFAST. Sour apples should be selected: Pippins, Northern Spies, etc.First fry some thin slices of pork, then the slices(without peeling them) of apples in the same hot fat. A RICE DISH ( Risotto à la Milanaise ). Put one ounce of butter (size of a pigeon's egg) into a stew-pan, and when hot mix in a quarter of an onion (half an ounce), minced, and cook until itassumes a pale-yellow color; put in the washed rice (uncooked), and stir it over the fire until it hasa yellow color also; then add a pint of stock. White stock is preferable, as it preserves the light color of the rice, yet any stock may beused. Boil slowly until the rice is tender (about halfan hour), when the stock will be mostly absorbed. Whenabout to serve, add one ounce of grated cheese, stirring for a few moments over the fire, without letting it boil; sprinkle alittle grated cheese over the top. This dish can be served alone as an entremêt or as a vegetable, with any kind ofmeat. A brown sauce may or may not be served aroundit. ANOTHER RICE DISH. Mixcarefully (not to break the grains) in a pint of boiled rice (see page 288) a table-spoonful of either minced parsley or shives. Put apiece of butter size of a pigeon's egg into asaucepan, and let it color a light-brown; mix the rice in the butter, and serveas a vegetable. MUSHROOMS IN CRUST ( Croûte aux Champignons ). For the crust, alittle extra butter is added to the dough for rolls;it is made round, three inches in diameter, and two inches high, instead of anoval roll shape. When freshly baked, a slice is cut from the top of each one,the crumb is removed, and the shells are buttered and filled with mushrooms, cooked as for garnishing, and mixed with a Bechamel sauce. Finelyminced parsley is sprinkled over the tops. They shouldbe served quite hot. Fresh mushrooms are required forthis dish. FLAXSEED FOR ACENTRE-PIECE. Sew coarse flannel around a goblet with the stem broken off; put this shapely domeupon a saucer of water; wet the flannel, and sprinkleover as much flaxseed as will adhere to it. Theflannel will absorb the water from the saucer, whichshould be often replenished. In about two weeks the flannel will be concealedin a beautiful verdure, which will vie with any tableornament. CASSEROLES. Casseroles are generally made of boiled rice, or of mashed boiledpotatoes. When of rice, first cookthoroughly with milk, salt, and a little butter; orthey may be cooked in broth, with a little ham added, which is afterward to be taken out. Mashfine. When of potatoes, boil, season, and mash them well. Butter the casserole mold. First press the rice, or the potatoes, whichever used, into the figures of the mold;then fill it. In the centre bread may be substituted.Put the casserole aside to harden. When quite cold and firm,carefully unclasp and take off the mold; then, with a small sharp knife and aspoon, scoop out the inside leaving the casserole from a half to an inch thick. Just beforeserving, with a little paste-brush, dipped in the yolk of an egg, brush the whole surface. This may beomitted if preferred. Put in a very hot oven a few moments, to heat the rice or potato, and to colorslightly the egg. Fill it with vegetables, such as cauliflower, Lima beans, string-beans, artichokes, pease, etc.; or with chicken fricasseed or fried, and served with a cream dressing, or with Bechamel sauce, or en blanquette; or with any kind of scollops, whetherof game, poultry, sweet-breads, fish, or shell-fish. SHELLS, OR COQUILLES. A TASTEFUL variety at table is a course of something served in shells ( en coquille ). The natural shells (except oyster-shells)are not as pretty as silver shells. Plated silverscallop-shells are not expensive, and are always ready. You canalways serve oysters in their shells, by once purchasing fine large ones; then,by cleaning them carefully every time they are used, they will be ready to befilled for the next occasion with suitable oysters from the can. Oysters,lobsters, shrimps, or cold fish of any kind, can be served en coquille in place of fish. Chicken, or meat ofany kind, should be served as an entrée. Salmon, or almost any kind of fish orshell-fish, can be served en coquille cold, with Mayonnaise dressing, as a salad. CHICKENS INSHELLS. Boil the chickens in water or in broth; cut the meat into little dice; mix them, while hot, with a hot Bechamel sauce, or with a white sauce madewith cream; sprinkle sifted bread orcracker crumbs over them; brown slightly in a hot oven. Serveimmediately. Sometimes mushrooms are mixed with the chicken dice. OYSTERS ENCOQUILLE. Prepare oysters as described for vols-au-vent; serve them in the scallop-shells, with sifted bread-crumbs (browned) sprinkled over them. Put intothe oven until they are thoroughly hot. FISH EN COQUILLE. Cutany good fish into little scollops (having boned andskinned them) half an inch wide; fry them in a sauté pan, with a little butter, salt, and a few dropsof lemon-juice; then mix them with any of the fishsauces, and put them into the shells; sprinkle over bread-crumbs ( sautéd brown in a little butter ), and warm them in the oven. LOBSTERS OR SHRIMPS ENCOQUILLE. Cut the lobsters into scollops orpieces; mix them with the Bechamel, orcream, sauce; sprinkle over bread-crumbs, and brown slightly in the oven. Proceedin the same manner with shrimps, picking those thatare mixed with the sauce, and reserving some whole, todecorate the tops. MUSHROOMS ENCOQUILLE. Cut the mushrooms, if they are toolarge; throw them for a few minutes into boilingwater, then into cold water to whitenthem; wipe well, and sauté them in a saucepan, with a little butter. When colored, and almost done, sprinkle in alittle flour and a little chopped parsley; when the flour iscooked (which will require but a few moments), pour in, say, a tea-cupful of stock; let it all simmer for about fifteen minutes.Just before serving, stir in the beaten yolk of anegg, and a few drops of lemon-juice. The sauce should be rather thick. Fill each shell withthis mixture; sprinkle a few sifted cracker-crumbs onthe tops; brown them slightly with a red-hot shovel, or put them into a veryhot oven a few moments just before serving. POTTING. IN England, potting is an every-day affair for the cook. If there be ham,game, tongue, beef, or fish on the table one day, you are quite sure to see itpotted on the next day at lunch or breakfast. It is a very good way of managingleft-over food, instead of invariably making it into hashes, stews, etc. Thesepotted meats will keep a long time. They are not good unless thoroughlypounded, reduced to the smoothest possible paste, and free from any unbrokenfibre. POTTED HAM. Mince somecold cooked ham, mixing lean and fat together; poundin a mortar, seasoning at the same time with a little Cayenne pepper, pounded mace, and mustard. Put into adish, and place in the oven half an hour; afterward pack it in potting-pots orlittle stone jars, which cover with a layer of clarifiedbutter (lukewarm), and tie bladders or paste paper over them. Thisis convenient for sandwiches. The butter may be usedagain for basting meat or for making meat-pies. POTTED TONGUE. Warne ). Ingredients: One pound and a half of boiled tongue, six ounces of butter, a little cayenne, a small spoonful of pounded mace, and cloves each half atea-spoonful. The tongue must be unsmoked, boiled, and the skintaken off. Pound it in the mortar as fine as possible,with the spices. When perfectly pounded, and the spices are well blended with the meat, press it into small potting-pans; pour over the butter. A little roastveal, or the breasts of turkeys, chickens,etc., added to the tongue, are animprovement. POTTED BEEF. This iswell-cooked beef chopped and pounded with a little butter, pepper, salt, and mace. Manage as forpotted ham. POTTED BIRDS. Clean pigeons, or any other birds, and thoroughly season them with mace, allspice, pepper, and salt; then lay the breasts ina pan as close as possible, and put some butter overthem; cover the pan with a coarse flour paste. Bakethe birds well in the oven, and when cold cut them into small pieces; poundthese to a paste in a mortar; pack them closely in apotting-pot, and cover with butter. POTTED FISH. Cut outthe pieces of fish; season with pepper, salt, and cloves, if you like; then put them into a dish; coverclosely as for potted birds. Bake one hour. When cold, press them into the pot,and cover well with butter, etc. POTTED CHICKEN AND TONGUE ORHAM. Roast the chicken; take off all the meat, separating it from the sinews and skin; chop andpound thoroughly, with a pound of tongue or of ham. Let the bones of the chicken be boiled down to a glaze; moisten the pounded meat with this glaze; season with salt, Cayenne pepper, nutmeg, and a little butter. When well pounded and run through a sieve, putit into pots, and press it in hard. Now put the pots into a covered stew-pan, with some boilingwater in the bottom; let them be steamed half an hour, then letthem cool. Press the meat down again, wipe dry, andcover with some hot butter. It will keep formonths. MACARONI. MACARONI, WITH CHEESE ( London Cooking-school ). Do not wash the macaroni. Throw it, broken intoconvenient pieces, into boiling water which is wellsalted; stir or shake it frequently, to prevent its adhering to the bottom ofthe stew-pan. The moment it is quite tender (no longer),pour it into a colander, and shake off all the water. In the mean time, melt a lump of butter the size of a large egg (two ounces) to half apound of macaroni, in a cup on the fire, and grate ahandful (four ounces) of cheese. Now, when the macaroni is well drained, place a little of it in the bottom of the dish in which itis to be served; pour over it some of the meltedbutter, and sprinkle over that a little gratedcheese. Continue alternate layers of the three ingredients untilall the macaroni is used, leaving butter and cheese on the top.Put the dish into the oven, and let it remain three or four minutes, or longenough for the macaroni to soak the butter and cheese; then takeit out; brown the top with a salamander or hot kitchen-shovel, when it will be ready to be served. Aimto have it done just the moment of serving, otherwise the cheese will cool and harden. * Itrequires about twenty minutes to boil macaroni. MACARONI AND WELSHRARE-BIT. When the macaroni is cooked as inthe preceding receipt, arrange it in the centre of a large hot platter; brownthe top with the salamander; place around it, as agarnish, little diamonds of Welsh rare-bits (see page264). This is a nice dish to serve in place of cheese. MACARONI, WITHSWEET-BREADS. Parboil, egg, bread-crumb, and sauté the sweet-breads. Place them in the centre of a large hotplatter; arrange macaroni (cooked with cheese) aroundit, and brown the top with the salamander. MACARONI, WITHTOMATO-SAUCE. Sauce. --Put butter size of an egg into a saucepan; when it is atthe boiling-point, throw in an onion (minced), twosprigs of parsley (chopped fine), and a little pepper. Let it cook five or eight minutes; then throwin a heaping table-spoonful of flour and a little broth from the stock-pot (ifthere be no broth, use a little boilingwater ). Stir this well, and let it cook five or eight minuteslonger. Now pour in about a coffee-cupful of tomatoes which have been stewed and strained through a colander or sieve, and stir all together. Thefollowing note appears at the bottom of page 210 in the original text. *The macaroni may be boiled in stock. Boil half a pound of macaroni tender in well-salted boiling water or in stock, and drain it in the colander. Place alternate layers of the macaroni and the sauce on ahot dish, pouring the sauce over the top; put the dishinto the oven two or three minutes to soak the sauce. Serve immediately. This sauce is simple and very nice. Ichange it from the receipt of the "LondonCooking-teacher," which requires a few additions. His sauce is as follows: Cut a carrot and an onion intolittle dice, and prepare a bouquet, i.e., tie a little parsley, thyme, and a bayleaf together. Put into a stew-pan some butter (size of a large egg); when it is hot, throwinto it the vegetables, bouquet, and three or four whole peppers; let them cook for eight or ten minutes. Thenmix in a heaping table-spoonful of flour, and a littleof the pot-au-feu broth; boil this eight or ten minutes longer; then add a cupful ofcooked and strained tomatoes. Stir alltogether. MACARONI AU GRATIN ( New York Cooking-school ). Ingredients: Half a pound of macaroni, four ouncesof cheese, two ounces of butter, three-quarters of a cupful of Bechamel sauce. Boil the macaroni as described in "macaroni withcheese." When well drained, pour over it nearly all of the sauce and the gratedcheese; toss it in the saucepan, mixing it well together withoutbreaking the macaroni; put it into a gratin dish; pour first the remainder of the sauce over the top, then the remainder of the cheese, and over this sprinkle a table-spoonful of cracker-dust and dots of butter. Put it into a very hot oven ten minutes,coloring the top. CRACKERS, WITHCHEESE. Soak in boiling water round crackers split in two, three inches in diameter andthree-quarters of an inch high (I do not know the name). Take them outcarefully, so as not to break them; make layers of these slices in a little gratin dish or a deep baking-dish, each slice buttered, spread with a little made mustard, and sprinkled with pepper, salt, and plenty of grated cheese. When all is prepared, bake them in ahot oven for ten minutes. EGGS. BOILED EGGS should allbe placed in a wire-basket, and put into boilingwater. Boil them two minutes and three-quarters precisely. Lord Chesterfield said it was only necessary for him to see a person attable to tell if he were a gentleman. He must have had a fine opportunity forobservation when boiled eggs were served. It seemsnonsense (and it is nonsense) when I say that the fashionable world abroad andtheir imitators here consider it insufferably gauche to serve a boiled egg but in one stereotyped way, i.e., in the smallest of egg-cups. The top of the egg iscut off with a knife, and with a little egg-spoon, dippedinto salt when necessary, the egg is eaten from the shell. I really can not see thatit matters much whether an egg is eaten from an egg-glass, or in the little egg-cups from the shell, unless one prefers to be in thefashion, when it requires no more trouble. POACHED EGGS. Salt the water well; when itis simmering, drop lightly each broken egg from a saucer into it. Cook one egg at a time, throwing carefully with a spoon the water from the side over the egg, to whiten the top. When cooked just enough (donot let it get too hard), take out the egg with a perforated ladle, trim off the ragged pieces, and slipit on a small, thin piece of hot buttered toast, cutneatly into squares. When all are cooked, and placed on their separate piecesof toast, sprinkle a little pepper and salt over eachone. Some put into the boiling water muffin-rings, in which the eggs are cooked, to give them an even shape; theypresent a better appearance, however, cooked in the egg-poacher, illustrated among the cooking utensils.Poached eggs are nice introduced into a beef soup--one egg for each person at table; they are also niceserved on thin, diamond-shaped slices of broiled ham instead of toast. Delmonico serves poached eggs on toast, with sorrel sprinkled over the tops. POACHED EGGS ON ANCHOVYTOAST. This is a favorite dish abroad. It is generally a supper-dish,yet can be served at breakfast, lunch, and even as a course for dinner. Thedish consists simply of thin pieces of toast, cut ofequal size, buttered, and spread with a little anchovypaste, and a poached egg placed on eachpiece. Anchovy paste can be purchased in little jarsat all the larger groceries. STUFFED EGGS ( for Lunch ). Boil the eggs hard; cut them in two lengthwise, and remove the yolks, which chop, adding to them some cooked chicken, lamb, veal, or pickledtongue chopped fine; season the mixture, and add enough gravy, or the raw yolk ofegg, to bind them; stuff the cavities, smooth them, and press thetwo halves together; roll them in beaten egg and bread-crumbs twice. When just ready to serve, dip themin a wire-basket into boiling lard; and when they havetaken a delicate color, drain. Serve on a napkin, and garnish with parsley or any kind of leaves, or serve with a tomato-sauce. STUFFED EGGS ( French Cook ). Boil the eggs hard, and cut them in two; take outcarefully the yolks, which mash well, adding a littlefinely minced onion, chopped parsley, pepper, and salt. Mash also double the quantity of bread, which has been soaked in milk; mix bread, yolks, etc., together; then bind them with a little raw yolk of egg; taste to see if they are properlyseasoned. Stuff the eggs with the mixture, so thateach half has the appearance of containing a whole round yolk; smooth the remainder of the mixture on thebottom of a pie-pan; arrange the halves symmetrically inthis bed; brown a little in the oven. STUFFED EGGS, WITHCHEESE. Ingredients: Six eggs, one ounce of cheese, two ounces of butter, one heaping tea-spoonful of flour, a little cayenne, onetable-spoonful of vinegar, one and a half cupfuls of milk. Put the eggs on the fire in coldwater, and when they come to a boilset them at the side of the fire to simmer seven minutes; then put them into cold water. When cold, remove the shells; cut them inhalf lengthwise with a sharp knife, taking care not to tear the whites; mash the yolks, towhich add the grated cheese, vinegar, cayenne. At thecooking-school was added also a tea-spoonful of oliveoil. Make a roux by puttingthe butter into a little saucepan on the fire, andwhen it bubbles mix in the flour. In another smallsaucepan have a wine-glassful of milk boiling, towhich add enough of the roux to thicken it, and then add the yolks, and mix all together until quite hot. Now tothe remaining roux add a cupful of milk, and stir until quite smooth for a sauce; fill thecavities of the whites of the eggs with the yolk preparation, rounding the tops to represent whole yolks; arrange them in a circle on a warm platter, andpour the white sauce in the centre. OMELETS. Nothing is more simple than to make an omelet, yet very few can make one.The eggs stick to the pan, or they are overdone, and tough. Senator Riddle, of Delaware, a decided epicure, took much pleasure in hissuperior knowledge on this important subject. Once when breakfasting with Mrs.Crittenden, of Kentucky, a piece of omelet of doubtful appearance was presentedto him. "Before we proceed with our breakfast," said he, "let me teach you avaluable accomplishment." They repaired at once to the kitchen range, where thesenator demonstrated at once his qualifications as a first-class cook. My ownfirst lesson was from Mr. Riddle, so of course I have the correct modus operandi; afterward in London, however, Iheard a lecture upon omelets from a cooking professor, and was astonished atthe multiplicity of dishes which could be made from this simple preparation;not only breakfast dishes, but also the variety of sweet omelet fordessert. PLAIN OMELET. The fireshould be quite hot. All cookery-books especially expatiate on the necessity ofa pan to be used omelets alone. Any clean, smooth iron spider, or sauté pan, is a good enough omelet-pan. Put the pan on the fire to become heated;break the eggs into a kitchen basin; sprinkle overthem pepper and salt, andgive them twelve vigorous beats with a spoon. This is enough to break all the yolks, and twelve beats was Mr. Riddle's rule. Now put butter the size of an egg (for five eggs ) in the heated pan; turn it around so that itwill moisten all the bottom of the pan. When it is well melted, and begins to boil, pour in the eggs. Holding the handle of the omelet-pan in the left hand, carefully and lightly witha spoon draw up the whitened egg from the bottom, sothat all the eggs may be equally cooked, or whitenedto a soft, creamy substance. Now, still with the left hand, shake the panforward and backward, which will disengage the eggs from the bottom; then shaking again the omelet alittle one side, turn with a spoon half of one side over the other; andallowing it to remain it all the time, toss it over the other; and allowing itto remain a moment to harden a little at the bottom, gently shaking it all thetime, toss it over on to a warm platter held in the right hand. A littlepractice makes one quite dexterous in placing the omelet in the centre of theplatter, and turning it over as it is tossed from the omelet-pan. However, if one is unsuccessful in the tossing operation, which is thecorrect thing, according to the cooking professor, the omelet can be lifted tothe platter with a pancake-turner. It should be creamyand light in the centre, and more firm on the outside. I will specify several different omelets. A variety of others may be made inthe same way, by adding boiled tongue cut into dice,sliced truffles, cooked and sliced kidneys with the gravy pouredaround, etc., etc. OMELET, WITHTOMATOES. Make the plain omelet; and justbefore turning one half over the other, place in the centre three or four whole tomatoes which have been boiled a few minutespreviously and seasoned. When the omelet is turned, of course the tomatoes will be quite enveloped. Serve with tomato-sauce (see page 125) poured around it. OMELET WITH GREENPEASE is managed as omelet with tomatoes,putting several spoonfuls of cooked green pease in thecentre before the omelet is lapped, then serving with a neat row of pease (without juice) around it. OMELET, WITH HAM. Throwinto the omelet-pan fine-cut shreds of tender ham with the butter. When the ham has cooked a moment, throw in the eggs, and proceed as for plain omelet. A littlechopped parsley beaten with the eggs will improve it. The dish may be garnished withthin diamonds of ham around the omelet. OMELET, WITH FINEHERBS. Before beating the eggs, add with the pepper and salt some chopped parsley and shives; cook amoment in the butter some thin shreds of onion, then pour in the eggs, and proceed as for a plain omelet. The shives maybe omitted. OMELET, WITHMUSHROOMS. Boil the mushrooms in a little water, or stock, to which areadded pepper, salt, a fewdrops of lemon-juice, and, when done a little flour, to thicken it slightly. Inclose some mushrooms in the omelet inthe manner explained for tomatoes; pour the remainder of the mushrooms around the omelet, with a little juice. OMELET, WITHSHRIMPS. Inclose some picked shrimps in thecentre of the omelet. Garnish the omelet with shrimpsunpicked. OMELET, WITHOYSTERS. Scald the oysters in their own liquor; when just about to boil, plump them bythrowing them into cold water; then beard them; beatthem into the eggs before they are cooked leaving afew oysters for garnishing the plate. OMELET, WITH CHEESE, ORFONDUE. Brillat Savarin says: "Take thesame number of eggs guests at table. Take then a piece of good fromage de Gruyère, weighingabout one-third, and a piece of butter one-sixth thisweight. Break up and beat your eggs well in asaucepan; then add your cheese and butter grated. Put your saucepan on the fire, and stirwith a wooden spoon until the substance is thick and soft; put in a little salt, according to the age of the cheese, and a good sprinkling of pepper, which is one of the positive characteristicsof this ancient dish. Serve up on a warm dish. Get some of your best wine from the cellar, which pass around briskly, andyou will see wonders." Gruyère cheese is considered superior toother cheeses in this omelet; yet any kind of Americancheese, if highly flavored, is most delicious also, and, I think,quite as good as the Gruyère. I would use fresh cheese, and chop it fine, rather than grate it, andalso would not add so much butter. We will say, then,to six eggs add three-quarters of a cupful, or twoounces, of cheese chopped fine, a piece of butter the size of a small egg, salt, and pepper. Proceed asfor plain omelet. OMELET, WITH CHEESE ANDMACARONI. Add to the above receipt about two or three cupfuls of macaroni which has been boiled in saltedwater and drained, and is still hot. FRIED OMELET SOUFFLé( for Breakfast ). Beat the whites and yolks of four eggs separately, and then,adding pepper and salt, putthe whites over the yolks, and mix them together carefully. Put butter the sizeof a small egg into an omelet-pan, and when it hascovered the bottom of the pan and is bubbling turn in the eggs; with a spoon lift them from the bottom until allis slightly cooked, or at least well heated; then gather up the sides to makeit into omelet form; shake the pan to disengage the omelet, and at the sametime to color it slightly at the bottom; turn this over into the centre of awarm platter, so that the colored part be on top. SWEET OMELET ( for Dessert ). Add a little sugar to the eggs, instead of pepper and salt; make it then as a plain omelet, inclosing in thecentre any kind of preserves, marmalade, or jam; when it isturned on to the dish, sprinkle sugar over thetop. OMELET, WITH RUM. Thisis a most delicious omelet. Add a little sugar tothe A flaming omelette on a roundplatter. eggs, say asherry glassful to six eggs and make the omelet as aplain omelet. When turned on the dish, sprinkle a little handful of sugar over the top, and pour over five or sixtable-spoonfuls of rum. Set it on fire, and serve itat the table burning. OMELETSOUFFLé. Although it is a simple thing to make an omelet soufflé, and although in France there is notone cook in a score who can not make a delicious one for any and everyoccasion, I would not advise a careless cook to ever attempt it. Theingredients are: Six whites and three yolks of eggs, three ounces of pulverizedsugar (three table-spoonfuls), and a flavoring of vanilla or lemon. First, beatthe yolks and sugar to alight cream, and add a few drops of flavoring; thenbeat the whites to the stiffest possible froth. Havethe yolks in a rather deep kitchenbowl; turn whites over them, and with aspoon giving it a rotary motion, cut the two, mixing them carefully together.Turn this on to a baking-dish, either of earthenware ortin, with sides two or three inches high and slightly buttered. Smooth over thetop, sprinkle over sugar, and put it into a moderateoven. If it has to be turned or moved in the oven, do it as gently as possible.When it has risen well, and is of a fine yellow color, it is ready to beserved. It should be served at once, or it will fall. Omelet soufflé was especially nice at theCafé Vienna in Paris. This is their cook's receipt: "For one portion,"said "use the whites of three eggs; beat them well; add onetable-spoonful of marmalade cut into fine pieces, or little pieces offresh peaches; mix with powderedsugar. Bake it on a dish rubbed with butter in a rather quick oven." It seemed as if thiswas too simple a receipt to be so nice. In another place was a layer of marmalade on the bottom of the dish, with a soufflé according to the first receipt,flavored with vanilla, banked over it. OMELET, WITH ASPARAGUS POINTS,CAULIFLOWERS, OR OTHER VEGETABLES. Cook the vegetables first until they are done, as they will nothave time to cook with the eggs. Make them in the samemanner described for tomatoes; or the vegetables may be beaten with the eggs. Make a border around the omelet of thevegetables used. SALADS. In an English book is told a story of a famous French salad-dresser whobegan very poor, and made a fortune by dressing salad for dinners in London. Hewould go from one place to another in his carriage, with a liveried servant,and his mahogony case. This case contained all the necessaries for hisbusiness, such as differently perfumed vinegars, oils with or without the tasteof fruit, soy, caviar, truffles, anchovies, catchup, gravy, some yolks of eggs,etc. I confess to lively curiosity as to how these perfumed and scientificmixtures would taste; however, we will be satisfied with the hundred and oneways of arranging our simple and delicious salads, within the comprehension ofall. A French man thinks he can not eat his dinner without his salad. It would bewell if every one had the same appreciation of this most wholesome, refreshing,and at the same time most economical dish. It is an accomplishment to know howto dress a salad well, which is especially prized by the fashionable world. Thematerials used for salads are generally those shown in the list on thefollowing page: Lettuce, Celery, Endive, Garden-cress, Sorrel, Onions, Garlic, Radishes, Beet-root, Pepper-grass, Coldboiledpotatoes, Cabbage, Cives, Tarragon, Nasturtiumblossoms; or salads of mixed vegetables ( salades enmacédoine ), selected from this list of vegetables: Cold boiledpotatoes, String-beans, Navy-beans, Limabeans, Beet-root, Olives, Tomatoes, Pease, Cauliflower, Asparagus-tops, Cucumbers, Carrots, Truffles, Turnips. Salads are also made of cold boiled fowls or fish, as follows: Chickens, Lobster, Salmon, Prawns, Shrimps, Sardines. There are two kinds of dressing which are the best and oftenest used: the Mayonnaise and the French dressing. Epicures preferthe simple French dressing for salads served without fish or fowl. For chickenand fish salads, and some vegetables, as tomatoes and cauliflowers, they usethe Mayonnaise sauce. This arrangement of dressing isalmost universal in London and Paris. In America we use the Mayonnaise for all salads. I prefer the foreigncustom. The simple salad with the French dressing is, after all, the mostrefreshing and satisfactory, if one has a heavy dinner served before it. Thereceipts are as follows: MAYONNAISE SAUCE. Putthe uncooked yolk of an egg into a cold bowl; beat itwell with a silver fork; then add two salt-spoonfuls of salt, and one salt-spoonful of mustardpowder; work them well a minute before adding the oil; then mix in a little good oil, which must be poured in very slowly (a few dropsat a time) at first, alternated occasionally with a few drops in vinegar. In proportion as the oil is used, the sauce should gain consistency. Whenit begins to have the appearance of jelly, alternate a few drops of lemon-juice with the oil. Whenthe egg has absorbed a gill of oil, finish the sauce by adding a very little pinch of Cayenne pepper and oneand a half tea-spoonfuls of good vinegar; taste it tosee that there are salt, mustard, cayenne, and vinegar enough. If not, add more very carefully. Theseproportions will suit most tastes; yet some like more mustard and more oil. Becautious not to use too much cayenne. By beating the egg a minute before adding the oil, there is little danger of the sauce curdling; yetif, by adding too much oil at first, it shouldpossibly curdle, immediately interrupt the operation. Put the yolksof one or two eggs on another plate; beat them well, and add thecurdled Mayonnaise by degrees, and finish by adding more oil, lemon-juice, vinegar, salt, and cayenne according to taste. If lemons are not at hand, many use vinegar instead. Delmonico uses four yolks ofeggs for two quart-bottles of oil. It isonly necessity, then, to use one yolk for a pint of oil, the egg only being afoundation for the sauce. It is easier, however, to begin with more yolks: many use three of them for a gill of oil. The sauce will notcurdle so easily if the few drops of vinegar are usedat first, after a very little oil is used. It keepsperfectly well by putting it into a glass preserve or picklebottle, with a ground-glass stopper. It is well to have enough madeto last a week at least. The opportunity of making it may be taken, and addingit to the Mayonnaise bottle, when there are extra yolks left, after the whites of the eggs are used forother purposes, such as white cake, corn-starch pudding, etc. It requires about a quarter of an hour to make this sauce. In summer, theprocess of making it is greatly facilitated by placing the eggs and oil in the ice-chest half an hour before using them. Sometimes, forthe sake of a change, the Mayonnaise sauce is made green. It is thencalled SAUCE à LARAVINGOTE. Here is Carême'sreceipt for it: "Take a good handful of chervil, together with some tarragon, and a few cives. When these herbs have been washed, put them into boiling water for five or six minutes, with a little salt; after which, cool, drain, and squeeze them dry.Pound them well, adding a spoonful of Mayonnaise sauce; then passthe whole through a sieve, and mix with the Mayonnaise sauce. If you find it pale a green,add a little spinach prepared in the same way." It is more convenient and simple to add boiled and mashed greenpease to the sauce for coloring. The green Mayonnaise is sometimes used to spread over a coldboiled fish (marinated). The dish is garnished with lettuce heads. Sometimes,for lobster or fish salads, the Mayonnaise sauce is prepared red. RED MAYONNAISESAUCE. Pound some lobster coral, pass itthrough a sieve, and mix it with the Mayonnaise sauce. FRENCH DRESSING. Ingredients: Onetable-spoonful of vinegar, three table-spoonfuls of olive-oil, one salt-spoonful of pepper, one salt-spoonful of salt, one even tea-spoonful of onion scraped fine. Many use tarragonvinegar, i.e., vinegar in which tarragon has been soaked. Pour the oil, mixed with the pepper and salt, over thesalad; mix them together; then add the vinegar and mixagain. Chaptal says: "It results, from this process,that there can never be too much vinegar: from thespecific gravity of the vinegar compared with the oil, what is more than needful will fall to the bottomof the salad-bowl. The salt should not be dissolved inthe vinegar, but in the oil, by which means it is more equally distributedthrough the salad." This is the usual mode of mixing the salad; but I prefer to mix the pepper and salt, then add the oil and onion, and then the vinegar; and, when well mingled, to pour the mixtureover the salad, or place the salad over it, and mix all together. It seems tome to be more evenly distributed in this manner. Many different combinations can be made to suit the fancy, from the list ofsalad materials. I will give certain combinations oftenest seen. It must beremembered that salad is never good unless perfectly fresh. It should not bemixed, or brought into the dining-room, until the moment when it is to beeaten. When preparing lettuce salad, choose the crisp,tender, centre leaves of head lettuce. The kind seenin England and France, called romaine, is now much used in New York;it is very crisp and tender. The seeds of this lettuce can be obtained in New York. In the East, tarragon, and endive also, arelargely produced, and used to imitate these foreign salads. The tarragon leaves are chopped fine, and mixed in the French dressing (without onion) to use with lettuce. The taste for tarragon is generally an acquired one: I prefer the tarragon vinegar to the fresh leaves, as it has only aslight flavor of the plant. COMBINATIONS. 1. LETTUCE ( French Cook ). Rub garlic in the dish in which lettuce, with French dressing (withoutonion), is to be served. Leave no pieces of the garlic --merely rubbing the dish will give flavorenough. The French often use garlic in salads. I wouldadvise, however, the use of the simple French dressing withonion to be mixed with the lettuceleaves, and dispense with the garlic. Use the plain or the tarragon vinegar. Nasturtiumblossoms have a most pleasant piquant flavor, and make a beautifulgarnish for a salad. 2. Lettuce, with water-cresses or pepper-grass mixed, and small radishes placed around for a garnish. French or Mayonnaise dressing. 3. Lettuce, with cives mixed, and olives placedaround for garnish. French dressing. 4. Lettuce, with celery mixed (most excellent). Cut the celery into pieces, an inch and a half long; thenslice these lengthwise into four or five pieces. Mix with lettuce. Frenchdressing. 5. Lettuce and sorrel mixed. Frenchdressing. 6. Lettuce, with anchovies (cut into thin strips as celery ) and chopped cives. To vary this dish, prawns and shrimps are usedfor a garnish; or the anchovies may be left out. French dressing. 7. Endive alone. Frenchdressing. 8. Endive, mixed with water-cress. Frenchdressing. 9. Endive, with celery, beets, and hard-boiled eggs in slices. Frenchdressing. Endive in centre, row of eggs around, then row of beets, then an edge of fringed celery. 10. Water-cress is good mixed with coldboiled beets. Cut the beets into little dice; garnish with olives. Frenchdressing. 11. Lettuce and dice of cold boiled potatoes, and cold boiled beets. Potatoes piled in thecentre, beets next, and lettuce around the edge of the dish. French dressing. 12. POTATO SALAD. Newsmall onions sliced, mixed with cold boiled potatoes cut into dice. Frenchdressing. This potato salad is very nice. Another way is to rub the dish with garlic in which the salad is made. Mix chopped parsley with the potatoes cutinto dice. French dressing. 13. Sliced cucumbers, and sliced newonions. French dressing. 14. Cabbage alone, with French or Mayonnaise dressing. 15. COLD SLAW. Cut the cabbage not too fine; sprinkle pepper and salt over it, andset it crisp. Dressing. --Beat the yolks of threeeggs, or the whole of two eggs, with fivetable-spoonfuls of good strong vinegar, two heapingtea-spoonfuls of sugar (three, if the vinegar is very strong), half a tea-spoonful of made mustard, and butter sizeof an almond. Put these ingredients into a tin cup, and stir them over the fireuntil they are about to boil, or until they become a smooth paste. Put themixture one side to become cold, and to remain until just before it is wantedat table; then mix it well with the cold cabbage, andgarnish the top with slices of hard-boiled egg. Cold slaw is especially nice served with fried oysters. Place it in thecentre of the warm platter on a folded napkin (a too warm platter would injureit), then make a circle of fried oysters around it.This makes a nice course for dinner. The salads of vegetables are generally better with the French dressing. Theypresent a better appearance by cutting them with a small vegetable-cutter. SALAD OF VEGETABLES ( Salade de Légumes ). Mix cold boiled pease, string-beans, piecesof cauliflower, asparagus-tops, or almost any one of the smallvegetables; do not cut the larger ones too fine. Frenchdressing. 17. Cold boiled potatoes, Limabeans, beets, carrots. Frenchdressing. 18. Cold baked navy beans, with Mayonnaise sauce. 19. MAYONNAISE OFCAULIFLOWER. Place some cauliflowers intojust enough boiling water to cover them; add a little salt and butter to the water. When cooked, let them become cold; then seasonthem with a marinade of a little salt and pepper, three spoonfuls of vinegar, and one spoonful of oil. Let them then remain for an hour. When ready toserve, pile them on the dish to a point; then mask them with a Mayonnaise sauce. Carême finishes this dish by placing aroundit a border of croûtons of aspicjelly. I can not think that aspic jelly isgood enough to pay for the trouble of making it, and I am a particular advocatefor dishes that taste well. Gouffé arranges around the dish a border of carrots, beets, turnips, or any greenvegetables which have been marinated. 20. TOMATOES à LAMAYONNAISE. This is a truly delicious dish; it would, in fact, be goodevery day during the tomato season. Select large fine tomatoes and place them in the ice-chest; the colder they are, the better, if notfrozen; skin them without Eight slices of tomatoserved in a ring on a round platter. the use of hotwater, and slice them, still retaining the form of the whole tomato. Arrange them in uniform order on a dish, witha spoonful of Mayonnaise sauce thick as a jelly on the topof each tomato. Garnish the dish with leaves of any kind. Parsley isvery pretty. Some marinate the tomato slices, i.e., dip them into a mixture of three spoonfuls of vinegar, to one spoonful of oil, pepper, and salt; and then, after draining well, mix them in the Mayonnaise sauce. STRING-BEANS IN SALAD ( French Cook ). String the beans and boil them whole; when boiledtender, and they have become cold, slice them lengthwise, cutting each bean into four long slices; place them neatly, theslices all lying in one direction, An illustration ofstring beans served on a long ovalplatter. crosswise on a platter. Season them anhour or two before serving, with a marinade of a little pepper, salt, and threespoonfuls of vinegar to one spoonful of oil. Just before serving, drain from them any dropsthat may have collected, and carefully mix themwith a French dressing. This makes a delicioussalad. CHICKEN SALAD. Boil ayoung tender chicken, and when cold separate the meatfrom the bones; cut it into little square blocks or dice; do not mince it. Cutwhite tender stalks of celery into about threequarter-inch lengths, saving the outside green stalks for soups; mix the chicken and celery together;and then stir well into them a mixture in the proportion of threetable-spoonfuls of vinegar to one table-spoonful of oil, with pepper, salt, and a little mustard totaste. Put this aside for an hour or two, or until just beforeserving; A chicken salad garnished with greens andslices of hard-boiled eggs served on a roundplatter. this is called marinating the chicken; it will absorb the vinegar, etc. When about to serve, mix the celery and chicken with a Mayonnaise sauce, leaving aportion of the sauce to mask the top. Reserve severalfresh ends or leaves of celery with which to garnishthe dish. Stick a little bouquet of these tops in the centre of the salad, thena row of them around it. From the centre to each of the four sides sprinklerows of capers. Sometimes slices or little cutdiamonds of hard-boiled eggs are used forgarnishing. Chicken salad is often made with lettuce instead of celery. Marinate the chicken alone; add it to the small tender leaves(uncut) of the lettuce the last moment before serving;then pour Mayonnaise dressing over the top. Garnish with little centre-heads of lettuce, capers, cold choppedred beets if you choose, or sliced hard-boiled eggs. Sometimes little strips of anchovy are added for a garnish. When on the table itshould all be mixed together. Many may profit by this receipt for chickensalad; for it is astonishing how few understand making so common a dish. It isgenerally minced, and mixed with hard-boiled eggs, etc., for a dressing. CHICKEN SALAD ( Carême's Receipt ). Take some tender pullets; fry them in the sauté pan, or roastthem; when cold, cut them up, skinning and trimming them neatly. Put the piecesinto a tureen, with some salt, pepper, oil, vinegar, some sprigs of parsley, and an onion cutinto slices; mix all well together; cover, and let stand for some hours; then,just before serving, drain the salad, taking care to remove all bits of onion, etc., and place it tastefully on lettuce-leaves, with the hearts of thelettuce on top, and cover with a mayonnaise dressing. MAYONNAISE OFSALMON. Remove the skin and bones from a piece of salmon, boiled and cooled, and cut it into pieces twoinches long. Marinate them, i.e., place them in a dish, and season them with salt, pepper, a little oil, and, in this case, plenty of vinegar, some parsley, and alittle onion cut up; then cover, and let them standtwo or three hours. In the mean time, cut up some hard-boiledeggs into four or eight pieces for a border. Cover the bottom ofthe salad-dish with lettuce leaves, seasoned with a French dressing; place your salmon slices in a ring on the lettuce, pouring in the centre a Mayonnaise sauce. Sprinkle capers over the whole. Other kinds of fish, such as pike,blue-fish, and flounders, make very good salads, arranged inthe same way. Carême, Gouffé, andFrancatelli fry their fish and fowl in a sauté pan, instead ofboiling them. If you do not make use of remnants of salmon left from the table, you can form better-shapedslices by cutting the fish into little shapes beforeit is boiled. If you wish to boil them, immerse them in warmwater (with vinegar and salt added) in a wire basket, or drainer. SALAD à LAFILLEY. Ingredients: Cottage cheese, hard-boiled eggs, cives. Arrange cives on a salad-dish in such a manner as to form a nest; put intothe nest whole hard-boiled eggs (shelled), one foreach person at table, alternated with little round cakes of A Salad à laFilley, with the eggs and cottage cheese served on a bed of chives in thecenter of a round platter. The dish is garnished with a ring of hard-boiledeggs cut in half to display the yolk. cottage cheese. In serving, place upon each plate an egg, a cake of cottagecheese, and some of the cives. Each person cuts all together, andputs on the French dressing of oil, vinegar, pepper and salt. FRITTERS. FRENCH FRITTER BATTER ( French Cook ), No. 1. PUT a heaping cupful of flour into a bowl; add two yolks of eggs, a table-spoonful of oliveoil, which is better than meltedbutter, and one or two table-spoonfuls of brandy, wine, or lemon-juice. * Stir it well,adding, little by little, water enough to give it thethickness of ordinary batter. This may be used at once; but it is better to putit away for a day, or even for a week. At the moment of cooking, stir in wellthe whites of two eggs beaten to a very stifffroth. FRITTER BATTER (No.2). Ingredients: One pint of milk, three eggs, a little salt, one pintof flour. It can be made with or without atea-spoonful of baking-powder. Beat the egg well; add part of the milk and salt, then the flour and milk alternately,beating it all quickly, and cooking it immediately, dropping it by the spoonfulinto boiling-hot lard. The fritters are improved byusing prepared flour, Horsford's or Hecker's beingespecially good. PINE APPLE, APPLE PRESERVE, ORPEACH FRITTERS. Add a pint or less of any of these fruits, cut into small pieces, to either of the abovereceipts. When done, sprinkle sugar over the tops. *The brandy, wine, or lemon-juice may be omitted ifpreferred. OYSTERS OR CLAM FRITTERS (No.1). Chop, not too fine, twenty-five of either clams or oysters (bearded ornot), and mix them in the fritter batter of either ofthe above receipts. CLAM FRITTERS (No.2). Strain one pint of clams, saving the juice; add to this juice sufficient water to makeone pint; mix into it one egg, well beaten, andsufficient prepared flour to make a light batter, also the clams chopped, andsome salt. Drop by the spoonful into boiling-hot lard. KENTISH FRITTERS ( Mrs. Acton ). Beat up the whites of three eggs and the yolks of six, with half a pound of flour, a cupful of milk, anda large tea-spoonful of yeast. Put the mixture into ajar, and set it near the stove until the next day; then add to the batter twolarge apples chopped. Drop this by the spoonful intoboiling lard. Sprinkle over sugar. FRIED CREAM ( Crême Frite ). Every one should try thisreceipt: It will surprise many to know how soft cream could be enveloped in thecrust, while it is an exceedingly good dish for a dinner course, or for lunchor tea. When the pudding is hard, it can be rolled in the egg and bread-crumbs.The moment the egg touches the hot lard it hardens and secures the pudding,which softens to a creamy substance very delicious. Ingredients: One pint of milk, five ounces of sugar (little more than half a cupful), butter the size of a hickory-nut, yolks ofthree eggs, two table-spoonfuls of cornstarch, and one table-spoonful of flour (agenerous half cupful altogether), stick of cinnamon oneinch long, one half tea-spoonful of vanilla. Put the cinnamon into the milk, and when it is just about to boil stir in the sugar, and the corn starch and flour, the two latter rubbed smooth with two or threetable-spoonfuls of extra coldmilk; stir it over the fire for fully two minutes, to cook wellthe starch and flour; take itfrom the fire, stir in the beaten yolks of theeggs, and return it a few moments to set them; now, again taking itfrom the fire, remove the cinnamon, stir in the butter and vanilla, and pourit on a buttered platter until one-third of an inch high. When cold and stiff,cut the pudding into parallelograms, about three inches long and two incheswide; roll these carefully, first in sifted cracker-crumbs, then in eggs (slightly beaten and sweetened), then again in the cracker-crumbs. Dip these into boiling-hot lard (a wire basket should be used if convenient), andwhen of fine color take them out, and place them in the oven for four or fiveminutes to better soften the pudding. Sprinkle over pulverizedsugar, and serve immediately. PEACH, APRICOT, OR APPLEFRITTER ( French Cook ). The fresh or the canned fruit may be used. Iffresh, pare, core, and cut them in halves. In either case, let them remain twoor three hours in brandy, rum, or wine, with plenty of sugar sprinkled over, with some grated lemon peel or zest. When theyhave absorbed the flavor of these surroundings, drain, and dip them into the fritter batter (No. 1). If rum is used for marinating the fruit, it should be also used in the batter. When thefritters are done and well drained, sprinkle powderedsugar over them. BREAD FRITTERS. Havingcut off the crust, cut the bread into any shapepreferred, such as squares, circles, diamonds, etc. Let it soak in custard ( milk, one or two eggs, sugar, and a flavoringof either lemon-zest, or vanilla, cinnamon, nutmeg, rose-water, brandy, or wine ). When wellsoaked (not enough, however, to break into pieces), roll it first in bread crumbs, then in beaten egg (sweetened and flavored), and again in bread or cracker crumbs, andfry in boiling lard. Serve the fritters sprinkled with powdered sugar, with or without a sweetsauce. PORK FRITTERS (see page 164). CORNFRITTERS. Ingredients: The corn cut fromseven ears, one pint of milk, one egg beaten, salt, prepared flour enough tomake a light batter. Drop by the table-spoonful into boiling-hot lard. APPLE FRITTERS. Paresome fine apples, and with an apple-corer cut out the core from the centre of each;now cut them across in slices, about one-third of an inch thick, having theround opening in the centre; dip these in either fritter batter No.1 or No. 2; fry in boiling lard; sprinkleover sugar, and serve in a circle, one overlapping theother, with or without a sweet sauce in thecentre. PASTRY. PROFESSIONAL cooks use butter for pastry. Puff paste should never beattempted with lard or a half mixture of it. If lard or clarified beef suet isused, the pastry of an indifferent cook will be improved by adding a littlebaking-powder to the flour and rolling the paste very thin. It is not difficult to make puff paste. In winter, when it is freezingoutdoors, or in summer, when a refrigerator with ice in it is at hand, it isvery little more trouble to make puff paste than any other kind. The simplerolling of the dough to form layers requires very little practice. The onlysecret left, after using cold water and butter cold enough not to penetrate thedough, is to have it almost at a freezing-point, or a least thoroughly chilled,as it is put into a hot oven. The vols-au-vent of strawberries, or berries of anykind, or of jellies, or of lemon paste (see age 244), and also rissoles, are especially fine, and are quicklymade. As hundreds of different dishes can be made with pastry, and as Carêmehas devoted a good-sized volume to the subject, I will copy his receipt forpuff paste. It is not modest, perhaps, to put my own first; but it is for thebenefit of more ordinary cooks, who will never take extra trouble to make athing perfect. PUFFPASTE. Ingredients: One pound of flour, three-quarters of a pound of butter, yolks of two eggs, alittle salt, a sprinkle of sugar, a little very cold (or, better, ice-cold) water. (All the professional cooks use a pound of butter to a pound of flour. Ithink it makes the pastry too rich, and prefer three quarters of a pound of butter to a pound of flour. ) Sift and weigh the flour, and put it on the boardor marble slab; sprinkle a little salt and a verylittle sugar over it. Beat the yolks ofthe eggs, and then stir into them a few spoonfuls of ice-cold water; pour this slowly into the centre ofthe flour with the left hand, working it at the sametime well into the mass with the tips of the fingers of the right hand.Continue to work it, turning the fingers round and round on the board, untilyou have a well-worked, smooth, and firm paste. Nowroll it out into a rectangular form, being particular to have the edges quitestraight. Much of success depends upon the even folding of the paste. Work the butter (which should be kept some minutes in very cold water if it is at all soft) until the moistureand salt are wiped out, and it is quite supple; caremust be taken, however, to keep the butter fromgetting too soft, as in this condition it would ruin the paste. Divide it intothree equal parts; spread one part as flatly and evenly as possible over halfof the crust, turn the other half over it, folding it a second time from rightto left. Roll this out to the same rectangular form as before; spread thesecond portion of the butter on half of the crust;fold and roll it out again as before, repeating the same process with the thirdportion of butter. The paste has now been given whatthey call three turns; it should be given six turns, turning and rolling thepaste after the butter is in. However, after the firstthree turns, or after the butter is all in, the pasteshould be placed on the ice, or in a cold place, toremain about ten or fifteen minutes between each of the last three turns: thiswill prevent the butter getting soft enough topenetrate the dough. Each time before the dough is folded, it should be turnedhalf round, so as to roll it in a different direction each time; this makes thelayers more even. In order to turn the paste, theend may be held to the rolling-pin; then, rolling the pin, the dough will foldloosely around it; the board may be sprinkled with flour; then the dough can be unrolled in the sidedirection. This is better than to turn it with the hands, as it should behandled as little as possible. When folded the last time, put the paste on aplatter, cover, and place in on the ice for half an hour, or where it maybecome thoroughly chilled; then roll it out for immediate use; or, so long asit is kept in a half-frozen state, it may be kept for one or two days. Firm,solid butter should be selected for puff paste; alight, crumbling butter would be very unsuitable.After the pies, patties, or other articles are made (as in receipts), thescraps may be used for making rissoles. Always select the coolest place possiblefor making puff paste. In winter it is well to make itby an open window. CARêME'S RECEIPT FOR PUFFPASTE. Ingredients: Twelve ounces of fine sifted flour, twelve ounces of butter, two drams of finesalt, and the yolks of twoeggs beaten. Manner of working: Having placed twelve ounces of flour on the board, make a small hole in the middle,into which put two drams of fine salt, the yolks of two eggs, and nearly a glass of water. With the ends of the fingers gradually mix the flour with the ingredients, adding a little water when necessary, till the paste is of a properconsistence--rather firm than otherwise. Then lean your hand on the board, andwork it for some minutes, when the paste will become soft to the touch andglossy in appearance. Care must be taken, in mixing the flour with theliquid ingredients, that they do not escape, and that the paste be very lightlygathered together, to prevent it from forming into lumps, which render itstiff, and very difficult to be worked, thereby in some degree causing afailure, which is easily ascertained by the paste, when drawn out, immediatelyreceding, which arises from its having been clumsily and irregularly mixed. Toremedy this, let it be carefully rolled out, placing here and there five or sixpieces of butter, each the size of a nutmeg, when, after working it as before, itwill acquire the degree of softness necessary. It is of importance to observethat this paste should be neither too soft nor too hard, but of a propermedium; yet it is better to be a little too soft than too stiff. One should notchoose a hot place in which to make paste: for this reason, summer renders theoperation quite difficult. If one can not find a cool place, the paste might beslightly stiffer in summer than in winter. When the paste has been made as above, take three-quarters of a pound of butter in pieces, which has been twenty minutes in ice-water, well washed and pounded. Squeeze and workit well in a napkin, in order to separate the water from it, and at the same time to render it soft,and, above all, of an equal consistence; then, as quickly as possible, roll thepaste into a square on a marble slab (the ends must be perfectly even, as muchsuccess depends upon folding); place the butter in themiddle; spread it over half the paste, immediately turning over the other halfof the paste to cover it. Then roll the paste out about three feet in length;fold it into three parts by doubling one part over the other; after which rollit out again, and fold it once more into three equal parts; now roll it to agreater length, fold it, and put it quickly on a plate sprinkled with flour. Place this upon ten pounds of pounded ice, then, covering it with a second plate,put upon that one pound of broken ice. This plate serves to keep the surface ofthe paste cool, and also to prevent its becoming soft by the action of the air.After two or three minutes, remove the plate, and turn the paste upside down,instantly covering it as before. After about fifteen minutes, roll it out, anduse it as expeditiously as possible. Thus, in less than half an hour, it is possible to make very fine puff paste, having previously every thing ready--theice pounded, the butter frozen, and the oven quitehot; for otherwise it can not be done. This is all-important, as it issometimes an hour before the oven can be made hot. When the oven is halfheated, begin to make the paste. The great variety of elegant and delicate forms * thispaste is made to assume justifies one for givingsuch explicit instructions, and repays one for all necessary pains to makeit. The following note appears at the bottom of page 235 in theoriginal text. *Francatelli used three oblong tin pans, three inchesdeep, instead of plates, the under and upper pans serving to hold the poundedice.--ED. FOR PIES. I mean Yankeepies. Our English cousins, when speaking of pies, mean only meat-pies, callingour pies tarts. When the paste is fitted over the pie-plate, cut round the edge of it with a sharp knifedipped in flour. Now cut a long curved strip, about three-quarters of an inchwide, wet slightly the top of the paste on the pie-plate near the edge ( not theedge ), and fit the strip around the pie, the edges coming together. Fillthe pie, and place in the oven as soon as possible. PIE PASTE OF LARD AND BUTTER ( Mrs. Treat ). Rub a half pound of fresh lard into a pound of flour; use just enough of very coldwater to bind it together; roll it out rather thin, and spread butter over the surface; now fold the paste, turningit twice; roll it out again, dredging the board (a marble slab is preferable)with flour; spread on more butter as before, and fold it again. The same processis continued a third time, using in all a quarter of a pound of butter, which should at first be divided into threeequal parts. * A COMMON PASTE ( for Meat-pies and Puddings ). Ingredients: Onepound of flour, half a pound of lard, two tea-spoonfuls of yeast-powder, and a little coldwater. First mix well the yeast-powder into the sifted flour; then rub in very carelessly and lightly the lard, distributing it in rather coarse pieces. Nowpour in enough cold water to bind it together loosely,using the separated fingers of the right hand to turn the flour lightly, while the water is being poured in with the left hand; roll itout in its rough state; prepare the dish, and bake or boil immediately. The following note appears at the bottom of page 236 in theoriginal text. *Four cupfuls of sifted flour are a pound; one cupfulof lard or butter is half a pound. AN APPLE-PIE ( Carême ). Select fine apples; pare them, and take out thecores without breaking them. Boil several wholein a stew-pan with a little lemon-juice, a very little of the yellow part of the peel, some sugar, and enough water tocover them, until nearly done. Quarter other apples; put them also on the fire with a little water, lemon-peel, lemon-juice, and sugar; boilthese to a kind of marmalade; add some butter and peach marmalade, and rub it through a colander. Have some pie-plates covered with puff paste; fill the bottom with the marmalade, and put in four small apples (whole) to each pie, filling the cavitiesbetween with peach marmalade. Put two strips of crust (half an inch wide) across the pie, which willdivide the apples. Bake in a quick oven. This isespecially good served with cream. A PLAIN APPLE-PIE ( Miss Amanda Newton ). Slice pippin apples, and put them between twolayers of pie-paste, with enough water to keep them moist. When they are baked, liftthe crust carefully off with a knife, and put it aside; now mash the apples with a spoon, season them with plenty of sugar, butter, and grated nutmeg; replace the top crust and sprinkle sugar over it. These pies are especially nice whenfreshly made, then allowed to cool, and served with cream poured over each piece as it is cut, ready to beeaten. I think the flavor of the apple is better preservedin this manner than if the seasoning were cooked in it. However, many stew the apples first, before baking them in the pie. FRUIT AND BERRY PIES, ORTARTS. In England, only an upper crust is made. In this country thereis generally only an under crust, with bars of paste crossed over the top. I prefer this mode; butthese tarts should always be served fresh, or the under crust will becomesoaked and unwholesome. The berries or fruits are first stewed with sugar to taste, then baked, or not baked in the crust,as preferred. LEMON-PIE ( Mrs.Hunt ), No. 1. Ingredients: One heaping table-spoonful of cornstarch, one cupful of boiling water, onecupful of sugar, one egg, onetable-spoonful of butter, and one small lemon. Moisten a heaping table-spoonful of corn starch witha little cold water, then add a cupful of boiling water; stir this over the fire for two orthree minutes, allowing it to boil, and cook the starch; add a tea-spoonful of butter and a cupful of sugar; remove the mixture from the fire, and whenslightly cooled, add an egg, well beaten, and the juice and grated rind of a fresh lemon. This makes onepie, and should be baked with the crust. LEMON-PIE ( LongBranch ), No. 2. Ingredients: Four eggs, four table-spoonfuls of sugar, two-thirds of a cupful of flour, nearly a quart of milk, two small lemons, alittle salt. * Bake two under-crusts. Mix the egg-yolks and sugar welltogether. Bring the milk to the boiling-point, thenadd the flour mixed with some of the milk, to prevent lumping. Stir it until it hasthickened and cooked, when remove it from the fire to stir in the yolks and sugar; return itfor a minute to set the eggs; again remove it, andflavor with lemon-juice and grated rind; when thecrusts are done, spread over cream, and over thisspread the beaten whites of the eggs sweetened andflavored. Put it into the oven a few minutes to color. ORANGE-PIE ( Mrs. Miller ). Ingredients: Half a pound of sugar, quarter of apound of butter, two oranges, six eggs. Grate the rinds of the oranges, and squeeze the juice. Cream the butter, andby degrees add the sugar. Beat in the yolks of the eggs (already well beaten), then the rind and juice of the oranges. Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, and mix themlightly in the other ingredients. Bake in paste-lined tin pie-plates. The following note appears at the bottom of page 238 in theoriginal text. *If fresh lemons can not be obtained, the extract oflemon may be used. Do not let the pies remain in the tins. PUMPKIN-PIE ( Mrs. Otis, of Boston ), No. 1. Pare a small pumpkin, and take out the seeds; stewit rather dry, and strain it through a colander; add twoquarts of milk, three eggs, and three table-spoonfuls of molasses; let the remainder of the sweetening (totaste) be of sugar; season it with two table-spoonfulsof ground cinnamon, one of ginger, and two tea-spoonfuls of salt. PUMPKIN-PIE (No.2). Cut the pumpkin into large pieces, andbake with the skins on; scoop out the soft pumpkinpulp, and proceed as with stewed pumpkin. MINCE-PIES ( Mrs. Bonner ), No. 1. Ingredients: Four pounds of lean, cold boiled meat chopped fine, nine pounds of apples chopped fine, one and a half pounds of suet chopped fine, three pounds of raisins, two pounds of currants, half a pound of citron sliced fine, five pounds of sugar, three tea-spoonfuls of ground cloves, ten tea-spoonfuls of ground cinnamon, five tea-spoonfuls of ground mace, one tea-spoonful of ground blackpepper, six table-spoonfuls of salt, onequart of cider and vinegar mixed with one quart of molasses. Mix all, and add the juice and grated rinds of twolemons; or, instead of cider, vinegar, and molasses, onequart of sherry and one pint of brandy may be substituted. Keep this mince-meat instone jars; add a little more liquor, if it should become too dry, when aboutto make pies. MINCE-PIES ( Mrs. Hazard ), No. 2. Boil, until tender, a beef's tongue which has beenkept in salt four or five days; when cold, chop itfine, and add to it two pounds of suet (also choppedfine), two pounds of raisins, two pounds of Zante currants (previously washed and drained), twelvelarge apples (chopped), four pounds of sugar, the grated rind of one, and thejuice and pulp of two large oranges, a cupful of strawberry or of raspberry jam, a cupful of quince preserve, three-quarters of a pound of citron shaved fine, two table-spoonfuls of ground cinnamon, and one table-spoonful of nutmeg. Moisten it with the spiced vinegarfrom the sweet peach-pickle jar, and add the juice andgrated rinds of four lemons. POTATO-PIE ( Mrs. Osborne ). Ingredients: Two pounds of boiled potatoes sifted,six eggs, three-quarters of a pound of butter, one pound of sugar, one lemon grated andsqueezed into the potatoes while hot, half a nutmeg grated, half a pint of wine, one and a half of richmilk. Rub the sugar and butter toa cream; add the yolks well beaten, then the potatoes, etc., lastly the whites of theeggs beaten to a stiff froth. Bake with an under crust only. PINE-APPLE-PIE ( "Choice Receipts" ). Ingredients: A grated pine-apple and its weight in sugar, half its weight in butter, five eggs (the whites beaten to a stiff froth), one cupful of cream. Cream the butter, and beat it with the sugar and yolks until verylight; add the cream, the pine-apple, and the whites of theeggs. Bake with an under crust. To be eaten cold. CHESS-PIE. A gentlemenfriend spoke to me so often about a wonderfully delicious pie that a ladyfriend in the country made, that it is not surprising that a person of myculinary tastes should have been very curious. "I will send for the receipt,"said I. "But that will not benefit you," he replied, "for I have given thereceipt to several of my friends, and they never succeed. Instead of the lightproduction three or four inches high of my country friend, the others areheavy, waxy affairs, very different." I actually took a little journey to seethe lady, to get any side explanations from her own lips. I was repaid, as youwill see by trying the pie. Ingredients: For two pies, five eggs, threequarters of a cupful of butter, one cupful of sugar, and necessary flavoring. Beat the yolks and sugar together until they are a perfect froth. Beat the butter until it is a creamy froth also. Now quicklyadd them together, flavoring with a little extract ofvanilla. Bake it in a crust: it will rise very light. As soon asdone, have ready the whites of the eggs beaten to astiff froth, sweetened with a little sugar, andflavored with a few drops of the extract. Spread this over the tops of the pies, whichreturn to the oven, to receive a delicate coloring. The lady says the secret of the pies not becoming heavy is in cutting them,and distributing them on the plates, as soon as they are cooked, and still hot;that if they are allowed to cool without cutting them, they will fall. This israther strange; nevertheless, it seems to be true. SMALL VOLS-AU-VENT, OR PATTYCASES. Make puff paste as before described;give it six or seven turns, wetting the top of the paste, before turning it thelast time, with water or a little lemon-juice; roll it out evenly about a third of aninch thick. Cut out as many cakes as are required with a circular tin cutter (a scolloped one is prettier) about twoinches in diameter. Now take a second cutter about half an inch smaller indiameter than the first, and press it into the tops of the patties, allowing itto sink half-way through the crust; or cut the patties with a sharp penknife, tracing it around a little paste-board model. When all are cut, brush over the tops with beaten egg, being careful not to moisten the edges; if theyare to be filled with sweetmeats, sprinkle Ninepatty cases arranged on a round platter. sugar over the tops. When baked, take off themarked-out covers, and cut out the centres without defacing the outsides. Keepthem in a warm place until just before serving, when they should be filled, andcovered with the little crust tops. In entertaining, it will be found very convenient to purchase patty-cases atthe confectioner's. They can be reheated the last five minutes, and filled withany thing preferred made at home. They are also quite cheap. OYSTERS FOR VOLS-AU-VENT,SCALLOP-SHELLS, OR SERVED ON BUTTERED TOAST FOR BREAKFAST (No.1). Bring a canful or a quart of oysters tothe boiling-point in their liquor; then drainthem. Put butter the size of half an egg into asaucepan, and when hot add half a small onion (cutvery fine) and a tea-spoonful of flour, stirring themwell; add then half a tea-cupful of the juice in a can ofmushrooms, pepper, salt, a sprig of parsley (cutvery fine), half a box of mushrooms (chopped not toofine); then add the oysters. Stir all together overthe fire for a minute; add a few drops of lemon-juice. This is a very nice filling for vols-au-vent made as in receipt. OYSTERS FOR VOLS-AU-VENT,SCALLOP-SHELLS, OR SERVED ON BUTTERED TOAST FOR BREAKFAST (No. 2). Putthe oysters on the fire in their own liquor, and when they are just beginning to simmerskim them out quickly with a perforated ladle; if thereis too much juice in the saucepan, pour out all exceptwhat is necessary for making a sauce of creamy thickness for the oysters; skim this well, and make it as thick as richcream with flour and butter smoothed together ( roux ). Season it well with salt and Cayenne pepper; someadd also a little nutmeg. When cooked enough, take thesauce off the fire, add the yolks of two or three eggs well beaten, and the oysters. Let them merely becomehot again on the range without allowing them to boil. Serve immediately. Ifthese preparations are used for scallop-shells, sprinklesome cracker-crumbs over the tops, and brown themquickly with a salamander. VOLS-AU-VENT OF OYSTERS (No.3). Fill the vols-au-vent (madeas in preceding article) with oysters prepared asfollows: Beard and put them into a stew-pan with alittle stock; as soon as they are cooked, cut them intwo; add three or four table-spoonfuls of the oyster-liquor to the stock, and add to it a roux of a little butter and flour; add then a very little cayenne, a little nutmeg, andtwo or three table-spoonfuls of cream. It should berather thicker than cream. Fill the pastry the last thing before serving, andcover with the tops. VOLS-AU-VENT OFSWEET-BREADS. Prepare the sweet-breads asdescribed in receipt for frying them in the sauté pan (see page 152), preparingalso the same cream-sauce. After the sweet-breads are cooked, cut them into dice, or intorather small pieces; fill the vols-au-vent with them, pouring over them a littleof the cream-sauce; cover with the vols-au-vent tops. VOLS-AU-VENT OF CHICKENS,SHRIMPS, SALMON, MUSHROOMS, VEAL, GAME, ETC. Fill the vols-au-vent with almost any kind of meat or fish cut into dice,pouring over them a very little sauce. Do not add toomuch sauce, as it would run through the sides. For chicken, a Bechamel or a cream sauce is good; for shrimps, a shrimp-sauce; for salmon or any other kind of fish, Hollandaise, shrimp, pickle, or anyfish sauce; for veal or lamb, a little thickened gravy. This is a very good way of using up remnants ofany kind of fish or meat. VOLS-AU-VENT, WITH STRAWBERRIES, RASPBERRIES, ORCURRANTS ( English Lady ). Instead of sprinkling sugar over the tops of the vols-au-vent, glaze them on top withfour ounces of sugar boiled to a candy, on whichsprinkle some fine pieces of pounded loaf-sugar. Takeabout one-fourth of the ripest of the strawberries tobe used, mash them fine, add a little more sugar towhat remains of the sugar used for glazing, and afterboiling it so that it is not quite ready to candy, add the mashed strawberries and their juice; skim the mixture, and as soon as it sticks tothe fingers take it off the fire. Just before serving, fill the vols-au-vent with the fresh strawberries, and cover them with the sirup, when itis cold. Proceed in the same manner with raspberries and red and whitecurrants. VOLS-AU-VENT, WITH STRAWBERRIES,ETC. When the vols-au-vent arenearly or quite done, take them out of the oven, brush the tops over with the white of an egg, then sprinkle over this coarse sugar; return them to the oven to set the glaze. Atthe moment of serving, fill the vols-au-vent with fresh strawberries, raspberries, orany kind of preserved fruit. Place a few spoonfuls of whipped cream over the tops of the fruit. LEMON PASTE ( for Tarts or Patties ). To one pound of lump-sugar add six eggs, leaving out the whites of two, the juice of four large lemons, with thegrated rinds of three of them, and one quarter of apound of very good butter. Put all into a stew-pan, and stir gently over a slow fire (or set thebasin into a pan of boiling water ) until it becomesthick and looks like honey; do not let it boil. Pour it into bottles or jars,and keep it in a cool place. It will keep three or four years. Bake the crust for the tarts. Put in a little ofthe lemon paste while the crusts are hot. Then return them to the oven, toremain until the paste is nicely melted, when thetarts will be quite ready. MINCE-MEATPATTIES. Either make or purchase the patty-shells, and just before serving fill them with mince-meat (see page 230), and heat them for a fewminutes in the oven. CREAM RISSOLES ( Rissoles à la Crême ). The cream rissoles are made as meat rissoles (see page 142), substituting the corn-starch pudding described for fried cream (seepage 230) for the prepared meat; or the rissoles may be filled with apple-sauce, marmalade, orany of the stewed fruits or berries. CANNING. THIS is a most valuable manner of preserving vegetables and fruits. Incities where vegetables, fruits, or berries are bought at high prices, andperhaps not entirely fresh at that, my experience has taught me that it ischeaper to buy the canned fruits than to have them put up in the house. In thecountry the expense is very little as the cans may be purchased in quantitiesvery cheap; and, with proper care in cleaning and drying them, they can be usedseveral times. The manner of canning one kind of fruit or vegetable applies to almost allkinds, except corn. I would not advise any one to attempt canning corn withoutthe correct process direct from Mr. Winslow himself. By mixing corn andtomatoes together no difficulty will be found. Gumbo and tomato mixed arevaluable for soup. Canned tomatoes are invaluable in a household. They are veryeasily managed, and are as desirable for soups and sauces as for a separate vegetable dish. If fruits or vegetables or any kind arequite fresh, and there is not too large a quantity scalded at one time toprevent careful management of each can, not one can in a hundred will be lost.I also advise the canning of sweetmeats of every kind. In that casethe same amount of sugar is not required, and the fruit does not have to beboiled until the natural flavor is entirely lost. If glass jars are usedinstead of cans, they must be put on the fire in cold water with a plate orpiece of wood in the bottom of the kettle. They should not be filled until thewater is boiling, and then they will not be broken. They should be sealed assoon as possible after they are filled, and when they are cold the coversshould again be tightened, as the glass will contract a little aftercooling. TO CAN TOMATOES. Letthem be entirely fresh. Put scalding water over themto aid in removing the skins. When the cans with their covers are in readinessupon the table, the red sealing wax (which is generally too brittle, andrequires a little lard melted with it) is in a cup at the back of the fire, thetea-kettle is full of boiling water, and the tomatoes are all skinned, we are ready to begin thecanning. First put four cans (if there are two persons, three if only oneperson) on the hearth in front of the fire; fill them with boilingwater. Put enough tomatoes in a porcelain preserving kettle to fill these cans; add no water to them. With a good fire let them come to theboiling point, or let them all be well scalded through. Then, emptying the hot water from the cans, fill them with the hot tomatoes; wipe off the moisture from the tops with asoft cloth, and press the covers on tightly. While pressing each cover downclosely with a knife, pour carefully around itthe hot sealing-wax from the tin cup, so bent at the edge that the wax may runout in a small stream. Hold the knife still a moment longer, that the wax mayset. When these cans are sealed, continue the operation until all the tomatoes are canned. Now put the blade of an old knifein the coals, and when it is red-hot run it over the tops of the sealing-wax tomelt any bubbles that may have formed; then, examining each can, notice ifthere is any hissing noise, which will indicate a want of tightness in the can,which allows the steam to escape. If any holes are found, wipe them, and coverthem while the cans are hot with a bit of the sealing-wax. There will be juiceleft after the tomatoes are canned. Seasonthis and boil it down for catchup. TO CAN PEACHES. Cling-stones are best. Pare, halve, and stone them.Boil the stones or pits untilall the flavor is extracted; then, having every thing in readiness, asdescribed in the preceding article, pour off the water from the pits, and when it is at boiling-point,throw into it enough peaches to fill three or fourcans; sprinkle over sugar to taste, or about as muchas would be sprinkled over fresh peaches for thetable. When just scalded, can them, placing round pieces of writing-paperdipped in brandy over the tops of the peaches beforeputting on the covers. Pears,plums, and all kinds of fruit and berries are thrown into alittle boiling water sweetened to taste, scalded, andcanned in the same manner as tomatoes. STRING-BEANS. Next to tomatoes,the vegetable easiest to can is, perhaps, the string-bean. Remove the tough strings at the sides,and break the bean into two or three pieces. When allready, throw them into a little boiling water, scald,and then can them. OKRA AND TOMATOES are merelymixed and scalded together. Some add pepper and salt, yet these are not necessary in canning. This makes a most delicious soup added to a little stock. RASPBERRIES are especially easy tocan. They are merely thrown into a little boilingwater (which is slightly sweetened), scalded, and then canned.They are very wholesome and nice as a sauce for tea. GREENGAGES should be canned withoutskinning. They should be well scalded in a little sweetened boilingwater before canning. CORN. Since writing the precedingdiscouraging remark about corn, I have found, in aSupreme Court decision, Mr. Winslow's receipt for canning corn as follows: Fill the cans with the uncooked corn (freshlygathered) cut from the cob, and seal them hermetically; surround them withstraw to prevent them striking against each other, and put them into a boiler over the fire, with enough coldwater to cover them. Heat the water gradually, and when they have boiled an hour anda half, puncture the tops of the cans to allow the escape of gases, then sealthem immediately while they are still hot. Continue to boil them for two hoursand a half. In packing the cut corn in the can, the liberatedmilk and juices surround the kernels, forming a liquid in which they arecooked. This process, patented by Mr. Winslow, is by farthe best one for preserving the natural flavor of green sweetcorn. SUCCOTASH. Limabeans and corn mixed. They should beboiled until they are thoroughly done. CORN AND TOMATOES make agood combination for canning. The corn, however,should be thoroughly cooked, and mixed with the tomatoes, after the latter have been scaldedmerely. PRESERVES. To make clear, good preserves requires: 1st. No economy of trouble; 2d. Thatthe fruit be perfectly fresh, alive from the tree or bush, or, as a friend says,"tasting of the sun." The French make the clearest, best preserves, because they spare no pains.They first prepare their sirup or clarified sugar; then, after neatly andcarefully paring or dressing their fruit, cook a few pieces at a time, or onlyas many as they can oversee, carefully lifting each piece out of the sirup themoment it is done. How they preserve strawberries in bottle (each little bottleof which sells for seventy-five cents), retaining the full flavor and almostthe firmness of the fresh strawberries, is something for me to investigate. I consider the peach marmalade the most valuable preserve, as it is usefulin preparing desserts. It is a good sauce for almost any kind of pudding,especially corn-starch and rice puddings. Preserves are generally made toosweet. Before hermetically sealed cans or jars were in general use, it requireda large quantity of sugar to keep the preserves from fermenting. Now, in usingcans, one can suit the taste as to the sweetness of the preserve. I prefer tincans to glass bottles, as sometimes the bottled jelly or preserves willferment, requiring a second cooking. Tin cans have never failed me. Othersprefer bottles, having no trouble, they say, in tightening them perfectly. Thecitron preserve, flavored with root ginger and lemon, is a success. It has theflavor of the ginger preserve from the West Indies, which is so fashionable,expensive, and serviceable as an accompaniment for ice-cream, etc.; it is alsoinexpensive. Apples preserved with a flavor of lemon and ginger are particularly nicealso; of course, they are not as firm as citron, and do not imitate so well theginger preserve. The outside of the water-melon (skinned) makes a clear, prettypreserve, flavored in the same manner. The next in favor is the greengagepreserve, which is as clear and beautiful as it is delicate in flavor. Peaches,unless made into marmalade, are better when canned with very little sugar thanwhen preserved. Canned peaches, half-frozen when served, make a deliciousdessert with cake. First, then, for preserves the sirup must be made. I give the old rule; yet,as before remarked, if canned, they may be made less sweet. I generally usehalf a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. SIRUP FORPRESERVES. Put two pounds of the best whitesugar, with one pint of fresh, clear water, into a white porcelain saucepan; put it on thefire, and before the sirup becomes hot mix well into it the partly beaten white of an egg. When it begins to boil, remove thescum as it rises; watch it constantly that it does not boil over; and continueto boil it until no more scum rises. Now peach, pear, greengage, Siberian crab-apple, andcherry preserves are all made in the same manner. The peaches are neatly peeled, stoned, and halved. The pears are peeled, cored, and cut into two. The greengage makes a prettier preserve without beingskinned--pricking them, and halving the stem. The French preserve greengages inthis manner. Some think the skins of plums are toughin preserves, and throw them into boiling water toskin them. The Siberian crab-apple, which makes a verygood preserve, is cored with a small tin tube or corer (see page 57). Half of the stem is cut from cherries. When the sirup is gently boiling, a fewpieces are put into it at one time. They are boiled until they become justsoft. Do not allow them to break. When the pieces are done, take them carefullyout, and put more into the sirup until all are cooked; pour the sirup over, andput them into jars. Many add a little juice of lemon to pear, crab-apple, and plum preserves. I would recommend a very little. Inthe case of peaches, more flavor is gained by boilingthe pits, if they are cling-stone (which they shouldbe--the White Heath being the best preserving peach ),and after straining the water using it to make thesirup. They will be firmer by laying the uncooked peaches into the sirup, and letting them remain in itovernight, cooking them the next morning. Others harden fruit by letting it remain ten or fifteen minutes in alum-water. This impairs the flavor. However, forgood, clear preserves, I prefer the first method of preserving them, using thepits for the water with which to make peach marmalade.Peach marmalade and peach preserves should bemade at the same time, when the peaches of lesspretentious appearance can be used for the marmalade. Boil preserves without acover to the kettle. CITRON PRESERVES ( Miss Leslie ). The citrons can be pared, cored, and sliced, or cutinto fancy shapes with cutters which are made for the purpose. To six pounds ofthe citron, use six pounds of sugar, four lemons, and aquarter of a pound of ginger-root. Put the slices of lemon into a preserving-kettle, and boil them for half an hour, oruntil they look clear, in a little clear water; thendrain them. Save the water, and put the slices intoanother dish with a little cold water; cover them, andlet them stand overnight. In the morning wrap the root-ginger (bruised) in a thin muslin cloth; boil itin three pints of clear water until the water is highly flavored, when take out the bag of ginger. Having broken up the loaf-sugar, put it into the preserving-kettle with the ginger-water. When the sugar is all melted, set it over the fire; boil, andskim until no more scum rises. Then put in the pieces of citron and the juice of thelemons. Boil them in the sirup till all the slices are quitetransparent. Do not allow them to break. When done, put them into the cans orjars, pouring the sirup carefully over them. If one desires toimitate the West Indies ginger preserve, the slices of lemonmay not be added; yet they are pretty addition. QUINCE PRESERVES ( Mrs. Hazard ). Pare, core, and quarter the quinces. Select thebest-looking quarters for the preserves; the inferior-looking ones reserve,with the cores and skins, for the marmalade. For the preserves, allow three-quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. Make a sirup as beforedescribed (sirup for preserves), allowing one pint of water to two pounds of sugar. When it is clear, and still boiling-hot, add the hot quinces, which have been boiled in just enough clear water to cover them well--boiled until they aretender, or are easily pierced with a broom-straw--no longer. The preserves arenow ready to be put away. With this proportion of fruit, water, and sugar, the preserveswill not have much juice. What there is will form athin, clear jelly around the quinces after they arekept a short time: the hot sirup will draw juice from the hot quinces to flavor and color it just enough. There ismuch difference in the choice of quinces. There is akind which makes a white or light-colored preserve, very inferior in flavor tothe large quince, which makes the red. TOMATO PRESERVES ( Mrs. Wilson ). Choose little red, plum-shaped tomatoes, if redpreserves are desired, and the small yellow ones for yellow preserves. Peel,and prick them with a large needle; boil them slowly for half an hour in preserving-sirup, with the juice of onelemon to every two pounds of tomatoes; addalso a little bag of ginger-root; then skim out the tomatoes; let them remain two or three hours in thesun to harden. Put the white of an egg into the sirup;boil and skim well, and pour it over the tomatoes. Theold rule is a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. I prefer three-quarters of a pound of theformer to a pound of the latter. The yellow tomatoes are preferable. GRAPEPRESERVES. Squeeze with your fingers the pulp from each grape. Put the pulps on thefire, and boil them until they are tender; then press them through a colander, so that the seeds may be taken out; now addthe skins to the pulps and juice. Put a cupful of sugar to each cupful of fruit, and boil all together until of a thick consistency. Green-grape preserves are also nice. In managing the green grapes, halve them, and extract the seeds with asmall knife. Put also a cupful of sugar to a cupful of fruit. Many prefer the green to the ripe grapepreserves. APPLE GINGER. Boil ginger-root, tied in a thin muslin bag, in clear water until the water is wellflavored; make a sirup of this water and sugar, adding to it a little lemon-juice, and allowing three-quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of apples. When the sirup is skimmed clear, boil in it afew quarters of the apples at a time, until they become clear--no longer.Replace the apples in the sirup when it becomes cold. The golden pippins should be used. This preserve can be madewithout ginger. CANDIED FRUITS. Boil peaches, plums, pears, apricots, cherries, or almost any fruit dressed, in a thick sirup made with a tea-cupful of water to each pound of sugar, until tender--no longer. Let them remain twodays in the sirup; then take them out, drain them, and sprinkle sugar over each piece separately. Dry them slowly inthe sun or in an oven not too warm. MARMALADES. To produce the best marmalades, choose ripe and luscious fruits. Cut theminto pieces, and put them into the preserving-kettle withlayers of sugar, placing fruit at the bottom. For marmalades of peach, pear, green grape, pine-apple, quince, or plum,allow three-quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. If the fruit isnot very juicy, add a little water. Be careful that the marmalade does notburn. When the whole begins to look clear, and becomes thick by cooling aportion of it on a plate, it is done, and may be put into jars at once. QUINCE MARMALADE. Savethe water in which the quinces for preserving wereboiled; add to it the skins and cores, rejecting those which are worm-eaten ordiscolored. After boiling about half an hour, strain through a colander, allowing the pulp only to pass. To this juiceadd the reserved quince quarters and the sugar (three-fourths of a pound of sugar to one pound of fruit ).Let all boil together slowly for about an hour and a half, stirringoccasionally, and breaking the quinces into smallpieces. When done, pour it into glasses or bowls. The marmalade will harden,and each mold will form a convenient little dish for lunch. PEACH MARMALADE is made as above. Yet moreflavor may be obtained by boiling the pits until theirflavor is extracted; then remove them, and continue boiling the water until youhave sufficient to add to the peaches. ORANGE MARMALADE. Allowthree-quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. Cut the peels so thatthey may be removed in four pieces. Boil these peels in a large quantity of water for two hours; then cut them into fine shreds.While these are boiling, press the inside of the oranges through a sieve fine enough to prevent theseeds and skin from passing through. For every five oranges, add the grated rind and juice ofone lemon. Put all into a preserving-kettle with the sugar. When done, the marmalade should be quite thickand solid. Cover closely in little preserving-jars. RASPBERRY JAM. Usethree-quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. First boil the fruit afew minutes with very little water; then add the sugar. Boil three-quarters of an hour, stirring well.Fill little jars or glasses, covering them first with papers soaked in brandy,and then with second papers moistened with the whites of eggs, and pressedagainst the sides of the glasses to exclude the air. GREENGAGE JAM. Usethree-quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. Skin and stem ripe greengages, and boil them quickly for three-quartersof an hour with the sugar, and only enough water to keep them from burning at first. Skim, andstir very frequently. BRANDY PEACHES. Use cling-stone peaches. Rub off the down from each one,and prick it to the stone with a silver fork. Make a sirup with half a pound of sugar for each pound of peaches, and half a tea-cupful of water for each pound of sugar; also add a little white ofegg slightly beaten. Skim, when it boils, as long as the scumrises. Then put in the peaches, boiling them slowlyuntil they are just tender, and no longer; then take them carefully out. Removethe sirup from the fire, and add to it half a pint of the best brandy to a pound of peaches. Now pour this over the peaches. Can them, or put them into jars, wellsecured. Apricots and greengages brandied are made inthe same way. TO JELLY FRUITS. Tomake jelly clear, the fruit must be quite fresh, andall blemishes removed. Have the flannels used for straining perfectly clean andwhite. Nearly all jellies are made in the same way, whether currant, plum, Siberian crab-apple, gooseberry, quince, apple, peach, or grape. Some add less sugar tothe sweeter fruits. The first five fruits mentioned are exceedingly easy to jelly; the grape is often quite vexatious, with its perverseinclinations. Cherries will not jelly without gelatine. After having freed the fruit from all blemishes,put them into a porcelain preserving-kettle, with onlyenough clear water to keep them from burning at first.Let them boil slowly until quite soft; then, putting them into a flannel cloth,press from them all the juice possible. Strain the juice two or three times through a clean cloth; thenreturn it to the clean preserving-kettle, adding a cupof sugar for every cup of juice, and the beaten white of anegg for the whole. The rule is to boil the sirup (withoutstirring) very rapidly for twenty minutes, not counting the minutes until itbegins to boil. The safest rule is to boil it until it runs a little thick uponthe spoon; then let it run through the jelly-bag withoutpressing it. If there is any fear of the jelly becoming too hard before it allruns through, place it near the fire. The most convenient jelly-strainer is made by fastening the four corners ofa flannel cloth to a filter-stool (see page 57). If thefirst dripping of the jelly is not entirely clear, return it to the straineruntil it runs perfectly limpid. Put the jelly into glasses; and, after it hasbecome quite firm, cut out little papers to fit the tops, which should bedipped in brandy. Place over these second papers larger ones, which have beendipped in the whites of eggs. Press the edges against the sides of the glasses,to exclude the air. CURRANT JELLY. Followthe preceding directions. A jelly of prettier color is obtained by mixing the white and red currants. Some take the trouble to makejelly from the white and red currants separately, then harden it in successive layers in theglasses. In this way, the jelly has to be made on different days, allowing timefor each layer to harden. Another pretty arrangement is to melt the jelly theday before it is served at the table, and put it into a little jelly-mold. The next day it will be quite hard enough toturn out. CURRANT JELLY (from Scribner's Monthly ). "This receipt has three advantages: First, it never fails, as the old planis sure to do five times out of eight; secondly, it requires but half the usualquantity of sugar, and so retains the grateful acidityand peculiar flavor of the fruit; thirdly, it is byfar less troublesome than the usual method. Weigh the currants without taking the trouble to remove thestems; do not wash them, but carefully remove leaves and whatever may adhere tothem. To each pound of fruit allow half the weight of granulated or pure loaf sugar. Put a few currants into a porcelain-lined kettle, and press themwith a potato-masher, or any thing convenient, in orderto secure sufficient liquid to prevent burning; then add the remainder of the fruit, and boil freely for twenty minutes, stirringoccasionally to prevent burning. Take out and strain carefully through athree-cornered bag of strong, close texture, putting the liquid into eitherearthen or wooden vessels--never in tin, as the action of the acid on tinmaterially affects both color and flavor. When strained, return the liquid tothe kettle, without the trouble of measuring, and let it boil thoroughly for amoment or so, and then add the sugar. The moment the sugar is entirely dissolved, the jelly is done, andmust be immediately dished, or placed in glasses. It will jelly upon the sideof the cup as it is taken up, leaving no doubt as the result. Gather the fruit early, as soon as fully ripe, since the pulpsoftens and the juice is less rich if allowed to remain long after ripening. Inour climate, the first week in July is usually considered the time to makecurrant jelly. Never gather currants or other soft orsmall seed fruit immediately after a rain for preserving purposes, as they aregreatly impoverished by the moisture absorbed. In preserving all fruits ofthis class, if they are boiled until tender or transparent in a small quantity of water, and the sugar is addedafterward, the hardness of the seeds, so objectionable in small fruits, will be thus avoided. A delicious jam may bemade of blackberries, currants, and raspberries, orwith currants with a few raspberries to flavor, by observing the abovesuggestion, and adding sugar, pound for pound, andboiling about twenty minutes." MRS. WALWORTH'S CURRANTJELLY. This jelly took the premium at the fair, for it was not only offine flavor, but of crystal clearness. An equal proportion of red and white currants wasplaced in the whitest of porcelain kettles, with a very little clear water, just enough to keep the fruit from burning at first, and was boiled twentyminutes, then poured into a jelly-bag; this was notsqueezed or touched until a quantity of clear liquid had run through. (The bagafterward can be well pressed, and the second juice can be made into aninferior jelly.) To each pint of the first clear liquid was added a pound of loaf-sugar; it was then returned to the porcelainkettle (well cleaned), and, after it came to the boiling-point, was boiledtwenty-five minutes. The jelly was again passed through the bag, after beingwell cleaned. COMPOTES are fresh fruits boiled when needed, with very little sugar. I consider it apity to cook or stew peaches, when they are so much better fresh, with sugarsprinkled over them and half-frozen. And what a destruction of fine pears!However, compotes are much appreciated and used in France. Ivalue compotes of apples, however, and also of inferiorhard pears. The first two of the receipts are from ProfessorBlot. SIRUP FOR COMPOTES. Apound of sugar in a porcelain stew-pan, with a pint of water, a wine-glass of brandy, and a small piece of grated cinnamon. Set it on a slowfire, skimming off the foam; boil it for ten minutes; then, after cooling,bottle it, and by cooking well it will keep for months in a cool, dryplace. COMPOTE OF PEACHES ANDAPRICOTS. Cut the fruit in two; take out thestones; throw them into boiling water (a very little lemon added) for two minutes; then throw them into cold or ice water, taking them out immediately. Thismakes them white. Then peel them. Put a pint of water into a porcelain pan, and set it on a good fire;when boiling-hot, put in the apricots or peaches, and skim off the foam; as soon as soft, takethem out, place them on a dish, and pour over sirup. COMPOTE OFAPPLES. Quarter, peel, core, and cook apples in a stew-pan, with alittle water and sugar. Takeout the apples when cooked. Boil down the sirup (addingsliced lemon and some raisins )to a jelly; then pour it over the apples. Brandy added improves it. A BEAUTIFUL STUFFEDCOMPOTE. Choose large fine pippins of equalsize; pare them, and take out the cores, leaving the apples entire; cook them about three parts done in sirup; drain and bake them a few moments in a quickoven. When they are done and still hot, fill the interior with peach marmalade. Now roll each apple in jelly produced by boiling down the sirup usedto boil the apples; this will give the apples a beautiful gloss. Dish them in pyramidal form;put cream, or whippedcream, or a little maraschino, around thebase. Or, form them into dome, and pour over them a méringue of beaten whites ofeggs and sugar, sticking regularly overthe top sweet almonds cut into four lengths (samesize); put it into the oven to brown. This looks like the apple hedgehog. Or,pour among the apples, before pouring over the méringue, a marmalade ofapples or boiled rice. PICKLES AND CATCHUPS. PICKLES, FOR COUNTRY USE ( Mrs. Shaw ). Make a brine strong enough to bear the weight of anegg. Into this put cucumbers fresh from the garden.They will keep in this brine indefinitely. Whenever fresh pickles are wanted, take out as many as are desiredfrom the brine, and let them soak in fresh water two days, changing the water once. Now put two quarts of the best cider vinegar (to fifty cucumbers ) on the fire in a porcelain kettle, with oneounce of whole pepper, half an ounce of mustard-seed, one ounce of ginger sliced, half an ounce of mace, a small stalk of horseradish, a piece of alum the size of a large pea, and half cup of sugar. Tie up the spices inthree muslin bags. Boil all together ten minutes; then pour all over thepickles. It is not necessary to scald the cucumbers, yet many do so, putting them into the kettle, with the vinegar and spices when cold,and covering the bottom, sides, and top closely with cabbageleaves, which improve color. If they are not green enough at thefirst scalding, scald them a second time, with fresh leaves around. This receipt is especially desirable for people living in the country,because, having many vines, the cucumbers of any sizepreferred can be picked each day, washed, and put into the brine. INDIANPICKLE. Ingredients: To every gallon of vinegar put four ounces of currypowder, four ounces of mustardpowder, three ounces of bruised ginger, two drams of Cayenne pepper, two ounces of turmeric, two ounces of garlic, half a pound of onions (skinned), and a quarter of a pound of salt. Put all into a stone jar. Cover it with a bladder wet with the pickle, andkeep it warm by the fire for three days, shaking it well three times a day. Anything may be put into this preparation, excepting red cabbage and walnuts.Gather every thing fresh, such as small cucumbers, green grapes, green tomatoes, cauliflowers, small onions, nasturtiums, stringbeans, etc., etc. Wipe them, cut them when too large, and throwthem fresh into the vinegar. CHOWCHOW PICKLE ( Miss Beltzhoover ). Ingredients: One peck of green tomatoes, half apeck of ripe tomatoes, half a dozen onions, three heads ofcabbage, one dozen green peppers, andthree red peppers. Chop them any size you choose, then sprinkle half a pint of salt over them. Put them into a coarse cotton bag. Letthem drain twenty-four hours. Put them into a kettle, with three pounds of brown sugar, half a tea-cupful of grated horseradish, one table-spoonful each of ground black pepper, groundmustard, white mustard, mace, and celery seed. Coverall with vinegar, and boil till clear. TO PICKLECAULIFLOWERS. Cut the cauliflowers intolittle flowerets of equal size. Throw them into boiling saltedwater. Place them at the back of the range, and when they are justabout to boil take them off and drain them. Put them into jars. Boil (aboutfifteen minutes) enough vinegar to well cover them,seasoning it with one ounce of nutmeg, one ounce of mustard-seed, and half an ounce of mace to three quarts of vinegar. Pour this hot over the cauliflowers, adding a little sweet-oil the last thing, to cover the top. Coverthem, while warm, with a bladder or fine leather over their corks. PICKLEDWALNUTS. Ingredients: One hundred walnuts, salt and water, one gallon of vinegar, two ounces of whole blackpepper, half an ounce of cloves, oneounce of allspice, one ounce of rootginger sliced, one ounce of mace. Gather the walnuts in July, when they are fullgrown. They should be soft enough to be pierced all through with a needle.Prick them all well through. Let them remain nine days in brine (four pounds of salt toeach gallon of water ), changing the brine every third day. Drain them, and let them remainin the sun two or three days until they become black. Put them into jars, notquite filling them. Boil the vinegar and spices together ten minutes, and pour the liquid overthe walnuts. They will be fit for use in a month, andwill keep for years. PICKLED GREEN TOMATOES ANDONIONS ( Mrs. Monks ). Chop one peck of green tomatoes, and half a peck of onions. Let them stand two days in layers of salt. Bring vinegar (enoughjust to cover them) to the boiling-point. Put in the vegetables, mixed with cloves (one ounce), allspice (one ounce), whitemustard-seed (two ounces), and redpeppers (five large ones shredded). When well scalded, they areready to be put in jars. PICKLED ONIONS. Selectsmall silver-skinned onions. After taking off theoutside skins, remove with a knife one more skin, when each onion should look quite clear. Put them into strong brine for three days. Bring vinegar to a boil with one or two blades of mace and some whole redpeppers. Pour it hot over the onions welldrained from the brine. PICKLED BELLPEPPERS. Cut a slit in the side of each pepper, and take out all the seeds. Let them soak in brine (strong enough to float an egg) two days. Then,washing them in cold water, put them into a stone jar.Pour over them vinegar boiled with cinnamon, mace, and nutmeg. Whenever they are wanted to be served, stuffeach one with a boiled tongue cut into dice, and mixedwith a Mayonnaise dressing. Or little mangoes may be made,stuffing each one with pickled nasturtiums, grapes, minced onions, red cabbage or cucumbers, seasoned with mustard-seed, rootginger, and mace. RIPE CUCUMBERPICKLES. Pare and seed ripe cucumbers. Sliceeach cucumber lengthwise into four pieces, or cut itinto fancy shapes, as preferred. Let them stand twenty-four hours covered withcold vinegar. Drain them: then put them into fresh vinegar, with two pounds of sugar, and one ounce of cassia-buds to one quart of vinegar. Boil all together twenty minutes. Cover themclosely in a jar. SWEET PICKLEDPEACHES. To seven pounds of peaches allowthree and three-quarter pounds of sugar, one quart of vinegar, two ounces of cloves, and two ounces of stick-cinnamon. Pare the peaches, and stick one or two cloves into each one. Boil the sugar and vinegar, withseveral sticks of cinnamon, for five minutes, then put in the peaches. When cooked till thoroughly done, take them out. Boil the sirup, reducing it to nearly half, and pour it overthe peaches. STRAWBERRYPICKLE. Ingredients: Seven pounds of strawberries, three and a half pounds of brown sugar, one and a half pints of cidervinegar, one ounce of cloves, one ounceof stick-cinnamon. Place the strawberries and spices inalternate layers in a deep dish. Boil the sugar and vinegar three minutes, and pour it over them, lettingthem remain until the next day. The second day pour the liquor off and boil itagain three minutes, returning it, as before, to the strawberries. Let them remain until the third day,when boil all together over a slow fire for half an hour. Put it away injars. TOMATO CATCHUP. Boilone bushel of tomatoes in porcelain kettle until soft;press them through a sieve; then add half a gallon of vinegar, two ounces of cloves, one and a half pints of salt, one ounce of Cayennepepper, five heads of garlic (skinned andchopped), two ounces of whole pepper, one pound of allspice, five ounces of mace, and five ounces of celeryseed. Mix all together; and boil until it is reduced to half.Strain, and bottle it. TOMATO CATCHUP ( Mrs. Cramer, of Troy ). Ingredients: One peck of tomatoes, two quarts of vinegar, five table-spoonfuls of mustard, five table-spoonfuls of salt, four table-spoonfuls of blackpepper, two table-spoonfuls of cloves, three table-spoonfuls of allspice, and two tea-spoonfuls of redpepper. Let it boil an hour. Strain it through a sieve. GOOSEBERRY CATCHUP ( Mrs. Shaw ). Ingredients: Three pounds of fruit, four pounds of sugar, one pint of vinegar, two ounces of cloves, and two ounces of cinnamon. Boil all four hours. Bottle it. CUCUMBER CATCHUP. Gratethe cucumbers, and strain off the water through a colander. Addsix large onions (chopped very fine) to a gallon ofthe grated and strained cucumbers. Add vinegar, salt, Cayenne pepper, and horse-radish to taste. Bottle it without cooking. CHEESE. IN England, and at almost every well-appointed table in America, cheese is apositive necessity to a good table. Brillat Savarin, in his "Physiologie duGout," says, "Un beau diner sans vieux fromage est une jolie femme à quiil manque un œil." Among the best cheeses of England are the Stilton and Cheshire; of France,are those of Neufchatel, Brie ( fromage de Brie ),and the fromage de Roquefort. The fromage de Roquefort is, perhaps, one of the mostpopular of all cheeses. The Gruyère cheese of Switzerland is also awell-known cheese. It is made from new milk, and flavored with a powdered herb.In serving this cheese, French mustard, pepper, and salt are usually passed atthe same time. The Roquefort cheese is made of a mixture of sheep's and goat'smilk: the first communicates consistence and quality; the latter, whiteness anda peculiar flavor. The Parmesan (an Italian cheese) is made of skimmed milk. Itis a high-flavored and hard cheese, and is not sent to market until it is sixmonths old, and is often kept for three or four years. It is extensively used,grated, for cooking. The Stilton cheese is made by adding the cream of thepreceding evening's milk to the morning's milking, producing a very rich andcreamy quality. This cheese is preferred by epicures when it is old, afterhaving been buried for some time in tin cans to become moldy. The Cheshire ismade with rich new milk. This cheese can be appreciated without cultivating ataste for it. Our American cheeses, since the introduction of the factory system, areexported in immense quantities to England, where they are much sought for, and considered by epicures as greatluxuries. This is generally astonishing to Americans abroad, who, at home,often consider it only in rule to offer guests cheese of foreign manufacture. Ithink, however, in comparison with our own, the celebrated foreign cheese haveone advantage. The latter take the name of the exact locality where they aremanufactured; consequently, when people speak of a Stilton or a fromage de Brie they know exactly of what they aretalking; not so of American cheese. American cheese means that which may besuperior, good, bad, or indifferent: it is too general a name. America hashundreds of cheese manufactories, and not a famous one; although many of themmake that which do credit to America as the greatest cheese-making country inthe world, if only these best specimens were more generally known. I have taken great pains in trying to decide which of many samples is thebest American cheese, and have decided upon one made in Otsego County, NewYork, which is called the "England dairy" cheese. Before proceeding anyfurther, I shall enter may protest against the name. Why do they not call itOtsego cheese? If it were eaten in London, an Englishman would certainlyflatter himself that it was made in England. If they will only change the name,then, I will take more pleasure in saying that the Otsego cheese is undoubtedlyone of the best specimens of American cheeses. It has a dark-yellow color, isvery rich, and highly flavored. The pastures of Otsego County are exceptionally fine, and its generaladvantages of climate, etc., render its locality one of the best adapted forthe manufacture of cheese. One of the best specimens of cheese of a milder character, white andwell-flavored, is made at Milan, Cayuga County, New York, the name of whichmight be Cayuga cheese. Perhaps the cheapest of the foreign famous cheeses is the Neufchatel. Itcomes in little rolls about an inch thick and three inches long, is envelopedin tin-foil, and costs about twenty cents a roll. Two rolls are quitesufficient for a large dinner. It is a delicious cheese. Care must be taken,however, when purchasing, to ascertain that it is not musty. The tariff may be saved by purchasing the Neufchatel manufactured in NewJersey and Westchester County, New York. As for that, the Stilton made inCayuga County can hardly be detected from the Leicestershire manufactureitself; and, in fact, nearly all the famous cheeses are very perfectly imitatedin America, so that those who choose may indulge in foreign names and encouragehome manufacture at the same time. In serving Stilton cheese, the top should be cut off to form a cover, andthen the cheese should be neatly surrounded with a napkin. Whenever the cheeseis taken from the table, the cover should be replaced. Cheeses are generally cut into little squares and passed in a glasscheese-dish. No morsel of dried cheese should ever be thrown away, as it can beused grated for macaroni, cheese omelets, etc. Cheese should form a course at dinner. For further particulars concerningcheese as a course, see page 345. WELSH RARE-BIT. Toast carefully thin square or diamond-shaped slicesof bread, with the crust removed. While hot, butter them slightly; then dip them for a moment in apan containing enough hot water to half cover them;they should be only slightly moistened. Now place each slice on a separate hotplate, allowing one slice for each person at table; sprinkle over a little salt, and pour over them enough melted cheese to cover them. Select rich, new cheese, as it is more easily melted. It can be meltedin a little cup. It should not be made until almost ready to serve, as themoment it is finished it should be eaten; otherwise the cheese will harden, the toast will become cold, and the dish altogether will bequite ruined. This is a favorite dish for gentlemen's suppers or for lunch; yet it issometimes served at dinner for a cheese course byitself, or for decorating a platter of macaroni with cheese. This simple receipt is decidedly the best one, I think; yet some spread alsoa little mustard over the toast, and others add a little ale to the melted cheese. Sometimes the toast may be dipped into ale instead of hotwater, and some serve a poached egg on each slice of Welsh rare-bit;still others mix the yolks of eggs into the cheese when melted. The Welsh rare-bit makes a decidedly pretty course, served in little chafing-dishes in silver, or plated silver, about fourinches square, one of which, standing in a plate, is to be served to eachperson at table. The reservoir contains boiling-hot water; the little platterholds the slice of Welsh rare-bit, which is thus kept hot. COTTAGE CHEESE. Place apan of clabbered sour milk over the fire, and let itbecome well scalded; then, pouring it into a clean cloth, squeeze out all thewater, leaving the clabber quite dry. Put this into akitchen basin, and work it with the hands, making it a little moist by adding cream. Add also a little butter and plenty of salt; mold it into little balls. RAMEKINS ( Ramequins à la Ude, Cook to Louis XVI. ) Ingredients: Four ounces of grated high-flavored cheese, two ounces of butter, two ounces of bread (without crust), a scant gill of milk, one-third of atea-spoonful of mustard, one-third of a tea-spoonfulof salt, small pinch of Cayennepepper, yolks of two eggs, whites ofthree. Crumb the bread, and boil it soft in the milk; add the butter, mustard, salt, pepper, cheese, and the yolks of the eggs; beat thoroughly; then stir in the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth. Pour thisinto little round paper cases (see page 61), whichrequire only a few minutes to make; fill each one about three-quarters full;bake the paste about five or six minutes, when it should be puffed high abovethe edge of the paper. Serve the ramekins immediately, or they will fall. Agood cheese course for dinner, and nice for lunch orsupper. RAMEKINS, WITH ALE ( Warne ). Ingredients: Four ounces of cheese, two ounces offresh butter, half a Frenchroll, two eggs, half a cupful of cream, half a wine-glassful of good ale. Boil the roll and cream together until quitesmooth; rub the grated cheese and the butter smoothly together; then mix all, adding the ale and the yolks of the eggs well beaten. When the paste issmooth, stir in the whites of the eggs beaten to astiff froth; put the mixture into paper cases; bakeabout fifteen minutes, and serve very hot. * PASTRY RAMEKINS ( Warne ). Ingredients: Some good cheese, puffpaste, the yolk of one egg. Take some puff paste, and roll it out rather thin;strew over it some good grated cheese, and fold itover; repeat this three times, rolling it out each time; then cut the ramekinswith a paste-cutter in any form you please, brush themover with the yolk of a well-beaten egg, and bake themin a quick oven for about fifteen minutes. When done, serve them quickly on ahot napkin. SWEETSAUCES FOR PUDDINGS. BUTTER SAUCE ( Mrs. Youmans ). Ingredients: Three-quarters of a cupful of butter, one and a half cupfuls of powderedsugar, four table-spoonfuls of boiling-hot starch, made of flour or corn starch, with either brandy, maraschino, wine, lemon-juice and zest, vanilla, or other flavoring preferred. Stir the butter with a fork to a light cream; add the sugar, and continue to beat it for one or two minutes.Just before serving, stir in with an egg-whisk theboiling starch and the flavoring. SIRUP SAUCES. Boil twocupfuls of sugar with two or three table-spoonfuls of water, until it thickens slightly; take it from thefire; stir in a piece of butter the size of ahickory-nut, and either lemon-juice, fruit-juice, or, in winter, fruitsirups, wine, brandy, or any of the flavoringextracts. The following note appears at the bottom of page 266 in theoriginal text. *Five or six minutes will suffice for bakingthem.--ED. APLAIN AND CHEAP SAUCE. Ingredients: Three and a half cupfuls of water, one cupful of sugar, a small piece of butter, a table-spoonful of either cornstarch or flour, flavoring of either brandy, vanilla, lemon, or wine (with orwithout a little nutmeg ), or zest and cinnamon. When the water boils, stir in the cornstarch or flour (rubbed smooth with alittle cold water ), sugar, and, if used, the yellow rind of alemon and the cinnamon, and cook well fortwo or three minutes; take the pan from the fire, and stir in the butter and flavoring (if the lemon and cinnamon are not used). SAME SAUCE,RICHER ( Mrs.Osborne ). Ingredients: One pint of water, threetable-spoonfuls of flour or cornstarch, half a cupful of butter, twocupfuls of sugar, two eggs, half of a nutmeg, half apint of Madeira or sherry. Beat the butter and sugar to a cream; add the eggs well beaten, then the nutmeg; heat the wine as hot as possible without boiling; bring the water to a boil in another vessel, and stir in the corn starch or flour (rubbedsmooth with a little cold water ), and cook it well forabout two minutes. Mix well the ingredients off the fire. WHIPPED-CREAM SAUCE ( Mrs. Embry, Kentucky ). Mix a plateful of whipped cream (flavored with wine or vanilla ), the beaten whites of two or three eggs, and pulverized sugar to taste, all together. Pile a bankof this mixture in the centre of a platter, and form a circle of little fruit puddings or Swedishpuddings (steamed in cups or little molds), blanc-manges, corn-starchpuddings, etc., around it; or place a large pudding in theingredient, with a circle of the sauce around. FRUIT SAUCES. The Frenchbottled apricots, greengage plums, or strawberries make delicious sauces for a Bavariancream, blanc-mange, charlotte-russe, or corn-starch pudding. They maysimply be poured around the pudding on a platter, or the juice may be thickened by boiling it with a verylittle corn-starch, then adding the fruit to it when cold. The American canned May-duke cherries ( Shrivers ) make a good pudding sauce. Boil the juice, and add the slight corn- starch thickening and a little sugar; when cold, add the cherries. It makes a good sauce poured around thesepuddings. Fresh red cherries, stewed, sweetened,passed through a sieve, and slightly thickened with cornstarch, make another pudding sauce. TheColorado wild raspberries make a fine berry pudding,with the same kind of berry sauce around it. Marmalades and preserves, ifnot too stiff, make pretty garnishes as well as good sauces. STRAWBERRY SAUCE ( for Baked Puddings ). Ingredients: Half a cupfulof butter, one cupful of sugar, the beaten white of anegg, and one cupful of strawberries (mashed). Rub butter and sugar to acream; add the beaten white of the egg, and the strawberries thoroughly mashed. BOILED CUSTARD makes agood sauce. If served with plum-pudding, flavor it with brandy; if served with rice-pudding (in mold) or cornstarch or other puddings, flavor it with lemon, vanilla, chocolate, or coffee, etc., etc. A GOOD SAUCE FOR PUDDINGS ( Miss Amelia Foote ). Ingredients: Half a cupul of butter, one cupful of sugar, white of one egg, twotable-spoonfuls of wine, a little vanilla, and half a wine-glassful of boiling water. Beat the butter and sugar for about fifteen minutes; then add theflavoring. Just before sending to the table, add the egg, beaten to a froth, and stir in the boiling water, beating it to a foam; or it may beflavored with brandy or wine, without the vanilla. SABYLLON. This is aFrench pudding sauce, and an exceedingly good one. It is so rich that one ortwo table-spoonfuls poured over a fruit, batter, bread, or almost any kind ofpudding, are sufficient. The amount of sauce in the receipt is, therefore,enough for six or seven persons. Put two yolks and one whole egg, also a scant half tea-cupful of sugar, into a little stew-pan; beat them well for a few minutes. Then put the saucepan into another, containing boiling water, over the fire; beat the eggs briskly with the egg-whisk while you gradually pour in a scant half tea-cupful of sherry; when the sherry isall in, the egg will begin to thicken; then take itfrom the fire, and add the juice of a quarter of a smalllemon. CARAMEL SAUCE ( New York Cooking-school ). Dissolve six ounces of cut loaf-sugar in half apint of boiling water; add a stick of cinnamon, a little lemon-zest, and two cloves, and boil it ten minutes. Next put two ounces of loaf-sugar, dissolved in a table-spoonful of boiling water, on a moderate fire, and stir it untilit assumes a light brown color; pour the other boiledsugar over this; give it one boil, remove it from the fire, andadd two or three table-spoonfuls of sherry. PUDDINGS AND CUSTARDS. PLUM-PUDDING, WITH RUM ORBRANDY ( Gouffè ) TAKE three-quarters of a pound of chopped suet, three-quarters of a pound of stoned raisins, three-quarters of a pound of currants, quarter of a pound of citron, three-quarters of a pound of sugar, three-quarters of a pound of bread-crumbs, two apples cutinto small dice, and the grated peel of a lemon; mixthe whole in a basin, with A flaming plum puddingserved on a round platter. three pounded cloves, a pinch of salt, six eggs, and half a gill of rum or brandy. Butter a pudding-mold, fill it with the mixture, and tie a clothover the top. Place a plate at the bottom of a kettle which is three-parts fullof boiling water. Put the pudding in, and boil forfour hours, keeping the pot replenished with boilingwater. Turn out the pudding on a hot dish; sprinkle over it sugar. Pour over half a pint of warm rum or brandy, and light itwhen putting the pudding on the table. German Sauce. --Made with eight yolks of eggs, quarter of a pound of sugar, three gills of Madeira, and the grated peel of half alemon. Stir it over the fire until the spoon is coated. Serve in aboat. Or serve a common brandy sauce, or the same kindof sauce flavored with rum, if rum should be used in the pudding. PLUM-PUDDING ( Mrs. General Sherman ). Ingredients: One cupful of butter, one cupful of sugar, half of cupful of cream, half a cupful of rum, one cupful of ale, onecupful of suet (chopped), one cupful of fruit ( currants and raisins ), half a cupful of candiedorange cut fine, six eggs well beaten,two grated nutmegs, one tea-spoonful of ground cinnamon, half a tea-spoonful of ground cloves, bread-crumbs. Beat the butter and sugar together to a cream. The bread-crumbs should be dried thoroughly, and passedthrough a sieve. Beat all well together before adding the bread-crumbs, then add enough of them to give properconsistency. Put the pudding into a tin mold (not quite filling it), and boilit four hours. The Sauce. --Use equal quantities of butter and sugar. Cream the butter, then add the sugar, beating them both until very light. Add then thebeaten yolk of an egg, and a little grated nutmeg. Heat on the fire a large wine-glassful of sherry wine diluted with the same quantity of water, and when just beginning to boil, stir it intothe butter and sugar. PUDDING WITH REMAINS OFPLUM-PUDDING. Line a charlotte mold or basin with slices of cold plum pudding, cut so that they will fit closelytogether. Fill the inside with a sufficient quantity of gelatinepudding (see page 272). Set it in a cool place to stiffen. Turn outthe charlotte on a dish, with a brandysauce on the bottom. PLAINER FRUITPUDDING. Ingredients: One cupful of sugar, one-quarter of a pound of raisins, one cupful of butter, one half-pound of Englishcurrants, three and a half cupfuls of flour, a little citron sliced,four eggs, the whites and yolks beaten separately. Put one tea-spoonful of saleratus with onehalf-cupful of cream. Flour the raisins, currants, and citron beforeadding to the mixture. Boil it three hours in a floured cloth, or in buttered forms, large orsmall. Pour some brandy on top, and set it on firejust before taking to the dining-room. Serve with brandy-sauce. SUET-PUDDING ( Mrs. Gratz Brown ). Ingredients: One cupful of suet chopped fine, onecupful of molasses, one cupful of sweetmilk, one cupful of raisins, onetea-spoonful of salt, one small teaspoonful of soda mixed in the molasses, three and a half cupfuls of flour. Boil in a bag or form three hours; or, better, steam it. It may be steamedin tea-cups, filling them a little more than half full.Serve with brandy-sauce. PRUNE-PUDDING ( Grace Greenwood ). This is the same as the suet-pudding, excepting that one half-pound of prunes and one half-pound of Englishcurrants are substituted for the raisins. EVE'S PUDDING ( Mrs. Frank Blair ). Ingredients: Six ounces of bread-crumbs, six ouncesof sugar, six ounces of raisins or currants, sixounces of butter cut in small pieces, or beef suet chopped fine, six large apples chopped, one table-spoonful of flour, six eggs, onetable-spoonful of cinnamon, one tea-spoonful of ground cloves. Flour the fruit. Mix eggs and sugar together, andthe suet and apples; then mixall, adding the beaten whites of the eggs the lastthing. Boil it in a form or bag three hours, or bake it two hours. Serve with brandy-sauce. A SPICEDAPPLE-PUDDING. Ingredients: Three tea-cupfuls of bread-crumbs, three tea-cupfuls of apples chopped, one tea-cupful of sugar, one-quarter of a pound of raisins, perhaps a little citron, two table-spoonfuls of brandy, one table-spoonful of ground cinnamon, half a tea-spoonful of ground cloves, one tea-spoonful of mace, two or three eggs beatenseparately. Cook the bread-crumbs a few minutes with a pint of milk before adding the other ingredients; add the whites of the eggs the last thing before baking. Bakehalf an hour, if the oven is quite hot. Serve with any sweetsauce. COTTAGE-PUDDING. Ingredients: One cupful of sugar, one and one-half cupfuls of flour, one table-spoonful of butter, one half-cupful of milk, two eggs beatenseparately, one tea-spoonful of baking-powder, or onehalf-tea-spoonful of soda, and one tea-spoonful of cream of tartar. Brandy or winesauce. MINUTE-PUDDING. Ingredients: One quart of milk, salt, two eggs, about a pint of flour. Beat the eggs well; add the flour and enough milk to makeit smooth. Butter the saucepan, and put in theremainder of the milk well salted; when it boils, stirin the flour, eggs, etc.,lightly; let it cook well. It should be of the consistency of thick corn mush.Serve immediately with the following simple sauce, viz., milk sweetened totaste, and flavored with grated nutmeg. NANTUCKETBERRY-PUDDING. Ingredients: one pint of grated cold boiledpotatoes, one pint of flour, one quarterof a pound of butter, one tea-spoonful of salt, and almost any kind of berries. Wet these with milk or water to the consistency of soft biscuit-dough; rollit; spread with blackberries, raspberries, cherries, orstewed dry berries. Roll, fasten in a cloth, and steamit an hour and a quarter. Serve with any sweetpudding-sauce. GELATINE-PUDDING ( Miss Colby, of Rochester ). Separate the whites and yolks of four eggs. Withthe yolks make a boiledcustard (with a pint of milk, and sugar to taste). Set a third of a box of gelatine to soak a few minutes in a little cold water, then dissolve it with three-fourths of acupful of boiling water. When the custard has cooled,add the gelatine water and the whites ofthe eggs beaten to a stiff froth;flavor with vanilla, stir all together, and put itinto a mold or molds. It will settle into three layers, and is a very prettypudding, tasting much like a charlotte-russe. A pretty effect can be obtained byusing Coxe's pink gelatine. TAPIOCA-PUDDING. Pareand core (with a tube) six or seven apples; lay themin a buttered dish. Pour over a cupful of tapioca or sage one quart of boilingwater; let it stand an hour; add two tea-cupfuls of sugar, a little lemon, vanilla, or wine; pour thisover the apples, and bake an hour. Peaches (fresh or canned) may be substituted, and arean improvement. TAPIOCA CREAM. Soak atea-cupful of tapioca overnight in milk. The next day, stir into it the yolksof three eggs well beaten and a cupful of sugar. Place a quart of milk on the fire, let it come to the boiling-point, andthen stir in the tapioca, and let the whole cook untilit has thickened; then take it off the fire, and stir in the whitesof the eggs beaten to a froth. Flavor to taste. A small portion ofthe beaten whites of the eggs can be saved to decoratethe top. Stir into the latter a little sugar, put itinto a paper funnel, press it out over the top of the pudding according tofancy, and place it in the oven a few moments to color. CABINET-PUDDING ( Mrs. Pope ). Butter a mold well; line the bottom with raisins and with citron cutinto fancy shapes; cover this with pieces of cake, thenmore raisins and citron, alternating with the cake, until the mold isfull to A cylindrical pudding served on a roundplatter. within an inch and a half of the top. Mixin a bowl three table-spoonfuls of sugar and the yolks of three eggs until they are a cream; then mixin slowly a pint of milk just brought to theboiling-point. Pour this over the cake, etc., in the mold. Put this into a panof cold water, so that the water may cover one-third of themold. Set it over the fire until the water boils; thenput the whole into the oven to bake an hour. Serve with wine-sauce. BATTER-PUDDINGBAKED. Ingredients: One quart of sifted flour, butter the size of anegg, one pint of milk, half a tea-spoonful of salt, four eggs. Scald the milk, and melt the butter in it. When partly cooled, stir in the yolks of the eggs well beaten, then the salt and flour. When quitecold, stir in lightly the whites of the eggs beaten toa stiff froth. Bake in rather large patty-pans. Serveimmediately with a sauce. The puddings should be lightpuffs. Strawberry-sauce is especially nice with thesepuddings. ROLY-POLY PUDDINGBOILED. Make a biscuit dough and roll it outinto a square about a fourth of an inch thick. Spread over it (leaving an inchuncovered at the edges) almost any kind of fruit, or berries, such as strawberries, raspberries, etc., sweetened, or preserves. Roll it tight. Sew it in a cloth, givingroom for it to swell. Boil or steam it an hour. Serve with almost any kind of pudding sauce. A nice roly-poly pudding may be madewith sponge cake baked in sheets, spread with preserves or jelly, rolled,sprinkled on top with sugar, and served with wine-sauce. BAKED BERRY ROLLS. Roll biscuit-dough thin, in the form of a large square, orinto small squares. Spread over with berries. Roll thecrust, and put the rolls into a dripping-pan closetogether until full; then put into the pan water, sugar, and pieces of butter. Bake them. Serve any of the pudding sauces. SWEDISHPUDDING. Ingredients: One half-pound of flour, one half-pound of butter, half-pound of sugar, eight eggs, a little salt. Rub the sugar and butter toa cream; add the yolks well beaten, the salt, flour, and, lastly, the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Put thebatter three-fourths of an inch deep into tea-cups. Cook by steaming them in a steamer about half an hour. The batter will fill thecups. Turn them out on a hot platter. Serve immediately with a clear brandy-sauce in the bottom of the dish. Half the aboveamount will be sufficient for a small family. CHERRY-PUDDING ( Mrs. Bonner ). Ingredients: Two eggs, one cupful of sweet milk, three tea-spoonfuls of yeastpowder, flour to make a stiff batter, asmany cherries or fruit of anykind as can be stirred in. Boil or steam it two hours. Serve with fruitsauce, made as in receipt for "fruit sauces" of the same kind of fruit of which the pudding is made. A CORN-STARCHPUDDING. Many kinds of puddings can be made with this receipt byadding different flavorings. I consider it a great success; besides, it is veryeasily and quickly made. It may or may not be served with a boiledcustard made with the yolks of theeggs. Ingredients: One pint of rich milk, twotable-spoonfuls of corn starch, a scant half-cupful of sugar, whites of three or foureggs, a little salt, flavoring. Beat the eggs to a stiff froth. Dissolve the corn starch in a little of the milk. Stir the sugar into theremainder of the milk, which place on the fire. Whenit begins to boil, add the dissolved corn starch. Stirconstantly for a few moments, when it will become a smooth paste; now stir inthe beaten whites of the eggs, and let it remain alittle longer to cook the eggs. It can be flavoredwith vanilla, and put into a form; yet it is stillbetter as a COCOA-NUT PUDDING. Whenthe preceding pudding is just finished, add half a cocoa-nut grated; put it into a mold. Serve with whipped-cream around it, or a sauce ofboiled custard made with the yolks of theeggs. As only half of a cocoa-nut is usedfor this pudding, sprinkle sugar on the other half,and spread it on something, when it will keep a month. In that time perhapsanother pudding of the same kind may be wanted. Fresh cocoa-nut is better andcheaper than the desiccated cocoa-nut. It requires thewhole of a twenty-five cent package of the desiccated cocoa-nut, and only half of a fresh one, which costsbut ten cents. CHOCOLATE-PUDDING. Withstill the same receipt for a corn-starch pudding, firstflavor the whole with vanilla; now take out a third ofthe pudding; flavor the remainder in the kettle with a bar of chocolate, softened, mashed, and dissolved with alittle milk. Put half of the chocolate-pudding in thebottom of a mold (which has been wet in cold water );smooth the top; next make a layer with the whitepudding (the third taken out); smoothit A layered cylindrical pudding served on a roundplatter. also; next the remainder of the chocolatepudding. Serve with whipped cream, or a boiled custard made with the yolks of theeggs and flavored with vanilla, aroundit; or, the one-third portion of pudding may be flavored with half a bar of chocolate, and placed in the centre of the two layersof white, as in the picture; or one can use the same receipt for a corn-starch pudding, and flavor it with chopped pine-apple, strawberries, or,in winter, with dried cherries swollen in water; or it may be flavored with chocolate, with the white centre part of cocoa-nut. COCOA-NUT PUDDINGS, IN PAPERCASES. Melt over the fire butter the size ofan egg, with a cupful of sugar, and a table-spoonfulof water. Pour them into a dish when they have boileda couple of minutes, and let them cool; mix with them half of a cocoa-nut grated, a table-spoonful of small cuts of citron, the grated rind and juice of halfa lemon, and the yolks of four eggs beatenseparately; add the whites (beaten to a stiff froth)the last thing. Fill little paper cases (see page 6),and bake immediately. They may be served hot or cold. Of course it may all bebaked in one dish; but it makes a very dainty course to serve one of thesecases placed on a plate for each person. EGG SOUFFLé, IN PAPERCASES. Make a boiled custard of cream with half a pint of milk, yolks of two eggs, threetable-spoonfuls of sugar, a heaping tea-spoonful of flour, a very little butter, salt, and a flavoring of vanilla, or any thing else, as preferred. When it hasjust thickened a little, take it off the fire, and let it partly cool. Add thentwo raw yolks of eggs and four whites beaten to a stiff froth. Butter the paper cases, fillthem with this preparation, and bake them ten or fifteen minutes in a moderateoven. SNOW-PUDDING ( Miss Amelia Foote ). Cover one-third of a package of gelatine with alittle cold water, and, when softened, stir into it apint of boiling water; add one cupful of sugar, or sugar to taste, andeither the juice of two lemons, or half a tea-cupfulof wine: when cold, and beginning to thicken, add thewell-beaten whites of three eggs. Beat all lightly andsmoothly together, pour the mixture into a mold, and set it away until hard.Serve in the centre of a platter, with a boiledcustard poured around, made with the yolks of threeeggs, one pint of milk, and half a cupfulof sugar. BOILED CUSTARD (No.1). I will venture a receipt for boiled custard (perhaps it should begranted that every one knows how to make it), as it is so often used in makingmany kinds of dessert, and as an excellent sauce for several puddings. It is considered better made of the yolks only ofthe eggs (some whites may beused, however). A dessert-spoonful of sugar is enoughfor each egg, and five yolks are quite sufficient for a quart of milk. Beat the yolks and the sugar together to a froth, and stir in the milk; put it into a custard-boiler, or, if one has none, into a small tinpail. Place this in a kettle of boiling water; stirthe mixture constantly until it is a little thickened. If it is well stirred,the custard will be a smooth cream; if allowed to remain a few moments too longin the boiling water after it begins to thicken, itwill curdle and be spoiled. Do not flavor it with any of the essences, wines, or brandy, until afterit is cooked; if either a vanilla-bean or peach-leaves are used, cook them with the custard. If the whole eggs are preferred, for economy'ssake, to be used (and they make very good custard), allow four eggs to a quart of milk, andfour dessert-spoonfuls of sugar. If the milk is first boiled before it is added to the otheringredients, there will be less danger of the custard curdling. BOIILED CUSTARD ( Miss Eliza Brown ), No. 2. Beat the yolks of three eggs very lightly; stirinto them two small table-spoonfuls of cornstarch, dissolved in a little milk, andone tea-cupful of sugar. Bring two quarts of milk to a boil, then take it off the fire; pour itinto the eggs, etc., a little at first; return it tothe fire, and stir it until it thickens, not allowing it to boil; let it remainlong enough to well cook the starch. Now stir inlightly the whites of four eggs beaten to a stifffroth, allowing the custard to remain a half-minute on the fire to set the eggs. Flavor with vanilla or chocolate, or with both. APPLE MéRINGUE ( Mrs. Shaw ). Boil tart apples after they are pared and cored;rub the pulp through a colander, and sweeten it totaste. To a pint of the soft pulp stir in lightly the whites ofthree eggs, beaten to a stiff froth. Flavor with grated rind and juice of lemon, or with lemon orvanilla extract. Serve it with cream. Itis a decided improvement to put this into a pudding-dish and cover it with the beaten whites of two or three eggs, sweetened and flavored.Color it in the oven. Serve with cream or custard. BAKED APPLES. Pare andcore large, juicy pippins, without cutting them topieces; fill the cavities with sugar, and a little lemon-juice or extract, and some thin slices of the yellow part of the lemon-rind; put them into a panwith a little water in the bottom; sprinkle sugar over the tops, baste them often, and, when done,set them away to cool. Serve them with cream, or theymay be served with whippedcream, flavored with sugar and essence of lemon, poured over so as to nearly concealthem; or serve them with a boiled custard poured overthem. FRIAR'S OMELET ( Mrs. Treat ). Stew six or seven good-sized apples as forapple-sauce; stir in, when cooked and still warm, butter the size of a pigeon's egg, and one cupful of sugar; when cold, stir in three well-beaten eggs and a little lemon-juice. Now put a small piece of butter into a sauté pan, and when hot throw in acupful of bread-crumbs; stir them over the fire untilthey assume a light-brown color. Butter a mold, andsprinkle on the bottom and sides as many of the bread-crumbs as will adhere; fill in the apple preparation, sprinkle bread-crumbs on top, bake it for fifteen or twentyminutes, and turn it out on a good-sized platter. It can be eaten with orwithout a sweet sauce. FLOATINGISLANDS. Separate the whites and yolks of foureggs; with the yolks make a boiled custard with, say, a large pint of milk, four table-spoonfuls of sugar, and a flavoring of vanilla, essence of lemon, sherry-wine, peach-leaves, orany of the usual flavorings. Beat the whites to a stiff froth, sweetening and flavoring thema little also. Wet a long spoon, turn it around in the beaten egg, taking out a piece of oblong shape; poach it,turning it around in boiling water, or milk, which is better. When the custard is cold, pourit into a glass dish, and place these poached whites ontop; or make a circle of the whites in a platter, andpour the custard between. TIPSY-PUDDING. Soak a sponge-cake baked in a form (or, in fact, dry pieces of cake of any kind can be used) in sherry-wine. When saturated enough, so that it willnot fall to pieces, pour over it a boiled custard (No.1), flavored with any thing preferred. If placed in a glass dish, decorate withthe beaten whites of the eggs poached, and with dotsof jelly. If served in a common platter, squeeze thebeaten whites (sweetened and flavored) through a funnel in any fancy shapes over thepudding, and put it into the oven to receive a delicate color. LEMON-PUDDING. Beat the yolks of two eggs in a pudding-dish; add two cupfuls of sugar. Dissolve four table-spoonfuls of corn starch in a little coldwater. Stir into it two tea-cupfuls of boilingwater. Put in the juice of twolemons, with some of the grated peel. Mixall together with a tea-spoonful of butter. Bake itabout fifteen minutes. When done, spread over the top the beaten whites of the eggs sweetened, and let it color amoment in the oven. To be eaten hot or cold. BLANC-MANGE. Put half apaper of gelatine, two ounces of sugar, half of the very thin rind of alemon, and eight bitter almonds, blanchedand bruised, into a pint of milk, and let it stand anhour. Place it over the fire, and let it come merely to the scalding-point,stirring it well to dissolve the gelatine. Strain it into a bowl, add a pint of cream, and alittle wine or brandy, totaste. Stir it occasionally, to prevent the cream A ring of nine moldedblanc-manges served on a round platter. fromsettling on the surface. Turn it, avoiding the settlings, into molds, toharden; or, in place of almonds, a stick of cinnamon may be substituted; or infuse a few more almonds, and omit the wine or brandy; or, theblanc-mange may be flavored with maraschino, or any otherliqueur. I prefer blanc-mange made with cornstarch, as the same ingredients necessary for a blanc-mange properare better made into Bavarian creams. CORN-STARCHPUDDING. Ingredients: One and one-half pints of richmilk, one large heaping table-spoonful of cornstarch, one scant cupful of sugar, four eggs, omitting two whites, a little salt, and flavoring. Bring the milk and the sugar almost to a boil, then add the corn starch (stirredsmooth with a little milk ), and a pinch of salt. Stir it at the back of the range for fiveminutes, not allowing it to boil. Then take it off the fire; when a littlecooled, stir in the eggs, and when well and smoothlymixed, place the kettle again on the fire for only a few moments, to be surethat the eggs are slightly cooked. Now stir in theflavoring, if it is an extract. Zest ( sugar rubbed on fresh lemon-peel ) is an exceedingly delicate flavoring. The vanilla powder boiled in the milk is better than the extract. It makes a pretty dish to pour this into cups or little molds, and, whencold and solid, to arrange them in a circle or, according to taste, on aplatter, with strawberry, grape, or any kind of fruitsauce, or whipped cream poured into thebottom of the dish; or, mold it in a circular form, and pile up any kind of berries in the centre, with or without whipped cream. For an invalid I prefer the otherreceipt for "a corn-starch pudding." The common rule of corn-starch pudding is one quart of milk, three eggs, threetable-spoonfuls of corn starch, one even cupful of sugar; add flavoring and alittle salt. BREAD-PUDDING. Soaksome crumbled bread in milk. Put a layer of this (rather moist) in the bottomof a pudding-dish; sprinkle over some raisins and a little cinnamonpowder, then another layer of soaked bread-crumbs, raisins, and cinnamon powder. Now beat up three eggs (to about a quart of soaked bread-crumbs ) with two heaping table-spoonfuls of sugar; mix into it a quarter of a cupful of rum, brandy, or wine, and pour it all over the pudding in the dish.Bake about twenty minutes. BREAD-AND-BUTTERPUDDING. Strew layers of Englishcurrants between slices of buttered bread (crust cut off). Pour over them a boiled custard flavored with nutmeg or any other flavoring desired.Set them into the oven to soak, and bake about fifteen minutes. FRIEDBREAD-PUDDING. Cut the crust from slices of bread. Cut them into pieces of the same shape andsize. Soak them a few moments in custard -- i.e., some milk, one or two eggs, and sugar to taste, anda flavoring of cinnamon. Sauté them in hot lard to a delicate brown. Serve with brandy-sauce, or almost any kind of sweetsauce. INDIAN-CORNPUDDING. Scald a quart of milk, and stir inseven table-spoonfuls of sifted corn-meal, atea-spoonful of salt, one tea-cupful of molasses, a table-spoonful of ginger. Bake three hours. BAVARIAN CREAMS. THERE is not a more delicious dessert than that of Bavarian cream. Thesecreams are exceedingly easy to make, and, as they are prepared some time beforedinner, they have the advantage of being out of the way when cooking this meal.They are a cheap country dessert, where one has plenty of cream, yet are not sovery expensive in the city, as it only requires a pint of common cream to makea quart and a half of Bavarian cream. When cream is thoroughly chilled, it is much more readily whipped. A pintcan be whipped in a few minutes with a little tin tube cream-whipper. If no whipper is at hand, beat the creamwith a fork, and skim of the whipped cream as it rises. It is always better notto cook gelatine; it should be soaked in a little water near the fire for anhour or two, when it will be entirely dissolved, and then it should be stirredinto the custard while it is still hot. In making the Bavarian creams, do notadd the whipped cream to the ingredients with the gelatine until they are quitecold and are beginning to set, or they would otherwise dissolve the cream. Theingredients will set very soon if placed on ice. The pine-apple Bavarian isespecially nice, and can be made with the canned pine-apple if the freshpine-apple can not be obtained; however, there is not much choice, as they areall delicious. The Bavarian creams all make good charlottes-russe, the peach Bavarian making anespecially delicious one. Sometimes these mixtures are frozen, and put into charlotte molds; the cake is formed in molds atrifle larger. When the cream is frozen, it is inserted into the cake justbefore serving. When freezing the mixture, the whipped cream is not added untilthe custard or ingredients with the gelatine are partly frozen. BAVARIAN CREAM, WITH VANILLA ( Mrs. Blair ). Whip one pint of cream to a stiff froth, laying iton sieve. Boil another pint of cream or rich milk, with a vanillabean, and two table-spoonfuls of sugar, until it is well flavored; then take it off thefire and add half a box of Nelson's or Coxe's gelatine soaked for an hour in half a cupful of water, in awarm place near the range; when slightly cooled, stir in the yolksof four eggs well beaten. When it has become quite cold, and beginsto thicken, stir it without ceasing a few minutes until it is very smooth, thenstir in the whipped cream lightly until it is wellmixed. Put it into a mold or molds, and set it on ice, or in some cool place. BAVARIAN CREAM, WITHCHOCOLATE, is made as the preceding cream, adding two sticks of chocolate, soaked and smoothed, to the yolks of the eggs. BAVARIAN CREAM, WITHSTRAWBERRIES. After picking two pounds and a half of strawberries, squeeze them through a colander, and add six ounces of sugar to the juice; when the sugar is dissolved, add half a box of gelatine soaked as before described. Place it on the ice, stir it smooth when it begins to set, then stirin a pint of cream whipped; put it into a mold ormolds, and serve with fresh strawberries aroundit. BAVARIAN CREAM, WITHALMONDS. Take three ounces of sweet and one ounce ofbitter almonds, blanch and skin them, and put them into a pan on amoderate fire, stirring them continually. As soon as they have acquired a fineyellow color, take them off the fire, and when cold pound them into fine pieces. Then add a pint of cream or rich milk (nearlyboiling), and two or three table-spoonfuls of sugar, and half a package of gelatine, which has been soaked as before described.Put it upon the ice, and when about to thicken stir ituntil it is very smooth, then stir in lightly a pint of cream whipped, and put it into a mold. BAVARIAN CREAM, WITHPEACHES. Cut eighteen fine peaches into smallpieces, and boil them with half a pound of sugar. Whenthey are reduced to a marmalade, squeeze them through a sieve or colander. Then add A moldedbavarian cream dessert garnished with peach slices and served on a roundplatter. half a package of dissolvedgelatine, and a glassful of good cream. Stir it well, to make it smooth when it is aboutto set, then add the pint of cream whipped, and moldit. It makes a still prettier dish to serve halves or quarters of fresh peaches half frozen, around the cream. BAVARIAN CREAM, WITHPINE-APPLE. Cut a pine-apple into finepieces; boil it with one half-pound, or a coffee-cupful of sugar; pass the marmalade through a sieve or colander; turn off part of the juice; add half a packageof dissolved gelatine. Stir, and add the pint of cream whipped, as before described. Mold it. BAVARIAN CREAM, WITHCOFFEE. Throw three heaping table-spoonfuls of fresh roasted andground Mocha coffee into a pint of boiling rich milk. Make a strong infusion, strain it, and addto it the whipped yolks of four eggs well beaten, withan even cupful of sugar. Stir the custard over thefire until it begins to thicken; take it off the fire, and add to it, whilestill hot, half a box of gelatine which has beenstanding an hour on the hearth to dissolve in a little coldwater. When just beginning to set, stir it well to make it smooth,then add the pint of cream whipped. Mold it. CHARLOTTE-RUSSE. The sponge-cake may be made with four eggs, one cupful of sugar, oneand one-half cupfuls of flour, and two eventea-spoonfuls of yeast powder, or as described forsponge jelly-cake (see page 300). To make an even sheet, professional cooks pass the cake batter through the méringue bag on alarge sheet of foolscap paper in rows which touch eachother, and which run together smoothly when baking; or, without the méringue bag, it maybe spread over the sheet as evenly as possible. When baked, an oval piece iscut to fit the bottom of the charlotte pan, then even-sized parallelograms are cut to fit around thesides. Fill with cream made as follows: Whip one pintof cream flavored with vanilla to a stiff froth, and add to it the well-beaten whites of two eggs, and one half-pound of pulverized sugar; mix it all lightly and carefullytogether. Fill the charlotte pan, or pans, and put them into the ice-chest to set. This is the best and simplest manner of making a charlotte-russe. Many take the trouble to add gelatine, which is unnecessary. ProfessorBlot made the filling of his charlotte-russe of sweetened and flavored whipped cream only. It will harden without difficultyif placed upon the ice, and it is very delicate; yetthe whites of eggs are an improvement. It there isonly enough cake at hand to fit the sides of the pan, put a paper in the bottomof the mold cut to fit, and the charlotte can be served without a top. These charlottes are very prettily decorated on top withicing squeezed through a small-sized funnel; or, you may pour a transparent icing over the whole, and make thedecoration over this with the common icing. Sometimesthey are made in little molds, one charlotte for each plate, and, again, a large charlotte is decorated with a circle of strawberries around it. Cream is much more easily frothed when placed on ice and thoroughly chilled before whipping; whenwhipping it, place the froth on a sieve, and all that drops through can bereturned to the bowl to be rewhipped. Sometimes professional cooks work thefroth with an egg-whisk to make it finer grained. AMBROSIA. Slice peeled oranges. Make alternate layers of orangeslices, sugar, and grated cocoa-nut, until a glass dish is filled, having grated cocoa-nut on top; now pour a little sherrywine over the top, to run through the mixtures. It is as oftenserved without the wine. DESSERTS OF RICE. TO BOIL RICE. ALWAYScook rice with plenty of salt; it is insipid without it. It is sometimes cookedin a steamer, with milk, withoutstirring it; although it is more quickly cooked by soaking it an hour or two,and then throwing it into salted boiling water in thebrightest of saucepans. To half a pound of the rice use about five pints of water. Let it simmer abouttwenty minutes. Handle it carefully, not to break the kernels. RICE-PUDDING. Thisreceipt makes one of the plainest and best puddings ever eaten. It is a successwhere every grain of rice seems lying in a creamybed. Ingredients: One cupful of boiled rice (better ifjust cooked, and still hot), three cupfuls of milk, three-quarters of a cupful of sugar, a table-spoonful of cornstarch, two eggs; add flavoring. Dissolve the corn starch first with a little milk, and then stir in the remainder of the milk; add the yolks of theeggs and the sugar beaten together. Nowput this over the fire (there is less risk of burning in a custard-kettle ), and when hot add the hot rice. It will seem as if there were too much milk for the rice; but thereis not. Stir it carefully until it begins to thicken like boiled custard, thentake it off the fire, and add the flavoring, say, extract of lemon. Put it into a pudding-dish, and place it in the oven. Now beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, and add a little sugar and flavoring. Take the pudding from the ovenwhen colored a little, spread the froth over thetop, and return it to the oven for a few minutes to give the froth a delicatecoloring. RICE-CONES. Mold boiled rice, when hot, in cups which have been previouslydipped in cold water; when cold, turn them out on aflat dish, arranging them uniformly; then with a tea-spoon scoop out a littleof the rice from the top of each cone, and put in itsplace any kind of jelly. Just before serving, pour inthe bottom of the dish hot brandy-sauce. For a change,it is well to boil a stick of cinnamon in the rice to flavor it. RICE-CAKE, WITHPEACHES. When some rice is cooked in a steamer with milk, and is stillhot, add a little butter, sugar, and one or two eggs. Butter a plain pudding-mold, strew the butter with bread-crumbs, and put in a layer of rice half an inch thick; then a layer of peaches, and continue alternate layers of each untilthe mold is full. Bake this for about fifteen or twenty minutes in an oven;when done, turn the cake out of the mold, and pour in the bottom of the dish a boiled custard-sauce flavored with wine, or any thing preferred. RICE-CAKE, WITHPINE-APPLE. Prepare rice as above. Cut the pine-apple into dice, and boil them in sirup ( water and sugar boiled ten or fifteen minutes); drain and mixthem in the rice. Butter aplain pudding-mold or basin, and strew it with bread-crumbs; put in the rice and pine-apple, and bakeit; when done, turn it out of the mold, and pour around it a sauce made as follows: Peel three large apples, and cook them in one pint of sirup sweetenedto taste. When the apples are quite soft, strain themthrough a sieve, and mix this sirup with that in which the pine-apple was cooked; boil, or reduce it until itcoats the spoon. GROUND RICE-PUDDING, WITHCHOCOLATE SAUCE. Steam one quarter of a pound of ground rice and one pint of cream aquarter of an hour, then flavor it with vanilla; add one ounce of butter, the yolks of four eggs, let it cool, and beat it for halfan hour; beat up the whites of the eggs to a froth,which mix in gently. Steam it a quarter of an hour. Serve it with half a pintof boiled custard, having one ounce of soaked andmashed chocolate stirred well into it, poured into thebottom of the dish. ORANGE SNOW-BALLS ( Mrs. Acton ). Boil some rice for ten minutes, drain, and let itcool. Pare some oranges, taking off all the thickwhite skin; spread the rice in as many portions asthere are oranges, on some pudding ordumpling cloths. Tie the fruit (surroundedby the rice ) separately in these, and boil the ballsfor an hour; turn them carefully on a dish, sprinkle over plenty of sifted sugar. Serve with any kind of sauce or sweetened cream. APPLE SNOW-BALLS. Pareand core some large apples without dividing them.Prepare the rice as in the foregoing receipt; inclosethe apples separately in it, and boil themthree-quarters of an hour. Sauce. --A little butter and sugar mixed to acream; a spoonful of corn starch cooked in two cupfulsof boiling water; flavoring of cinnamon. To mix, see Sweet Sauces. align="center" placement="heading">RICESOUFFLé. Ingredients: Half a cupful of rice, one even cupful of sugar, one pint of milk, butter the size of a butter-nut, half a lemon, five eggs. Throw the rice into boiling saltedwater, and let it boil for ten minutes. Then put it into a stew-pan with the milk, butter and sugar, and setthis to simmer very slowly for about half an hour, when the rice should be very soft (or the pan can be placed ina vessel of boiling water, or in a steamer ). If it is placed directly on the range, muchcare should be taken not to let it burn. Now work the rice, etc., with a wooden spoon until it is a smoothpaste; add the yolks of the eggs beaten to a perfectfroth, and a lump of loaf sugar (mashed) which hasabsorbed all the oil out of the rind of the wholelemon (called zest ); add also the juice of half of thelemon. If the rice is now too firm, add alittle cream also. When cold, stir into this the whites of the eggs beaten to the stiffest possiblefroth, and put the mixture into a flat pudding-dish, orinto little paper cases (see page 61). Sprinkle granulated sugar over the top or tops. Bake in theoven about ten minutes. Serve immediately, or the soufflé will fall. Ground rice may be used instead of whole rice. It should be rubbed smooth with a little cold milk, and then added to the remainder of the milk and the butter on thefire, and stirred until it thickens. It is then taken off the fire, sweetened,and flavored; the beaten yolks and then the beaten whites are stirred in quickly, and the sugar is sprinkled over the top, when all is put intothe oven. RICECROQUETTES. Ingredients: To half a pound of rice, one quart of milk, onetea-cupful of sugar, a very little butter, yolks of one or twoeggs beaten, flavoring, and a little salt. Soak the rice three or four hours in water; drain, and put into a basin with the milk and salt. Set the basinin the steamer, and cook until thoroughly done. Thenstir in carefully the sugar, the yolks ofone or two eggs, very little butter, andflavor with extract of lemon or vanilla. If fresh lemon is used, add a little zest. When cool enough to handle, form into smallballs; press the thumb into the centre of each; insert a little marmalade, or jelly of anykind, and close the rice well over them. Roll inbeaten eggs (sweetened a little), and bread-crumbs. Fry in boiling-hot lard. RICE PANCAKES, WITHPRESERVES. Make the pancakes (see page 70),and while hot spread them with butter, and A line of eightrolled-up rice pancakes served on an ovalplatter. with almost any kind of preserve or jelly; roll them,cut off the ends, arrange them tastefully on a hot platter, sprinkle sugar over the tops, and serve immediately. WINE JELLIES. WINEJELLY. Ingredients: One box of gelatine soakedin one pint of clear cold water, one pint of wine, the juice and the thin cuts of rindsof three lemons, one and three-quarter pounds of loaf-sugar, one quart of clear boilingwater, the whites of two eggs (well beaten) and theshells, with a small stick of cinnamon. Soak the gelatine in the pint of coldwater an hour, then pour over it the quart of boilingwater, stirring it well; now add the wine, sugar, eggs, lemon-juice (strainedin a fine strainer), and the thinnest possible cuts from the peelsof the lemons. These cuts take only the little globules of oil inthe peel, which are exceedingly delicate in flavor, the white part beingbitter. A fancy molded wine jelly served on a roundplatter. Add also the small stick of cinnamon, as it adds much to the flavor of the jelly.Put this into a porcelain kettle, let it boil rapidly about a quarter of aminute without stirring it; now, setting the kettle on the hearth, let itremain another half-minute to settle, then skim off carefully the scum which isat the top; pour it through the jelly-bag. It should beentirely clear: if, however, the first should not be so, return it to thebag. Cold water should be poured into the molds, thenemptied just before using. Jelly hardens much quicker on ice, or in the coolest place to be found. Dip the molds into warm water a moment, beforetaking out the jelly. If allowed to remain a moment too long, the jelly mightdissolve a little, injuring the form. Many kinds of wines and liquors may be used. The above receipt is wellproportioned for sherry, Madeira, or port; a smallerproportion of brandy, maraschino, noyau, or of punch would make sufficient flavoring; a largerportion of Champagne might be used, as it is not sostrong. ORANGE JELLY ( molded with Quarters of Oranges ). Ingredients:Eight oranges, two lemons, three-quarters of a box of gelatine soaked in half a pint of coldwater, three-quarters of a pound of loaf-sugar, one pint of boilingwater, beaten whites and shells of twoeggs. Rub the loaf-sugar on the peels of twooranges and one lemon; squeeze the juice from six or seven oranges and two lemons, andstrain it. Take off the peel carefully from two oranges, leaving only the transparent skin surroundingthe quarters, and separate all the sections without breaking them. Soak the gelatine half an hour in half a pint of water; boil the other pint of water and the sugar together,skimming all the time until no more scum rises; then put in the sections of oranges, and when they have boiled about a minute takethem out, and put them one side. Pour this sirup overthe soaked gelatine, adding the orange andlemon juice, the beaten whites and the shells of twoeggs. Put it on the fire, and let it boil about quarter of aminute without stirring; then, placing it at the side of the fire, skim offcarefully all the scum at the top, and pass it through the jelly-bag. When half of the jelly is in the mold, put iton the ice, and let it set hard enough to hold the orange sections, which place in a circular row aroundthe edge of the mold; then add enough more jelly to cover the sections; whenthis has hardened, pour over the remainder of the jelly, which should have beenkept in a warm place to prevent it from hardening. All the sections of orange may be put in with the first half of the jelly,as they will rise to the top, although they will not hold their places evenly.Or, if time is valuable, mold the jelly without the sections, and save them togarnish the jelly on the dish. LEMONJELLY. Ingredients: Half a box of gelatine soaked in half a pint of water, juice of five largelemons, two cupfuls of loaf-sugar, or sugar to taste, beaten white and shell ofan egg, one and a half pints of boilingwater. Soak the gelatine in the half-pint of water half an hour. Rub several of the pieces of the sugar on the peel of thelemon, to soak the oil on thesurface. Pour a pint and a half of boiling water onthe soaked gelatine, and add lemon-juice, sugar, and egg; let it come to a boil, then set it at the side ofthe range a few moments; skim carefully, and pass through the jelly-bag into molds. MACEDOINE OFFRUITS. This is made with any kind of jelly; however, jelly made with Champagneor sherry is preferable. Any of the delicate fruits of the season, such as grapes, cherries, peaches, strawberries, raspberries, mulberries, currants (on their stems), plums, and orange sections,or preserved fruits, such as brandiedcherries, peaches, etc., are tastefully imbedded in the jelly, soas to show their forms and colors to best advantage. A fine bunch of Hamburg or of Malaga grapes is exceedingly pretty,incorporated whole into a clear Champagne jelly; itshould be suspended with a small thread in the centre of the jelly-mold, and the jelly poured in when quite cold,although not set. The bunches of grapes are in thisway much more easily imbedded than other fruits. Inthe latter case, the mold is placed on ice; a littlejelly is poured in, and, when set, some fruits arearranged in a circle, or according to taste; more jelly poured in, and left toharden again; more fruit added, and thus continueduntil the mold is full. Do not heat the jelly a second time; merely keep it in a warm place,awaiting that on the ice to harden. FANCY JELLIES. Jelly is sometimes formed in a mold with a cylindricaltube in the centre; the open space in the centre is then filled with whipped cream. Then, to be still more fanciful, the whipped cream may be dotted with strawberries, or any kind of preservedfruits, such as cherries, grapes, cuts of peaches, etc.,etc. Then there is ribbon jelly, or jelly made in twocolors, in this way: Half of a Champagne or sherryjelly is colored quite red with a few drops of prepared cochineal; a little pale jelly is poured intothe mold, and, when set, a layer of the red jelly is poured carefully over it,and so continued until the mold is filled with alternate layers of the twocolors. Italian jelly is pretty also. The mold is halffilled with jelly, and, when set, a chain of cakes of blanc-mange (made rather firm, hardenedin a thin layer, and cut of equal sizes with a pepper-box cover or a small tincutter ) is arranged; then the remainder of the jelly is added tothe mold. Whipped jelly makes a pretty change. When itis set a little, put it into a bowl; whip it with an egg-whisk until it is full of air-bubbles. Fill themold, and put on ice. WHAT TO DO WITH PARTS OF JELLYLEFT OVER IN WINTER. Add lemon-juice; beatthe jelly until it becomes entirely white, which will take some time, and putit into a mold again. CALF'S-FOOT JELLY. Ihave made calf's-foot jelly twice, and never intend to make it again. I wouldnot have made it the second time, except for the purpose of succeeding, andgetting a reliable receipt for this book. At the first attempt, I happened tohave company who had heard that I pretended to be a cook. The jelly was opaque,tasteless, and split in two. Here is a successful receipt. It requires almostevery thing known in the cooking calendar; but do not attempt it with less, andafter a trial use gelatine only for jellies. Ingredients: Four calf's feet boiled in a gallon of water, seven eggs, one and ahalf pounds of sugar, one pint of sherrywine, a stick of cinnamon, three cloves, and half a box of gelatine. Split the calf's feet, break the bones, and place them on the fire at the back of therange, with a gallon of cold water, to boil gently fofive hours. Skim the water often, which should bereduced to rather less than two quarts; then strain the jelly into a pan, and,when perfectly firm, remove the fat and sediment. Add to the jelly the beaten whites and crushed shells of seveneggs, one and a half pounds of sugar, apint of sherry wine, a stick of cinnamon, three cloves, andhalf a box of gelatine soaked in a little water, and whip this well together; set it over thefire, and when it has just begun to boil throw in the juice of sixlemons, and one or two table-spoonfuls of clear, coldwater; take the kettle off the fire, let it remain at the side in rather a hot place about ten minutes, then skimoff carefully all the scum from the top. Put into the jelly-bag the thin cuts from the peels offour lemons, not cutting the white or under skin, as that isbitter; then pour in the jelly, having the apparatus near the fire to preventthe jelly hardening before it has all passed through. WHIPPED JELLY, WITHFRUITS. Prepare about two cupfuls of preservedfruits --for instance, pine-apples, peaches, greengages, and cherries; keep the cherries whole, but cut the others into dice; moistenthem all with sherry. Prepare about a quart of Champagne, sherry, or brandyjelly, and when strained pour it into a basin, which place on the ice, or on ice and salt; whipit now gently with the egg-whisk, adding the juice of two lemons; when it begins to set, and isquite frothy (not too much so, however), stir in the fruits; place all into a mold, and surround it withice. CAKE. Rules for Cake. --Have every thing ready beforemixing the material-- i.e., the ingredients allmeasured and prepared, and the tins buttered. The sooner the cake is mixed(after the ingredients are ready) and put into the oven, the better. Sift theflour, and have it dry. Mix baking-powder or cream of tartar, it used, wellinto the flour, passing it through the sieve several times, if particular. Rollthe sugar; mix sugar and butter together to a cream. The eggs must then be very, very well beaten separately. If one personmakes the cake, beat the yolks first. If soda is used, dissolve it in the milk,or, if no milk is used, in a little lukewarm water; add it the last thing,unless fruit is used, when it should always be rolled in flour, and added thelast thing. Cake, to be light, should be baked slowly at first, until thebatter is evenly heated all through. Many leave the oven door slightly open forthe first ten or fifteen minutes. The prepared flour is especially good forcake. SPONGE-CAKE. This isthe most perfect of sponge-cakes, when properly made. Ingredients: Ten eggs, one pound of pulverized sugar, half apound of flour, juice of half a largelemon, with the rind grated. After all the ingredients are quite ready-- i.e., the flour and sugar sifted, the lemon-peel grated, the half lemon squeezed, and the tinsbuttered--the success of this cake is in the beating of the eggs. Two persons should beat them at least half anhour, one beating the whites, and the other the yolks and half of the sugar together. Next cut the yolks into the whites, thenstir in lightly the remainder of the sugar, then the flour and lemon bydegrees. * The oven heat should be rather moderate at first. Much of the success depends uponthis, as the batter should be evenly heated throughout before it begins torise. When baked, spread over the cakes a wafer thickness of icing (see page 304) slightly flavored with vanilla. WHITE CAKE ( Miss Eliza Brown ). I venture to say there is not to be found a better receipt for white cakethan the following. The cake is mixed contrary to the usual rules for makingcake, but it is the best mode for making it fine-grained and delicate. Ingredients: Whites of six eggs, scantthree-quarters of a cupful of butter, one andone-quarter cupfuls of pulverized sugar, two cupfulsof flour, juice of half alemon, one-quarter of a tea-spoonful of soda. The following note appears at thebottom of page 295 in the original text. *A pound of sugar is three cupfuls; half a pound offlour, two and a half cupfuls-- i.e., the ordinarysized kitchen cup. Do not try to make half thequantity. If soda is used, mix it well with the flour, and pass it through the sieve several times todistribute it equally. Beat the butter to a lightcream, and add the flour to it, stirring it ingradually with the ends of the fingers until it is a smooth paste. Beat the whites of the sixeggs to a stiff froth, and mix in them the pulverizedsugar; now stir the egg and sugar gradually into the flour and butter, adding alsothe lemon-juice, and mix it smoothly together with the egg-whisk. As soon as it is perfectly smooth, put itinto the oven, the heat of which should be rather moderate at first. When doneand still hot, spread over it a frosting made with the white of oneegg, pulverized sugar (see page 304), anda flavoring of lemon. The frosting is a decidedimprovement, and, according to the receipt, only requires a few minutes toprepare. This cake may be made with one tea-spoonful of baking-powder, or with prepared flour, or with the one-quarter tea-spoonful of soda and one-half tea-spoonful of cream oftartar, when the essence of lemon shouldbe used instead of the lemon-juice. JUMBLES ( Mrs.Wadsworth ). Ingredients: Two cupfuls of sugar, three eggs (beaten separately); one cupful of butter, just enough flour toroll it out. Mix quickly, and roll it thin. Cut out the cakes with a round cake-cutter, cutting them out again in the centre withthe top of the pepper-glass of the caster. When they are in the pans, wet the tops, using a paste-brush or feather, with the white of anegg slightly beaten. Then sprinkle over very coarse-pounded lump-sugar; the sugar, infact, in little lumps. ALMONDJUMBLES. Ingredients: One pound of sugar, one-half pound of butter, one pound of almonds blanched and chopped fine, two eggs, flour enough to mix stiff. Roll thin. Moisten the top of each one with the white ofeggs, and sprinkle with sugar. Bakequickly. Some persons wet the jumbles with a brush or a little cloth saturated with sherry-wine after they are cooked, and then returnthem to the oven a few moments to dry. COCOA-NUT CAKE ( Miss Emma Witt, of Cleveland ). Ingredients: One-half coffee-cupful of butter, twosmall tea-spoonfuls of cream of tartar, two andone-half coffee-cupfuls of sugar, one small tea-spoonful of soda, four and one-half coffee-cupfuls of flour, two grated cocoa-nuts, one coffee-cupful of sweetmilk, the whites of seven eggs. Reserve a large handful of the grated cocoa-nut tosprinkle on the frosting. This cake looks most beautiful mixed with fruit-cakein a cake-basket. FRUIT-CAKE ( Miss Abbie Carpenter, of Saratoga ). Ingredients: One pound of flour, one pound of sugar, one and one-eighth pound of butter, one-half pound of candiedcitron, four pounds of currants, fourpounds of raisins (stoned and chopped), nine eggs, one table-spoonful each of ground cloves, of cinnamon, of mace, and of nutmeg, andthree gills of brandy. This cake is perhaps not too large, as it will keep for years. ENGLISHPOUND-CAKE. Ingredients: One pound of butter beaten to a cream, one pound of pounded sugar, ten eggs ( whites and yolks beatenseparately), one pound of dried flour, eight ounces of almonds, eight ounces of candiedpeel, two wine-glasses of brandy. When all are well beaten together, add three pounds of Englishcurrants and one pound of raisins (bothdredged in flour ). Set it immediately in a moderateoven, and bake three hours at least. BOSTONCREAM-CAKES. Paste. --One pint of water, half a pound of butter, three-quarters of a pound of flour, ten eggs. Boil the water and butter together; stir in the flour while boiling, and let it cook a moment; whencool, add the eggs, well beaten, with a tea-spoonfulof saleratus and a little salt. Drop with a spoon on buttered tins, forminglittle cakes some distance apart. Bake in a quick oven; they will puff inbaking. When done and cold, cut one side large enough to insert the cream with a spoon. This will take about sixtycakes. Cream. --One cupful of flour, two cupfuls of sugar, four eggs, one quart of milk. Beat the eggs and sugar together, then add flour and enough of the milk to make a smooth and thin paste; pour this into the remainder of the milk when it is boiling, and stir constantly until itis sufficiently thickened; flavor with vanillla. Donot use it until it is cold. It is better to make this, as indeed all custards,in a custard-kettle. CRULLERS ( MissAmanda Newton ). Beat three eggs well with four table-spoonfuls of sugar; add four or five table-spoonfuls of melted lard, then flour enough tomake it not too stiff. Roll rather thin (one-third of an inch). Cut the cakesinto shapes, and throw them into boiling lard, likedoughnuts. They may be simply shaped, as in Fig.1. Three illustrations labeled 1, 2, and 3, showingthe process of shaping crullers. To give them theshape of Fig. 3, first cut the paste, as in Fig. 2; hold the first line withthe thumb and finger of the left hand, then with the right hand slip the secondline under the first, then the third under the second, and so on until they areall slipped under; pinch the two ends together, and the cruller will be in formof Fig. 3. DOUGHNUTS ( Mrs.Bartlett ). Ingredients: Two eggs, one cupful of sugar, one cupful of sourmilk, half a tea-spoonful of soda, fourtable-spoonfuls of melted lard; add flour, making the dough rather soft. Fry them in hot lard, and sprinkle pulverized sugar over them while still hot. BREAD-CAKE. Ingredients: Three cupfuls of bread-dough, one cupful of butter, three scant cupfuls of sugar, one cupful of raisins or English currants, three eggs, a nutmeg grated,one tea-spoonful of soda, two tea-spoonfuls of cream of tartar, a wine-glassful of brandy. GINGERBREAD ( Mrs. Lansing ), No. 1. Ingredients: Two cupfuls of molasses, one cupful of butter, one cupful of sugar, one cupful of milk (sour orsweet), five eggs, five cupfuls of sifted flour, two table-spoonfuls of ginger, half a tea-spoonful of cloves, one tea-spoonful of soda. GINGERBREAD (No.2). Ingredients: One cupful (half a pint) of molasses, one cupful (half a pint) of boiling water, butter thesize of an egg, one tea-spoonful each of ground cloves, ground cinnamon, ginger, and soda, half apound of flour (light weight). First, put butter (partly melted) into the molasses, then spices. Dissolve the soda inthe boiling water; stir it into the molasses, etc.; then the flour. Cream of tartar shouldnot be used with molasses. CHOCOLATE-CAKE. Make acup-cake with the following ingredients: One cupful of butter, two cupfuls of sugar, three cupfuls of flour, one cupful of milk, four eggs beaten separately, one tea-spoonful of soda, twotea-spoonfuls of cream of tartar, or two tea-spoonfulsof yeast powder. Cut the cup-cake, when baked, through the middle, or bake it in two or threeparts. Put a layer of the chocolate mixture between and on the top and sides ofthe cake. Chocolate Mixture. --Five table-spoonfuls ofgrated chocolate, with enough cream or milk to wet it, onecupful of sugar, and one egg well beaten. Stir the ingredients over the fireuntil thoroughly mixed; then flavor with vanilla. MOUNTAIN-CAKE. Ingredients: Whites ofsix eggs, one and a quarter cupfuls of sugar, one and a quarter cupfuls of flour, half a cupful of butter, half a cupful of sweetmilk, half a cupful of corn starch, alittle vanilla, two tea-spoonfuls of baking powder. Bake it in two or three parts, like jelly-cake; put a frosting between thelayers and on top of the cake, made of the whites of foureggs, nine table-spoonfuls of pulverizedsugar, and a little vanilla; or usegrated cocoa-nut, mixed thickly in the frosting,without vanilla; or use the chocolatemixture in the preceding receipt; or make it a jelly-cake. CREAM CAKE OR PIE ( Mrs. Arnold ). This is an excellent dessert cut as a pie, or it may be served as a cake fortea. Crust. --Three eggs, onecupful of sugar, one cupful of flour, one-third of a tea-spoonful of soda, and one tea-spoonful of cream oftartar. Beat the whites and yolks well separately; stir all together as quickly aspossible, and bake in two pans (if rather small; if large, use only one), thebatter three-quarters of an inch thick. Cream. --Two and a half cupfuls of sweet milk, four even table-spoonfuls of sugar, two table-spoonfuls of flour, and one egg. Boil thisa few moments until it has thickened, and flavor with vanilla or lemon. When the crust is cold, split it, and put the custard between. This cake is much improved with a boiled icing. SPONGE JELLY-CAKE ( Mrs. Pope ). Ingredients: Five eggs, one cupful of sugar, one cupful of flour, two even tea-spoonfuls of yeast-powder, and grated rind of alemon. Beat the yolks, sugar, and lemon together to a cream; add whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth; then the flour and yeast-powder perfectly mixed. Bake in a dripping-pan, and when done spread jelly(not sweet) over the bottom of the cake, roll it from the side,and sprinkle sugar over the top; or bake it in two orthree jelly-cake pans, and spread jelly between. The cake may be iced on thebottom. The rolled jelly-cake may be cut into slices, and served with a sweet sauce for dessert. COCOA-NUTCONES. Ingredients: One pound of cocoa-nut grated, half a pound of sugar, the whites of twoeggs, and the yolk of one egg. Beat the yolk well; add the sugar to it; then the cocoa-nut and whites of theeggs beaten to a stiff froth. Drop by the tea-spoonful on sheetsof buttered paper placed on tins. Form each little cake into the shape of acone, and bake in a moderate oven about half an hour. CROQUANTE CAKE ( Mrs. Lackland ). Ingredients: Three-quarters of a pound of shelled almonds, half a pound of citron, three-quarters of a pound of sugar, three-quarters of a pound of flour, and six eggs. Blanch and halve the almonds, and slice the citron; mix them well together, and roll them in flour; add to them the sugar, then the eggs (wellbeaten), lastly the flour. Butter shallow pans, and lay in the mixture two inchesthick. After it is baked in a quick oven, slice the cake into strips one inchwide, and turn every strip. Return the pan to the oven, and bake the sides alittle. When cold, put it away in tin boxes. This cake will keep a year ormore, and for reserve use is quite invaluable. TO BLANCH ALMONDS. Putthem over the fire in cold water, and let them remainuntil the water is almost at the boiling-point, notallowing them to boil; then throw them into coldwater. Remove the skins, and dry the almonds in a cloth before using. When they are to be pounded for macaroons, méringues, etc., they should be first driedfor two or three days in a gentle heat. REBECCA CAKE ( Mrs. North ). Ingredients: Half a cupful of butter, one cupful of sugar, one cupful of sweetmilk, one egg, one pint of flour, one tea-spoonful of soda, and two tea-spoonfuls of cream oftartar. For a change, a cupful of raisins or of English currants, or a mixture of both, or an additionof sliced citron, may be added. GINGER-SNAPS ( Mrs. Leach ). Ingredients: One pint of molasses, onecoffee-cupful of brown sugar, one coffee-cupful of butter, one table-spoonful of ginger, and one heaping tea-spoonful of soda dissolved in one table-spoonful of hot water. Mix very thick with flour, and roll them verythin. PLAINCOOKIES. Ingredients: One cupful of butter (orhalf butter and half lard ), two cupfuls of sugar, one cupful of milk, two eggs, about a quart of flour (cookies are better to have no more flour than isnecessary for rolling them thin without sticking), three tea-spoonfuls (notheaping) of yeast-powder, or one tea-spoonful of cream of tartar and half a tea-spoonful of soda. Sour milk can be used, when add the halftea-spoonful of soda, and omit the creamof tartar. Bake in a quick oven. ALMONDMACAROONS. Blanch and skin eight ounces of Jordan almondsand one ounce of bitter ones; dry them on a sieve, and pound themto a smooth paste in a mortar, adding occasionally avery little water, to prevent them from getting oily;add to them five ounces of pulverized sugar, onetea-spoonful of rice flour, and the whitesof three eggs beaten to a stiff froth; with a spoon, put this onpaper in drops the size of a walnut; bake in a slow oven until they are of alight-brown color, and firmly set; take them from the paper by wetting theunder side of it. LADY'S-FINGERS. Mix six yolks of eggs with half a pound of powdered sugar; work the preparation with a spoonuntil it is frothy; then mix into it the whites of sixeggs well beaten, and at the same time a quarter of a pound of flour, dried and sifted. Put this batter into a méringue bag, andsqueeze it through in strips, two or three inches long, and sprinkle over somefine sugar; bake in a slack oven twelve or fourteenminutes. MéRINGUES à LACRèME. Ingredients: Six whites ofeggs, nine ounces of pulverized sugar, half a pint of cream (whipped), three ounces of sugar with the cream, aslight flavoring of vanilla. Whip the eggs to a very stiff froth, add three orfour drops of vanilla, and mix in the pulverized sifted sugar, by turning the sugar all over the eggs atonce, and cutting it together very carefully. Sprinkle sugar over a tin platter, and on it placetable-spoonfuls of this mixture at convenient distances apart; smooth the tops,and sprinkle a little sugar over them also. The secret of making méringues is in the baking. Put them into amoderate oven, and leave the oven-door open for thirty-five minutes at least.They should not be allowed to color for that time, which would prevent them fordrying properly, and a thin paper crust is very undesirable for a méringue; in fact, the longer they dry beforecoloring, the thicker will be the crust. They should be in the oven at leastthree-quarters of an hour, only allowing them to color slightly the last two orthree minutes. While they are still hot, scoop out carefully the soft contents,and when they are cold fill them with whippedcream, press two of them together, forming a ball, and put theminto the refrigerator to set the cream. Whipped Cream. --Add the threeounces of sugar and a flavoring of vanilla, sherry, or any thingpreferred, to the cream, and when whipped put thefroth into a kitchen bowl, and whip it again with the egg-whip or a machineegg-beater; this makes it finer-grained and stiffer. A much prettier arrangement for desert is the méringue as it is fashioned at Delmonico's.Instead of little méringues, each one is made a half ball,about six inches in diameter. They are dried very slowly, so that the crust isabout one-third of an inch thick. When Anillustration of a decorated meringue served on a roundplatter. emptied of the soft interiors, and whencold, two shells are placed on a platter, like an open clam-shell. The whipped cream, when about to serve (already set, bybeing on the ice ), is banked between them, reaching ashigh above as suits the fancy. The cream may bedecorated with strawberries, raspberries, etc., or it may be served withoutornamentation. GERMAN CAKE ( Mrs. Schulenburg ). Ingredients: One pound of flour, three-quarters ofa pound of butter, six ounces of sugar, one egg, half a cupfulof rum. Bake in a pie-pan, pressing the cake until it isabout one-quarter of an inch high. Before baking,sprinkle sugar and ground cinnamon on top; after it is baked, cut it intosquares while it is yet warm. RANAQUEBUNS. Ingredients: One pound of butter, oneand a quarter pounds of sugar, two pounds of flour, six eggs, fourtable-spoonfuls of ground cinnamon. Mix the cinnamon into the flour; rub the butter to acream, then mix the flour with it. Beat the sugar with the eggs, then alltogether, as little s possible. Distribute this by the spoonful intorough-looking cakes on buttered tins placed at a little distance apart. This isvery nice lunch-cake. FROSTING. The old wayof making frosting was a half-day's work. I now laugh at the extra exertiononce made to be sure that the eggs were sufficientlyand properly beaten. The following is the true way to make frosting, which isdone and dried on the cake in ten minutes, allowing three minutes for themaking: Use a heaping tea-cupful of fine pulverized sugar tothe white of each egg, or, say, a pound of sugar to the whites of threeeggs. Beat the whites until they areslightly foaming only; do not beat them to a froth. The sugar may all be poured on the egg at once, or, if considered easier to mix, it maybe gradually added. Either way, as soon as the sugar and eggs are thoroughlystirred together, and flavored with a little lemon or vanilla, the icing is ready to spread over the cake.It would be advisable to ice the cakes as soon as they are taken from the oven.The icing made with the white of one egg is quitesufficient to frost an ordinary-sized cake. It is very little extra trouble to decorate a frosted cake. One can purchasefunnels for the purpose with different shaped ends. In place of no betterfunnel, make a cornucopia of stiff writing-paper; fill it with the frosting,and press it out at the small end, forming different shapes, according totaste, over the cake. Little centre-pieces or leaves can always be purchased atthe confectioner's to aid in the decoration. For a cocoa-nut cake, mix plenty of the grated cocoa-nut into the frosting, which spread over thecake; decorate it then with plainfrosting. For a chocolate-cake, after spreading over the chocolate frosting mentioned in the receipt forchocolate-cake, decorate it with delicate lines of the whitefrosting. The appearance of boiled icing (which is generally flavored with lemon) ismuch improved also by a decoration with the plain white frosting. BOILEDICING. Ingredients: One pound of sugar, whites of three eggs. First, boil the sugar with a little water; when it is ready to candy, or will spin inthreads when dropping from the end of a spoon, take it off the fire, and whileit is still boiling hot add the whites of the eggs well beaten, stirring them in as fast as possible.Flavor with lemon (if preferred), vanilla, Jamaica rum, or anyof the flavorings, and it is ready for use. CANDIES. CARAMELS ( Mrs.Wadsworth ). Ingredients: One cupful of best sirup, one cupfulof brown sugar, one cupful of whitesugar, two cupfuls of grated chocolate, two cupfuls of cream, vanilla, onetea-spoonful of flour mixed with the cream. Rub the chocolate to a smooth paste with a littleof the cream; boil all together half an hour, and pourit into flat dishes to cool; mark it with a knife into little squares when itis cool enough. WHITE-SUGAR CANDY ( Miss Eliza Brown ). Ingredients: Four pounds of sugar, one pint of water, four table-spoonfuls of cream, four table-spoonfuls of vinegar, butter the size ofan egg. Boil all together slowly for about three-quarters of an hour. VINEGAR CANDY ( Mrs. Clifford ). Ingredients: Three cupfuls of sugar, half a cupfulof vinegar, half a cupful of water, one tea-spoonful of soda. When it boils, stir in the soda. If the candy ispreferred clear, stir it as little as possible; if grained stir it. ICES. WITH a patent five-minute freezer (it really takes,however, from fifteen minutes to half an hour to freeze any thing), it is ascheap and easy to make ices in summer as almost any other kind of dessert. Ifone has cream, the expense is very little, as a cream-whipper costs but twenty-five cents. A simplecream, sweetened, flavored, whipped, and then frozen, is one of the mostdelicious of ice-creams. By having the cream quite cold, a pint can be whipped,with this cream-whipper, in five or ten minutes. It willrequire ten cents' worth of ice--half of it to freeze the preparation, and theother half to keep it frozen until the time of serving. Salt is notproverbially expensive; a half-barrel or bushel of coarse salt will last a longtime, especially as a portion of it can be used a second time. In summer,fruits, such as peaches or pears, quartered, or any kind of berries, are mostdelicious half frozen and served with sugar. The chocolate ice-cream with fruitis excellent. The devices of form for creams served at handsome dinners inlarge cities are very beautiful; for instance, one sees a hen surrounded by herchickens; or a hen sitting on the side of a spun-glass nest, looking sidewaysat her eggs; or a fine collection of fruits in colors. One may see also aperfect imitation of asparagus with cream-dressing, the asparagus being made ofthe pistache cream, and the dressing simply a whippedcream. These fancy displays are, of course, generally arranged by theconfectioner. It is a convenience, of course, when giving dinner companies, tohave the dessert or any other course made outside of the house; but forordinary occasions, ices are no more troublesome to prepare than any thing else, especially when they can bemade early in the day, or even the day before serving. FROZEN WHIPPEDCREAM. Flavor and sweeten the cream, makingit rather sweet. Whip it, and freeze the froth. VANILLA ICE-CREAM. Beatthe yolks of eight eggs with three-quarters of a poundof sugar until very light. Put one and a half pints of rich milk on the fire to scald, highly flavored withthe powdered vanilla-bean (say, one heapingtable-spoonful). When the milk is well scalded, stirit into the eggs as soon as it is cool enough not tocurdle. Now stir the mixture constantly (the custardpan or pail being set in a vessel of boilingwater ) until it has slightly thickened. Do not let it remain toolong and curdle, or it will be spoiled. When taken off the fire again, mix in aquarter of a box of gelatine, which has been soakedhalf an hour in two table-spoonfuls of lukewarm water near the fire. The heat of the custard will be sufficient to dissolve it, if itis not already sufficiently dissolved. Cool the custard well before putting itinto the freezer, as this saves time and ice. When itis in the freezer, however, stir it almost constantly until it begins to set;then stir in lightly a pint of cream, whipped. Stir itfor two or three minutes longer, put it into a mold, and return it to a secondrelay of ice and salt. The powderedvanilla can be purchased at drug-stores or at confectioners'. Itis much better than the extract for any purpose, and is used by all the best restauranteurs. DELMONICO VANILLACREAM. Ingredients: One and a half pints of cream, one ounce of isinglass, one pound of sugar, yolks of eighteggs, half a pint of milk, vanilla powder. Scald the cream only;then add the isinglass dissolved in the milk, and pour it on the sugar and eggs beatentogether to a froth; add the flavoring. Strain, cool, and freeze it; then packit for three hours and a half at least. CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM ismade in the same way as the vanilla ice-cream, adding a flavoring of chocolate and a little vanillapowder. For instance, to make a quart and a half of cream: Makethe boiled custard with the yolks of sixeggs, half a pound of sugar, one pint ofboiled milk, and a tea-spoonful (not heaping) of vanilla powder. Pound smooth four ounces of chocolate; add a little sugar and one or two table-spoonfuls of hotwater. Stir it over the fire until it is perfectly smooth. Addthis and a table-spoonful of thin, dissolved gelatine to the hot custard. When about to set in the freezer, add one pint of cream, whipped. TO MAKE A MOLD OF CHOCOLATE ANDVANILLA CREAMS. A mound of ice cream servedon a round platter. Freeze the different creams in two freezers. Cut a piece of pasteboard to fit the centre of a mold; fill each sidewith the two creams, remove the pasteboard, and imbedthe mold in ice and salt fortwo hours. STRAWBERRYICE-CREAM. Sprinkle sugar over strawberries, mash them well, and rub them through asieve. To a pint of the juice add half a pint of good cream. Make it very sweet. Freeze it in the usual way,and, when beginning to set, stir in lightly pint of cream(whipped), and, lastly, a handful of whole strawberries, sweetened. Put it into a mold, whichimbed in ice. Or, when fresh strawberries can not beobtained, there is no more delicious cream than thatmade with the French bottled strawberries. Mix the juice in the bottle with the cream, and add the whippedcream and the whole strawberries, whenthe juice, etc., have partly set in the freezer. Many prefer this cream of a darker red color, whichis obtained by using prepared cochineal. NAPOLITAINE CREAM. Tomake a form of three colors: Vanilla, chocolate, and strawberryice-creams are frozen in three different freezers,and A brick of ice cream with threelayers. filled in a mold the form of a brick inthree smooth layers of equal size. CHOCOLATE FRUITICE-CREAM. Make a chocolate cream. When setin the freezer, add about half a pound of assorted French candiedor preserved fruits cut into small pieces. Put it into amelon-shaped mold, to imitate a plum-pudding. When ready to serve, turn the cream on a platter, and make a circle around it ofwhipped A mold of chocolate fruit ice creamsurrounded by whipped cream and served on an ovalplatter. cream, sweetenedand flavored with vanilla. This cream is a decided success, and a beautiful dessertfor a dinner-party. It may be improved by sprinkling over it chopped almonds dried of a light-brown color, mixed withchopped pistachios. This is intended to imitate therugged appearance of the rind of a melon. FROZEN FRUITCUSTARD. Ingredients: One pint of richmilk, one pint of cream (whipped), yolks of three eggs, one and a half cupfuls of sugar, one pint of fresh peaches cut into pieces not too small, or fresh ripe berries. Beat the eggs and sugar well together. Heat the pint of milk almost to theboiling-point, and add it gradually to the beaten eggs and sugar. Return it to the custard-kettle, and stir it constantly until it hasslightly thickened, taking care that it does not curdle. When the custard ispartly frozen, having stirred it in the usual way, add the whippedcream; stir a few minutes longer, and then stir in the fruit. Put all into a mold, which place in a freshrelay of ice and salt. GERMAN STEAMER BAKEDICE-CREAM. This dish was at least a curiosity, served at the table ofone of the German steamers. A flat, round sponge-cake served as a base. A circular mold of veryhard frozen ice-cream was placed on this, and thencovered with a méringue, orwhipped white of egg, sweetened and flavored. Thesurface was quickly colored with a red-hot salamander, which gave the dish the appearance of being baked. The gentleman who told me about this dish insisted that it was put into theoven and quickly colored, as the egg surrounding the cream was a sufficiently good non-conductor of heat toprotect the ice for one or two minutes. However, there is less risk with a salamander. PINE-APPLE ICE-CREAMPUDDING. Add one pound of pine-apple gratedfine to the yolks of eight eggs well beaten with onepound of sugar, one and a half pints of boiled cream, and a very little salt. Stir all together Apineapple ice cream pudding surrounded with whipped cream and decorated withthe top of the pineapple. over the fire until itbegins to thicken. When beginning to set in the freezer (having stirred it inthe usual way), add a pint of cream (whipped). Thisaddition of the whipped cream is a great improvement,although it is generally omitted. Put it into a form. When ready to serve,press the tuft of leaves, cut from the pine-apple and trimmed,in the top of the cream. Surround it with whipped and sweetened cream. ICED RICE-PUDDING ( Francatelli ). Wash and parboil half a pound of rice; then put itinto a stew-pan, with a quart of milk and a pint of cream, twosticks of vanilla, three-quarters of a pound of sugar, and a little salt. Allow the rice to simmervery gently over or by a slow fire, until the grains are almost dissolved,stirring it occasionally with a light hand. When the rice is done, and while it is yet hot, add the yolks of six eggs; then stir all well together forseveral minutes, in order to mix in the eggs, and alsofor the purpose of breaking up and smoothing the rice. Let this rice custard be frozen like a ordinary ice-cream, stirring it from thesides until it is set, when put it into a mold, and immerse it in the ice and salt. While the above part of the process is going on, a compôte of twelve oranges should be prepared in the following manner:First, separate them into sections, and remove every particle of the white pithwith a small knife, laying the transparent pulp of the fruit quite bare. When all the oranges are ready, throw them into a stew-pan containing about a pint of sirup (made with one poundof An iced rice pudding served with fruit on a roundplatter. sugar and nearlya pint of clear water ); allow the pieces of oranges to boil up gently in this for two minutes, andthen drain them in a sieve. Boil the sirup down to about one-half of itsoriginal quantity; then add two wine-glasses of curaçoa and three table-spoonfuls of peach marmalade or apricotjam; mix all together, and pour this preparation over the oranges in a basin. When about to send the pudding totable, turn it out of the mold on a platter, dress the compôte of oranges onthe top and around the base, pour the sirup over it, and serve. BISCUIT GLACéS, IN SMALLCASES. Beat well eight yolks of eggs, withten ounces of sugar, and a very little salt; add one pint of cream. Stir over the fire until slightly thickened.Flavor with vanilla powder, the extract ofalmonds, lemon, or with coffee or chocolate. It mayalso be made by adding Purée ofpeaches, strawberries, raspberries, or pine-apple to the custard.When just beginning to set in the freezer, stir in lightly one-half pint of cream (whipped); then partly fill papercases with the mixture. Smooth over the tops. Set the cases in thefreezer well dried, and allow them to harden until ready to serve. BISCUIT GLACéS ( Francatelli ). Ingredients: One pint of clarified sirup, twelve yolks of eggs, two whole eggs, a large wine-glassful of maraschino. Mix the whole of the ingredients in an earthen basin; then pour thepreparation into an egg-bowl that has been previouslywarmed with hot water and wiped dry. Whisk the soufflé briskly (the eggbowl being placed on a stove containing hot ashes) until itresembles a well-prepared, firm, sponge-cake batter. Fill the papercases with the preparation, and smooth over the tops. Place them ina tin pail or in the freezer, surrounded with ice and salt, and half a pound of saltpetre mixed, and let them remain well covered forthree or four hours at least, before serving, without stirring them. Or, theymay be frozen all together in one mold, and some sifted macaroonpowder or grated chocolate sprinkled overthe surface, to imitate a baked soufflé. NESSELRODE PUDDING ( Carême's Receipt ). Ingredients: Forty chestnuts, one pound of sugar, flavoring of vanilla, one pint of cream, the yolks of twelve eggs, one glass of maraschino, one ounce of candiedcitron, two ounces of currants, twoounces of stoned raisins. Blanch the chestnuts in boilingwater, remove the husks, and pound them in a mortar until perfectly smooth, adding a few spoonfuls ofthe sirup; then rub them through a fine sieve, and mix them in a basin with a pint ofsirup, made from one pound of sugar, clarified, andflavored with vanilla; one pint of cream, and the yolks of twelveeggs. Set this mixture over a slow fire, stirring it without ceasing, until the eggs begin to thicken (without allowing them tocurdle), then take it off. When it is cold, put it into the freezer, adding the maraschino, and make the mixture set; then add thesliced citron, the currants, and stoned raisins (these two latter should be soaked the day previous in maraschino, and sugar pounded with vanilla ) tothe whole. Thus mingled, add a plateful of whippedcream, mixed with the whites of threeeggs beaten to a froth. When the pudding is perfectly frozen, putit into a mold, close the lid, place it again in the freezer, well surroundedwith pounded ice and saltpetre, and let it remain until the time ofserving, when turn it out of the mold. ICEDPUDDING. Ingredients: One and one-half pints of custard, composed of the yolks of foureggs, a pint of boiled milk, fourtable-spoonfuls of sugar, a flavoring of vanilla, eight ounces of fruits, consisting of equal parts of driedcherries, pine-apple, driedpears, or apricots, all cut into verysmall squares. These fruits may be selected, orperhaps it would be more convenient to purchase half a pound of the French preserved dried fruits; or add one ounce of candied citron sliced, two ounces of currants, two ounces of stoned and chopped raisins, and half a pint of cream whipped. Freeze the custard in the usual manner, then mix in the fruits and whipped cream. Agill of maraschino is an improvement to this pudding,but may be omitted. If added, it should be at the same time with the fruit. Put into a mold, and place it on ice and salt. Serve whipped cream around it. TUTTI FRUTTI. When arich vanilla cream is partly frozen, candied cherries, Englishcurrants, chopped raisins, chopped citron, or any other candiedfruits chopped rather fine, are added; add about the same quantityof fruit as there is of icecream. Mold and imbed in ice and salt. It may beserved surrounded with a whipped cream. FRESH PEACHES HALFFROZEN. An exceedingly nice dish for breakfast, lunch, or tea may bemade of quarters of large fresh peaches, half frozen, and then sprinkled with granulated sugar. PEACHES AND CREAMFROZEN. Peel and quarter the fresh peaches; mix them with sugar and cream to taste. Arrange some of the quarters of the peaches tastefully in the bottom of a basin, or charlotte mold, then fill,and freeze the mass solid, without stirring. Turn it out to serve. LEMON ICE. Boil threepints of water and one quart of loaf-sugar until reduced to nearly one quart ofliquid, skimming it when necessary. When cold, add the juice ofseven lemons, and the thin-sliced yellow part of the rind of four of them. Let it infuse an hour. Strain itinto the freezer without pressing. When beginning to set in the freezer, stirin lightly and well the beaten whites of four eggs. Putinto a mold, and return it to a fresh relay of salt and ice. Or it may be frozen and served in the lemon-skins. A neat slice is taken off the top of the lemon. The juice, etc., iscarefully removed. When the preparation is set in the freezer, the skins are filled, the tops fitted over, and allimbedded in the ice. I once saw at one of Delmonico'sdinners a course of these lemons (one for each person)filled with Roman punch. CURRANT ICE. Boil onequart of water and a pound of sugar until reduced about a pint-- i.e., until a pint of water hasboiled away; skim it, take it off the fire, and add a pint of currant-juice; when partly frozen, stir in the beaten whites of four eggs. Mold, and freeze again. A goodice for fever patients. COOKERY FOR THE SICK. I BELIEVE it is the general practice now to give a patient, in almost everykind of illness, food that is very nourishing, yet very digestible, that thesystem may become strengthened to throw off its disease. I devote a chapter to "cookery for the sick," as it is such a useful anddelightful accomplishment to know just how to prepare the few available dishesfor invalids, so that while they may be most suitable food for the recovery ofthe patient, they may at the same time be most agreeable to the taste andpleasing to the eye. The three events of the day to the sufferer are the three meals. Howgratefully is it remembered if they have been delicately and carefullyadministered! Let the mother or the wife prepare them with her own hands; lether never ask an invalid what he will have to eat, but with thought andingenuity strive to vary the bill of fare each day, always providing propernourishment. This is an art in itself which can be delegated to no one. It isworth as much to the suffering and beloved patient as is the medicalprescription of the physician. Never leave an article of diet in the sick-room: it is a good means ofdestroying the appetite, which should be encouraged and not weakened. Whatever is served, let great attention be paid to giving the dish, after itis properly cooked, a dainty appearance. Place it on the choicest of ware inthe house, with the cleanest of napkins, and the brightest of sliver, even ifthat consists only of a tea-spoon. If tea and toast be served, put the tea, freshly drawn, into the daintiestof tea-cups. Every family might well afford to buy onelittle, thin china cup and saucer, to use in case of illness; put a square ofloaf-sugar into it. A few drops of cream are easily saved for the patient's teafrom a small quantity of milk; and cream in small quantities is considered moredigestible than milk. All cooks think they can make toast. There is about one person in tenthousand who really does know how to make it; whoactually appreciates the difference between a thin, symmetrical, well-yellowed,crisp piece of toast with the crust cut off, and just from the fire, and athick, unshapely slice, unevenly crisped on the outside, and of doughy softnessin the centre. One is digestible; the other is exceedingly indigestible. The scientific mode of making toast is explained on page67. Of the laxative articles of diet, undoubtedly one of the most important isthe oatmeal porridge. The chemists say, "Oatmeal stands before all other grainsin point of nutritive power." I do not mean to serve gruel, but a thickerpreparation, of considerable consistence, which is more palatable. The mode ofmaking it is explained on page 74. Put a heaping table-spoonful of this on athin saucer; pour some cream over it; then sprinkle over this a littlegranulated sugar. Now place the saucer on a little salver, on which is spread the whitest of napkins. Always remember that in cooking any of the grains, as, for instance,corn-meal, oatmeal, hominy, cracked-wheat, etc., let them be thrown into salted boiling water. This makes very greatdifference in the flavor of the dish. Make every thing in small quantities, sothat the patient may always have his dishes freshly made. A very nourishing, digestible, and excellent dish for invalids is a raw,fresh egg, the receipt for administering which is given among the invalidreceipts (see page 322). In regard to rice, Dr. Lee remarks: "We regard rice as the most valuable ofall the articles of food in cases of the derangement of the digestive organs.It nourishes, while it soothes the irritable mucous membrane; and while itsupports strength, never seems to aggravate the existing disease. For acute orchronic affections of the alimentary canal, rice-water for drink and rice-jellyfor food seem peculiarly well adapted, and appear to exert a specific influencein bringing about a recovery. These preparations are invaluable also inconvalescence from acute fevers and other maladies, and in the summercomplaints of young children." Jellies made with gelatine or calf's feet are very appetizing, but must notbe relied on as furnishing much nourishment. Theyafford a pleasant vehicle for administering wine, of which the stimulatingproperties are often very advantageous. I copy a short article from Booth's"Chemistry" on the subject: "Gelatine in domestic economy is used in the forms of soup and jelly as analiment; but though experiments seem to show that when mixed with fibrous,albuminous, and caseous substances it becomes nutritive, this conclusion is yetdoubtful; for the theory of respiration proves that histrose, which producesthe gelatine, has accomplished its part in the animal organization, and can nolonger afford sustenance thereto. One fact, however, seems positive, and thatis its inability alone to yield nourishment to carnivorous animals. The feeblenutritive power of a gelatinous matter seems to be owing to the destruction ofits organization." On the same subject of the dietetical value of gelatine, Professor Youmanssays: "It is regarded as a product of the partial decomposition of albuminousbodies in the system, but as incapable of replacing them when taken as aliment.The French attempted to feed the inmates of their hospitals on gelatinousextract of bones. Murmurs arose, and a commission, with Magendie at their head,was appointed to investigate the manner. They reported gelatine as,dietetically, almost worthless." Graham bread, corn bread, or the Boston brown-bread, made with part ryeflour, are much more nourishing than breads made from bolted wheat. The whiterthe wheat flour, the more starch it contains, and the less gluten, which isseparated in bolting, and which is the nutritious, or flesh-producing portion.The rich Boston brown-bread is especially good cut into thin, even pieces, witha little cream, poured over it. The value of corn-meal for invalids who are thin and incapable ofmaintaining their natural warmth is scarcely appreciated. Indian-corn containsa large percentage of oil, which is nourishing and fattening. Fat is theheat-producing power. As to the meats, it seems to me a mistake that that from the ox, with hiswholesome food, cleanly habits, sweet breath, and clear eye, is not the mostwholesome and digestible of aliments. Not meat is so tender and juicy as thecut from the tenderloin or the porter-house steak. Pork should be avoided in every form by invalids. I can not but believe that rare-cooked, tender beef if the most valuabledish in the culinary répertoire for invalids; yet Dr. Beaumont, afterexperimenting with St. Martin, ranks venison, when tender and in season, as themost digestible and assimilable of meats. He classes mutton second; then beef.Lamb is less digestible than mutton. Veal should be avoided as well as pork.Fatty substances are also difficult of assimilation. Poultry is less digestiblethan beef. Then, again, the manner of cooking beef has a great influence on itsdigestibility. The best modes are broiling and roasting. Potatoes roasted orbaked are digested an hour sooner than potatoes boiled. Before beginning the receipts for especial dishes, I will copy a littlestory, which furnishes an illustration that the simplest modes of cooking are,after all, the most satisfactory. "The Vicomte de Vaudreuil, when appointed chargé d'affaires of France to the Court ofSt. James's, brought over with him a young cook, an élève of the highest schools of the cuisines of Paris. This young culinary aspirant tofame, shortly after his arrival in London, obtained permission of his master togo and witness the artistic operations of that established cordon-bleu, Monsieur Mingay, the cook to PrinceEsterhazy, who had been brought up under the Prince Talleyrand's famous chef, Louis, and previously under the most bleu of all cordons, the great Carême. On the élève's return, the Vicomte, hearingthat his cook was in a state of astonishment from something he had witnessed inPrince Esterhazy's kitchen, summoned him to his presence, and said, "What isthis culinary miracle, which I have heard astonishes you, and casts into theshade all other triumphs of the art?" Vatel's follower replied, "Oh, Monsieurle Vicomte, when I entered the cuisine at Chandos House it was near the time of theprince's luncheon, for which his excellency had ordered something which shouldbe very simple and easily digestible, as he was suffering from languor. The chef, Mingay, accordingly cut from under a well-hungrump of beef three slices of fillet, and rapidly broiling them, he placed thechoicest-looking in the middle of a hot dish, and afterward pressing the juice completely out of the remainingtwo, he poured it on the first! Oh, monsieur, how great the prince! how greatthe cook!'" RECEIPTS FOR THE SICK-ROOM. TEA. Tea is best, madefresh in the sick-room. A little tête-à-tête china service is apretty ornament for a bedroom, and it is a convenient and tasteful arrangementfor serving tea to invalids. If one has no little tea-pot like that belongingto the service here referred to, a small one of any other kind isdesirable. Put two tea-spoonfuls of tea-leaves into the smalltea-pot; pour two tea-cupfuls of boiling water over it; cover it closely, andlet it steam for a few moments. With a small table at the side of the invalid's bed, it is a decidedlypleasant little diversion to make tea in this manner, being sure at the sametime that it is perfectly fresh. However it is made though, do not present acupful of tea to a sufferer with a part of the tea spilled into the saucer. To avoid having fat left in the soups, it is safer to allow them to getentirely cold, when the fat can be easily skimmed off. Just enough can beheated each time the soup is served. BEEF TEA, OR ESSENCE OFBEEF. Cut, say, a pound of perfectly leanbeef into small pieces, put them into a wide-mouthed bottle (a pickle-bottle answers the purpose), cork it tightly, andplace it in a pot of cold water in which thereis a saucer at the bottom. Heat it gradually, then let it boil slowly for twoor three hours, when all the juice will be drawn out of the meat. Now pour off the juice, season it with salt carefully, as it requires very little. When it iscold, skim off all the globules of fat. This is an invaluable aliment for invalids who are very ill, or for weakinfants, when they need much nourishment in small compass. This beef tea canthen be given by the tea-spoonful at regular intervals, administering it asmedicine. ANOTHER BEEF TEA ( for Convalescents ). Soak three-quarters of apound of small-cut pieces of lean steak (say a cutfrom a round steak ) in a pint of coldrain-water for half an hour, squeezing the beef occasionally; they put it on the fire, cover it,and boil it slowly for ten minutes, removing the scum. Season with salt, and serve hot. Serve Albertbiscuit, or thin wafers (see page 72),with it. The addition of a little boiled rice makes apleasant change. BEEF JUICE. Choose athick cut of fine, fresh, juicy steak without fat.Broil it over the coals for only a minute, or long enough to merely heat itthroughout. Put it over a warm bowl set in a basin of hotwater; cut it in many places, and squeeze out all the juice with the aid of the meat-squeezer (see page 56). Salt it very slightly. It should be servedimmediately, freed from every atom of fat, and accompanied with a wafer cracker. CHICKEN BROTH. Cut up a fowl, and crack the bones. Putit into three pints of cold water. Boil it slowly,closely covered, for three or four hours, or until the meat falls in pieces. Strain it, then add twotable-spoonfuls of rice which has been soaked for halfan hour in a very little warm water, also a choppedsprig of parsley, if you have it. Simmer it for twentyminutes longer, or until the rice is thoroughlycooked. Season with salt and pepper, but not too highly. Serve with crackers, which should be broken into the broth the last minute. CHICKENCUSTARD. Ingredients: One half-pint of chickenbroth, beaten yolks of three eggs, alittle salt. Mix well, and cook it in the custard-kettle (as for boiled custard) until it hasthickened. Serve in custard-cups. CHICKEN PANADA. Roast asmall chicken, and take out the breasts, or use more of the meat if preferred, and add a little salt; chop it as fine aspossible, pound it, and pass it through a colander. Soakhalf the amount of the crumb of French rolls, or good bread (not too fresh), in tepid milk; squeeze it nearly dry, and mix it with the chicken. Thin it with a little strong chicken broth (which may be made with the remainder ofthe chicken ) or with boilingwater. Serve it in a custard-cup, to beeaten with a spoon. For convalescents, a very little finely minced parsley may be added. MOLD OF CHICKENJELLY. Cut half a raw chicken into smallpieces, and break the bones; put it on the fire with aquart of cold water. Boil it slowly until it isreduced to less than half; season with salt and alittle pepper, if the invalid is not too ill for pepper. Strain it first through a colander, then a jelly-bag, intoa mold or a bowl. If the chicken is quite tender,broil carefully the breast of the other half of it;cut it into dice, or put it whole into the mold or bowl, and cover it with theliquid. When the jelly has hardened, scrape off the layer of fat at the top ofthe mold before turning the jelly on a little oval platter. CHICKEN AND CEYLONMOSS. Cut a small fowl (two pounds) intosmall pieces, and put it over the fire with three pints of coldwater, four ounces of Ceylon moss (whichcan be obtained at the drug-stores), and half a tea-spoonful of salt. Boil all together an hour; then strain itthrough a jelly-strainer or napkin into little cups ormolds. MUTTON BROTH may bemade in the same manner as chicken broth, allowing a quarter of cold water to each pound of meat. VEAL AND SAGO BROTH ( Marian Harland ). Ingredients: Two pounds of knuckle of veal crackedto pieces, two quarts of cold water, threetable-spoonfuls of best pearl sago soaked in a cupfulof cold water, one cupful of cream heated to boiling, and the yolks oftwo eggs beaten light. Boil the veal and water ina covered saucepan very slowly until reduced toone quart of liquid; strain, season with salt, andstir in the soaked sago (having previously warmed itby setting for an hour in a saucepan of boilingwater, and stirring from time to time). Simmer half an hour, takingcare it does not burn; beat in the cream and eggs. Give one good boil up, and turn out. BEEF AND TAPIOCABROTH. Soak one pound of beef, cut intopieces, in a quart of cold water for half an hour;then boil it slowly, keeping it closely covered for two hours. Strain it. Thelast half hour, add half a cupful of tapioca (whichhas been soaked an hour in a little water ), a smallsprig of parsley, and a thin cut from an onion. When done, remove the parsley and onion; seasonwith a very little pepper and salt, and two or three drops only of lemon-juice. When just ready to serve, put into thesoup an egg, carefully poached in saltedwater, the white being merely set. If patients are not too ill, any kind of beef soup made from stock, asexplained on page 80, ought to be advantageous. HOW TO PREPARE AN UNCOOKEDEGG. This is a delicate, strengthening, and valuable preparation foran invalid. Beat well the yolk and a tea-spoonful of sugar in a goblet; then stir inone or two tea-spoonfuls of brandy, sherry, or port wine. Add tothis mixture the white of the egg beaten to a stifffroth. Stir all well together. It should quite fill the goblet. If wine is not desired, flavor the egg with nutmeg. It is verypalatable without any flavoring at all. TAPIOCAJELLY. Ingredients: One cupful of tapioca, four cupfuls of water, juice and a little ofthe grated rind of one lemon, and sugar to taste. Soak the tapioca for four or five hours in the water. Sweeten it, and set it in a pan of boiling water to cook an hour, or until it isthoroughly done and quite clear, stirring it frequently. When nearly cooked,stir in the lemon; and when done, pour it into little molds. Serve with cream sweetened and flavored. SEA-MOSSBLANC-MANGE. Wash the moss well, and soak itfor half an hour or more in a little cold water. Tohalf an ounce or a handful of moss allow one quart of water, or rather of richmilk, if the patient can take milk. Whenthe water or milk is boiling,add the soaked sea-moss, and sugar to taste. Let them simmer until the moss isentirely dissolved. Strain the juice into cups orlittle molds. Many boil a stick of cinnamon with the water or milk, and flavoralso with wine; but the simple flavor of the sea-mossis very pleasant. It may be served with a little cream and sugar poured overit. ARROWROOT JELLY ORBLANC-MANGE. Add two heaping tea-spoonfuls of best arrowroot, rubbed smooth with a little cold water, to a coffee-cupful of boiling water or rich milk which has been sweetened with twotea-spoonfuls of sugar. Stir and boil it until it hasthickened. It may be flavored with lemon-juice if madewith water, or with brandy or wine if made with milk. it isvery nice without flavoring. Pour into a cup or little mold. Serve with cream and sugar poured over,or with a compote offruit around it. CORN-STARCH AND RICE PUDDINGS are explainedamong the regular receipts for puddings. Little circular molds come in form ofFig. A, on page 59. It is a pretty form for any of these puddings or blanc-manges, witha compote of apples, peaches, plums, orany other kind of fruit, in the centre. RICE JELLY. Mix enough water to two heaping tea-spoonfuls of riceflour to make a thin paste; then add to it a coffee-cupful of boiling water. Sweeten to taste with loaf-sugar. Boil it until it is transparent. Flavor byboiling with it a stick of cinnamon if the jelly isintended for a patient with summer complaint; or add, instead, several drops of lemon-juice if intended for a patient with fever. Moldit. Vanilla should never be used for flavoring any dish for an invalid.Homeopathic books can never say enough about its poisonous effects on evenhealthy and robust person. RICE-WATER FOR DRINK ismade in the same way, in the proportion of a table-spoonful of riceflour to a quart of boiling water. JELLY AND ICE ( for Fever Patients ). Break ice into small pieces about as large as a pea; mixwith it about the same quantity of lemon jelly, alsocut into little pieces. This is very refreshing. PARCHED RICE. Parch rice to a nice brown, as you would coffee. Throw itinto a little boiling saltedwater, and boil it until it is thoroughly done. Do not stir itmore than necessary, on account of breaking the grains. Serve with cream and sugar. MILK PORRIDGE. Put adozen raisins into two cupfuls of milk. Bring it to a boil; then add a heaping tea-spoonful of flour rubbed to a paste with a little coldwater or milk; boil it three or fourminutes. The raisins may not be eaten, yet they give apleasant flavor to the milk; in fact, they may betaken out if the dish is intended for a child. For a change, the well-beaten white of an egg maybe stirred into this preparation just after it is taken from the fire, and, again,the raisins may be left out, and the porridge simplyflavored with salt or sugar, or sugar and nutmeg. BEEF SANDWICH. Scrapevery fine two or three table-spoonfuls of fresh, juicy, tender, uncooked beef; season it slightly with pepper and salt; spread itbetween two thin slices of slightly buttered bread; cut it neatly into little diamonds about two and a half inches long and an inchwide. PREPARED FLOUR FOR SUMMERCOMPLAINTS ( Mrs. HoraceMann ). Tie up a pint of flour very tightly in a cloth, andput it into boiling water, and let it boil threehours. When untied, the gluten of the flour will befound in a mass on the outside of the ball. Remove this, and the inside willprove a dry powder which is very astringent. Grate this, and wet a portion ofit in cold milk. Boil a pint of milk, and when it is at the boiling-point stir in asmuch of the wet mixture as will thicken it to the quality of palatableporridge. Stir in a little salt, and let this be thearticle of diet until the disease is removed. Relieve it at first by toasted bread, or a muttonbroth, which latter is also astringent. If the disease has notprogressed to the degree of inflammation, this diet will generally preclude allneed of medicine. The author would also add, for a change of diet, well-boiled rice with a little cream, parched rice, beef juice, toasted water or milk crackers, a little tea (avoiding generally too much liquid), and a little wild-cherry brandy; or to Mrs.Mann's flour porridge, when cooked, and just taken hot from the fire, thewell-beaten white of an egg might be added; and, afterstirring them well together, the preparation should be servedimmediately. MILK TOAST. Toast one or two thin slices of bread with the crust cut off; if there are two slices,have them of equal size. When still hot, spread evenly over them a very littlefresh butter, and sprinkle over some salt. Now pour over a small tea-cupful of boiling milk, thickened with half a tea-spoonful of flour, and salted to taste. If the invalid can nottake milk, the toast may bemoistened with boiling water. Serve immediately. It isa very appetizing dish, when fresh made and hot. PANADA. Sprinkle alittle salt or sugar betweentwo large Boston, soda, or Graham crackers, or hard pilot-biscuit; put them into a bowl; pour over justenough boiling water to soak them well; put the bowl into a vessel of boiling water, and let it remain fifteen or twentyminutes, until the crackers are quite clear and like ajelly, but not broken. Then lift them carefully, without breaking, into a hotsaucer. Sprinkle on more sugar or salt if desired: a few spoonfuls of sweet, thick cream poured over are a good addition for a change.Never make more than enough for the patient at one time, as they are verypalatable when freshly made, and quite insipid if served cold. Toasted bread cut into thin even slices may beserved in the same way. This is also a good baby diet. A panada may be made by adding an ounce of gratedbread or rolled crackers to half a pintof boiling water, slightly salted, and allowing it toboil three or four minutes. It may be sweetened, and flavored with wine or nutmeg, or both; orthe sugar and nutmeg may besimply sprinkled over. ASH-CAKE. Wet corn-meal, salted to taste, with enough cold water to make a soft dough, and let it stand halfan hour or longer; mold it into an oblong cake, about an inch and a half or twoinches thick. A clean spot should then be swept on the hot hearth, the breadplaced on it, and covered with hot wood-ashes. Thebread is thus steamed before it is baked. It should be done in a half tothree-quarters of an hour, and brushed and wiped before eaten. There is nobetter food than this for dyspeptics inclined to acidity of the stomach, onaccount of the alkaline properties of the ashes left in the crust. I n other extreme cases of dyspepsia where acidsare required, I have heard of cures being effected by the use of buttermilk. MILK PUNCH. Sweeten aglass of milk to taste, and add one or twotable-spoonfuls of best brandy. Grate a little nutmeg over the top. EGG-AND-MILKPUNCH. Stir well a heaping tea-spoonful of sugar, and the yolk of anegg together in a goblet, then add atable-spoonful of best brandy. Fill the glass with milk until it is three-quarters full, then stir well into the mixture the white of the egg beaten to a stiff froth. The receiptfor "Eggnog" among the "Beverages" is similar to this, and better, of course,as whipped cream is substituted for milk. HERB TEAS are made bypouring boiling water over one or two tea-spoonfuls ofthe herbs, then, after covering well the cup or bowl,allowing it to steep for several minutes by the side of the fire. The tea issweetened to taste. Camomile tea is quiteinvaluable for nervousness and sleeplessness; calamus tea, for infants'colic; cinnamontea, for hemorrhages; watermelon-seed tea, for strangury. BONESET FOR A COUGH OR COLD ( Mrs. General Simpson ). Pour one and one-half pints of boiling water on aten-cent package of boneset. Let it steep at the sideof the fire for ten or fifteen minutes, when strain it. Sweeten it with two anda half coffee-cupfuls of loaf-sugar, then add onehalf-pint of Jamaica rum; bottle it. A child shouldtake a tea-spoonful before each meal; a grown person, asherry-glassful. BOTANIC COUGHSIRUP. This book is not a medical treatise, yet I can not resist thetemptation to add the following receipt, given me by Mrs. H----, of Buffalo.Many cases of long and aggravated cough have been entirely cured by its use. Ifthe patient has a tendency to vertigo, the bloodroot may be omitted from the receipt; but for palepersons of weak vitality it will be found a valuable addition. Ingredients: Elecampane, one ounce; spikenard, one ounce; cumfreyroot, one ounce; bloodroot, one ounce; hoarhound tops, one ounce. Add two quarts of water to these herbs, and steep them five hours in a porcelain or newtin vessel; add more boiling water as it boils away,to keep the vessel as full as at first. At the end of this time, strain theliquid, add one pound of loaf-sugar, and boil it untilit is reduced to one quart. Dose. --A dessert-spoonful before each meal andbefore retiring. It should be kept in a cool place; or a little spirits may be added to prevent itsspoiling. ARRANGEMENT OF DISHES FORINVALIDS. BEEFSTEAK. Cut out thetender part of the beef from a porter-house or a tenderloin steak. The slice fromthese steaks, if large, can be cut in two, as it issufficient for two meals for an invalid. Let it be three-quarters of an inchthick; trim or press it into shape (it should be oval in form). Broil itcarefully over a hot fire, cooking it rare: the inside should be pink, not raw.To cook it evenly without burning, turn it two or three times, but do notpierce it with a fork nor squeeze it. It does not require over two minutes tofinish it. Do not put pepper and salt over it until it is cooked, as salt rubbed on fresh meat contracts the fibres and toughens it. However, assoon as it is cooked and placed on a little hot oval platter, sprinkle salt and pepper over it; then,placing a small piece of fresh butter on the top, setit into the oven a minute to allow the butter to soakinto the meat: it only requires a small piece of butter. Beefsteak swimming in butter is unwholesome, and as slovenly as it iswasteful. If an invalid can eat beefsteak, he can generallyeat some one vegetable with it; and to make the little plump, tender morsel of beef look more tempting, garnish it with thevegetable. If with potatoes, bake one or twoequal-sized potatoes to a turn. When quite hot, removethe inside; mash it perfectly smooth, season it with butter, or, what is better, cream and salt, and press itthrough a colander. It will look like vermicelli. Placeit in a circle around the steak. If with pease, when they are out of season, the French canned pease or the American brand of "Triumph" pease with be found almost as good. One can,if kept well covered, should furnish three or four meals for an invalid. Merelyheat them, adding a little salt and butter. Do not use much, it any, of the juice inmaking a circle of them around the beef. If you garnish with tomatoes, make them into asauce, as follows: After cooking and seasoning them with salt and pepper, turn off thewatery part, add a little stock, if you have it(however, it is nice without it, if the word stock frightens any body), and press it through thesieve. Pour it around the steak. If with Lima beans, cook them as in receipt (seepage 201) with parsley. Limabeans, as well as string-beans, green corn, and onions, shouldnot be trusted, in severe cases of illness. A few water-cresses around a steak would not be injurious to a convalescent. MUTTON-CHOP. Scrape thebone, and trim the chop into good shape; this addsmuch to the appearance, and requires but little time for one chop. Rub a little butter on both sides, and broil it carefully, havingit well done; season it as explained for beefsteak. It can be garnished in thesame way. BREAST OFCHICKEN. Choose a tender chicken, and cut outthe breast; season it, rub a little butter around it, and throw it on a fire of live coalswhich is not too hot. Watch it constantly, turning it around to cook evenly onall sides. If skillfully done, the surface will be very little charred, and theinside meat will be more tender and juicy than ifcooked in any other way. Cut off such parts as may be much crisped. Season with butter, pepper, and salt. Form the breast into a cutlet, with the leg, asdescribed on page 175. Rub it with butter, and broilit carefully on the gridiron. Garnish it with rice steamed with richmilk. It is especially nice with tomato-sauce. CHICKEN BOILED. Thesecond joint of a leg of chicken thrown into a little salted boiling water, or into stock, makes a delicious dish, with a chicken-sauce (see page 123) poured over it. I thinkthis second joint is more tender, and has more flavor, than the breast. VENISON STEAK. A tendercut from a venison steak should be broiled the same as a beefsteak. It is nice with mashed potatoes (à la neige), or a currant-jelly, or a tomato-sauce around it. TO PREPARE A BIRD. Iremember the effects of a quail so well, eaten whenvery ill, that I have a decided disinclination to mention the word "bird" inassociation with "invalid dishes" at all. But there is a difference in thetenderness of birds, of course; and, then, a bird need not be swallowed whole,if one should be ever so hungry. If a bird is to beserved, be sure that it is a tender one. Broil it carefully, or cook it wholein this manner: Put it into a close-covered vessel holding a little boiling water, and place it over a very hot fire;steam it for a few minutes; then brown it in the oven, basting it veryfrequently. Serve a tomato, currant-jelly, or winesauce around it. INVALID'S BILL OFFARE. (When a laxative diet is notobjectionable.) BREAKFAST. Oatmeal porridge. A poachedegg on toast. DINNER( at half-past twelve o'clock ). Beefsteak and mashed baked potatoes; toasted Grahamcrackers. Dessert: Sea-moss blanc-mange. TEA. Bostonbrown-bread cut into slices, with cream poured over. A baked apple. BREAKFAST. Hominy grits; a mutton-chop,with tomato-sauce. DINNER. A chicken broth, quite thickwith rice, and some pieces of chicken in it. Wafers. Dessert: A raw egg, arrange as in receipt on page 322,with sherry wine. TEA. Milk-toast. BREAKFAST. Oatmeal porridge. The secondjoint of a leg of chicken cooked on the coals and served with pease aroundit. DINNER. Beefbroth, thick with tapioca. Graham wafers. Dessert: Boiled parched rice, withcream. TEA. Corn-meal mush, with cream andsugar. PREPARED FOODS FOR INVALIDS, ETC. I am indebted to Dr. Franklin, of St. Louis, forthis little chapter. Appreciating his experience in the uses of prepared foodsfor invalids, I asked his advice about certain ones, when he kindly sent me awritten opinion, which I insert verbatim. Dr. Franklin says: "In the dietetic treatment of the sick, notwithstanding thatwell-meaning and unwise friends often injure their patients by solicitations totake more food, it is often one of the great difficulties to induce the invalidto partake sufficiently of what is suitable, remembering that the body isnourished by the assimilation of the food, and that the assimilating power isweak, and can not be overtaxed. But the desire of food, and, indeed, theassimilation, depend in a considerable degree on the manner in which it ispresented. It should not only please the eye and gratify the palate, but shouldbe varied in kind and method of preparation. " Liebig's Extract ofMeat is an economical and valuable preparation. It is valuable innearly all cases of physical debility andextreme emaciation, especially after profuse losses of blood in collapse fromwounds; for patients suffering from severe and prolonged fevers in the laststage of consumption; in bad cases of indigestion, when the stomach rejects allsolid food; and as an article of diet for nursing-mothers, etc. "In cases of extremeexhaustion, the extract may be mixed with wine. As it is stimulating, it may take the place oftea and coffee, and will be less liable than they to produce derangement of thedigestive organs. An advantage with this extract is that it can be readilyprepared. " Valentine's Extract ofMeat. --This is one of the best articles of the kind for thesick-chamber, and is not only simple of preparation, but is the most nutritiveof all the beef essences. As a medicinal agent, it will be found of great value to the sick, and forpersons (children as well) with weak constitutions. * "These beverages, in common with any nutritive soups, offerto the patient whose general bodily functions are more or less suspended afluid and assimilable form of food. It is to this adaptation of nourishment tothe condition of the body that we must, in part at least, ascribe theirbeneficial results. They have a remarkable power of restoring the vigorousaction of the heart, and dissipating the sense of exhaustion following severe,prolonged exertion, and may be recommended in preference to the glass of winewhich some take after watching, preaching, prolonged mental effort, etc. "Rice (whole or ground), barley, etc., may often beadvantageously added to thicken beef tea. " Gillon's Essence of Chicken. --Asimilar preparation may be more readily made by using this essence of chicken,which may be procured from any homeopathic chemist. This simply requiresdiluting with hot water in the proportion stated upon each tin case. " Oatmeal Porridge. --When properlymade, this is both wholesome and nutritious, and especially suitable when apatient does not suffer from water-brash, acidity, or from any form of bowelirritation. It has long been the staple food of the Scotch, and produces goodmuscular fibre and strong bone. It is a very nourishing diet for growingchildren. The common oatmeal is not equal to the Scotch oatmeal; however, it isnot always easy to obtain the latter. " Pearl Barley forms anexcellent meal. It should be boiled for four hours, so tied in a cloth thatroom is left for the grain to swell. Only so much water should be added from time to time as to feed the barley and supply the waste of evaporation, lest thestrength of the barley should be boiled out. It may beserved with milk, or (if the patient can digest them)with preserves, jelly, or butter. " Macaroni-pudding. --Threeounces of macaroni should be soaked for forty minutesin cold water, then added to a pint of boiling milk. This should be stirred occasionally, while itsimmers for half an hour; two eggs are then added,beaten with a dessert-spoonful of sugar; also, ifdesired, a flavoring of lemon. This may then be bakedin a pie-dish for twenty minutes. " Vermicelli may be used instead of macaroni, but requires only twenty minutes'soaking. The following note appears at the bottom of page 332 in theoriginal text. *Dr. Franklin admits that Valentine's extract ismore nutritive than that of Liebig. I have heard other physicians say that theyconsidered the Valentine much preferable to the Liebig extract, abandoning theuse of the latter for the former.--ED. "Part of a loaf of stalebread, boiled, and served with butter and salt, or with preserves,affords a change of wholesome food. Bread-pudding made with eggs and milk, either boiledor baked, may be used, made according to the receipt used at WestminsterHospital, viz.: Bread, one-quarter of a pound; milk, one-quarter of a pint; sugar, one-quart of an ounce; flour, one-quarter of an ounce; one egg for every two pounds. A pudding may bemade in the same way of stale sponge-cake or rusks, to diversify thediet. " Neave's Food. --Many years'experience in the use of Neave's Farinaceous Food justifies the recommendationof it as an excellent article of diet for infants, invalids, and persons offeeble digestion. Competent chemical analysts have found the preparation tocontain every constituent necessary for the nourishment of the body, and thishas been abundantly confirmed by what we have frequently observed as the resultof its use. For infants it should be prepared according to the directionsupplied with the food, taking care not to make it too thick; it also makes avery agreeable and highly nutritious gruel. "One precaution is necessary: Neave's food should be obtainedfresh and in good condition; if exposed too long, it deteriorates. Underfavorable circumstances it keeps good for from six to twelve months. It maygenerally be procured in good condition from the leading homeopathicdruggists. "Ridge's, Hard's, and other farinaceous foods have theiradvantages, and are preferred by some patients. "Those foods that are pure starch, as 'corn flour,' socalled, and all those which thicken in like manner, contain but a smallproportion of nutriment, being less sustaining and also more difficult ofdigestion than ordinary stale bread. They are very unsuitable for young infantsand children suffering from diarrhea, indigestion, constipation, flatulence,atrophy, or aphthæ. "In all cases, food which contains traces of bran, and alsogluten, gum, sugar, cellulose, and saline matter, especially the phosphates, inproportion to the starch, are to be preferred. I prefer the Ridge's food fornursing infants, but either may be used according to adaptability. " Sugar of Milk. --A preparation ofcow's milk and sugar of milk forms a still lighter food, and one which, in thecase of very young infants, should be used to the exclusion of farinaceousfood. Cow's milk may be assimilated to human milk by dilution with water andthe addition of sugar of milk. Cow's milk contains more oil (cream) andcaseine, or cheese matter, but less sugar, than woman's. When necessary tobring up a child by hand from birth, sugar of milk is more suitable to beginwith. " Formula: One ounce of sugarof milk should be dissolved in three-quarters of a pint of boiling water, and mixed as required with an equalquantity of fresh cow's milk. The infant should be fedwith this from the feeding-bottle in the usual way. Care must be taken to keepthe bottle, etc., perfectly clean. " Alkershrepta (Chocolate).--One ofthe most delicate and nutritious beverages is made from this preparation of thecocoa. It is prepared from the best cocoa-bean, the highly nutritious naturaloil of which is not extracted, as in the ordinary soluble chocolates, but soneutralized as not to derange the stomach of the most delicate. Its nutritiousand mildly stimulating qualities, its purity, and the facility with which it isprepared for use-- not requiring to beboiled--recommend it as an excellent substitute for tea and coffee. Directionsfor its preparation accompany each package. " Delacre's Extract of MeatChocolate. --This agreeable article combines in one preparation, andunder a most agreeable form, a large proportion of tonic and nutritiveprinciples. It contains both the properties of chocolate and beef. It is auseful tonic and nutritive agent for invalids and convalescents, and forpersons of delicate constitutions. It contains three per cent. of La PlataExtract of Meat, and every square represents the nutritive constituents of oneand a quarter ounces of beef. It is employed as ordinary chocolate. Fulldirections accompany each box. " Welluc's Biscotine. --A mostexcellent, healthy, and invigorating food for infants and invalids. It isprepared from sweetened bread and other nutritious substances, reduced to afine powder, so as to render them easily soluble in water or milk. As anarticle of common diet for infants, particularly those suffering from delicateconstitutions or with looseness of the bowels, it will be found to give healthand strength with more certainty than the crude substances now in use, and not, like them,liable to sour on the stomach." SOME DISHES FOR"BABY." No particular diet can be recommended for the infant that is so unfortunateas to be deprived of its natural nourishment. What agrees with one is quiteunsuccessful with another. Different kinds of diet can only be tested.Children's little illnesses are often the result of food which, in their case,is unassimilating and indigestible; and it is often better to attempt a changeof food than to resort to medicines. City babies generally thrive poorly with cow's milk. Some can stand it,however, diluting it with a third water, adding a slight thickening of rice,well boiled and mashed, and also a little sugar. Others thrive well on goat'smilk, when no other kind will answer. The Borden condensed milk serves like acharm with very young infants in cold weather; but in warm weather its excessive sweetness seems to causeacidification when taken. In New York, where it may be obtained fresh, withoutsweetening, I have heard that it is more satisfactory. Some babies are ruddy and strong with an oatmeal diet (oatmeal porridgestrained and mixed with the milk). I have already mentioned this as especiallysuccessful in Ireland and Scotland. However, in the warm climate of many of ourcities in summer I have known the oatmeal diet to cause eruptions or boils. Itis almost a crime to undertake to bring up children artificially in warm summerclimates. Many a heart-ache is caused when, failing to supply the natural food,nothing would seem to agree with the baby. PAP. Put a little butter into a saucepan for the purpose of keeping themixture from sticking. When it is hot, pour in a thin batter of milk and flour, a littlesalted; stir well, and boil gently about five minutes; then add a little sugar. If the child is over three months old, an egg may be mixed in the batter for a change. WHEAT-FLOUR AND CORN-MEALGRUEL. Tie wheat flour and cornmeal (three-quarters wheat flour andone-quarter corn meal ) into a thick cotton cloth, andboil it three or four hours. Dry the lump, and grate it as you use it. Put onthe fire cream and water (onepart cream to six parts water ), and when it comes to a boil, stir in some ofthe grated lump, rubbed to a smooth paste with a little water. Salt it slightly.Judgment must be used as to the amount of thickening. For a young infant, thepreparation should be thin enough to be taken in the bottle; if the child isolder, it may be thicker. If the child is troubled with constipation, theproportion of corn meal should be larger; if withsummer complaint, it may be left out altogether. ROASTED RICE boiled andmashed is a good infant diet in case of summer complaint. CORN-MEAL GRUEL isundoubtedly the best relaxing diet for infants, and may be used instead ofmedicine. FOOD FOR INFANTS WITH WEAK DIGESTIVE ORGANS. OATMEAL GRUEL ( Dr. Rice, of Colorado ), No. 1. Add one tea-cupful of oatmeal to two quarts of boiling water, slightly, salted; let this cook for twohours and a half, then strain, it through a sieve. When cold, add to one gillof the gruel one gill of thin cream and onetea-spoonful of sugar. To this quantity add one pintof boiling water, and it is ready for use. BEEF ( Dr.Rice ), No. 2. Scrape one-half pound of beef, and remove all theshreds; add one-half pint of water, and three drops of muriatic acid. Let it stand one hour; then strain itthrough a sieve, and add a small portion of salt. HOW TO SERVE FRUITS. THE French deserve much praise for their taste in arranging fruits for thetable. They almost invariably serve them with leaves, even resorting toartificial ones in winter. In the following arrangements, I have some of their dainty dishes inmind. STRAWBERRIES. TheFrench serve large fine strawberries without beinghulled. Pulverized sugar is passed, the strawberry is taken by the thumb and finger by thehull, dipped into the sugar, and eaten. The Wilson strawberry, however, which seems to be ourprincipal market strawberry, certainly requiresstemming, and deluging with sugar before serving. MIXEDFRUITS. A variety of fruits and leavesdecoratively arranged in a raised bowl. Alwayschoose a raised dish for fruits. Arrange part of the clusters of grapes to fall gracefully over the edge of the dish.Mix any kind of pretty green leaves or vines, which may also fall, and wind around the stemof the dish. Although the colors of the fruits should blend harmoniously, andthe general appearance should be fresh and négligé, arrange themfirmly, so that when the dish is moved there will be no danger of anavalanche. WATER-MELONS. A water-melon should be thoroughly chilled; it shouldbe Two watermelon halves decoratively cut andgarnished with leaves, served on a roundplatter. kept on the ice until about to be served. It may be simply cut intwo, with a slice cut from the convex ends, to enable the halves to standfirmly on the platter. When thus cut, the pulp is scooped out in egg-shapedpieces with a table-spoon and served; or it may be cut as shown in figure, whenslices with the rind attached may served. CANTALOUPEMELONS. A cantaloupe cut into wedges andserved on a round plate. Put it into therefrigerator until just before serving, to become thoroughly chilled; cut it asin figure here given, removing the seeds. Arrange four or five grape leaves on a platter, upon which place the melon. CURRANTS. Anillustration of currants served in a raisedbowl. Serve currants inrows of red and white, with a border of leaves aroundthe outside, as shown in annexed cut. CURRANTS OR OTHER FRUITSICED. Beat the white of an egg barely enoughto break it. Dip in selected bunches of fine currants, and while moist roll them in pulverized sugar. Place them on a sieve to dry. Thismakes a refreshing breakfast dish. Plums, cherries, grapes, or any other fruit maybe iced in the same way. HOW THEY EATORANGES IN HAVANA. A fork is pierced partly through the centre of an orange, entering it fromthe stem side; the fork serves for a handle, which is held in the left hand,while with a sharp knife the peel and thin skin are cut off in strips from thetop of the orange to the fork handle; now, holding it in the right hand, theorange can be eaten, leaving all the fibrous pulp on the fork. FRESH PEACHES. Chooselarge, fresh, ripe, and juicy peaches; pare, and cutthem into two or three pieces. They should be large, luscious-looking pieces,not little chipped affairs. Sprinkle over granulatedsugar, put them into the freezer, and half freeze them; this willrequire about an hour, as they are more difficult to freeze than cream. Do nottake them from the freezer until the moment of serving, when sprinkle over alittle more sugar. Serve in a glass dish. Cannedpeaches may be treated in the same manner. PINE-APPLES. When pine-apples are picked and eaten fresh in their ownclimate, they seem to dissolve in the mouth, and the fibrous A raised bowlcontaining diced pineapple, garnished with cake slices and the top of thepineapple. texture is hardly perceived. Not so atour tables. Here I have sometimes partly resolved that they are not much of aluxury after all, especially when the slices are so tough as to require theknife and fork. They are better cut into dice, saturated with sugar, and piled in the centre of a glass dish, with arow à la Charlotte of sponge-cake slices, or of ladies'-fingers around the sides. BEVERAGES. PUNCH ( Mrs.Williams ). RUB loaf-sugar over the peels of sixlemons to break the little vessels and absorb the ambrosial oil ofthe lemons. Then squeeze out all the juice possible from six oranges and six lemons, removing the seeds; add to it five pounds of loaf-sugar (including the sugar rubbed over the peels) and two quarts of water, with five cloves andtwo blades of mace (in a bag); simmer this over thestove about ten minutes, making a sirup. This sirup will keep forever. It should be bottled and kept to sweeten the liquors, whenever punch is to bemade. Mix then one pint of green tea, a scant pint of brandy, one quart of Jamaicarum, one quart of Champagne, and onetea-cupful of Chartreuse. When well mixed, sweeten itto taste with the sirup; pour it into the punch-bowl, in which is placed aneight or ten pound piece of ice. Slice three oranges and three lemons, removing the seeds, which put also into thepunch-bowl. MILK PUNCH ( Mrs. Filley ). Ingredients: Four quarts of Jamaica rum, threequarts of water, five pints of boiling milk, three pounds of loaf-sugar, twenty-four lemons, two nutmegs. Cut thin slices, or only the yellow part of the rinds of thetwenty-four lemons. Let these thin parings and the two grated nutmegs infuse fortwenty-four hours in one quart of the rum. It shouldbe put in a warm place. At the end of the twenty-four hours, add to the juice of thetwenty-four lemons (freed from seeds) the water, sugar, rum, and also the rum containing the lemon-peel and nutmeg. Put all into a large vessel. When the sugar is dissolved, add the five pints of boiling milk while the mixture is being stirred all the time.It will curdle, of course. Then cover it, and let it stand still one hour, whenfilter it through a bag, until it is as clear and bright as a crystal. It maytake three or four hours. Pale rum should be used.This quantity will make enough to fill about one dozen quart bottles. Cork themwell, and keep them standing. It may be used at once, but it will not be inperfection until it is a year or two old. It will keep forever. The bag may bemade three-cornered with a yard square of rather coarse Canton flannel. This punch is nice to serve with mock-turtle soup, or it may be used formaking Roman punch. Like sherry, it is a convenient beverage to offer, withcake, to a lady friend at any time. ROMAN PUNCH. Make orpurchase lemon ice. Just before serving, put enoughfor one person at table into a saucer or punch-glass, andpour over two table-spoonfuls of the milk punch, madeas in the last receipt. A course of Roman punch is often served at dinnerparties just after the roast. There is no better, cheaper, or easier way ofpreparing it than this. CLARET PUNCH. Cut upthe yellow part of one lemon, and let it soak forthree or four hours in half of a quart bottle of claret; add then the other half of the wine. Sweeten to taste, and add one bottle of soda. Put a clove into eachglass before pouring out the punch. EGGNOG. Ingredients:Six eggs, half a pound of sugar, half a pint of brandy or whiskey, three pintsof cream whipped to a froth. Beat the yolks of the eggs and the sugar together until it is a froth; add the brandy or whisky, next the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth, and thenthe whipped cream. SHERRY, CLARET, OR CATAWBACOBBLERS. Put four or five table-spoonfuls of the wine into a glass with half a table-spoonful of sugar; one or two thin slices of orange or lemon may be added.Fill the glass with finely chopped ice. Now pour thisfrom one glass to another once or twice, to mix well. Put then two or three strawberries, or a little of any of the fruit of the season, for a garnish. The beverage cannot be completed without the addition of two straws. LEMONADE. Rub loaf-sugar over the peels of thelemons to absorb the oil; add to the lemon-juice the sugar totaste. Two lemons will make three glassfuls oflemonade, the remainder of the ingredients being water and plenty of ice chopped fine. TOM ANDJERRY. Ingredients: Four eggs and six largespoonfuls of powdered sugar beaten together very light(a perfect froth), six small wine-glassfuls of rum, andone pint of boiling water. Stir the water into the mixture, and then turn itback and forth into two pitchers, the pitchers being hot, and the glasses alsohot. Grate nutmeg on the top of each glass, and drinkimmediately. MINT-JULEP. Bruiseseveral tender sprigs of fresh mint in a tea-spoonfulof sugar dissolved in a few table-spoonfuls of water. Fill the glass to one-third with brandy, claret, sherry, or any wine preferred,and the rest with finely pounded ice. Insert somesprigs of mint with the stems downward, so that theleaves above are in the shape of a bouquet. Drink through a straw. MILK PUNCH AND EGG-AND-MILK PUNCH (see page 326). BLACKBERRYCORDIAL. Ingredients: Two quarts of blackberryjuice, two pounds of loaf-sugar, half an ounce of powdered cinnamon, half an ounce of powdered allspice, half an ounce of powdered nutmeg, quarter of an ounce of powdered cloves. Boil it all together two hours. Add, while hot, one pint of fourth-proofpure French brandy. Bottle it. CURRANT WINE. To twoquarts of the currant-juice (after the currants are pressed) add one quart of water and three and a half pounds of sugar. Let it stand in an open jar until it stopsfermenting; then draw it off carefully, bottle, and cork it securely. RASPBERRY VINEGAR ( Miss Nellie Walworth ). Pour one quart of vinegar over three quarts of ripe black raspberries in a china vessel. Let it standtwenty-four hours, then strain it. Pour the liquor over three quarts of fresh raspberries, and let it infuse again for a day andnight; strain again, and add one pound of whitesugar to each pint of juice. Boil twentyminutes, skimming it well. Bottle when cold. When it is to be drunk, add onepart of the raspberry vinegar to four parts of ice water. SUITABLECOMBINATION OF DISHES. THERE are dishes which seem especially adapted to be served together. Thisshould be a matter of some study. Of course, very few would serve cheese withfish, yet general combinations are often very carelesslyconsidered. SOUP. Soup is generally served alone; however, pickles and crackers are a pleasantaccompaniment for oyster-soup, and many serve grated cheese with macaroni andvermicelli soups. A pea or bean soup (without bread croutons ) at one end of the table, with a neatsquare piece of boiled pork on a platter at the other end, is sometimes seen.When a ladleful of the soup is put in the soup-plate bythe hostess, the butler passes it to the host, who cuts off a thin wafer-sliceof the pork, and places it in the soup. The thinpork can be cut with the spoon. Hot boiled rice is served with gumbo soup.Well-boiled rice, with each grain distinct, is served in a dish by the side ofthe soup-tureen. The hostess first puts a ladleful ofsoup into the soup-plate, then a spoonful of the rice inthe centre. This is much better than cooking the rice with the soup. Sometimes little squares (two inches square) of thin slices of brown bread(buttered) are served with soup at handsome dinners. It is a French custom.Cold slaw may be served at the same time with soup, and eaten with the soup orjust after the soup-plates areremoved. FISH. The only vegetable to be served with fish is the plain boiled potato. It maybe cut into little round balls an inch in diameter, and served in little pilesas a garnish around the fish, or it may be the flaky, full-sized potato, servedin another dish. Some stuff a fish with seasoned mashed potatoes, then servearound it little cakes of mashed potatoes, rolled in egg and bread-crumbs andfried. Cucumbers, and sometimes noodles, are served withfish. BEEF. Almost any vegetable may be served with beef. If potato is not served withfish, it generally accompanies the beef, either as a bed of smooth mashedpotatoes around the beef, or à la neige, or as fried potato-balls ( à la Parisienne ), or, in fact, cooked in any of themyriad different ways. At dinner companies, beef is generally served with amushroom-sauce. However, as any and all vegetables are suitable for beef, it isonly a matter of convenience which to choose. Horse-radish is a favorite beefaccompaniment. CORNED BEEF should be served with carrots, turnips, parsnips, cabbage, or pickles aroundit. TURKEYS. Cranberry-sauce, or some acid jelly, such as currant or plum jelly, should be served with turkey. Manygarnish a turkey with sausages made of pork or beef. Any vegetable may beserved with a turkey; perhaps onions, cold slaw, turnips, tomatoes, andpotatoes are the ones oftenest selected. CHICKENS. Fried chickens with cream dressing are good served with cauliflower on thesame dish, with the same sauce poured over both. A boiled chicken is generallyserved in a bed of boiled rice. A row of baked tomatoes is a pretty garnisharound a roast chicken. It is fashionable to serve salads withchickens. LAMB is especially nice served with green pease or with spinach; cauliflowers andasparagus are also favorite accompaniments. PORK. The unquestionable combination for pork is fried apples, apple-sauce,sweet-potatoes, tomatoes, or Irish potatoes. Pork sausages should invariably beserved with apple-sauce or fried apples. Thin slices of breakfast bacon make asavory garnish for beefsteak. Thin slices of pork, egged and bread-crumbed,fried, and placed on slices of fried mush, make a nice breakfast dish; or itmay garnish fried chickens, beefsteak, or breaded chops. MUTTON. The same vegetables mentioned as suitable for lamb are appropriate formutton. The English often serve salad with mutton. VEAL. Any vegetable may be served as well with veal as with beef. I would select,however, tomatoes, parsnips, or oyster-plant. ROAST GOOSE, apple-sauce, and turnips especially. GAME. Game should invariably be served with an acid jelly, such as a currant or a plum jelly. Saratoga potatoes à la Parisienne, spinach, tomatoes, andsalads, are especially suitable for game. CHEESE is served just before the dessert. It is English to serve celery orcucumbers with it. Thin milk crackers or wafer biscuits (put into the oven justa moment before serving, to make them crisp) should be served with cheese;butter also for spreading the crackers, this being the only time this it isusually allowed for dinner. Macaroni with cheese, Welsh rare-bits, cheeseomelets, or little cheese-cakes, are good substitutes for a cheesecourse. SWEET-BREADS. Sweet-breads and pease--this is the combination seen at almost every dinnercompany. They are as nice, however, with tomatoes, cauliflowers, macaroni mixedwith tomato-sauce or cheese, or with asparagus orsuccotash. ROMAN PUNCH is generally served as a course just after the beef. It is a refreshingarrangement, preparing one for the game which comes after. In England, punch isserved with soup, especially with turtle or mock-turtle. One often sees Romanpunch served as a first course just before the soup. CATALOUPE MELONS are served just after the soup at dinner. This is especially French;however, this melon is more of a breakfast than a dinner dish. the water-melonis served the same time as fruit at dinner. SERVING OF WINES. At dinners of great pretension, from eight to twelve different kinds ofwines are sometimes served. This is rather ostentatious than elegant. In myjudgment, neither elegance nor good taste is displayed in such excess. Fourdifferent kinds of wine are quite enough for the grandest occasions imaginable,if they are only of the choicest selection.Indeed, for most occasions, a single wine--a choice claret or Champagne--isquite sufficient. In fact, let no one hesitate about giving dinners without anywine at all. Proper respect for conscientious scruples about serving wine wouldforbid a criticism as to the propriety of serving any dinner without it. Suchdinners are in quite as good taste, and will be just as well appreciated bysensible people; and it make very little difference whether people who are not sensible are pleased or not. If three wines are served, let them be a choice sherry with the soup, claretwith the first course after the fish, and Champagne with the roast. If a fourthis desired, there is no better selection than a Château Yquem, to beserved with an entrée. If Champagne alone is used, serve itjust after the fish. Many serve claret during the entire dinner, it matters nothow many other varieties may be served; others do the same with Champagne--forthe benefit of the ladies, they say. I believe, however, Champagne isconsidered with more disfavor every day. In England, punch is served withturtle or mock-turtle soup. A receipt may be found for one of their bestpunches (see page 339). I consider it, however, a decided mistake to serve sostrong a beverage, especially at the beginning of a dinner. A fine ale is oftenserved with the cheese-and-cracker course at family dinners, when wine is notserved. As a rule, I would say that the white wines, Sauterne, Rhine, etc., areserved with raw oysters, or just before the soup; sherry or Madeira, with thesoup or fish; Champagne, with the meat; claret, or any other of the red wines,with the game. Many prefer claret just after the fish, as it is a light wine,and can be drunk instead of water. If still another wine is added for thedessert, it is some superior sherry, port, Burgundy, or any fine wine. Verysmall glasses of liqueurs, such as maraschino and curaçoa, aresometimes served at the end of a dinner after coffee. In France, coffee ( café noir ) is servedafter the fruit at dinner, a plan which should be generally followed at dinnerparties at least. It is always well to serve cream and sugar with coffee, asmany prefer it. PROPER TEMPERATURE IN WHICH WINES SHOULDBE SERVED. Sherry should be served thoroughly chilled. Madeira should be neither warm nor cold, but of about the same temperatureas the room. Claret should be served at the same temperature as Madeira, never with ice;it should remain about forty-eight hours standing, then decanted, care beingobserved that no sediment enter the decanter. Champagne should either be kept on ice for several hours previous toserving, or it should be half frozen; it is then called Champagne frappé. It is frozen with somedifficulty. The ice should be pounded quite fine, then an equal amount of salt mixed with it. A quart bottleof Champagne well surrounded by this mixture should be frozen in two hours, or,rather, frozen to the degree when it may be poured from thebottle. TREATMENT OF WINES. Connoisseurs on the subject of wine say much depends upon its treatmentbefore it is served; that it is invariably much impaired in flavor throughignorance of proper treatment in the cellar; and that a wine of ordinary gradewill be more palatable than one of better quality less carefully managed. Theysay wine should never be allowed to remain in case, but unpacked, and laid onits side. Above all, wine should be stored where it is least exposed to thechanges of temperature. All red wines should be kept dry and warm, especially clarets, which aremore easily injured by cold than by heat. Consequently, on account of the rigorof our winters, clarets are better stored in a closet on the second floor (nottoo near a register) than in a cellar. Champagnes and Rhine wines stand coldbetter than heat, which frequently causes fermentation. The warmer sherry,Madeira, and all spirits are kept, the better. CHOICE OF BRANDS Champagne.--Perhaps the choicest brands of Champagne are Pomméry(dry, supposed to mean less sweet), Giesler (sweet), Veuve Cliquot (sweet), andRoederer (sweet). The best of the cheaperChampagnes are Charles Roederer, Heidsick, Montebello, and Krug. Claret. --Choicest brands: Châteaux La Rose,Château la Tour, Château Lafitte, or Château Margeaux. Bestcheaper brand, St. Julien. Sauterne. --Best: Château Yquem, La TourBlanche. Best cheaper, Haut-Sauterne. Burgundy. --Best brands: Clos Vougeot, Chambertin,Chablis, and Red Hermitage. Sherry. --Best brand, Amontillado. Hock. --Best brands: Steinberg Cabinet andMarcobrunner. Best sparkling wine, Hochheimer. The American dry wines are most excellent, and might be more patronized bythose who know no other wine than that of foreign manufacture. The MissouriCatawba and Concord wines are especially good; so are some of the Californiawines. The Ohio Catawba is quite noted. BILL-OF-FARE TABLE. Bills of fare can be easily made by selecting more or less dishes, andserving them in the order indicated in the table. The dishes are to begarnished as explained in receipts. 1stCourse.--Raw oysters, little clams, Roman punch. 2d Course.--Soup(potages): any kind of soup or soups. 3dCourse.--Hors-d'œuvers (cold): sardines, pickled oysters, cucumbers,radishes, preserved herrings, anchovies, cold slaw. These dishes are consideredas appetizers, and are served just after the soup. It is a French custom.Melons are served as a course after soup also. 4th Course.--Fish(poissons): any kind of fish or shell-fish. 5thCourse.--Hors-d'œuvers (hot). The hot hors-d'œuvers are the lightentrées, such as croquettes, all kinds of hot vols-au-vent, or patties(not sweet ones, however), sweet-breads, brains, etc. 6thCourse.--Relevés: the relevés or removes, are the substantialdishes. Roast joints, i.e., of beef, veal, lamb, mutton, or venison, roastor boiled turkeys or chickens, fillet of beef, braised meats, ham, sometimesgame. 7th Course.--Roman punch. 8thCourse.--Entrées: cutlets, all kinds of vols-au-vent, or patties (notsweet); sweet-breads, fricassees, scollops, casseroles, poultry or game oncoquille, croquettes, salmis, blanquettes; any of the meats, or game made intoside-dishes. 9thCourse.--Entremêts: dressed vegetables served alone, such as cauliflower,asparagus, artichokes, corn, spinach, boiled celery, string-beans ( haricots verts ), or French pease on toast, etc., macaroni,dressed eggs, fritters. 10th Course.--Rôtis: game of anykind. 11th Course.--Salade: any kind of salad; a plain salad isoften served with the game. 12th Course.--Cheese, macaroni dressedwith cheese, cheese omelet, cheese-cakes; cheese and salad are often servedtogether. 13th Course.--Entremêts, sweet: any kind ofpudding, jellies, sweet fritters, sweet pastries, creams, charlottes,etc. 14th Course.--Glaces: any thing iced; ice-creams, water ices,frozen puddings, biscuits glacés, etc. 15thCourse.--Dessert: fruits, nuts and raisins, candied fruits, bonbons, cakes,etc. 16th Course.--Coffee, and little cakes, or biscuits(crackers). TO PREPARE COMPANYDINNERS. IT is very simple to prepare a dinner served à la Russe, as it matters little how manycourses there may be. If it were necessary to prepare many dishes, and to havethem all hot, and in perfection at the same minute, and then be obliged toserve them nearly all together, the task might be considered rather formidableand confusing. But with one or two assistants, and with time between eachcourse to prepare the succeeding one, after a very little practice it becomes amere amusement. The soup, or the stock for the soup, and the dessert, should be made the daybefore the dinner. A bill of fare should be written, and pinned up in the kitchen. Every thingshould be prepared that is possible in the early part of the day; then, afterthe fish, chickens, birds, etc., are dressed and larded (if necessary), theyshould be put aside, near the ice. If sweet-breads are to be served, theyshould be larded, parboiled, and put away also. The salad (if lettuce) shouldbe sprinkled with water (not placed in water), and put in a cool, dark place in abasket, not to be touched until the last three minutes. The plates and platters for each course should be counted, examined, andplaced on a table by themselves. However, the arrangement of the dishes wasexplained in the chapter on setting the table. After this, the kitchen should be put in order, and the tables cleared ofall unnecessary things. Then every thing needed for the courses to be cookedshould be placed in separate groups at the back of a large table, so that theremay be no confusion or loss of any thing at the last minute. If there aresweet-breads, have them egged and bread-crumbed; if pease are to be served withthem, place them in a basin at their side, properly seasoned. If there ismacaroni with cheese, have the proper quantity desired already broken on adish, with a plate of grated cheese and a tin cup, with the necessary amount ofbutter to be melted, side by side. If there is a fillet of beef to be baked andserved with a mushroom-sauce, have the fillet in the baking-pan already larded, the mushrooms in the basin inwhich they are to be cooked, at the side; also the piece of lemon and thespoonful of flour ready. The stock will be in the kettle at the back of thestove. By-the-way, in giving a fine dinner, there should always be an extra stock-pot, separate from the soup, at the back of thestove, as it is excellent for boiling the sweet-breads or the macaroni, andmaking the sauces, etc. If a simple salad of lettuce is to be served, have the oil, vinegar, pepperand salt, and the spoonful of finely chopped onion, in a group all ready. If a Mayonnaise dressing is to be served, that should bemade in the morning. Look at the clock in the kitchen, and calculate the time it will take eachdish to cook, and put it to the fire, so that it will be finished "to a turn"just at the proper minute. During dinner, one person should attend to placing out of the way all thedishes brought from the dining-room, and, if necessary, should wash any spoons,platters, etc., which may be needed a second time. She should know beforehand,however, just what she is to wash, as every one must know exactly her ownbusiness, so that no questions need be asked at the last moment. The cook canattend to nothing but the cooking, at the risk of neglecting this mostimportant part. As the course just before the salad is sent into the dining-room, begin tomake the salad, having every thing all ready. First, pick over thelettuce-leaves, wash and leave them to drain, while you prepare the dressing.It should just be ready when its turn comes to be sent totable. If the dinner company is very large, and there are many dishes, the cookingof them may be distributed between two persons, and perhaps the second cook mayuse the laundry stove; but with a little practice and the one or twoassistants, one cook can easily prepare the most elaboratedinner, if it is only properly managed before the time of cooking. She should,of course, never attempt any dish she has not made before. A bain-marie is very convenient forpreserving cooked dishes, if there is some delay in serving the dinner. Of all things, never on any occasion serve a large joint or large article ofany kind on a little platter, as nothing looks so awkward. Let the platteralways be at least a third larger than the size of its contents. I give several bills of fare. They are long enough and good enough for anydinner party. Guests do not care for better or more, if these are only properlycooked. They can be easily prepared in one's own house, and this is always moreelegant than to have a list of a hundred dishes from a restaurant. A WINTER DINNER. Oysters on the half-shell. Amber soup. Salmon;sauce-Hollandaise. Sweet-breads andpease. Lamb-chops; tomato-sauce. Fillet of beef, with mushrooms. Roastquails; Saratoga potatoes. Salad;lettuce. Cheese; celery; wafers. Charlotte-russe, with French bottled strawberries aroundit. Chocolate Fruit Ice-cream. Fruit. Coffee. The same bill of fare in French is as follows: MENU. Huîtres. Consommé de bœuf clair. Saumon; sauce Hollandaise. Ris deveau aux petits pois. Côtelettes d'agneauà la Purée de tomate. Filet debœuf aux champignons. Cailles grilléesaux pommes de terre. Salade. Fromage; céleri. Charlotte-russe aux fraises. Plum-pudding glacés. Fruits. Café. This is a bill of fare seen very often at dinner parties. It is notdifficult to prepare, as there are only five of the courses which arenecessarily prepared at dinner-time. The oyster course is very simple, and maybe placed on the table before the guests enter the dining-room. This soup maybe made the day before, and only reheated at the time of serving. The Saratogapotatoes may be made in the morning; and if the charlotte-russe is not purchased at a restaurant, itmay be made the day before. So, after the quails are broiled or roasted, thecook has nothing more to do but to make the salad, which is an affair of threeminutes, and the coffee, for which she has a long time, the coffee having beenground and in readiness in the coffee-pot two or threehours before dinner. The four last courses before the coffee are easilypurchased outside. The cheese might be a Neufchatel or a Roquefort. The charlotte and the ice-cream can come from theconfectioner's. The fruit is on the table during the dinner as one of thedecorations. DINNERBILL OF FARE. Roman punch. Giblet soup. Little vols-au-vent of oysters. Smelts; tomato-sauce. Scollopedchickens ( en coquille ); Bechamel sauce. Saddleof venison; potatoes à la neige. Breasts ofquails in cutlets, with French pease. Salad of lettuce. Cheeseomelet. Pine-apple Bavarian cream. Vanillaice-cream, and ginger preserve; little cakes. Fruits. Coffee. MENU. Punch à la Romaine. Bouchées d'huîtres. Leséperlans frits; sauce tomate. Coquilles devolaille à la Bechamel. Selle de venaisonà la Purée de pommes de terre. Filetsde cailles aux petits pois. Salade delaitue. Omelette au fromage. Le Bavaroix. Glace à lacrème de vanille. Dessert. Café. DINNER BILL OF FARE ( Spring ). Macaroni, clear soup, with grated cheese. Salmon; lobster-sauce; cucumbers. Chicken croquettes; tomato-sauce. Sweet-breads in cases, or in silverscallop-shells; sauce Bechamel. Filletof beef, with mushrooms. Roman punch. Snipe; potatoes à la Parisienne. Mayonnaise of chicken. Asparagus,with cream dressing. Ramequins. Champagne jelly en macédoine, with whippedcream. Neapolitan ice-cream; littlecakes. Fruits. MENU. Potage au macaroni clair. Saumon auxconcombres; sauce homard. Croquettes de volaille;sauce tomate. Ris de veau en papillotes, à laBechamel. Filet de bœuf auxchampignons. Punchà la Romaine. Bécasses; pommes deterre à la Parisienne. Mayonnaise devolaille. Asperges à lacrème. Ramequins. Macédoine de fruits. Glace decrème à la Napolitaine. Dessert. DINNER BILL OF FARE ( Winter. ). Oysters served in block of ice. Julienne soup (can purchase it canned). Soft-shell crabs. Sweet-breads;tomato-sauce. Braised pigeons, withspinach. Fillet of beef; sauceHollandaise. Roman punch, inlemon-skins. Fillets of ducks, larded;poivrade-sauce; salad of vegetables. French cannedstring-beans ( haricots verts ) sautéd withbutter, served on toast. Macaroni, withcheese. Maraschino Bavarian cream. Chocolate-pudding, iced. Fruits. Coffee. MENU. Huîtres. Potage à la julienne. écrevisses frites. Ris deveau; sauce tomate. Pigeons àl'écarlate. Filet de bœuf; sauceHollandaise. Sorbet. Filets de canards; sauce poivrade; salade delégumes. Haricots verts sautés aubeurre. Macaroni au Parmesan. Le Bavaroix au maraschino. Poundingde chocolat glacé. Fruits. Café. DINNER BILL OF FARE ( Winter ). Mock-turtle soup (can be purchased canned). Boiled white-fish, garnished with potatoes au naturel andolives; sauce Hollandaise. Fried oysters; coldslaw. Casserole of sweet-breads; cream-sauce,decorated around the base with green pease. Roastwild turkey, chestnut stuffing; Saratoga potatoes. Fried cream. Spinach on toast,garnished with hard-boiled eggs. Salad; lettuce,with small, thin diamonds of fried ham. Cheese;wafers; celery. Little cocoa-nut puddings in paper cases. Ice-cream andcakes. Fruit. Coffee. MENU. Potage à la tête de veau entortue, or potage fausse tortue. White-fish; sauceHollandiase. Huîtres frites. Casserole de ris de veau aux petits pois. Dinde sauvage rôtie. Beignetsde bouillie, or crème frite. épinardsaux œufs. Salade. Soufflé. Glace de crèmeau chocolat. Fruits. Café. DINNER BILL OF FARE ( Winter ). Oysters on half shell. Ambersoup. Fish croquettes (pear-shape), garnished withparsley. Rice casserole, filled with blanquette ofchicken. Roast beef (ribs rolled), with a circle ofmashed potatoes à la neige and water-cresses. Canvas-back ducks; celery. Romanpunch. Reed-birds cooked in sweet-potatoes. Poached eggs on anchovytoast. Salad. Coffee;Bavarian cream. Nesselrode pudding. Fruits. Café. MENU. Huîtres. Consommé debœuf clair. Croquettes depoisson. Blanquette de volaille. Bœuf rôti à la Purée de pommes deterre. Canards; céleri. Punch à la Romaine. Œufs pochés aux croûtesd'anchois. Salade. Bavaroix au café. Poudingà la Nesselrode. Fruits. Café. DINNER BILL OF FARE ( Summer ). Clear amber soup. Fried cuts of fish,with tomato-sauce. Sweet-breads and cauliflowers(cream dressing over both). Croquettes of chicken(in form of cutlets), with pease. Roast lamb;caper-sauce; spinach. Green corn served inhusks. * Sliced tomatoes,with Mayonnaise dressing. Cheese; wafers;cucumbers. Maraschino Bavarian cream, and freshstrawberries. Ice-cream. Fruits. *Foreigners consider it vulgar to eat corn from thecob, although quite elegant to eat asparagus with theirfingers.--ED. MENU. Consommé de bœuf clair. White-fish à l'Orlay. Ris deveau aux choux-fleurs. Croquettes de volaille aux petits pois. Agneau rôti aux épinards. Mayonnaise de tomate. Fromage;concombres. Bavaroix au maraschino. Glace de crème au chocolat. Dessert. A SIMPLE DINNER FOR FOUR PERSONS ( Menu ). Soup, with fried bread ( aux croûtons ). Chicken,with rice (see page 177). Macaroni, withtomato-sauce (see page 210). Lettuce, withMayonnaise dressing. Corn-starch pudding (page 275),with a circle of peach marmalade around. Necessary--a soup-bone, a soup-bunch, with plenty of parsley, a largechicken, half a pound of macaroni, a half-pint can of tomatoes, three-fourthsof a tea-cupful of rice. Make the Mayonnaise dressing with three eggs in the morning.Use the whites of the eggs for the corn-starch pudding, which make at the sametime, and put away in a mold to harden. Also put aside the rice to soak in coldwater. Five hours before dinner, put on the soup-bone, with the neck of the chickenalso, as every little adds. An hour before dinner, cut up the soup-bunch,saving part of it for the tomato-sauce, as one or two sprigs of the parsley anda small onion. Put the remaining vegetables (frying the onion) into the soup,leaving only a sprig of parsley for the chicken. Cut up the pieces of chicken,which fry or sauté brown in some hot drippings; put themthen into a stew-pan. Add to the drippings (about atable-spoonful) a tea-spoonful of flour, and, when rubbed smooth, a pint of hotwater, a ladleful of the soup taken from the soup-kettle, and a sprig of parsley chopped fine. Addthis now to the fried pieces of chicken in the stew-pan; let them simmer until about five minutes beforedinner. For the soup, cut some bread into rather large dice, say three-quarters ofan inch square; fry, or rather sauté, them in a little butter, turning allsides of the bread to allow it to become brown. Place the dice in the openoven, or at the back of the range, to become perfectly dry before thedinner-hour. Half an hour before dinner, put themacaroni to boil in another ladleful of stock mixed with some salted boilingwater. Now make the tomato-sauce: make it as in receipt, and place it at theside of the fire or in the bain-marie untilthe macaroni is done. Put on the rice to boil for about fifteen minutes in alittle salted boiling water. Just before serving the dinner is the busiest time. Strain the macaroni, andmix it with the sauce; put it into the oven for a few minutes to soak. Strainthe soup, remove all the grease, and season it with pepper and salt. Put thebread dice, or croûtons, into the soup-tureen, pour over the soup, and send it to table.Take out the pieces of chicken, which arrange neatly on a warm platter; strainthe stock in which it was boiled, remove all the fat, add the rice to it,season with pepper and salt, and let it simmer on the fire until it is time tobe served, and then pour it over the chickens, and send them into thedining-room. The lettuce is next washed and dressed; afterward the pudding isturned from the mold, and decorated with the circle of peachmarmalade.
