SOUP. A few points are essential in making good soup. Beef is the best meat forthe purpose, as it contains the most nourishment. A shank bone should be wellcracked (that the marrow may be extracted), put on to cook in cold water,allowing a full quart for every pound of beef, and by very gradual heat come toa slow simmer, which should be kept up five or six hours. Soup, on no account,should be allowed to boil, except for the last fifteen minutes, to cook thevegetables in finishing. For the first hour of simmering it should befrequently skimmed. Salt, pepper and savory should be cooked in it from thefirst; rice, tapioca, macaroni or dumplings added at the last, to thicken. Ifvegetables are desired, they should be nicely sliced. Soup is much better to bemade and allowed to cool, and used the second day, as then all grease can beremoved. It should be strained before putting away. BEEF SOUP. Mrs. John G. Lowe. Put on a shin of beef early in the morning. An hour beforedinner put in the vegetables -- corn, tomatoes, potatoes, or anyother the season affords. Half an hour before dinner add pearlbarley, vermicelli, or dumplings, as youprefer. Season with salt, pepper and catsup, totaste. BEAN SOUP. Mrs. Axie Green. To a quart of beans a teaspoonful of soda. Cover well with water, and set them on to boil untilthe hulls will easily slip off; throw them into coldwater; rub well with the hands; the hulls will rise to the top.Drain carefully and repeat until the hulls are wholly removed. To a quart of beans, two quarts of water. Boil until the beans mash perfectly smooth. It seasonsthe soup to boil a piece of meat (mutton, beef orpork) with it. If you have not meat, add butter and flour rubbedtogether. Break into tureen well toasted bread, pour over it the soup, and add plentyof salt and pepper. CORN SOUP. Mrs. S. B. Smith. Clean and scrapetwelve ears of corn. Boil the cobs for fifteen or twenty minutes in one quart of water; remove them and put in the corn. Let it boil a short time, then add two quarts of rich milk. Season with pepper, salt, and butter that has been melted enough to rub flour into it (two tablespoonsful of flour). Let thewhole boil ten minutes, and then turn the soup into a tureen into which the yolks of threeeggs have been beaten. TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. Simon Gebhart. One quart of tomatoes, one quart of milk and one quart of water. Boil the water and tomatoes togetherabout twenty minutes, and then add the milk; then oneteaspoonful of soda. Let it just boil up. Season asyou do oyster soup, with butter, pepper and salt; add crackers if desired. OKRA GUMBO. Mrs. S. Craighead. Cut up one chicken (an old one is preferable); wash and dry it; flour it well; salt and pepper; have ready in a skillet a lump of lard as large as an egg; let it get hot; put in your chicken; fry very brown all over,but do not let it burn. Put it in your vessel in which you make soup; pour onit five quarts of water; let it boil two hours; thencut up about two dozen okra pods and add to it; besure they are tender and pretty well grown; then let it boil another hour. Whenyou first put on your soup, cut up an onion in it; salt and pepper to taste. Tobe served with rice, either boiled or steamed dry. Dried okra can be used by being put to soakthe night previous; pour off most of the water. PLAIN GUMBO SOUP. Take a piece of ham half the size of your hand, and a knuckle of veal; put them in a pot with two quarts of cold water, simmer slowly two or three hours, then addtwo quarts of boiling water. Twenty minutes beforeserving, put in one small can of okra and as many oysters as you please. Season to taste. PLAIN CALF'S HEAD SOUP. Mrs. S. Craighead. Take a calf's head well cleaned, and a knuckle ofveal; put them into a large porcelain vessel; put a largetablespoonful of sweet marjoram, and one of sweet basil, in a clean rag; also a large onion cut up in a cloth; take at least four quarts of water (it must be started as early as eight o'clock,if you wish it for a one o'clock dinner); let it boil steadily but not toorapidly; salt and pepper well. About twelve o'clock, take off the soup, pour it through a cullender, pick out all the meat carefully, chop very fine and return it to thesoup, placing again upon the fire. Boil four eggs veryhard; chop them fine, and slice one lemon very thin, and at last add a wine glass of wine. CORN AND TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. S. Craighead. Take a good soup bone; wash it nicely; pour over it sufficient water to cover it well; cut up an onion in it; salt and pepper; cut down about onedozen ears of corn and as many tomatoes in it, and let it boil slowly for at leastthree hours. For dumplings, take one egg and beat it alittle; one coffee-cup sour milk; small teaspoonful of soda; a little salt; and flour enough to make a stiff batter; drop it into theboiling soup, from a spoon, twenty minutes before serving. Thesedumplings are good in bean soup also. GREEN PEA SOUP. Mrs. Eliza Pierce. One peck green peas; four tablespoonsful of lard heated in the kettle; put in the peas and stir them till perfectly green; add pepper and salt, and pour inas much water as you want soup; boil three-fourths ofan hour, then add one teacupful of milk thickened witha tablespoonful of flour; put in the soup three orfour young onions cut fine and fried a light brown in butter. Just as you take it up, add yolksof two eggs, beaten in a little cream. PEA SOUP. Mrs. Robert Buchanan. Boil the hullswith a chicken or knuckle of veal, then strain theliquid; throw in a handful of peas, and boil tothicken the soup; when done, put in some peas cookedseparately, pepper and salt, cream and butter totaste. MACARONI SOUP. Take six pounds of beef, and put into four quarts of water, with two onions, one carrot, one turnip, and a head of celery; boil it down three or four hoursslowly, till there is about two quarts of water; thenlet it cool. Next day, half an hour before dinner, take off the grease and pourthe soup into the kettle (leaving the sediment out) and add salt to suit the taste; a pint of macaroni broken into inch pieces, and a tablespoonfuland a half of tomato catsup. NOODLES FOR SOUP. Beat up one egg; add a pinch of salt and flour enough to make a stiff dough; roll out in a verythin sheet; dredge with flour to keep from sticking;then roll up tightly; begin at one end and shave down fine like cabbage forslaw. MEAT BALLS. Half a pound of lean veal and a pound of fatbeef chopped fine; a tablespoonful of thyme, one of parsley, alittle less marjoram and a little more onion, a pinch of mace, cloves and nutmeg, the yolks of two eggs, a little crumbledbread, pepper and salt; mix with the hand in a large bowl; mould intoballs the size of a walnut,and fry in lard. Afterfrying the balls, make a browning of the lard they arefried in (put flour in and stir until well cooked) andbrown the soup with it; put the balls in the soup whole. DUMPLINGS. Take a small teacupful of flour, a pinch of salt, and butter the size of a walnut; rub well with the flour; sprinkle in a little pepper; add sweet milk enoughto form a stiff dough; flour the board and roll verythin; cut in small squares; drop into the soup, and let them boil tenminutes. FISH. BOILED FISH. All large fish, with the skin whole, should be wrapped in acloth, wound with twine, and covered with more than two inches of cold water. In the water puta little flour; a small lump of butter; a chopped onion and parsley. Be careful not to have too much water. Afterthe fish has boiled sufficiently, take the yolks of four eggs; the juice of onelemon; a little mace; and about a gill ofthe water in which the fish has been boiled; put all into a stew pan and let boiluntil it thickens; stirring all the time; then pour over the fish. FRIED FISH. Having cleaned the fish thoroughly, wipe dry; sprinkle with salt; dust thick with flour. Take yolks of four eggs; beat tolerably light. Put alittle sweet oil in the frying pan, and let it beboiling. Dip the fish in the batter; put them in thepan and fry slowly. Fish should not be put in to fryuntil the fat gets boiling hot. It is very necessaryto observe this rule. BAKED FISH. Mrs. Geo. L. Phillips. After cleaning, salt the fish for about anhour, then wash it. Make a dressing of bread crumbs, salt and pepper, summer savory, and a pieceof butter the size of a walnut. Then put in a pan andsprinkle with flour; put on a little butter, pepper, salt and about half a pint of water. Bake an hour and a half. BAKED CODFISH. Soak the codfish over night; clean it off with a brush kept forthat purpose; then put it into a stone crock and cover with water. Let it simmer until quite tender, then take itout, pick it over, and mash it fine. Take two-thirds mashedpotatoes, seasoned with butter and salt, and one-third codfish; mix well together and bake in a dish until brown; then make a sauceof drawn butter, and cut up two hard boiledeggs into it. STEWED CODFISH. Mrs. Isaac Van Ausdal. Pick the codfish into small pieces; cover it with cold water and let it remain over night. In themorning pour that off, and put on some boiling water. Let it stand a few minutes, then drain, and stir it up, with two tablespoonsfulof cream and a lump of butter the size of an egg. Let it come to the boil, and serve with fresh boiled potatoes. FISH FRITTERS. Mrs. J. A. McMahon. Take the remainsof any fish which has been served the preceding day;remove all the bones, and pound in a mortar; add breadcrumbs and mashed potatoes in equalquantities. Mix half a teacupful of cream with twowell beaten eggs, cayennepepper and anchovy sauce; beat all up toa proper consistency; cut it into small cakes, and fry them in boiling lard. CLAM FRITTERS. Twelve clams minced fine; one pint of milk; three eggs. Add the liquor from the clams to the milk; beat up the eggs andput to this salt, pepper, and flour enough for a thin batter; lastly the chopped clams. Fry in hot lard. A tablespoonful makes a fritter, oryou can dip the whole clam in batter and cook in likemanner. FISH SAUCE. Stir in one cup of drawn butter the yolks of twoeggs well beaten, pepper and salt, and a few sprigs ofparsley; let it boil, and pour over the fish when ready for the table. ANOTHER SAUCE FOR FISH. Mrs. R. P. Brown. Piece of butter size of two eggs; melt and mix with it one-halfteacupful of vinegar, two mustard spoonsful of mademustard, a little salt, one well beaten egg. Stir all the time, or it will thicken in lumps.It is best made over boiling water, as the heat fromthe stove is apt to harden the sauce. TURBOT A LA CREME. Mrs. Sarah Crane. Boil a nice fresh fish; pick out all the bones, and season highlywith white pepper and salt. Mix one-quarter pound of flour smoothly with one quartof milk; put in five very small onions, a bunch of parsley, asprig of thyme, one teaspoonful of salt, and one-half teaspoonful of whitepepper. Place over a quick fire, and stir all the time until itforms a thick paste, then take off and put in one-half pound of butter and the yolks of twoeggs. Mix all together and pass through a sieve. Pour some of thissauce into a baking dish, and add a layer of fish and sauce alternately, until it is all used. Thesauce must be on top, with bread crumbs and cheese. Bake in a moderate oven half an hour. PICKLED SALMON. Mrs. Geo. W. Hoglen. Soak salt salmon twenty-four hours, changing the water several times; afterward put boilingwater around it (not over it), and letit remain fifteen minutes, then pour on boilingvinegar, with cloves and mace added. LOBSTER CROQUETTES. Mrs. Jonathan Harshman. Chop the lobster very fine, and mix with it a little parsley, black pepper, salt and bread crumbs; moisten with a little cream. Butter added makes them less dry. Shape them with yourhands; roll in bread crumbs; dip in egg and fry. OYSTERS. OYSTER SOUP. Mrs. E. F. Stoddard. To three pints of oysters put three pints of water; when thoroughly cooked, add one pint of cream or milk, the yolks of foureggs, three tablespoonsful of butter, andthree of flour. OYSTER SOUP. Mrs. J. J. Patterson. To twohalf- cans of oysters add three quarts of good milk; let the whole come to a boil. Put into a soup tureen seven crackers rolled fine, salt and pepper to taste, and half pound of butter; when the oysters have cooked, pour the soup over the crackers and serve. STEAMED OYSTERS. Drain the oysters well and turn them into a steamer over a pot of boilingwater; let steam for half an hour, stirring occasionally; seasonwith plenty of butter, pepper and salt. ESCOLLOPED OYSTERS. Mrs. Harvey Conover. Roll crackers very fine, and cover with them the bottom ofa baking dish previously buttered; spread a layer of oysters over these crumbs; pepper and salt them, anddrop on bits of butter; cover with a layer of crumbs,and thus alternate the layers until the dish is full, having the crumbs coverthe top; place in a very hot oven that it may brown nicely. It takesthree-quarters of an hour. No liquid is put in the dish, not even the liquor ofthe oysters, for the butter moistens it sufficiently. ESCOLLOPED OYSTERS. Mrs. J. F. E. Take twohalf- cans of oysters; look them over carefully to seethat there are no pieces of shell among them. Take equal quantities of rolled cracker and bread crumbs; cover the bottom of a well buttered dish with them; then a layer of oysters sprinkled with pepper and salt; add a generous supply of butter; then another layer of crumbs; and so on, mak the top layer crumbs, with bits of butter through it.Pour over one pint of milk or water; bakethree-quarters of an hour; cover with a plate; when nearly done, take it offand let them brown. OYSTER PIE. Mrs. J. A. McMahon. Take a large dish, butter it, and spread a richpaste over the sides and around the edge, but not on the bottom.The oysters should be fresh and as large and fine aspossible; drain off part of the liquor from theoysters; put them into a pan, and season them with pepper, salt and spice. Have ready the yolks of threeeggs, chopped fine, and grated breadcrumbs; pour the oysters with as much oftheir liquor as you please, into the dish that has the paste in it; strew over them the chopped egg and grated bread; rollout the lid of the pie and put it on, crimping the edges; bake in a quickoven. OYSTER PATTIES. Mrs. G. W. R. Line small, deep tins,with puff paste, and bake; when cold, put into each,three or four oysters, and season with pepper, salt, and a little butter; bake about ten minutes. Have ready equal partsof water and butter, and pourover each, as you dish them up. BROILED OYSTERS. Drain the oysters well and dry them with a napkin. Have ready a griddle, hot and well buttered; season the oysters, lay them on the griddle, and brown them on both sides; serve them on ahot plate with plenty of butter. OYSTER FRITTERS. Mrs. D. A. Bradford. One quart of oysters; half pint of milk; two eggs. Open the oysters; strain the liquor into a pan, and add to it half pint of milk and the eggs wellbeaten; stir in flour enough to make a smooth butrather thin batter; when perfectly free from lumps, put in the oysters. Have some beef drippings orbutter made hot in a frying pan; when boiling, drop in the batter,one or more oysters in each spoonful. Brown on bothsides and serve in a hot dish. FRIED OYSTERS. Mrs. D. W. Stewart. Take large oysters; wash and drain them; lay on a napkin to dry.Have cracker flour well seasoned with salt and cayenne pepper; rollthe oysters in the cracker, and fry in hot butter and lard in equal quantities. When there is a largequantity needed it is best to put them, as soon as done, into a tinvessel tightly covered, and place in the heater till all arecooked, as but few can be attended to at a time. OYSTER CROQUETTES. Take a can of the best oysters; pick them over and dry in a napkin; season well with pepper and salt. Have ready the whites of twoeggs well beaten, and some fine cornmeal. Take one oyster at a time, dip itfirst into the egg, then the meal, and drop in a deepskillet of boiling lard. Cook a lightbrown. Serve on a hot dish. OYSTER CHOWDER. Lewis G. Evans. Fry out three rashersof pickled pork in the pot you make the chowder; addto it three potatoes and two onions, both sliced; cover with water; boil until they are nearly cooked; soak two orthree dozen crackers in coldwater a few minutes, then put into the pot a half can of best oysters, one quart of milk and the soaked crackers. Boil all together for a fewminutes; season with salt, pepper, and butter. Fish Chowder can be made in the same way by using fresh fish instead of oysters. COVE OYSTERS. One heaping tablespoonful of butter; one even tablespoonful of flour; put in a skillet and stir till a dark brown;pour on the liquor of the oysters; stir till it thickens, then put in oysters and let them get hot. Season with pepper and fine herbs; keepwell covered. MEATS. RULES FOR BOILING MEAT. All fresh meat should be put to cook in boiling water, then the outer partcontracts and the internal juices are preserved. For making soup, where you want all the juices extracted, put on in coldwater. All salt meat should be put on in cold water, that the salt may be extractedin cooking. In boiling meats, it is important to keep the water constantly boiling,otherwise the meat will absorb the water. Be careful to add boiling water, ifmore is needed. Remove the scum when it first begins to boil. Allow about twenty minutes for boiling for each pound of fresh meat. Themore gently meat boils the more tender it will be. To broil meat well, have your gridiron hot before youput it on. In roasting beef it is necessary to have a brisk fire. Baste often. Seasonwell with pepper and salt. Twenty minutes is required for every pound ofbeef. BOILED TURKEY. Stuff the turkey as for roasting. A very nice dressing is madeby chopping half a pint of oysters and mixing them with bread crumbs, butter, pepper and salt, thyme or sweetmarjoram, and wet with milk or water. Baste about the turkey a thin cloth, the inside of which has been dredged with flour, and put it to boil in coldwater, with a spoonful of salt in it. Leta large turkey simmer for two and a half or threehours. Skim it while boiling. Serve with oyster sauce made by adding to a cupful of the liquor in which the turkey wasboiled the same quantity of milk andeight oysters chopped fine. Season with minced parsley; stir in a spoonful of rice orwheat flour wet with cold milk; atablespoonful of butter. Boil up once and pour into a tureen. TO ROAST A TURKEY. Mrs. S. Craighead. A turkey a year old is considered best. See that it iswell cleansed and washed. Salt and pepper it inside. Take a loaf and a half of bakers stale bread for a good sized turkey; rub itquite fine with your hands; have in your skillet a lumpof butter as large as an egg (or a little more); cutinto it one large white onion; let it cook a fewminutes, but not get brown; then stir in your bread, one teaspoonful of salt, one of pepper; let it get thoroughly heated. Put the turkeyinto a dripping pan; salt and pepper the outside, and sprinkle a little flour over it. Put about one coffee cup of water in the pan; baste very frequently; use a good,moderate oven; roast about three hours, or three and a half. Be sure to keep upan even fire. PLAIN, EXCELLENT STUFFING. Mrs. R. P. Brown. Take stale bread; cut off all the crust; rub very fine, andpour over it as much melted butter as will make itcrumble in your hands; salt and pepper to taste. TURKEY DRESSED WITH OYSTERS. Mrs. W. A. B. For a ten-pound turkey, take two pints of breadcrumbs; half a teacupful of butter cut in bits (not melted); one teaspoonful of sweet basil, pepper and salt, and mix thoroughly. Rub the turkey well, inside and out, with salt and pepper; then fillwith first a spoonful of crumbs, then a few well drainedoysters, using half a can for the turkey. Strain the oyster liquor and use to baste the turkey. Cook the giblets inthe pan and chop fine in the gravy. A fowl of this size will require three hours cooking ina moderate oven. POTATO STUFFING. Mrs. J. Harris. Take two-thirds bread and one-third boiled potatoesgrated, butter the size of an egg, pepper, salt, one egg and a little ground sage. Mix thoroughly. APPLE STUFFING. Take half a pound of the pulp of tart apples, which have been baked or scalded;add two ounces of bread crumbs, some powdered sage, a finely shred onion; and season well with cayennepepper. This is a delicious stuffing for roastgeese, ducks, &c. CHESTNUT STUFFING. Boil the chestnuts and shell them; then blanch them and boiluntil soft; mash them fine and mix with a little sweetcream, some bread crumbs, pepper and salt. Excellentfor roast turkey. BOILED CHICKEN POT PIE. Mrs. James Stockstill. Cut up a goodsized chicken in all the joints; make a rich crust or like soda biscuit; have ready a smoothpot; put in a layer of the chicken at the bottom; pepper and salt; then small,square pieces of dough, and then a layer of potatoes (quartered if large) and small pieces of butter; thenanother layer of chicken, and so on. Put a crust overthe top with a slit cut each way, so that you can turn back and add more water if necessary. Beforeputting it on, fill the pot with boiling water andcover closely; boil with a good fire one hour and a half. CHICKEN PIE. Mrs. W. R. S. Ayres. Boil a chicken until it is tender (one a year old is best);peel half dozen potatoes while it is stewing. To makethe crust, take one quart of flour; one tablespoonfulof baking powder; a little salt; half a teacupful of lard, and sufficient water tomake a stiff dough. Roll half the dough to the thickness of half an inch; cutin strips and line the dish. Then put in half the chicken and half the potatoes; season with butter, pepper and salt; dredge wellwith flour, and put in some of the crust cut in smallpieces. The other half of the chicken and potatoes, put in, with butter, salt and pepper, and dredge with flour as before; roll out the remainder of the dough for upper crust. Before puttingon the cover, fill the dish with boiling water; put inthe oven immediately, and bake one hour. CHICKEN PIE. Mrs. Judge Holt. Stew chicken till tender; season with one-quarter of apound of butter, salt and pepper; line the sides of pie dish with a rich crust; pour in the stewed chicken, and cover loosely with a crust, first cuttinga hole in the center, size of a small teacup. Have ready a can ofoysters; heat the liquor; thicken with a little flour and water, and seasonwith salt, pepper and butter size of an egg. When it comes to a boil, poutit over the oysters, and about twenty minutes beforethe pie is done, lift the top crust and put them in. FRICASSEED CHICKEN. Mrs. John A. McMahon. Stuff two chickens as if to boil; put in a pot; don't quitecover with water; put them on two hours beforedinner. Chop an onion, some parsley, and a little mace; rub a piece of butter twice as large as an egg with flour, and stir all in.Before dishing, beat the yolks of six eggs and stir incarefully; cook five minutes. TURKEY SCALLOP. Pick the meatfrom the bones of a cold turkey (without any of the skin); chop itfine. Put a layer of bread crumbs on the bottom of abuttered dish; moisten them with a little milk; thenput in a layer of turkey with some of the filling, andcut small pieces of butter over the top; sprinkle with pepper and salt; then anotherlayer of crumbs, and so on until the dish is nearly full; add a little hot water to the gravy that was left fromthe turkey, and pour over it. Then take two eggs; two tablespoonsful of milk; one of melted butter; alittle salt; and crackercrumbs as much as will make it thick enough to spread on top witha knife; put bits of butter over it, and cover with a plate; bake three-quarters of an hour. About tenminutes before serving remove the plate and let the crust brown nicely. TURKEY OR CHICKEN CROQUETTES. Mrs. S. Gebhart. Mince turkey or chicken as fine as possible; season with pepper, salt, a little nutmeg, and a very little onion. Take a large tablespoonful of butter; two of flour; one-half glass of cream; mix, boil, and stir the meat in. When cold, take a spoonful of the mixture anddip into the yolk of an egg; then in breadcrumbs; roll lightly in your hand into the proper shape, and fryin boiling lard deep enough to cover them. CROQUETTES. Mrs. J. R. Young. One sweet bread; one pound of chopped chicken; half pound breadcrumbs; pour on of boiling water enoughto moisten them; add the yolks of two eggs; stir overthe fire till quite stiff, and set away to cool.Chop three teaspoonsful of parsley, three of thyme, three of onions, oneof mace, one of nutmeg; salt and cayenne pepper totaste; add half pound of butter; then beat in themixture, two eggs; mix well with hand; shape as pears;dip in bread crumbs and egg, and fry in hot lard, a light brown. CROQUETTES. Take the breast oftwo chickens, or as much cold, cookedveal; beat in a mortar; add as much ham. Add parsley, thyme, salt and pepper to taste.Boil a pint of new milk, and thicken it with a little flour. Put in the meat; boilit a short time; take it out, and set it away to cool. Roll in grated cracker, then in the yolk of anegg, and fry. CURRIED CHICKEN. Lewis G. Evans. Fry out in the pot youmake the curry in, three large rashers of pickledpork, and three onions sliced; fry untilthe onions are brown; cut the chicken into small pieces, and slice three potatoes thin; add them to the pork and onions; cover wellwith water; cook until the chicken is done and the potatoes have thickened the water; salt to taste. Slicetwo or three more potatoes, very thin; put twotablespoonsful of curry powder in a tumbler, and mix with water; add the potatoes and mixed curry powder to the stew,and boil until the potatoes are cooked, but notbroken; serve with rice. Greenpeas and corn are a valuable addition.The above is for one extra large chicken, or two ofordinary size. STEWED CHICKEN WITH OYSTERS. Mrs. J. F. E. Season and stew a chicken in a quart of water until very tender, but not to fall from the bones. Take it out on a hot dishand keep it warm; then put into the liquor in which it wasstewed a lump of butter the size of anegg; mix a little flour and water, smooth and make thickgravy; season well with pepper and salt, and let it come to a boil. Have ready a quart of oysters picked over, and put them in without any ofthe liquor; stir them around, and as soon as they are cooked pour all over the chicken. TOMATO STEWED BEEF. Scald the tomatoes; skin and quarter them, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Bury the meat in a stew pan with tomatoes and add bits of butter rolled in flour; alittle sugar, and an onion minced fine; let cook until the meat is done and the tomatoes dissolved into a pulp. BEEFSTEAK SMOTHERED IN ONIONS. Mrs. Sarah S. Crane. Put in the skillet a little lard, and the steak; peel the onions; sliceand lay them over the meat till the skillet is full; season with salt and pepper; cover ittightly and put it over the fire. After the juice of theonions has boiled away and the meat begins to fry, remove the onions, turn the meat tobrown on the other side, then replace the onions asbefore. Be very careful that they do not burn. STUFFED BEEFSTEAK. Take a flankor round steak; pound it and sprinkle with pepper and salt; then make aplain filling and spread it on the meat; roll it upand tie closely. Put in a pot with a quart of boilingwater, and a lump of butter the size ofan egg. Boil slowly one hour, then put in a pan with the water in which it was boiled, and bake until nicelybrowned, basting it frequently. Dredge a little flour into the gravy, boil and pour over the meat. POUNDED BEEF. Boil a shin oftwelve pounds of meat until it falls readily from the bone; pickit to pieces; mash gristle and all very fine; pick outall the hard bits. Set the liquor away, and whencool take off all the fat; boil the liquor down to a pint and a half; thenreturn the meat to it while it is hot; add what salt and pepper is needed,and any spice you choose. Let it boil up a few times,stirring all the while. Put it into a mould or deep dish to cool. Use cold, andcut in thin slices for tea, or warm it for breakfast. PRESSED BEEF. Mrs. G. Arnold. Corn a bit of briskit (thin part of the flank or the top of theribs) with salt and pulverizedsaltpetre five days, then boil it gently until quite tender. Putit under a heavy weight or a press till perfectly cold. It is very nice forsandwiches. CORN BEEF PICKLE. Mrs. J F. Schenck. Ten pounds of salt; three of sugar; one-fourth of ginger; one-half of pulverized saltpetre; one ounce cayennepepper; nine gallons of water. CORN BEEF. Mrs. J. F. Edgar. Take your beef, be it much or little, rub it over lightly with salt, and put it in either an earthen orwooden vessel; let it stand two or three days, then take it out;throw away the liquor; cleanse the vessel, and put it back again. Make a pickleof good salt that will bear up an egg; to about everyfour gallons of liquor add two pounds of sugar and twoounces of pulverized saltpetre; mix well together, andpour over the meat until it is covered; it must bekept under the brine. SPICED BEEF. Mrs. J. A. McMahon. For a twenty-fivepound round take one and a half ounces of pulverized saltpetre and a handful of brown sugar; pound and mix thoroughly; then rub the beef well with the mixture. Put it into a tub as nearthe size of the round as you can get, and let itremain forty-eight hours, during which time turn and rub the beef twice. Then have prepared one and a half ouncesof ground pepper; two ounces of allspice; one of cloves; andthree or four good handsful of fine salt; pound andmix the spice and salt, andrub the beef with it; turn and rub it every day for aweek, taking care to preserve the pickle. It will be ready for use in three orfour weeks. SPICED BEEF. Miss Blossom Brown. To twenty poundsof round beef take two and a half pounds of suet, chopped very fine, and mixed with black pepper until it is almost black. Mix with this,one handful whole allspice, and one of whole cloves; punch holes through the meat and stuff with suet; sewup in a bag very tight, and cover well with a brine made of four gallons of water, one and a half poundsof sugar, two ounces of pulverizedsaltpetre, and six pounds of common salt. It is ready for use in three weeks. Boil well, and when cold remove the bag andslice from the cut end. VEAL OMELET. Three pounds of finely chopped veal; six rolled crackers; three eggs well beaten; two large spoonsful of cream; one of salt; oneteaspoonful of white pepper; use powderedsage; thyme or sweet marjoram if youlike; mix all well together; form into one or two loaves; baste with butter and water whilebaking. Bake one hour and a half. Fresh beef canbe used in the same way. VEAL ROLL. Mrs. A. C. Clark. Two pounds of porksteak; three pounds of veal, chopped fine; ten crackers, rolled; one tablespoonful of thyme, summer savory orparsley; six eggs; salt and butter. Mixthoroughly. Bake one hour; then spread eggs and cracker over it and put in to brown. VEAL CUTLETS. Mrs. S. Craighead. Have a steak of first cut; pound and season it well; cut theouter edges; then beat it into a good shape. Take one egg; beat it a little; roll the cutlet in it; thencover thoroughly with rolled crackers. Have a lump of butter and lard mixed hot inyour skillet; put in the meat and let cook slowly; when nicely browned on both sides, stir in one spoonful of flour for the gravy; add a half pint of sweet milk and let it come to a boil; salt and pepper, and grate alittle nutmeg on it. VEAL CROQUETTES. Mrs. S. Gebhart. Mince veal very fine; add one onion chopped; mix half a cup of milk with one teaspoonfulof flour; piece of butter size of a walnut; cook until thickened, and stir into the meat; roll into balls; dip into a beaten egg and roll in bread crumbs; fry in plenty of hot lard. SCOLLOPED VEAL. Take three vealsteaks; boil until very tender; take them out; save the water in which they were boiled; chop the meat up very fine; put into a deep dish alternatelayers of the meat and breadcrumbs; salt and pepper each layer; use small lumps of butter. When the bowl is pretty full, add the liquor,of which there should be about a pint, and a teacup of milk; a pint of bread crumbs will be about enough. Cold roast veal, with thestuffing and gravy, can be used in the same way. MARBLED VEAL. Mrs. D. A. Bradford. Take some cold, roasted veal; season with spice; beat in a mortar. Skin a cold, boiled tongue; cut up and pound it to a paste, adding to itnearly its weight of butter; put some of the veal into a pot; then strew in lumps of the pounded tongue; put in another layer of the veal, and again more tongue; press it down and pour clarified butter on top. This cuts very prettily, likeveined marble. The dressed white meat of fowls may be used instead of veal. IRISH STEW. Winnie. Take muttonchops (one for each person); cover well with water, and let come to a boil. Pour off this and addmore water. Take a lump of butter the size of an egg; two tablespoonsful of flour; a teacupful of milk, with pepper and salt totaste; also potatoes, and a small onion or two, if liked. Boil all till the potatoes are done. SWEETBREADS. Parboil the sweetbreads as soon as you get them. Remove the toughparts carefully. Let them lie in cold water a shorttime before using them, then have rolled crackers torub them in, and broil or fry as you choose. SWEETBREADS WITH TOMATOES. Mrs. John A. McMahon. Take two large parboiled sweetbreads; put them into a stew pan withone and a half gills of water, and season with salt, cayenne and black pepper to taste. Place them over a slow fire.Mix one large teaspoonful of browned flour with asmall piece of butter, to which add a leafof mace. Stir the butter and gravy welltogether. After letting them stew slowly for half an hour, set the stew paninto a quick oven, and when the sweetbreads are nicelybrowned, place them on a dish. Pour the gravy into ahalf a pint of stewed tomatoes thickened with onedessert-spoonful of flour and a small piece of butter, and seasoned with salt and pepper; strain itthrough a small wire sieve into the stew pan; let itcome to a boil and stir until done, then pour it over the sweetbreads and send it to the table hot. SWEETBREADS WITH MUSHROOMS. Parboil sweetbreads, allowing eight medium ones to a can of mushrooms. Cut the sweetbreads about half an inch square; stew untiltender. Slice mushrooms and stew in the liquor for onehour, then add to the sweetbreads a coffee cup of cream, pepper and salt, and a tablespoonful of butter. Just before serving throw quickly in, twotablespoonsful of Madeira wine. Sweetbreads broiled, and served with a dressing of green peas, make a very nice dish. FRIED LIVER. Mrs. G. Cut the liver in pieces an inch thick; steam fifteen minutes;have frying some slices of pickled pork; when donetake out the pork and fry the liver in the hot grease a nice brown; add a little flour and water to the gravy,cooking a few minutes; pour over the meat, and serve; pepper and salt to taste. MOCK TERRAPIN. Half a calf'sliver, seasoned and fried brown; hash it, not very fine, anddredge it thickly with flour. Take one teaspoonful of mixed mustard; a pinch of cayennepepper; two hard boiled eggs, choppedfine; a piece of butter the size of an egg; oneteacupful of water; and boil together a minute ortwo. DRIED LIVER. Mrs. W. A. B. Allow a beef's liver to remain in corn beefbrine for ten days. Hang it up ten days to dry. Slice thin andbroil or fry in butter. BOILED HAM. Mrs. P. P. Lowe. Scrape off theoutside gently; soak in cold water for three hours, ifthe ham is small, or over night if it is large.Take the ham from the water; wipe it dry, and place it in a boiler large enough to hold it without bending, andcover with cold water. Throw in six cloves, four small onions, and a handful of parsley; boil gently four hours, fora medium sized ham. When boiled, take out and trim;removing the rind and the small bone at the large end, by breaking it offcarefully without tearing the meat. After the ham is trimmed, put it in the oven for from one-half to an hour, basting itfrequently. BAKED HAM. A ham of 16 pounds to be boiled three hours slowly; then skin, and in the fat rub half a pound of brownsugar; pour over it a gill of wine andcover with bread crumbs. Bake for two hours, bastingwith wine. HAM SANDWICHES. Mrs. J. W. S. Chop fine some cold dressed ham, and mix with it a teaspoonful of chopped pickle, one of mustard, and a little pepper. Beat about half a pound of butter to a cream, and thenadd the ham and seasoning. Spread on thin slices of bread and place between thembits of cold roast beef, mutton, chicken or quail. TRAVELING LUNCH. Miss HattieBrown. Sardines chopped fine; also alittle ham; a small quantity of choppedpickles; mix with mustard, pepper, catsup, salt and vinegar; spreadbetween bread nicely buttered. To be like jelly cake,cut in slices crossways. Will keep fresh some time. SANDWICHES. Mrs. Rebecca Buck. Rub onetablespoonful of mustard into one-half pound of sweet butter; spread on thin slices of bread; cut boiled ham verythin, and place in between two pieces of the bread. HASH. Take coldbeef of any kind; cut very fine; then take about one-third mashed potatoes; warm, season and pound altogether ina stone crock; cut in slices and brown in butter. CRACKER HASH. Mrs. D. W. S. To one pound of cooked beef chopped fine, take seven crackers (rolled). First cook the meat in a little water a fewminutes, seasoning with salt and pepper; then stir into the crackers and pour all into a pudding dish; if too dry,add a little water. Take a piece of butter size of a walnut and cut in small pieces overthe top of the dish. Bake about twenty minutes, or until quite brown; serve inthe same dish. HAM BALLS. Beat together two eggs and a half cupful of breadcrumbs; chop fine some bits of boiledham, and mix with them; make into balls and fry a nice brown. FRIED PATTIES. Mince a little cold veal and ham, allowingone-third ham to two-thirds veal; add an egg boiled hard and chopped fine, and a seasoning of pounded mace, salt, pepper and lemon peel; moisten with a little gravy or cream. Make a good puff paste; roll rather thin and cut into round orsquare pieces; put the mince between two of them, pinch the edges to keep inthe gravy and fry a light brown. They may also bebaked in patty pans; in that case they should be brushedover with the yolk of an egg before they are put inthe oven. SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH BEEF. Chip dried beef very fine; put equal parts of lard and butter in a skillet; when hot put in the beef; heat up a few minutes, stirring to keep from burning; break up some eggs in a bowl; season and stir in. It will requirebut a few minutes' cooking. OMELETTE, OR FRENCH EGG CAKE. E. C. Beat up thoroughly six eggs; a teaspoonful of sweet cream ormilk, and a little salt. Fry in a pan inwhich there is one-half ounce of melted butter, over aquick fire. In order that the omelette may remain soft and juicy, it isnecessary that the pan should be hot before the eggs are poured in. During the frying move the pan continually to and fro, so thatwhat is below may always come on top again. Continue this until there is a cakeformed, then let it remain still a moment to give it color. Turn out on a dishand serve immediately. FRENCH OMELETTE. One quart of milk; one pint of breadcrumbs; five eggs; one tablespoonful of flour; one onion, choppedfine; chopped parsley; season with pepper and salt. Have butter melted in a frying pan; when the omelette is brown, turn it over. Double it when served. SAUCES AND CATSUPS. DRAWN BUTTER (FOR SAUCE). Mrs. R. P. Brown. One-quarter pound of butter; rub with it two teaspoonsful of flour. When well mixed, put in a saucepan, with one tablespoonful of water and alittle salt. Cover it and set the saucepan in a larger one of boiling water. Shake it constantly till completely melted and beginning to boil. If the pancontaining the butter be set on coals, it will oil thebutter and spoil it. A great variety of sauces, which areexcellent to eat with fish, poultry or boiled meats, can be made byadding different herbs to meltedbutter. CURRY POWDER, FOR GRAVIES FOR DUCKS AND OTHERMEATS. Mrs. D. W. S. Mix an ounce of ginger; one of mustard; oneof black pepper; three of corianderseed; three of tumeric; quarter of anounce of cayenne pepper; half an ounce of cardamom; half an ounce of cuminseed and cinnamon. Pound the whole veryfine; sift and keep it in a bottle corked tight. CELERY SAUCE. As this sauce is to be usedfor boiled chicken or turkey, put a good handful of celery tied up in a bunch into the pot with the fowl. When quite soft takeit out; chop it fine, and mix with rich drawn butter and some of the water in which it was boiled. Seasonwith pepper and salt, andstew all together. TOMATO CATSUP. Miss Perrine. Take one gallon of strained tomatoes; four tablespoonsful of salt; one and a half of allspice; three of mustard; eight pods of red pepper. Grind the articles fine.Simmer slowly in strong vinegar three or four hours,then strain through a hair sieve, and bottle. Enough vinegar should be used to have half a gallon of liquorwhen the process is over. TOMATO CATSUP. Mrs. H. L. Brown. Cut up ripe tomatoes; boil soft and strain; put them on again andboil half down. Then to every three and a half gallons of juice put twelve tablespoonsful of salt; six of pepper; one of allspice; one of mustard; oneof mace; one-half of cloves; one of ginger; six small pods of redpepper, chopped fine; boil hard one hour. TOMATO CATSUP. Mrs. E. F. S. To one and a halfbushels of tomatoes use the following spices : Three papers ofcloves; two of allspice; a little cayenne pepper, and plenty of blackpepper and salt, and a pint of vinegar to each gallon. Tie up a few onions in a bag and boil with the catsup. Boil halfdown. COLD TOMATO CATSUP. Mrs. Bierce. One-half peck tomatoes, run through a sieve; one teacupful of salt; one of mustard seed; six red peppers; three tablespoonsful of pepper; one-half gallon of vinegar; piece of horseradish; one teacupful of nasturtions; half a cup of celeryseed. Do not cook, but seal tight in bottles. TOMATO MUSTARD. Take one peck of tomatoes; cut them into a porcelain kettle; boil untilsoft; rub through a sieve; put the pulp back in the kettle, and boil untilquite thick. Take one teaspoonful of cayenne pepper; one ofwhite; half a one of cloves; two of mustard; one tablespoonful of salt. Let all boil together, a few minutes, then stirin half a pint of vinegar. When cool, bottle and corktightly. FOR MIXING MUSTARD. Mrs. L. Moore. Three teaspoonsful good mustard; one teaspoonful salt; half teaspoonful pepper; two tablespoonsful brownsugar, rolled; mix with hot vinegar. Better after the first day. MIXED MUSTARD. Two tablespoonsful of dry mustard; one teaspoonful of salt; one teaspoonful of brownsugar. Mix to a thick paste, with oil, and then to a proper consistency, with vinegar. Letstand twenty-four hours before using. CUCUMBER CATSUP. Mrs. William Bomberger. Take threedozen large cucumbers; three whiteonions; grate all to a pulp; drain through a sieve, several hours; add to the pulp, salt, pepper, and good vinegar. Seal up in bottles. WALNUT CATSUP. Mrs. E. Take young, tender walnuts; prick them and place in a jar with sufficient water to cover them; add a handful of salt to every twenty-five walnuts. Stir them twice a day for fourteen days;drain off the liquor into a kettle; cover the walnuts with boilingvinegar; crush them to a pulp, and strain through a cullender into the juice. For every quart, take twoounces each of white pepper and ginger, and one each of cloves and gratednutmeg; a pinch of cayenne pepper; asmall onion, minced fine, and a teaspoonful of celery seed tied in muslin. Boil all together for onehour. When cold, bottle. MUSHROOM CATSUP. Put the mushrooms in layers, with salt sprinkled over each layer. Let them stand fourdays. Then mash them fine, and to every quart add two-thirds of a teaspoonfulof black pepper, and boil in a stonejar, set in boiling water, two hours.Strain without squeezing; boil the liquor; let it stand to cool and settle.Then bottle and cork tight, and set in a cool place. WILD PLUM CATSUP. Mrs. Admiral Schenck. To ten pounds of plums take five pounds sugar. Boil, mash and strain the fruit; and to every quart ofjuice add rather more than one-half pint of vinegar; add cinnamon, cloves and nutmegs; boil fifteen minutes and put intobottles. GOOSEBERRY CATSUP. Mrs. E. Rohrer. To five pounds of berries put two and a half pounds of sugar; boil down as thick as apple butter; add cinnamon and cloves to taste;a pinch of salt; one pint of vinegar; strain through a hairsieve. CURRANT CATSUP. Mrs. John Day. Two quarts of currant juice; three pounds of sugar; one pint of vinegar; one tablespoonful each of cinnamon, cloves, pepper, allspice and nutmeg; boiltwenty minutes. GRAPE CATSUP. Mrs. J. D. Loomis. Ten pints of grapes; two pounds of sugar; one pint of vinegar; one ounce cloves; one ounce cinnamon. Put the vinegar and sugar together; boil fifteen minutes; then squeeze thepulps of the grapes out of the skin and boil a fewminutes; then warm the pulps and rub the seeds out in a cullender; put the skins and pulps together and add themto the vinegar and sugar; boil the whole twenty minutes. CHILI SAUCE. Mrs. R. P. Brown. Six good sized onions; twelve green peppers; three dozen ripe tomatoes peeled and chopped; three orfour tablespoonsful of fine salt. Stew all togethergently several hours, until soft, and begin to thicken; seal hot. CELERY VINEGAR. Pound two large spoonsfulof celery seed fine; put it in a quart bottle and fillup with sharp vinegar; it must be closely corked. Thesame steeped in brandy is nice for flavoringsoups. CELERY SOY. Mrs. J. Morehead. One peck of tomatoes boiled; one teacup of salt; one-half teacup of fine whitepepper; one teaspoonful cayenne pepper; four onions chopped fine; one pound sugar. Boil one hour, and just before removing fromthe fire add a quart of good, sharp vinegar. Whencold, add a half cup of celery seed, rolled; twotablespoonsful ground cloves and allspice. Let stand one night; then press through a sieve and bottle closely. TO KEEP HORSE RADISH All winter; have aquantity grated while the root is in perfection; putin bottles; fill up with strong vinegar; and keeptightly corked. The following 13 recipes within this chapter are handwritten. Christmas Plum Pudding 1 pt bowl grated breadcrumbs 1 cup suet chopped 1 do Brownsugar 1/2 do Molasses (orleans) 1/2 do SourMilk 2 Teaspoons Soada - little salt 1/4 Tea cup brandy 1 Tea spoon each kindspices including mace - lemon extract. 4 Eggs, beatseparate 1 large cup raisins 1 do docurrants 1 small piece citron, cut fine Fruit to be dredged in flour - also add flour to make a thick batter. Rubthe crumbs of bread and suet together. The water to be boiling when the steameris put on and to continue boiling for 5 hours without stopping. Sauce for the Pudding Butter and sugar stirred to a cream - one teaspoonful corn starch withboiling water poured over it, then pour over the butter & sugar, add Brandylast Suet Pudding 1/2 cup brown sugar 1/2do Molasses 1 quart bread crumbs 1 cupcurrants 1 do Raisins 1/2 do suet 1/2 spoonsoda 1 Tea spoon spices nutmeg, cloves, cinnamon andlemon extract. Baked Pudding 1 teacup sweet milk 1 dosugar 2 Eggs 1 lump butter half size of anegg 1 teaspoonful soda 2 do creamtartar Flour to make batter as stiff as can stir - Halfthe measure enough for six Sanderland Pudding. 3 Eggs - 1 pt sweet milk - 8 spoons full flour, a little suet. Mix a littlemilk and flour and yolks of eggs at a time to make a smooth paste, without anylumps, until all the milk is worked in. Beat the whites to a stiff froth andadd last - To be eaten the moment it is done A sauce made with flour, sugar, water, butter and brandy, flavored withlemon. Suet Pudding 1 cup molasses - 1 do suet chopped fine - 1 cup water - 1 tea-spoonful soda- and flour to make a thick batter - Put in a cake pan - set in a steamer over a kettle of hot water and steam 3hours. Corn Meal Pudding 1 qt of milk - Take half of it and let it boil, and stir in meal to make athick mush - beat three eggs separate - take the remaining milk and yolk ofegg, and sugar to your taste and mix with the mush, stirring in the white thelast, and bake half an hour Christmas Plum Pudding 1 pound cut raisins - do of cut currants - one do bread crumbs - 1/2 poundsuet chopped fine, with 2 table spoonfuls flour - 8 eggs - 1 quart milk - 1 teacup sugar - 1 nut-meg - 4 oz candied citron - 4 oz Lemon - 1 table spoonpowdered cloves. Boil gently 4 hours and eat with rich sauce Delmonico Pudding Boil 1 quart of milk - stir in just before it boils 3 tablespoons cornstarch wet with rich milk - Boil 3 minutes - Yolks of 5 eggs beaten with 4 table spoons of sugar. Flavorwith vanilla & add to the starch and milk. Put in a buttered dish and baketen minutes - Beat the whites to a stiff froth with 3 table spoons of sugar, flavor withvanilla and put over the top - bake a light brown & serve cold with creamand sugar Poor Mans Pudding 2 quarts milk - 1 cup uncooked rice 1/2 cup sugar - butter size of walnut -2 salt spoons suet - spice to taste. Bake 3 hours and stir several times duringthe first hour. Green Corn Pudding Take 1/2 doz ears good sweet green corn - split each row of Kernels with asharp Knife and scrape from the cob - mix with the pulp 2 eggs well beaten. 2table spoons sugar 1 do butter - salt spoon of salt - 1/2 pint sweet cream (ormilk may be substituted with an extra spoonful butter) 1 doz crackers poundedfine or grated - Mix well together & bake 3 hours in a pudding dish, or 2 in custardcups. Use the corn raw. Mrs. Meachams Boiled Indian Pudding 2 cups Indian Meal 2  "    Flour - 1 egg - 1/2 cup Molasses.1 tea spoon soda - 2 cream-Tartar sifted in the flour. Wet with milk untilabout as thick as cake - Steam 3 hours, never lift the cover whilecooking Baked Indian Pudding. 1 quart milk - 4 eggs - 3 large spoons Indian Meal - Nutmeg and sugar totaste - Boil milk and scald the meal, and let it cool before adding eggs. Bake3/4 of an hour End of handwritten recipes. VEGETABLES. Endeavor to have your vegetables as fresh as possible. Wash them thoroughly.Cut out all the decayed parts, and lay them in cold water until you are readyto use them. Vegetables should be put on to cook in boiling water and salt. Never letthem stand after coming off the fire; put them instantly into a cullender, overa pot of boiling water, if you have to keep them back for dinner. Peas, beans and asparagus, if young, will cook in twenty-five or thirtyminutes. They should be boiled in a good deal of salt water. Cauliflower should be wrapped in a cloth, when boiled, and served with richdrawn butter. Potato water is thought to be unhealthy; therefore do not boil potatoes insoup, but in another vessel, and add them to it when nearly cooked. BAKED TOMATOES. Fill a deep pan (as many aswill set on the bottom) with ripe tomatoes; round outa hole in the center of each and fill up with breadcrumbs, butter, salt, pepper and a little sugar. Put a teacupful of water in the pan to prevent them from burning. Bakebrown, and send to the table hot. BROILED TOMATOES. Take smooth, flat tomatoes; wipe and set them on a gridiron; with the stem side down; over live coals. Whenthis is brown, turn them and let cook until quite hot through; place them on ahot dish. To be dressed, when eaten, with butter, pepper and salt. SCALLOPED TOMATOES. Put alternate layers ofsliced tomatoes and breadcrumbs into a bread pan. Season with sliced onion, butter, pepper and salt; and bake forone hour. FRIED TOMATOES. Slice tomatoes quite thick; pepper and salt them; roll in flour; and fry in equal parts of butter and lard. Put them in a dish to be served; keeping veryhot. A little flour and butter mixed; stir into the skillet with a cup of milk; boil until well thickened; pour over the tomatoes. SLICED TOMATOES. Scald ripe tomatoes; let them stand in coldwater fifteen minutes; then take off the skin and slice in a dishgarnished with sweet peppers. TOMATO SALAD. Slice tomatoes and serve with mayonnaise saladdressing. STEWED CORN. Kate P. Brown. Cut the corn from the cobs; boil the cobs ten or fifteen minutes; then take them out andput the corn into the same water. When it is tender, put in some milk; season with butter, pepper and salt. Just beforeserving stir in beaten eggs; allowing three eggs to a dozen ears of corn; one pint of milk to a quart of corn. SUCCOTASH. Kate P. Brown. Put Limabeans on to boil, soon after breakfast; let them get well done.Have the corn boiling in a separate pot. When done,cut the corn off the cobs and have twice as much corn as beans; put the corn with the beans and let themboil. Just before serving, put in a little butter, pepper and salt. GREEN CORN PUDDING. Mrs. James Stockstill. Four ears of green corn cut down fine; two eggs; one pint of milk; butter size of an egg; three tablespoonsful of flour; salt and pepper; beat well together; bake one hour; to beserved as a vegetable. CORN OYSTERS. To one quart of grated corn add three eggs, and three or four grated crackers; beat well, andseason with salt and pepper; fry in butter or lard. If the corn is young and juicy, more crackers may be needed; drop in the pan with aspoon. CORN FRITTERS. Mrs. P. P. Lowe. One dozen ears of corn when it first comes, or a half dozen earsafter it is grown. Cut the grains down the middle of each row, and cutcarefully off the cob. If the grains are large, chopthem a little with the chopping knife after they are cutoff. Add to the corn and mix well the yolks of two eggs; one half cup of sweetmilk; a lump of butter the size of awalnut; a pinch of salt, pepper, and a small cup of flour; lastly, beat to a stiff froth the whites of the eggs. Fry a nice brown on both sides, ina skillet with fresh lard, andserve hot. BOILED ONIONS. Boil in four waters and drain off; pick to pieces with a fork as they cook. Mix a little flour and butter together,and put in two tablespoonsful of warm milk; boil andpour over the onions; season well. BOILED TURNIPS. Mrs. McM. Boil turnips in a good deal of saltwater; when soft, drain off the water and put them in a skillet with cream and butter, and let them simmer. GREEN PEAS. Kate P. Brown. Put the hulls in a pot;cover them with water and boil thoroughly; then strainand put the peas in the same water and let boil until tender. When ready to serveput in some butter and pepper, a pinch of salt, andthe least bit of sugar. FRICASSEED PEAS. Mrs. Eliza Pierce. Put the peas in a pot; boil till soft; season with salt, pepper and a cup of milk; a small cup of butter; a tablespoonful of flour in the milk. When ready to serve, add the yolksof two eggs in a cup of milk orcream. STRING BEANS. Get them young and crispy;break off both ends and string them; break in halves, and boil in water with a little salt until tender; drain free from water and season with pepper; add butter and aspoonful of cream or milk, and boil a few minutes. COOKING BEANS. From Moore's Rural New Yorker. If, my dear Rural, you ever should wish For breakfastor dinner a tempting dish Of the beans sofamous in Boston town, You must read the rules I here laydown; When the sun has set in golden light, And aroundyou fall the shades of night, A large,deep dish you first prepare; A quart of beans select with care; And pick themover, until you find Not a speck or a moat is leftbehind. A lot of cold water on thempour 'Till every bean is coveredo'er, And they seem to your poetic eye Like pearls inthe depth of the sea to lie; Here, if you please you may let themstay 'Till just after breakfast the very next day, Whena parboiling process must be gone through (I mean for the beans, and not for you;) Then, if in thepantry, there still should be That bean pot, so famous inhistory, With all due deference, bring it out, And, ifthere's a skimmer lying about, Skim half of the beans from the boiling pan Into the beanpot as fast as you can; Then turn to Biddy and calmly tellher To take a huge knife and go to thecellar; For you must have, like Shylock of old, "Apound of flesh," ere your beans growcold; But very unlike that ancient Jew, Nothing but pork will do for you. Then tell once moreyour maiden fair, In the choice of the piece to take greatcare, For a streak of fat and a streak oflean Will give the right flavor to every bean! This you must wash, and rinse, andscore, Put into the pot and round it pour The rest,till the view presented seems Like an island of pork in an ocean of beans; Pour on boiling hotwater enough to cover The tops of the beans completely over, Shove into the ovenand bake till done, And the triumph of Yankee cookery'swon! BAKED BEANS. Mrs. A. C. Coburn. Three pints of beans and half a pound of saltpork; put beans to soak over night; nextmorning put them in a vessel with a gallon of softwater and half a teaspoonful of soda; letsimmer slowly until thoroughly swelled, but not bursted; then lift them outwith a perforated skimmer, into a pan with clear hotwater. Set them on the stove where theywill keep hot but not boil; then pour boiling water over the pork; scrape the rind and score it; lay it ina flat stone crock kept for that purpose; put the beans in all around it; add one tablespoonful of butter, and two of molasses; fill up with boiling water; bake four or fivehours. TO COOK ASPARAGUS. Mrs. James Stockstill. Cut off all thetough parts and lay the bunches in a pan; cover with boilingwater and let them cook slowly half an hour. Ten minutes beforethey are done, add a little salt. Have ready two orthree slices of toasted bread. Butter well, and put a tablespoonful or two of liquorover it; take the asparagus up carefully and lay it onthe toast; mix a piece of butter thoroughly with a little flour; add pepper and salt, and stir into the liquor and pour over the asparagus. NEW POTATOES. Scrape and wash new potatoes; put in a sauce pan with hotwater; when done pour off the water; setthem on top of the stove a few minutes to steam; put in a lump of butter size of an egg; two tablespoonsful of cream; season with salt and pepper; boil a few minutes. Shake the pan to keep themfrom burning. STEWED POTATOES. Boil the potatoes and cut into thin slices; make a dressing bymixing one tablespoonful of melted butter with alittle flour and a cupfulof cream; add the yolk of anegg and a little chopped parsley. Stir upwith potatoes and serve immediately. POTATO BALLS. Mrs. R. P. Brown. Mix mashed potatoes with the yolk of anegg; roll into balls, and flour them; orcover with egg and breadcrumbs. Fry them in clean drippings orbrown in a dutch oven. POTATO PUFFS. Mrs. W. A. Phelps. Take two cupsful of mashed potatoes, and stir in two tablespoonsful of melted butter; beating to a whitecream before adding any thing else. Then put with this two eggs whipped very light, and a teacupful of cream or milk; salting to taste. Beat all well; pourinto a deep dish; and bake in a quick oven until brown. POTATO FRITTERS. One cupful of mashed potatoes; two eggs; one half pint of milk; one tablespoonful of flour, and lump of butter. Drop in boiling lard. POTATO CROQUETTES. Miss Hotchkiss. Take six potatoes; peel, and cut in small pieces; cover with boiling water; when soft, strain off the water, and pass through a cullender; mix three eggs (oneat a time) with the potatoes; add two tablespoonsfulof bread crumbs and a little salt; place all over the fire, and stir constantly.When thoroughly mixed, take off the fire, and set to cool. Roll into balls, andfry in hot lard. SARATOGA POTATOES. Mrs. D. W. S. Take four large potatoes (new ones are best); pare, and cut into thinslices on a slaw cutter; put them into saltwater, and let stand while breakfastis preparing. Then have ready a skillet of boilinglard. Take a handful of the potatoes, squeeze the water from them, and dry in a napkin; separate the slices and drop into the lard, beingcareful that the pieces do not adhere to each other. Stir with a fork till theyare a light brown color. Take them out with a wirespoon, and drain well before putting into the dish. Do not put morethan a handful into the lard at a time. Do not coverthe dish when served. CABBAGE A LA CAULIFLOWER. Mrs. R. P. Brown. Cut the cabbage fine, as for slaw; put it into a stew pan; cover with water, andkeep closely covered; when tender, drain off the water; put in a small piece of butter with a little salt; one half a cup of cream, or one cup of milk. Leave on the stove a fewminutes, before serving. CREAM CABBAGE. Mrs. Charles Spinning. Beat togetherthe yolks of two eggs; one half cup of sugar; one half cup of vinegar; a piece of butter the size of an egg; salt, and a little cayenne pepper. Put the mixture in a saucepan, and stir until it boils; then stir in one cup of cream. Let it boil. Pour it over the cabbage while hot. STEAMED RICE. One large cup of rice; pick it over and wash thoroughly and drain; putit in a bucket and cover closely; set in boilingwater; don't stir while cooking. Steam till soft. Season and eatwhile warm with cream. BOILED RICE. Mrs. W. R. S. Ayres. Take one cup of rice; half a pint of water, and put on to boil; when the rice has absorbed the water, put in one pint of sweetmilk, and let boil three-quarters of an hour; don't stir whilecooking. RICE CROQUETTES. Take cold boiled rice; add three eggs, with sugar and lemon peel to yourtaste. Make into oval balls; rub with bread crumbs, and dip them in beaten egg. Fry in butter; when done, sprinkle sugar over them. FRIED EGG PLANT. Cut in slices and lay in salt and water for one or twohours; wipe dry and season with pepper and salt; dip the slices into yolk of anegg and grated bread crumbs. Fry in butter till brown. TO COOK EGG PLANTS. Hattie B. Brown. Slice, pare andparboil; mash, and season with butter, salt and pepper; one egg to a plant; about two tablespoonsful of flour; milk enough to make abatter. Drop a spoonful at a time into hot lard, andfry like fritters. STUFFED EGG PLANT. Mrs. S. Craighead. Take a full grown egg plant; cut it in two, lengthwise; take all theinside out (leaving the skin about half an inch thick); chop it quite fine; mixwith it about as much bread crumbs as you have of egg plant; salt and pepper to taste; one teaspoonful of sugar. Have ready a tablespoonful of butter in a skillet, and, whenhot, put in the mixture, and let it cook about ten minutes, stirring itoccasionally. Then return it to the shells; put in the oven and bake about one half hour. Serve in theshells. OYSTER PLANT. Mrs. Geo. L. Phillips. Wash andscrape; cover with water and a little salt. When tender, pour off the water; chop then upimmediately, or they will turn black; put into a kettle; add half a pint of cream; one teaspoonful of flour; a lump of butter. Pourover and let come to a boil. FRIED OYSTER PLANT. Parboil oyster plant; scrape off the outside; cut it inslices; dip it into beaten egg and fine bread crumbs; fry in hotlard. FRIED OYSTER PLANT, NO. 2. Scrape the roots, and boil in water, with a little salt, until tender; drain and mash them;put in a small lump of butter and one egg; season with pepper and salt; add flour enough tomake them stick together. Make into cakes, and fry, in butter. BOILED HUBBARD SQUASH. Mrs. Evans. Skin, and cut up in longslices; put in a pot, with points down; boil till tender; pour off water, anddrain; mash, with butter and salt. BAKED SQUASH. Cut in squares, leaving onthe rind, and bake in the oven like sweet potatoes. SPINACH. E. C. B. After being carefully washed,stuff it into a sauce pan, without any water; sprinkleover a little salt, and cover closely; shakeoccasionally while cooking. When tender, drain it, and serve with drawn butter. GREENS. Boil beettops, turnip tops, spinach, cabbage sprouts, poke sprouts, dandelion, and lamb's quarters, in saltedwater, until they are tender; drain in a cullender, pressing hard.Serve them, garnished with hard boiled eggs, cut inslices. BROILED MUSHROOMS. Cut off the stems andpeel off the skins of the mushrooms; put them on the gridiron, hollow side up; put a little butter, pepper and salt, on each; cook over hot coals, a few minutes; donot turn. Serve hot, with a little more butter. STEWED MUSHROOMS. Prepare as above; putthem in a stew pan, with a little water and salt; simmer slowlyhalf an hour; add butter, a little flour, pepper, and twotablespoonsful of cream. Boil up once, and serve on toast. MACARONI, AS A VEGETABLE. Mrs. R. P. Brown. Simmer one halfpound of macaroni, in plenty of water, till tender, but not broken; strain off the water. Take the yolks of five, and thewhites of two eggs; one half pint of cream; white meat and ham, chopped very fine; three spoonsful of grated cheese; season with salt and pepper; heat alltogether, stirring constantly. Mix with the macaroni; put in a buttered mould, and steam one hour. It is quite as good baked. BAKED MACARONI. Boil half a pound of macaroni, until quite soft; put it into a vegetable dish, with a little mustard, pepper and salt, a small piece of butter, and some gratedcheese. Bake ten or fifteen minutes. SALADS. CHICKEN SALAD. Miss L. Eight eggs; one pint of vinegar; one-half pound of butter; three tablespoonsful of olive oil; sixteen teaspoonsful of mademustard; one teaspoonful, each, of red and blackpepper. Beat the eggs very light; stir ina tablespoonful of salt; add one half pint of vinegar; one half pound of meltedbutter; set the jar in a pot of boilingwater; stir well till cooked to a good thickness; take off thefire, and stir in the rest of the vinegar; then addthe pepper, mustard, and oil. This quantity is sufficient for three chickens, or one turkey. After boiling the chickens, chop up, not too fine;take equal quantities of celery and chicken; put in cabbage, ifyou like it. CHICKEN SALAD. Mrs. G. L. Phillips. For one chicken, use six eggs, andtwice as much celery as chicken. Beat the eggs separately; one heaping teaspoonful of mustard, in yolks; one and a half cups of vinegar; one large spoonful of sugar; lump of butter thesize of an egg; a little cayenne pepper. Cook thedressing same as custard. Save a little for the top. MAYONNAISE SALAD DRESSING. Mrs. E. F. Stoddard. Into the yolk of one raw egg, stir all the oliveoil it will hold; if dropped in very slowly, half a pint of oil can be used; season with cayennepepper, salt and mustard. CHICKEN SALAD. Mrs. R. R. Dickey. To one pint ofchopped chicken take one pint of chopped celery; a heaping teaspoonful of mustard; one and a half teacupsful of vinegar; one tablespoonful of sugar, and one of meltedbutter; five eggs beaten separately; apinch of cayenne pepper; salt to taste. Mix sugar, vinegar, mustard and eggs together andscald the dressing as you would float. One large chicken will fill a pint cup. SALAD DRESSING. Mrs. G. L. Phillips. One teacupful of vinegar; put it on to boil; yolks of threeeggs beaten with a desertspoonful of flour; six mustardspoonsful of mixedmustard; a pinch of cayenne pepper; threetablespoonsful of white sugar; and three of salad oil; two teaspoonsful of salt. Beat all together and let cook until itthickens; stirring all the time. SALAD DRESSING. Mrs. J. H. Pierce. Rub till smooth the yolks of five hard boiled eggs; add fivetablespoonsful of rich, sour cream, thick enough toheap upon the spoon; season with salt, pepper, plenty of mustard, and but little vinegar. Serve upon lettuce alone; or add cold chicken, or anydelicate meat or fish cut small. MUSTARD CABBAGE. Mrs. A. F. Payne. Beat one egg with a tablespoonful of sugar; mix one teaspoonful of mustard in one half teacupful of vinegar; add this to the egg and sugar and boil until it is quite thick, stirringall the time; pour while hot over finely cut cabbage, previously salted. LETTUCE SALAD. Mrs. A. L. Stout. Cut two bunches of lettuce; two tablespoonsful of mustard; two of catsup; oneof horseradish. Mix with yolks of twoeggs; and butter the size of an egg; alittle vinegar; chop the whites of theeggs, and mix all together. CELERY SALAD. Mrs. J. R. Young. One headof cabbage; three bunches of celery; chopped very fine. Take one teacupful of vinegar; alump of butter the size of an egg; yolksof two eggs; one teaspoonful mustard; oneof salt; a pinch of cayennepepper; two teaspoonsful of sugar. Mixthese well; put the mixture on the stove and heat untilit thickens; stir it all the time; when cold, add two tablespoonsful of rich, sweet cream. Pour this over your salad; and ifit does not make it moist enough, add a little coldvinegar. POTATO SALAD. Mrs. A. L. Stout. Take two large potatoes; boil with the skins on; boil two onions. When all is cold, cut the potatoes about half an inch square; cut the onions very fine; mix with them a handful of parsley, cut into little pieces; also one large bunchof celery, chopped. Put all together; then add pepper and salt and wet withabout half a teacupful of vinegar. POTATO SALAD. Mrs. Cady, Indianapolis. Boil four potatoes; peel and slice; add half of a small onion, cut fine; two small bunches of celery, chopped fine; also whites of two hard boiled eggs. The yolks mixed with mustard, oil, vinegar, pepper and salt to taste. CELERY SLAW. Miss Dryden. One half headof cabbage; one bunch of celery; two hard boiled eggs, all chopped fine. Mix with it twoteaspoonsful of sugar; two of mustard; one-half of pepper and salt. Moisten with vinegar. COLE-SLAW. Mrs. Dr. McDermont. Put two large spoonsfuls of cream on to boil, with a wine-glass of vinegar; beat the yolks of threeeggs, and stir in the cream; let it boila moment, then set away to cool. Chop fine a small sized head ofcabbage, and sprinkle it with salt, pepper and mustard. Add the egg mixture just before serving. COLE-SLAW. Mrs. Wm. Craighead. Beat the yolks of two eggs, and half a pint of cream, or rich milk; two tablespoonsfuls of sugar; one of mustard; four of vinegar; one teaspoonful celeryseed; two teaspoonsful salt; a little cayenne pepper; a piece of butter size of a walnut. Pour the mixture into a sauce pan; stir constantly, until it boils. Chop your cabbage fine, and pour the mixture over while hot. Letit stand until cold, before sending to the table. DRESSING FOR HOT SLAW. Mrs. D. W. Iddings. Yolksof two eggs, well beaten; one teaspoonful of salt and pepper; onetablespoonful of sugar; three of meltedbutter; four of vinegar; two of water. Let come to a boil. Then put in the cabbage and boil. PIES. PASTRY. Mrs. Eliza Pierce. One and a quarterpounds of flour; one pound of shortening (two-thirds butter and one-third lard); wet sufficiently with cold water and mix with a knife; stirring as little aspossible. This quantity will make five pies. CELEBRATED PUFF PASTE. Mrs. Jerome Buckingham. One pound of flour; one pound butter andone egg. Mix the flour with alump of butter the size of an egg, and the egg to a very stiff paste with coldwater; knead well for ten or fifteen minutes; divide the butter into six equal parts; squeeze the buttermilkall out of the butter; roll the paste and spread onone part of the butter, dredging it with flour; repeat until all the butter is rolled in. PASTRY. Mrs. James Turpin. One pound of flour; one half pound of lard; one quarter pound of butter. Rub lard and flour well together; add water sufficient to make a dough; and roll out into athin sheet. Spread all the butter over it. Roll up thepaste into close folds as you would a sheet of music; fold over once, and rolllightly. This quantity will make three pies. PLAIN PIE CRUST. Mrs. H. Strong. Three cups of flour; one cup of shortening; rub lightly through the flour; wet with cold water; mould it as little as possible. This makescrust for two pies. TO ICE PIES. White of oneegg to one pie; beat up and spread on top crust with a feather, after the pie is a little cool. Then spread sugar on with knife dipped in hot water; repeat several times. Set in a cool oven todry. PLAIN PASTRY. Mrs. James Stockstill. To one quart of flour; one half teaspoonful of salt and two tablespoonsful of butter orlard. Rub lightly through the flour (itis better to use a spoon); then add only enough water to moisten. Take out on the board and roll very thin without kneading it;spread with butter in bits; sprinkle with flour and fold evenly and square. If you desire, itcan be rolled a second time. Before putting the top crust on the pie, wet with milk; it improves the appearance. POTATO PASTE. Boil and mash ten potatoes; add a teaspoonful of salt; a large spoonful of butter, and one half cup of milk orcream; then stiffen with flour until itcan be rolled out. This is nice for pot-pie or appledumplings. BAKED APPLE DUMPLINGS. Pare, quarter andcore the apples; put one tablespoonful of baking powder in one quart of flour; one teacupful of butter. Mix with milk; makestiffer than for biscuits; roll and cut in strips, and put around the pieces of apple. Put in a pudding dish one quart of water; one teacupful of sugar; and a small lumpof butter; set it on top of the stove, and let it cometo a boil; then put in the dumplings. Bake in a brisk oven. BOILED APPLE DUMPLINGS. Mrs. Isaac Van Ausdal. Pour on onequart of flour, enough boilingwater to make a stiff paste; one teaspoonful of salt in the flour. Roll thepaste half an inch thick. Cover the apple, and tie upseparately. Boil until tender. STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE. Mrs. H. Wyatt. Make a short pie crust;roll two thicknesses, and sprinkle flour between them.Bake together in a quick oven. Have the berries sprinkled with sugar. As soon as the cake is done,split open, and spread the berries over it, andreplace the cover. STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE. Mrs. W. R. S. Ayres. In one quart of flour, mix one tablespoonful of bakingpowder, and one teacupful of butter; roll, and cut out with a bucket lid the size of a breakfast plate. Bake in aquick oven. Sugar the berries well, and mash them; spread between the cakes, and over the outside, after theyare put together. PEACH PIE. Line your pans with paste; pare and cut the peaches; lay them in thickly, with pits upward;sprinkle sugar over them, and bake without uppercrust. When fresh fruit can not be obtained, canned willanswer. CREAM PIE. One quart of milk; two tablespoonsful of flour; three of sugar; two of butter; three eggs; vanilla, to taste; bake with lower crust; beat whites to afroth, and put in a little sugar; spread on, and letit brown. LEMON CREAM PIE. Miss M. J. Dickson. One teacupful powdered sugar; one tablespoonful butter; one egg; the juice and grated rind of one lemon; one teacupful of boiling water; one tablespoonful of cornstarch, mixed in a little cold water; cream the butter and sugar together, and pour the hot mixture over them; when cool, add the lemon and beaten egg; takethe inner rind of the lemon, and mince very small. Bake in an open shell. LEMON PIE. Mrs. A. DeGraff. Grate the outside ofthree lemons, and squeeze the juice separately; take two cups of whitesugar; one half cup of butter; six eggs, beaten separately; beat to a cream, the butter, sugar, and outsidesof the lemons; add one cup of sweetmilk, and the juice of the lemons. Put whites of the eggs in last. This will make threepies. LEMON PIE. Mrs. J. W. S. Four ounces of butter; one pint of cream; nine eggs; juice and rind of twolemons; three-quarters of a pound of sugar. IOWA LEMON PIE. Mrs. J. .Baldwin. The juice and grated rinds of two lemons; two cups of water; two cups of sugar; onesmall teacup of butter; two eggs; two tablespoonsful of cornstarch. Boil the water; wet the corn starch with a little coldwater, and stir in; when it boils, pour it on the sugar and butter; when cool,add the eggs and lemon. Bakewith two crusts. LEMON PIE. Mrs. A. A. Butterfield. To the grated rind and juice of two lemons, add one cup and ahalf of sugar; two tablespoonsful of flour; lump of butter thesize of an egg; four eggs, beaten separately; one pintof milk. Stir all together, and bake. SCOTCH PIE. Miss Hannah C. Strong. Mince enoughripe apples to fill a deep dish; then make a stiffbatter of one pint of sweet milk; two teaspoonsful of baking powder, and flour enough to make a batter; lastly a tablespoonful of meltedbutter. With a knife spread the batter overthe apples and cook well. When done, turn into aplate, leaving apples uppermost; season with sugar and butter. COCOANUT PIE. Mrs. T. A. Phillips. One large cup of grated cocoanut; one quart of milk; the yolks of five eggs; a lump of butter size of a hickory-nut; sweeten to thetaste; beat the whites of the eggs, and bake over thetop, after the pie is done. COCOANUT CUSTARD. Mrs. Armstrong. One cocoanut; one quart of milk; three eggs; one nutmeg; alittle cinnamon; a little wine, brandy and rose water; a piece of butter size of an egg. Sweeten to taste; make like a custard; stir the cocoanut in; bake in a crust. CUSTARD PIE. Take three tablespoonsful of butter; one egg beaten; grated lemon or nutmeg to your taste; threetablespoonsful of flour; a quart of sweetmilk. Put in part of the milk and mixuntil smooth; then add the rest of the milk; bake iton a crust. Beat the whites of two or three eggs with sugar, as for icing; with a little tartaric acid in it. When the pies are baked, spreadthe icing over them and put them back in the oven to brown; being careful notto have it too hot. The above will make three pies. Pies you intend for thesecond day, do not put on the icing until the morning before you use them. A GOOD SUGGESTION. A bowl containing twoquarts of hot water set in the oven of thestove, prevents any article from being scorched; such as cakes,pies, &c. PUMPKIN PIE. To one pint of stewed pumpkin take one quart of milk; a pinch of salt; six eggs. Ginger and grated lemon or nutmeg are good spices for thepies. HASTY PUMPKIN PIE. One pint of grated pumpkin (raw); one quart of milk; six eggs; sugar and spice to taste.Boil the pumpkin in the milk until it swells; then let it get cold; add eggs and sugar with any spice youchoose. SQUASH PIE. Mrs. Evans. Four pounds of squash; one quart of milk; four eggs; a pinch of salt, nutmeg, and sugar totaste. ORANGE PIE. The juice and partof the rind of one orange; two tablespoonsful of cornstarch; one teacupful of hot water withone quarter box of gelatine dissolved in it; mix andbake in one or two pies; to be eaten cold. PINE APPLE PIE. To one teacupful of grated pineapple, add one half teacupful of sugar. Bake with paste topand bottom thirty minutes. POTATO PIE. Mrs. Lucy Green. Scald one quart of milk; grate in four large potatoes, and four ounces of butter, while the milk ishot. When cold, add four eggs well beaten; spice and sweeten to your taste; bake with under crust. SWEET POTATO PIE. Mrs. J. Stockstill. One pound of sweet potatoes, boiled and rubbed through a sieve; one half pound of butter; one half pound of sugar; quart of milk; seven eggs beaten separately. Warm the butter and milk and add otheringredients; nutmeg and brandy to taste. MOCK APPLE PIE. One teaspoonful tartaric acid; two cupsful pounded crackers; two eggs; one and ahalf cups of sugar; five cupsful of water. Bake with two crusts. APPLE CUSTARD PIE. Grate the apples; then make a custard of one pint of milk; three eggs; a pinch of salt; small lump of butter, and a little grated cracker; nutmeg, orcinnamon. This will make two pies. APPLE JONATHAN. Take a small piece of bread dough; work in butter until quite short; then line the sides of a pie dish; fill with good cooking apples, and cover with a pretty thick paste. When baked, lift off the crust; turn it bottomup on another dish; then put sugar and a small lump of butter with the apples, mixand spread on the crust; add spice if you like. To beeaten warm with cream. MINCE MEAT. Mrs. E. F. Stoddard. Two pounds of beef, cooked and minced; one and one half pounds of beef suet; two pounds of currants; two pounds of raisins; one half pound of citron; two and one half pounds of apples, chopped fine; two pounds of sugar; juice of three lemons; one tablespoonful, each, of cloves, cinnamon, and nutmeg; cider to thin; use brandy, and sherry wine, to taste, when making up thepies. MINCE MEAT. Mrs. L. A. Tenney. Seven pounds of lean beef (a neck is best); boil until very tender,without salt, in a little water, adding more if needed to prevent burning; saveone half pint of the liquor. When the meat is cold,chop it fine; add to it six quarts of tart apples; twoquarts of cider, or juice of spicedfruit; two quarts of brown sugar; one andone half pints New Orleans molasses; two cups of strong green tea; two pounds of chopped suet; the juice of the meat; one and one half desert-spoonsful of cloves, two of cinnamon; four nutmegs; a little mace; four desert-spoonsful of salt and three pounds of raisins. Boil slowly one hour and a half, stirringoccasionally, to prevent burning. This will keep, in a covered stonejar, without fermenting. If too thick, when you make thepies, warm and thin with a little cider or fruitjuice. A tablespoonful of wineor brandy, poured into the pie, with nutmeg grated over it, just before covering, is animprovement. MINCE MEAT. Mrs. J. J. Patterson. Take two poundsof finely chopped beef, of the best quality; fourpounds of raisins, after they are stoned; two of currants, picked and dried; two and one half pounds of beef suet; two pounds of apples, after they are chopped; two pounds of sugar; one pint of wine, and one of brandy; nutmeg, cloves, mace, and cinnamon, and onelarge piece of citron, cut up fine. APPLE MINCE PIE. Miss B. Pease. Twelve apples (part sweet), chopped fine; six eggs, well beaten; half a pint of cream; raisins, and spice. MOCK MINCE PIE. One cup of vinegar; two cups of water; one cup of sugar; one of molasses; one of chopped raisins; two of bread crumbs; one half cup of butter, and two eggs. Spice to suit taste.Bake with upper and lower crust. PUDDINGS. BOILING PUDDINGS. In boiling puddings, haveplenty of water in the pot boiling when the puddinggoes in, and do not let it stop. Have a teakettle of boilingwater at hand to add to as it evaporates. The pudding should befrequently turned. When it is done, dip it in a pan of coldwater, to prevent its adhering to the cloth. In using pudding moulds, grease well with butter; tie lid on closely, and set in a pot with verylittle water, and add more as it is needed. PICCOLOMINI PUDDING. One pint of grated bread crumbs; one quart of sweetmilk; the yolks of four eggs; oneteacupful of sugar; lump of butter the size of an egg; rind of onelemon. Bake in a dish, and let cool; spread fruit over; add the beaten whites of theeggs; five tablespoonsful of sugar; juice of one lemon. Bake a few minutes. BOILED BREAD PUDDING. Three-fourths of apound of bread crumbs; eight eggs, beaten to a froth; three or four spoonsful of sugar; one nutmeg, grated;and one quart of milk. Boil, and pour on the bread. Let it remain until one half of the milk is soaked up; then stir in two tablespoonsful of flour; one teaspoonful of salt. Put in a mould, and boil onehour. To be eaten with rich sauce. CLEVELAND BISCUIT PUDDING. Grate stale bread, or light biscuit, till you have sixheaping tablespoonsful of crumbs; sift them; beat six eggs very light; stir into a pint of creamor rich sweet milk, alternately with the crumbs, a little at atime. Beat the mixture very hard and light; then butter some large breakfastcups; fill with the batter, and set immediately into an oven, andbake half an hour. To be eaten with wine sauce. CRACKER PUDDING. Mix ten ounces of finely powdered crackers with a wine-glass of wine; a little salt; half a nutmeg; three or four tablespoonsful of sugar, and two of butter. Beat eight eggs to a froth; mix with three pints of milk. Pour over the crackers, and let stand till soft; then bake. MINUTE PUDDING. Mrs. E. E. B. Eight tablespoonsful of flour; one pint of milk (cold); a small quantity of salaratus, dissolved inthe milk; sift in flour tothe consistency of thin starch; add four eggs, well beaten. Bake in a quick oven, and eat with cream sauce. VIRGINIA PUDDING. One teacupful of butter; one teacupful of sugar; one teacupful of molasses; two and one half cups of flour; four eggs; twoteaspoonsful of soda; add spice to taste. Bake one hour. To be eaten with wine sauce. CREAM PUDDING. Miss Mary E. Mitchell. One pint of flour; same of sweet milk; seven eggs; three tablespoonsful of whitesugar, and one of melted butter; one pint of sweet cream. Mix milk and flour together untilsmooth. Beat eggs and sugar together to a froth; then add to the batter; then the butter and a pinch of salt; lastly add the cream, and bake from three quarters toone hour. Serve hot with sauce. It is best baked incups. GELATINE PUDDING. Two tablespoonsful of gelatine; pour over it one pint of boilingwater, and sweeten to taste. Prepare this at night, and keep in acool place. In the morning make a custard of one pint of milk and three eggs, using yolks only, and sugar. Beatthe whites to a stiff froth; and just before serving,cut the jelly in small squares; pour over the whites of theeggs first, and then the custard. It is better to let the jellyform in the dish in which it is to be served. SNOW PUDDING. Miss Hattie Brown. One quart of milk; three tablespoonsful of flour; four eggs; boil the milk, leaving out sufficient to moisten the flour; beat the eggs, leavingout the whites of three for the top; mix the moistened flour and eggs thoroughlytogether; add a little salt; pour the boiling milk over it (stirring gently at the sametime); pour into pudding dish; bake about fifteenminutes; not too fast; then beat the three whites; adda teacupful powdered sugar; a little lemonor vanilla extract, and pour over the pudding as it comes from theoven. To be served warm. TAPIOCA SNOW PUDDING. Mrs. A. A. Butterfield. Threetablespoonsful tapioca soaked four hours, or overnight; a quart of milk; boil half an hour; one halfteaspoonful of salt; one half teacupful sugar; and the beaten yolks of threeeggs; flavor to taste. As soon as this thickens like custard,remove from the fire and stir in the whites, beaten stiff; then pour into the dish for the table and setaway to cool. GELATINE SNOW PUDDING. One quarter of a boxof Cox's gelatine; one heaping cup of sugar; one large lemon; the whites of five eggs. Pour over the gelatine one-fourth of a pint of coldwater; let it soak until it is soft; then pour over half a pint of boiling water; let it thoroughly dissolve and standuntil cold but not stiff; when it begins to stiffen, add the whitesof the eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Whip well together and turninto a mould and set on the ice; make a boiled custard, flavored with vanilla, and pour over it. FULLER PUDDING. Mrs. Dr. Craighead. One cup of molasses; two-thirds cup of butter; one of water; oneteaspoonful soda; two of cloves; one of salt; foureven cups of flour; steam two or three hours; fruit if you like. DORRIT PUDDING. Mrs. T. A. Phillips. Three cups of flour; one cup of milk; onecup of molasses; one of chopped suet; one of raisins; twoteaspoonsful cinnamon; one of cloves; two teaspoonsful soda. Boil three hours. PLUM PUDDING. One pound of raisins; one of currants; oneof suet; one quarter pound of citron; four eggs; oneteaspoonful of cloves; two of cinnamon; one half of nutmeg, grated; wine glass of brandy; one teaspoonful of salt; one cup of sugar; oneof milk; flour enough to makea thick batter. Butter a puddingmould, and boil four hours. Pour a little spirits over the pudding, and bring to the tableburning. ENGLISH PLUM PUDDING. Mrs. Dr. Gundry. Two and one halfpounds of raisins; two of currants; two of fine moistsugar; two of bread crumbs; two of suet; six ounces of candied lemonpeel; one of ground nutmeg; one of cinnamon; one half ounce of almonds; one half pint of brandy; rind of two lemons. Well butter and flour the pudding cloth. The water shouldbe boiling when the pudding is put in. Boil eight or nine hours, or divide itand boil six hours. BAKED INDIAN PUDDING. Boil one pint of milk; while boiling, stir in one large teacupful of Indian meal; cool a little, and add three eggs, well beaten; one pint of coldmilk; one tablespoonful of flour; onehalf cup sugar; one half cup molasses; one teaspoonful of ginger; one of cinnamon; alittle salt. Bake one hour and a half. BOILED INDIAN PUDDING. Mrs. Evans. One pint of corn meal, scalded; two thirds of a cup of molasses; a little cinnamon, and salt; two eggs, beatentogether (if not eggs, one teaspoonful of soda); makea thick batter. Put in a mould, and boil severalhours. TAPIOCA PUDDING. Miss Armstrong. One cup tapioca, soaked several hours in water; drain, and rub fine; one quart of milk; let come to a boil; add a little salt; then stir the yolks of sixeggs, well beaten, with one and a half cupsful of sugar; stir in the milk; letit boil to the consistency of custard; then add the tapioca, and let it boil ten minutes, stirring all thetime; it must not be too thick; flavor with vanilla. When the pudding is cool, cover it with the whites of theeggs beaten, with a cupful of white sugar; put in the oven, and bake to a light brown. This can be made the day before using. BAKED TAPIOCA. Mrs. Mary Gebhart. Soak sixtablespoonsful of tapioca over night, in about onequart of water. In the morning, stand it over the fireuntil it becomes like starch; then add the juice and rind of one lemon, and one cup of sugar. Pare apples; put themin the pudding dish, and pour the tapioca over them.Bake until the apples are soft. Serve with cream. APPLE TAPIOCA PUDDING. Mrs. Henry Stoddard. Put a teacupfulof tapioca in a quart of coldwater; let it stand from three to five hours; put it into a stew pan, on a hot stove, and letit boil thoroughly for fifteen minutes, or until it looks perfectly clear; stirconstantly, thinning it from time to time with boilingwater, so that when done it will run from a spoon; then seasonwell with salt, and add four tablespoonsful of white sugar. Half fill a glass dish in which thepudding is to be served, with coddled apples, sprinkling ground cinnamon over the top; then pourover it the tapioca while still hot. When cold, servewith cream. TAPIOCA PUDDING. Miss Drusie Harris. One large cup of tapioca soaked over night; six large apples, peeled and cored; fill the apples with butter and sugar. After arranging them in a pan, pour tapioca over them, with an additional cup of water. Bake. BOILED TAPIOCA. Mrs. W. A. B. One teacupful tapioca soaked over night in one pint of water; six large tart apples sliced thin. Put them in layers in a milk boiler and boil two hours. Serve with cream, sugar and nutmeg. RICE PUDDING. Put one half cupful of rice into a dish; cover up with water and soak over night. In the morning drain offthe water; add two quarts of milk; a pinch of salt; twotablespoonsful of sugar; one tablespoonful vanilla; a few lumps of butter. Stir this well and place in the oven. To be eaten cold. LEMON RICE PUDDING. Boil one teacupful of rice in one pint of water till dry; add one quart of new milk, and boil tillthick; then add the yolks of three eggs well beaten;six tablespoonsful of sugar; the rind ofone lemon; beat together, and put in a puddingdish; beat the whites to a stiff froth;then add six tablespoonsful of sugar; the juice of the lemon; spread it on the pudding, and putin the oven to brown. RICE MERINGUES. Miss B. Pease. One teacupful of rice boiled soft; when cold, add one quart of milk; the yolks of threeeggs; three tablespoonsful of sugar, anda little nutmeg. Pour in a dish and bake half an hour;when partly baked, stir a few large raisins throughit. When cold, beat the whites of the eggs with twotablespoonsful of sugar; spread over the rice and bake a light brown. FRUIT RICE PUDDING. Put a teacupful of rice in a quart of milk, andboil slowly till soft; add a little salt; a teacupfulof cream, and sugar enough tosweeten it. Have ready, in a deep dish, any kind of fruit, cherriesblackberries, apricots, apples or peaches, cut up and wellsweetened (uncooked). Spread the rice roughly over,and bake slowly two hours. FARINA PUDDING. Kate P. Brown. To one quart of milk, three tablespoonsful of farina, and two eggs. Put the eggs, milk, and raisins on together, and let them scald; then add the farina, and let it cook twenty minutes; sweeten, andflavor to taste. FLORENTINE PUDDING. Mrs. J. W. Stoddard. One quart of milk; five eggs; threetablespoonsful of corn starch; three tablespoonsful of white sugar. Boil the milk; dissolve the starch in a little milk, and stir into the boiling milk, with the yolks and sugar. Bake twenty minutes. Spread with the whites of the eggs. CORN STARCH PUDDING. Heat one quart of milk to boiling, then stir in slowly one cupful of corn starch; mix with this about six good apples, pared and sliced; add two tablespoonsful of sugar; one of butter, and alittle spice. Pour the whole in a dish and bake fortyminutes. VALISE PUDDING. Make a lightbiscuit dough; roll out, and spread on one quart of seeded cherries; fold over, and fasten the edgesclosely, to secure the syrup. Sew up in a pudding cloth, previously wrung out of hot water, and dredged with flour. Put in boiling water, and boil one hour and a half. Any other freshfruit may be used in the same way. Serve with butter and sugar. WAPSIE PUDDING. Take one pint of sour cream, with a little soda, and flour enough,stirred in, to form a batter. Fill a pan with nice bakingapples, not packed too closely; pour the batter over, and baketill brown. Eat with cream and sugar. SPONGE PUDDING. Six eggs; the weight of five in sugar; the weight of three in flour; one teaspoonful of bakingpowder. Steam in a pudding mould one andone half hours. BATTER FRUITPUDDING. Butter thickly a pudding dish thatwill hold a pint and one half; fill it nearly full of good bakingapples, cut up fine. Pour over them a batter made with fourtablespoonsful of flour, three eggs, and one-half pint of milk. Tie a buttered and floured cloth over the dish(which ought to be quite full), and boil the pudding one and one quarter hours;turn it out into a hot dish, and strew sugar thicklyover it. HUCKLEBERRY PUDDING. One pint of best Orleans molasses; a pinch of salt; one teaspoonful cloves; one of cinnamon and one of soda dissolved in a teacupful of sweetmilk; flour enough to make it theconsistency of pound cake; one quart of huckleberries; boil two and a half hours in a pudding mould. Eat with cream and sugar, or pudding sauce. SEVEN-CENT PUDDING. One pint of flour; one teacupful of sugar; one of sweet milk; one egg; butter size of an egg;one teacupful currants, and one half teaspoonful baking powder; spread over with meltedbutter; sprinkle with cinnamon. To beeaten warm with sauce. DRIED FRUIT PUDDING. Take half pound of suet chopped fine; four teacupsful of flour, and five eggs. Beatthese very light; then add a quart of milk and onehalf teaspoonful of salt. Rub three teacupsful of raisins in flour, and stirin; scald the pudding bag and flour it; allow room for the pudding to swell. Boilthree hours. Dried cherries or pared driedpeaches can be used instead of raisins. DRIED FRUIT PUDDING. One pint of flour; one pint of milk; madeinto a batter; then add one pint of suet; one of cut peaches; one of raisins; oneof currants or dried cherries. Tie up well in afloured cloth; put in boiling water and boil threehours. EVE'S PUDDING. Six large apples pared and chopped; six tablespoonsful of grated bread; six tablespoonsful of sugar; six of currants; six eggs; citron to taste; awine-glass of wine; a tablespoonful of mixed nutmeg, cinnamon, and cloves; a quarter of a pound of butter, and three tablespoonsful of flour. Put in a pudding mould and boil three hours; use cold sauce. MERANGUE PUDDING. Miss Carrie Brown. Bake a sponge cake in jelly-cake pans; spread with strawberry jam or other fruit; make thelayers of the fruit as thick as the layers of thecake; spread over the top and sides the whites of threeeggs beaten to a froth; and mix with them at the moment of usingthree tablespoonsful of powdered sugar; place in the oven a moment or two to brown. YOUNG AMERICA PUDDING. Mrs. William Heisley. One teacupful of sugar; three eggs; onetablespoonful of butter; three tablespoonsful of sweet milk; one tablespoonful of bakingpowder; flour enough to make it theconsistency of sponge cake. Divide in three parts and bake quickly in jelly-cake pans; spread fruit orjelly between each layer; serve with warmsauce. JELLY-CAKE PUDDING. Mrs. E. F. Stoddard. One cup of butter; two cups of sugar; three and a half cups of flour; four eggs; one cup of sour cream; one teaspoonful of soda; bake in two pans. For the jelly make a custard of one pint of milk; three eggs; twotablespoonsful of white sugar; one tablespoonful of flour; flavor with vanilla or finebrandy. After the milk boils, stir in theother ingredients and let it get very thick. Open the cake when hot and puthalf the custard into each. To be eaten cold with cream. SAVOY PUDDING. Stale sponge orother plain cake may be made into a nice pudding by crumbling itinto a little more than a pint of milk, with two orthree beaten eggs, and baking it.Sauce-- Sugar and butter beaten together. SPANISH CHARLOTTE. Place crumbsof stale cake or rolled crackers on the bottom of a pudding dish, and put a layer of any kind of jelly or fruit over them. Continue them alternatelyuntil the dish is nearly full, making the crumbs form the top. Pour a custardover it and bake; serve with sauce. TIPSY CHARLOTTE. Miss Drusie Harris. One large stale sponge cake; one pint of rich sweetcream; one cup of sherry wine; one fourthof a box of Cox's gelatine, soaked in a cup of cold water two hours; one teaspoonful of vanilla, or bitter almond; three eggs, thewhites and yolks beaten together very light; one pint of milk, and one cup of sugar. Heat the cream almost to boiling; put in the soaked gelatine, and one half cup of sugar, and stew until dissolved. Remove from the fire;flavor; and, when cool, beat to a standing froth. Cut off the top of the cakein one piece, and remove the middle, leaving the sides and bottomthree-quarters of an inch thick. Over the inside, pour the wine in spoonsful, that all may be evenly moistened;fill with the whipped cream; replace the top, whichshould also be moistened with the wine, and set ina cold place. Serve with it, or pour around it, acustard made of the eggs, milk, and the other half cup of sugar. LEMON PUDDING. Mrs. J. R. Young. One half of a poundof flour; one half of a pound of suet, cut very fine; one half of a pound of sugar; the rind of twolemons, and the yolks of two eggs. Boilit four hours in a mold. Serve without sauce. ORANGE PUDDING. Grate the rind,and squeeze the juice of two large oranges; stir to a cream, one half pound of butter with one half pound of powderedsugar; add a wine glass of mixed rum and brandy; beat very lightly, six eggs; stir them gradually into the mixture. Put into abuttered dish with broad edge, around which lay a border of puffpaste. Bake half an hour; and, when cold, gratesugar over it. COCOANUT PUDDING. Mrs. Munger. Nearly two quarts of milk; six eggs; one cocoanut, grated; sugar totaste; one teacupful of butter; add nutmeg, after it is placed in the oven. Stir once ortwice as soon as it commences to form. RICH COCOANUT PUDDING. Mrs. J. W. Stoddard. One quarter of apound of butter; the yolks of fiveeggs; one quarter of a pound of sugar; beat the butter and sugar together; add a little of the cocoanut at a time, andone half teacupful of cream. Don't bake too long, orit will destroy the flavor. After it is baked, beat the whites ofthe eggs, with four or five tablespoonsful of sugar; spread over the pudding, and bake a lightbrown. GERMAN CHOCOLATE PUDDING. Mrs. S. B. Smith. Two ounces of grated chocolate; two ounces, or four tablespoonsful,of flour; the yolks of foureggs; one pint of milk; two ounces of butter. Put the butter overthe fire to melt; when hot add the other ingredients, and stir till itthickens; when cool add the yolks of four more eggs; beat the whites of the eight eggs, and add them.Butter a pan, and, after putting in the pudding, siftsugar over the top, and bake one half of an hour. It rises like abatter pudding, and must be sent to the table hot as soon as it is taken fromthe oven. Put more sugar in the milk, and use more chocolate, if desired. CHOCOLATE PUDDING. Mrs. James Stockstill. Not quite onequarter of a pound of Baker's chocolate, scraped anddissolved slowly in one quart of milk; sweeten totaste, and flavor with vanilla. Beat the yolks of three eggs, with one half tablespoonful of corn starch. When the chocolate boils, stir in and boil up once; pour in adish (to be brought to the table). Beat the whites andspread on the top with cracked almonds and coarse sugar sprinkled over; brown slightly. CHOCOLATE PUDDING. H. Maillard. Scrape very fine twoounces of Maillard's single, double or tripple vanillachocolate and add it to half a teaspoonful of powderedcinnamon. Put it into a pan; pouring over it one quart of new milk; stirring it until it boils; and adding bydegrees four ounces of sugar; milling the chocolate until it is smooth and light; then pour itout to cool. Beat eight eggs to a froth; mix them withthe chocolate; pour into a buttered dish and bakethree quarters of an hour. Serve cold with siftedsugar over it. LEMON SAUCE. Mrs. J. J. P. One large coffee cup of white sugar; half the rind of one lemon;one teaspoonful of juice; a lump of butter the size of an egg; one half pint of water; add a teaspoonful of cornstarch mixed with a little water; let allsimmer, but not boil. ORANGE CHEESE CAKE. Mrs. Crane. One-third of a pound of butter; one third of a pound of sugar; three eggs; wine glassof milk or cream; the rind of an orangegrated; one half of a nutmeg grated; onetablespoonful of brandy; two of rosewater; two ounces of sponge cake. Pourthe cream or milk over the cake to moisten it; thenstir this with sugar and butter; beat your eggs; mashthe cake very fine and mix all together with the brandy and spice. Lemons can be used in the same way; only add the juice of half a lemon. Serve with sauce. CREAM SAUCE. One cup of milk; one of sugar; threetablespoonsful of corn starch; boil it a few minutes;then add one tablespoonful of butter and two of brandy. PUDDING SAUCE. One cup of sugar; a little less than one half cup of butter; work together until smooth; add a wine glassof wine; flavor with nutmeg, and stir in boiling milk until the whole is of theconsistency of thick cream. Send to the table, and stir well when served. Don'tput the wine in until perfectly cold. PUDDING SAUCE. One fourth of a cup of butter; one cup of sugar; yolk of one egg; one half glass of wine; one half teaspoonful of flour; beat well together; then pour on a teacupful of boiling water. Let it simmer. FOAM SAUCE. One cup of sugar; two eggs; threetablespoonsful of cold water; set over a teakettle of boiling water; stir all the time, till well cooked. Then put a piece of butter size of an egg in a bowl, and pour the mixtureover it. Flavor to taste. SNOW SAUCE. One cup of sugar; one half cup of butter; yolk of one egg; oneglass of wine or brandy. Heat the wine before mixing, and, when ready to send to thetable, beat the white of the egg very light, and puton top of the sauce. SAUCE FOR MINUTE PUDDING. Four heapingtablespoonsful of sugar; one of flour; two of butter. Beatall together until like cream. Just before using, stir in boilingwater to make it the consistency of starch. Flavor with vanilla, the last thing. HARD SAUCE. Mrs. C. Wright. Stir to a cream onecup of butter and three cups of sugar; add one half cup of wine; one teaspoonful of lemonessence; cinnamon and nutmeg to suit the taste. Beat till light and creamy;smooth into shape, and put upon the ice until thepudding is served. WHITE SAUCE. Make a rich syrup of white sugar; boil it; and put in groundcinnamon and nutmeg while boiling. Servehot. SAUCE FOR MERANGUE PUDDING. One half pintof water; one quarter pound of whitesugar; one quarter pound of butter rubbedinto a tablespoonful of flour; boil a short time;adding a sliced lemon just before taking fromfire. PUDDING SAUCE. Mrs. Henry Stoddard. One pint of wine; the yolks of six eggs, and the whites of three; a sufficient quantity of lemon; ground cinnamon and sugar to taste. Heat the whole over the fire, butdon't let it boil. Serve hot. VINEGAR SAUCE FOR PUDDINGS. One cup of brown sugar; one of water; pinch of salt; one spoonful of butter; a few drops of essence oflemon; one spoonful of vinegar. Beat butter, sugar, lemon, vinegar, and flour well together; pour the water boiling on them, and let it scald up. The following 38 recipes within this chapter are handwritten. Fruit Cake 2 cups butter-- 4 cups sugar 6 do flour (or 8) 1 1/2 cups sweet milk -- 12.Eggs -- 1 teaspoon soda -- 2 do cream tartar -- 4 do cloves -- 4 do cinnamon --2 do allspice -- 2 do nutmegs -- 1 lb. citron -- 3 lb raisins -- 2 lb currants-- Brandy Mrs. Custers Silver Cake 1 cup butter -- 2 do sugar -- 3 do flour less 1 tablespoonful -- 1/2 cupsweet milk -- 1/2 teaspoonful soda -- 1 teaspoonful Cream tartar -- Lemon totaste -- Whites of 8 eggs beaten to a stiff froth The cup of butter to be fulland solid and with the sugar worked to a cream-- Then put in the milk -- thenthe flour, add whites last-- Gold cake to be made same way using theyolks Silver Cake (Vancouver) 2 cups sugar -- 1/2 do butter -- 2 1/2 do sifted flour -- 3/4 do sweet milk-- Whites of 8 eggs -- stir butter and sugar to a cream -- then add the Whiteswell beaten to a froth, add the flour, then the milk -- stir the whole severalmoments. Gold Cake. (Vancouver) Take the yolks of the eggs and beat to a stiff froth -- 1 1/2 cups sugar 3/4cup butter beat to a cream -- 2 do sifted flour-- 1/2 cup sweet milk -- alittle soda or yeast powder French Cake (Vancouver) 2 cups white sugar 3 do flour -- 1/2 cup butter 1 small cup sweet milk -- 4eggs 1 tea-spoon soda-- do cream tartar-- little spice to taste. Custard Cake 1 cup butter stirred with 2 cups sugar to a cream -- 1 cup sweet milk -- 5eggs beaten separate or the whites of ten-- 1 teaspoon soda 2 do cream tartardissolved-- 4 cups flour or enough to make it stiff enough, flavor to suit thetaste. To be baked in jelly cake pans-- The custard, to put it together with,is nuts or currants chopped fine and one pint sweet milk-- 2 eggs stirred upwith 3 spoonfuls corn starch guess at the sugar and flavor to suit taste. Letthe milk come to a boiling heat and stir in the balance until thick likecustard. Roll Jelly Cake (Vancouver) 2 spoonsfuls sour milk-- 2 do sweet milk-- 1 cup sugar-- 1 cup flour--essence-- 3 eggs beaten separate Pork Cake (Vancouver) 1 po pork chopped fine-- 1 do raisins 1/4 " citron-- 1/2 pint molasses-- 1/2pt brown sugar-- 1/2 pt boiling water poured on the pork-- 1 teaspoon each ofsoda-- alspice-- cloves- cinnamon & nutmeg. 1 quart flour more or less--according to the judgment-- Kentucky Pound Cake (Sarah) 3 cups sugar-- 2 do butter-- 4 cups sifted flour, heaping, 2/3 cup sourmilk-- 1/2 teaspoon soda-- 9 eggs-- mix sugar and butter to a cream -- thenstir 3 eggs and one teacup flour alternate -- (most beat the eggs) adding milklast Stir eggs & flour well before adding the next 3 eggs &flour. Corn Starch Cake Whites of 6 eggs-- 2 cups sugar-- 1 do butter-- 1 sweet milk-- 2 do flour--1 do corn starch. 1 teaspoon cream tartar 1/2 do soda-- First whip the butterto a cream. then add sugar & whip again-- then add milk with sodadissolved-- Mix flour and cream tartar and sift. Then add alternate flour, eggsuntil you have a cake-- after which you can boil or bake to your taste. Cocoanut or Custard Cake (Ettenscroll) 1 cup butter stirred with 2 do sugar 1 teaspoon soda-- & 2 cream tartardissolved in 1 cup sweet milk-- 5 eggs beaten separate or the whites of ten--see 2nd page back for balance of this Fruit Cake. (Vancouver) 1 po sugar-- 1 do flour-- 1 do butter-- 2 do seeded Raisins-- 2 docurrants-- 1 po citron-- 10 0r 12 eggs-- 1 teaspoon soda 1/2 cup molasses--Mace, nutmegs-- cloves cinnamon-- lemon 1 cup good brandy and somerosewater. Coffee Cake 3 cups brown sugar 1. do butter-- 5 eggs-- 1 do strong coffee (liquid) 1tea-spoonful soda-- 4 cups flour with 2 tea spoon cream tartar in it 2 teaspoon cloves-- do cinnamon-- 2 do nutmeg. Loaf Cake 3 pds flour-- 1 pt sweet milk-- 1/2 po lard-- 3/4 po butter-- 1 1/2 posugar-- 5 eggs beat separately 1 1/2 pd Raisins-- 1 1/2 tea spoon soda 1/2 pintbrandy-- flavor to taste. Lemon Cake 4 tumblers flour-- 2 1/2 do sugar 2/3 do butter-- 1 do milk-- juice &rind of 2 lemons-- 3 eggs 1 heaping tea-spoonful saleratus Sponge Cake (Sargent) 2 cups sugar-- pour over it a very little cold water-- and let it dissolvewhile beating the whites of six eggs-- then beat the yolks with the sugar andslowly beat in 3 cups of flour-- stir in the whites last. Stir as little aspossible after adding the whites-- Bake in one or two pans Soda Cake 2 eggs-- 2 cups flour-- 1 cup sugar 1/2 do butter-- 1/2 tea spoon soda-- 1do cream tartar-- 1/2 cup milk-- flavor with vanilla or peach Sponge Cake (Mallory) 6 eggs-- yolks beaten separate & mixed with 1 pt sugar-- 1/2 pint coldwater. 1 pint flour the whites beaten stiff and added last-- sprinkle sugarover top before putting in the oven. Sponge Cake (Fairfield) 1 cup sugar-- put with 1/2 cup water, set it on fire and let it boil, whilebeating 5 eggs. Then slowly mix the hot sugar with the eggs & add one cupflour. Cocoanut Cake 1 pd sugar 1/2 pd butter 3/4 pd flour-- 6 eggs. 1 grated cocoanut. Beatbutter & sugar to a cream add yolks well beaten, then the whites beaten toa stiff froth-- then flour-- and last the cocoanut Sponge Cake (Fairfield) Take 2 cups sugar pour in it a very little cold water & let stand whilebeating 6 eggs-- beat the yolks first & put them with the sugar. Beat thewhites to a stiff froth, then stir into the sugar and yolks slowly 3 cups offlour-- Stir it well then add the whites last & stir as little as possible.Put it in one or two pans and bake slowly until done White Cake (Mrs. S. Migton) Whites of 10 eggs-- 1 cup sweet milk-- 1 butter 2. sugar. 4 flour-- 2 teaspoonful baking powder-- Stir butter and sugar to a cream-- Sift the bakingpowder in the flour-- and add it to the cream alternately with the milk-- addthe whites last, after being beaten to a stiff froth Lemon Pie 1/2 Tea cup water. 1 Lemon 5 eggs-- 1 large spoon melted butter. 1 cup brownsugar. Squeeze the juice and grate the rind of the lemon. Stir together theyolks. Sugar-- butter, juice and rind. Cover a plate with pastry, pour in themixture and bake until the pastry is done-- beat the whites to a stiff froth,add 4 spoonsful white sugar put it on the pie and place it in the oven until itis a delicate brown-- Cocoanut Pie 1 good sized cocoanut peeled and grated. 1 quart mild, sweetened likecustard, butter the size of a walnut in each pie, 4 eggs to the quart. Muffins Melt half teacup of butter in pint & 1/2 of milk-- add little salt, gillof yeast 4 eggs stir in flour to make a batter. rather stiffer than for griddlecakes. Keep moderately warm, and it will raise enough in 8 or 9 hours Boston Brown Bread 1 heaping quart of rye flour 1 " Indianmeal 1 " graham flour scanty quart milk dowarm water 1 coffee cup molasses 1 penny worth of 1 coffee cup home made yeast -- tea spoonful saternalus --desert spoon salt -- Grease an Iron Kettle-- put in the mixture and placeimmediately in a slow oven & bake six hours. or-- see 2nd page forwards Cream Cake 1 tea cup cream-- 2 do sugar-- 3 well beaten eggs-- tea spoon soda. dissolvein wine glass milk-- butter size 1/2 an egg-- flour to make thick as poundcake-- add raisins and spice to taste & wine & brandy if you like Mountain Cake 1 cup sugar-- 2 eggs-- 1/2 cup butter, do milk or water. 2 cups flourteaspoonful a tartar 1/2 T spoonful soda-- nutmeg Sweet Potatoe Cake 1/2 po grated raw sweet potatoe. 8 eggs 1/2 po white sugar-- handful siftedflour-- 1 grated nutmeg-- stir well and bake thoroughly in a quick oven. Mince Pies 5 pounds finely chopped meat 4 " goodapples 3 " sugar-- 3 do Raisins 1 " currant jelly-- 4oz butter mace & cinnamon, one ounce When this is prepared make a crust of 2/3 the usual quantity of lard and 1/3of fat salt pork chopped fine. All to be rubbed in the flour and wet with coldwater Bake in a slow oven one hour. Boston Brown Bread or-- put in a pan made on purpose and covered tight. Set in a Kettle of hotwater, the Kettle to be covered and Kept boiling from early in the morning till2 O clock p.m. Then taken out and put on a pie pan and set in the oven toharden the crust. Chicken Corn Pie Prepare 2 chickens as for frying-- Then put them down and let them stew in agreat deal of rich highly seasoned gravy--until they are just done. Then haveready picked 24 ears of green corn-- Take very sharp knife & shave themdown once or twice then scrape the heart out with the rest already scrapeddown. Take a baking pan (a deep one) place a layer of the chicken, with some ofthe gravy, then a layer of corn and so on. Until you get the chicken all in--The cover with the corn and pour in all the gravy, add a small lump of butteron the top and set it to baking in not a very hot oven. It does not take longto cook. As soon as the corn is done its ready for the table. Either in thesame dish or turned into another, much gravy is best. Rolls Warm 1 oz butter in 1/2 pt milk-- 1 spoonful Bakers yeast-- little each--put 2 pds flour in a pan & mix in the above, let it rise 1 hour-- Knead itwell, make into seven rolls and bake in a quick oven. Rusk---(Molly) 1 cup butter-- 1 sugar-- 1 yeast 2 eggs-- 1 pt sweet milk-- flour enough tostir it stiff-- beat the sugar and eggs to-gether until very light-- then addthe butter and part of flour and stir again until light. Boil the milk and letit get nearly cold -- Then add the rest of flour & milk-- Adding the yeastlast of all-- Make up in evening & let it raise til morning-- Then work itand let it raise again. When light rub a little butter on your hands, and workas little as possible into rusk-- Put in a pan & when light bake them. Egg Omelette (Mallory) 4-eggs-- 4 table spoons Corn starch-- 2 cups sweet milk-- salt &pepper-- Cook on top of stove & then set in the oven to brown the top-- Ginger Bread 1 po flour-- 1/2 do sugar-- yolks of 3 eggs-- 1/2 po butter-- Ginger totaste Ginger Bread 1 cup brown sugar-- 1 do butter-- 1 do sour milk-- 4 eggs-- 2 tea spoonssoda-- 1 table spoon ginger-- flour to make soft as cake-- Bake in a moderateoven. Rusk 1 cup sugar. do milk-- do yeast-- do flour-- mix over night & in themorning add half cup sugar & 1/2 cup butter-- rub together two eggs--reserving the white of one egg beaten to a stiff froth with a little sugar tospread over the top of the rusk when baked-- Jumbles 1 pound butter-- do sugar. 2 do flour-- 3 eggs-- 1/2 cup sour milk tea-spoonsoda-- Roll in white coffee sugar. This will make a large batch End of handwritten recipes. Custards, Creams, &c. FLOAT. Mrs. J. T. Wolf. One quart of milk; let it come to a boil; the yolks ofthree eggs; one and a half tablespoonful of cornstarch; beat together with a little coldmilk. When the milk boils, stir in the starch and eggs. When done,sweeten and flavor to taste. Beat the whites of theeggs; pour boiling water over them in abowl; then lift off, on the custard. APPLE FLOAT. Mrs. G. W. Rogers. One quart of apples slightly stewed and well mashed; whites of three eggs well beaten; four heapingtablespoonful of sugar. Beat together for twentyminutes. To be eaten with cream soon after made. APPLE CODDLE. Miss Louie Phillips. Pare and quarter tart apples and boil them gently with one lemon for every six apples, till a straw will pass through them. Make a syrup of half a pound of white sugar to each pound of apples; put the apples and lemons sliced into the syrup, and boil gently untilthe apples look clear; then take them up carefully soas not to break them, and add an ounce or more of gelatine to the syrup and let it boil up; then lay aslice of lemon on each apple and strain the syrup and pour over them. The following name is written in script at the bottom left-hand cornerof page 81. Ms Phillips APPLE OMELET. Mrs. C. Wight. Eight large apples; four eggs; one cup of sugar; one tablespoonful of butter; nutmeg, or cinnamon, to taste. Stew the apples, and mash fine; add the butter and sugar. When cold,add the eggs well beaten. Bake until brown, and eatwhile warm. OMELET SOUFFLEE. Take two ounces of sugar; two ounces of butter, three ounces of flour, and one pint of milk. Mix all together well; set on a slow fire; keepstirring until it gets the thickness of soft butter; then take it from the fire, and add the beaten yolks of fiveeggs; then beat the whites of five eggs to a stiff froth; mix well the above. Add any flavoring you prefer. Pour into buttered pudding cups, and bake in a moderate oven. BLANC MANGE. Mix one tablespoonful of Sea Moss Farina with a little coldmilk; then add one quart of milk, andhalf a teacupful of powdered white sugar. Heat slowly;let it boil fifteen minutes, stirring all the time. When taken off, flavor totaste. Pour into moulds, and serve with cream. RICE BLANC MANGE. One quart of new milk; six tablespoonful of coarselyground rice. Wash the rice very well, anddrain the water off. Just as the milk begins to boil, add the rice, one tablespoonful at a time, stirringconstantly; boil for twenty minutes, or untill it becomes quite thick; sweetento taste; add two tablespoonsful of water, and oneteaspoonful of rose water. GELATINE BLANC MANGE. Mrs. C. G. G. Two and a half sheets of gelatine dissolved in coldwater, to one quart of milk. Sweeten andflavor to taste. CORN STARCH BLANC MANGE. Fourtablespoonsful of corn starch dissolved in a little milk Put one quart of milk onthe stove, and, when boiling, stir the starch into it;add a lump of butter the size of a hickory-nut; flavorto taste. PEACH BLANC MANGE. Mrs. L. G. Evans. Boil in one quart of sweet milk about ten fresh peachleaves, with four ounces of sugar and oneteacupful of corn starch dissolved in a quarter of apint of cold milk; stir all the time; boil a fewminutes and turn out into a mould. CHOCOLATE BLANC MANGE. Mrs. M. Eells. One ounce of Cox's gelatine dissolved in as much water as will cover it; four ounces of grated chocolate; one quart of milk; three quarters of a pound of sugar. Boil the eggs, milk, and chocolate togetherfive minutes; then put in the gelatine, and let thewhole boil five minutes longer, stirring constantly. Add one teaspoonful of vanilla extract; and put in moulds to cool. NEAPOLITAN BLANC MANGE. Heat one quart of milk to boiling; stir in one ounce of gelatine that has been soaked in one cup of the milk for an hour, and three fourths of a cup of sugar. When the gelatine isdissolved, strain it through a thin muslin bag. Divideinto four portions, allowing one cupful for each. Wet one large tablespoonfulof chocolate, with a little boilingwater; rub it up very smooth. Put this in one portion, and seton the fire, stirring until very hot, but do notlet it boil. Mix with the second portion, the yolk of oneegg beaten very light, and heat as above. Color the third with cochineal, or cranberry juice. Wet a mould, and put the white in; and, when cold, put in thepink, then the yellow, then the chocolate. Set in a cold place. Loosen, bydipping the mould in warm water for a second. CUSTARD. The general rule to observe inmaking custard is to take five eggs to one quart of milk, and a tablespoonful of sugar to every egg. Beat the eggs separately. Always boil milk, custard, rice, andcracked wheat in a vessel set within another of boilingwater. Stir in the yolks of the eggs before the milk boils, to prevent its curdling. CREAM CUSTARDS. Mrs. Dr. Stewart. One quart of cream; four tablespoonsful of whitesugar; whites of four eggs. Stir the sugar into the cream; thenadd the whites of the eggs without beating them; stirall well, and flavor with bitter almonds or vanilla. Bake in cups, set in a pan half filled with water; putin the oven, and bake till it thickens. ALMOND CUSTARD. One pint of newmilk; one cup of pulverized sugar; onequarter pound of almonds, blanched and pounded; twoteaspoonsful of rose water; the yolks offour eggs. Stir this over a slow fire until it is of theconsistency of cream; then remove it quickly, and put in a dish. Beat the whites with a little sugar added to a stiff froth, and lay on the top. INDIAN CUSTARD. Mrs. E. P. Filleo. Heat two quarts of milk; then stir in one cup of molasses; a small cupof fine corn meal; two beaten eggs, and a little salt. Cookslowly one hour. If it seems too thick, thin it with a little coldwater. LEMON CREAM. Take one lemon, and grate it up fine; one cup of sugar; three-fourths of a cup of water; one cup of butter, andthree eggs. Take the lemon, sugar, butter, and water, and put them in a pan, and let it come to aboil. Have the eggs well beaten, and stir in whileboiling; let it thicken, then take off to cool. Is nice for travelinglunch. WINE CREAM. One half ounce of gelatine dissolved in one and one half cups of white wine, to which is added the rind andjuice of one lemon, and three quarters of a pound of white sugar. Let it simmer till mixed; then strain.When cool, but not congealed, add one and one-half pints of cream, stirring gently, that it may not separate. A little orange juice and peel is animprovement. HAMBURG CREAM. Mrs. Armstrong. Take the rind and juice of two large lemons; eight eggs; with one cup of sugar. Stir together the yolks of the eggs, lemons, and sugar. Put in a tin bucket set within another of boilingwater; place over the fire; stir well for three minutes; take fromthe fire, and add the whites of the eggs, which mustbe beaten to a froth. Put in custard cups, or small glasses. To be eaten beforequite cold with cake. ITALIAN CREAM. Nellie Andrews. One quart of milk; three eggs; sixtablespoonsful of sugar; three tablespoonsful of corn starch. Boil like custard. Make a merangue withthe whites, and a little sugar. Flavor with vanilla. RUSSIAN CREAM. Nellie Andrews. Five eggs; one quarter of a pound of sugar; one lemon, grated. The yolks, sugar, and lemon to be beaten together very light; then boil;stir in the whites while cooking. SPANISH CREAM. Miss Drusie Harris. One box of gelatine soaked in a large cup of milk orwater; one quart of milk boiled andpoured into it; then beat the yolks of eight eggs, andadd to the gelatine, with one and a half cups of sugar. Let it thicken as for custard. Beat the whites of the eggs in a dish, and pour in the custard;mix well; flavor with lemon or vanilla; and let coolin the mould. TAPIOCA CREAM. Mrs. A. Butterfield. Soak twotablespoonsful of tapioca in a teacupful of milk or water over night. In the morning place a quartof milk over the fire; let it come to a boil. Beat the yolks of three eggs and mix with the tapioca; sweeten and flavor to taste. Pour in the milk, and cook the same as boiledcustard; when done, pour in cups. Beat the whites to a froth with two tablespoonsful of sugar, and put over the top. WINE JELLY Mrs. Jno. G. Lowe. One box of Cox's gelatine; pour on it a pint of coldwater, and let it stand ten minutes; then pour on four pints of boiling water; one pint of wine; two pounds of sugar; the juice of three lemons, and the grated rind of one. Strain immediately through a jelly bag, and let stand tocool. WINE JELLY. Two ounces of Cox'sgelatine dissolved in one pint of coldwater; soak one hour; half pint of wine; wine glass of brandy; juice of two lemons; grated rind of one; one and threefourth pounds of sugar. Over this pour three pints of boiling water; strain into moulds. CHOCOLATE JELLY. Mrs. Admiral Schenck. One cup of sugar; one cup of molasses; three fourths of a cup of milk; one half cake of chocolate dissolved in water; a piece of butter size of a hickory-nut; one tablespoonful of flour mixed with a little milk to thicken; one half teaspoonful of soda. Boil one quarter of an hour. FROST JELLY. Miss Fannie Clarke. One half box of gelatine; one half pint of coldwater poured over to dissolve it; one half pint of boiling water; two cupsful of sugar; juice of two lemons. When cool, and just beginning to form, add the beaten whites of twoeggs, and beat the whole together until it is thoroughly mixed.Set in a cool place. ORANGE OR LEMON GELATINE. Hattie B. Brown. One half box of gelatine dissolved in one half pint of cold water; one half cupful of sugar; juice of six and grated rind of oneorange; and one half pint of boilingwater. For lemon gelatine, afterdissolving, add one and a half pints of boiling water; one cup of sugar; the juice of three andrind of one lemon; then strain and set to cool. CHARLOTTE RUSSE. Mrs. J. J. Patterson. Beat the yolks of seven eggs and stir them into one pint of scalding milk with a little sugar; boil like custard and set away to cool. Pour alarge cup of warm water over a half box of gelatine; set it on the stove, but don't let it get hot. Beat the whites of the eggs very light, and add enough pulverized sugar to make it stiff; then whip one quartof cream, and stir into the custard; then the whites flavored with vanilla; then the gelatine well dissolved; mix thoroughly andset away to cool (about two hours). Line your dish with either sponge cake or lady fingers, and fill with themixture; let stand five or six hours. CHARLOTTE RUSSE. Mrs. J. R. Young. One quart of cream whipped to a stiff froth; one third of a box of Cox's gelatine dissolved in one half pint of boiling water; sweeten and flavor to taste; stir in alittle cream; not whipped, to cool it; then stir inthe whipped cream. Line a dish with spongecake, and pour on the cream, and set itaway to congeal. Let the gelatine stand in warm water until it is almost dissolved; then set thecup in a pan of boiling water, and, when it isscalding hot, pour it over the egg and sugar. CHARLOTTE RUSSE. Mrs. F. W. Grimes. One quart of cold cream; two ounces of gelatine; two eggs (if thecream is thick, omit the eggs); one-half of a pound of sugar. Dissolve the gelatine in a little milk, very slowly; beat the eggs and sugar together; whipthe cream to a stiff froth; line the mould with sponge cake; mix theingredients together, and put into the mould; set it on ice. CHOCOLATE CHARLOTTE RUSSE. Mrs. D. W. Stewart. Soak in cold water one ounce of isinglass; take three ounces of best chocolate; mix in a pint of cream, adding the soaked isinglass. Put all over the fire, and boil slowlyuntil the whole is melted; then take off the fire, and let it cool. Take eight yolks, and four whites ofeggs; beat very light, and stir gradually in the mixture in turnwith one half of a pound of sugar. Simmer the whole over the fire, but do not letit boil; then take it off, and whip to a strong froth; line the moulds with sponge cake, andset it on the ice. SOUFLEE DE RUSSE Mrs. A. Brown. Three pints of milk; four eggs; one half boxof gelatine; sweeten and flavor to taste. Boil ascustard. As it is taken from the fire, stir in the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Pour into moulds, and when cold eat with cream. LEMON SPONGE. Mrs. J. L. Brenner. To one half box Cox's gelatine, take one and a half pints of cold water; dissolve over the fire; then add one poundof white sugar; rinds of two and juice ofthree lemons. Boil all together for a few minutes. When nearlycold add the whites of three eggs beaten to a froth.Beat all well together; then set in a cool place. When it begins to thicken,stir thoroughly; let stand again and beat as before. The oftener this isrepeated the whiter it will become. Pour into moulds; serve with cream. One half this recipe is enough for five or sixpersons. ICE CREAM. One quart of cream; two eggs; two cups of sugar; eggs beatenseparately, sugar in the yolks, then beaten very hard together; stir the eggs into the cream; flavor to taste. ICE CREAM. Mrs. John W. Stoddard. Two quarts of pure cream; one pound of powderedsugar; whites of four eggs. Flavor totaste. CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM. Use five ounces of chocolate, dissolved in warm milk, to one gallon of cream. CHOCOLATE CREAM. H. Maillard. One quart of cream; eleven ounces powderedsugar; yolks of six eggs; white of one egg; zest of lemon, a piece as large as a nickel cent; one bar of chocolate (Maillard's single, double, or triplevanilla). Scrape the chocolate very fine,and put it with the eggs and sugar; stir or beat until the mixture is complete, andadd the cream by degrees. Pour into a milkboiler, and stir until the cream is thickenough to stick to the spatula; then pour the contentsinto an earthen dish, or freezer, and set in a very coldplace. The boiling of the cream is of greatimportance, and requires particular attention, especially when no milk boileris at hand, and the cream is boiled on open fire. Inthis case, as soon as the cream begins to stick to the spatula, the pan must be immediately withdrawn. Theflavoring should be added after the cream is boiled.Before freezing it is advisable to pass it through a hairsieve. FROZEN PUDDING. Mrs. Henry Stoddard. One and one halfpints of cream; four ounces of macaroons; six ounces of whitesugar; the yellow rind of one orange, grated, and thejuice of two. If oranges can not be had, use one ounceof orgeat. Beat the cream on ice until it hangsto the beater; then add the sugar, oranges, and the macaroons (grated and put through a sieve). Freeze like ice cream, and afterward put into moulds. LEMON ICE. Make a rich lemonade; add a little arrowroot. Be careful to stir steadily while freezing. ORANGE ICE. Juice of sixoranges, and grated rind of three; juice of two lemons; one pint of sugar dissolved in one pint of coldwater. Mix, and freeze same as lemon ice. ORANGE ICE. One and one half pints of water; one pint of sugar; juice of eight oranges, and two lemons; whites of four eggs, beaten very light; rub some ofthe sugar on the orange, toextract the flavor. Boil the sugar and water together for ten or fifteen minutes, and pour itover the eggs, boiling hot, stirring all the time;then add the juice, which must be strained. When cool,freeze. FROZEN PEACHES. Take two quarts of rich milk, and two teacupsful of sugar mix well together, and put into a freezer, with ice and salt packed aroundit. Have ready one quart of peaches, mashed andsweetened. When the milk is very cold, stir them in,and freeze all together. Strawberries can be usedin the same way, but will require more sugar. FROZEN STRAWBERRIES. Take nice, ripe strawberries; put them into a bowl and mash them; makethem rather sweeter than for the table. Let them stand until the juice is drawnout, then freeze. Serve with cream, or ice cream. CONFECTIONERY. TAFFY. Melt in a stew pan three ounces of butter and one pound of moistsugar; stir well over a slow fire; boil one quarter of an hour;pour out on a buttered dish and mark in squares. MOLASSES CANDY. Lillie. One half pound of sugar; one quarter pound of butter; one quart of molasses; boil until it will crack in coldwater. When cool it can be pulled until white. CREAM CANDY. Miss M. A. Cummin. One pound of loaf sugar; one cupful of water; one half teaspoonful of creamtartar; two of vanilla; two of vinegar; butter size of anegg. Boil until it hardens when dropped into water. When nearly cold, pull as you would other candy. CHOCOLATE CAROMELS. Mrs. Ashley Brown. Take of grated chocolate, milk, molasses and sugar, onecupful each; piece of butter size of an egg; boiluntil it drops hard; put in a buttered pan and, before it cools, mark off insquare blocks. CANDY DROPS. Mrs. Ashley Brown. One pint of sugar; half pint of water; boil till it cracks when dropped in water; flavor with lemon or peppermint; drop in small drops on butteredpaper. COCOANUT CANDY. Two pounds of coffee sugar to one cocoanut; dissolve sugar in the milk of thenut; then let it come to a boil and add the gratedmeat. Boil until tender; then pour out and let cool on butteredpans; cut in squares. BUTTER SCOTCH. Mattie. One cupful of Orleans molasses; one cupful of sugar; one half cupful of butter; boil until it snaps in water. BREAD. YEAST. Pour three pints and a half of cold water on one handful of hops; grate three large potatoes; boil the hops fifteen minutes; then mix together one half cup of sugar; a large kitchenspoonful of flour; one tablespoonful of ginger and one of salt; alump of alum the size of a hazelnut. After strainingthe water off the hops, pourit over the mixture and let it boil five minutes; stir all the time. When cool,add one pint of sponge and let stand twenty-four hours, stirring it frequently;then jug and cork tight. Put in a cool place. It will keep three weeks. DRY YEAST. Take three pints of flour and put it in a crock; boil and skin six common sized potatoes; press themthrough a cullender into the flour; add three pints of water in which a handful of hops has boiled five minutes. Mix well together andlet stand fifteen minutes, or until about milk warm;then pour in enough cold water to make it of theconsistency of sponge. Soak half a pint of dry yeast and add to it. Let it rise very light, stirring it down three or four times;then put three quarts of sifted corn meal into a breadbowl and pour the raised yeast into the middle of it.Mix until quite stiff; spread out thin and dry it in the shade, turningoccasionally. It will dry in a couple of days. BREAD. In the evening, pare and cut six oreight potatoes; boil and mash them; add one quart of boiling water; while hot, stir in flour to make a batter; when cool enough, add oneteacup of dry yeast that has been soaked in a little tepid water. The next morning, stir up the sponge to athick batter with one quart of water, and twotablespoonsful of salt, and add the yeast. When light, mix in flour and knead well; then let it rise again; mould,and put into pans. When light, bake one hour. This will make four smallloaves. BREAD. Mrs. W. R. S. Ayres. Four pints ofgood sour milk; let it come to a boil; pour it overtwo large tablespoonsful of flour; let stand tillcool. Then make a thin batter by adding flour and onehalf teacupful of jug yeast; let stand till morning,then mix in flour enough to make it stiff; knead well;let it rise in the bowl until very light. Mould into four loaves; let it riseagain before baking. Bake in a quick oven three quarters of an hour. BREAD, WITH DRY YEAST. In the evening, takefour medium sized potatoes; pare and boil them; whensoft, drain off the water, and mash, with a teacupfulof flour; then rub the lumps out with your hands; iftoo hot, add a little cold water. Add a cake of dry yeast soaked in a little tepidwater; mix well, and let stand till morning. Then stir into thesponge a quart of milk; two tablespoonsful of salt, and flour enough tomake a dough. Knead well, and let it rise; then make into loaves, and, whenlight, bake one hour. BROWN LOAF. Mrs. A. D. Wilt. One coffee cup of molasses; nearly one teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in one half teacupful of boiling water, stirred into the molasses till it foams; then mixthree parts of Graham flour and one part corn meal, to make a thick batter, and add onedesert-spoonful of lard. Pour the mixture into a wellgreased mould, and steam four hours. To be eaten hot.Very nice as a pudding, with rich sauce. BROWN BREAD. Mrs. D. W. Stewart. Take a quart of bread sponge that has been raised over night; a smallteacupful of Orleans molasses; one teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in a little water; a piece of alum thesize of a pea, dissolved in water. Have the molasses, alum, and soda well mixed into the sponge, then add unbolted flour enough to make a soft dough--not quiteas stiff as white bread. Make into small loaves; let stand until light, andbake. Never use sugar-house molasses or syrup. BROWN BREAD. Lena Vignos. For six loaves of bread take three pints of warmwater; one cent's worth of brewer'syeast; set it in the evening. In the morning add one teacupful of Orleans molasses and a little salt; mix stiff; let rise again; knead and bake asother bread. RYE BROWN BREAD. Mrs. C. E. Corp. One pint of corn meal scalded; when cool, add one pint of sponge; one teaspoonful of soda; two thirds cupful of Orleansmolasses; wheat or rye flour to make astiff batter. Place in a pan; let stand until very light. Bake one andone-quarter hours. RICE BREAD. Take a plate of boiled rice warm enough to melt a lump of butter the size of a walnut; beat two eggs, separately. Mix with them one and one halfteacupsful of flour, and milk enough to make a thick batter, adding a little salt. Grease the pans and bake like bread or muffins. CORN BREAD. One pint of sourmilk; one teaspoonful of saleratus; onepint of corn meal; three eggs; two tablespoonsful of sugar, and one of meltedbutter. Bake in shallow pans. CORN BREAD. Piqua, Ohio. Three eggs beaten separately; put the yolks in last; one fourth cupful of lard and butter mixedtogether; one teacupful of buttermilk; one teaspoonfulof soda, and a little salt; corn meal enough to make it stiff as pound cake. CORN BREAD. Mrs. Dr. Steele. One quart of corn meal; one pint of flour; one pint of thick, sour milk; one egg; two tablespoonsful of molasses; one teaspoonful of soda. Mix together, putting the white ofthe egg in last. Steam one hour in a two-quart tinpan; then bake ten minutes to brown. MISSISSIPPI CORN BREAD. Mrs. Admiral Schenck. Same quantity of soft boiled rice and sifted cornmeal; add a little lard or butter; mixwith sour milk sweetened with soda. Bake in a deep tin pan ina quick oven. Bring it to the table in the pan hot. CORN DODGERS. Mrs. A. Grimes. Two pints of corn meal; one tablespoonful of lard; two eggs, and oneteaspoonful of salt. Scald the meal with the lard in it;cool with a very little milk; add the eggs and beat hard for ten minutes. If too thick add alittle more milk. They must be just thick enough toretain their shape when dropped from a spoon. Grease the pan, and have it hotbefore putting them in. RUSKS. Mrs. J. F. Edgar. One quart of milk; six eggs; three fourthspound of butter; two cups of sugar; one pint of potatoyeast; mix with flour to a batter. Whenlight, make into a soft dough; let rise again; then roll out, cut, and put intopans to rise. When light, bake. RUSK. Mrs. A. M. Woodhull. Piece of breaddough large enough to fill a quart bowl; oneteacupful of melted butter; one egg; one teaspoonful of saleratus. Knead quite hard; roll out thin; laptogether; cut with a mould; and set them to rise in awarm place. ENGLISH ROLLS. Mrs. D. A. Bradford. Take two poundsof flour; two ounces of butter; three tablespoonsful of yeast and a pint of warmmilk. Stir well together, and set before the fire to rise; kneadand make into twelve rolls. Bake in a moderate oven twenty minutes. SARATOGA ROLLS. One pint of sweet milk; two pints of flour; two tablespoonsful of butter; four tablespoonsful of yeast. Beat thoroughly and let rise five or six hours,or all night. Before baking, add one half teaspoonful saleratus dissolved in a little warmwater. Pour into a shallow pan and bake half an hour. PARKER HOUSE ROLLS. Mrs. Wm. Clark. At night take twoquarts of flour; rub in two tablespoonsful of lard; make a hole in the middle and put in one pint of cold boiled milk; one half cup of yeast; three tablespoonsful of sugar, and a little salt. Letthis stand until morning without mixing; then beat hard and let it stand untilnoon. Then roll and cut round; spread a little butter on each one and fold over; put them into pansand let stand until ready to bake. GRAHAM BREAKFAST ROLLS. Two pounds of potatoes boiled and pressed through a cullender; one pint of water; one half cupful of sugar; one teaspoonful of salt, and one half cupful of yeast. Mix into a stiff dough with Grahamflour; let it rise over night. In the morning mould into smallcakes, and, when light, bake. POUNDED BISCUIT. One quart of flour; a pinch of salt; onehalf teacupful of butter; make a stiff dough with milk; knead it a little; then beat hard with a rolling pin fifteen or twenty minutes. Roll out and cutinto small biscuits. Stick with a fork and bake in a hot oven. HUNTER'S BISCUIT. Mrs. J. H. Pierce. Into five pints of sifted flour mix three teaspoonsful of cream tartar; stir in one half pint of sweet milk and one half pint of meltedbutter or fresh lard. Into this stir one half pint of sweet milk with a saltspoonful of salt and one teaspoonful of soda thoroughly dissolved in it. The dough should bevery stiff, rolled in thin sheets, and cut upon the baking pan with a knife or notched wheel. SODA BISCUIT. Mrs. David Rench. One pint of sweet milk; one teaspoonful of creamtartar; one half teaspoonful of soda withthe milk; one teaspoonful of lard mixed with the flour; alittle salt; cut one quarter of an inch thick. Baketen minutes. DROP BISCUITS. One quart of flour; three teaspoonsful of bakingpowder; one small teaspoonful of salt; piece of butter thesize of an egg rubbed thoroughly in the flour; onepint of milk; drop from a spoon in buttered pans. Bakein a quick oven. RYE DROP CAKES. To one pint of sour milk, or buttermilk, add three eggs; a small teaspoonful of soda; a little salt, and rye meal sufficient to make a stiff batter; add the soda to the milk before themeal; then the yolks, and, lastly, the whites, well beaten. Bake in muffinrings, or drop on a griddle. WHIGS. One quart of flour; one pint of milk; three eggs; one large spoonful of meltedbutter; three teaspoonsful of bakingpowder. Bake in muffin rings or cups MUFFINS. Mrs. G. W. H. One pint of warm milk; three or four eggs; a piece of lard thesize of an egg; one teaspoonful of salt, and one halfcup of yeast; mix with flour stiff enough to drop from a spoon; let rise three hours in a warm place. CORN MUFFINS. Mrs. S. Gebhart. One large cupful of sweet milk; one of buttermilk or sourcream, in which dissolve one half teaspoonful of soda; one large tablespoonful of lard, one cup of boiled rice; one cup of corn meal; one tablespoonful of sugar, and two eggs. Beat the milk, rice, lard, sour cream, and yolks of the eggs well together; then add the whites, beaten very light; lastly, the flour. Bake in muffin pans. RICE MUFFINS. Mrs. S. G. One pint of boiled rice; one of sweetmilk; five eggs; one half cup of butter and lard mixed; onepint of sponge, and apinch of salt. Beat the yolks of theeggs, rice, and butter together; then add the sponge and milk; stir in sufficient flour to make a batter. Let it rise very light; beatthe whites of the eggs, and stir in just beforebaking. GRAHAM GEMS. Mrs. J. F. E. Two eggs; two cups of sweet milk; one cup of Graham flour; one of wheatflour, and a little salt. Grease the panswith lard; heat them very hot; fill almost full, andbake about half an hour. POTATO CAKES. Two pounds of mashed potatoes; two tablespoonsful of butter, and a little salt; two pounds of flour; stir in milk enough to make a batter; put in one halfteacupful of yeast. Set before the fire to rise; whenlight, bake in cakes the size of a muffin. SALLY LUNN. Mrs. G. W. Loomis, Suffield. One pintof milk; three eggs, beatenseparately; one tablespoonful of sugar; oneteaspoonful of salt, and three pints of flour; one half teacupful of yeast, and a piece of butter the size of an egg, warmed in the milk. Mix it up inthe morning, if wanted for tea. When light, stir down, and pour into pans, andlet Sally rise again. Bake from three quarters to one hour. SALLY LUNN, WITHOUT YEAST. One quart of flour; one half pint of milk; two eggs; a piece of butter the size of an egg; three tablespoonsful of sugar; oneteaspoonful of soda, and two of creamtartar. Bake twenty minutes. SALLY LUNN. Mrs. Dr. Stewart. One half teacupfulof butter, warmed in a pint of milk, with a little salt; three well beaten eggs; seven cups of sifted flour, and one half teacup of yeast. Pour into pans, and bake when light. BREAKFAST PUFFS. Mrs. F. W. Grimes. One cup of milk; one cup of flour; two eggs, beaten separately; a pinch of salt, and a little cream. Half fill the cups, and bake three quarters of an hour. PUFFETS. Miss Sidney Simms. One quart of flour; one half teaspoonful of salt; a piece of butter thesize of an egg; two eggs; two tablespoonsful of white sugar; one pint of sweetmilk, and three teaspoonsful of bakingpowder. (In all such recipes, sift the baking powder into theflour). Rub the butter in the flour; beat the eggs separately, adding the white last. Bake in gem pans, in a hot oven. ROSETTES. Mrs. E. F. Stoddard. To three eggs, the yolks beaten verylight, add one quart of milk; a piece of butter the size of an egg, cut in little pieces intothe milk and eggs; threecoffee cups of flour, or enough to make a batter ofthe consistency of waffles; a little salt; twoteaspoonsful of cream tartar; one of soda, and, last of all, the whites of theeggs, beaten very light, and stirred quickly into the mixture. Tobe baked in a quick oven. POP OVERS. One cupful of milk; one cupful of flour; one egg, and one teaspoonful of salt. * Bake in gem pans; let them get hot before putting inthe batter; bake quickly. Serve immediately. The following footnote and above asterisk is handwritten. * one Table Spoon full of meltedbutter YEAST WAFFLES. Mrs. Jno. G. Lowe. Take three pints of milk, and one tablespoonful of butter; put them into a pan on the stove until the butter melts; add five eggs, well beaten; one teaspoonful of salt; one and one halftablespoonsful of yeast, and about three pints of flour. Make up, and let rise three or four hoursbefore baking. RICE WAFFLES. One teacupful of boiled rice (if cold, warm it on the stove); a piece of butter thesize of an egg; three eggs; add the yolks well beaten; stir in gradually one and one halfcupsful of flour; one cupful of milk; a little salt; oneteaspoonful of soda; two of creamtartar, and, lastly, just before baking, stir in the whites of the eggs, well beaten. SOUR MILK WAFFLES. One quart of sour milk; one teaspoonful of soda, and a little salt; twotablespoonsful of melted butter; five eggs, beaten separately, and flour enough to make a stiff batter; add the whites of the eggs. BUCKWHEAT CAKES. Put in a jar, two quartsof tepid water; one pint of milk, and a little salt; stirin buckwheat flour to a smooth but not very thickbatter; add one handful of corn meal, and a teacup of potato yeast. Cover the jar and keep in a warm place;let rise very light; bake on a griddle. CORN BATTER CAKES. Mrs. B. C. R. One pint of corn meal; a small teaspoonful of soda and salt. Pour on enough boiling water to make it like mush; let stand a fewminutes to cool; then take four eggs; put the yolks in with the meal; a handful of flour, with two teaspoonsful of cream tartar; stir in as much milk or water (either will answer) to make the battersuitable to bake; beat the whites last, and put injust before baking. CORN BATTER CAKES. Mix two parts buttermilk with one of sweetmilk; one egg; one handful of wheat flour; a little salt; one teaspoonful of soda, and as much cornmeal as is needed to make a batter. HOMINY FRITTERS. To one quart of well boiled hominy, seasoned with pepper and salt, add one egg; two tablespoonsful of milk, and one of flour. Stirall together; mould into small cakes, and fry in a skillet, with a little butter orlard. PANCAKES OF RICE. Mrs. Gorton Arnold. Boil half a poundof rice to a jelly, in a small quantity of water; when cool, mix with it a pint of cream; eight eggs; a pinch of salt; nutmeg; eight ounces of melted butter, and flour enough to stiffen. Fry in as little lard aspossible. FRIED MUSH. Mrs. W. A. B. Into two quarts of boiling water, stir cornmeal, until it makes a smooth mush; boil half an hour; add salt, and stir briskly. Have hot, in a skillet, one tablespoonful, each, of lard and butter; drop theboiling mush into the skillet in little pats; fry alight crisp brown on both sides. CRUMB CAKES. Put pieces of stale light bread in a dish; pour some milk (or buttermilk) over them, and let stand untilsoft. Rub and press through a cullender; beat up three eggs and stir in; add a little salt, and a teaspoonful of salaratus. Stir in flour enough to make it of the proper consistency to bake on a griddle. PENNSYLVANIA FLANNEL CAKES. The yolks of five eggs well beaten; one quart of milk slightly warmed; a little salt, and flour enough tomake a batter; add one cup of yeast. They will takeseveral hours to rise and must be kept warm. Just before baking, add twotablespoonsful of melted butter, and the whites of the eggs beaten to a froth. Bake on a griddle. LEMON TURNOVERS. Mrs. D. A. Bradford. Fourdessertspoonsful of flour; one of powderedsugar; the rind of one lemon; two ouncesof melted butter; two eggs, and a little milk. Mix the flour, sugar, and the grated rind of the lemon with a little milk to the consistency of batter; then add the butter and eggs well beaten.Fry and turn over. PEACH FRITTERS. Make a batter with eight eggs; eight tablespoonsful of flour, and one quart of milk. Have ready in a frying pan some hot butter. To eachtablespoonful of batter add one half of a peach, andfry. SPANISH FRITTERS. Cut baker'sbread into strips thick as a lady-finger and any shape desired.Take one pint of cream; sweeten; add ground cloves, cinnamon, nutmeg, pepper, and a pinchof salt. Stir in the whites of two orthree eggs, well beaten; dip the bread inthe cream and fry in butter quickly. Serve very hot. CAKE. In cake-baking much of the success depends on the oven, which should be welland evenly heated before baking, and not allowed to cool. Do not remove the cake until it is thoroughly baked, or it will fall. Try itby piercing with a broom splinter; if nothing adheres,it is done. Flour should never be used without sifting. BUCKEYE CAKE. One cup of butter; two cups of whitesugar; four cups of flour; one cup of sweet milk; six eggs; twoteaspoonsful of cream tartar, and one of soda. POUND CAKE. Miss P. One pound of sugar; three quarters of a pound of butter; one of flour; nine eggs; a piece of sal volatile the size of a pea, dissolved in a teaspoonful of water. Beat butter and sugar to a cream; then add the eggs, beaten separately; lastly, the flour. CORN STARCH CAKE. Miss M. J. Dickson. Two cups of powdered sugar; one of butter; three fourths of a cup of milk; the whites of six eggs; three fourths of a cup of cornstarch; two full cups of flour; threeteaspoonsful of baking powder, mixed in the flour. Flavor with lemon. DELICATE CAKE. Mrs. J. R. Reynolds. Two teacupsful of white sugar; three quarters of a cupful of butter; one cupful of sweetmilk; four of flour; the whites of four eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; threeteaspoonsful of baking powder. Flavor with vanilla, lemon, or nutmeg. DELICATE CAKE. Mrs. R. One half pound of flour; one half pound of sugar; one quarter of a pound of butter; one teaspoonful creamtartar; one half teaspoonful of soda, and whites of eight eggs. Flavor to taste. SNOW CAKE. Whites of teneggs; one and one half glasses of sugar; one of flour; one teaspoonful of creamtartar, and one half teaspoonful of salt. Put the cream tartar and salt in the flour; stir in the sugar; beat the whites of theeggs very light, and stir all together. Flavor with lemon. SILVER CAKE. The whites of fiveeggs; one cup of sugar; two and one halfcups of flour; one half cup of butter; one half cup of milk; one teaspoonful of cream tartar, and one halfteaspoonful of soda. Mix the butter and sugar together;add the milk; then the flour, in which has been mixed the cream tartar; then the whites of the eggs; then the soda, dissolved in a little boilingwater. GOLD CAKE. One cup of butter; two cups of sugar; three cups of flour; one half a cup of milk; the yolks of five eggs; one teaspoonful of creamtartar; one half a teaspoonful of soda; flavor to taste. FRENCH BUNN. Mrs. G. W. Rogers. One pound of sugar; one pound of flour; one half pound of butter; two wine glasses of new milk; one teaspoonful of soda; two of cream tartar, and eight eggs. Beat butter and sugar to a cream. LIVERPOOL CAKE. Miss Mary A. Cummin. One pound of flour; one pound of sugar; one half pound of butter; four eggs; one cupful of sweetmilk; two teaspoonsful of cream tartar, and one teaspoonful of soda, in the milk. Flavor to taste. Beat the sugar and butter together;then the eggs, without separating; add milk, flour, and soda last. SOCIAL CAKE. Mrs. L. Moore. One cup of butter; two of sugar; threeand one half cups of flour; five eggs, beaten separately; three quarters of a cup of milk; one teaspoonful of creamtartar, and half a teaspoonful of soda. Flavor with lemon. QUEEN CAKE. Miss Lucy Chambers. One pound of sugar; one pound of flour, light weight; ten eggs, leaving out four whites. Beat the yolks and sugar together; then add the whites and flour. Spice to suit taste. SIMPLE SPONGE CAKE. Miss S. M. Three eggs; one cup of sugar, andone of flour. Beat the eggs very light; then add the sugar; and stir in the flour, and one teaspoonful of water. Flavor to taste. SPONGE CAKE. Miss Armstrong. Take twelve eggs and weigh them; take their weight in sugar, and one half their weight in flour; two small lemons, orone very large one, grated. Bake in a hot oven. SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. A. F. Payne. One pound of powdered sugar; one half pound of flour; ten eggs; the juice of one lemon, and a little salt. Beat the yolks untilvery light; then stir in the sugar, lemonjuice and salt; then add part of the flour, and part of the whites, beaten stiffly; then the remainder of the flour, and, lastly, the remaining whites. COCOANUT SPONGE CAKE. Miss Mary Gebhart. Beat the yolks of six eggs, with one half pound of sugar; one quarter pound of flour; add one teaspoonful of lemonessence. Stir in the whites of eggs beaten to a froth; add the grated pulp of onecocoanut. COCOANUT POUND CAKE. Mrs. J. A. McMahon. One pound of butter; one of flour; one of sugar; one of cocoanut,grated, and ten eggs. Beat the butter and sugar to a cream;put the cocoanut in before the flour; beat the eggs separately, and mix like other cake. Bake three hours in a moderate oven. COCOANUT CAKE. Miss Maggie Connelly. One cupful of butter; three of sugar, andfour of flour; whites of eighteggs; one cupful and three tablespoonsful of milk; one teaspoonful of soda; two and one half of creamtartar; one and one quarter of gratedcocoanut in the cake; mix the butter and sugar with your hand; then add the milk (use that of thecocoanut); mix the cocoanut with the flour, and add the eggs last.Bake in square pans. Use the following ICING. Whites of three eggs; two cups of sugar; three fourths of a cup of gratedcocoanut. Spread thickly all over the top and sides; set in the oven with the door open for a few minutes. ALMOND CAKE. Miss Mary Brady. One cupful of butter; two of sugar; threeof flour; one of sweet milk; the whites of eight eggs; one teaspoonful of cream tartar; one half teaspoonful of soda, and two pounds of almonds, blanched and powdered fine in rose water. Best when several days old. HICKORY NUT CAKE. Mrs. Munger. Two cupsful of sugar; three fourths of a cupful of butter; three cupsful of flour, mixed with three teaspoonsful of baking powder; three fourths of a cupful of sweet milk; whites of sixeggs, and one pint of nuts, rolledfine. HICKORY NUT CAKE. Mrs. Dr. Smith. Three tumblersful of sugar; one of butter; alittle more than one of milk; four of flour; one teaspoonful of soda; three eggs, beatenseparately; essence of lemon; one and one half pintsof kernels, chopped fine, and two tablespoonsful of raisins, chopped. WATERMELON CAKE. Mrs.Graham. WHITE PART.--Two cups of sugar; one half cup of butter; one of sweet milk; two teaspoonsful of baking powder; two and one halfcups of flour, and one lemon. PINK PART.--Made the same as the white, except use pink sugar (which can be bought at theconfectioners), and one half pound of raisins. Put the raisins in the sugar. Put thepink part all in the center of the pan, and the white on the outside. COFFEE CAKE. Mrs. J. D. Dubois. One cup of butter; one of sugar; one of molasses; one of raisins; oneof cold coffee; three of flour; two eggs; a piece of citron, cut small; nutmeg and cinnamon. "ERIE" COFFEE CAKE. Three cups brown sugar; one of butter; one of cold coffee; three eggs; three teaspoonsful of soda; two of cinnamon; one of cloves; one of nutmeg, andthree and one half cups of flour. CITRON CAKE. Mrs. H. Conover. Whites oftwelve eggs; two cups of butter; two cupsof sugar; four and one half cups of flour; one half cup of milk; one teaspoonful of soda, two of creamtartar, and one pound of citron. CURRANT CAKE. Mrs. H. C. Two cups of butter; two cups of sugar; one cup of milk; four cups of flour; one teaspoonful of soda; two of cream tartar; one pound of currants, and seven eggs. BREAD CAKE. Mrs. J. F. Edgar. Three cups of light dough, before it is kneaded; three cups of sugar; one cup of butter; four eggs; spice, cinnamon, and cloves. Mixtogether thoroughly; let it rise until very light, then mix pretty stiff with flour, add what fruit may bedesired, and one teaspoonful of soda. Divide in twocakes, and let rise again. Bake three hours. FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. G. A. Black. One cup of butter; one of sugar; one of molasses; one of sweet milk; three of flour; four eggs; cinnamon, cloves, and allspice to taste; one teaspoonful of soda; two of cream tartar, and two pounds of raisins. FINE FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. A. F. Payne. One pound of powdered sugar; one of butter; one of flour; twelve eggs; two pounds of raisins; two of currants; one half pound of citron; one tablespoonful of powderedmace; one of cinnamon; two nutmegs, grated; mix a large wine glass of Maderia wine, and one of brandy, together, and steep the spices in it over night. Flour the fruit before adding it to the cake. Bake in twoloaves. BLACK FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. T. M. McCormick. Four cups of sugar; two of butter; one of molasses; one of brandy; eight of flour; one half pint of sourcream; eight eggs; two pounds of raisins; two of currants, andtwo of almonds; one half pound of citron; one tablespoonful of cloves; one of saleratus; one lemon, and two nutmegs, grated. BLACK CAKE. Mrs. John W. Green. One pound and onequarter of butter; one pound of brownsugar; one of flour; three of raisins, seeded and chopped; two of currants; one of citron, cutthin and small; one of figs, chopped; thirteen eggs; one wine glass of Maderiawine, and two of brandy; one teacupful of molasses; one large nutmeg, grated; two teaspoonsful of cinnamon; one of mace, and one of cloves. Beatthe butter and sugar untilvery light; then stir in one fourth of the flour; whisk the eggs, very stiff, and add them gradually; then the remainder of the flour, one half at a time; after beating well, add the wine, brandy, and spices, then mix all the fruit together, and add one third at a time. Beatwell; butter and line the pan with white paper; put inthe mixture, and smooth with a knife. Bake in a moderateoven, about four hours. FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. Mary C. King. Two cups of butter; two and one half cups of sugar; two and one half of cups molasses; eight of flour; twoof sour milk; eight eggs; twoteaspoonsful of soda; three pounds of raisins; three of currants; one of figs; one of citron; two lemons, grated; two tumblers of currant jelly; one half pint of brandy; cloves, mace, cinnamon, and nutmegs. Mix flour and fruit alternately. Bake three and one half hours. GINGER FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. S. Craighead. One half pound of butter; one half pound of sugar; six eggs, beatenseparately; one pint of molasses; one pint of sour milk, in which put one tablespoonful of soda; three pints of siftedflour; one wine glass of brandy; threetablespoonsful of ginger; one of cinnamon; one of nutmeg, grated; one teaspoonful of cloves; one pound of raisins, mashed, with the seeds in; one pound of currants; one half pound of citron; put the whites of theeggs in last. To be baked in a slow oven. This will make twocakes, and will keep several weeks. DRIED APPLE FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. Lucy Green. Two cupsful of dried apples soaked over night; chop fine and simmerslowly in two cups of N. O. molasses until it looksdark. When cool, add one cupful of butter; one halfcupful of sugar; three cupsful of flour; one cupful of sweetmilk; two teaspoonsful of cinnamon; twoof cloves; two of allspice; three of baking powder; one half pound of raisins, and three eggs. Ifyou wish, add one cupful of currants and one quartercupful of citron. Bake in a slow oven two and one halfhours. FRENCH LOAF CAKE. Two and one half cupsful powdered sugar; one and one half cupsful of butter; five of flour; one of milk; one half glass of wine; one half glass of brandy; one half pound of raisins; two ounces of citron, cut in small pieces; one nutmeg,grated, and one tablespoonful of bakingpowder. Stir the sugar and butter to a cream; then add part of the flour, with the milk (slightly warmed), and the beaten yolks of the eggs; then the remainder of the flour, and the whites of the eggs, well beaten; add the spice, wine, brandy, and baking powder. Mix thoroughly together; put the fruit in last. Thiswill make two loaves. Bake one and one quarter hours. SPONGE GINGERBREAD. One cup of sour milk; one of molasses; one half cup of butter; two eggs; one and one half teaspoonsful of soda; one quart of flour, andone large tablespoonful of ginger. BLACK GINGER-BREAD. Three cupsful of molasses; one of butter; oneof sour cream; five cupsful of flour; four eggs; one ounceof ginger; one teaspoonful of soda in the cream; fruit if you like. GINGER-BREAD. Mrs. D. W. Iddings. One pint of molasses; one glass of sour milk orcream; one tablespoonful of soda; onehalf pint of melted lard. Put the soda into the molasses and milk, and beat to a foam. Make the dough verysoft. MARBLE CAKE. Miss J. A. E. Whites ofseven eggs; three cups of white sugar; one of butter; one of milk; four of flour; one andone half teaspoonsful of baking powder. Darkpart-- Yolks of seven eggs; two cupsful of brown sugar; one of butter; one of milk; one of Orleansmolasses, and four of flour; onetablespoonful of baking powder; one of cinnamon; one of allspice, and one half tablespoonful of cloves. Put some of thewhite mixture first into the pan, then with a large spoon drop in some of thedark, alternating until all is used. This will make one large and one smallcake. CHOCOLATE MARBLE CAKE. Miss Sallie C. Wight. One cupful of butter; two cupsful of sugar; one of sweet milk; three of flour; whites of five eggs; two teaspoonsful of cream tartar, and one of soda. Take one teacupful of the batter and stir intoit one large spoonful of grated chocolate; wet with asmall tablespoonful of milk; fill cake dish about oneinch deep with the white batter; then drop in two or three places a spoonful ofthe dark mixture; continue this until the batter is all used. LAYER CAKES. CHOCOLATE CAKE. Miss Lina Miller. The yolks of three eggs; one and one half cupsful of sugar; three quarters of a cupful of butter; one cupful of milk; three teaspoonsful of baking powder; flour enough to stiffen; bake in jelly cake pans. ICING. Whites of three eggs beaten stiff; add white sugar enough to sweeten; nine tablespoonsful of sweet chocolate, grated; mix well and spread on eachlayer while a little warm. CHOCOLATE CAKE. Blossom Brown. One cupful of sugar; one half cupful of butter; one half cupful of milk; two eggs; one and onehalf teaspoonsful of baking powder; two cupsful of flour; bake in thin layers. For filling, take one halfcake of sweet chocolate, grated; one half cup of sweet milk; one half cupful of sugar; yolk of one egg; onetablespoonful of vanilla. Boil in a pan set in akettle of boiling water, until stiff, like jelly. Whencool, spread it between the layers. SPRINGFIELD ALMOND CAKE. Two cupsful of sugar; one of butter; one of milk; four of flour; five eggs; two teaspoonsful of creamtartar, and one of soda. Bake in jellycake pans. Make a custard of one cupful of sour cream; one egg; one half pound of almonds, blanched and chopped fine; one tablespoonfulof sugar. Flavor it with vanilla. Do not spread the custard on until the cakeis cold. If you can not procure sour cream, take jelly; flavor, and mix almonds with it, and spread betweenlayers. ORANGE CAKE. Mrs. G. W. Rogers. One cupful of butter; two of sugar; one of milk, and three and one fourth cupsful of flour; five eggs, leaving outthe whites of three; one and one half teaspoonsful of bakingpowder; juice of one orange. Bake injelly cake tins and spread between the layers an icing made of the whites of three eggs and enough sugar to make it stiff; juice of one andgrated rind of two oranges. LEMON CAKE. One cupful of butter; four of flour; threeof sugar; one of sweet milk; five eggs; one tablespoonful of bakingpowder; juice and rind of one lemon. Bakein flat tins. AMBROSIA CAKE. Miss Louie Myers. One half cupful of milk; three fourths cupful of butter; two cupsful of sugar; three of flour; four eggs; three teaspoonsful of baking powder. Bake in jelly cake pans. When cold, spread with one pint of cream, whipped; one grated cocoanut; two eggs; onecupful of sugar; two oranges; and thegrated rind of one. JELLY CAKE. Miss Ellen P. Dickson. Five eggs; four cupsful of flour; three cupsful of sugar; one cupful of butter; one cupful of sourcream; three fourths teaspoonful of soda. WASHINGTON CAKE. Mrs. J. T. Wolf. Two cupsful of sugar; one half cupful of butter; three cupsful of flour; three teaspoonsful of bakingpowder; seven eggs; one half cupful of sweet milk. FILLING Three tart apples grated; one cupful of white sugar; one egg; the grated rind and juice of one lemon. Boil about twominutes; then let it stand to cool before spreading on the cake. RAILROAD CAKE. One cup of sugar; one of sweet milk; twoof flour; one teaspoonful of butter; two of baking powder, and three eggs, beaten separately. Mix, and bakeimmediately; use shallow pans. While hot, spread on jelly, and roll up. This will make two cakes. ROLLED SPONGE CAKE. Two eggs; two cupsful of sugar; two of flour; essence of lemon orbrandy to taste. Bake in thin sheets; spread the jelly on while warm, androll up. Use it while fresh. It makes a nice pudding with winesauce. SPONGE CUSTARD CAKE. Miss Louie Myers. Six eggs; two cupsful of sugar; three of flour; three teaspoonsful of baking powder, and four tablespoonsful of water. CUSTARD. One pint of milk; one half cupful of butter; put it into the milk and let come to a boil; then stir in two eggs; onecupful of sugar; two small teaspoonsful of corn starch; spread this between the layers ofcake. SPONGE COCOANUT CAKE. Miss Mary Gebhart. Take one pint of sugar; one of flour; eight eggs, beaten separately, and one tablespoonful of water; mix, and bake in jelly cakepans. FILLING. One cocoanut, grated; one cupful of sugar; one of cream; butter the size of an egg; warm it a little; mixthoroughly, and spread it between the layers. The cake is nicest whenfresh. COCOANUT CAKE. Mrs. W. A. B. One cupful of butter; three of sugar; threeof flour; one half cupful of sweetmilk; whites of ten eggs well beaten;three teaspoonsful of baking powder. Beat butter and sugar to a cream;add flour, milk, and baking powder; and last, stir in the eggs very lightly. Bake in a moderate oven, in pansone inch deep. Make three cakes. ICING. Three eggs; one pound of sugar; two cocoanuts grated; one lemon. Beat the eggs to a stiff froth; then add the sugar and lemon juice. Putone cake on a stand; while warm, spread on the icing; then sprinkle thick with cocoanut. Lay on another cake and do the same. At thelast, spread icing all over the top and edges and put on as much cocoanut as will adhere. WHITE MOUNTAIN CAKE. Mrs. I. Van Ausdal. One pound of flour; one of sugar; one halfpound of butter; one teacupful of sweetmilk; six eggs, beaten separately; oneteaspoonful of soda; two of creamtartar; the grated rind and juice ofonelemon. Bake in jelly cake pans put icingbetween the layers. Previous to icing, dredge with flour. ICING. One half teacupful of water; three of sugar, and the whites of threeeggs. Boil the sugar and water until quite thick; pour it on the whites of the eggs (previously beaten), and beat alltogether until cool. SMALL CAKES. GOOD COOKIES. Mrs. Dr. McDermont. Five eggs, beaten light; four tablespoonsful of cream; one half pound of butter; two cups of whitesugar; two teaspoonsful of cream tartar; one of soda. When rolled out sprinkle with sugar, and roll again; cut into small cakes. AUNT BETSEY'S COOKIES. Twenty ounces of sugar; ten of butter; twoteaspoonsful of saleratus; two teacupsful of milk; caroway seed, and flour to make it stiff enough to roll. CANADA COOKIES. Mrs. Munger. One half pound of butter; one half pound of sugar; one pound of flour; two eggs; rub the butter and sugar to a cream; beat the eggs well together; add flour, and roll out very thin; sprinkle with white sugar, and bake quick. COOKIES. Mrs. Fred Lange. Two coffee cups of brown sugar; one of butter; five of sifted flour; one egg; one half cupful of milk; one half teaspoonful cream tartar; one fourthteaspoonful soda, in the milk; roll thin; bake in a quick oven. SAND TARTS. Two cups of sugar; one of butter; four eggs, leaving out the yolk ofone. Beat the butter and part of the sugar together, and the remainder with the eggs; flour enough to make avery stiff dough. Roll thin; wet the top with white ofegg; sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon, and put blanchedalmonds over the top. GINGER NUTS. Mrs. Gibbs. Three pounds of flour; one of butter; onepint of molasses; two teaspoonsful of saleratus; ginger to thetaste. GINGER SNAPS. Mrs. Mary E. Mitchell. One pint of molasses; one and one half coffee cups of butter; two and one half cups of sugar; one half cup of water; two eggs; one tablespoonful of ginger; one heaping teaspoonful of soda. Mix all together with flour to make a soft dough; roll very thin, and bakein a quick oven. GERMAN CRACK CAKE. Amelia. One cupful of sugar; three quarters pound of flour; four eggs, leaving out the whites of two; beat all together, and bake in abiscuit pan. Sprinkle sugar and cinnamon over the top. Bake in a quick oven; whilewarm (before taking out of the pans), cut in squares. NANCY'S DOUGHNUTS. Two small cupsful of sugar; one cupful of sweetmilk; three eggs; one tablespoonful of melted butter; one small teaspoonful of soda, and two of creamtartar. Mix with flour as soft as theycan be rolled out. Fry in hot lard. RAISED DOUGHNUTS. Two cupsful of sweet milk; one of lard; oneand one half cupsful of white sugar; one cupful of yeast; two eggs; a little grated nutmeg and salt; add flour enough to make a thick batter; let it rise untilvery light; knead well, roll out and cut with a biscuitcutter, and cut the center out with a canistertop; put them on a floured board to rise again. When light, fry in hot lard. THE QUEEN OF DOUGHNUTS. Mrs. Mary Spinning. One half pound of butter; one tablespoonful of lard; three quarters of a pound of sugar; five eggs; one and onehalf pints of milk, and coffeecupful of home made yeast. Heat the milk and sugar together; mixwith them flour enough to make a stiff dough; heat the butter and lard; pour overthe dough when very hot, and work in well with the hands; add the eggs beaten separately, cinnamon ornutmeg, and then the yeast; let standuntil light; pinch off pieces about as large as a walnut; roll into balls andfry in hot lard. When done, and while warm, sift powdered sugar over them. EXCELLENT CRULLERS. Mrs. J. Langdon. One egg; four tablespoonsful of sugar; one pint of sweet buttermilk; one tablespoonful of butter or lard; flour enoughto make a soft dough. CRULLERS. Mrs. H. L. Brown. To five tincupsfulof flour put two teaspoonsful of soda; four teaspoonsful of creamtartar; five eggs; one and one halftincupsful of sugar; one fourth pound of butter and pint of milk; add cinnamon and nutmeg. CRULLERS. Mrs. Dr. Smith. Two cupsful of sugar; one half cupful of butter; one half teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a cupful of sourmilk; cinnamon or nutmeg to taste; four eggs; flour enough to make asoft dough. DROP GINGER CAKES. Mrs. William Craighead. One pint of molasses; one teacupful of sugar; one cupful of butter; four eggs; two tablespoonsful of ginger; same of groundcinnamon; one teaspoonful of salt; onetablespoonful of soda in a half teacupful of hot water; flour enough tomake a stiff batter. Drop on tins and bake. SAVORY CAKES. Mrs. Ashley Brown. Beat four eggs, whites and yolks separately; put them together,and add one half pound of white sugar; beat very hard;stir in slowly one quarter pound of sifted flour; flavor with vanilla; drop with a spoon in thin cakeson white paper; grate loaf sugar over the top, andbake in a quick oven. SHREWSBERRY CAKES. Miss Armstrong. One pound of flour; one pound of sugar; one half pound of butter; three eggs; flavor with cinnamon or carawayseed. Drop on tins. CHOCOLATE JUMBLES. Miss Jennie A. Edgar. One pound of sugar; one half pound of chocolate,grated; whites of eight eggs,or four whole ones beatenvery light; six ounces of flour; oneteaspoonful of cinnamon; one of cloves. Drop with a teaspoon on well buttered tins. CHOCOLATE PUFFS. Miss Joan Rench. Beat stiff the whites of two eggs, and beat in gradually one halfpound of powdered sugar; scrape down very fine one andone half ounces of best chocolate (prepared cocoa isbetter), and dredge it with flour toprevent it oiling; mix the flour well with it; thenadd the mixture of egg and sugar, and stir all very hard. Cover the bottom of asquare tin pan with a sheet of white paper; place upon it spots of powdered sugar about the size of a half dollar; put aportion of the mixture on each spot, smoothing it with a broad knife dipped in cold water; sift white sugar over the top of each; bake a few minutes in a brisk oven. When cold, loosenthem with a broad knife. DROP JUMBLES. One pound of sugar; three fourths of a pound of butter; yolks of eight eggs, or four wholeones; one cup of sour cream; oneteaspoonful of soda; one pound of currants; flour sufficient tomake the batter thick enough to drop from a spoon. Bake in buttered pans. COCOANUT JUMBLES. One pound of cocoanut, grated; three fourths of a pound of sugar; three eggs; largeironspoonful of flour; drop on buttered pans. ALMOND MACAROONS. Mrs. M. Eells. One half pound of almonds, blanched and pounded with a little rose water or essence of lemon; one half pound of whitesugar; two eggs; whites well beaten. Dipyour hands in water and work the mixture into ballsthe size of a hickory-nut. Put them in a cool oven and bake a light brown. Cocoanut can be grated and made into macaroons inthe same way. EGG KISSES. Miss Irene Stout. Take one half poundof granulated sugar, and the whites offour eggs, beaten very stiff; put writing paper in a pan, and dropin spots with a teaspoon. Bake in a slow oven three quarters of an hour. MERANGUES. Mrs. D. W. Stewart. The whites of nine eggs, beaten to a froth; mix with themone pound of powdered sugar. Drop on paper with ateaspoon and bake a light brown, putting the paper on a board (not pine) on thebottom of a pan, in the oven. When done, fill with whippedcream flavored with lemon. COCOANUT CAKES. Grate the whitepart of one cocoanut; allow an equal weight of whitesugar; add the grated rind and juice of onelemon. Mix the ingredients well; make into cakes the size of anutmeg with a little piece of citron in each. Bake onbuttered tins about twenty minutes in a moderateoven. MADELEINES. Blanch and chop rather finesome sweet almonds. Mix well together in a bowl threeounces of flour; three of sugar, and two eggs; then addone ounce of melted butter and a few drops of essence, to flavor. Butter slightly small tin moulds,and dust with equal parts of sugar and flour. Fill the moulds abouttwo thirds full; spread the almonds over the top and bake in a quick oven. Tobe eaten cold. CREAM CAKES. Miss Birge. Boil in one half pint of water three fourths of a cupful of butter, and stir in one and three fourths cupsful of flour. Take from the fire; put into a large bowl andstir in five eggs, one at a time, without beating, andone half teaspoonful of soda (dry). Drop in pans halfthe size you wish them; bake in a quick oven fifteen or twenty minutes. FILLING FOR THE ABOVE. One quart of milk; five eggs; one and one half cupsful of sugar; two tablespoonsful of cornstarch; flavor with lemon or vanilla. BOSTON CREAM CAKES. Mrs. I. Baldwin. One pint of water; one half pound of butter; three fourths of a pound of flour; ten eggs. Boil the water, with the butter in it;stir in the flour dry while it boils; when cool, add ateaspoonful of soda, and the eggs well beaten. Drop the mixture on buttered panswith a desertspoon. Bake twenty minutes. CREAM. One cupful of flour; two of sugar; one quart of milk andfour eggs. Beat the flour, sugar and eggs together andstir them into the boiling milk. When the mixture issufficiently scalded, set it to cool; flavor with lemon. When the cakes are cool, cut them open and fillin the cream. PICKLES AND RELISHES. In preparing pickles, avoid the use of metal vessels. If pickles are kept inthem any length of time they will become poisonous. When it is necessary toboil vinegar, do it in a porcelain kettle, or in a stone jar on top of thestove. Always use the best vinegar. A small quantity of alum is an improvementto pickles, but too much is injurious. Keep them in either glass orhard stoneware. CUCUMBER PICKLES. Mrs. G. W. Rogers. Two hundred smallsized cucumbers; three tablespoonsful of white mustard seed; three of black; three of celery seed; one handful of juniperberries, one handful of small greenpeppers; two pounds of sugar, and a fewsmall unions. Let the cucumbers stand three days in salt water closely covered. Boil a little alum in a half gallon of vinegar, and pour over the cucumbers scalding hot; repeat three or four times.When ready to bottle, add one half pound of groundmustard, and one bottle of Englishchow-chow. Take the vinegar from thechow-chow and mix with it sufficient cold vinegar tocover well the pickles. Seal up in glass jars. CUCUMBER PICKLES. Mrs. T. A. Phillips. Wash your cucumbers well, and place them in stonejars. To every gallon of vinegar add one half teacupful of salt; one ounce of gingerroot; one ounce of allspice; one ounce of cloves; one ounce of cinnamon; one ounce of blackpepper. Boil the vinegar and spices together for three mornings and pour over thepickles hot; cover them closely. Will be ready for use in three days. CUCUMBER PICKLES. Mrs. James R. Wallace. Let the cucumbers lie in salt water forty-eight hours; put together two quarts of vinegar; some cinnamon; red peppers and horse radish, and let them boil hard for fifteenminutes; then throw in the pickles and put in enough vinegar to cover them. Let them scald, not boil; thenset the kettle upon the stove and let the pickles remain in it (kept hot) untilthey are green; then pack them in jars and scald freshvinegar, adding one pint of sugar toevery gallon of vinegar, and pour over the pickles.Seal them tight. GHERKINS. Mrs. J. R. Young. Put the gherkins in brine for a week;if they are salty, soak one day; then take a kettle and line it with grape leaves; put the gherkins in and cover them with vinegar; put in a piece of alum the size of a hickory-nut; let them stand on thecoolest part of the stove all day and keep warm but notboil. If the vinegar is salty, put on fresh. Put the spices, cloves, cinnamon, mace, allspice, and pepper in aseparate vessel with vinegar and boil. Pour it overthe gherkins and they are done. INDIA PICKLES. Admiral Schenck. One gallon of best vinegar; three ounces of salt; one half pound of flour ofmustard; two ounces of turmeric; threeounces of white ginger; one ounce of cloves; one of mace; one of white and longpeppers each; four ounces of chalots peeled; two ounces of garlic peeled; two ounces of cayenne pepper. The mustard and turmeric must be rubbed together with a little cold vinegar and stand until smooth; stir in the otheringredients just before it boils. As soon as it boils, remove it; let it cooland it is fit for use. YELLOW PICKLES. Mrs. R. P. Brown. Six gallons of best vinegar; six ounces of turmeric; six of whiteginger; six of long peppers; one of mace; one of cloves; two of white mustard; one of whitepepper; two of celery seed; two pounds of brown sugar; two handsful of garlic; oranges and lemons to taste. Into this pickle put any vegetable preferred, prepared as follows: Soak in cold brine for one week; after which expose them tothe sun through the day; at night return them to the brine; then soak four days in vinegar and afterward put them into the pickle. Onions should have boilingbrine thrown over them and stand four or five days; then bleach asthe others. Vegetables may be prepared as they come in season. Thispickle will keep for years. STUFFED CUCUMBERS. Mrs. H. Strong. Let the cucumbers lie in brine fouror five days; then cut open one side, and scrape out the inner part. If theinside is very salty, let them lie in cold water untilthe next day; if not, two or three hours will answer. STUFFING. American mustard seed, cloves, black pepper, red pepper pods, small onions, celery seed, and horse-radish, chopped fine. FILLING FOR CUCUMBER MANGOES. Miss Louie Phillips. One half pound of white mustard seed; one ounce of cloves; one of blackpepper; two of celery seed; one cup of horse-radish, grated; one pod ofgarlic in each cucumber; fourtablespoonsful of table mustard; eight of oil, and one of turmeric. Mixthe mustard in cold water, and boil; when cold, stir in the oil and turmeric, and then mix with the other ingredients. Onions, cabbage, and tomatoes may be chopped withthe filling, if desired. RIPE CUCUMBER PICKLES. Take bright yellow cucumbers, firm but not soft; pare andcut them in strips, and, after removing the seeds, put them in a weak brine for twelve hours; pour off the brine, and scald them in alumwater until clear; wash in cold water, and drain. To one gallon of vinegar, take three andone half pounds of sugar; one stick ofcinnamon, nutmeg, and mace. Boil, and pour over the cucumbers; repeat two or three times. SLICED CUCUMBER PICKLES. Take one peck ofmedium sized cucumbers, and one half dozen onions; slice, and sprinkle with salt; let them lie three or four hours, then drain,and boil in vinegar for ten minutes, with thefollowing spices : one half pound of yellowmustard seed; two tablespoonsful of cloves; one of mace; one of turmeric, and two of brownsugar. Pack in jars, and tie paper closely over them. GREEN TOMATO PICKLES. Mrs. Judge Sherman. One peck of green tomatoes, sliced thin; sprinkle with salt, and let them stand one night; slice twelve onions; put with the tomatoes, and boil in vinegar for two hours, with the following spices : four ouncesof white mustard seed; four of groundmustard; one half ounce of turmeric; oneounce of cloves; one of allspice; one of ginger; oneof pepper; one of cinnamon; one fourth of a teacupful of salt; and one half poundof brown sugar. FRENCH PICKLES. One half peck of green tomatoes; one dozen of whiteonions; slice thin, and sprinkle with salt; let stand over night; drain in a cullender; thenput them into a porcelain kettle; cover with vinegar and water, equal parts; boil slowly one hour; thendrain one half hour. Take one and one half gallons of vinegar, and three pounds of brownsugar; boil and skim; then add one half teacupful of French mustard; one ounce each of groundcloves, allspice, cinnamon, black pepper, and turmeric. Mix to a smooth paste with water, and stir into the vinegar while boiling. Use stonejars; put in a layer of pickles, and then a cup of the mixture.They are ready for immediate use. PICKLED TOMATOES. Take redtomatoes, not very ripe, puncture slightly with a fork, and coverthem with strong brine; let them remain six or eightdays; then soak them twenty-four hours in vinegar and water; drain off, and, for every gallon your vesselholds, take six ounces of ground mustard; four of ginger; two of celery seed; one of cloves, and one dozen whiteonions, sliced. Mix the spices alltogether; put a layer in the bottom of the jar; then onions and tomatoes, and soon, alternately, until the jar is full. Fill up with strongvinegar. PICKLED TOMATOES. Mrs. A. C. C. Take pear-shaped tomatoes,yellow and red mixed; wash themoff, and put in narrow mouthed vessels, so that they canbe made air tight; to a quart of tomatoes, take ateaspoonful of salt, some gingerroot, cinnamon, mace, and small red peppers mixed in among them; make the jars full, and fill up with vinegar. Set in a cool, dark place. In three or fourweeks they will be ready for use. GREEN TOMATO PICKLES (SWEET). Scald andpeel full grown green tomatoes; drop them into strong ginger tea, andscald well. For every two pounds of tomatoes, take apound of sugar and a pint of vinegar; make a syrup of this, and drop in the fruit; let them cook until perfectly clear; add mace, cinnamon, and white ginger. Cover well with the syrup and tie upclosely. WALNUT PICKLE. Mrs. E. F. Stoddard. Take white walnuts fresh and tender; put them in salt and water for three days; then put in the sununtil they turn black. Take half a pound of mustardseed; two ounces of pepper; one halfounce of cloves; one half ounce of mace; one half ounce of nutmeg, and a good stock ofhorse-radish, boiled in one gallon of vinegar. Cover the walnuts close, and let them remainthree or four weeks. Pour off the liquid for catsup, if desired, and bottle it, covering thewalnuts again with cold vinegar. SMALL WHITE ONION PICKLES. Take small white onions, and peel them; lay them in salt water for two days; change the water once; thendrain them in a cloth, and put them in bottles; boil mace, pepper, and vinegar together; let it cool, and pour over thepickles. ONION PICKLES. Mrs. L. G. Evans. Put white onions on the stove in warmmilk; when they commence to boil take them out and rub the outsideskin off with a coarse towel; then put them in jars and sprinkle them lightlywith salt; add a very little mace; about six sticks ofcinnamon as long as your finger; a little horse-radish, and plenty of red pepperpods. Cover them well with vinegar. PICALILY. Mrs. J. F. Edgar. Take green tomatoes chopped very fine; sprinkle well with salt; let stand twenty-four hours; drain off and putin a stone jar. Take abouthalf the quantity of cucumbers, and the same of cabbage; after they are chopped, put into jarsseparately, and cover with cold vinegar. Take aboutone quarter as much white onions chopped; salt and pour boiling water on them; let stand a few hours; drain off and cover with vinegar as above. Let all remain several days in acool place; then press very dry and mix together; add some yellowand black mustard seed, celery seed, anda bountiful supply of grated horse-radish, with a few green peppers, chopped fine. Then take the best vinegar and about four pounds of brownsugar to each gallon. Boil it in part of the vinegar; scum well, and pour over the whole. Add asmuch cold vinegar as is required. CHOW-CHOW. Two dozen large cucumbers sliced; three quarters of a peck of green tomatoes sliced; twelve large peppers (red and green) sliced; one fourth peck ofsmall white onions peeled; one pint of small red peppers. Sprinkle one and one half pints of salt over them and let stand all night. In the morningdrain them well; then add one ounce of mace; one ounceof white mustard seed; one half ounce of cloves; one ounce of celeryseed; one ounce of turmeric; threetablespoonsful of ground mustard; one large piece of horse-radish cut up; cover all with vinegar and boil half an hour, or until tender. PICALILY WITHOUT TOMATOES. Mrs. Roger Stemble. Two heads of cabbage; four dozen cucumbers; one dozen greenpeppers; one of white onions; chop allbut the onions; sprinkle with salt; let them stand one hour; drain well; then coverwith cold vinegar and let stand twenty-four hours;chop the onions; pour hotwater over them; squeeze it out and mix all together. To onegallon of the mixture add one half pound of sugar; onepint of mustard seed; a little mace and cloves. Boil the spices inthe vinegar and pour over hot. OIL PICKLE CABBAGE. Mrs. W. B. Trim and quarter six heads of good cabbage; boil in vinegar and water until abroom splint can be passed through them. Prepare a paste of one half pint of best sweet oil; one pound of whitemustard; one half pound of black mustard; one quart of chopped horse-radish; one ounce of celery seed; one ounce of turmeric; one teacupful of brownsugar. Put down one layer of cabbage; then cover with the above mixture, and alternate in this way, covering eachlayer with good vinegar. SPICED NUTMEGS. Mrs. John Rench. Take small nutmegs, not quite ripe; pare and quarter them; coverwith vinegar and let stand twenty four hours. Thenmeasure out one quart of the vinegar, and to eachremaining quart add two pints of brown sugar; then addthe quart of vinegar that has been measured out; putthe vinegar and sugar on toboil a few minutes. Tie the spices, cloves, cinnamon and mace in a bag and put in a jar with the nutmegs and pour the vinegar over them. Boil this vinegar once a day for threesuccessive days The third time drop in the nutmegs andlet them boil fifteen minutes; then put them in stonejars, and in three weeks they will be ready for use. WATERMELON PICKLES. Mrs. T. A. Phillips. Pare off the green of the water melon rinds; cut in squares, andcover with weak alum water, poured on hot; let itstand twenty-four hours; then soak in rain water untilwell cleansed of the alum; put in a kettle; cover with pure water, and boil until tender; then press thewater out with a napkin. Make a syrup of equalquantities of vinegar and sugar; add one stick ofcinnamon, and race ginger. Put the fruit in and cook till clear; then take it out andcook the syrup a little more. PICKLED PLUMS. Mrs. Theodosia Dubois. Seven pounds of plums; three of sugar; oneounce of cinnamon; one of cloves, and one quart of vinegar. Put in a jar a layer of plums and a layer of spice; boil the sugar and vinegar, and pour it over the plums three days in succession,and the fourth day boil spices and all together. Theywill keep for years. SWEET GRAPE PICKLE. Mrs. Admiral Schenck. Seven pounds of fruit; four pounds of sugar; one quart of vinegar. Spices should be tied in a thin cloth, and boiled in the syrup, which should be pouredboiling hot, for three successive days, on the grapes. After that they may be put away for use. CHERRY PICKLES. Mrs. G. W. R. Two pounds of cherries; one pound of sugar; one half pint of vinegar; pour on boiling sevenmornings in succession; the last time, if ambercherries, put them in and boil a few minutes; add cinnamon. SWEET PICKLE CHERRIES. Mrs. Dr. Craighead. To seven pounds of fruit take one quart of vinegar and three of sugar; one half teacupful of broken cinnamon, and a few cloves. Seed one half the cherries and stew them rich. SPICED APPLES. Eight pounds of apples, pared; four pounds of sugar; one quart of vinegar; one ounce of stick cinnamon, and one half ounce of cloves. Boil the sugar, vinegar and spices together; put in the apples whenboiling, and let them remain until tender. Take them out and put in a jar; boildown the syrup until thick, and pour it over. SPICED CURRANTS. Mrs. J. L. Brenner. Three pounds ofripe currants; two pounds of sugar; one tablespoonful of cinnamon; nearly one half tablespoonful of allspice; one half tablespoonful of cloves, and nearly one half pint of vinegar. Boil all one half hour. Put into close glass jars. SPICED PEACHES. Mrs. W. A. B. Pare and halve one peck peaches, and place in a stonejar; boil three pints of vinegar and threepounds of sugar; skim, and pour over the fruit; repeat three times, every other day; the thirdtime, add, while boiling, one half ounce of cloves; one ounce of cinnamon, and one quarter ounce of mace unground. SWEET PICKLE PEACHES. Miss B. Pease. One quart of vinegar, and four pounds of sugar; boil, and skim; peel seven pounds of fruit; put in and boil until a little soft; take themout; heat the syrup three times, and pour over hot; the last time, boil itdown. If not as sweet as desired, a little more sugar may be added. SWEET PICKLE PEACHES. Mrs. Wm. Craighead. To twelve poundsof peaches take six pounds of sugar and one pint of vinegar; add spice totaste. SWEET CRAB PICKLES. Put half a bushel of crab apples in a kettle with vinegar enough to cover them, and cook until tender;then take them out of the vinegar and put them injars. Measure the vinegar and add a pint more thanwill cover the fruit, and to each pint add one and onehalf pints of brown sugar; one handful of stick cinnamon; three tablespoonsful of cloves, and two of mace. Tiethe spices in a bag and boil in the vinegar half an hour; then put the fruit in the jars and cover with the vinegar. TO PICKLE PEARS WHOLE. E. A. E. Take three pounds of pears; peel them and cut out the ends, leaving thestems in; put them into a preserving kettle, with onequart of water, and boil until a fork will go throughthem easily; then lay them out on a dish; add to the juice one and one half pounds of sugar; one pint of vinegar; some stick cinnamon, wholecloves, and race ginger. Boil all fiveminutes, and skim; put in the pears and boil themuntil the syrup thickens; then take them out in a jar, and, after the syrup hasboiled a little longer, pour it over them. If, after standing a few days, thesyrup should become thin, take it off and boil again. TO PICKLE NASTURTIONS. Take green nasturtions fresh from the vines; put them in salt and water for one day;then drain in a napkin. Put them in glass jars and cover with strong vinegar; keep the bottles closely corked. Areequal to capers, with roast lamb. The following 38 recipes in this chapter are handwritten. Italian Cream (Fairfield) 1 quart rich milk - 1 oz sheet isinglass - put in a bucket - Set the bucketin hot water until the isinglass dissolves & let boil a few minutes -Sweeten quite sweet - after it has boiled strain thro a thin cloth & stiror pour it until it is quite cool - While it is cooling beat a pint of richcream, that has been standing on ice, to a stiff froth, then pour the milk&c into the cream, slowly beating the cream all the while - add onespoonful vanilla Artificial Oysters Grate as many cans of (green) as will make one pint of pulp add one tea cupof flour - 1/2 do of butter - 1 egg - pepper & salt to suit taste. Droppedand fried in butter. Cream Cake 1 cup cream - 1 do sugar - 2 flour - 2 eggs - 1 tea spoon soda - flavor withlemon Water Muffins. 1 quart flour - 1/2 teacup yeast - 1 tablespoonful salt - warm water to makea thick batter - beat it with a spoon - let it rise 8 hours - bake it in muffinrings half full - 15 or 20 minutes - Cookies 1 cup butter - 2 sugar 1 cold water 1/2 tea-spoonful saleratus - 2 eggs -flour enough to roll and no more. Corn Bread 1 quart milk - 2 table spoons of saleratus - 4 oz butter - 3 eggs - 3 tablespoons flour - Corn meal to make stiff batter - Crullers 6 table spoons melted butter 6 do sugar - 6 eggs - flour to roll - fry inhot lard - Green Tomato Chow Chow 1/2 bushel green tomatoes - 12 onions - 12 peppers - all chopped fine -sprinkle over the whole 1 pint salt - Let stand over night drain off brine -cover with vinegar - cook slowly in porcelain kettle one hour - drain off thevinegar - pack in a jar there take 2 pounds of sugar - 2 table spoons cinnamon- one do allspice - one do cloves - one blackpepper - half cup ground mustard 1pint horse radish - vinegar enough to cover the pickle - mix the ingredientswith the vinegar - heat all quite hot, pour over and cover tight. Currant Soy 5 pd currants ripe - 3 do Brown sugar - 1 table spoon pepper - 1 do cloves 1do cinnamon - 1 tea-spoon salt - half pint vinegar - small measure - stir onehour - Cholera Medicine (Hills) 1 table spoon Laudanum - 1 do spts camphor - 1 do capsicum - 1 do sptsHartshorn - 1 pint best brandy - Teaspoonful 1 dose - mix with sweetenedwater Siberian Crab Jelly Take off the stems & cut open - weigh & mash them - To each 1 1/2pds add a pint of water & boil gently until they are broken - but do notallow them to fall to a pulp - Pour the whole into a jelly bag. When the juiceis transparent weigh it - put into a clean kettle & boil quickly for 10minutes - Take it from fire & dissolve in it ten oz fine sugar to eachpound of juice - boil from 12 to 15 minutes longer, skim it clean & pourinto jelly dishes - Should the quantity be large a few additional minutesboiling must be given to the juice before the sugar is added. Grape Jelly 14 ounces of sugar to each pound of grapes - Quince Jam 12 oz brown sugar to 1 pd quince - Boil fruit in little water as possibleuntil it will mash easily - pour off water - mash fruit with spoon - add sugar- boil 20 minutes - stir often. Quince Jelly Pare, quarter - core & weigh some ripe but quite sound quinces asquickly as possible - and throw them as they are done into a pint of the waterin which they are to be boiled - allow one pint of water to each pound offruit, and simmer gently until it is broken, but not so long as to redden thejuice which should be very pale - Turn the whole into a jelly bag and let itdrip without the slightest pressure - weigh the juice & put it in a cleankettle and boil quickly 20 minutes - Take it from the fire and stir in untildissolved twelve or fourteen ounces sugar (if the fruit should be very acid) toeach pound of juice - Put it back on the fire & keep it constantly stirredand cleaned from scum from 10 to 20 minutes longer or until it jellies - Cherry Jam 12 pd Ripe cherries - 1 pd sugar - break the stones of part and blanch them- put them to the fruit and sugar and boil all quickly, until the jam comesclear of the pan Waffles - 1 lb flour - 1/2 do butter - 4 eggs 1 quart milk - 1 tea spoon yeast boilthe milk stir in the butter, beat up warm & let rise - Lemon Pickle Wipe six Lemons - cut each into 8 pcs - put on them 1 pound of salt - sixlarge cloves of garlic - 2 oz Horse radish sliced thin - Likewise of cloves -mace - nutmeg & Cayene Pepper 1/4 oz each, & two oz flour of mustard.To these put 2 quarts vinegar - Boil 15 minutes in a well tinned sauce pan orin a jar set in a kettle of boiling water. Set the jar by for six weeks - stir daily and keep close covered - Then putinto small bottles. Tomato Pickles 8 lbs skinned tomatoes - 4 do brown sugar. put in preserving kettle &stir often to prevent burning - Boil to the thickness of molasses add 1 qt goodcider vinegar - 1 teaspoon mace - do cloves and boil 5 minutes longer. Fruit Fritters Make a batter of milk flour, eggs, whatever richness desired. Stir into iteither Raspberries, Currants or other fruit. Fry in hot lard. Pan Cakes Beat 3 eggs 1 qt milk - make a batter with flour, little salt - spoonfulground ginger, little grated lemon peel. Let it be of a fine thickness andperfectly smooth - Clean the frying pan thoroughly, put in a good lump ofdripping or butter, heat hot and pour in a cup full of batter, let it run allover of an equal thickness - shake the pan frequently that the batter may notstick When done on one side turn it, baking both sides a nice light brown - Layit on a dish before the fire - strew sugar over it & so do the rest. To beeaten directly or they become heavy - The above is a good batter if thickened a little more for applefritters To Stew Red Cabbage Slice a small, or half a head, of red cabbage, wash it & put into asaucepan with pepper & salt, add water but what hangs about it and a pieceof butter. Stew till quite tender. On serving add 2 or 3 spoons full of vinegar& give it a boil over the fire. Serve it with cold meat or with sausage onit. To Pickle Red Cabbage Slice it - in a cullender and sprinkle each layer with salt, let it draintwo days, then put it into a jar and pour boiling vinegar enough to cover. Putin a few slices of red beet root - If you like spice boil it with the vinegar.Cauliflower cut in bunches and thrown in after being salted will look abeautiful red Pickled Onions In September take some small white round onions - take off the brown skinhave ready a stew pan of boiling water, throw in as many onions as will coverthe top - As soon as they look clean on the outside take them up as quickly aspossible and lay them on a clean cloth, cover them closely with another thenscald more and so on. Let them lay on the cloth until cold. Put them in a jarpour over them best vinegar just hot but not boiling. When cold cover them -Should the outer skin shrivel, peel it off - They must look quite clear- Chocolate Cake Two cups sugar - 2/3 cups butter - 1 cup sweet milk - 3 cups flour 3 eggstwo teaspoons baking powder lemon extract - Bake as jelly cakes - Caramel - The whites of 3 eggs beaten very stiff - 2 cups sugar boiled untilalmost candy - pour very slowly on the whites beating them quite fast - 1/2cake Baker's chocolate grated - vanilla extract - stir until cool - then fillbetween each cake to cover the top & sides - Lemon Jelly Cake 2 cups sugar - 3/4 cup butter - 1 cup milk - 3 cups flour - 2 tea spoonsbaking powder - 4 eggs - Bake in layers. Jelly - 2 lemons pulp & peel - 1 coffee cup sugar - butter size of anegg - & 2 eggs - mix & boil till clear - Lightning Cake (Bess Hull) 1 1/4 cupsflour 1 " sugar 1 teaspoon B. Powder pinchsalt Mix 1/4 cup melted butter drop in 1egg Fill cup up with sweet milk. Flavor & beatwell. Cinnamon Cake 1 cup sour cream - 1 cup sugar 1/2 cup melted butter - 1 egg - 1/2 tea spoonsoda - Mix as for cookies roll out & spread ground cinnamon over the top -then roll up as a roll jelly cake & slice off with a sharp knife & bake- Any good cookey recipe will do - Caramel Cake 3 cups sugar - 1 1/2 cups butter - 1 cup milk - 4 1/2 cups flour - 5 eggs -2 tea spoons baking powder - Bake in layers Caramel for filling - 1 1/2 cups brown sugar 1/2 cup milk - 1 cup molasses 1tea spoon butter - 1 table spoon flour 2 table spoons cold water - Boil thismixture 5 minutes - add 1/2 cake Bakers chocolate (grated) - boil till theconsistency of custard - add a pinch of soda - stir well &, remove from thefire - when cold flavor with vanilla - spread between the layers & on topof the cake & set it in a sunny window to dry - Ginger Bread Two tea cups New Orleans molasses 2 cups boiling water 3/4 cup melted butter- 1 table spoonful ginger - 2 teaspoons soda - add flour to make a smoothbatter - beat well Lemon Pie Yolks of 2 eggs - 1 cup sugar the juice & grated rind of 1 lemon 1 1/2cups cold water 2 table spoons flour & 5 of water mixed for thickening -Bake till done but not watery - Beat the whites to a stiff froth & stir in3/4 cup sugar - spread over the top & brown in oven Frosting Icing &cc Beat 1/4 lb pulverized sugar with the juice of 1 larger lemon - add thewhite of 1 egg beaten to a stiff froth. 1 table spoon rum or Annak - Beat tillsnowy white - put over your cake & dry in a warm oven - Chocolate frosting - 1 cake or (1/2 lb) Maillard's French vanilla sweet chocolate grated - 1/2cup granulated sugar - 3/4 cup sweet milk. 1 table spoon butter a little salt -Boil 20 minutes stirring constantly Take from the fire & pour into a dishWhen near cool add 1 table spoonful vanilla - spread on the cake - If mixtureis thicker than jelly thin it with milk - This quantity will be 2 cakes 3layers each - Another Whites of 3 eggs beaten very light 9 table spoons powdered sugar 6 tablespoon grated chocolate - make acream or custard pie reserving for frosting the whites of 3 eggs using theyolks & 1 or 2 whole eggs for the pie - While the pie is baking scrape veryfine 2 table spoons Baker's Chocolate & place it on the back part of thestove to melt - Now beat the whites of the eggs well - add 6 tea spoonspulverized sugar - When the chocolate is melted, stir a little of the frostingit beating very hard - add a little more, till all is added - Do not make themistake of stirring the chocolate into the egg as it will remain clouded - Whenthe fire is done pour the frosting on top & return to the oven for 5minutes - It is better to warm chocolate to make it soft to mix in frosting orCharlotte Russe, than to dissolve in water - Icing 2 1/2 cups sugar - 2/3 cup water - Boil together until it candies - Then addthe whites of 3 eggs slightly beaten - stirring briskly for 15 minutes or untilperfectly smooth & white - Then add the juice of 1 lemon - This issufficient for white mountain cake of 8 or 9layers Another Beat the whites of 4 eggs with powdered sugar,sifted over 1/2 table spoon starch & 1/4 ounce fine gum Arabic - stir itwell Chocolate icing The whites of 2 eggs 1 1/2 cups powd sugar - 6 large table spoons Choco Chocolate filling - Whites of 3 eggs - 1 1/2 tea cups sugar 3 table spoons grated chocolate 1tea spoon vanilla - Beat the whites of the eggs well, then add the otheringredients - then beat all tog & spread between the layers & on top ofthe cake - Crab Apple Jelly Wash & halve the apples cut out the blossom - put them into a porcelainlined kettle. turn boiling water on them but not enough to cover them &cook until very soft - stirring occasionally to prevent burning - remove fromthe fire & let them cool off some - then put them into a bag made doublefrom a piece of an old table cloth coarse & soft - & then squeeze - inconsequence of having the bag double none of the pulp gets through - put thejuice into the kettle to boil removing the scum as it rises until perfectlyclear & continue to boil a few minutes longer - then measure it - add thesame amt. of sugar (granulated) & boil a little over 1/2 hour or until itis jelly - if when cold it is not thick enough it can be heated over End of handwritten recipes. Canned Fruits &Vegetables. CANNED PEACHES AND PEARS. Mrs. P. P. Lowe. Of peaches, the white heath clings are preferred; of pears, the flemish beauty. Take white clings tolerablyripe; pare and keep them covered in a deep jar until ready to use; then tothree pints of seeded peaches put one pint of water and four tablespoonsful of purewhite sugar; cook them a few minutes, or until a silver fork willenter them easily, but not enough for the fruit tobreak; then put in cans and seal immediately. This quantity usually fills a onequart can. Pare only enough for four cans, and put them up before preparingmore, unless two or three persons are at work; then let one person cansteadily, using two kettles, and putting in each enough to fill two quart cans.First put in your kettle the water; add the sugar, and when that is dissolved put in the peaches. Can as soon as possible after peeling toprevent their discoloring by exposure to the air. CANNED PEACHES. Mrs. J. R. Reynolds. Take nice ripe peaches; after paring, put them in a boiling syrup of sugar and water, (fourtablespoonsful to one quart); cook ten minutes. Can and seal boiling hot. BRANDY PEACHES. Mrs. J. R. Young. Take nice peaches, pared smoothly; scald them in an ordinary syrup until soft enough to run a straw in;place them in a jar; make a fresh, rich syrup. To onepint of syrup add one pint and a half of best whisky; pour this over your peaches and let stand over night; if the syrup looksthin, boil over and add more sugar. TO PRESERVE PEACHES FOR PIES. Take fivepounds of sugar to fifteen pounds of peaches; boil half an hour; then add one and one halfpints of vinegar and let boil fifteen minutes. Bottleand seal up. TO PRESERVE STRAWBERRIES. Miss Armstrong. To two pounds of finelarge strawberries, add two pounds of powdered sugar; put them in a preserving kettle over aslow fire until the sugar is melted; then boil themprecisely twenty minutes, as fast as possible. Have ready a number of smalljars and put the fruit in boiling hot; cork and sealthe jars immediately; keep in a dry place. The jars must be heated before thehot fruit is put in, otherwise they will break. PRESERVED QUINCES. Mrs. Theodosia Du Bois. Take fine apple quinces; cut them in half; pare and remove thecores; weigh them, and to each pound of quinces allowone of sugar. Then put them into a kettle; cover with cold water and boil until they are tender enough topass a broom splint through. Take out one at a time, andput them on dishes to cool and drain. Put sugar in akettle with water enough to dissolve it; then put the quinces into the syrup and let them cook until of alight color, skimming them all the time. Do not let them remain long, or theywill turn dark. Lay them on dishes, and when coolput in jars. Skim the syrup and strain through a hairsieve and pour over the quinces. BLACKBERRIES. Allow one pint of currant juice and one pint of water to six pounds of blackberries. Give them their weight in sugar; boil until the syrup is rich. PRESERVE CRAB APPLES. Put the crab apples in a kettle with grapeleaves in and around them, and a small bit of alum. Keep them scalding hot about one hour; then takethem out; skin and take out the seeds with a smallknife, leaving on the stems; lay them in coldwater. Make a syrup of one pound of sugar to one pound of apples; wipe and put them in; stewgently until they look clear; take them out and boil the syrup longer. TO PRESERVE ORANGES. Boil the oranges in soft water untilyou can run a straw through the skin. Put three quarters of a pound of sugar to each pound of fruit; take the oranges from the water and pour the hot syrup over them; let them standover night; next day boil them in the syrup until itis thick; then take them out and strain it over them. GREEN GAGE PLUMS. Take an equal quantity of fruit and sugar; pour boiling water on the plums and wipe them dry; prick them. Then make a syrup of the sugar and one half pint of water; when it boils put in half the plums; let them do slowly until they look clear; thentake them out and put in the balance. If the syrup is thin, boil it longer. CITRON MELON. Pare the melons; take out the seeds, and cut in squares half an inch thick; lay in salt and water one hour; thenwash off and boil in strong ginger tea. Make a weaksyrup of sugar and water andboil ten minutes; then make a syrup of one pound of sugar to one pound of citron; boil in this until it looks clear; season with lemonpeel. GOOD APPLE SAUCE. Peel, quarter and core asmany apples as you desire; put them in a vessel withjust enough water to stew them. While they are cookinghave a vessel on the fire with one half pint of water; one tablespoonful of butter; one of sugar, and one quarter of a nutmeg,grated. When this boils, stir in enough paste thickening to makeit of the consistency of cream; put your apples in adish and pour this over them. RASPBERRY JAM. Mrs. S. Craighead. Take the best of red antwerp strawberries; to every pound of fruit allow three quarters of a pound of white sugar; mash them up well and mix with the sugar. Put them into a preserving kettle (porcelain isbest), and let them boil one half hour, skimming them frequently; put intoclose glass jars; keep in a cool, dark place. JAM. Mrs. Theodosia DuBois. Seven pints of white currants; ten of redraspberries; twelve pints of sugar. Boilslowly one half hour; then put in the sugar, and boilwell three quarters of an hour, stirring most of the time to prevent itsburning. PEACH JAM. Take ripe freestonepeaches; pare and cut in small pieces; to every pound of peaches allow one half pound of whitesugar; put the sugar over the peaches and let them stand two hours; then put theminto a porcelain kettle on the fire, and boil slowly; stir all the time until the fruit is mashed smooth, and it almost jellies; putinto glass jars. CHERRY JAM. To each pound of cherries allow three quarters of a pound of white sugar; seed them; and as you do so throw the sugar gradually into the pan with them; cover, and letthem stand over night; next day boil them until they form a thick paste. ORANGE MARMALADE. Separate the pulp fromthe skin and seeds of the oranges; soak the skins over night in coldwater; (if the oranges are bitter put a little salt in the water). Scrapethe skins well, carefully removing all the white; then cut the yellow part intoshreds, as fine as possible, and add to the pulp. Add one pound of sugar to every pound of fruit. Boil twenty minutes. PINEAPPLE JAM. Peel pineapples, carefully cutting out black specks with apenknife; grate on a coarse grater. Use one pound of sugar to one pound of pineapple; boil until clear (about three quarters ofan hour). Put in small glass jars, and seal up. TOMATO JAM. Take one half pound of sugar to one pound of tomatoes; put together in a stonejar and let stand twenty-four hours; then take off the juice andstrain it. Put it in a porcelain kettle; bring to a boil, and skum; then put inthe tomatoes with a handful of stickcinnamon tied in a cloth; stir all the time. About ten minutesbefore removing from the fire, take out the cinnamon and add one teacupful of good vinegar to one gallon of jam. Boil until the jelly will not separate. FOR CANNING CORN. Mrs. J. R. Young. Get the best sweet corn; scald it on the ear, and cut it off while hot; put it in a pan over a kettle of boiling water, to keep it hot until you get enough cutto fill a can. Have a kettle of weak brine boiling ina porcelain kettle. Fill your can within an inch of thetop with corn; then cover it with the brine, leaving room for it to swell; seal the canwhile boiling hot. FOR CANNING CORN. Dissolve one and onefourth ounces of tartaric acid in one half pint of water; cut the corn from thecob; put it in a vessel over the fire, and bring to the boilingpoint; to each pint of corn allow one tablespoonful ofthis solution. Boil one half hour, stirring occasionally; then put the corn in quart cans, and seal tightly. When wanted foruse, pour the corn into a bowl, and stir in two thirdsof a teaspoonful of soda to each quart of corn. Let it stand one hour before cooking. TO CAN GREEN CORN. Cut the cornoff the cob; pack very closely into quart cans; then solder sothat every particle of air is excluded. Set the cans in a kettle of cold water and bring it to a boil; let the corn boil two and a half hours in this sized cans(larger cans will require more time). When done pour coldwater into the kettle to cool the cans and enable you to removethem carefully. Drinks for Family Use. TO MAKE CHOCOLATE. Take threetablespoonsful of chocolate (scraped) and dissolve itin one teacupful of boiling water; add to it one pintmore water, and when it comes to a boil, stir in asmuch milk as is desired. Boil five minutes. TO MAKE COFFEE. First have the coffee roasted an even, rich brown; do not grind ittoo fine; allow one tablespoonful of ground coffee foreach cup of coffee; put it into the coffeeboiler; stir into it the white of one egg, and just enough cold water to mix it; then pour on boiling water. For six tablespoonsful of coffee put in three pints of water; boil twenty minutes; set it aside, and pour inone teacupful of cold water to settle it; thentransfer it to the urn. Coffee for forty persons--three pints of groundcoffee and two gallons of water. TO MAKE TEA. First scald the teapot; pourout that water, and put in two teaspoonsful of green tea; add a cupful of water; let it stand ten minutes; fill up with boiling water. GRAPE WINE. To every quart of grape juice, take one pound of sugar, and one quart of water. Put it in jugs, filling them, and keeping outenough to supply the jugs as it works over; when it is done fermenting, put thecorks in loosely, and let stand six weeks; then bottle, and cork tight. ELDERBERRY WINE. To two quarts of berries, put two quarts of water; boil half an hour; strain the liquor through a hair sieve; then to every quart, put three quarters of apound of brown sugar; four ounces of ginger, and two of cloves. Boil the whole fifteen minutes. Pour it into a tub, and, when cool, put in ajug or keg, with a piece of toast dipped in yeast. Keep it in a warm place; in four or five daysput in one pint of brandy. It will be ready to bottleabout Christmas. BLACKBERRY WINE. Measure the berries and bruise them; to every gallon, add onequart of boiling water; let them stand twenty-fourhours, stirring occasionally; strain the juice through a flannelbag; to every gallon, add two pounds of brownsugar; pour it into a cask, and let it stand till throughfermenting; then bung up tight. CURRANT WINE. Mrs. J. F. E. Take one quart of juice; two of water, andthree pounds of sugar; dissolve the sugar in the water; then mixall together, and fill the vessel to the brim, leaving the bung out untilfermentation ceases; fill up every morning with fresh juice and water, so that theskum may throw itself off; when it has stopped fermenting, add two quarts of whisky to one barrel. Bung up tightly, until Februaryor March, when it may be racked off and bottled. CURRANT SHRUB. To a pint of strained currant juice, put a pound of sugar; boil gentlytogether eight or ten minutes; then set it to cool; when lukewarm, add a wineglass of brandy to every pint of syrup; bottle, andcork tight. Keep in a cool place. RASPBERRY SHRUB. Mrs. Graham. One gallon of red berries, and one half gallon cidervinegar; let it stand over night; then strain; put in six poundsof white sugar; let it boil; skim, and let it standuntil cool; then bottle it, and when used, put in two thirds icewater. RASPBERRY VINEGAR. Put two quarts of raspberries in a stone jar; pour over them one quart of the very best vinegar; letit stand twenty-four hours; then strain, and pour the liquor over fresh fruit, and let it stand in the same way; allow onepound of sugar to a pint of juice; put it into a stone jar, and set in a pot of boiling water for one hour; skim well; put intobottles, cork and seal tight. Diluted with water, itis a very nice drink for the sick. Toasted bread maybe eaten with it. STRAWBERRY ACID. Twelve pounds of fruit; two quarts of water; five ounces of tartaric acid. Put the acid in the water, and, after it is dissolved, pour it over the fruit; let it remain forty-eight hours; and thenstrain it. To one pint of clear juice, add one and onehalf pounds of white sugar; let it stand two or threedays, stirring once or twice a day to dissolve the sugar, then bottle it. Place a cork loosely in eachbottle until a slight fermentation take place, then cork tight, and keep thebottles erect; the whole process to be cold, and no tin vessel must be used inthe making of it. ELDERBERRY SYRUP. Wash and strain the berries, which should be ripe; to a pint of juice, add a pint of molasses; boil twenty minutes, stirring constantly. When cold, add to each quart fourtablespoonsful of brandy; bottle, and cork tight. Isgood for a cough. ORANGE SYRUP. Select ripe and thin skinned fruit; squeeze the juice through a sieve, and to every pint add one pound of whitesugar. Boil slowly ten minutes and skim as long as any skum rises;when cold, bottle. Two tablespoonsful of this syrup, mixed with melted butter, makes a good sauce for puddings. Threetablespoonsful of it in a glass of ice water makes anice drink. LEMON SYRUP. To every pint of strained juice, add one pound and one quarter of sugar. Let it simmer until it becomes clear; whencold, bottle and cork tightly. PINEAPPLE SYRUP. Pare and cut the pineapples in pieces, and to every three pounds add aquart of water; cover them, and boil until very soft;then mash and strain. To one pint of this juice addone pound of sugar; boil to a rich syrup, put inbottles and cork tightly. BLACKBERRY CORDIAL. Mrs. G. W. Rogers. To a peck of berries, take one pint of water; boil and strain them; to three quarts of juice, add three pounds of crushedsugar; boil and skim; stir in one ounce each of cloves and cinnamon; whencold, add one quart of best brandy, and two nutmegs, grated; bottle and seal up. QUINCE CORDIAL. Grate the quinces, and strain them through a flannel bag. Toevery three quarts of juice add one quart of brandy; two pounds of sugar; spice if you wish;bottle tight; keep in a cool place. CHERRY CORDIAL. Mash and strain the cherries, and, to one gallon of juice put two pounds of sugar. Boil together, and add one half pint of spirits to a gallon. When cold, bottle. SUMMER DRINK. One large lemon; one ounce of gingerroot; one and one half pounds of sugar; one gill of yeast; one ounce of tartaricacid; two and one half gallons of water. Slice the lemon; bruise the ginger, and mix all together, except the yeast; pour the water boilinghot upon the mixture, and let stand until it is milk warm; then add the yeast and set in a warm place for twelve hours; thenbottle; tie the corks down tightly. It will be ready for use in forty-eighthours. CREAM NECTAR. Three pounds of white sugar; two ounces of tartaricacid dissolved in one quart of soft water over night; stir in the whites of three eggs, wellbeaten; flavor to taste; bottle and keep in a cool place. Allow threetablespoonsful of the syrup to one glass of water; add soda enough to make it effervesce; put the soda in the water first. EGG NOGG. Twelve eggs; one and one half pounds of sugar; three pints of cream; one of new milk; two tumblersful of jamaica spirits; one of brandy. Beat together for one hour; then heat over hot water until milk warm; then beat until cold. EGG NOGG. Mrs. William Craighead. Twelve eggs; one pound of granulatedsugar; beat the yolks of eggs and sugar together until very light; set them over a pot of boiling water, beatingconstantly until they are warmed through. Add from four to six wine-glasses of brandy, five pints of milk, and the whites, beaten to a stiff froth, last. BEER. One pint of molasses; one pint of yeast; one tablespoonful of cream tartar; one ounce of ginger, and six quarts of coldwater; mix and let stand twelve hours before bottling. SPRUCE BEER. Take four ounces of hops; boil half an hour in one gallon of water; strain it; add sixteen gallons of warm water; two gallons of molasses; eight ounces of essence ofspruce dissolved in one quart of water; put it in a clean cask; shake it well together; add onehalf pint of yeast; let it stand and work one week; ifwarm weather, less time will do. When drawn off, add one tablespoonful of molasses to each bottle. HARVEST BEER. To make fifteen gallons of beer, put into a keg threepints of yeast; three pints of molasses and two gallons of coldwater. Let it stand a few minutes; then mix well together threequarts of molasses, three gallons of boiling water with one ounce of ginger, and pour all into the keg; fill it up with coldwater. A decoction of sassafras is anaddition to the flavor of the beer. FOOD FOR THE SICK. In preparing articles of diet for the sick be careful to use cookingutensils that are perfectly sweet and clean. Food should be prepared in small quantities, and served in the most invitingmanner. BEEF TEA. Cut one pound of lean, fresh, juicy beef into thin slices; sprinklewith a little salt; put it into a wide-mouthed glassor stone jar; cover closely; set it in a kettle of water which must boil hard for one hour; take out thejar and strain the essence of the beef into a bowl. Chicken tea may be made in the samemanner. MUTTON BROTH. Boil a piece of mutton until it will fall from the bone; then strainthe broth and let it get cold, so that the fat will rise, which must be takenoff; then warm the liquor and put in a little salt. Swelled rice or barley may be added toit. Veal or chicken broth is made inthe same way. GRUEL FOR THE SICK. Gruel can be made from oatmeal, arrowroot, wheat flour or corn meal. Inall cases these things should be first mixed smoothly with a little cold water, and afterwards more water added; boil andseason to taste. Two tablespoonsful of any of them is enough to make one pint,when boiled. A few raisins boiled in gruel is animprovement. EGG GRUEL. Beat the yolk of oneegg with one tablespoonful of whitesugar; pour one teacupful of boilingwater on it; add the white of the egg beaten to a froth, with any seasoning or spice you maydesire. To be taken warm. PANADA. Toast a slice ofbread very dry, until a nice brown color, but do not scorch it;break in small pieces into a bowl; put in sugar and alittle grated nutmeg and pour boilingwater over it. If the patient has no fever one half glass of wine may be added. BARLEY PANADA. Boil a small teacupful of barley in water (with a few raisins) until it is soft. Put in sugar and a little gratednutmeg; break in bits of toast or dryrusk after it is taken from the fire. EGG PANADA. Boil one handful of good raisins in one pint of water; toast a piece of bread nicely and cut it up into abowl; beat one egg with a teaspoonful of sugar and put with the bread. When the raisins are soft, pour them, with the water in which they were boiled, over the toast and egg, stirring allthe time; season to taste with wine, nutmeg and butter, if thepatient can bear it. TOAST WATER. Cut slices ofbread very thin; toast it dry and brown, but do not let it burn;put it in a pitcher and pour boiling water on it. Toast water will allay thirst better than almost anything else. APPLE WATER, ETC. Roast two nice, tart apples; mash and pour over them one pint of water, or slice raw apples and pour boiling water over them. Tamarinds, currant or grape jellies, cranberries or driedfruits of any kind, mixed with water, make agood drink. WINE WHEY. Boil one pint of milk; when it rises to the top of the saucepan, pour in a large glassful of sherry or maderiawine; let it boil up; if it separates, take it off the fire; letit stand a few minutes, but do not stir it. Strain it through swiss muslin. BUTTERMILK WHEY. Put one quart of buttermilk in a sauce pan overthe fire; when it boils, put in the beaten yolk of oneegg, and, if it can be allowed, a little cream orbutter; beat the white of the egg verylight and stir in; add sugar and spice to taste. TAMARIND WHEY. Mix one ounce of tamarind pulp with one pint of warmmilk; strain it and add a little sugar tothe whey. MULLED WINE. Beat together one egg; one glass of wine, andone tablespoonful of sugar; add to it one half pint of boiling water; stir all the time to prevent curdling;pour it into a tumbler and grate a little nutmeg overit. MULLED JELLY. Take one tablespoonful of currant or grape jelly; beat with it the white of one egg and a little loafsugar; pour on it one half pint of boilingwater, and break in a slice of dry toast or twocrackers. EGG NOGG. Mrs. William Craighead. Beat up one egg; one and one half tablespoonsful of sugar; three tablespoonsful of cream, and one of liquor. BLACK TEA. Put one teaspoonful of tea in a vessel that will hold one pint; pour over ittwo small teacupsful of boiling water; cover closely,and set by the fire to draw. COFFEE. Put two teaspoonsful of ground coffee in a small tincup. Pour boiling water onit; cover and set over the fire five minutes; then let it settle and pour offin a cup; add sugar and cream if desired. CHOCOLATE. To make a single cup of chocolate, grate one desert-spoonful in a tincup and pour on it a teacupful of boilingwater; cover and let stand over the fire five minutes; just beforetaking it off, stir in a teaspoonful of cream. IRISH MOSS BLANC MANGE. Pick over,carefully, one teacupful of Irish moss; wash it firstin saleratus water; then rinse it several times infresh; put it in a tin bucket, with one quart of milk; cover closely and set in a pot of boiling water. Let it stand until the milk begins to thicken, then strain through a fine sieve, and sweeten with powderedsugar; flavor with lemon or vanilla; wetthe mould in cold water; pour in the blanc mange, andset in a cool place. When quite firm, loosen the edges from the mold and turnout on a dish. To be eaten with sugar and cream. RYE MUSH. Take four tablespoonsful of rye flour; mix smooth with a little water, and stir it into one pint of boiling water; boil twenty minutes, stirringfrequently. To be eaten with cream or milk. OYSTER TOAST. R. L. E. Make a thick slice of wellbrowned and buttered toast; lay it in a hot dish. Put six oysters; half ateacupful of their own liquor, and not quite one half teacupful of milk, into a tin cup. Boil one minute. Season with butter, pepper, and salt, and pour over the toast. BOILED CUSTARD. Beat up one egg, with a heaped teaspoonful of sugar; put it into a teacupful of boiling milk; stir until it thickens. Pour it into a bowl,over a slice of toasted bread. Spice to suit. MEIG'S DIET FOR INFANTS. A piece of sheet gelatine two inches square, soaked for a shorttime in cold water, then boil in one half pint of water about ten minutes; add, with constant stirring,one teaspoonful of arrowroot, dissolved, and one halfpint of milk; add a little cream just before removing from the fire, and amoderate quantity of sugar. DRIED FLOUR FOR INFANTS. Take one teacupfulof flour; tie it up tightly in a close muslin bag; put it in a pot with coldwater; boil three hours; then take it out and dry the outside.When used, grate it; one tablespoonful is enough for one teacupful of milk (which would be better with one third water); wet the flour with alittle cold water; before stirring it into the milk add a very little salt. Boil five minutes. BEEF TEA FOR INFANTS. Take one and one halfpounds of the best steak; cut it into very smallpieces, and put them into a glass jar with enough coldwater to cover the meat; tie the top ofthe jar on and put it into a saucepan full of coldwater; place it on the fire and boil three hours. MISCELLANEOUS. DIPTHERIA. Make two small bagsout of close drilling, long enough to reach from ear to ear; fillthem with equal parts of wood ashes and salt; wring one at a time, very dry, out of hot water, and apply to the throat; cover it up with dry flannel; when it becomes cold, change for a warmone, and continue to do so until the skin is slightly irritated. For children,put flannel between the bag and the throat; or, the salt and ashes may be heatedbefore putting them into the bags, and applied dry to the throat. Make a gargleof one teaspoonful of molasses; one of salt, and one half teaspoonful of cayennepepper; mix these with one teacupful of hotwater; when cool, add one quarter of a cup of cidervinegar. Gargle every fifteen minutes. COUGH SYRUP. Take one ounce of thoroughwort; one of slipperyelm; one of stick licorice, and one of flaxseed. Simmer together in one quart of water until the strength is extracted; then strain,and add one pint of molasses, and one half of a poundof loaf sugar; simmer well together. When cold, bottletight. Dose--One tablespoonful at a time, as often as the cough demands. EXCELLENT COUGH MIXTURE. Take a handful of hoarhound; boil in a quart of water; add one pint of Orleans molasses, and one pound of brownsugar. Boil to a thin syrup. Put all in abottle, and add one tablespoonful of tar. Shake whilewarm, until the tar is cut into small beads.Dose--Take one tablespoonful whenever the cough is troublesome. FOR A COUGH. Roast a lemon very carefully, without burning it. When it isthoroughly hot, cut, and squeeze the juice into a cup,over two tablespoonsful of powdered sugar. Dose.--Atablespoonful. REMEDY FOR BURNS. One pint of lard, warm; one tablespoonful of brimstone(pulverized); one of tar, and oneteaspoonful of verdigris. SIMPLE REMEDY FOR RHEUMATISM. Bathe theparts affected with water (in which potatoes have beenboiled), as hot as can be borne. This has been tested and found tobe very efficacious. DYSPEPSIA REMEDY. One cup of sugar; one pint of bran. Mixwell together, and brown it in the oven same as coffee,stirring often. Eat of it two or three times a day. CURE FOR FEVER AND AGUE. Mrs. A. C. Clark. One ounce of Peruvian bark; one ounce of creamtartar, and sixty cloves; all pulverized,and put into one quart of whisky. Dose--One half of awine glass, three times a day. AGUE BITTERS. Mrs. P. P. Lowe. Ten cents' worth of prickly ash berries; five cents' worth of dogwood bark; same of sarsaparilla, and the same of wildcherry. Put the above into a bottle large enough to hold them, with one quart of the best whisky. Let stand a day or two before using. Dose--Foran adult, a little more than one half a wine glassful three times a day; use ituntil there is only enough left for three doses for the ninth day, or whateverday precedes the one on which the chill is likely to return. ANTIDOTE FOR POISON. Swallow, instantly, aglass of warm water, with a heaping teaspoonful of common salt, and one of groundmustard, stirred together. This will serve as an emetic;afterward, take the whites of two raw eggs. If youhave taken corrosive sublimate, take one half dozen raweggs, besides the emetic; if laudanum, acup of very strong coffee; if arsenic, first theemetic, then one half cup of sweet oil, or meltedlard. TO PREVENT LOCKJAW, In case of any wound orscratch, from which lockjaw may be apprehended, bathe the parts freely with lye, or saleratus water. A rind of saltpork bound upon a wound occasioned by a needle, pin, or nail,prevents lockjaw. It should always be applied until medical aid can beprocured. FOR FROSTED LIMBS. Two drachms of beeswax; two of Veniceturpentine; one and one half drachms of chloroform; one half drachm of camphor, and one half ounce of lard. Melt the beeswax, turpentine, and lard, over aslow fire; then add the camphor and chloroform. Bathe the frosted parts in warm water, and rub the ointment on by the fire. TO STOP THE FLOW OF BLOOD. Bind the cutwith cobwebs and brown sugar, pressed on like lint, or with the fine dust of tea. When the blood ceases to flow, apply laudanum. CURE FOR WASP STING. Make a poultice of saleratus water and flour, and bind on the sting. For a bee sting, apply sliced rawonion. CURE FOR SPRAINS. Beat up an egg to a thick paste with finesalt; spread it on a cloth, and bind on the part affected. Renewoccasionally. TO REMOVE TAR FROM THE HANDS OR CLOTHING. Bub well with clean lard, and afterward wash with soap and warm water. TO REMOVE DISCOLORATION BY BRUISING. Applya cloth, wrung out of very hot water, and renewfrequently, until the pain ceases. TO CLEANSE THE HAIR. Beat up the yolk of an egg, with a pint of softwater; apply it warm; rub well, and afterward rinse with clean soft water. CAMPHOR ICE. Mrs. Wm. Craighead. One ounce of white wax; two of spermacetti, and one of gumcamphor, well pulverized. Put all in a tincup, and nearly cover with olive oil; putit on the stove and let simmer for fifteen minutes, butnot boil. COLOGNE. Mrs. J. R. Young. Three ounces of oil of burgamont; two of lemon; two of lavender; rose, one hundred and twenty-eight drops; alcohol, two gallons; twenty-eight drops nevoli. COLD CREAM. One ounce of rosewater; one half ounce of spermacetti; onedrachm of white wax, and fourteen drachms of almond oil. Melt the lastthree in a china cup, in hotwater; then add the rose water gradually. SALVE. Mrs. W. C. Four ounces of mutton tallow; two of beeswax; one of rosin, andone half ounce of gum camphor. Simmer well together;take off the fire, and then add one gill of alcohol. Good for all kinds of sores and wounds. BROWN SALVE. Two pounds of mutton tallow; put in as many gympson(Jamestown weed) and plantain leaves aspossible; fry, until they crimp up, and then strain; to this add about twotablespoonsful of tar; let it boil up; then pour itinto the vessel in which it is to be kept, and let cool. EXCELLENT LINIMENT. One ounce of spirits turpentine; two of oliveoil; one of spirits camphor, and two of spirits ammonia. EXCELLENT LINIMENT FOR CUTS. Take fourounces of balm gilead buds, and steep them two orthree days in one quart of alcohol; then strain offthe liquor, and add to it three ounces of turpentine; four of gum camphor; three of oil ofarganum, and two of sweet oil. Is goodfor either man or beast. CURE FOR A FELON. Take rocksalt, and heat it in the oven; then pound it fine, and mix it with turpentine, equal parts; put it on a cloth, and wraparound the part affected; as it dries out, make a fresh application, and so onuntil cured. LEY POULTICE. Tie a tablespoonful of wood ashes in a rag and boil it in one pint of water fifteen minutes; take out the ashes and thicken with corn meal. Stir in a teaspoonful of fresh lard; spread on a cloth and apply warm. CREAM POULTICE. Put to boil one teacupfulof cream; mix two tablespoonsful of flour in milk and stir intothe boiling cream. LILLY ROOT POULTICE. Pound the roots of the sweet whitelilly, and put them on to boil in richmilk; when soft, thicken with breadcrumbs. This is a most valuable poultice for a gathering. HOP POULTICE. Boil a handful of hops in a pint of water untilvery soft; then thicken with corn meal. It is good fora sore throat or swelled face. POTATO POULTICE Is said to be better thanone made of bread; is more efficacious; keeps heat longer, and can be reheated,if necessary. The potatoes are pared, boiled andmashed fine; put into a thin muslin cloth, and applied quite moist, and as warmas the patient can bear it. FOR KEEPING CIDER. Mrs. L. A. Tenny. One quart of milk; one pound of best mustard (in box); one full barrel of cider, and four extra gallons. As it ferments fill itup until it becomes quiet; then rack it off; put it in a cleanbarrel and set it in the cellar. TO PRESERVE MILK. Put a small piece of horse-radish into a pan of milk and it will keep it sweet. PRESERVING BUTTER. Take two parts of thebest table salt; one part of sugar, and one part of salt-petre; blend the whole completely. Take one ounceof the composition for one pound of butter; work itwell into a mass; then pack it solid into a stonejar. TO KEEP BUTTER. Mrs. A. C. Coburn. Make a brine of rock salt that will bear up an egg. Boil, andskim it well; pour into a clean vessel to cool. Then pour off into a stone or wooden vessel that has not been used for anything else; tie up rolls of butter in cloths and dropin the brine. Be careful to keep the vessel covered,and the butter under the brine. FOR KEEPING PICKLES IN BRINE. Mrs. G. Arnold. Wash them clean. Putinto the bottom of a cask one half inch of dry salt; then a layer of pickles; then a layer of salt (no water). Put a board on, and a light weight to keep them down; they willdraw their own brine. When wanted for use, put the pickles into a porcelain kettle; not more than half full; fill up with cold water; cover and set it on top of the stove; stirthe pickles frequently; when almost boiling, pour offthe water and fill up as before. Repeat this processseveral times, or until the salt is extracted; put asmall lump of alum in the last water with part vinegar; throw that away and boil vinegar with any spice you desire, and when cold put in the pickles. They will be ready for use in a few days. CURING HAMS. Mr. Prugh. As soon as the hams are cut and ready, rub them thoroughly with amixture of salt and saltpetre, dry, in the proportion of threetablespoonsful of salt and one tablespoonful of saltpetre (pulverized) to four hams. Let them lie for twenty-four hours; then putthem down into a tub and cover them well with brine strong enough to bear an egg. Leave the hams in this liquor for five weeks; then take them outand wash off with warm water. Have ready plenty of ground black pepper and rub the wholeham well with it, especially on the cut sides; rub it very thick,and in any little cracks and about the bone. Then hang up and smoke with greensugar-tree wood. TO SUGAR CURE HAMS. For one hundred poundsof meat take five pounds of sugar; two ounces of pulverizedsaltpetre, and seven pints of salt. Rubthe hams first with the saltpetre and then with the sugar; then pack them in a meat-tub and let them remain one week; rub salt into them and pack them again in the same tub.They will be ready for the smoke-house in from four tosix weeks, depending upon the size of the hams. Theposition of the hams ought to be changed several timesso that all will be equally salted. TO CURE TONGUES. Wet each tongue with molasses; rub onit a teaspoonful of pulverized saltpetre, and as much salt as will stick to it, besides putting a littleloosely in the cask. Let them lie three weeks in brine, turning frequently, then rinse off and hang upto dry. TO PRESERVE EGGS. One heaping pint of salt; one scant pint of lime, and six quarts of water. Let the pickle stand a few days, stirring it occasionally;drop the eggs in carefully without cracking them. Theymust be fresh. KEEPING EGGS. One and one half pints of lime, and five cents worth of beefsuet. Slack the lime; then add one andone half gallons of water. Render out the suet and put with it; let all come to a boil. Have a wire ladle; dip a few eggs at a time in the boiling solution, for a minute;then lay them on something to dry; then pack away in a box, in either sawdustor bran. TO PRESERVE SAUSAGE. Heat ground sausage meat slowly in a tin pan or kettle,while mixing in the salt, sage and pepper; notpermitting it to cook or burn. When thoroughly mixed and while hot, put in atight jar and pour melted lard over the top one halfinch thick. Keep it in a cool place. For use during the summer. WASHING FLUID. Mrs. W. R. S. A. Take two pounds of potash; put it in an earthen vessel and add twogallons of boiling rain water; one ounce of salamonia, and one ounce of salts oftartar. Put them in an earthen vessel; addone quart of boiling rain water, and let standtwenty-four hours. Then strain all through a flannel bag; put together in astone jug and cork tight. Have the water in the boilernear boiling; then put in one teacupful of the fluid and use less soap. Afterthe clothes have been well washed through one water, put them in and boil for half an hour. Then rub the clothes out of the boil andrinse; for each boiler of clothes after the first, use only half the quantityof the fluid. CLEANSING FLUID. Two drachms of chloroform; one half ounce of salsoda; one half ounce of alcohol; twoounces of white castile soap; two and one half ouncesof aqua ammonia; cut the soap fine and dissolve it inone gallon of soft water; strain it and then add theother ingredients. This fluid will remove grease and spots from any fabric. CLEANSING CREAM. Three ounces of castile soap, and one of borax; dissolve together, in one quart of rain water, over the fire. When dissolved, add four quarts more of coldwater; then add the spirits : four ouncesof alcohol; three of ammonia; two of ether, and one of glycerin. This is nice totake out grease, paint, &c, from all materials. HARD SOAP. Pour four gallons of boiling water on six pounds of salsoda and three pounds of unslacked lime. Stir and let stand over night; pour off carefully and add six pounds ofperfectly clean grease; boil two hours, stirring mostof the time. If it does not seem thick enough, put another pailful of water on the settlings; stir well, and when settled,drain off carefully and add to the mixture as is required; try it by taking alittle out to cool. When ready to take off the fire, stir in one handful of salt; rinse out a tub with coldwater; put the soap into it and let stand until solid; then cutinto strips and lay on a board to dry. SODA ASH SOAP. Mrs. W. R. S. Ayres. To five pounds of soda ash, take four pounds of unslackedlime; eight gallons of rain water, andfifteen pounds of grease. Put lime, soda, and water, into a kettle and boil twenty minutes; thenpour out into a tub, and let it stand all night; in the morning, dip the clear water off carefully; put into a kettle; add the grease(cleaned), and boil one hour; then dip it out into tubs to cool. Be careful notto get any of the lime from the bottom of thekettle. SOFT SOAP. Mrs. Eliza Pierce. Fifteen pounds of clean grease; fifteen pounds of crudepotash. Put the potash in a bucket of boiling water to dissolve; put the grease into abarrel and pour the potash water over it; every dayadd a bucket of hot water until the barrel is full.Stir well each time. A HINT TO THE LAUNDRESS. Take some beeswax and tie it in a piece of whitecotton cloth. When ironing starched linen rub the wax over the iron once or twice; then over the cleansing cloth tomake sure there is nothing on the iron to soil the clothes; this will preventthe starch from rolling, and imparts a gloss to thelinen. A little salt sprinkled in starch while boiling, and a spermcandle stirred around in it a few times, will keep it fromsticking. A large spoonful of alum stirred into a hogshead of muddy water will so purify it that in a few hours thedirt will sink to the bottom. TO WASH BLANKETS. Put two largetablespoonsful of borax and one pint bowl of soft soap into a tub of coldwater; when dissolved, put in a pair of blankets and let themremain over night. Next day rub and drain them out; rinse thoroughly in twowaters and hang them out to dry. Do not wring them. TO WASH BROWN HOLLAND CHAIR COVERS. Afterbeing washed in the usual manner, they must be rinsed at the last in water in which some hay has been boiled. This willrestore the color that has been washed out. It is also good for crumb clothsand covering for stair carpets. Straw matting should always be washed in salt and water and wiped dry with a coarse towel. It willprevent its turning yellow. TO CLEAN LIGHT KID GLOVES. Take a flannelrag; rub on soap and dip in milk, wetting lightly; rub the glove while on yourhand. WASHING SILK. Miss Maggie Connelly. Mix together onetablespoonful of molasses; two tablespoonsful of soft soap, and three of alcohol; add to this one pint of hot rainwater; lay your silk on a bare table and rub on the mixture with asmall clothes brush. Have ready a tub of luke-warm rainwater; dissolve five cents worth of whiteglue and put in the tub of water. As youclean each piece of silk, throw it in the water andlet it lay until you have finished; then dip each piece up and down in the water but do not wring it. Hang it up to dry by theedges, and iron it before it is quite dry. CLEANING SILK. Pare and slice three potatoes (very thin); pour on one half pint of water and add an equal quantity of alcohol. Sponge the silk on the right side, and, whenhalf dry, iron on the wrong side. FOR RENOVATING SILK. Mrs. McVey. Take an old kid glove;dark colored, if the silk is dark; light, if the silk is light. Tear it inpieces; put it in a tin-cup, and cover with water. Setit on the stove and let it simmer until the kid can bepulled into shreds. Take a cloth or sponge; dip it in this water; rub it over the silk and iron immediately. Thisprocess will cleanse and stiffen old silk and give it the appearance ofnew. TO CLEAN BLACK DRESSES. Two tablespoonsfulof amonia to one half gallon of water. Take apiece of black cloth and sponge off with the preparation; and afterwards with clean water. FOR CLEANING ALPACA. Miss Sidney Sims. Put the goods into aboiler half full of cold rain water; let it boil for three minutes. Have ready a pail of indigo water (very dark with indigo), and wring thegoods out of the boiling water, and place in the indigo water. Let remain for one half hour; then wringout and iron while damp. TO REMOVE INK STAINS. While an ink spot isfresh, take warm milk and saturate the stain; letstand a few hours; then apply more fresh milk; rub itwell and it will soon disappear. If the ink has become dry, use salt and vinegar or salts of lemon. TO REMOVE FRUIT STAINS FROM TABLELINENS. Spread the stained parts over a large bowl and pour on boiling water. Repeat several times before puttinginto soap suds. TO CLEAN STRAW HATS. Make a paste ofpounded sulphur, and coldwater; wet the hat, and cover it with the paste, until the strawcan not be seen; rub hard, and hang the hat where it will dry; then rub the sulphur off with a brush, until the straw lookswhite. TO CLEAN BOTTLES. Put them into a kettle of cold water, with some woodashes, and boil; then rinse in clean softwater. TO KILL MOTHS IN CARPETS. Wring a coarsecloth out of clean water; spread it smoothly on thepart of the carpet where moths are suspected to be, and iron it with a hot iron. The steam will destroy the moth and eggs. TO PRESERVE FURS FROM MOTHS. Moths deposittheir eggs in the early spring, and that is the time to attend to furs. Beatthem with a light rattan, and air for several hours;then comb with a clean comb, carefully; wrap them up in newspapers, perfectly tight, and put in a close linen bag, or cedarchest. Examine them several times during the summer, and each timerepeat the combing. TO DESTROYCOCKROACHES. Pulverized borax, scatteredabout where they are, will banish them effectfully. TO DESTROY BEDBUGS. Mix together one ounceof corrosive sublimate; one of gumcamphor; one pint of spirits turpentine, and one of alcohol. Put in a bottle; apply with afeather. Rank poison--be very careful. TO CLEAN PAINT. Smear a piece of flannel in common whiting, mixed to the consistency of commonpaste, in warm water. Rub the surface to be cleaned,quite briskly, and wash off with warm soft water. Grease spots will, in this way, be easily removed, and the paint retain itsbrilliancy unimpaired. Wood ashes, and commonsalt, wet with water, will stop thecracks of a stove, and prevent the smoke fromescaping. TO PREVENT METALS FROM RUSTING. Melttogether three parts of lard, and one of resin, and apply a very thin coating with a brush. Itwill preserve stoves and grates from rusting through thesummer. TO CLEAN STEEL OR IRON. One ounce of soft soap, and two ounces of emery, made into a paste. Rub the articles forcleaning with wash leather. It will give a good polish. TO REMOVE RUST FROM STEEL. Rub well with sweet oil; let it remain two days; then rub with pulverized lime. TO TAKE OUT IRON RUST. To one gallon of buttermilk, add a large handful of gratedhorse-radish; let the goods remain in the milk from twelve to twenty-four hours, rubbingoccasionally; then wash out in clean water. Another way is to rub the spots of rust with oxalicacid, mixed in a little water, and exposeto a hot sun. RUBBER CEMENT. Shreds of indiarubber, or gutta percha, dissolved in refinedturpentine, will make a good cement for rubber shoes, shoe soles,&c. Plaster of Paris, stirred into the white of an egg, tolerably thick, makes a strongcement for glass and china. TIN POLISH. Six cups of water; five tablespoonsful of nitricacid; one tablespoonful of emery, and twoof pumice stone. SILVER POLISH. Four ounces of paris white, with one pint of hotwater; put it over the fire, and let come to a boil; when cool,add one ounce of amonia. FOR VARNISHING GILDED FRAMES. Take pure white alcoholic varnish, such as is used fortransferring engravings. Apply with a soft brush. Theframes can afterwards be cleansed with a damp cloth without injury. VARNISH FOR GRATES. Take one tablespoonfulof sugar, and one half teacupful of vinegar. Mix, and apply with a cloth. SWEETENING KITCHEN SINKS. One half pound of copperas, and one quart of pulverizedcharcoal, dissolved in two gallons of water. Heat the mixture to nearly a boiling point, andpour a quart of it or more at one time down thesink pipe. This mixture will remove strong, disagreeable odors from either glass or earthen vessels, by simply rinsing themthoroughly with it. TO MAKE COLORS PERMANENT. Three gills of salt, in four quarts of boilingwater. Put the calicoes in while hot, and let them remain untilcold. Alum, or vinegar, is good to set colors of red, andgreen. TO COLOR BLACK. To every pound of goods,take one ounce of extract of logwood; one ounce of blue vitriol. Put the blue vitriol in sufficient water to cover the goods without corroding, or it willspot; let it boil; have the goods clean and free from grease; wet thoroughlybefore you put them in; let them simmer twenty minutes; then take them out andhang up to air. Dissolve the extract of logwood andput it in the kettle with the vitriol; put back thegoods and let them simmer as before, twenty minutes. Take out the goods; letthem dry, and soak in sweet milk over night; washthoroughly next day in soap suds. LYE COLOR. To eight pounds of yarn, take one pound of coperas and as much water aswill cover the yarn; bring the water to a boil; putthe copperas in, and let it be well dissolved; thenpour it out in a tub; put the yarn in, and let it remain one half hour; takeweak lye, as much as will cover the yarn, and bring it to a boil; take the yarnout of the copperas water, and let it air one halfhour; then put into the lye one half hour; repeat theprocess, until the color is sufficient. Wash well in hardwater; then in hard soap suds soak onehalf hour; afterward, wash in hard water.
