PART FIRST. THOUGHTS AND MAXIMS ON HOUSEKEEPING. THE PRACTICALHOUSEKEEPER. PART I. THOUGHTS AND MAXIMSON HOUSEKEEPING. CHAPTER I. DR. STARK says, "The only test of the utility of knowledge is its promotionof the happiness of mankind." Viewed thus, the subject we are about to treatpresents claims superior to most others, and is eminently worthy of study. Thesuperintendence of a house, and the management, forethought, domestic economy,and good sterling sense requisite for the discharge of this duty, demandapplication and perseverance, and ought to receive as much, at least, as isbestowed on the acquisition of music, painting, or any of the ornamentalaccomplishments. Young ladies are educated to shine in society; would it not bewell if they were also sedulously taught--by a system of training--to performthe homely duties which make home the abode of comfort? It has been said that Americans in general have little attachment to home.Often, indeed, is the domestic comfort, so prized in England, absent from theabodes even of the wealthy, in our land. May not this undeniable fact, and theroving propensity of young people in this country, be attributable to thecircumstance that girls, whose condition exempts them from servitude, arebrought up wholly without reference to home duties? Even those who may dependon their own labor for a subsistence, are taught some trade, or superficiallyqualified as teachers, or instructed in various branches of needlework; whilethey know little or nothing of household matters; though such knowledge wouldenable them to command an independence. It is not alone the wife and mother whoshould be skilled in domestic affairs; every girl who has emerged fromchildhood, is liable to be called on to take charge of a house. If the motheris bedridden, or deceased, why should the father of daughters sixteen oreighteen years old be compelled to look elsewhere for a housekeeper, andintrust the management to the hands of a stranger? The general cultivation of this valuable knowledge, too, would make theoccupation of a "help," or servant, more acceptable to thousands who now preferstarvation in a garret, or the ruin of health in sedentary employments. Themore attention is turned to this branch of learning, the more will itsimportance be recognized, and the higher place will it assume in the list ofuseful arts; and a degree of respect being accorded to those who excel, morewill be found ready to engage in it as a profession. What an improvement wouldbe made, by such a result, in our social and domestic life! We would not be understood to say that we wouldhave a woman merely an upper servant in the house it is her province to guide,or that we undervalue intellectual attainments and elegant occupations. But itwill not detract from the charm of these, nor from the dignity of the well-bredlady--to be familiar with the routine of domestic duties, well acquainted withthe minutiæ of household economy, and competent to direct, or if need be,teach her servants; ay, even, to do things herself in cases of necessity. Onthe other hand, will it not enhance admiration and strengthen regard, to seethat she possesses these acquirements, and is willing to exercise them topromote the comfort of others? Who can tell that she may not, at some period oflife, be thrown into circumstances where the mere fine lady would be utterlyhelpless, or where intellectual refinement and distinguished position may proveless available than industry, ingenuity, and practical common sense? What is a kingdom, a merchant's counting-house, or a mechanic's workshopwithout a head? We do not mean a mere master, but a presiding intellect toplan, contrive, direct, and guide. Not less absolute or important is the ruleof a sensible woman in her own home. She has full scope for the exercise ofgood taste, prudence, and refinement. She is invested with an amount ofresponsibility she perhaps never dreamed of, for her influence over the temper,habits, actions, and dispositions of those about her is very great, and greatin proportion should be her self-government, for with self the command mustbegin, if it is to be worth having. There is much talk, nowadays, about the "rights" and "mission" of woman.Without entering into the merits of the subject, we would only say, that ifwomen, from the highest to the lowest, were systematically educated to wieldproperly the great power they indubitably possess--a power which can be made tomove the secret springs of action and the machinery of business--they wouldhave little reason to complain of the want of influence; and were they sotrained to enter actively and energetically into domestic employments andaffairs, that none could deem it a pursuit unworthy of them, they would findample scope for the exercise of their faculties, and the acquisition of meansto live. There is a medium, however, in all things. A woman who worries all withinher reach by her ultra-housewifery, who damps one down with soap and water,poisons one with furniture polish, takes away one's appetite by the troublethere is about cooking the simplest thing, and fidgets one by over-donetidiness and cleanliness, is almost as much to be avoided as a downright slut,or the veriest simpleton who ever took counsel with her stupid servant as tohow long a potato ought to be boiled; she exercises a pernicious influence onall, and is a misery to herself and others. Neither would we have domestic economy and home duties vaunted, or made theconstant theme of conversation; they are the private employments of a woman;she must study other things in order to entertain her relatives and friends.Those who talk most of their duties are generally those who perform them mostimperfectly. When a man returns to his home, or enters his sitting-room,fatigued and perhaps disappointed by the business of the day, he does not wantto be annoyed by the detail of domestic accidents, the misdemeanors ofservants, and the cheating of tradespeople; he has had his worries during the day, too, and, with thatpride, or reserve, or want of confidence which is peculiar to most men, heperhaps keeps them to himself. Let his example be followed in all cases whereadvice, or support, or assistance is not absolutely necessary, and pleasant, cheerful themes be chosen, or some amusementselected which shall render the evening and leisure hours those of relaxationand enjoyment, and tend to give a charm and zest to home which no other placecan possess. Men are free to come and go as they list, they have so muchliberty of action, so many out-door resources if wearied with in-doors, that itis good policy, if nothing else, to make home attractive as well ascomfortable. An education in household matters should be complete--comprising theknowledge requisite for use in all departments. Many a girl can make good pastry, jellies, &c., for an evening party,and being much complimented for her labors by those who relish the produce,forthwith fancies herself a capital housewife, while, in all probability, shescarcely knows how vegetables are cooked, is profoundly ignorant of the pricesof the commonest articles of daily consumption, and could not tell of whatmaterial a housecloth ought to be made. And how few there are who could, incase of need, make a cup of good gruel, or a glass of white-wine whey, or evena little broth or barley-water! We do not say that they could not manage toproduce something resembling these things, but the capricious appetite of theinvalid would reject the tasteless messes. Many have suffered martyrdom fromthis one neglected branch of female education. Perhaps few branches of female education are more useful than greatreadiness in figures. Accounts should be regularly kept, and not the smallestarticle omitted to be entered. If balanced every week or month, the income andoutgoings will be ascertained with facility, and their proportions to eachother duly observed. Some people fix on stated sums to be appropriated to eachdifferent article, as house, clothes, pocket, education of children, &c.Whatever may be the amount of household expenditure, a certain mode should beadopted and strictly adhered to. Besides the regular account-book, in which thereceipt of money and every payment should be regularly entered, a common-placebook should be always at hand for the entry of observations regardingagreements with servants, tradesmen, and various other subjects, so as toenable the lady at once to ascertain the exact state of the affairs under herimmediate management. A minute account of the annual income and the times of payment should betaken in writing; likewise an estimate of the supposed amount of each articleof expense; and those who are early accustomed to calculations on domesticarticles will acquire so accurate a knowledge of what their establishmentrequires, as will enable them to keep the happy medium between prodigality andparsimony. Some aver that they have no capacity for this matter, no taste for that. Butif the things referred to are duties, cultivate a taste--perserve inendeavoring to improve a capacity for them. This world is a beautiful one,spite of what grumblers say, and thousands would find it a much happier one ifthey studied more what they ought to do, and sought their pleasure or indulgedtheir fancies less. Every human being exercises some influence on thecharacter, happiness and destinies of others, and is accountable foropportunities wasted, and blessings neglected or transformed. This isespecially true of women. Every sensible, high-minded, right-hearted woman, beshe peeress or peasant--is, or may be, a blessing to many; if not by greatdeeds or achievements the world calls heroic, by a simple, quiet,straightforward performance of the duties which lie before her, and aretherefore given her to do. As it is the business of man to provide the means of living comfortably, soit is the province of woman to dispose judiciously of those means, and maintainorder and harmony in all things. On her due performance of her part rest thecomfort and social peace of home; while misery and ruin follow her neglect.Some women, it is true, are placed in an unnatural position by having theburden of supporting the family thrown upon them. They have double duties, anda harder part to sustain; but their toils may be materially lightened by careand method in what they have to do. So much by way of exordium. We shall now proceed through the various mattersappertaining to a house, endeavoring to present a clear chart of the necessarybusiness, pointing out hidden rocks, and showing how these may be avoided, andthe vessel sent to float in calm waters. With much labor we havecollected information on all subjects that fall within the proper scope ofhousekeeping; and multifarious as these are, it is our belief that she whoconsults our index will be sure to find whatever she can wish to know. CHAPTER II. THAT sensible and oft-quoted old lady, Mrs. Glasse, begins one of herrecipes thus: "First catch your hare." Following so good an example, we willfirst take a house and furnish it, before laying down axioms for itsmanagement. Before any steps are taken, the income or pecuniary means of the partiesabout to commence housekeeping, should be well considered. It is not well torush into matrimony without due attention to such sublunary matters as dollarsand cents; for the notion that when once a couple is married, all will goright, is a foolish one. A young man with an income of four or five hundreddollars, every cent of which has been annually swallowed up by his ownexpenses, falls in love with a young lady who can sing and play well, speakFrench and produce marvels in the way of crochet or ornamental work, who lovessentimental poetry and romance, and can trim herself a neat bonnet; but knowslittle of the realities of life. Having never known what it is to want anything--she has no idea that any thing can be wanted. The young man feelscertain in his own mind that a wife will be an actual saving to him; and makesan eloquent declaration of his affection. The prospect for the future is butslender; for he ignores the fact that he has been accustomed to spend half hisincome on clothes and amusements, which he does not think of doing without; andshe forgets how much she is in the habit of spending on gloves, ribbons,perfumes, et cetera. When they are married--the bridal dress and entertainmentnot being reckoned among their expenses--they find themselves fettered by athousand inconveniences, and obliged to deny themselves travelling and manyother kinds of recreation; more than that, they discover that the etiquette ofthis enlightened age, imperiously demands reckless expenditure, when commonsense would advise more than usual economy; and without losing the socialposition they aim to preserve, they can do nothing but submit. What an effecton the success of after-life must be such a beginning! However, we do not consider it our mission to enter on Quixotic quarrelswith the ways of the world. It is, as our young people soon find-- "A very good world to live in, To lend, to spend, or togive in; But to beg, or borrow, or get one's own, 'Tis the very worstworld that ever was known." In taking a house, the first matters to beconsidered, are the rent we can afford to give, or the money that can bedevoted to its purchase, and the locality that suits us best. A dwelling in town affords many opportunities for social intercourse,amusement, and the acquisition of general knowledge; a suburban residenceoffers some advantages in healthiness of location and convenience. The remotecountry has a distinct class of enjoyments, though want of society often makestime pass slowly. Where locality is not specified, always choose one as openand airy as may be, and where the soil, or at any rate the subsoil, is notclay, where the drainage is good, and there is an ample supply of water, and noneighboring factories giving out noxious gases and poisonous smoke and vapor.Too close a vicinity to a churchyard is likewise to be avoided. Of course, thehouse must be capable of accommodating the family who are to occupy it, andthere should always be a spare room or two which can be used for bed-rooms, orother purposes in case of emergency. There should be closets, cellars, &c.,and good ventilation front and back. A fee to a well-qualified surveyor isoften well bestowed; for he may detect serious faults in a house which, to anordinary observer, seems well built and comfortable. The agreement with the landlord should be clearly understood, and allliabilities as to taxes, local rates, house repairs, with charges for fixtures,&c., inquired into, and definitely arranged, before the agreement issigned. It will be well for every house to have some shelter at its entrance; aporch or portico, in a style regulated by that of the rest of the building,will be found useful. A hall, vestibule, or entry, is essential, and the sizeand location of the staircases considerably affect the convenience of thedwelling. The dining-room should be so placed that the way to it from thekitchen is easy, and yet so that the noise or odors do not prove annoying. Thegeneral style of the drawing-room should be light and cheerful; that of thelibrary plain and quiet. The bed-chambers should be as lofty and spacious aspossible, and so contrived that a thorough draught can be obtained, to changethe air completely. Each should have a chimney fireplace. Small closets andrecesses are to be avoided as sleeping apartments. The nursery should be nearthe chamber of the mistress. Dressing and bath-rooms should be as uniformly attached to bed-rooms as thesize of the house and means of the owner will permit; the bath is anindispensable convenience. Every house should be provided with twowater-closets at least. In large establishments, a breakfast-room lookingeastward and with glass doors opening on a garden or lawn, a billard-room forexercise within doors, a room for hunting and fishing tackle, a gallery formusic, paintings, or statuary, a lady's boudoir or sitting-room tastefullyornamented, a school-room, and domestic laboratory, with a conservatory, areconvenient additions. A number of rooms for domestic offices are connected withthe house, and various cellars, as well as separate buildings, appropriated tomany different purposes--which we shall not describe particularly. The kitchenwill be examined under another head. In contriving the mode of warming a house, attention should be paid notmerely to economy of fuel, but to the preservation of a salubrious atmosphere.A chimney fireplace or grate is preferable to a stove, which is apt to give theair a close or disagreeable smell, and produce headache and stupor. CountRumford imagined that the hot iron roasted the dust that settled on it, whichdust was composed of all sorts of animal and vegetable matters; others complainof the extreme dryness of the air. Stoves of brickor earthenware, used in various parts of Europe, are said to be better thaniron; but all close stoves are liable to the objection, that in using them itis difficult to change the air continually, or procure proper ventilation. Thesame difficulties prevail, to some extent, in warming a house by a furnace, andthe dryness of the air is often productive of discomfort. Steam might afford anagreeable and convenient method of warming apartments. Of all the modes usuallyadopted, the advantage seems to lie with the open fire. The temperature shouldbe steady and not too high: say 60° or 62°. Apartments in our citiesare generally kept at a dangerous degree of heat. Bed-rooms should not bewarmed, more than to have the "outside chill" taken off. Ventilation is a very important consideration. The atmospheric air inbreathing loses the constituent that sustains life, and must be got rid of, andreplaced by air that is fresh and pure. This change of air should becontinually going on in our apartments. Windows that open at the top areuseful, the vitiated air ascending to the ceiling. The practice of sleeping inrooms not sufficiently ventilated, is utterly destructive to health. It shouldbe remembered also that the vital part of air is exhausted by a burning light.It would be well to have a ventilator in the centre of the ceiling, which canbe concealed by ornamental work in plaster; and in the admission of fresh air,care should be taken that it does not come in a direct stream, so as to produceunpleasant draughts. It is often necessary to fumigate or disinfect the air contaminated bynoxious effluvia. Muriatic acid and nitric acid fumes have been employed forthis purpose, and chlorine, a most effectual agent in destroying noxiousqualities in the air, is generally employed. Chloride of lime and chloride ofsoda are used as the most convenient preparations. The latter is calledLabarraque's Disinfecting Liquid. Vinegar is used in sick rooms, and quicklime, alone or mixed with ashes, in sinks, sewers, &c. Having taken our house, it generally wants a thorough cleaning and airing.In spring, autumn, and winter, fires should be kept for three or four days,according to the time the house has been empty, and to the repairs it hasundergone during that interval; for of course nobody ought to enter a house inthe state of dirt and disrepair in which it is usually left by an out-goingtenant, or if they do so under the notion that the landlord will set it all torights after they are in, they will find out their mistake, and repent theirconfidence. It sometimes happens that the chief rooms are not papered and painted untilthe house is let. In such case the in-coming tenant generally has the power ofchoosing the papers, or panellings, and paint. He will, of course, select suchas will best harmonize with the color which the furniture and hangings shouldhave. We will now suppose the house taken, cleaned thoroughly, and well aired, and will proceed tofurnish it. But first we must pause to observe that young people will do wellcarefully to consider matters before they take upon themselves the troubles andresponsibilities of housekeepers. Where their joint savings, or some sumespecially bestowed for the purpose by friends or parents, will enable them tomake the necessary outlay for furniture, linen, &c., and yet have somethingleft to put by for "a wet day," and the rent and taxes can be afforded by theincome of the husband, it is all well and good. But if money must be borrowed,or debts incurred, begin life in the quietest way, rather than with theseincumbrances. Take board or apartments for a time,until you see your way clear. From $150 to $400 a year will pay for part of ahouse in a city, and much less in a village. Board can be obtained inrespectable houses at four or five dollars a week and upwards in our largesttowns. There are some disadvantages in this mode of living. It is customary tosay that boarders are victimized; one is sometimes brought into contact withdisagreeable individuals, who become enemies if they find they are not receivedin a sociable or friendly manner; and on the whole, it is wiser to keep housewith three or four rooms. There are always respectable families to be found,who will let a set of apartments. Now to the business of furnishing a house. CHAPTER III. HERE again the unsentimental consideration of dollars and cents obtrudesitself. The limit to which we can go is dependent upon the funds in hand whichmay be expended without incurring debt or causing inconvenience. It would be curious to trace the history of furniture in different ages andcountries. But we have no space for such a review. The taste has been revivedof late years, for pieces of ancient furniture, and the skill of cabinetmakershas been brought into requisition to produce imitations of the antique style,or tasteful restorations, by the putting together of fragments, interestingfrom singular or historical associations. Window curtains contribute much to the comfort and elegance of apartments,tempering the light, and excluding the cold air. They may be of variouspatterns and materials. The hall, or entry, should be furnished with an umbrella and hat stand, andchairs or hall seats. If there is a closet for hanging up hats, cloaks,&c., it should be near the door. Door scrapers should always be placed atthe entrance. PICTURES ON THE WALL. Pictures, if well chosen, add much to the appearance of a room, and impartto it an air of completeness, and a home look, which many people know how toappreciate. To produce this effect, the subjects of the pictures must be suchas we can truly sympathize with, something to awaken our admiration, reverence,or love. All the feelings of our nature may be illustrated by pictures. Thereare some which we seem to make bosom companions of; others have a moral effect,and at times prevent our going astray by their silent monitions. It is,therefore, worth while to take pains and choose good subjects, whether inengravings or paintings, and to frame and hang them suitably when chosen. Giltframes are most suitable for rather dark paintings, and on a deep colored wall;while prints look well in a frame of composition, oak, rose-wood, or bird's-eyemaple, finished with a gilt moulding. Care should be taken to hang them in aproper light, so as best to bring out all the effects of the pictures, and toplace them so that the light shall fall from the same side as represented bythe painter. In picture galleries and great houses, brass rods are fixed allaround the room close to the ceiling, from which the pictures are hung, but insmall rooms it is often best not to show the lines or wires by which thepictures hang. This is done by nailing a strong cord across the back, about twoinches below the top, and then suspending it from two nails standing out but alittle way from the wall. When there are several pictures in a room, theordinary rule is, to have either the upper or lower edge of the frames in aline, on whichever side they may be hung. For bed-room furniture, mahogany, maple-wood, and oak, are the bestand prettiest; there are also very serviceable, well-polished, stained woodimitations of all these three; and there are, too, very common and trumperyimitations, which turn shabby in a few months, and are generally badly puttogether, and do no service; two good chairs are worth a dozen of suchrubbish. As a general rule we should advise avoidance of all cheap, showy furnishingestablishments: likewise, unless you are wealthy, of all fashionableupholsterers. Patronize good, old-established houses of business. Never buy second-hand bedsteads, bedding, or hangings, unless you are wellconvinced that no more than you bargain for is included in the purchase. Iron and brass bedsteads, which can now be had of every size, form, andprice, are far preferable, both as regards health, cleanliness, and lightness,to any others. It can scarcely be necessary to repeat how injurious to health are verysmall bed-rooms, and the same rule will apply to curtains which prevent thechange of air, compelling us to breathe over again a portion of the air we haveexpired. The curtains should never enclose the bed. In low chambers, the bedshould be near the floor, and the best place for it is at the middle of theside of the room, not touching the wall. Chintz or dimity are better for bed-furniture than damask, moreen, or anyfabric containing wool; they harbor less dust and are less liable to hidevermin. Three-ply carpets are best adapted for bed-rooms. Never place carpet under abed, or you provide a resting-place for all the dust and flock which dailyfalls from the mattresses, and establish a nice hot-bed for fleas. Let thecarpet be made in about three pieces, in order that it may be frequently takenup and beaten or shaken, and the floor scrubbed clean. Soft feather beds cause an undue warmth that weakens the action of theskin, and makes one susceptible to cold. A well stuffed feather bed, ora mattress, should be used. Good mattresses of wool, and wool and horsehair,iron bedsteads, and as little bed-furniture, curtains, &c., as may be, witha light quilt, are the best preventives against rising languid, inert, andunfit in the morning for the duties of the day. The covering should be light. Awide bed affords the luxury Franklin recommends, of moving from side to side,and a bed should have but one occupant. Bed-room and dressing-room chairs should be light. Couches, tables,dressing-glasses, wash-stands, &c., are necessary articles, and the couchesmay be made of cheap materials, covered with chintz or brown holland. Bureausand ward-robes will not be forgotten. Fireguards of painted wire are a securityagainst accidents. Of the smaller articles in use a host might be enumerated;but everyday need will suggest them. Never crowd a bed-room with furniture; have that which is really useful andrequisite, and no more; and in fitting it up, always remember that illnessoften comes when we least expect it, and take care that your room shall possesssuch articles as will then be needful for comfort and ease. A dining-room requires little furniture but that little should be good andhandsome, and of mahogany. About furnishing drawing-rooms we can give no directions, so much dependsupon taste. We would only reiterate our warning to beware of showy, veneered,vamped-up furniture, or, when the room has had a fire in it some dozen times,you will be startled occasionally by reports as if small cannon weredischarged, and on rising to investigate such alarming noises, you will find,perhaps a crack across one door of the beautiful rosewood cabinet, or a gaping chasm in that lovely centre table, or apiece of carved work flown off the card table, showing only pine beneath! Here, again, a little furniture tastefully arranged is far better than acrowd of articles; besides, in one's course through life, furniture accumulatesgradually, and if it is necessary to sell one thing in order to make way foranother, that is a very losing business. We now come to the kitchens, where the wants are multifarious; for here mustbe accumulated means of feeding, and cleaning, and keeping in order the wholehouse. Of course we can give no detailed account of what will be required, asall depends upon the extent and style of the household; all we can do,therefore, is to make one or two general remarks on the durability of differentwares. As few copper cooking utensils as possible should be had, and those fewshould be most thoroughly tinned in the inside, and always carefully cleanedand dried before being put away. We prefer block tin to anything else forsaucepans, pots, and kettles generally. Iron does not so quickly or plainlytell any tale of dirt or neglect; cast iron is very brittle, and cannot berepaired when broken; and copper is likely to harbor verdigris. A gooddouble block tin saucepan should always have the cover, the handle, and theback, kept bright as silver; and the top, spout, front, and handle of thekettle, should also be kept bright; for besides that a polished surfacemaintains heat better than an uneven, blackened one, it looks wonderfullybetter; and if the smoke is never allowed to gather on these parts, it is easyto keep the utensils as bright as they were at first. For stewpans, iron tinned on the inside is most useful. The ancients seem to have used lamps of various forms; an improvement ontorches, certainly, but a more simple contrivance than candles, which in thetwelfth century and afterwards, came into use throughout Europe. Wax,spermaceti, and tallow, with different kinds of oil for lamps ofan improved fashion, are still in use. Spirit gas and camphene arecleanly substitutes, but extremely dangerous. The lighting of apartments byinflammable gas is one of the most useful results of the investigations ofmodern science. It is said that Murdoch, an engineer, was the first to makethis discovery available on an extensive scale. He commenced his experiments in1792. Candlesticks for common house or kitchen use should be of tin or brass, andlarge enough to save grease spots. There is no wear in japan. Wooden bowls for washing glass and china, and block tin or zinc hand bowlswill be found most serviceable. All utensils for the conveyance of water about a house should be ofmetal, as water-cans of different sizes, hot-water ewers withcovers, shaving mugs, &c., as thereby much breakage will be saved, andthese, if bought good at first, will, with ordinary care, last a very longtime. The same remark applies to foot-baths. Very pretty toilet sets forthe wash-stand are also now made in zinc, and beautifully painted orjapanned. Sarcophagus and other extraordinarily shaped coal-scuttles, are to beavoided as most troublesome and awkward affairs, out of which it is next toimpossible to extract coal conveniently. Soyer gives the following list of kitchen articles for a family of six. Eight copper stewpans, two larger ones, holding one gallon and a half, andthe next one gallon, the others smaller by degrees to one pint; one ovalfish-kettle, holding about one gallon and a half; one middle-sizedbraising-pan; one preserving-pan; one round bowl for beating whites ofeggs; two sauté-pans; one omelette-pan; one frying-pan; onebain-marie; six saucepans for sauces; onemiddle-sized tin pie-mould; two tin jelly-moulds; one tin flanc mould forfruit; one freezing-pot, with every requisite; two baking-sheets; onegridiron; one small salamander; one colander-spoon; one bottle-jack; two spits;one dripping-pan; one screen; one sugar-pan; two soup-ladles; eightcopper spoons, two of them colanders; two wire baskets; one wire sieve; twohair sieves; twenty-four tartlet-pans; two tammies; one jelly-bag; twelvewooden spoons; two paste-brushes; one pair of scissors; two kitchenknives; six larding-needles; one packing-needle; one box of vegetable-cutters;one box of paste-cutters; one meat-saw; one cutletchopper; one meat chopper; six meat-hooks, tinned; onerolling-pin; eight kitchen basins; six china pie-dishes; six earthen bowls forsoups and gravies; four kitchen table-cloths; eighteen rubbers; twelvefish-napkins; six pudding-cloths; four round towels. CHAPTER IV. WITH regard to all those articles which fall under the general denominationof "plate," we should advise that all imitations be avoided; let those whocannot afford silver be content to use simple metal, which does not pretend tobe more than it really is. All the imitations of silver will, even with theutmost care, betray themselves in a very short time, and have awould-be-genteel-if-I-could sort of air, which is ten thousand times moreridiculous than the plainest of all materials; besides, the money they costwould purchase a few real articles, which are always worth their weightin silver, whereas the imitations have only a nominal value, and lose even thatas they become discolored and dull. Metal tea and coffee pots may be had very good, and in handsome patterns,and are far more durable than china, drawing better, and retaining heatlonger. The following is a list of the usual articles in silver required to furnishthe table. Dishes and covers. Table knives andforks. Dessert knives and forks. Table spoons. Dessert spoons. Gravy spoons. Soupladles. Sauce ladles. Salt spoons, with giltbowls. Fish slice. Trays and waiters. Breadbaskets. Cake baskets. Decanterstands. Decanter labels. Liqueur and bottlestands. Cruet frames. Egg frames. Asparagus tongs. Cheesescoops. Knife rests. Nutcrackers. Grape scissors. Tea urns. Coffee urns. Tea pots. Coffee filterers. Sugar basin. Cream ewers. Sugar tongs. Tea spoons. Toast racks. Buttercoolers. Snuffer trays. Snuffers. Candlesticks. Cheap cutlery is mistaken economy. Good knives and forks will, with ordinarycare, last for years; common ones have no wear in them, and never can be madeto cut well. Crockery, china, and glass, we need say little about, for they may be had atall prices and of all qualities. The moulded or cast glass looks as well as cutglass, if not placed in contrast with it, and wears as long, and costsconsiderably less. For dishes, pitchers, butter-coolers, &c., we shouldalways use it; decanters, wine-glasses, and tumblers, do not look so well init. As regards ornamental china, or glass, or what not, little can be said,these things being so much matters of taste; but it is better to have but one,and that one really handsome and good, than a crowd of cheap, showy trifles;besides, these are things which gradually accumulate, and therefore it isalways better to devote the money in hand to necessary articles, and leave themore ornamental ones for after consideration. A good clock for the kitchen, anda handsome one for the drawing-room, are useful and necessary things,especially the former. In household linen, again, it is false economyto buy common or cheap materials. For sheets, linen, cotton, and Swiss twilledcalico are used; these substances are now woven wide enough to render a seamunnecessary, and all we have to do is to measure the width of the beds andallow an extra half yard; the ordinary length of a sheet is three yards and ahalf. The pillow cases must be of the same material as the sheets. Marseillesquilts are too heavy to be beneficial to health. Any industrious housewife mayknit very serviceable and pretty counterpanes in squares or shell-shapedpieces, during those periods when she is chatting, or between the lights, or athours when she would otherwise most probably be doing nothing. It is for suchuseful purposes as these we value knitting, crochet, &c., for they can bemade the means of economy and usefulness, instead of being, as they too oftenare, employed on useless expensive trifles. The most durable sort of linen for sheeting is the Russian, German, or Irishfabric, a good stock of which should be laid in to avoid the necessity offrequent or irregular washing. An inventory of furniture is given by Soyer as follows:-- Twelve pairs of sheets; ten ditto pillow-cases; three dozen napkins; twodozen and a half various-sized table-cloths, including breakfast, dinner,&c.; six servants' table-cloths; three dozen towels; six round towels;three dozen kitchen rubbers; two dozen napkins for fish, vegetables, andfruits; six pudding-cloths; two dozen damask d'oylies; one dozen Berlin woolditto. I also have occasionally in the wash the cover of the carpet, theanti-macassars, which I have knitted at my leisure, and the netted windowcurtains. Of glass and china, I have the following; they are counted everymonth, and the broken ones replaced:--three dozen wine-glasses; two dozenchampagne ditto: two dozen claret ditto; three dozen goblets; six watercaraffes; six decanters; one liqueur-stand; twelve liqueur-glasses; two glasspitchers; one celery-glass; one trifle-bowl; eight dessert-dishes. China: onefull dinner service; one common set for kitchen; one common tea service forkitchen; one good tea service; one breakfast service; one good dessertservice. The following is my list of plate:--three dozen prongs; two dittotable-spoons; one and a half ditto dessert-spoons; one and a half dittodessert-forks; two ditto tea-spoons; six salt-spoons; one cheese-knife; fourbutter-knives; one asparagus-tongs; two sugar-tongs; two soup-ladles; foursauce-ladles; two gravy-spoons; two sugar-ladles; two salvers; onebread-basket; four candlesticks; one hot-water dish for haunch of mutton. Table-cloths, tray-cloths, and dinner napkins will of course come under thecategory of "linen," and can be obtained at very reasonable prices comparedwith what they were twenty years since. Towels, too, are included in this list.In the case of chamber towels, again, comes diversity of opinion; somepreferring a soft, others a hard, some a rough, and some a smooth towel; damaskand diaper are not soft enough for some delicate skins. For our own part welike towels which administer a certain amount of friction to the skin, and allmedical men agree that this is requisite to health. For the kitchen, roundtowels, tea-cloths, and glass-cloths, will be required, as well as dusters,pudding-cloths, knife-cloths, house-cloths, and flannels for cleaning. Thesewill have to be purchased at the same time by young housekeepers newlyfurnishing, who "have no rags--poor things," and therefore may as well bementioned here. Old sheets make good glass cloths; old table-cloths make nicesoft towels; all dresses of cotton, or olddress-linings, will serve for dusters, and old blankets for house-flannels. There are also needed toilet-covers for chamber tables, and chests ofdrawers, &c., carpet covers, muslin for chamber window-curtains, muslin fordrapery for the toilet-table, coarse sheeting for dusting-sheets to cover thebeds or drawing-room furniture when sweeping and cleaning; a yet coarser sheetto lay down in front of the stoves when they are being cleaned; chamoisleathers for cleaning the plate, brass, steel, and windows; and bags for thebest brooms. Then we come to brushes, and their name is legion. Oh, this furnishing ahouse is a serious affair! a carpet-broom, a short-handled one for the staircarpets, a hair-broom for the bed-rooms, and another for the passages andkitchens; feather-brushes, dusting-brushes, stove-brushes, hearth-brushes,shoe-brushes, plate-brushes, paste-brushes, clothes-brushes, a hat-brush, and atable-brush to remove the crumbs from the table-cloth, are all needed; andthese should be bought at a good warehouse, and of good quality, if we wouldhave them do us service, and not fall to pieces, or lose their hair, as soon asthey are fairly brought into use. There are many items yet unmentioned, but it will not be requisite for us towaste our time, or that of our readers, by enumerating them all seriatim; we will therefore proceed to othermatters. CHAPTER V SUPPOSING now that we have our house, and it is furnished, the next thing todetermine is how many servants can be afforded. Must we be content with one, a"general house-servant;" or can we afford a cook and housemaid, or even aspireto the gentility of a man-servant or a butler? The expenses must be determined by the sum which can, without incurringdebts or living too closely up to one's income, be devoted to "housekeeping,"under which head we include rent, taxes, wages, and every outlay appertainingto the house. Now, in reckoning the expenses of a servant, the question ofwages is not the only one to be considered; there is the board and washing; and$100, exclusive of wages, is the lowest at which the keep of each servant canbe estimated. In hiring servants always be particular in inquiring their character, and,if possible, learn something of the people with whom they have lived; let allstipulations as to wages, extras, holidays, and such matters, be clearlyspecified and rightly understood. The greatest trouble in housekeeping in this country, is the difficulty ofprocuring and retaining good servants. In the Southern States this difficultyis not realized; their servants having been trained for the labor allotted tothem, and being contented and happy in their condition without aspirationsafter change. But elsewhere, both in the city and country, the case isdifferent. Men and women born in America look upon service as degrading tothem, and will prefer any hardship or privation to engaging in it as abusiness. Those who do so for a time, are usually tormented with jealous fearsthat their dignity will be infringed on, or are found neither qualified nortrustworthy. Housekeepers are mainly dependent on the Irish and Germanemigrants, who as a rule are utterly ignorant of household service, and have tobe taught everything; often receiving wages for months before they begin tomake themselves useful. By the time they can be trusted to do the work, theyare corrupted by intercourse with other servants, or persons who prompt them to make exactions on your time for visiting theirnumerous relatives from the old country, as well as to fill your kitchen withstrangers, till the annoyance becomes intolerable. A complaint on this scorefrom the employers is followed by an outbreak of insolence, and the abruptdeparture of the servant you have taken such pains to teach;--and so unusual isit to find one who knows any thing--that she will readily get another place,perhaps with one of your neighbors who has envied you her possession. An English lady gave this account of the progress of a favorite--"The firstyear she was a good servant; the second an indulgent mistress; the third anintolerable tyrant." A good maxim is to select servants not younger than thirty; they are, as arule, less fond of change, and better satisfied when really comfortable. Butchange is the order of things in the United States. Respecting servants, there are a few things which cannot be too stronglyurged; one is, never to retain a cook who is not fond of her occupation; forunless she take pleasure in her art, she cannot be depended upon for accuracyin the preparation of dishes with which she is well acquainted, and will noteasily be induced to acquire any thing new. She also must possess a naturalregard for cleanliness, or all the pains in the world will never render hercleanly: where dirty habits are manifested, dismissal should follow, for inalmost every instance they will be found incurable. Another point of mainimportance is her temper; for if that be not good, she will bedisinclined to receive instructions, and, if found fault with, may, out ofpique, spoil a dinner; whereas a good-humored, intelligent servant, when madeacquainted with the habits of the house, and equal to her common duties, willhardly fail of success when called upon by her mistress to try any of thosereceipts which she has not already used. The low character of servants heard of at common intelligence offices hascaused such places to be held in small esteem; for their recommendations can inno case be depended on. There are institutions in Great Britain which have fortheir object the security of housekeepers from the evils of disreputable anddishonest inmates. The officials are so minute in their inquiries intocharacter, as to preclude the necessity of those who hire from their officetaking any trouble themselves in the business. Servants whose characters willnot bear the strictest investigation will scarcely apply to such institutions.They are sorely needed in this country. It may be curious to see the list of servants which form the household of aBritish nobleman of high rank, or a wealthy citizen, who keeps from twenty tothirty domestics. Women. Housekeeper. A lady's maid for eachgrown lady of the family. Cook. Upper housemaid. Laundrymaid. Under housemaid. Under laundry maid. Still roommaid. Kitchen maid. Scullion. (To this establishment thatof the nursery is added.) Men. Housesteward. Groom of the chamber. Valet to each gentleman in the family. Man cook. Butler. Gentleman's footman. Lady'sfootman. Under butler. Gentleman's coachman. Lady'scoachman. Couriers. Outriders. Grooms, in number according to the stud. Under servants. Errand boys. Steward's boy. In the United States so many servants are rarely kept in one family, evenamong millionnaires, or in the Southern States; where, however, it is customary for each member of the family to have aseparate attendant. An extensive establishment would perhaps number a coachman,groom, porter, footman, gardener, butler, and perhaps a valet and French cook;the female servants consisting of a housekeeper, cook, scullion, lady's maid,chambermaid, laundrymaid, nurse, and one or more maids-of-all-work. Indeed themost wealthy families keep less than half this number; and the average not morethan three women and one man-servant. Those of slender income are content withone for "general house-work." In all large establishments in England the men and women servants, in theintervals of their employments, are never allowed to sit in the same room, buthave their separate places of resort, assembling together only at dinner andsupper. It is the duty of the steward and housekeeper to see this regulationobserved. In servants generally we look for the essential qualities of integrity,sobriety, cleanliness, and general propriety in manner, with knowledge of theirduties in the departments they profess to understand. A glance at somereprehensible practices among them may be useful, as every instance ofpilfering and trickery accumulates odium on the whole class. One of the chiefanxieties of housekeeping is the apprehension of the dishonesty of those whoare under our roof and receiving bread from our hands; and suspicion, for whichthere is often just cause, injures both the employer and the employed. Cookshave been found to dispose of provisions in other ways than for the use of thefamily they serve. Presents are sometimes demanded by servants from thetrades-people dealt with by the master. The so-called "honor," which prevents aservant from exposing the frauds and misconduct going on among others, is butanother name for deception and dishonesty. The servant who knows of frauds andis silent, becomes an accomplice. Though it is very disagreeable to suspect any one's honesty, it is yetprudent to weigh meat, sugar, &c., when brought in, and to compare theweight with the charge. Scales should be placed in the kitchen, near the doorused by the tradespeople. The knowledge of such things as weights and scalesbeing in use, will operate as a check to any petty fraud which might otherwisebe contemplated. In large establishments abroad the servants have sometimes an allowance offood, or are kept on board wages. The former system prevails on plantations atthe South, among field laborers only; the servants in families, as in theNorthern States, taking their meals immediately after, and on the remains ofthe family meals. The perquisites of servants are, in many cases, so many encroachments on theproperty of their employers, who tacitly allow, while they in principle condemnthe practice. There is no doubt that perquisites tend to corrupt the morals ofdomestics, placing their own interests in opposition to those of others, andoffering temptation against which their integrity is not always proof. Amongthese objectionable customs, one that particularly calls for attention as anodious kind of taxation, is the practice of servants receiving vails, or presents in money, from visitors. It is aspecies of bribery for services which ought to be performed without it, andtends to make servants less attentive to those who cannot give them greatpecuniary rewards. This custom has grown into disuse in England, and mosthighly respectable families make it a condition in hiring their servants, thatthey shall accept no such gifts, but when they are offered shall inform the visitor that it is contrary to the rule ofthe house to take them. It was formerly so usual in hotels in the United Statesfor the attendants to expect gifts from the guests, that one could not obtainany service without it. I knew a party of travellers visiting Niagara, to leavethe dining-room, unable to obtain any thing to eat, the waiters not attendingto them. One who had been longer in the house, informed them they would not beserved unless each person gave fifty cents to one of the waiters--who, in fact,were paid no wages, but allowed to extract all they could fromtravellers! This is downright swindling on the part of hotel proprietors, andno respectable landlord now permits such impositions. In all the first-classhotels in our cities, persons should be particularly requested to give no feesto servants. The charges per day at hotels certainly ought to cover ordinaryattendance; extra services may be paid for. As some country people, andSoutherners, when they travel, continue to give gratuities to servants,proprietors of public houses ought to be the more resolute in abolishing apractice tending to produce murmuring, discontent, and neglect of duties amongtheir domestics. The caution should be inserted among the printed rules of theestablishment, and the servants discharged who is known to receive any thing inthis way. Still more onerous and odious is the custom that inflicts a tax uponvisitors in private families, in violation of the sacred obligations ofhospitality. Such a burden is this felt to be, that many are compelled torefuse invitations to the houses of their friends on account of it. A Southernlady informed us that the expense of a short visit to one of her neighbors wasmade, by this necessity, to exceed what she would have paid at the highest rateof hotel fare. We found this the case on spending a day or so on a Virginiaplantation at the invitation of the owner; each servant on the premisesexpecting gratuities. They learn, of course, to estimate the worth or standingof a guest by the amount bestowed on them, and frequently to treat withinsolence or contempt those who cannot give so much. A "help" in New Jersey,was highly indignant at receiving a present of a mousseline de laine dressinstead of a silk one, and declared she would not have it made up. We knew ofanother lady who emptied her purse to give five dollars each to severalflaunting girls in the house where she was staying; though she was obliged todeny herself many things for want of the money. "If you do not give themsomething very elegant, they will make fun of you; nothing simple will pleasethem;" said another lady when consulted on the subject. What a motive forliberality! There are very few who have moral courage enough to be independent in suchthings, even though their charities have to be stinted in consequence;especially when it is known that the mistress frequently asks her servants whatthey received from her guests, and even draws conclusions founded on theirinformation! So at the risk of inconvenience or impoverishment, the tax must bepaid; though as a rule it is always paid with with secret dissatisfaction. Whatan insult to the name of hospitality is this! The prevailing motive for this kind of liberality is not the charity whichdelighteth in giving--but a selfish fear of being thought penurious by one'sfriends, or of being ridiculed by saucy servants. We do not remember a singleinstance in which the custom,considered imperative, when the custom, consideredimperative, when mentioned at all, has not been mentioned with condemnation. Itshould be utterly and for ever abolished. The mistress, in hiring a domestic,should make known her invariable rule that such things are not to be allowed, and should let it be known among all herfriends. We do not object to the largest kind of liberality in giving. The poor andneedy have claims that meet us at every turn; and the most rigid self-denial tosatisfy their just demands, is commendable. It is an excellent rule--"Mysuperfluity must give way to my neighbor's convenience; my convenience to hisnecessity; my necessity to his destitution." In instances where our regard isattracted by a kind and faithful domestic in a friend's family, or wherecircumstances would render a gift peculiarly acceptable, it is pleasant to giveand right to receive. We object to the system which makes present-giving compulsory without regard to the feelings or meansof the donor, or the necessities of the receiver. And what well-bred lady whoinvites her friends for the pleasure of their society, would willingly havethem feel under the necessity of putting themselves to inconvenience to givelarge fees to her servants, already well paid for the trifling services theyrender? The custom which we have understood is actually prevalent in some places, ofvisitors "making up in presents" the expense incurred by their friends inhospitably entertaining them,--is certainly "better honored in the breach thanthe observance." What hospitality can there be, when an equivalent is offeredand received? It would be more fair and open to make the bargain regularly indollars and cents. The indirect exaction of compensation in this way,frequently beyond what could reasonably be charged, appears to us to bespeculation without the s. Yet we occasionally hear of this as expected fromvisitors. A lady in Illinois once said to her guest: "I know you will want tomake me some nice present before you go away; I will tell you what I wouldlike: &c." A lady from the country who staid a fortnight with a cityfriend, left money when she went away to purchase "some sort of a present." Allwe have to say of this and every other practice tending to make gifts (whichshould be free as the love that ought alone to prompt them) in the slightestdegree compulsory, is, that it is wrong, and entirely subversive of truefriendship. To return to our subject. It is in vain that societies are formed for theencouragement of faithful domestics, by giving premiums and high testimonialsto those who serve a reasonable time in the same family. These last are notvalued, where a choice of places can be had without them, and the rovingdisposition is fostered by the notion of independence and the certainty ofbeing well paid for doing as one pleases. The only protection to housekeepers from this endless source of discomfort,is to be found in correcting the mistaken notion among American girls that aplace in domestic service is less honorable than the severer toils ofseamstresses, binders, shopkeepers, or milliners' workwomen. If they could bepersuaded, instead of wasting away their lives in health-destroying needlework,miserably paid for by speculators in female servitude,--to engage in the activeand varied duties of domestics, secure of a good home and abundant wages--a newera would commence for American housewives. Something might be done towards this end by regulating the hours devoted tohousehold employments, in such a way as to leave a portion of the day for thegirl's own time, which she is at liberty to employ as she pleases; and byencouraging her to use it in the acquirement of useful knowledge. "It requiresa refined mind to dust properly;" and the cultivation of intellect will not bethrown away in any department. Let the humiliation of servitude be thus takenaway, and persons who have seen better days will engage in the occupation. We would recommend the establishment of an Association inour large cities--to find suitable places for persons of a respectable class,stipulate for suitable privileges, and persuade them to this easy mode ofearning a livelihood. The gratitude of the community would be due to such aninstitution. CHAPTER VI. As a country cannot be governed without laws, neither can a household; andthe mistress should be as absolute in her own house as a sovereign in herdominions. Order and regularity are the key-stones to comfort, and ourhousewife must carefully arrange and digest her scheme of government in thefirst place, and be always alive to any modifications which emergencies, orprudence, or circumstances, may call for. And she must understand what she is about, or her scheme will beworthless; she must be able to teach, nay, to demonstrate upon occasions; shemust be regular in her own habits if she would have those about her regular,neat in all that concerns herself, attentive to the details of housekeeping,economical, just, active, and considerate. She must neither hold the reins ofgovernment loosely and negligently, nor too sternly, but must quietly exercisea general and regular surveillance over every part of her house and household;and this can be done without tyranny, without vexatious interference, orexhibitions of temper. Let the servants once feel that this is her habit, andthey will act accordingly; and if the place is good, conduct themselves so asto endeavor to please and keep it. And it is the interest, as well as duty, ofevery mistress, to make her servants comfortable; to see that they have asufficiency of good food, that they are well lodged; that they have time tomend and wash their own clothes, nay, that they know how to do so, and doit. "Do not send your clothes home to your mother to wash and mend," said afriend of ours to a new servant; "you will have plenty of time to arrange themyourself." "Please, mum, I don't know how!" replied the girl. "Well, Mary, you shall be taught, then, for it is time you did knowhow!" "But please, mum, I don't want to learn!" said the girl; and learn she wouldnot, for the foolish indulgence which leads mothers to spare their children alloccupations they do not like, is as prevalent among the poorer as among otherclasses. To return: a mistress need never forget herself, nor weaken her authority,nor show any false indulgence; but in numerous ways she will have theopportunity of endeavoring to guide, to advise, and to benefit those dependentupon her; but she must be patient, if she would really do good. She mustremember what may have been the early education, the trials and temptations,the experiences of those girls, and must not expect too much from them. As wehave before said, she must hold the reins of government with a firm hand; shemust not overlook neglect of duties, irregularities of conduct, want of orderor cleanliness, or inattention to her commands; but she can notice these thingsquietly, without loss of temper, and when alone with the offender; and she canalso notice and praise neatness, attention, obedience, and such like, and notaccept the good as mere matters of course, and only mark the evil. She shouldlikewise endeavor to induce her servant, by example and precept, to be regularin attendance on religious worship, and make Sunday to them in some degree aday of rest, instead of one of extra cooking and work, and should have a supply of those excellent little works to lend them,which are published by the religious societies. While she inculcates economy inthings relating to herself, she should try to induce them to save; to put byregularly a certain portion of their wages, and not be extravagant in clothes,but make and mend their things properly. There is little saved by giving paltry wages; a useful servant will notaccept them, and those who do, cannot clothe themselves respectably, and willtoo often eke out their means by peculation. It is well to begin with moderatewages, and promise an annual increase, which promise both induces a wish toplease, and takes away one great excuse for leaving, viz., a desire of"bettering herself." Even in the present "degenerate age," attached servantsare to be found, and may be created. We are all more or less human, and humanaffections and home ties act upon us; we learn to love those who are kind,courteous, and considerate; we value the notice and regard of our superiors,and we take a certain pride in deserving their good opinion. The fault lies inthat antagonism of classes, that want of understanding each other, thatforgetfulness that all are fellow-creatures, that tendency to regard each otheras mutual enemies to be conquered or circumvented. But we will pass to another topic. The amount of the income will determinewhat sum can be allowed per annum for housekeeping; for besides, there will beclothing expenses to be provided for, sundries of various kinds, expenses ofillness, on which we must all reckon, and there ought to be a reserve fund regularly laid by toprovide for any unforeseen emergency, or form the "nest egg" of a provision fora rising family. Well, suppose the sum determined! the next question is, how toapportion it so as to combine economy with comfort, and secure a regular anduniform style of living; not luxuries to-day and parsimony to-morrow. Now, howcan our young housekeeper do this, if she knows little or nothing of the pricesof provisions; if she scarcely remembers when things are in season and may bepurchased at a reasonable rate, and when they are actual extravagances; if shehas no idea what quantity of this or that ought to be consumed, by a family ofa certain size, per week or per month; and, above all, if she has littleaptitude for domestic management, and considerable contempt for all such vulgardetails? Few who have read that truthful sketch of Dickens, the "child-wife,"will forget the pretty helplessness of Dora; but, although this reads well in anovel, very few such girls, and there are many of them, will meet with husbandsas indulgent; for men like to see their home well ordered, and to feel thecomforts of good management. Every girl, or almost every girl, looks uponmarriage as the great aim and end of her existence; but unfortunately, sheregards it, as it is treated in novels, as the concluding chapter, the entranceto that "and-lived-happily-ever-after" state of bliss which we read of in fairytales. And certainly it is the entrance to a new life, though not one sorose-colored as she dreamed; it takes her from the home where she has beennurtured, cared for, provided for, perhaps petted and indulged, and places herwhere she will have to be the presiding intelligence; where all will look toher for guidance and instruction; where her happiness and comfort, and that ofher husband, will depend upon how she is qualified to fulfil the duties she hasundertaken. Mothers, wishing to have your daughters well married, how have youprepared them for the duties you well know they will have to perform? Perhapsyou were domestically educated, for our grandmothers were more careful in their generation, and thought it no degradation tobe good housewives! Perhaps you have had to fight your way through a host ofpainful lessons, of annoyances, losses, and domestic worries. Do you never lookback upon that miserable time, and feel anxious to spare your children asimilar probation? Life, even at its best, has enough of painful experiences,without our doubling them by neglecting to teach each individual, in propertime, the things she will be expected to know when she reaches woman'sestate. Every housekeeper should keep a strict account of all her expenditures;should see that each bill is receipted when paid; should file all receipts, andkeep them for a year at least--we should rather say two or three. Allhousekeeping bills should be paid every week, for it is easier to pay smallsums than large ones; and besides, the correctness of the bills can then beascertained. The mistress should look over each one herself, and thus she willdetect, and can check, any inaccuracy on the part of the tradesmen, orextravagance on the part of her servants. Should she be her own housekeeper,let her deal regularly with respectable tradesmen, for they will rarely risklosing a good customer by sending bad goods. Bargain-hunting is alwaysperilous, even to good judges. Cheap tea, coffee, sugar, &c., are alladulterated; cheap vegetables and fruit are generally stale; cheap meat is thatwhich has been sent ready killed to the market, and therefore is by no means asfresh as might be wished; and cheap poultry and fish are to be regarded withvery great suspicion. Those who have store-closets will find their advantage in purchasing somethings wholesale. Candles should be bought in the latter part of summer, whenthey are usually cheaper, and a store laid in, for they improve by keeping. Sodoes soap. Coal, too, should be ordered in July or August, and if there iscellarage, a stock for the winter laid in. Many groceries may be purchased inquantities at considerable saving. The same remark applies to bacon, butter,and cheese; but unless there are good dry storerooms, these latter cannot bekept. It is useless to make pickles or preserves unless the house is dry--indamp localities these things mildew and spoil; nor are we sure that in smallfamilies it is economical to make them at all, they can be bought soreasonably. All stores should be kept by the mistress, and given out asrequired. All good homekeepers will provide themselves with weights and scales, andthus be prepared to check the quantities of stores sent them by theirtradespeople, who are as liable to make errors in weighing as in casting theirbills. We cannot too particularly impress this upon the attention of ourreaders, as an essential means of protecting themselves against errors inweight, whether arising from accident or design. Many heads of families areexceedingly particular about the price of their purchases, who are utterly regardlesswhether or not they have the weight they paid for. Tradesmen are aware of thistrust reposed in them, and too often take advantage of it. Unlike the symbol ofJustice, who, as she holds the scales in her hands, is blind to allpartialities, some tradesmen (some especially amongst the class who arepurveyors to the poor) are too open-eyed to see that they descend in their ownfavor. In the realm which our housewife is to govern, order, cleanliness,punctuality, and economy must be the fundamental principles which, by preceptand practice, she endeavors to enforce. It matters little whether her subjectsare limited to a single maid-of-all-work, or general Work Table. An illustration of a work table with a span that is with fewneedles stick on it. servant, as it is now the fashion to call this domestic, orwhether she reign over two, three, or more "helps," still the principle must bethe same; a certain routine of daily and weekly duties must be laid down, andit lies with the mistress to see that not only these are performed properly,but that all incidental matters are likewise attended to. However wealthy afamily may be, they are not willing that their houses and furniture should beinjured by neglect or mismanagement. Money can enable a man to hire moredomestics, but it cannot provide that these persons shall be cleanly, diligent,trustworthy, and painstaking; it cannot secure him from the consequences oftheir ignorance, their carelessness, their extravagance. Nothing but thesupervision of the mistress, or a good housekeeper, can do this. If, then, arich man, who can pay the best wages, and hire the most experienced servants,finds still that he lacks something, how much more will one of moderate incomeor of limited means suffer, should he not find in his wife a housewife? What I am now about to say, some of my readers may think perhaps out ofplace; nevertheless I shall say it. A woman cannot really do her duty as awife, mother, or mistress of a family, unless she is fully sensible of theimportance of health, and gives to all sanitary measures their due attention.With loss of health come diminished powers of usefulness. Languor and delicacyin a wife may call forth the sympathies, but do not increase the comforts orhappiness of a professional or business man; neither do they render a womanmore inclined for, or equal to, the performance of her part in domestic life.And too many of our young girls render themselves languid, feeble, anddelicate, by inattention to the commonest requirements of human nature. Thecrying evil of small towns is usually the want of baths attached to houses, andthe small size of bed-rooms; now these are in general accepted as things whichmust be endured, and little or no attempt is made to palliate them. All medicalmen, however, agree that plentiful ablutions of the body with cold or tepidwater, and a good supply of fresh air in every sleeping andsitting-room, do more to preserve health than all the drugs in thepharmacopœia. And next to these come early rising, avoidance of latehours and crowded assemblies, regular exercise in the open air, attention todiet, and abstinence from pernicious viands, as pastry, sweetmeats, richgravies, unripe fruit, &c. Pork, veal, andvarious kinds of vegetables can only be eaten sparingly and occasionally bysome persons. Spirits should only be used medicinally, that is to say,at times when common sense tells us they might be of benefit. To take themhabitually is equivalent to slow poison. Besides the benefit a woman derives in herhealth and person from attention to all matters relative to personal care, shewill gain another in the effect of her example upon her dependents; for we areall, to a certain extent, creatures of imitation and prone to follow example,be it good or bad. Servants who see before them one who consistently practisesthe virtues of economy, regularity, personal cleanliness, and general neatness,will never run diametrically counter to all this, but will in some degree shapetheir conduct accordingly, while all the precepts in the world, withoutpractice, will but go in at one ear and out at the other. Where only one or two servants are kept, the mistress will do well not toleave her chamber before she has opened her windows, and laid the bed-clothesback over two chairs so as to insure the sheets and blankets, heated by contactwith the body all night, being well aired and cooled. No bed should be made, ornight-dress folded up, until it has been aired, and suffered thoroughly to coolfor at least two hours. Nurseries should be aired while the children are atbreakfast, and while they are taking their morning walk. Dining anddrawing-rooms require a current of fresh air passed through them at least onceevery day, to dislodge all the stale atmosphere tainted by the smell of food,flowers, &c., and by having been inhaled by those using the rooms. Many ofour readers have doubtless been struck, on entering some houses, by the close,faint, unwholesome smell they, coming from the fresh air, at once perceive.Those who dwell in it habitually are not conscious of it. They dread the chillof fresh air, or the dust it will bring with it into their rooms; and thereforeshut it carefully out, and cherish in its stead a species of slow poison--aheavy atmosphere loaded with all sorts of pernicious gases. Light, too, is another forbidden luxury in some houses. Heavy Venetianblinds jealously protect the delicate hues of the curtains and carpets from itsinfluence, and the inmates consequently fade instead of their upholstery; for ahuman being can no more do without light than can a flower, and we only needplace this latter in a cellar for a few days, and we shall see how it willlook. It must not, however, be supposed that we would recklessly suffer thenoonday sun to shine on our damask curtains or tapestried carpets, or that weshould open our windows when rain, hail, or snow beat full upon them; all wewish to do is, to advise such a use of the choicest gifts of Providence, ashealth requires and common sense would dictate. Nor is it only with a view to exercising a salutary influence upon herdomestics and strengthening herself, that we would counsel our housewife to paystrict attention to all matters of sanitary importance. A female writer of somecelebrity has said, "If before marriage, a woman has been deluded into thenotion that a multiplicity of small ailments invested her character with aninteresting kind of delicacy, the sooner she becomes well after marriage, thebetter for herself and all around her." Now we do not intend to assert that there are not many men who are unweariedin their tenderness in time of illness; but this we must say, that there arethousands more who "vote sickness a bore;" who have little sympathy with,little tolerance for it; who married to have a cheerful companion, not adrooping, languid invalid, to come home to; and who soon begin to seekelsewhere that companionship and cheerfulness they have failed to find at home.And alas! when a man's love has once been dimmed, or alienated from his wife,it never wholly recovers its lost lustre, but remains a mere mechanical matterof duty or honor, and too often not even that.Matrimony may bind a man to his wife legally, but herself only can retain herempire over his heart; and to do this, she will need even more than herformer charms and attractions and fascinations, besides a vast variety of otherattributes which her new position will require of her. Women little dream what they peril when, after marriage, they neglect theaccomplishments, the tasteful dress and adornment, the charming coquetterie of manner, which enthralled the lover.They not only risk their happiness, for it depends on him, but they neglectwhat ought to be their highest ambition, that of proving how much dearer is thewife than the mistress, and of rendering his home a refuge from cares, a sceneof tranquil happiness, of social enjoyment, and of real comfort. Milton is notuttering a merely poetical exclamation, but a great truth, when he says-- "For nothing lovelier can befound In woman than to study household good, And good works in herhusband to promote;" for a woman who is true to herself will inevitablybe the better angel of her husband. Contact with her true heart, hergentle pursuance of all her duties, and with her cheerful, rational, andearnest spirit, will restore the tone of his mind, defiled, saddened,rendered morbid, it may be, by contact with the outer world and all itschicanery, its worry and its debasing influences. Wisely are all thingsordered, if we would not, by our follies, our impatience and self-seeking,derange them. Beautiful is the mission of woman, if she would but see it in allits holiness and brightness. Those who have a home which they can make happy, will not sigh for contactwith the outer world, to be permitted to wrestle and contend among its fiercetrials and the fiercer spirits that struggle there for dailybread; or despise the peaceful path of domestic duty, which, although ithas its trials, is yet in a great degree sheltered; or reject the gentle tiesof wife, mother, sister, to study some learned profession, and rush into thosehaunts and paths already too crowded with the sterner sex. Such must be thelot, nevertheless, of many women, whom necessitous circumstances have forcedinto an unnatural position. Our "model housewife" believes with us that we should endeavor a "Well ordered home, man's best delight, tomake: And by submissive wisdom, modest skill, With every gentle,care-eluding art, To raise the virtues, animate the bliss. And sweetenall the toils of human life; This is true female dignity andpraise." So turn we now again to more practical matters. There are few things more perplexing at first to young housewives than themomentous question of dinner. A social dinner party, and a quiet family dinner,require equal consideration. We once heard of an old bachelor who, to savehimself the daily trouble of stating what he would have for dinner, drew up aprogramme of dinners for every day in the year, and handed it over to hishousekeeper; and a lady has lately published a pamphlet, entitled, "What shallwe have for dinner, in order to save idle folks the trouble of thinking." Now, a good cookery book, a short walk round the region where the marketingis done, and a knowledge of family likes and dislikes, will generally enableeven a novice to arrange this important matter, at least so far as the orderinggoes, the cooking being another consideration. Joints should always, whenweather permits, be purchased fresh, and then hung as long as is deemedrequisite to fit them for eating. A knowledge of the sauces and condimentsappropriate to every dish, is a subject well worth attention. The cooking ofvegetables is an important point, and one in whichwe may derive much useful instruction from the French. Vegetables cannot be toofresh; in large towns we can form no idea how little we know of the real flavorand delicacy of green vegetables, accustomed as we are to have them at least aday after they are cut. Fish should be chosen by touch and look. If it feels flabby, andlooks pale about the gills, and dull about the eyes, it is to be avoided;firmness of body, brightness and fulness of eyes, and ruddiness of the gills,are signs of freshness. Crabs and lobsters must be selected byweight, not size, and the olfactory organs employed to test theirsweetness. We have already spoken of the desirableness of dealing regularly withrespectable people, but no rule is without its exception; and those who arepretty good judges of articles of provision, may often obtain some variety bylooking about them. Practice and habitual attention and observation, and thewholesome annoyance of one or two blunders, will soon give experience. We would advise that our housewife should see occasionally that all thecooking utensils are kept clean; that there is no waste or extravagance, thatthe ends of loaves, spare bits of cut bread, bones of meat, coldvegetables, &c., are not recklessly thrown about. There are in everyneighborhood only too many poor to be found, who will most gratefully receivethe scraps from the richer man's table; and a little inquiry will always findsome family on whom such odds and ends may well be bestowed. Thetea-leaves should be regularly put by in some vessel, to be used insweeping. Perhaps there are few things in which the respectability of a man is moreimmediately felt, than the style of dinner to which he may accidentally bringhome a visitor. Every one ought to live according to his circumstances, and themeal of the tradesman ought not to emulate the entertainments of the higherclasses; but if merely two or three dishes be well served, with the properaccompaniments, the table-linen clean, the small sideboard neatly laid, and allthat is necessary be at hand, the expectation of both the husband and friendwill be gratified, because no interruption of the domestic arrangements willdisturb their social intercourse. Hence the direction of a table is no inconsiderable branch ofa lady's concern, as it involves judgment in expenditure, respectability ofappearance, and the comfort of her husband, as well as of those who partake oftheir hospitality. Inattention to it is always inexcusable, and should beavoided for the lady's own sake, as it occasions a disagreeable degree ofbustle and evident annoyance to herself, which is never observable in awell-regulated establishment. In doing the honors of her table, the mode ofcarving is also of importance, and will be treated of in a future chapter. The mode of covering the table differs in taste. It is not themultiplicity of things, but the choice, the dressing, and the neat,pleasing look of the whole, which give respectability to her who presides. Thetable should be furnished with more than the necessary quantity of plate, or plated ware, andglass, to afford a certain appearance of elegance; and if accompanied by aclean cloth and a neatly dressed attendant, it will show that the habits of thefamily are those of gentility. For a small party, or a tête-à-tête, a dumb waiter is aconvenient contrivance, as it partly saves the attendance of servants. Thecruets should be looked to and filled every day an hour before dinner; and muchtrouble and irregularity are saved when there is company, if servants areaccustomed to prepare the table and sideboard in similar order daily. Too manyor too few dishes are extremes not uncommon: theformer encumbering the dinner with a superfluity which partakes of vulgarity,whilst the latter has the appearance of poverty or penuriousness. An illustration of a basket that looks like a boat from the sideview. Servants should always be accustomed to lay the cloth and serve dinner asneatly when the family is alone as when company is expected; they shouldlikewise be taught to bring up and place on the table or sideboard everythinglikely to be required during the meal, and not have to leave the roomrepeatedly on trifling errands. The mistress should glance around to see thatall is there; and if she perceives omissions, mention them before dinnercommences. Servants should also be taught to wait at table without bustle ornoise; to remove plates, &c., without rattling them; to open and close thedoors gently; to lift covers from dishes so as not to let the drops ofcondensed steam fall on the table or those seated at it. If these things areordinarily insisted upon, the mistress of the house will not, when she gives adinner party, sit on thorns, trembling lest some gaucherie be committed. Those who would give dinner parties, must, generally speaking, if their ménage is small, hire a professed cook. Asmall, well cooked, well chosen dinner, is far preferable to a table crowdedwith dishes. Symmetrical arrangement of the dinner table, too, is a powerfuladjunct. The silver should be bright, the glass sparkling, the table-linen pureand snowy, the room well lighted, of comfortable temperature, and wellventilated. The pleasure of eating a good dinner is greatly enhanced whencomfort is studied, and taste gratified. Vegetable Dish. A large vegetable dish with a lid. The wines, if you give any, should be good; it is better to give only one ortwo kinds, and let those be good, even though they be only old-fashioned portand sherry, than to aim at greater things, and set before the guestthose "cheap and nasty" imitations of other vintages. A large two tiered serving dish with a lid. Choose the company and arrange them as carefully as the dishes. Ill assortedguests are difficult to please, while persons who assimilate find additionalzest in their social enjoyment. Vegetable Warmer. An illustration of a pan with with four legs. The dessert should be well selected, and more choice than plentiful. Bychoice, do not let us be understood to mean extravagant, consisting offruits not yet in season nor having their proper flavor, or ofpreserved fruits, or fancy confectionery. All these are prejudicial tohealth, and we cannot understand why people who dine out should be tempted toeat indigestible things; why what ought to be a means of social enjoyment,should be made a matter of form, ostentation, and discomfort. Let the dessertconsist of fine specimens of the fruits in season, backed in winter by afew dried fruits and biscuits. Plate Warmer. A tall, three legged, ornate plate warmer. Cake Basket. A large oblong baskt with a tall handle. Fruit Dish. A circular dish with steep sides and a decoratedrims. Soyer's housewife thus describes her dinner:--The first thing to be lookedto is the lights; these ought to be so placed as not to intercept theview of any person at the table, but at the same time they ought to be enoughto show everything off to advantage. I prefer removing some of thelights from the table to the side-board when the cloth is removed, asthe light after dinner ought to be more subdued. In laying the cloth, we placeit over the baize and remove it after dinner, as Mr. B. says he likes to seethe mahogany; for when he asks a city friend to come and put his feetunder his mahogany, it looks rather foolish if he never sees it. I have, as youknow, my table rather wide, that is, six feet, and I generally place avase of flowers in the centre, as I think their freshness and odor add greatlyto the appearance of the table, and admit a flanc on each side. We prefer theold English plan of taking the top and bottom of the table, instead of me andMr. B. together at the side. Dish Cover. A bell shaped dish cover with handle. "The cloth being laid with its proper side uppermost, I order a napkin, twoknives, two prongs, two tablespoons, and two wineglasses to be placed for eachperson, a saltcellar between every other; that being a condiment which everyone uses, though often wrongly; the cruet-frames and other requisites are kepton the sideboards. I then have the fish and soup served together; thepotatoes and sauce on the sideboard; I serving the soup, and Mr. B. thefish; and often a little dish of fried fish, such assmelts, &c., to remove the soups. This gives me an opportunity ofseeing that my guests are properly attended to, and also leisure to takewine with any gentleman who challenges me. During the time this coursehas been progressing, the cook has had time to dish up the removes nice andhot, and get all up close to the door, as I like as little time as possible tointervene in changing the dishes; and these consist generally of variouslydressed chickens, which I have before me, as this gives an opportunityfor the gentleman on my right to display his gallantry; Mr. B., who is acapital carver, either has a saddle or a haunch of mutton, or a quarterof lamb before him, the rest of the dishes consisting of a tongueand entrées. I select those most easy to carve, and also easy for thecook to prepare. This is a period of dinner where a great deal depends upon theattendants; they should know almost by the look what this lady or thatgentleman requires, and what kind of vegetables to hand them; a first-ratebutler should be able to judge by the physiognomy to whom he should offermint sauce with the lamb, and who prefers cayenne; ontheir attention and hot plates depends the success of the substantial part ofthe dinner. "As soon as I see that all are served, and words are few in consequence ofthe organ which utters them being employed in another way, I give a look to thetwo servants which they understand, and immediately two reports are heard--theyare from two bottles of champagne, opened at the same time by theattendants, who have each a salver with six glasses on it; this takes but ashort time to serve, and prepares the palate for the entrées, whichgenerally get praised; indeed, my cook would think something was wrong if twoof the dishes did not go down empty. By having the champagne thus, Ifind it goes much further than if only one bottle was opened at the time, therebeing sufficient left in the bottles for a gentleman to challenge a lady totake champagne with him. If I have game I remove the top andbottom dishes with them, and make the sweets a separate course, taking care tohave cold plates for the jelly, and having the Fish Carver & Fork. A knife and fork used for eating fish. Silver Skewer. A large needle-like utensil. A metal carrying device with two baskets each of which contain acrystal or glass cruet. liquors handed round when thesweets are on the table; one cheese I place opposite Mr. B., andmacaroni opposite myself. In the dessert I generally introduce some newimportation, such as bananas, sugar-cane, American ladyapples, prickly pears, &c.; these also give a subject for thegentlemen to talk about when the ladies have left, as free trade, colonialpolicy, &c. About half an hour after the dessert is on the table, and whenI see that the conversation is becoming less general, I retire to thedrawing-room; the servants then remove the used glass and plates, and Mr. B.introduces some of his choice claret or Burgundy in ice coolers." Wine Cooler. Two conjoined baskets for chilling wine. There are so many varieties of evening parties that no directions can begiven respecting them. As a general rule, we would advise that they should beas simple, unostentatious, and sociable, as possible. It is the extravagancewhich has been introduced into these matters, the insane desire of outvyingeach other felt by individuals, which is the bar to real social enjoyment, andprevents us from being as lively a people as the French. Why cannot we meet toconverse, have music, dance, or amuse ourselves in any rational way, and becontent with light, simple refreshments, and a sincere welcome? Surely such réunions are more enjoyable than crowds,grand suppers, superb toilettes which are scarcely seen in the crush, andsuffocating heat or currents of cold air. Such assemblies upset the house ofthe party-giver for a week at least, weary and worry her, and are criticisedmost severely by all her "dear friends" who did not enjoy themselves, norreceive the attention they expected. In them all is most certainly "vanity andvexation of spirit;" there is no pleasant converse, no comfort, nointellectual enjoyment; weariness, lassitude, headache, and expense, are theonly concomitants of such parties. May our "model housewife" have courage toreject them altogether. A device to hold four or five small containers CHAPTER VII. FEW persons would believe what a waste of money and property arises simplyfrom want of care. We cannot, of course, expect this carefulness from servants,from those who are often thought less, inexperienced girls, coming from a homewhere there was little worthy of care, perhaps from a place, where there was notime to bestow due attention on the various duties. Few servants stay longenough in a situation to become attached to, and, as it were, identifiedwith it and its belongings; they are ever strivingto "better themselves," or, in other words, obtain higher wages. It matters notthat they are comfortable, that they like their employers; that they arewell-treated, and not over-worked;--should some acquaintance or relative bereceiving higher wages than they are getting, they will sacrifice all to "goand do likewise;" and too often not in order that they may contribute more tolay up a fund in case of illness or misfortune, but to be able to dress moresmartly, or indulge in some favorite pleasure. All this is much to beregretted, as it too often entails loss of health, comfort, and respectabilityon the young woman. But it is not this point from which we now have to regardit. It is the mistress, not the servant, whom we are addressing, and whom wewould guard from the troubles which must befall her, if she too, be careless, if she does not know and seethat her property is well managed and regularly and properly attended to. We have before said that no household knowledge can be deemed superfluous,or ought to come amiss to a woman, who is to be at the head of a house. Surelyshe is not the less a lady because she understands how her house should bemanaged and cleaned, and kept tidy?--because she can teach her servants whenthey are ignorant, put method into their proceedings when they are careless,and quietly but attentively look on and superintend when they are tolerablyefficient? We are all made of the same clay, though differently tempered byeducation and position; we are all subject to vicissitudes, and cannot tellwhat a day, or even an hour, may bring forth; is it not, then, wiser to bearmed at all points, prepared for all circumstances, equal to anyemergency? These preliminary remarks have been made to preface the directions we areabout to give for the daily routine of a servant's duties, which else mighthave seemed out of place here, had it not been our opinion that, in order tomanage servants well, a mistress should fully understand what their actualduties are. Early rising is indispensable if a servant would do her duty; it is notpossible that the rooms can be dusted, the fires lit, the breakfast got ready,and all the little incidental jobs done, unless a servant is down stairs atleast two hours before breakfast-time. We should fix six o'clock as the properhour at which work should begin all the year round; for in winter even more hasto be done than in summer, and few things are more unpleasant than to haveservants pottering about their work all day, instead of getting through thechief and dirtiest part of it in the morning hours. If we make a call, whichgives us the most favorable impression of the family,--to see a tidy-looking,clean servant, answer the door; or to have it opened by one who looks as if shehad deemed it necessary when blacking the stoves to black her own personalso? A servant should be trained to rise about half-past five, throw open herbed, and her window, too, when the weather permits; unclose the shutters of thestaircase and dining-room, open the windows of this latter to air it; pass intothe kitchen, and open the shutters and windows there; light the kitchen fire;well rinse the kettle, and fill it with fresh water; see that the boiler iswell supplied with water, and then proceed to prepare the room required forbreakfast. The rug must be folded up and removed, and the proper cloth laid down infront of the fire-place before the grate is touched (we are supposing that itis winter); the box containing the black-lead and brushes for a black stove, orthe emery paste, and leather, brushes, cloth, &c., for a polished stove,and the scuttle containing coal, wood, &c., must be brought up. Once a week, at least, the soot should be gently swept downfrom the chimney into a shovel, as it otherwise gathers all round the lowerledges, and is very apt to take fire. The stove must be polished with a brush,or a cloth, according to its nature, every morning, and thoroughly cleaned atleast once a week. The fire may then be laid and lighted, and in doing thisthere is some art. Where one girl will light and re-light the same fire threeor four times over, consuming in each attempt a quantity of wood, and paper,another will, with less wood, kindle a brisk fire at once. The mystery lies inobtaining a perfect draught of air through the pile of materials, and placingthose in juxtaposition which are most combustible in nature. Where this isproperly done there will be little smoke, and great saving of fuel; butfire-lighting requires the use of one's senses and some skill, commonplace amatter as we may think it. This much having been done, the sweeping comes next. Now, it will not berequisite thoroughly to sweep the carpet all over above once a week; on theother six days those parts of the room chiefly used, alone requisite sweeping,and this may be done with a dust-pan and a soft hand-brush. Then comes thedusting, and in doing this a feather brush should be used for the frames andchair covers, and a duster for the furniture. On the cleaning day the carpetmust be well swept with a carpet-broom and tea-leaves, the furniture wellcleaned and rubbed, the mantel-piece and ledges washed, the inside of thewindows cleaned, and every ornament well dusted. Window Brush. A brush with bristles on both sides of the head. The street-door steps should be cleaned, the mats shaken, the passage swept,and the brasses polished before the family come down. Feather Duster. An illustration of handeled instrument with long bird feathersprotruding from one end. The breakfast is then to be prepared; the cloth laid, the breakfast serviceproperly arranged, the ham or eggs, or whatever it may be,cooked, the toast made, the butter set in clear, freshwater, the coffee prepared and the milk boiled. Brushes for Cleaning. The first of three brushes is long and cylindrical. The second hasa row of tightly packed bristlesand a wooden handle. The third has bristleslike a tassel and a long handle. The servant next proceeds to the bed-rooms, opens the windows, lays thebed-clothes back to air, and turns up the mattresses or feather-beds in eachroom; then empties the slops, cleanses and rinses all basins, ewers, bottles,&c., wipes up all slops, and brings fresh water to supply all wantsin each room. The beds are then to be made, and the rooms dusted. On cleaningday, which should come for each room once a-week, the chamber utensils must allbe well washed in warm water, the carpets taken up and shaken, and thefurniture cleaned. During the summer the floor under the bed should be washedover three times a-week at least, to remove all dust and flue. Before all this can be finished, the breakfast will have had to be removed,and this should be methodically done; the china being gathered on a traywithout either fuss or rattle, the crumbs brushedfrom the cloth, and this latter doubled up in its original folds, and anycrumbs which may have fallen on the floor swept up into a dust-pan. The servant will now get her own breakfast, and then wash up and put awayall the breakfast things, having first set aside all the catables, giving thescraps to the cat, and taking care that nothing is wasted. The up-stairs work having been done, the candlesticks and lamps should becleaned and trimmed; and then the knives cleaned. Where only one servant iskept, she will ere this have had to think about dinner, and manage so as tomake the earlier preparations for that important matter between whiles. Amistress should always inform her domestic charged with such duties, what sheintends having for dinner, when the girl is removing the breakfast things,otherwise she cannot possibly arrange her daily duties so as to attend to thecooking without neglecting them; and the mistress should, as far as possible,endeavor to arrange her dinner so as to suit the household duties of theparticular day for which she is catering. For each day should have its specialduties; as, Monday, the wash for towels, dusters, servants' clothes, &c.,and looking up the clothes for the laundress; Tuesday, cleaning the attics;Wednesday, the best bed-rooms; Thursday, the drawing-room; Friday, thedining-room and plate; and Saturday, the hall, staircase, and kitchen, covers,&c. Such regulations once laid down, the servant will know what duties eachday requires of her; and the mistress, being aware what has to be done, will beable to give her orders accordingly,--for nothing can be done without goodmanagement in a small household. Both mistress and servant must exerciseforethought, or the whole day will be one scene of hurry, scurry, anddiscomfort. The next thing, then, is dinner, and this meal having been served andremoved, the servant must, if the family are in the habit of retiring to thedrawing-room, run up and see that all is right there; the fires burning andcurtains let down, if in winter, or any little customary summer arrangementsmade. Then comes washing up the dinner things, and preparing for tea,and serving that at the proper hour. While the family are at tea is the best time for the servant to go upto the bed-rooms, turn down the beds, close windows, light fires, or performany other customary or necessary duty. The tray has to be removed, and cups used at that meal, washed and put away.The tea leaves should be squeezed tolerably dry, and put away in an olddish or basin, for sweeping. All window shutters should be closed and doorsbolted at dusk, both in winter and summer. If supper is taken, it is usuallycarried up on a tray covered with a cloth; after that comes the putting out ofall fires and lamps, the fastening the hall door, and then to rest. Any one who takes the trouble to reflect upon the multifarious occupationsof a female domestic, in a family where but one is kept, cannot but perceivethe absolute necessity of a regular plan of proceedings, and also of the needthere is for consideration, patience, and kindness. With all the activity andgood-will in the world, it is physically impossible that a girl can be in twoplaces at once; and yet she may be just performing some nice operation incookery while a visitor may be knocking at the door, and her mistress ringingimpatiently to have something done towards tidying herself or the apartment.How is this to be managed? It can only be settled quietly by the mistressbestirring herself, and aiding in smoothing the difficulty. Where two or moreservants are kept, one should always be tidy andready to answer the door, and the lady of the house and her apartments shouldalways be mis à quatre épingles, or, in otherwords, in such order that a visit from royalty itself would scarcely create anybustle. Indeed, the test of a well-arranged establishment is the absence of allfuss. The advent of relatives from the country bent on finding a home and a bedthere, the arrival of unexpected guests to dinner, or any such unexpectedevents, will, of course, slightly derange the economy of a household,especially if it be a small one; but our housewife will not allow this to be visible.Quietly and without confusion she will take opportunities of giving thenecessary orders; and if her servants are regularly trained, they willcomprehend and second her at once. In every house spare sheets, blankets, andbed-clothes should always be kept aired, in case of their being required on anysudden emergency, and this can be done by laying them between the palliasse andmattress of any bed in regular use. We have before spoken of the advantage ofalways having the store-closet well supplied. It is a great mistake to fancythat anything is saved by purchasing articles that will keep, in smallquantities, and certainly the loss of time incurred by having constantly tosend out for trifles, is both a great waste and a great inconvenience. Noservant can get through her work properly if she has repeatedly to run out onerrands, or if she is called off frequently on frivolous pretexts. A mistressis quite right in exacting from her servants a regular and proper fulfilment ofall their duties; but on her part she must give them time and opportunity to dothis. If she sees they want method, she must try to teach them; and through allmust remember how defective their early education has too often been, howlittle preparation they have received for the path of life they have to follow,and be patient with them. The great social evil of the present age is, thatfemales are rarely trained with reference to their probable duties. This evilpervades all classes, from the lowest to the highest. The daughter of the millionnaire is seldom taught to consider how greatare the social responsibilities her wealth and position impose upon her,--toregard herself as a steward of the Almighty, a medium through which Hisblessings may flow to those poor and unfortunate ones, whose lot is cast so farapart from hers. If she learns at all that "to whom much is given, much will berequired," she probably imagines that much to be in the way of style, dress, andaccomplishments; which, to a certain extent, is not far wrong, for thecirculation of money is a commercial advantage, and those elevated in positionshould also be elevated in mental and moral attributes; but this is not allrequired of them. There is a duty to the poor, the duty of kindess, charity,and mercy. If all who have it in their power would but attend to this a little,how much good might be done! and what sits so gracefully on woman as suchgentle deeds and holy virtues? Then, as we have before said, the daughters of the working class are hardlyprepared for their position as wives, mothers, and housewives; and the childrenof the poor have too often a still worse bringing up, being reared amid misery,poverty, dirt, and vice, if not in their own families, at least in many ofthose around them. Vast as has been the general spirit of progression in this age, it ismarvellous that these every-day matters have been, practically speaking, sototally overlooked. There is much theory, but the greater part of it isspeculative and utopian. We are not advocates of systems, but would recommend good common sense instead; for systems can only beapplied to certain parties and in certain ways, whereas common sense will cullthe best parts of many systems, and adapt them to suit the peculiar position orcharacter it has to deal with,--and thus give to that character a firmness andfreedom from conventional prejudices which will, when strengthened by rightprinciples, make it good and useful. CHAPTER VIII. AMONG the many duties a woman is called upon to fulfil, surely none can bedeemed of such paramount importance as those she owes to her children. Now itis by no means our intention to write a chapter of "advice to mothers," orenter upon the subject of the education and general management of littlepeople; all we have to do with the matter here is to notice it as forming abranch of our subject; for the nursery is an important part of a house, andupon its good management much of the comfort, as well as the health andwell-being of every member of the family, will depend. Sitz Bath. A bath with a round basin component which also has a reclined backrest. If ever a woman has need of thought, care, and patience, it is when shebecomes a mother. Who can look upon that most helpless of all created beings--anew-born infant--and not feel pity for it, interest in it; and surely no mothercan bestow her first kiss on the little unconscious innocent without feelingsome sense of the responsibilities which now rest upon her--for it is not onlya human being, but an immortal soul which is committed to her charge. Wherever such an arrangement can be made, a good-sized airy room should beset apart for the nursery, and always kept scrupulously clean, well ventilated,and of an even wholesome temperature. Warmth is highly necessary to the healthof infants and young children--but not the warmth of a close, over-heated room,for that oppresses their lungs, and makes them delicate and verysusceptible of cold. Let the child be comfortably clad, and a naturaltemperature of body thus maintained. The health of very many infants isimpaired by the foolish custom of exposing their little chests and arms byfinely-worked low bodies and very short sleeves, tied up so as effectually toprevent their being of any use in the way of covering. Very young children haveso little natural heat, that they absolutely require that the temperature oftheir bodies should be kept up, by means of clothing, to a proper standard. The furniture of the nursery ought to be very simple, and to consist of nomore things than are absolutely necessary. The "bassinet," a wicker basketstuffed very soft and lined within, two and a-half or three feet long,and one and a-half wide, has been used in England for very young infants, andmay be carried about. Cradles and swinging cots are condemned by medical men,and are now less used than cribs. Children's chairs of various sizes, awashstand, shower bath, a child's bath, or a large earthernware basin fixed ina stand of wood, various vessels of earthenware, a nursery lamp for warmingliquids when there is no fire, sponges and linen baskets--comprise therequisite articles of furniture. A wire guard for the fire, and bars for the windows should never be omitted. French Folding Fender. A short folding screen. Next to warmth, in the category of matters indispensable to health iscleanliness. Morning and night, an infant or a child under three years of age,should be bathed in tepid water in winter, and cold water insummer. This operation should be performed both thoroughly and quickly, andthen the whole body wiped quite dry with a soft towel, and the limbs and backgently rubbed with the hand. The skin of an infant is so delicate that alittle dirt, a slight accumulation of powder, any dampness, any rough handlingor friction with a coarse cloth, will break or crack it, and often produce ahumor which is not easily got rid of. The clothes of an infant, and especiallythose in immediate contact with its body, should be soft and clean. Itsbed-clothes must likewise be kept well aired, and free from damp and unpleasantsmells. Can, Bath and Pail. Three assorted water vessels. Infant's Bath. A small bath that tappers at the foot end. Very young children should be kept as much as possible, in a recumbentposture; the less a child is allowed to sit upright for the first six months,the stronger will be its back afterwards. Too strong a light is prejudicial toyoung children; neither within nor out of doors should their eyes be exposed toanything like glare; they ought likewise to be shielded from high winds. Sleepis a great strengthener of children, when it is natural, and care should betaken that they lie comfortably as regards position, are warm, and shelteredfrom all draughts and from light, though allowed sufficient air. In all thingsendeavor to establish regular habits from the very first; regular hours forfeeding, sleeping, dressing, and undressing, should be observed. Few people canform an idea how much their own comfort and the child's well-being will bepromoted by this. Of course, every now and then illness, or some unforeseenevent, will interfere with this system, but it must be resumed again as soon aspossible. We are aware that many people will deem this regularity unnecessary,but from the cradle to the grave, we are all more or less the creatures ofhabit; and from the time a child first begins to notice anything, its habitsmay be said to commence. Leg Bath. Foot Bath. Two different baths, one for the legs and feet and one just forfeet. When a child is fed, it should be from a proper bottle, and with light, thinfood, not given too hot or in large quantities. Farinaceous substancesof various kinds are best adapted for children of tender age. For the firsttwelvemonth these may be given in a fluid, and semi-fluid state, and afterwardsin the shape of puddings either baked or boiled.Many children will not take meat, and they do not appear to thrive lessthan others; nature at this early age is generally the best pilot, and we shallseldom err if we follow her lead. The period of teething is always one of anxiety, and requires additionalcare and watchfulness; but plenty of fresh air, good and sufficient, but notover-feeding, and an occasional warm bath or gentle aperient when there appearsto be tendency to fever, will in most cases ward off serious evils. The lessphysic a child takes the better in a general way--not that we would advisemothers ever to slight any actual premonitory symptoms of illness; infantilediseases being frequently very rapid in their course. There is no occasion to teach children to walk; when they are strong enough,they will invariably find out the proper use of their feet; let them lieon the floor, and then sit, and then crawl; and by-and-by they will stand up,and then walk along, holding by something; and then, when they appear capableof doing yet more, encourage them to venture alone, but watch carefully thatthey do not fall, or they may be frightened, and thrown back some weeks. Aftera child is a year old, it must cease to be regarded as an irrational being bythose about it; a quick, lively baby is always taking notice; its intelligenceis becoming daily and hourly developed;--in a word, the first rudiments ofeducation are entering its little mind. This may sound extravagant andfanciful, but what says proverbial philosophy? "With his mother's milkthe child drinketh education;" and let any one take three children of from ayear-and-a-half to two years old, one of the three shall have been brought upby a quiet or ignorant nurse, one by an affectionate and sensible mother, andthe other among a family of children; the first, unless it be a prodigy, willbe far behind the second in quickness, and the third will be as much before thesecond. We would punish any one who mispronounced words before babies, ortaught them to call things or animals by ridiculous names; and we would doublypunish any one who instilled fear into the hearts of young children bythreats of "bogies," "black men," and such like nursery monsters. Many a grownman and woman has found it difficult to overcome the dislike to darknessimplanted in them when young children by some nursery bug-bears. Teach achild rather to believe that angels watch over it, induce it to be good from afear of grieving its parents, but never destroy or sully that sweet confidencewhich is the most blessed part of childhood. Never tell a child a falsehoodeither; if you promise a thing, do it; if you say a thing, act up to it. Emptythreats and vain promises made to quiet a child, teach it afterwards, in itsturn, to disregard truth, and make it distrust those whom, next to God, itshould love and honor; whereas "example is a constant monitor." We are not advocates for "cramming" children too early with crude, drylearning; but much may be taught without effort. "Line upon line" may beinstilled by such simple stories, such pleasant gossip as children love tolisten to, such bright pictures as they delight to look upon and have explainedto them. There is in the present age a royal road to all the fundamentalinstruction needed by children for the first eight or ten years of their lives;the dull, uninteresting paths we had to tread are now decked with so manyflowers that they have become attractive and pleasant. Even the very toys andgames are made means of improvement; and history, arithmetic, and geography maynow be learned as actual amusements. The physical wants of growing children are a sufficiency of good, plain foodat regular hours, exercise in the open air, well-ventilated rooms, clothing warm enough to promote health, and sufficientlyeasy in fit not to impede growth or a free use of the limbs: strong shoes orboots to protect the feet from damp, and a proper allowance of sleeptaken at regular hours,--no child under six years of age being suffered to situp after eight o'clock, and all under twelve being safely in bed by nine. Late hours, hot, crowded places, as theatres, &c., and children'sparties, are all very destructive of health; irregularities of all kinds are tobe avoided, such as too long walks, any great excitement or over-fatigue; forgrowing children require all their strength and energies for natural purposes;and being more excitable than grown persons, exhaust themselves the sooner. It may be thought by some that we are diverging from our subject, but "ourhousewife," if she be now single, may have younger sisters and brothers, andmay probably one day have children of her own, when she will learn "How infinite the wealth of love and hope, Garnered inthose same tiny treasure houses! And oh! what bankrupts in the world wefeel, When death, like some remorseless creditor, Seizes on all wefondly thought our own." At all events, the care of children is one of woman's most solemnresponsibilities--one of the most sacred of all the trusts committed to hercare; for has not a child an immortal soul? Those who live much among children should carefully purify their everythought, word, and action,--for the ductile and impressionable nature of achild, chameleon-like, takes its hue from that of the characters which surroundit. "The seeds of first instructions are dropped into the deepestfurrows;" therefore we cannot omit this chapter of our "Thoughts andMaxims." If we would cultivate a flower with success, we plant it in a fitting soil,we water it at proper times, we give to it its due proportion of air andsun; shall we not equally study the constitution and physical requirements of achild, in order to bestow upon it the requisite nurture? for children, likeflowers, require study--all are not equally hardy, equally vigorous, equallybeautiful. Some resemble hot-house plants, and are frail and delicate; others,like the hardy evergreen, can bear and brave change oftemperature and hardship. The system which would be suitable for one of thesenatures would be injurious to the other--hence, judgment is needful. Again, if we would train a vine so as to render it luxuriant and productiveof fine fruit, we bestow much pains on the arrangement of each branch;we do not neglect the smallest shoot, or wantonly injure or twist the leastbranch; if we prune, we do so but to remove that which might militateagainst the health or produce of the tree. Shall we bestow less culture uponthe moral education of a child? Shall we not, with equal care, endeavor toremove each evil propensity, and foster each good disposition? Is not thefruit of tenfold more importance? Pure and innocent is the mind of achild; let no care be spared to preserve it so. Those who would governchildren by harshness greatly err; a child never loves the person it fears;besides, all fear is more or less slavish and degrading. Rather teach them toact rightly from a sense of what is right and what is wrong; found theirobedience on affection; give them principles of action, and teach them toreason and think, and, above all, make religion their guiding star. A child who fears God and honors his parents is armed for the world'swarfare with a breast-plate, which, if not invulnerable, at least willturn aside many an arrow. Our favorite Tupperquaintly but truly says:--"When his reason yieldeth fruit, make thychild thy friend, for a filial friend is double gain, a diamond set in gold. Asan infant thy mandate was enough; as he grows in years, let him hear thyreasons." Believe me, we wantonly trifle not only with our own happiness, butwith that of those little ones committed to our charge, when we neglect towatch over the treasures we ought so dearly to prize, when we trifle with thehearts, minds, and souls of our children, ignoring their value, ourresponsibility, and the awful reckoning which will be required of us. We areall too apt to treat children as dolls, to dress and caress them one hour, andsend them out of our way the next, not deeming that beneath the seemingthoughtless gaiety of those little ones there lurks a world of feeling andsensibility. Kindness is as necessary to them as daily food. We do not meanfalse indulgence, but considerate kindness. An unjust, a cold or harsh word oraction, especially if undeserved, penetrates the heart of a child withas keen a sting as it does ours; and who shall say how many have grown upcallous and reckless from having their first affections blunted, their feelingsand wishes disregarded? Consistent practice is worth a whole world of precept,and example will influence while words or coercion are fruitless. Once more, then, we would beg "our housewife" to study what are her dutiestowards children. We would entreat mothers so to train their daughters thatthey may never have cause to blush and tremble for their grandchildren. It isno figure of speech to say that "the child is father to the man;" studydiligently, therefore, how best {qoute} "--to rear the tender thought, Toteach the young idea how to shoot; To pour fresh instruction o'er themind, To breathe the enlivening spirit, and to fix The generouspurpose in the glowing breast." Nor let children, who should be our blessings, become our treatments, "While young our folly, and when old our fear." Lastly, but not of the least importance in the good training of children itshould be rigidly observed by parents, never to show any difference of opinionin their treatment before them. Nothing can be more pernicious to their moralculture, engendering in them habits of disobedience, for they cannot obey oneparent without disobeying the other. We earnestly recommend attention to thisobservance; for, besides the evil of disobedience that is almost sure to followa difference in opinion from those in authority over the child, the latter issometimes prone to disregard the instructions and admonitions of both, and setup principles of his own, more in accordance with his inclinations, howevererroneous they may be. A chapter is devoted to cookery for children. CHAPTER IX. ANOTHER duty, of great importance, devolves on woman; namely--the care ofthe sick. From the highest to the lowest none are, properly speaking, exemptfrom this charge. 'Tis true that those who are rich can hire experiencednurses, but still the responsibility, the anxiety, rests with the mistress, forshe cannot hire affection, thoughtful care, and all those little attentionswhich make the sole comfort of an invalid; she can merely secure a species ofhuman machine which mechanically performs its duties, and between whiles eats,drinks, sleeps, and comforts itself. There are many excellent and kind-heartedprofessional nurses, but there are also more whobecome, as it were, petrified by the habitual contemplation of suffering, andwho merely regard the patient with an eye to business. In a sick room the kindness and attention of the nurse often work fargreater marvels than the skill of the doctor, for she is there every hour, shesees every change, and can minister to many little wants. Those trifles whichmake up the events of an invalid, those minor details, so unimportant to aperson in health, those whims, and desires, and nervous susceptibilities whichappear almost childish to lookers-on, will be studied by a good, conscientiousnurse, and overlooked or disregarded by one who either does not feel interestedin the patient, or has not sufficient sympathy to induce her to study thesematters. In the former case, the invalid will be soothed and cheered; in thelatter, irritated and depressed. Surely it is not difficult to conceive whichinfluence must act most beneficially upon the system. Gentleness, watchfulness, firmness, judgment, some delicacy of feeling, and savoir faire, and a truly Christian spirit, are thedistinguishing characteristics which will best adapt a woman for fulfillingthis phase of her duties. There are many who, from intense solicitude orromantic devotion, will give way to those impulses of feeling which lead themto devote themselves so entirely to the nursing of some beloved relative, thatall other duties, and even self, are wholly forgotten. What is the consequenceof this error of judgment? Their own health succumbs, and they become not onlyuseless, but render themselves sources of trouble and anxiety. How much betterto have husbanded their strength so as to be able to remain useful! Thatdespised article, common sense, would teach us all so much if we would but stopto listen; if we would not mount, each one, our own peculiar hobby, and gallopoff at a tremendous rate, heedless of all sign-posts, and often regardless ofeven hedges and ditches. Affection! feeling! sentiment! nerves! how much hasbeen done and left undone in these names! while poor dear common sense has beendecried as a most unfeeling person, and rudely ejected when she strove to makeherself heard. Yet in few places is common sense a more valuable assistant than in the sickroom; aided by self-command and good feeling, she will transform the mostuninitiated person into an excellent and efficient nurse. Let us hear a few ofher fundamental principles. Speak in a low but perfectly distinct voice, both to the invalid and to anyone who enters the room, in order that, although no unnecessary sound may beheard, the patient's ear may not be fatigued by striving to catch the words, orexcited by mutterings or whispers addressed to some one else. Let your countenance be calm and cheerful, your manners soothing andhopeful, and your words such as may cheer or comfort the mind. Avoid all fuss, all hasty movements, all noises that may startle or disturb;let even your dress and shoes be chosen with reference to quiet. Keep everything in its place, so that in an instant you can put your hand onit when required; have hot water, clean cups, spoons, glasses, and well-airedbody and bed linen always handy; let the air of the room be changed frequently;avoid all bad smells, or remove them as soon as possible; pay strict attentionto the temperature of the chamber, and keep it as even as may be; and regulatethe light with equal care. The furniture of a sick room should be adapted to the wants of the invalid.A reclining-chair will be found convenient; and a rocking-chair for exercise,with a movable one for those who cannot walk. Thebedstead should be contrived to afford ease by change of position. Dr. Arnott'shydrostatic bed has been mentioned as particularly useful for invalids. All food offered to invalids should be daintily prepared, and presented inthe most careful manner. How often, when one has been longing for food, has heturned from it with disgust, because he has seen the nurse cool it with herbreath, or taste it, and then drop the spoon back into it, and present it. Noris it well to inquire of invalids what shall be got for them. If they express awish for some particular thing, well and good, let it be got for them, ifreasonable; but a trifling delicacy unexpectedly brought will often tempt theappetite; besides, a sick person, or even a convalescent, is often too languidto be at the trouble of thinking about eating, and would sooner go without; orif he or she chooses something, it may be the very thing which would beimproper or prejudicial, and then comes disappointment, and a species ofdisgust for all else, for in illness the appetite is ever capricious. Nowhere is cleanliness of such paramount importance as in the sick room. Donot let us be misunderstood here. We do not mean that an immensity of sweeping,scouring, and dusting is to be done, but simply that the chamber must be keptclean and ventilated, that the bed and body linen must be changed often enoughto refresh without fatiguing the patient, and that the air must be purified bymeans of vinegar, or other disinfectants. As there are so many kinds of illness, no general rules can be laid down,and our friend, common sense, must be allowed to be the special adviser. In onecase body and mind may be paralyzed by weakness or languor; in another the bodymay be agonized, and yet the mind clear and active; while in a third the bodymay be sane, the mind insane. Hence no one who is a mere machine, guided bycertain rules, can be a good and efficient nurse; no one who does not study howto minister to the mind as well as the body, who will not endeavor, to acertain extent, to identify herself with the tastes, feelings, and evenprejudices of the patient, can be really useful. What we have hitherto said applies chiefly to adult patients; to nurse asick child may seem a far easier task, but is not so. What gentleness,firmness, playfulness, and, above all, what patience is needed in the sickchamber of a child!--for in time of illness, a child is doubly a child, almosta baby again. Every housekeeper should always have a store of old linen, cambric, andcalico rags, and old pieces of flannel; these are easily obtained by savingworn-out linen, flannel, and other garments, or at least the useful portions ofthem, and treasuring old silk and cambric handkerchiefs. Such things areinvaluable in time of sickness for poultices, fomentations, leeches, &c.Those who have them not will do well to visit a pawnshop, or the emporium ofone of those purchasers of wardrobes; and having there found one or twoarticles of no value but to be torn up, to buy these, bring them home, havethem thoroughly washed, and then put them away for use. It may seem to some that we dwell too long on a sad and painful subject, butit is good for us at times to be serious, to turn from the contemplation oflife's pleasures and enjoyments, and look upon its darker pages; for it hasbeen beautifully said by an eminent writer, that "suffering is not a slender,dark thread, winding every now and then through a warp of dazzling brightness,but it is interwoven with the whole texture. It is not incidental, but designedfor us; it enters into God's purposes; it has agreat work to do, and we know nothing of life until we comprehend itspurposes." Again: "Suffering nourishes the tenderest sympathies of our nature;it raises us to energy and a consciousness of our own powers, and at the sametime infuses the meekest dependence on God; it stimulates us to cherish andprize the blessings of this world, and at the same time weans us from and liftsus above mere earthly things." There is no home into which sickness may not come at any hour; and as it isto woman that the office of nurse is invariably delegated, surely every womanought to learn betimes all that will best qualify her to become the ministeringangel, whose presence shall bless the long hours of pain and confinement. Falsedelicacy, foolish weakness, and all that can militate against usefulness,should be early overcome. We have seen a daughter scream, and weep, and wringher hands, while her mother lay fainting before her; we have seen a mothershriek and fall on her knees, and utter words of agony, when some accidenthappened to her child. But how did all this unavailing grief benefit thesufferers? How much better she does, who, controlling her feelings, thinks onlyhow she can administer relief. Some might deem her callous, but others knowwhat real feeling is concealed behind the pale face,white compressed lips, and quivering eyelids; to utter it might weaken her, andincapacitate her from rendering that prompt assistance which may even berequisite to preserve life. It is our private opinion, that every woman shouldhave a general knowledge of the anatomy of the human frame, and of thefunctions of its various organs; also, that she should be acquainted withchemistry to a sufficient extent to prevent her from committing absurd errorsin cookery, or in the making of perfumes, cosmetics, and pomades, or picklesand confectionery; and to this we would add, that she will find it useful tounderstand the qualities and action of the drugs and medicaments in most commonuse, in order that she may not administer them to herself, or any members ofher family "promiscuously," but with some slight notion of what she is about.We do not, however, mean to advise "our housewife" to practise quackery onherself or those belonging to her; for many a constitution has been ruined byinjudicious physicking; but there are cases in which some household remedy,promptly applied, will often prevent a long illness, and then every one shouldknow how to act. Women should understand the making and applying of poultices, leeches,fomentations, warm baths, and similar things; but how few do! They may fancythemselves clever in such matters. We have known a young person who rushedheadlong on in everything of the kind she undertook; made a poultice in thekitchen, and wondered that it was cold as ice by the time she had carried it upto the second floor; applied fomentations, and damped the bed andnight-clothes, so that a chill, instead of heat, was produced. In another portion of our book is given a large list of articles of food forinvalids, with directions for cooking; and also a chapter containing remarks ondiseases common in families. CHAPTER X. THE STORE-ROOM AND MARKETING. IT must be borne in mind that an inventory of furniture, linen, and chinashould be kept, and the things examined by it twice a year, or oftener if therebe a change of servants; the articles used by servants should be intrusted totheir care, with a list, as is done with plate. Inarticles not in common use, such as spare bedding, tickets of parchment,numbered and specifying to what they belong, should be sewed on each; and minorarticles in daily use, such as household cloths and kitchen requisites, shouldbe occasionally looked to. The best means to preserve blankets from months isto fold and lay them under the feather-beds that are in use, and shake themoccasionally; when soiled, they should be washed, not scoured. A proper quantity of household articles should always be allowed for dailyuse. Each should also be kept in its proper place, and applied to its properuse. Let all repairs be done as soon as wanted, remembering the old adage of "astitch in time;" and never if possible, defer any necessary household duty amoment beyond the time when it ought to be attended to. Refrigerator. A refrigerator with eight shelves, four on the left and theright. A Store-room is essential for the custody of articlesin constant use, as well as for others which are only occasionally called for.These should be at hand when wanted, each in separate drawers, or on shelvesand pegs, all under the lock and key of the mistress, and never given out tothe servants but under her inspection. Pickles and preserves, prepared and purchased sauces, and allsorts of groceries, should be there stored; the spices pounded andcorked up in small bottles, sugar broken, and everything in readinessfor use. Lemon-peel, thyme, parsley, and all sorts ofsweet herbs, should be dried and grated for use in seasons of plenty;the tops of tongues saved, and dried for grating into omelets, &c.;and care taken that nothing be wasted that can be turned to good account. Bread is so heavy an article of expense thatall waste should be guarded against, and having it cut in the room will tendmuch to prevent it; but, for company, small rolls, placed in or on the napkinof each guest, are the most convenient, as well as the most elegant.Bread should be kept in earthern pans with covers. Sugar being also an article of considerableexpense in all families, the purchase demands particular attention. Thecheapest does not go so far as that better refined, and there is a differenceeven in the degree of sweetness. The close, heavy, and shining white, orloaf-sugar, should be chosen. The best sort of brown has a bright,crystalline appearance, as if mixed with salt, and if feeling coarsewhen rubbed between the fingers, is better than when more powdery. East Indiasugars are finer for the price, but not so strong; consequently, unfitfor wines and sweetmeats, they do well for common purposes. To poundwhite sugar, rolling it with a bottle, and sifting, wastes it less thana mortar. Both soap and tallow candles are improved by keeping, andare best when made in cool weather; at which time it will be prudent to lay ina stock of both. They are, indeed, better for being kept eight or ten months, nor will they spoil for two years ifkept in a cool place; and there are few articles that better deserve care inbuying, and allowing a regulated quantity of, according to the size of thefamily. Wax, spermaceti, and composite candles ought to be always purchased inquantities of not less than a dozen pounds, on which an allowance is usuallymade. Soap should be cut in pieces that will make along square, when first brought in, and kept out of the air two or three weeks;for, if it dries quickly, it will crack, and, when wet, break. Put it on ashelf, leaving a space between each piece, and let it grow hardgradually; thus it will save a full third in the consumption; but, for coarsewashing, soft soap will go further than thehard. Soda, by softening the water, saves agreat deal of soap. It should be melted in a large ewer of water,some of which pour into the tubs and boiler; and when the latter becomes weakadd more. Self-Heating Flat Iron. An iron with a small container for liquid attached at the backend. Many good laundresses advise soaping linen in warm water the nightprevious to washing, as facilitating the operation with less friction. Thisshould always be done with fine muslins and laces. The price of starch depends upon that of flour; thebest will keep good in a dry warm room for some years. Everything should be kept in the place best suited to it, as much waste maythereby be avoided. Great care should be taken of jelly-bags, tapes for collared things,&c., which, if not perfectly scalded and kept dry, give an unpleasantflavor when next used. Vegetables will keep best on a stone floor, if theair be excluded; meat in a cold dry place, where the air isfreely admitted; sugar and sweetmeats require a dry place, so doessalt; candles, cold, but not damp; dried meats, hams, bacon, andtongues, the same. All sorts of seed for puddings, such as rice,&c., should be covered close to preserve them from insects; but ifkept long that will not be sufficient, unless they be occasionally sifted. Apples and pears should be laid upon very clean and drystraw, to prevent a musty taste; nor should they be exposed to either light orair. The floor of a dark garret is a good place in which to deposit them; or,which is still better, shelves made by strips of wood about two inches wide,placed an inch and a half apart, and the apples laid between them. Theyshould be ranged singly in rows, without touching each other, and should beoften inspected, both to wipe them, if damp, and to reject those which mayappear to be getting rotten; but the larger sort of pears should be tiedup by the stalk. Apples may also be preserved in excellent condition fora long period by being packed in large barrels with dry sand, but require to beused immediately when they are taken out. Coarse nets suspended in the store-room are very useful in preserving thefiner kinds of fruit, lemons, &c., which are spoiled ifallowed to touch. When lemons and oranges are cheap, a proper quantity shouldbe bought and prepared, both for preserving the juice, and keeping thepeel for sweetmeats and grating; especially by those who live in thecountry, where they cannot always be had. They areperpetually wanted in cookery. The best way of scalding fruits, or boiling vinegar, is in astone jar, on a hot iron hearth, or by putting the vessel into a saucepan ofboiling water, called a water-bath, after its having been closelycorked, but not quite filled, as the heat may occasion the fruits toswell; but if they diminish after this is done, the vessel must then befilled. Onions, shallots, and garlic should be hung up for winter use inropes from the ceiling; as should dried parsley, basil, savory, and knotted-marjoram, or London-thyme, and tarragon, to be used when herbs areordered, but with discretion, as they are very pungent. Hams should be well covered in paper bags, and put in a chestor barrel, with layers of charcoal or ashes between. When youtake one out to cut for use, put it away in a dark place, well covered. Herbs should be kept from the air. Herb tea, to do any good,should be made very strong. Herbs must be gathered while in blossom.Those who have a little ground will do well to raise the most usefulherbs; apothecaries make large profits on them. Suet and lard keep better in tin than earthen-ware.Suet keeps good a year, if chopped, packed in a stone jar, and coveredwith molasses. Or, pick suet free from veins and skin,melt it in water before a moderate fire, let it cool till it forms ahard cake, then wipe it dry and put it in clean paper, in linenbags. MARKETING. Although respectable butchers may, in most cases, be relied upon for thegoodness of the meat which they sell to regular customers, yet manypersons (both ladies and gentlemen) go to market and choose for themselves,when, if not competent judges, the inferior sorts generally fall to their lot.In country towns, also, there are frequently but one or two market-days in theweek; and the meat being brought from a distance, it is an essentialpoint of good housekeeping to be so well acquainted with the quality as not tobe easily imposed upon. BEEF.--Well-fed beef may be known by the texture and color;the lean will exhibit an open grain of deep coral-red, and thefat will appear of a healthy, oily smoothness, rather inclining towhite than yellow. The suet firm and white. Yellowfat is a test of meat of an inferior quality. Heifer beefis but little inferior to ox beef; the lean is of a closer grain, thered paler, and the fat whiter. Cow beef may be detected by thesame signs, save that the older the beast the texture of the meat willappear closer, and the flesh coarser to the sight, as well as harder to thetouch. The grain of bull beef is coarser and closer still, the fathard and skinny, the lean of a deep red, and it has a stronger scent. Oxbeef is the richest and largest; but in small families, and to some tastes,heifer beef is preferred, if finely fed. In old meat, a streak ofhorn runs between the fat and lean of the sirloin andribs; the harder this is, the older, and the flesh is not finelyflavored; that is to say, the horn has become so firm as to appear likebone; but oxen are always the better if kept until five or sixyears old. OX TONGUE.--To choose a neat's tongue, it should be ofmoderate size, plump, firm, and smooth to the touch; for if the skinappears rough and shrivelled, it will be found hard and flavorless. VEAL.--When you observe the kidney well surrounded withfat, you may be sure the meat is of good quality. The whitest isnot the best veal; but the flesh of the bull-calf is of abrighter color than that of the cow-calf. The fillet of the latter isgenerally preferred on account of the udder. There is a vein in the shoulder very perceptible; and its colorindicates the freshness of the meat; if a bright red or blue, it isrecently killed; if any green or yellow spots are visible, it is stale. Thesuet will be flabby, and the kidney will smell. The other partsshould be dry and white; if clammy or spotted, the meat is staleand bad. If more than eight or ten weeks old, the flesh becomes coarse. Youwill, of course, get it somewhat cheaper, and it may, to some palates, be foundequally good in flavor, but not so delicate in either the color or the textureof the flesh. MUTTON.--The best is of a fine grain, a bright color, the fatfirm and white. It is better for being full-grown. The ram muttonmay be known by the redness of the flesh, and the sponginess of the fat.The flesh of the ewe is paler, and the texture finer, but neither themeat nor gravy so well flavored, though a "maiden ewe," when itcan be got, is considered particularly fine. If you wish to have a good haunch,choose one of small size and moderately fat, looking at the same time tothe closeness of the grain and the whiteness of the fat; but moreparticularly see that the flesh is dark-colored, that being a proof of age, andthe older the better. In boiled mutton this is not of so much importanceas in roasted. LAMB should be eaten very fresh. In the fore-quarter, the vein in theneck being any other color than blue betrays it to be stale. In thehind-quarter, try the kidney with your nose; the faintness of its smellwill prove it to be stale. It loses much of its nicety of flavor after itreaches four months old. It ought, therefore, to be small and white inappearance, and well covered with fat; the younger the moredelicate. PORK.--The rind should be thin, the fat very firm, andthe lean white; the principal point to be observed is the firmness ofthe fat. If the rind is tough, thick, and cannot easily beimpressed by the finger, it is old. Pigs that are short in thelegs and bodies, and have thick necks, and not long headsand ears, are always to be preferred. When fresh, the flesh will besmooth and dry; if clammy, it is tainted. What is called "measly pork"is very unwholesome, and may be known by the fat being full of kernels.Pork fed at still-houses does not answer for curing in any way, thefat being spongy. Dairy pork is the best. Porkers from three to four months old are the most delicate, and six monthsis the latest age at which they should be killed as such. BACON.--If the rind be thin, the fat firm and of areddish tinge, the lean tender, of a good color, and adhering to thebone, you may conclude it is good and not old. If there are yellowstreaks in it, it is rusty. For hams, stick a sharp knife under thebone, and also up to the knuckle. If it comes out with a pleasant smell,the ham is good; but do not buy it if the knife has a bad scent.Hams short in the hock are best; nor should long-legged pigs bechosen for any purpose. BRAWN.--The horny part of the young brawn will feel moderately tender, andthe flavor will be better than the old, the rind of which will behard. VENISON.--The fat should be clear, bright, and thick; and ifthe cleft of the haunch be smooth and close, it is young; but if the cleft isclose and tough, it is old. To judge of its sweetness, run a very sharp narrowknife into the shoulder or haunch, and you will know by the scent. Few peoplelike it when it has much of the haut-goût; but it bears keeping betterthan any sort of meat, and if eaten fresh killed it is not so good asmutton. Observe the neck of a fore-quarter; if the vein be bluish, it is fresh; if it have a green or yellowcast, it is stale. In the hind-quarter, if there is a faint smell under thekidney, and the knuckle is limp, the meat is stale. If the eyesbe sunk, the head is not fresh. When you can learn where it has beenreared, choose forest-venison, as that is the best; for some of thedealers stall-feed the deer, and fatten them with oil-cake. Itshould be full five years old. In every sort of provisions the best of the kind goes furthest, cuts up togreatest advantage, and affords most nourishment. Round of beef,fillet of veal, and leg of mutton, are joints that bear ahigher price; but as they have more solid meat, they deserve thepreference. It is worth notice, however, that those joints which are inferiormay be dressed as palatably, and, being cheaper, they ought to be bought inturn. In loins of meat, the long pipe that runs by the bone shouldbe taken out, as it is apt to taint; as also the kernels of beef.Rumps and aitchbones of beef are often bruised by the blows thedrovers give the beasts, and the part that has been struck always taints;therefore, do not purchase these joints if bruised. All meat should be carefully examined, and wiped with a dry cloth assoon as it comes in; and if flies have blown upon it, the part must be cut off.This should be daily observed until it is dressed, as it not only tends topreserve the meat long in perfection, but prevents that mustyflavor too often perceived in the outer slice when brought to table. In the country, where meat is often carried a great distance, itshould be well covered up with a cloth, over which fresh cabbage-leaveswould keep it cool. These cautions are more needful, as in some families greatloss is sustained by the spoiling of meat. The fly may in some measurebe prevented by dusting upon the parts most likely to be attacked,pepper and ginger mixed, after wiping, which should never be omitted; but a moreeasy and effectual mode is to exclude the fly by using a wire meat-safe,or to cover the joints with a long loose gauze or thin cloth, and hang them upfrom the ceiling of an airy chamber. In summer meat should be wiped every day, or sprinkled withpepper to keep off the flies; and should it wear any appearance ofbecoming tainted, it should be brushed over with pyroligneous acid; or even ifalready slightly infected, either the acid or roughly-pounded charcoal,if well rubbed into the meat, will restore it. The meat shouldalso be brought in early in the morning, as, if much exposed to the sun, theheat will render it flabby. In frosty weather, meat is sometimes in acongealed state, and should be thawed by soaking it in cold water beforeputting it to the fire. Meats become more tender, and consequently more digestible, as wellas better flavored, by hanging; but veal and lamb will notbear it so long as the flesh of older animals. In summer, two days islong enough for lamb and veal, and from three to four forbeef and mutton; in cold weather, these latter may be kept formore than double that time without risk of being tainted. POULTRY AND GAME. Turkey. --The cock bird when young has asmooth black leg with a short spur. The eyes bright and full, and moistsupple feet when fresh; the absence of these signs denotes age andstaleness; the hen may be judged by the same rules. Fowls like a turkey; the young cockhas a smooth leg and a short spur; when fresh the vent is close anddark. Hens when young have smooth legs and combs; when old thesewill be rough. Geese. --In young geese the feetand bills will be yellow and free from hair. Whenfresh the feet are pliable; they are stiff when stale. Ducks may be selected by the same rule. Pigeons, when fresh, have supple feet,and the vent will be firm; if it be discolored and supple they are stale. Plovers, when fat, have hard vents;but, like almost all other birds, may be chosen by the same rules. Other game birds may be chosen by the above rules. TO CHOOSE FISH. Fish. --In every sort of fish,stiffness, redness of the gills, and brightness of the eyes, are invariablesigns of freshness; thickness of the flesh generally marks the good conditionof all fish, and its firmness is an essential requisite. Fish,when quite fresh, curl round, but are particularly elastic, rising immediatelyupon the pressure of the fingers; and their staleness or freshness may bemeasured by the possibility of making an impression. If stale, the impressionwill remain; but, if fresh, it will rise again on removal of the pressure. Salmon. --The fish stiff, the scalesvery bright, the belly thick, the gills a brilliant color, and the flesh whencut, a beautiful red, will prove it to be a fine fresh fish. It cannotbe too fresh. Cod. --The best fish are thick at theneck, very red gills, firm white flesh, bright and blood-shoteyes, and small head. The liver should be of an opaquewhite; the whiter, the better the fish; when out of season theliver becomes red. It is improved by being crimped, as this increasesits firmness, and then it requires keeping one day before using. Whitings. --A clear color and firm bodies, indicate asuperior quality. Mackerel. --Bright eyes, thick bodies, stripesblack on the back, the prismatic colors very predominant on the belly, denotefreshness and goodness. The male is the best; his stripes are straight; thoseof the female, wavy. Pike, Carp, Perch, Smelts, Gudgeons,&c., may be judged by the above rules. Eels. --The bright silver-hued belly andthickness of back, are the guides in their selection. Lobsters. --To be had in perfection should beboiled at home; choose the heaviest. When they are boiled the tail should havea good spring; the cock lobster has a narrow tail in which the twouppermost fins are stiff and hard; the hen has a broad tail, andthese fins are softer. The male has the best flavor; the flesh is firmer; andthe color when boiled is brighter than the hen. Oysters. --There are many sorts ofoysters; when the oyster is alive the shell will close upon theknife; the common oyster should be used for sauce and thenatives, of which there are several kinds, should be sent to table. CHAPTER XI. UNDER the head of Domestic Manipulation, we propose giving a series ofarticles on the numerous and essential manual operations that are constantlyrequired in every family, and which, whether they are well or ill done, must ofnecessity be performed. The term Domestic Manipulation, employed in the widestsense, would include all the manual operations required in a house, but wepropose to limit it to such as partake in a slight degree of a scientificcharacter; thus the operations of Filtering, Decanting, Weighing, Measuring,Bottling, Corking, Unstoppering, Pounding, Heating, Boiling, Distilling,Cementing, &c. &c. will be included; whilst Dusting, Washing, andScrubbing, though no less, in strictness,manipulations, will be passed over in silence. We propose treating of the manipulations connected with BOTTLES ANDDECANTERS, &c., under the following heads: Cleaning, Drying, Corking, Tyingdown, Stoppering, and Unstoppering. Cleaning. --Perhaps no more effectual and easy modeof cleaning wine and beer bottles can be recommended than that commonlyadopted, viz., the use of small shot and water; in the case of old port winebottles, however, it often occurs that the mechanical action of the shot doesnot remove the hardened crust from the interior; a small quantity of pearlashor soda, or still better, washing liquids, added to the water, will soften thecrust sufficiently to permit its easy removal. There is, however, one objectionto the use of shot for the purpose of cleaning bottles; unless due care betaken, by the violence of the shaking it often happens that several becomefirmly wedged between the bottom and sides of the bottles, and are not removedby the subsequent rinsings of clean water, and if the bottles are used for acidwines or other liquids, (almost all home-made wines contain a considerableportion of free acid,) the shots are slowly dissolved; and from the metallicarsenic which they contain, as well as from the lead itself, the liquid isrendered poisonous. This effect may be readily guarded against by removing anyshots which may have become fixed, by a stiff wire slightly hooked at theend. Decanters are formed of flint glass, which is much softer and more readilyscratched than the common kinds; they require therefore a less rough treatment;in general, warm (not boiling) water, with the addition of a few pieces ofcoarse brown paper, and if requisite a little soda, will be found effectual;should greater force be required, a small portion of tow wrapped round thenotched end of a moderately stiff wire, and used with a little strong soda,will be found sufficient. Sand or ashes should never be employed in cleaningdecanters, as they roughen and totally disfigure the brilliant surface of theglass. Drying. --It is scarcely necessary to speak of theadvantages of being able to dry thoroughly both decanters and common bottles;if the former, after having been cleaned, are put away wet, they become musty;and many liquids are much injured by being put into wet bottles. Some of ourreaders have doubtless experienced the inefficiency of the ordinary means ofdrying decanters, &c.; after draining for some days they still remain damp,and if placed near a fire the warmth merely drives the vapor to the colder partof the vessel; they may, however, be readily and quickly dried after draining,by making them slightly warm and blowing in fresh air with a pair of bellows,which rapidly carries out the damp vapor, and leaves the vessel perfectly dry.If bellows are not at hand, the damp air may be drawn out (not blown) with the mouth, assisted by atube sufficiently long to reach nearly to the bottom of the decanter; in thelaboratory a piece of glass tube is usually taken, being always at hand, butfor domestic use a piece of paper may be rolled up so as to form anextemporaneous and effectual substitute. Corking. --Little can be said with regard to thecorking of bottles, beyond stating the fact that cheap bad corks are alwaysdear; the best corks are soft, velvety, and free from large pores; if squeezedthey become more elastic and fit more closely. If good corks are used ofsufficiently large size to be extracted without the corkscrew, they may beemployed many times in succession, especially if they are soaked in boilingwater afterwards, which restores them to theiroriginal shape, and renews their elasticity. Tying down. --The operation of tying down corksmerits a longer notice, as without it many effervescent liquids could not bepreserved. The most common mode of fastening down corks, is with theginger-beer knot, which is thus made: First the loop is formed as in Fig. 1 then that part of the string which passesacross the loop is placed on the top of the cork, and the loop itself passeddown around the neck of the bottle, and by pulling the ends of the cord is madetight beneath the rim; the ends of the cord is made tight beneath the rim; theends of the string are finally brought up, and tied either in a double knot, orin a bow on the top of the cork. When ginger-beer is made at home, it will befound most advantageous to use the best corks, and to tie them down with a bow,when both corks and strings may be made use of repeatedly. Fig. 1 A loop in a string with the loop un top of thestrings. Fig. 2 String heading up and then curving to the left and then passingunder itself and then exiting to the right. For effervescent wines, such as champagne, gooseberry,&c., which require to be kept a longer time, and are more valuable, asecurer knot is desirable, which may be made thus:--A loop as in Fig. 2 is first formed, and the lower end isthen turned upwards and carried behind the loop as shown at Fig. 3; it is then pulled through the loop asin Fig. 4, and in this state is put over theneck of the bottle; the part a being on one side, and the two parts of the loopon the other; on pulling the two ends the whole becomes tight round theneck, and the ends, which should be quite opposite, are to be brought upover the cork, twice twisted, as in Fig. 5, and then tied in a single knot. Fig. 3 An illustration of a loop in a knot to secure a top oneffervescent wines. Fig. 4 An illustration of a loop in a knot to secure a top oneffervescent wines. Fig. 5 An Illustration of the final loop in a knot to secure a top oneffervescent wines. Stoppering. --The stoppering of bottles is anoperation usually performed by the makers; it may, however, be useful to knowthat badly fitting stoppers may be readily fitted by regrinding; this is doneby dipping the stopper in a mixture of fine sand, or still better, emeryand water, replacing it, and turning it backwards and forwards with aslight pressure; fresh sand must be applied from time to time. When the fittingis exact, so that the stopper turns freely without shaking, the whole may befinished off by using a little fine emery and oil. Unstoppering. --This operation is much more likely tobe required than the last one described, for the stoppers of decanters,smelling-bottles, &c., from various causes, frequently become fixed, andmany are the fractures both of bottles and stoppers, caused by the misdirectedefforts to remove them. In treating of the various means that may beemployed we will mention them in the order inwhich they should be tried, beginning with the simpler and more easy, andpassing on to those which are more effectual, and at the same time,unfortunately, more dangerous. The first method, then, that should be tried, isto press the stopper upwards with the fore-finger and thumb of the left hand(the other fingers holding the neck of the bottle), and at the same timegiving the stopper a succession of short, sharp, light taps, with the woodenhandle of a chisel, knife, or small hammer; care must be taken not to strikethe stopper with sufficient force to break it, and it should be borne in mindthat it is not the force of the blow, but the vibration, or jar, which iseffectual in loosening it; should this plan be found ineffectual after a shorttrial, it may probably be from the stopper being cemented by some substance,such as the dried sugar of a sweet wine. In such cases we shouldendeavor to dissolve the cement by a suitable solvent, which should be placedin the groove between the stopper and the bottle; thus if the stopper iscemented with sugar, gum, or salt, water may be used; inmany circumstances, oil is advantageous, or spirit, or evenstrong acid may be used; whatever liquid is employed it should be allowed toremain some days, being renewed if requisite, and the tapping, &c., shouldbe again had recourse to. Should these methods fail, a piece of cloth may be dipped in very hotwater and wrapped round the neck of the bottle, when the heat causesthe expansion of the glass, and if the stopper be tapped or twisted before the heat has had time to enlarge it, itsremoval may be effected; this operation must necessarily be a quick one, for ifthe stopper is heated and enlarged, as well as the bottle, it is obvious thatno benefit will result. In the laboratory it is often customary to heat thebottle, not by a strip of cloth dipped in hot water, but by turning itrapidly over the flame of a lamp; in this way there is more danger of crackingthe bottle, and the plan is not to be recommended in general, although employedwith considerable success by those who, like operative chemists, are constantlyin the habit of applying heat to glass vessels. It will at once be seen thatthe plan is fraught with great danger if applied to bottles containinginflammable liquids, as spirits, &c. The most effectual mode of removing stoppers, especially those of smallbottles, such as smelling-bottles, remains to be described. Take a piece ofstrong cord, about a yard or four feet in length, double it at themiddle, and tie a knot (Fig. 6, b) so as to form a loop (a) of about four inches in length at the doubledend, bring the knot close to one side of the stopper, and tie the ends tightlytogether on the opposite side, as at Fig. 7, e, so as to fasten the stringsecurely round the neck of the stopper; now pass one of the ends throughthe loop (a), and then tie it firmly to the other end; thedoubled cord is then to be placed over a bar or other support, then if thebottle is surrounded by a cloth to prevent accidents in case of fracture, andpulled downwards with a jerk, the force of which is gradually increased, itwill be found that in a short time the stopper is liberated. Two precautions Fig. 6. An illustration of a knot that is used to remove stoppers frombottles. Fig. 7. An illustration of a bottle top showing how the knot is used toremove the stopped from a bottle. are requisite; one is, that thestrain on both sides of the stopper is equal; the other, that care be takenthat when the stopper is liberated, it is not dashed by the rebound against anyhard substance, which would cause its fracture. CUTTING, GRINDING, AND WRITING ON GLASS. We have described the most advantageous modes of extracting fixed stoppersfrom decanters, &c. It is possible that some of our readers may havefollowed our advice sufficiently well to have succeeded, in cracking the necks of their decanters. Incase any should have been so unfortunate, or rather we would say, if we werequite sure we were not addressing ladies--so clumsy, let them not despair;dexterity in manipulation comes by practice; and as no evil is without aremedy, we will next consider what can be done with the broken decanter. Unlessit is cracked down to the bottom, it may be cut off and converted into ahandsome sugar basin; or if not high enough for that purpose, will servefor a pickle-dish, or a flower-stand, &c.; and in the same way, atumbler broken at the upper part will furnish an elegant salt-cellar, orserviceable soap-dish; and even common bottles, if sufficiently stout,may be made into useful jars, instead of being consigned to the dust-heap. The operation of cutting glass, consists in leading a crack in the requireddirection; this is readily done by a hot iron rod, a piece of pointed burningcharcoal, or, what is still better, a burning pastile--which is somewhatsimiliar in its composition to those used for fumigation; and which latter,although rather expensive, and inconvenient from their shape, may be appliedfor the purpose. When the operation of cutting up glass vessels into usefulforms is much had recourse to, pastiles are prepared for the purpose, beingsuperior to a heated iron rod, as they continue to burn and retain their heat,whilst the latter requires to be re-heated, if the crack has to be led anyconsiderable distance. Pastiles are readily made by rubbing up half an ounce ofpowdered gum tragacanth with water, so as to form a mucilage about asthick as ordinary starch; this should be allowed to remain a few hours,and then mixed with a quarter of an ounce of benzoin, previously dissolved inthe smallest possible quantity of proof spirit; after mixing themtogether in a mortar, as much powdered charcoal should be added as willform a stiff paste, and the whole well worked together, rolled into sticks the size ofa common black-lead pencil, and dried. As thus prepared, they should be freefrom cracks, and solid throughout; and on being ignited at the end, they willburn steadily away to a point. If an iron rod is used, it should be nearly asstout as the little finger, and taper at the end for an inch and a half to ablunt point. Before commencing the line along which it is wished to divide theglass, it should be marked with a pen and ink, and allowed to dry, when theiron, heated to dull redness, on the lighted extremity of the pastile, shouldbe brought to the end of a crack, being held in a slanting direction withregard to the glass, as shown in the cut, and slowly moved in an obliquedirection towards the line; the crack will be found to follow the heated point,and may thus be led as required, even passing over parts varying veryconsiderably in thickness, as in the case of the flutings on a cut decanter;but it cannot, with certainty, be made to pass suddenly from a very thin to avery stout part, or the reverse: thus it may be led around the sides of atumbler, but could hardly be made to pass down one side, across the bottom and up the other. The rapidity with which theoperation is performed, depends upon the heat of the iron or pastile; if theformer is very hot, or the latter made to burn more vividly by blowing upon it,the operation is quickened, but it is not performed with so much certainty, asthe crack may pass on further than is desirable: care should be taken not tolead the crack to near the edge of the vessel, or to another crack, asin that case it is apt to leave the proper course, and fly suddenly to theedge, to which an inexperienced operator should not attempt to go nearer thanhalf an inch. An illustration of a glass being etched. It sometimes occurs that a piece is broken out of a glass, without leavingany crack to commence from; in this case, one must be made, by heating the edge(one formed by the fracture, if possible) with the iron or pastile, andinstantly applying the moistened finger. When a crack is formed, which may beused as described above, care must be taken not to cause an extensive fracture,which may run across the intended line of division; this may be avoided bycommencing the crack at some distance from the line, and by applying the heatedpoint for a very short time, preferring to make two or three unsuccessfulattempts rather than to hasten the operation, and risk the destruction of theglass. When a glass vessel has been thus divided, the edges are sufficientlysharp to cut the fingers in handling, and are usually wavy; it is thereforenecessary to make them smooth and even. The most ready way of doing this is, bygrinding them down on a flat sandstone, or ordinary paving-stone, with a littlesharp sand or emery, and water, taking care to move the glass ina circular direction, and not merely backwards and forwards; the smoothness ofthe whole will depend entirely on that of the stone, and on the fineness of thesand or emery employed. If, from any irregularity, there is much glassto grind away, it is preferable to commence with sand, and finish withemery on a smooth stone; if the edges are not thus ground down, theyshould have the sharp angles, which are really dangerous, removed by a finefile, which should be moistened with oil of turpentine or camphene, asthis liquid has an extraordinary effect in increasing the action of the fileupon the glass, and at the same time protecting the steel instrument fromwear. Advantageous as cracks are in glass vessels whenever we wish to separatethem into two parts, they are by no means desirable under other circumstances;and it is as important to know how to stop their progress, as to leadthem forward. This is readily done in stout glass, by drilling a hole abouthalf an inch in advance of the crack, which gradually passes on into it, andthen its farther progress is arrested. Holes may be drilled in glass with acommon drill and bow, the place being first marked with a file or flint, andthe drill point kept wet with oil of turpentine. It is hardly necessaryto state, that a crack existing in the neck of a decanter, and liable tobe forced apart with the stopper, could not be arrested in its progress by suchmeans. If necessary, a little emery powder may be used with oilof turpentine; and after the operation, the hole must be filled up with somecement; if the vessel is to be used for holdingliquids, a little fresh slacked lime, moistened with equal parts ofwhite of egg and water, may be used for this purpose. The grinding of glass on a flat stone with sand or emery, andwater, is often useful in making a bottle stand steadily; and by itsmeans a wineglass with a broken foot may be turned to good account; forif as much of the stem as possible is knocked off, by striking it with the backof a knife, the remainder may be ground away so that the vessel will stand. One of the most important Domestic Manipulations, although one of the mostsimple and easy, is the labelling of glass vessels. It is not too much toaffirm, that scores of lives might have been saved if this had been attendedto. In cases of accidental poisoning, we usually find that the victim has drunkfrom some bottle which has been put away without a label; and thus somecorrosive liquid used for cleaning, or some poisonous lotion, has beeninadvertently swallowed. One of the most ready modes of labeling glass, andother objects, consists in having at hand a sheet of paper, which hashad spread on one side some gum water, mixed with half its weight ofcoarse brown sugar, and allowed to dry; this may be cut into labels,written on, and readily attached to glass by moistening with the tongue;the white margin of a sheet of postage stamps answers the purpose verywell. If, however, acid liquids are used, or the vessel is placed in a dampsituation, as a cellar, other means must be had recourse to. With a littlepractice, it is easy to write in a legible, though not very conspicuous manner,on glass, with a gun-flint, or with the sharp-edged fragments of common flint.In the laboratory what is called a writing diamond is used for this purpose; thisshould not be confounded with a glazier's diamond, which is used for dividing,and not scratching glass. We would here caution our readers against writing onglass with a diamond ring, &c., as the practice injures the jewelconsiderably; in the glazier's diamond, the natural edges of the crystal areused, which are not liable to injury as are the cut angles of a brilliant. When glass vessels are exposed to damp, the best mode of writing on them isto prepare an ink for the purpose, by mixing the common cheap varnish, calledBrunswick black, with half its weight of oil of turpentine, or what isthe same thing, in a purer state, camphene; this should be kept in a closelycorked bottle, and used with a broad nibbed quill pen; it soon dries, andthough pale, is very distinct, and almost imperishable. If it is required muchdarker, about a quarter of an hour after it has been done, a little lampblackshould be rubbed over it, with cotton or wadding, when it immediately becomesas black as common ink, and resists damp, and rubbing or wiping with either wetor dry cloths for a very long time. The same ink is equally advantageous foruse with white earthenware; and although we have never had occasion touse such a mixture, there is no doubt that a little whiting mixed thin,with any common varnish, would furnish an equally useful ink for writing onblack bottles. CHAPTER XII. DECANTING,STRAINING, AND FILTERING OF LIQUIDS. The decanting of liquids is, under ordinary circumstances, an operationsufficiently simple to require no explanation; but the ease and certainty withwhich it can be performed, depend entirely upon the form of the vessel fromwhich the liquid is poured; the adhesion existing between liquids and solidsgiving rise to a tendency in the former to rundown the outside of the vessel; and if the latter is nearly full, or very largein circumference, or the sides approach the perpendicular direction, thisaccident almost always occurs. The difficulty of returning a glass of wine tothe decanter, or of pouring from one full tumbler into another, are well knownexamples of this inconvenience. Advantage may, however, be taken of the adhesion of liquids to solids, andby it the former may be led into the required direction. This cannot be betterillustrated than by a description of the means by which a glass of wine may bereturned, without spilling, to the decanter. If a teaspoon is dipped into thewine, so as to become wetted with it, and then held perpendicularly with thebowl downwards, and the point over, but not touching, the entrance into thedecanter, and the edge of the glass be made to touch the back of the spoon, itwill be found, on inclining the former, that the wine, having a perpendicularsolid body to adhere to and run down, will do so in preference to tricklingalong the oblique outer surface of the wineglass; and in this mode a liquid maybe poured steadily out of any similiar vessel with so little disturbance as notto agitate any sediment that may exist in it. In the laboratory of the chemist,a piece of glass rod is usually employed for this purpose; but a spoon, orpencil, or any similiar substance having a surface capable of being wetted bythe liquid, answers equally well. If, however, the vessel out of which it is wished to decant is large, veryfull, or the sides, on pouring, are nearly perpendicular, the plan is notsuccessful; thus, it could not be employed in aiding the transfer of the liquidfrom one full tumbler to another. Even this may be accomplished without the aidof a funnel, or without spilling, by preventing the adhesion of the liquid tothe edge or side of the vessel out of which it is poured, which may be readilydone by greasing the rim, when it will be found quite practicable to pour outof a nearly full tumbler without spilling. In many instances, the employment of a syphon in decanting will be foundvery advantageous, particularly when the containing vessel is large, and cannotbe readily moved, or when there is any sediment which it is desirable not todisturb. The most simple form of this instrument consists of a tube, bent as in Fig. 1, with one leg shorter than the other; thismay be made of glass, pewter, or, in fact, of any kind of stiff tubing thatwill retain its form--a piece of gutta percha pipe, carefully bent by amoderate warmth, whilst a piece of stout cord is in the interior to prevent thesides closing together, answers very well. Before use, the syphon must befilled with liquor; this is best accomplished by turning it upside down, withthe opening to the short leg raised on a level with that of the long one, whenthe liquid should be poured into the former. When both legs are filled, theyshould be closed with the fingers; the shorter leg introduced into the liquidit is wished to draw off; and the opening of the longer leg brought to a lowerlevel than that of the shorter, and on removing the fingers the liquid willflow as in Fig. 1, until it is below the level of the shortleg. If the syphon is made of small tubing, or is lessened at Fig. 1. An illustration of a syphon used in decanting. the opening so as not to exceedone quarter of an inch in diameter, there will be no occasion to close the endof more than one leg with the finger, as the liquid will not flow whenit is brought to the proper position unless both orifices are open; and thusthe necessity of plunging the finger into the liquid is obviated, and thesyphon can also be used with a narrow-necked bottle, into which the hand couldnot be passed. To do away with the necessity of filling the syphon before use, theinstrument is usually made with a sucking tube, as in Fig. 2; in this case, all that is requisiteis, to introduce the short leg, close the opening to the long one, andby the action of the mouth, draw up the liquid until both legs are full,when on removing the finger, the stream will flow. A very ingenious syphon ofthis kind is described by the German chemist Mohr; it is thusconstructed:--Take a long Eau de Cologne bottle, and, with a file andturpentine, make a deep notch across, about an inch and a half from the bottom;then, with a charcoal point or pastile, or hot iron, produce a crack,and cut off the bottom, grinding it smoothly; then take a tube bent at an angleof forty-five degrees, and, by means of a good cork, perforated with a rat-tail rasp, fit ittightly in the bottom of the bottle, and add also another piece of tubing for asuction tube; the whole will then have the appearance represented in Fig. 3, and will form an exceedingly useful,and very convenient syphon. Fig. 2. An illustration of a sucking tube from a syphon. Fig. 3. An illustration of a syphon described by the German chemistMohr. In emptying large stone bottles or carboys, the following plan may be hadrecourse to:--Perforate a sound cork with two openings by a rat-tail rasp, andfit, air-tight, two tubes bent as in Fig. 4. On blowing through the upper, theliquid will be forced to ascend and run over the bend of the other, which willthen act as a syphon. This plan is exceedingly useful in emptying carboys ofcorrosive liquids, as oil of vitriol, &c.; and if all the jointsare--as they should be--air-tight, the flow may be arrested by closing theupper tube with the finger. In the figure the outer leg of the syphon isshortened to save space; in practice it must be of sufficient length to belower than the inner leg within the vessel. Fig. 4. An illustration of a syphon used to empty large stone bottles orcarboys. If a syphon is required frequently for decanting the same kind of liquid, itis found troublesome to be constantly filling it before each time of using;this trouble is obviated by the use of an instrument formed with legs of equal length, which are turned upat the ends, as in Fig. 5; this having been filled, may be hungup in the erect position, and the liquid will not escape, but on plunging oneend into a liquid, it will be found immediately to flow from the other,provided that the latter is below the level of the surface of the liquid. Fig. 5. An illustration of an instrument for syphoning, formed with legsof equal length, which are turned up at the ends. The operations of straining and filtering are frequently required indomestic manipulations, and the apparatus employed usually consists of sievesand a jelly-bag. As, in many other instances, it will be found advantageous toimport several contrivances from the laboratory to the kitchen, one of the mostuseful (because most simple) strainers consists of a square frame, formed offour pieces of wood nailed together at the corners, with a piece of calico,linen, or canvas, of suitable fineness, tacked to the four sides; this straineris particularly useful in separating any solid substance--as the residue inmaking wines--or if grated potatoes are put on one made of coarse cloth, thestarch can be readily washed through, leaving the useless portion on thestrainer; the cloth should not be tacked very loosely, as it bags down when anysubstance is put on it, and the liquid runs away below from the centre. Thisstrainer is a most useful one; it is readily made, of any degree of fineness,and of any size; and it also possesses the great advantage, that, if necessary,the tacks fastening the cloth can easily be withdrawn, when the substanceremaining can be rolled up in the cloth, and tightly squeezed, to express thelast portions of liquid. In cases where a finer filtration is required than can be obtained by meansof a cloth, as in cleaning turbid wine or spirit, the use offiltering-paper is recommended. This paper is merely a stouterkind of blotting-paper, thick varieties of which answer very well fordomestic purposes; it is most simply used by taking a square piece, folding itinto half--by bringing the two opposite edges together--and then folding theoblong so obtained across its length; by this means a small square is obtained,one quarter the original size,which may be opened into a hollow cup, havingthree thicknesses of paper on one side, which may be opened into ahollow cup, having three thicknesses of paper on one side, and one onthe other; this is to be placed with the point downwards, in a funnel, and theliquid poured in; and as soon as the pores of the paper are expanded bythe moisture, it will be found to flow through perfectly clear; care must betaken in making the filter, not to finger it much where the two foldings crosseach other, as a hole is readily made at that part, and the filter spoiled. Theobjection to this simple contrivance is, that from its flat sides applyingthemselves closely to those of the funnel, the flow of the liquid is impeded,and is, therefore, slow. This effect may be obviated by the use of the plaitedfilter, the construction of which we will endeavor to describe. A square pieceof filtering, or stout blotting-paper is to be doubled, and the oblongso obtained is to be again folded in half, when if the last fold is opened, itwill have the appearance of Fig. 6. From the corners b b, folds are to be creased in the directiontowards a, but not reaching it for half an inch; these areindicated by the dotted lines, which divide the double paper into fourtriangles, each of which is to be again folded into eighths, and care must betaken that Fig. 6. An illustration of how to fold filtering or blotting paper tofilter liquids. all the folds are made the sameway, that is, projecting to the same side of the paper. When complete,the doubled and creased paper will appear as Fig. 7. Now divide each eighth into half, bya fold in the opposite direction to those previously made, when itwill be found that the whole will readily fold up like a paper fan; theprojecting loose ends which are formed by the corners b, should be cut off, and the double sides separatedfor the first time by blowing them apart, when the whole may be readily openedout as in Fig. 8. In making this filter, which takes amuch less time than to follow the description, two precautions are requisite.The folds should be made at once with one firm pressure, and not with a seriesof rubbings; and all the creases should stop short of the middle, otherwise ahole will be made at that point, long before the filter is completed. Theadvantages of this filter are that it exposes a large surface for the liquid topass through; and from its only being in contact with the funnel where theangles project, the current flows away readily. Fig. 7. An illustration of how the filtering or blotting paper should lookonce the folding is complete. Fig. 8. An illustration of a piece of paper that resembles a paper coffeefilter. The best means for filtration of water, and the construction ofwater filters, will be treated of when we speak of the "domesticmanipulation" connected with that liquid. CHAPTER XIII. THE MANUFACTURE ANDUSE OF CEMENTS. THE term cement, includes all those substances employed for the purpose ofcausing the adhesion of two or more bodies, whether originally separate, ordivided by an accidental fracture. As the substances that are required to beconnected together are exceedingly various, and differ very much in theirproperties as to texture, &c. &c., and as the conditions under whichthey are placed, with regard to heat and moisture, are also exceedinglyvariable, a number of cements, possessed of very different properties, arerequired; for a cement that answers admirably under one set of circumstances,may be perfectly useless in others. A vast number of cements are known and usedin the various arts; but they may all be referred to a few classes, and ourobject in this paper will be to describe the manufacture and use of the best ofeach class, and also to state what are the general principles upon which thesuccess or failure of cementing usually depends. The different parts of a solid are held together by an attraction betweentheir several particles, which is termed the attraction of cohesion, orcohesive attraction. The amount of this varies with the substances; thus, thecohesion of the particles of iron to one another is enormously great, whilstthat between those of chalk is but small. This attraction acts only when theparticles are in the closest possible contact; even air must not be betweenthem. The attraction of cohesion which takes place between the parts of thesame substance, must not be confounded with that of adhesion, which is theattraction of different substances to one another; for example, the particlesof a piece of wood are united by cohesive attraction, whilst the union of glueand wood to each other depends on adhesive attraction. And it is important thatthis distinction be borne in mind, for, in almost all cases, the cohesionbetween the particles of the cement is very much less than the adhesion ofthe cement to other bodies; and if torn apart, theconnected joint gives way--not by the loosening of the adhesion--but by thelayer of cement splitting down the centre. Hence the important rule, that the less cement in a joint, the stronger it is. Domesticmanipulators usually reverse this, by letting as much cement as possible remainin the joint, which is, therefore, necessarily a weak one. A thick, nearlysolid cement, which cannot be pressed out of the joint, is always inferior to athinner one, of which merely a connecting film remains between the unitedsurfaces. Having thus mentioned the general principles that ought always to be bornein mind, we will now proceed to describe the manufacture of some of the moreuseful cements, and their mode of use. Mouth Glue affords a very convenient means ofuniting papers, and other small light objects; it is made by dissolving by theaid of heat, pure glue, or gelatine, with about one quarter or one-third of itsweight of coarse brown sugar, in as small a quantity of boiling water aspossible; this, when perfectly liquid, should be cast into thin cakes on a flatsurface very slightly oiled, and as it cools cut up intopieces of a convenient size. When required for use one end may be moistened bythe mouth, and is then ready to be rubbed on any substances it may be wished tojoin; a piece kept in the desk or work-box is very convenient. Paste is usually made by rubbing up flour with coldwater and boiling; if a little alum is mixed before boiling it is muchimproved, being less clammy, working more freely in the brush and thinner; aless quantity is required, and it is therefore stronger. If required in largequantity, as for papering rooms, it may be made by mixing one quartern offlour, one quarter pound of alum and a little warm water; when mixed, therequisite quantity of boiling water should be poured on whilst the mixture isbeing stirred. Paste is only adapted to cementing paper; when used it should bespread on one side of the paper, which should then be folded with the pastedside inwards, and allowed to remain a few minutes before being opened and used;this swells the paper, and permits its being more smoothly and securelyattached. Kept for a few days, paste becomes mouldy, and after a short timeputrid; this inconvenience may be obviated by the use of-- Permanent Paste, made by adding to each half-pint offlour paste without alum, fifteen grains of corrosive sublimate, previouslyrubbed to powder in a mortar, the whole to be well mixed; this, if preventedfrom drying, by being kept in a covered pot, remains good any length of time,and is therefore convenient; but unfortunately it is extremely poisonous,though its excessively nauseous taste would prevent its being swallowedaccidentally; it possesses the great advantage of not being liable to theattacks of insects. Liquid Glue is made by dissolving shell-lac inwater, by boiling it with borax, which possesses the peculiar property ofcausing the solution of the resinous lac. This preparation is convenient forits cheapness and freedom from smell, but it gives way if exposed tolong-continued damp, which that made with naphtha resists. Of the use of common glue, very little need be said; it shouldalso be prepared in a glue-pot or double vessel to prevent its being burned,which injures it very materially. The objection to the use of this contrivanceis, that it renders it impossible to heat the glue in the inner vessel to theboiling point; this inconvenience can be obviated by employing in the outervessel some liquid, which boils at a highertemperature than pure water, such as saturated solution of salt. This boils at224° Fahr., 12° above the heat of boiling water, and enables the gluein the inner vessel to be heated to a much higher temperature than when purewater is employed. If a saturated solution of nitre is used, the temperaturerises still higher. Waterproof Cements are very numerous; a very goodone for uniting china and glass will be found elsewhere. It should be stated,however, that the gum ammoniac should be also dissolved in a small quantity ofspirit. Mastic, used instead of ammoniac, makes a clearer cement. This mixture,under various fanciful titles, is usually sold at a most exorbitant rate. Lime and Egg Cement is frequently made by moisteningthe edges to be united, with white of egg, dusting on some lime from a piece ofmuslin, and bringing the edges into contact. A much better mode is to slakesome freshly burned lime with a small quantity of boiling water; this occasions it to fall into a veryfine dry powder, if excess of water has not been added. The white of egg usedshould be intimately and thoroughly mixed, by beating, with an equal bulk ofwater, and the slaked lime added to the mixture, so as to form a thin paste,which should be used speedily, as it soon sets. This is a valuable cement,possessed of great strength, and capable of withstanding boiling water. Cementsmade with lime and blood, scraped cheese, or curd, may be regarded as inferiorvarieties of it. Cracked vessels, of earthenware and glass, may often beusefully, though not ornamentally repaired by white lead spread on strips ofcalico, and secured with bands of twine. But in point of strength, all ordinarycements yield the palm to Jeffery's Patented Marine Glue, a compound ofIndia-rubber, shell-lac, and coal-tar naphtha. When applied to china or glass,the substances should be cautiously made hot enough to melt the glue, whichshould then be rubbed on the edges so as to become fluid, and the parts broughtinto contact immediately. When well applied, the mended stem of a commontobacco-pipe will break at any other part, in preference to the junction. Thecolor of the glue unfortunately prevents its being used. The Red Cement, which is employed by instrument-makersfor cementing glass to metals, and which is very cheap, and exceedingly usefulfor a variety of purposes, is made by melting five parts of black resin, onepart of yellow wax, and then stirring in, gradually, one part of red ochre orVenetian red, in fine powder, and previously well dried. This cement requires to be melted beforeuse, and it adheres better if the objects to which it is applied are warmed. Asoft cement, of a somewhat similiar character, may be found useful for coveringthe corks of preserved fruit, and other bottles, and it is made by meltingyellow wax with an equal quantity of resin, or of common turpentine, (not oilof turpentine, but the resin), using the latter for a very soft cement, andstirring in, as before, some dried Venetian red. Bearing in mind ourintroductory remarks, it will be seen that the uniting broken substances with athick cement is disadvantageous, the object being to bring the surfaces asclosely together as possible. As an illustration of a right and a wrong way ofmending, we will suppose a plaster of Paris figure broken; the wrong way tomend it is by a thick paste of plaster, which makes, not a joint, but a botch.The right way to mend it, is by means of some well-made carpenter's glue,which, being absorbed into the porous plaster, leaves merely a film coveringthe two surfaces. If well done, the figure isstronger there than elsewhere. One useful substance is termed mastic cement, which is used for making a superiorcoating to inside walls, and which must not be confounded with the resin mastic. It is made by mixing twenty parts ofwell-washed and sifted sharp sand, with two parts of litharge, and one offreshly burned and slaked quick-lime, in fine dry powder. This is made into a putty, by mixingwith linseed oil; it sets in a few hours, having the appearance of lightstone; and we mention it as it may be frequently employed with advantage inrepairing broken stone-work (as stairs) by filling up the missing parts. Theemployment of Roman cement, plaster, &c., for masonry work, hardly comeswithin the limits of Domestic Manipulation. CHAPTER XIV. DIVIDING,POWDERING, GRINDING, ETC. THE operations of chopping, powdering, grinding, &c., are so frequentlyrequired in cooking, and the other branches of domestic economy, as to renderany description of their utility wholly unnecessary; and we may thereforeconfine ourselves to describing the best means of accomplishing the objectdesired. Powdering is usually performed by the aid of the pestle and mortar.Most of the works on Cookery recommend the use of a marble mortar; thismaterial is about one of the worst that could be selected for the purpose. Inthe first place, it is expensive; secondly, it is rapidly corroded, even by theweak acids used for food; thirdly, it is readily stained by oily substances;fourthly, it is absorptive of strong flavors, imparting them readily to thenext substance pounded; and lastly, it is brittle, and even if not broken, isnot calculated to withstand much wear. By far the best material for the purposeis the Wedgewood ware; mortars made of it are cheaper, cleaner in use, andstronger than those of marble, and are not corroded by acids or alkalies--theirpre-eminence is so great, that they are invariably used by druggists. The act of powdering requires great tact and practice to perform it neatlyand rapidly. After the object has been broken into small pieces by blows fromthe pestle, a grinding action is required; this should at first be given bystriking the fragments, not in the centre of the mortar, but towards the sidefurthest from the operator; the pestle, by this means, grinds over them in itsdescent to the centre, and much more rapidly accomplishes their division thanif mere blows are given. After the object has been divided to a certain extent,blows are entirely useless, and a grinding in circles becomes requisite; if thecircle is confined to one part of the mortar, the same portions get rubbed overand over again, the others escaping; this is avoided by constantly andregularly altering the size of the circles. If they are commenced in thecentre, they should gradually increase in size until the sides are reached, andthen contract again, and so on. By this means the whole of the powder isbrought under the action of the pestle, and the operation is much quicker thanif performed at random. One great fault usually committed in powdering, is theendeavor to operate on too large a quantity of material at one time. Theoperation is much more rapidly conducted if small portions are taken; Fig. 9. An illustration of a lidded glass jar with a bag of lawn inside itused as a filter. and if the material is tough, andcontains much fibrous matter, the process may be very much shortened byremoving those parts which are sufficiently powdered, by sifting from time totime through a sieve. This may be objectionable, however, from the fine powderescaping into the air; in this case, the following contrivance will be founduseful: A cylindrical tea-canister of the requisite size is taken, witha loosely fitting lid (or if tight, the lid may be enlarged by four slits beingmade partly up the sides); a bag of lawn is dropped into the canister, the topbeing turned over the edge; the powder to be sifted is put in a bag, the lidput on, and, by tapping and shaking, the finest portions pass into the canisterwithout any escaping into the air--a point of very considerable importancewhere the powder is irritating or expensive. All vegetable, and many mineral substances, are much more readily powderedafter having been thoroughly dried; so far is this process carried,that many drugs are dried so as to lose fifteen per cent. of their weightbefore powdering. After drying, substances should not be exposed to the air,but, unless they are of such a nature as to be softened by heat, are betteroperated on whilst still warm. Flints are more readily powdered by being heatedto redness and quenched in cold water; charcoal, for toothpowder, whilst still warm from drying. Gum can only be powdered whilstperfectly dry. Camphor, which is with great difficulty powdered alone,yields readily if a drop or two of spirit is poured on it. Substanceswhich clog together and cake under the pestle, are not uncommon; to these it issometimes requisite to add sand, which may afterwards be separated--thisprevents the clogging; but its use is often impracticable. Lime, ifrequired in very fine powder, for dusting over plants to kill slugs, &c.,is readily obtained by slaking it, when fresh burned, with boiling water; when, if too much wateris not used, it falls into an exceedingly fine powder. Sal-ammoniac, and some other saline bodies, are most readily powderedby dissolving them in as small a quantity of boiling water as possible,and stirring the solution rapidly as the water is boiled away, or as thesolution cools. Before dismissing the pestle and mortar, we may allude to itsuse in mixing powders together, although a much more ready mode of doing thisis with a sieve. Two or more powders stirred together and passed two or threetimes through a sieve, are much more intimately mixed, than if rubbed for along time in a mortar. Metals cannot be divided in the mortar; the mostconvenient mode of proceeding, if they are fusible under a white heat,is to melt them, and pour them whilst liquid into a pail of water, whichshould be full to avoid any spluttering, and the hotter the metal, the morefilmy the particles. It is scarcely requisite to state, that the metal shouldbe poured in a circle, so as not to collect at one place. Chopping is usually performed in the kitchen, with a large common knife; butis more speedily done by some of the improved contrivances similar to thefollowing:--The chopping-board should be made of hard wood, with thegrain at right angles to the surface of the board, Fig. 10. An illustration of an X-shaped chopping tool with a longhandle. Fig. 11. An illustration of an S-shaped chopping tool with a longhandle. by which it is rendered much moredurable, than if they are parallel to it. The chopping-knives should be fixedat right angles to the handles, and may be either of the preceding patterns. Ifa large quantity of material has to be acted on, we would recommend a board asabove, not less than three inches thick, and smooth on both sides, so thateither may be used, of the requisite size--say eighteen inches or twofeet in diameter. On this should stand a loose bottomless tub, toconfine the materials, and the whole resting on the floor, should be used witha knife, sufficiently long in the handle to be employed by a person standingerect, and it should have a small cross-bar for the hands, as shown in Fig. 12. Small chopping-knives are sold, consisting of three blades riveted together;and a very convenient one is made by fastening, at convenient distances, anumber of flat circular disks, sharpened at the edges to a central axis with ahandle at each end. Many substances, such as stale bread, dried herbs, &c.,may be very conveniently powdered by rubbing them through a wire sieve, of therequisite degree of fineness. Herbs intended for use in this way, shouldbe dried as rapidly as possible, without being scorched, in small heaps, beforethe fire; parsley and others done in this way, may be powdered,retaining their bright green color and flavor, both of which are preserved ifthey are corked tightly in bottles, and kept in a dry, dark cupboard. The useof waxed paper to preserve dried powders in, or for tying themdown in jars, or generally as a very good substitute for bladder, will often befound convenient. It is readily made by laying a sheet of smooth stoutpaper on a warm iron plate, as the top of a kitchen oven; on this placethe thin tissue or other paper to be waxed; put a piece of wax on it,and as it melts, rub it over, spreading it evenly. One end of a cork, coveredwith two thicknesses of linen, answers very well for a rubber. If a hot plateis not at hand, the sheet of paper may be held before the fire, andrubbed over, as it warms, with the cut edge of a cake of white wax; butthis requires the co-operation of two persons. Fig. 12. An illustration of a bottomless, wooden tub and a long handledknife. CHAPTER XV. KNOTS, PACKAGES,PARCELS, ETC. THE poet Crabbe, speaking of the writing of the rustics, signing his parishregisters, says-- "Tis strange that men Who guide the ploughshould fail to guide the pen! For half a mile the furrows even lie; For half aninch the letters stand awry." A parallel remark might with equal justice be made on the gentler sex, who,after exercising a degree of tact, neatness, and tasteful invention, that theself-styled "lords of the creation" might in vain hope to rival, in theformation of a piece of needlework, knitting, netting, or crochet, are, for themost part, totally unable, when it is finished, to tie it up so as to make adecent parcel; ladies' packages are, in fact, the opprobrium of the sex--theannoyance of all carriers, who have any thing todo with their conveyance, and the torment of their owners; the cords arecertain to become loose, the knots are sure to slip, except when a slip-knot isrequisite, and then it is a fixture! It is in the hope that we may beinstrumental in improving this state of things, that we are induced to devotethis chapter to Knots, Packages, Parcels, &c., and we shall at once laybefore our fair readers a method of tying a parcel neatly and securely, and atthe same time affording facilities for releasing the contents withoutdestroying the string by cutting it away--a too ordinary practice, especiallywhere time is an object. The most simple purpose for which a knot is required, is the fasteningtogether of two pieces of string or cord: the knot selected for this purposeshould possess two important properties;--it should be secure from slipping,and of small size. Nothing is more common than to see two cords attachedtogether in a manner similar to that shown in Fig. 13. It is scarcely possible to imagine a worseknot; it is large and clumsy, and as the cords do not mutually press eachother, it is certain to slip if pulled with any great force. In strikingcontrast to this--the worst of all, we place one of the best; namely, the knotusually employed by netters, and which is called by sailors "the sheet-bend."It is readily made by bending one of the pieces of cord into a loop (a b, Fig. 14), which is to be held between thefinger and thumb of the left hand; the other cord c is passed through the loop from the farther side,then round behind the two legs of the loop, and lastly, under itself, the looseend coming out at d. In the smallness of its size, and the firmnesswith which the various parts grip together, this knot surpasses every other: itcan, moreover, be tied readily when one of the pieces, viz. a b, is exceedingly short; in common stout twine,less than an inch being sufficient to form the loop. The above method offorming it is the simplest to describe, although not the most rapid inpractice; as it may be made in much less time by crossing the two ends of cord (a b, Fig. 15) on the tip of the fore-finger of theleft hand, and holding them firmly by the left thumb, which covers thecrossing; then the part c is to be wound round the thumb in a loop as shownin the figure, and passed between the two ends, behind a and before b; the knot is completed by turning the end b downwards in front of d, passing it through the loop, securing it underthe left thumb, and tightening the whole by pulling d. As formed in this mode, it is more rapidly madethan almost any other knot; and, as before stated, it excels all in security Fig. 13. An illustration of a knot that secures two pieces or string orcord. Fig. 14. An illustration of how to start a sheet-bend knot. Fig.15. An illustration of an alternate way to tie a sheet-bendknot. and compactness, so firmly do thevarious turns grip each other, that after having been tightly pulled, it isvery difficult to untie; this the only drawback to its usefulness, and in thisrespect it is inferior to the reef-knot, Fig. 16, which is made in precisely the samemanner that a shoe-string is tied, only pulling out the ends instead of leavingthem as bows. The only precaution necessary in making a reef-knot is, toobserve that the two parts of each string are on the same side of the loop; ifthey are not, the ends (and the bows if any are formed) are at right angles tothe cords; the knot is less secure, and is termed by sailors a granny-knot.Other knots are occasionally used to connect two cords, but it is unnecessaryto describe them, as every useful purpose may be answered by thoseabove-mentioned. Fig. 16. An illustration of a reef-knot. The binding knot (Figs. 17 and 18) is exceedingly useful inconnecting broken sticks, rods, &c., but some difficulty is oftenexperienced in fastening it at the finish; if, however, the string is placedover the part to be united, as shown in Fig. 17, and the long end b, used to bind around the rod, and finally passedthrough the loop a, as shown in Fig. 18, it is readily secured by pulling d, when the loop is drawn in, and fastens the end ofthe cord. Fig. 17 An illustration of a broken stick or rod and how to begin tying abinding knot. Fig. 18 An illustration of a completed binding knot. For fastening a cord to any cylindrical object, one of the most useful knotsis the clove hitch, which, although exceedingly simple and most easilymade, is one of the most puzzling knots to the uninitiated. There are severalmodes of forming it, the most simple being perhaps as follows:--make two loops,precisely similar in every respect as a and b, Fig. 19, then bring b in front of a, so as to make both loops correspond, and passthem over the object to be tied, tightening the ends; if this is properly done,the knot will not slip, although surrounding a tolerably smooth cylindricalobject, as a pillar, pole, &c. This knot is employed by surgeons inreducing dislocations of the last joint of the thumb, and by sailors in greatpart of the standing rigging. The loop which is formed when a cable is passedaround a post or tree to secure a vessel near shore, is fastened by whatsailors term two half hitches, which is simply a clove hitch made by theend of the rope which is passed around the post or tree, and then made todescribe the clove hitch around that part of itself which is tightlystrained. Fig. 19. An illustration of a rope/cord with two loops in it, called aclove hitch. From the tying of knots we may pass on to the tying over of bottles,preserves jars, &c.; the object with which this operation is performed is either to prevent the excess ofair or the escape or entrance of moisture; the act itself is so very simple asto require no explanation; but a few words may be said on the choice ofmaterial, which should be varied so as to suit the exigencies of eachparticular case. When a vessel of spirit is to be tied over, leather isfrequently selected--a very erroneous practice, as the vapor of spiritpasses readily through that substance, but cannot penetrate bladder, whichshould be invariably used for the purpose. So effectually is spiritconfined by bladder, that when weak spirits are put into bladders orinto vessels tied over with bladder, and allowed to remain some time, they arestrengthened, as the vapor of the water passes away, that of thespirit being retained. Bladder or other animal membranes of the same nature, in a moist and flaccidstate, are usually selected for tying over preserves and jams, for whichthey are well adapted. Many persons place a thin piece of brandied paperin the jar resting on the jam, in addition to tying it down; this assists inexcluding air and preventing mouldiness, but we have found a piece of very thinpaper moistened with white of egg much more efficacious. The thinsheet-lead used for lining the interior of tea-chests, or stouttin-foil, is very advantageously used in tying down vessels containingspecimens of natural history preserved in spirits, as they effectuallyprevent the escape of the latter for a long series of years. The plan usuallypursued is to tie the cork over first with a single bladder, then with themetal, and finally with a second piece of bladder, which is afterwards coveredwith a coat of black paint. The tying up of parcels in paper is an operation which is seldomneatly performed by persons whose occupations have not given them greatfacilities for constant practice. Whether the paper be wrapped round theobjects, as is the case usually when it is much larger than sufficient toenclose them, or merely folded over itself, as is done by druggists, who cutthe paper to the required size, it is important that the breadth of thepaper should be no longer than sufficient to enable it to be folded overthe ends of the object enclosed, without passing over the opposite side; it isimpossible to make a neat or close parcel with paper which is toobroad; excess in length may be readily disposed of by wrapping it round; butexcess of breadth should be cut away. With regard to turning in the ends themode adopted by grocers is the best. The most common cause of failure inparcels is their being badly corded; we will, therefore, (however unnecessarythe description of so simple a performance may appear to those alreadyacquainted with it), describe the most readily acquired mode of cording. Let a single knot be made in the end of the cord, which is then passed roundthe box or parcel. This knotted end is now tied by a single hitch round themiddle of the cord (Fig. 20), and the whole pulled tight. Thecord itself is then carried at right angles round the end of the parcel, andwhere it crosses the transverse cord on the bottom of the box (Fig. 21), it should (if the parcel is heavy,and requires to be firmly secured) be passed over the cross cord, then back underneath it, andpulled tightly, then over itself; lastly, under the cross cord, and on aroundthe other end of the box. When it reaches the top it must be secured by Fig. 20. An illustration of a box with rope tied around it. passing it under at that part ofthe cord which runs lengthways (a, Fig. 20), pulling it very tight, andfastening it by two half hitches round itself. The great cause of parcelsbecoming loose is the fact of the cord being often fastened to one of thetransverse parts (as b, Fig. 20), instead of the piece runninglengthways, and in this case it invariably becomes loose. The description mayperhaps be rendered clearer by the aid of the figures, which exhibit the topand bottom of a box corded as described. The cords, however, are shown in aloose state to allow their arrangements to be perceived more easily. Fig. 21. An illustration of a box with rope tied around it. CHAPTER XVI. IN spite of our receipts and our philosophy, the briskness of the fire, theskill of our cook, the excellence of the oven, the bright array of pots,kettles, pans, moulds, griddles and gridirons, and the presiding genius of evena half Fortunatus sort of a purse, or the most rigid scale and measure ofeconomy, one grand puzzle besets alike all kitchens--the difficulty of reallygetting the ingredients on which the mystery of food manufacture is to beexercised. The very water we have to cook with, is crowded with millions ofmonsters--things with two heads and no heads, with countless legs and no legs,with jaws and pincers and claws, and most wonderful springy tails; in somewater well nigh enough of them to make a sort of soup, to say nothing of thechalk, lime, iron, and a host of other impurities. The sugar, if it be brown, without taking note of such items as a littlelead, a good deal of sand, some clay and flour, is pretty nearly as thick as itcan hold of chips of cane and swarms of mites. Our tea, if green, is painted and polished with Prussian blue, turmericpowder, and China clay, and is a mixture of all the leaves that the wonderfulindustry and ingenuity of the Chinese, can accomplish; we have old tea-leavesdried and twisted up, and colored and glazed, and sold for black and green; wehave even gunpowder made up of dust and sand, and gum, faced as they call itwith plumbago. Coffee, fragrant, and refreshing, has almost become a myth; we may havepneumatic coffee-pots that will not let the finest dust pass through theirstrainers, French coffee-pots, German coffee-pots, and all kinds of traditionaldirections for the manufacture: but not one of them can help us to make coffee,unless as good old Mrs. Glass would say, "we have first got our coffee;" andwhat with foreign roguery and home roguery the chances are twenty to oneagainst us, that the brown powder we are at so much pains with, once flourishedat the end of a blue flower, on a long stalk under our own hedges, being knownwhere it grew under the name of wild endive, christened in trade chicory, andbeing in reality a tall and aristocratic sort of dandelion, possessing too themedicinal properties of dandelion, and none whatever of the properties ofcoffee. But even if people be taken with a liking for this dandelion teainstead of coffee, they cannot have it pure. The chicory itself is far toocostly to content the avaricious roguery of a number of dealers, and so it is adulterated with roasted corn, parsnips,manglewurzel, beans, Egyptian lupin seed, biscuit powder, burnt sugar, roastedcarrots, oak bark, tan, acorns, mahogany sawdust, and no little sand, theresult of the original dirt judiciously left as a make-weight upon the root ofthe chicory itself. Mustard can scarcely be said to have even the color of mustard, for it iscolored with turmeric, and what passes for mustard is in many a case littlemore than mere husks and flour. Pepper is messed up with wheat flour, mustard-seed husks, sago-meal, peaflour, and ware-house sweepings; nor does it fare better with food forinvalids, oatmeal being mingled with far less digestive barley-meal at half theprice. Arrow-root (which it should be understood is the produce of under-groundbranches or bulbs of the maranta plant, growing in the West and East Indies,having gained its name of arrow-root from the belief that it was a remedyagainst poisoned arrows,) is to the utmost economized; and though its purity isoften of great importance to the invalid, there is for the most part soldinstead, sago-flour, tapioca-flour, and most commonly of all,potato-starch. Milk and bread are not so much adulterated. But the milk, partly by the kindof keep of the cows, partly by a little careful skimming, and in a multitude ofcases by the liberal aid of the pump, is duly thinned. Flour and bread, of oldmixed with plaster of Paris, ground bones, and potato-starch--thanks to thecheapening of pure materials, has come to content itself with alum only. Butthis running account of roguery, except for its curiousness, would be of littleuse without a few hints, as to partial detection and prevention. As to tea, it is best to be content with black tea alone. For sugar, the best advice is--if you like to pay for dirt, and to mix itwith your preserves, puddings, and pastry, and choose to believe that sugarwhich moistens even the thick paper they place it in, and which looks dark,smells strong, and sticks to your fingers, is richer in sweetening than clearsparkling white sugar, out of which none of the sweetening but all of the dirthas been washed--then buy brown sugar. "Please tell the people over the way," said a gentleman, "that I would takeit as a particular favor, if in future they will send me the cow's hairs on oneplate, and the butter on another, and I can mix them myself as I want them."Such is our advice as to coffee. It seems beyond the reach of average humanhonesty to sell it pure. The chicory is so fragrant--so wholesome--such animprovement on the flavor of the Arabian berry, and withal so much cheaper,that mixed it must be. We say, therefore, Buy your coffee in the berry, raw;your chances are at all events fifty to one better of having coffee only. Roastand grind it for yourselves, and, if you like chicory or dandelion, endive, orany other weed with it, why, buy the roots, scorch them and grate them, and,like the man with the hairs in his butter, mix them to your taste. But do not,unless you choose to cheat your stomachs, buy ground coffee. A mill will soonpay for itself; and at all events never purchase canistered or bottled coffee,for in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred an additional dose of dust is made topay for the tin or glass. * *It may not be amiss to show how tea is made inChina, and coffee amongst the Turks. The art of making tea consists in pouring the water on and off immediately,so as to get the flavor. Coffee-making is a more intricate affair, and cannot be fully conveyed in areceipt. The coffee must be slowly roasted, not burnt, and brought only to anamber brown; it must be roasted day by day, and reduced by pounding to animpalpable powder. In making it, two opposite and apparently incompatible ends are to be secured--strength and flavor. Toobtain the first, it must be boiled; by boiling, the second is lost. Thedifficulty is surmounted by a double process,--one thorough cooking, one slightone; by the first a strong infusion is obtained, by the second that infusion isflavored. Thus a large pot with coffee-lees stands simmering by the fire; thisis the sherbet. When a cup is wanted, the pounded coffee is put in the littletin or copper pan, and placed on the embers; it fumes for a moment, then thesherbet is poured on; in a few seconds the froth (caïmah) rises; presentlyan indication that it is about to boil is made manifest, when the coffee isinstantly taken from the fire, carried into the apartment, turned into the cup,and drunk."-- Urquhart's Pillars of Hercules. As to water--every one knows that plumbers make the bottoms of the cisternsthicker than the sides, because the water eats the lead away; hard water doesso more than soft, and water from the same source more at the some times thanothers. Lead, as the phrase is, accumulates in the system, so that ever solittle, taken day by day, at length sums up to a poisonous dose sufficient tomar the health. The remedy for this mischief is simply to have the pipes madeof gutta percha. Many spring waters, though of course free from the animalimpurities, abound still more in the medicinal. To render such waters fit forhealthful use, some process of purification is absolutely essential, and suchpurification very perceptively improves both their cooking and washingproperties. Ordinary filters certainly free water from a considerable quantity of dirt,but not from the medicinal ingredients, nor even from all the animalculæ,some of which, though quite visible as monsters with a microscope, neverthelessfind their way through the filter. One of the simplest processes ofpurification, if people will only take the trouble to perform it--and it issurely worth it for the increase of comfort and the advantage tohealth--is--for every forty gallons that the cistern holds to pour in onegallon of lime-water; this has the effect of throwing down from the water alarge proportion of the chemical ingredients, and no small multitude of theanimalculæ. Another method of purification is by long slow boiling, thenallowing the water to cool, and filtering it. Some trouble no doubt there is inany such course; but pure water, like pure air, is essential to a life ofhealth, and those who will not be at the trouble, must make up their minds tosome degree of infirmity and unhappiness. The subject of the Water-supply to large towns is one of the highestimportance to the well-being of the community. The quality of water for domestic purposes depends mainly upon its degree ofhardness or softness; and this in its turn depends almost entirely upon thequantity of lime dissolved in some form or other in the water. It is found,upon experiment, that one gallon (weighing 70,000 grains) of pure water will not dissolve more than two grains ofchalk, and so acquire two degrees of hardness; and that whenever more iscontained in water, the excess is always owing to the presence of carbonic acidgas, which enables it to dissolve a much larger quantity. The practical part ofour subject depends on this fact; for if by any means we can get rid of thecarbonic acid, the dissolved chalk is necessarily precipitated, and the hardwater, unfit for culinary and domestic purposes, becomes soft, and well adaptedto both these uses. Carbonic acid is in part expelled from water by heating itto the boiling point: a still larger quantity is got rid of after boiling forsome few minutes, and nearly every trace disappears at the end of half an hour;and just in proportion as the carbonic acid gas is expelled, so does thechalk fall, rendering the water in the first instance turbid, andbecoming deposited on the interior surface of kettles, where it forms the well-known rock of fur. It has been found that water of 14 degrees of hardness lost twodegrees when merely made to boil; boiling for five minutes reduced the hardnessto 6 degrees; and for a quarter of an hour, to little more than 4 degrees. Thepractical application of this knowledge needs scarcely to be pointed out.Whenever a soft water is required, boil for several minutes beforeusing. In making tea, for instance, the economy and general superiorityof a soft water is well known. How many a young gentleman, with asmattering of science just enough to inform him that water gets nohotter however long or violently it is boiled, has laughed at his grandmother'santiquated notions, because she requested that the water might be madeto boil thoroughly before the tea was made: the old lady could give novery satisfactory explanation of her prejudice, yet it was not the less acorrect one. Before going further in this matter, it may be stated that there are somewaters in which the lime is dissolved in the form of gypsum (sulphate oflime): in these, the hardness is of a permanent character, and cannot belessened by boiling. Tea made under such circumstances may be improved,either by the addition of a very small quantity of carbonate of soda, orthe tea should be kept soaking for half an hour, under suchcircumstances as will retain the heat. In washing, the use of hard water is, as is well known, extremelyprejudicial. The explanation is exceedingly simple: every degree of hardness ina gallon of water destroys 10 grains of soap. There is one practical matter of great importance, to which we wish to drawthe attention of all concerned: it is the effect of boiling linen in hardwater. If clothes are put into cold water, and then boiled theprecipitation of chalk takes place on the clothes, and whatever coloringmatter exists in the water goes down with the chalk, and alsobecomes attached to the linen, rendering it of that disagreeable andunremovable dirty hue which is so characteristic of certain laundries. Ifboiling is absolutely requisite for white fabrics, it should be done inwater which has been boiled half an hour, allowed to stand, and thenpoured off from the sediment; otherwise, from the immediate precipitation ofthe chalk, the dirt is boiled in and thoroughly fixed to the fabric. Amoment's consideration will convince any one, that a deposit similar to the fur in a tea-kettle cannot be expected toimprove the appearance of white linen. Where clean rain water canbe obtained, there is no objection to the boiling of clothes in it; as, beingabsolutely free from lime, no precipitation can take place. The use ofsoda in softening water employed in washing, is well known; butthe remedy is not without its own evil: it weakens the fibre of the cloth, andunless it is much more thoroughly removed by rinsing than is usually the case,it occasions a very permanent yellow tinge when the cloth is heated. CHAPTER XVII. BOILING,STEWING, ETC. FROM considering the properties of hard and soft water, we pass by a naturaltransition to the employment of that liquid in culinary operations. Inpractice, nothing can at first sight appear more simple than the operation ofboiling, whether it be confined to the mere heating of a liquid, or extended tothe preparation of an article of food; yet it is one which involves chemicalprinciples of a very high order, and which is by no means so simple a matter as it may be regarded at a cursoryglance. To trace the steps of the process from its commencement, let us imagine avessel of water placed over the fire, and receiving constantly a supply of heatfrom that source; the effect is, that its temperature gradually rises fromabout 50° or 60°, the usual warmth of ordinary water, to 212°, thepoint at which boiling takes place; but before it reaches that height, a numberof bubbles may be observed foaming on the sides of the vessel; these graduallyincrease in size, and when they become sufficiently buoyant, quit theirposition, rise to the surface, and escape; they consist of air previouslydissolved in the water, and which is expelled by the increased heat. Waterwhich has been boiled and allowed to become cold, without much exposure to theair, fails to reabsorb the quantity it previously contained, and consequentlyhas its character somewhat altered. Thus, it freezes more readily than waterwhich has not been boiled, in consequence of the air not having to be expelledin the act of solidifying, as is usually the case: hence, the ice from boiledwater is free from those numerous air bubbles which are always to be observedin common ice. It possesses also a mawkish, unpleasant taste, and is totallyunable to preserve the life of any aquatic animal. The presence of this minutequantity of air in ordinary water, is very essential to its utility. Faradayfound that water, totally destitute of air, does not boil in the usualmode, but when heated to the boiling point, it at once, with an instantaneousand violent explosion, passes into the form of steam. This strange fact, whichshows upon what small, and, apparently, trivial circumstances, thecomfort--nay, we may truly say--the existence of man depends, is strikinglyshown by a very ingenious experiment, devised by that celebrated chemist. Hetook a piece of Wenham Lake ice, (which, from peculiar local causes, such asbeing formed from spring water, is totally destitute of air,) and melted itunder a covering of sweet oil; this prevented the absorption of any air duringthe liquefaction; on continuing the heat, the water rose in temperature, and onreaching the boiling point, suddenly burst into steam, with an explosive powersufficiently great to scatter the glass vessel in which the experiment was madeinto fragments; and had it not been for a protecting covering of wire gauze,very serious effects might have ensued. From the precipitation of the dissolved chalk present in most kinds ofwater, a cloudiness or slight turbidity is always to be observed in boiledwater. After the escape of the air, bubbles of steam, at first very small in size,are formed at the bottom of the vessel, those formed at first are at oncecooled from the whole water not being of an equal temperature, and arecondensed before they reach the surface: this very rapid and successivecondensation of numerous small bubbles gives rise to that peculiar vibrationwhich occasions what is termed the singing of the teakettle, and which, as is wellknown, is indicative of its approach to the boiling point; when the whole wateris uniformly heated, this effect no longer occurs, but the bubbles of steamrise to the surface and escape. After having been heated to 212°, thetemperature of water no longer rises; it is not possible, under ordinarycircumstances, to increase the temperature in the slightest degree; for all theextra heat that is given to boiling water merely produces increased quantity ofsteam, by which it is carried off, without affecting the heat of the remainingwater. This is a matter of considerable practical importance in cookery; and itshould be always borne in mind, that the most gentle simmer is as efficaciousin cooking as the most violent boiling; for thedegree of heat in both cases is precisely the same, so that after having onceraised the water to the boiling point, the most moderate fire is sufficient inordinary cases to keep it there; by attention to this point, a most enormoussaving may often be effected in the consumption of fuel, although this is aconsideration that will be more fully entered into in a subsequent chapter. Thick liquids, which do not readily permit the escape of steam or the rapidmotion between the particles of fluid, may, however, be readily heated at thepart exposed to the fire to a much higher degree, while those portions notimmediately in contact with the heat are much colder; from this cause they arevery apt to be charred, and if articles of food, they are totally spoiled. Toavoid this effect, recourse may be had to the bain marie, which is simply the same contrivancethat may be observed in a carpenter's glue-pot, applied to the preparation ofarticles of food,--being merely an inner vessel to contain the substance to beheated; this is placed in an outer one, the space between the two containingwater. On placing this contrivance on the fire, it is obvious that thesubstance in the inner vessel being heated solely by the boiling water, cannotpossibly become burnt. This most useful contrivance is adopted in allfirst-class kitchens, and is equally indispensable in the chemist's laboratory;by its aid, soups, gravies, &c., can be kept hot any length of time withoutrisk, preserves made without burning, &c. The chief precautions required inits use are, that the inner vessel should be thin and formed of metal, so as toallow the rapid transmission of heat from boiling water, and care should betaken that the outer vessel does not boil dry. One serious disadvantage attendsits use as ordinarily employed: it is, that it is impossible to heat substancesin it to the boiling point, for the water itself is only at that temperatureand the substance in the inner vessel is always a few degrees below. This evil,however, may be entirely obviated, by using a solution in the outer vessel,which boils at a higher temperature than 212°, and which will thereforeraise the inner vessel and its contents to that point; thus, if the water bemade to dissolve as much common salt as it is capable of doing, it will notboil until it is heated to 224°; or if it is saturated with sal-ammoniac ornitre, the heat will rise 12° or 14° higher. We need scarcely say thatthe first of these substances will be found a very useful and economicaladdition to the bain marie. When chemists require a still highertemperature, they have recourse to a bath of olive oil, which is capable ofbearing a degree of heat as high as 500°; but its extreme danger over anopen fire entirely precludes its use in any culinary operation. The mode of conducting the operation of boiling should not be uniform, butvary with the different purposes required. Thus, in the case of meat, atemperature of 212° hardens, instead of softening, two of the substanceswhich it contains; namely, the fibrine, or material forming the chief part ofthe muscular fibre, and the albumen, or portion which is analogous to white ofegg; if, on the contrary, meat is cooked by means of water at a lowertemperature, the most nutritious parts are dissolved out, and the solid foodleft comparatively innutritious. The celebrated German chemist, Liebig,proposes the following plan:--he recommends that a piece of meat ofconsiderable size should be taken and plunged into perfectly boiling water,over a good fire; that the water should be kept boiling for a few minutes, andthen a portion of cold water, equal in quantity to about one-half of theboiling water, should be thrown in: this will reduce the temperature to about160°, at which point the meat should be keptuntil thoroughly done; which, however, takes a much longer time than theordinary mode. The object of this mode of proceeding is, in the first instance, to hardenthe exterior of the meat, converting it into a sort of crust, which preventsthe escape of the nutritious juices into the water, while the long continuanceof the gentle heat afterwards cooks the interior without hardening either thealbumen or the fibrine. Of course, where the object of boiling is to make soup,the opposite plan must be had recourse to; the meat should be in small insteadof large pieces, put on in cold water and very slowly heated, so that all thesoluble parts may be dissolved before the fibre is hardened by the action ofboiling water. In boiling eggs, the effect of heat in hardening the albumen is well known;by being suddenly plunged into boiling water, the outside is hardened to thegreatest degree of which it is capable, and is thereby rendered exceedinglydifficult of digestion, while the inside is barely warmed; if, on the contrary,they are placed in cold water, which is then raised to the boiling point,removed from the fire, and allowed to stand about a minute (or two, if requiredto be well done,) it will be found that, instead of having an almost leatheryconsistence, the white will be uniformly partially hardened, and will furnish amuch more pleasant and digestible article of diet; the improvement, in fact, isso great, that common eggs cooked in this manner very nearly approach new laidones in quality. If the operation of boiling has to be performed on any substance containingstarchy matters--as potatoes, rice, flour, &c., then the heat must, on thecontrary, be raised to a sufficient degree to burst the little grains of whichthe starch consists, and liberate the interior nutritious portions,before it can become fit food for man; uncooked starch not being readilyor easily digested. And even in the case of those vegetable-feeding animalswhose power of digesting such substances surpasses that of man, there is thegreatest advantage to be derived from the use of cooked food, as the mostintelligent and scientific farmers at the present day well know; and we wouldstrongly urge on those of our readers who keep pigs to try theexperiment of baking the potatoes they give them; for this process, likeboiling, has the effect of bursting the starch grains; they will findthe effect to be, that the food will go much further, all of it being digested,and that the quality of the flesh will be very materially improved. CHAPTER XVIII. ECONOMY OFHEAT. PERHAPS few of our readers are aware of the extraordinary wastefulness ofour usual processes for obtaining artificial heat; at the most moderatecomputation, seven-eighths of the warmth produced by an open fire, pass up thechimney, and are entirely useless; and according to other estimates, which weregard as being nearer the truth, fourteen parts out of every fifteen areuselessly wasted. It may be asked what are the defects of a common fireplacethat render it so wasteful, and in what way is the heat carried off? In replyit may be stated, that one half the heat produced passes away with the smokeand heated air arising from the fire, a quarter is carried up by the draught ofcold air from the room, which, flowing around the fire and between it and themantel-piece, rises with the smoke. Again, the soot which passes away isunburned fuel, and is therefore useless; and a large portion of heat is thrown downwards upon the ashes and is wasted; whilethe iron of which the ranges are generally made, conveys away a considerablequantity. On the continent of Europe the production of heat is moreeconomically managed--stoves of very admirable construction being constantlyhad recourse to, both for the purpose of producing warmth and for cookery. Itis to the latter application of heat that we must mainly confine ourselves,having been at some considerable pains in examining the various stoves andranges now to be obtained. The cooking-stove common in Europe, consists of an enclosed fire-pan, with agrating below and a lid at the top for the supply of fuel; this is enclosed inan oven, supported on the floor of the room by feet, and which is heated by thewarmth thrown out by the sides of the fire-pan, and also by a flue spreadingover the top, which is thus heated; while the upper surface of the flue forms ahot plate, on which many saucepans, &c., can be kept boiling, and anyvessel can also be placed over the fire by the removal of the lid. As thedraught is under perfect control, the fuel is slowly consumed, and the stoveaffords means of baking, boiling, frying, and stewing, at a very smallexpense. Those of our readers who visited Prince Albert's Model Cottages opposite theExhibition in London, may have noticed a stove looking very much like a longoblong box, standing on four legs, having two doors in the front, one openinginto a large sized oven, the other disclosing the fire-grate, which was fed bythe removal of a lid at the top;--the draught from the fire passed over theoven, heating it, and the hot plate above. This stove combines all theadvantages of the continental cooking-stove, with the cheerful appearance of anopen fire; at the same time, by closing up the fire-place door, it is convertedinto a close stove with an excessively small consumption of fuel. It bakesadmirably, either large joints, or bread, at the same time it boils a saucepanand steamer over the fire-hole, and also four large, or six smaller saucepanson the top of the hot plate. It fries well, and broils before the fire, andthis with less than one half the fuel that was employed to do a portion of thework in the range. The Bain Marie, which is so excellent a means of keepingsoups, gravies, sauces, &c., hot without burning or drying them up, isreadily used with it; and the sauté pan or deep frying-pan, which isemployed as a preliminary operation in most French made dishes, is convenientlyused; this contrivance derives its name from the verb sauter, to jump--the meat being rapidly turned overand browned previous to stewing. The only disadvantage attending the use ofthis stove is, that it is not calculated for roasting, but every otheroperation in cooking it performs infinitely better than a common fire. Thisstove, which is termed the Cottager's Stove, is made by Messrs. Benham, WigmoreStreet, London. Cottager's Stove. An illustration of a rectangular steel box sitting on fourdecorative legs. The box has a chimney coming out of the top, back left corner,two small doors on the front and one round lid on the top front, rightcorner. Those who object to a stove, preferring a range, even at a greater sacrificeof economy, should still be somewhat guided by correct principles in theirselection; a range surrounded by iron is anabsurdity, as the metal conducts away the heat rapidly; it should be backed andlined with fire-brick, or Welsh lumps, which throw out the heat with greatpower. In an open fire-place, the active combustion is wanted in front forroasting, and there only should air enter the fire; in most ranges the airenters below, causing the greatest heat to be thrown upon the ashes. Itmay be thought that closing up the bottom would produce the same effect asallowing it to be choked up with ashes in a common grate, deadening thefire; this is not the case with a properly constructed range. Backed with aslanting back of fire clay, the ashes can be readily removed atthe bottom, and all the draught being in front, there is a bright fire at theplace where it is required. In situations where gas is to be obtained, it forms a ready, and for somepurposes, very economical means of obtaining heat; its economy does not arisefrom its cheapness compared with other means, but from the fact that it neednot be lighted till the instant it is required, and can be as quicklyextinguished when it has done its required duty; for heating any vesselscontaining liquids, especially if the heat is required to be only of shortcontinuance, gas will be found extremely advantageous. A ring burner,constructed as shown in Fig. 2, less than three inches in diameter,will quickly boil a gallon of water in a metallic vessel; burners ofthis description are usually used in the laboratory, surrounded by a case madeof sheet iron or tinned plate, as in Fig. 3; this serves to support the vessel tobe heated, to steady the jets of flame, and to conduct every portion of hot airagainst the bottom; the door also gives a ready access to the burner for thepurposes of lighting the gas. Fig. 2. An illustration of a ring burner. A device that looks like agoblet with a tube coming out of it. For the domestic use of gas in heating we believe there is no contrivance souseful as the following:--A circular hole, from two to four or more inches indiameter, is cut in the dresser, through which is passed a sheet-iron tube,supported by three little elbows; this tube projects a few inches above thetable, and about a foot and a half below; its lower end is open, andinto it projects a gas-pipe, furnished with a stop-cock; the upper extremity iscovered with a sheet of wire gauze, similar to that used for blinds, on which,as shown in Fig. 4, may be placed some pieces ofpumice-stone, surrounded and kept together by a broad ring;--neither thepumice-stone nor the ring, however, are essential parts of the contrivance. Theaction of this arrangement is as follows:--When the gas is turned on it escapesfrom the pipe, rising through the tube, and mixing with the air containedwithin it; this mixture then escapes through the wire gauze, and may be lightedon its upper side, without passing Fig. 3. An illustration of cylinder of metal with perforation at the topedge and a little rectangular door in the middle. Fig. 4. An illustration of a gas heating device for domesticuse. through it to the gas below; theflame should be perfectly free from smoke, which indicates too much gas--shouldbe pale, colorless, and not soil any bright metal placed in it; if the flame isin the slightest degree yellow it will do this, and then the gas should bepartly turned off--on the contrary, if there is not enough gas, the flame willbe extinguished. When lighted, the pumice becomes red-hot and throws out agreat heat; when used in boiling, the vessel should be supported a shortdistance over the flame by a trivet; if it is made to rest on the top of thering, and is sufficiently large to close it entirely, the current is stoppedand the flame extinguished, whilst the unburned gas still escapes below. Thiscontrivance is most useful; it is lighted in an instant, is perfectly free fromsmoke, no unburned gas escapes, it throws out great heat, and may be employedto heat bright tools with much more convenience than a charcoal fire.The objections to its use are, that in burning it produces, as all gas does, aquantity of carbonic acid gas, deteriorating the air, and that the flame cannotbe very much enlarged or diminished, so that if fires of different power arerequired, two or more of the contrivances must be put in order. Otherwise, theinstantaneous action, small cost, great heating power, and cleanliness of theplan, strongly recommend it. In summer weather, in many small families, it canbe made to dispense altogether with the use of a fire. By a little variation,the whole contrivance may be made to stand on the table, like Fig. 2; in this and other cases, vulcanizedIndia-rubber will be found to form by far the best kind of flexible tube, beingquite impervious, very durable, and excessively pliant. Those who wish to trythe experiment of heating on this plan, may readily do so by covering the topof the glass chimney of any common burner with a piece of wire gauze, foldingit over the sides; the gas may then be turned on, and lighted above the gauze,after it has mingled with the air in the chimney: a small burner, however, doesnot afford sufficient gas for the purpose, and there is consequently too muchair, and the flame is weak and liable to go out. We cannot conclude this chapter without entering our most earnest protestagainst all those injurious contrivances for burningcharcoal without a flue. The use of charcoal-braziers in a largekitchen is not to be recommended, but a charcoal stove in adwelling-room is most objectionable. Charcoal, in burning, producescarbonic acid gas, an invisible and therefore insidious poison, which is sodeadly in its effects, that if the air of a room contains but one-tenth of itsbulk, the breathing of it for any time is fatal. Every pound ofcharcoal, in burning, produces more than three pounds and a half of thisdeadly gas. In Paris, in the years 1834 and 1835, there were 360 cases resulting fromthe fumes of charcoal, of which more than 260 were fatal. In order totest the effects of these stoves, Mr. Coathupe, of Wraxall, shut himself up ina close room containing eighty cubic yards of air, with one of them in action.In four hours he was seized with giddiness, which, in an hour's time, becamemost intense; he then had the desire to vomit, but not the power; this wasfollowed by an utter loss of strength, throbbing at the temples, and agonizingheadache, but no sense of suffocation; finding that the experiment was becomingdangerous, he essayed to open the window, but had the greatest difficulty in sodoing; and when his wife came into the room, he was found in a speechlessstate, in which he remained for some time. In a fatal case, which happened in St. John'sWood, where two girls were killed by the use of these stoves, it was found,that the quantity of carbonic acid produced was capable of rendering poisonousthe air of a room ten times the size of the one in which it was used. Men who,knowing the poisonous effects of these stoves, still sell them, recommendingthem as wholesome, with the deliberate assertion that their prepared fuel,which is merely charcoal disguised, is not deleterious, evince a muchmore lively interest in the state of their own pockets, than in the lives oftheir customers. Let it not be imagined that the case of Mr. Coathupe is but a solitary one;the action of burning charcoal is of the same deleterious nature on allpersons. In January 1836, seventy people suffered the same symptoms, though ina milder degree, in the church at Downham, in Norfolk, England, where two ofthese dangerous contrivances had been introduced: and in the Annales d'Hygéine, tom. xi., will be found anaccount of the suicides in the department of the Seine in ten years; these were4595 in number, of which 1426 deaths were produced by burning charcoal.We would again recommend our readers under no circumstances, however much theymay be recommended by false assertions, to admit stoves without flues intotheir houses. CHAPTER XIX. CLEANING ANDDISINFECTING. WE have elsewhere given directions as to the best mode of cleaning variousarticles, such as bottles, glass, &c. What remains, therefore, under thishead, is to furnish hints for cleaning miscellaneous articles, which have notbeen included under previous accounts; and the very important process ofdisinfecting, which may be regarded as a medical cleaning, falls, naturally,into the same chapter. As the substances to be submitted to the process ofcleaning vary greatly from one another, we shall find it more convenient tothrow our remarks into the form of miscellaneous hints, than to arrange them ina chapter for consecutive reading. Iron-work which is exposed to wet, rusts rapidly; itis usually preserved from the action of moisture either by covering it with twoor three coatings of paint, as is customary in large out-door works, or bybrushing it over with a varnish termed Brunswick black; this plan is usuallyfollowed in the case of smaller substances used in-doors. A very superior planfor protecting small iron goods from the injurious action of wet, is to heatthem a little below redness, and whilst hot to brush them over with commonlinseed oil, which is decomposed by the heat, and forms a thin, very firmcoating of varnish, which is quite impervious to water, and unlike paint orJapan-black, does not chip off. It is evident that this plan can only beadopted in few cases, but where it is available we very strongly recommendit. Floor Boarding and other wood work is exceedinglyapt to be stained by various substances split upon it. Ink stains, forinstance, are extremely obstinate; they withstand washing many times, and atlast turn to a rusty iron color, from the application of the alkali of thesoap. But the black stain of recent ink and the rusty iron-mould may be removedby the action of oxalic or muriatic acid. As wood is not likely to be injuredlike cloth or linen, the latter may be used, being the cheaper, and it shouldbe diluted with two or three times its bulk of water, and applied until thestain is removed. Grease which has been trodden in, or has remained a long time, should be first softened by the application ofa little turpentine, and then it will be found to yield much more readily thanit otherwise would to the action of fuller's earth and pearlash or soda. Fruitstains are quickly removed by the action of a little chloride of lime, mixedwith water, and applied until the desired effect is produced. It should beborne in mind that all vegetable colors are utterly destroyed beyond anyrestoration, by the energetic action of this agent. Paint, when soiled, is readily cleaned by soap andwater; soda and pearlash are frequently employed, but they act by removing aportion of the paint, and if not thoroughly washed off with clean waterafterwards, they will be found to soften the whole. Caustic alkalies, such asthe solution for washing on the new plan, will rapidly dissolve paint, and aretherefore inapplicable for cleaning; they may, however, be usefully employed inremoving paint from wood, where such an operation is requisite. Plate may be cleaned by rouge, or if this is notreadily obtained, by washed whiting; this is readily made by stirring somewhiting up with water, then allowing the larger particles and the grit tosubside, and pouring off the water charged with the finer powder, which isallowed to settle, and dried for use. When plate is very much stained, it maybe cleaned with putty powder, but this preparation would soon wear away thesilver if used frequently or unnecessarily. It may be mentioned, that thissubstance is not made from putty, as its name might seem to imply, but is arust or oxide of tin, obtained by heating the metal. Japanned Goods, such as tea-boards, should not haveboiling water poured upon them, but should be washed with warm water, andpolished with a piece of wash-leather and fine flour. Knives --The common wooden knife-board wears out theknives very rapidly, it is therefore much better to employ a piece ofbuff-leather to cover the board; for very superior cutlery emery powder shouldbe used instead of Bath-brick. Whatever the material of the board, it will berapidly spoiled by cleaning the backs of knives upon the edge of the board; toprevent this evil, a small piece of leather should be fixed on one end to cleanthe backs upon. Steel Forks are readily cleaned by having a pot ofdamp moss or hay, with some sand intermixed, into which they may be repeatedlythrust. If knives or forks get an unpleasant taint which cannot be removedreadily, they may be plunged into the mould of the garden, which has muchabsorptive power, and rapidly removes such odors. Bedsteads may be freed from vermin by brushing themover in the cracks with a mixture formed of one ounce of corrosive sublimate,dissolved in half a pint of oil of turpentine, and the same quantity of anyspirit, such as strong gin or whiskey; this effectually prevents theirharboring. But when first applied, it has a disagreeable odor from theturpentine, and great care must be taken with it, as it is excessivelypoisonous. It has been found that the presence of the odor of creosote haseffectually driven away these enemies to our nocturnal peace. On the whole,constant and unremitting cleanliness, and the employment of iron bedsteads,which are now manufactured of the most elegant forms, are the best means ofgetting rid of these pests. We pass on to the important operations of disinfecting. Various means havebeen proposed of lessening or utterly destroying the infectious emanations thatproceed from persons in certain diseases, and which frequently have the powerof attaching themselves with greater or less tenacity to articles of wearing apparel, furniture, &c. Generally speaking, agood system of ventilation is sufficient to prevent infection. When rooms areproperly aired, a disease can seldom be caught more than a few feet from thepatient; or even in the case of those most infectious disorders, scarlet-fever,and small-pox, it seldom spreads more than a few yards; but if the air of aroom is confined, the infection is concentrated, and becomes much more certainin its action. Downy and fibrous materials readily receive infection; it may, in fact, inmany instances, be folded up in them, and so retained almost any length oftime; but if they are throroughly exposed to a free current of air, it isdissipated in a short time. It should be mentioned, that infectious diseasesare more readily received in certain states of the body; thus, fear, timidity,mental anxiety, and such states of mind, by lowering the general tone of thesystem, render it much more liable to contract infectious or contagiousdiseases; a state of exhaustion from bodily fatigue, or from hunger, has thesame tendency. Infection is also more readily received through the lungs thanthrough the skin; therefore, it is important never to receive the breath of apatient, and, as a sailor would say, always to keep to the windward side ofhim. Amongst the domestic disinfectants, vinegar has a great reputation, butundeservedly so; its only action is to overpower, by its odor, the smell of asick room--as a destroyer of the peculiar influences that engender disease, ithas no power. Burning substances act in the same manner. Burnt brown paper,fumigating pastiles, tobacco, only act by substituting one smell for another.The ridiculous practice of carrying about a piece of camphor is very common,and is perfectly inefficacious. If it has any action at all, it must be aninjurious one; for camphor is a stimulant, and its constant inhalation musttend to lower the system, and so produce the very evil it is supposed toremedy. The best means of preventing infection, are ventilation and cleanliness inevery particular. The best means of destroying it are those powerful chemicalagents which have the power of uniting with the hydrogen which is supposed toform part of the infectious substances. The most powerful, easily controlled, and in every sense the bestdisinfectant, is chlorine gas. This agent at once destroys every trace ofinfection in all substances submitted to its action. Its formation is perfectlyunder control, and goes on in a gentle manner for days together, withoutrequiring care or attendance. We consider that the slow liberation of chlorineis far superior to the employment of chloride of lime, which gives forth thegas in a modified form. In one case of a school where scarlet-fever had returned after severalattempts at purification, chlorine effected the complete removal of every traceof the disease. Various modes of liberating chlorine are known to chemists;but, for such purposes as the present, where a slow, uniform, and constantaction is required, there are none equal to the following plan:--One pound ofcommon table-salt is to be intimately mixed by stirring with an equal weight ofa substance called manganese, which may be readily obtained from any goodchemist. Small portions of this mixture should be placed in shallow pans (thesaucers of common flower-pots answer the purpose); and upon them should bepoured a mixture of oil of vitriol (sulphuric acid) and water, the quantityrequired for the above weights, viz., for one pound of each ingredient, beingtwo pounds of oil of vitriol and one of water, both by weight. These shouldhave been previously mixed in a wooden vessel, being stirred by a wooden lath,and allowed to become cool before being poured on the salt and manganese, as the mixing of the acid and water generates greatheat. Too much care cannot be taken with the acid, as it is excessivelycorrosive in its nature, and destroys most substances with which it comes incontact. When these materials are all mixed, chlorine is slowly evolved for aperiod of three or four days, and in so gentle a manner that not the slightestirritating or unpleasant effect is produced. If it is wished to cause the morerapid production of gas, the saucer may be placed over a basin of boilingwater, or upon a hot brick; but the slow generation for a considerablelength of time is what should be more especially aimed at. It is needless tosay, that all substances supposed to have been contaminated, should be spreadout so as to receive the influence of the gas; the bed-linen, and all woollengarments, being exposed by being spread out on chairs, lines, &c.; thedrawers and cupboards opened; and while the disinfecting is in actualoperation, the windows and doors should be kept shut, to prevent thedissipation of the chlorine. It is found that two ounces of manganese, with aproportionate quantity of the other materials, is sufficient for a room twentyfeet wide, forty feet long, and twelve feet high, whichcontains 20X40X12=9600 cubic feet. It may be mentioned, that breathing chlorine in this highly diluted state,is not injurious to the general health; although, in a concentrated form, orunless very much diluted with air, it is irritating in the highest degree. Inthe very dilute state, it is occasionally prescribed for the inhalation ofconsumptive patients. For the satisfaction of those who rely on the authority of a great name, itmay be stated, that chlorine used in the manner here recommended, was employedby one of the most illustrious of English chemists, in the case of thePenitentiary, when a violent and fatal disease broke out there, and withcomplete success. The operator in this case was FARADAY. It may occasionally be found more convenient to use another mixture for theliberation of chlorine gas, in which case the following may be employed:--Onepart of manganese is to be drenched with four parts by weight of muriaticacid (spirits of salts), mixed with one part of water. Thegas is evolved slowly in the cold, and rapidly if assisted by a gentle heat.This process is rather more expensive, and possesses no advantage over the onepreviously described. CHAPTER XX. FERMENTING ANDDISTILLING. IN ordinary language, the term fermentation is employed to signify thepeculiar changes which take place when a solution of sugar, or any vegetablesubstance containing saccharine matter, is converted into spirit--this,however, is only one of many of such kinds of action, which are well known tochemists. The most important fermentations are the saccharine fermentation,when sugar is formed by a change taking place in starch; the vinous, whenspirit is formed from sugar; and the acetous, in which vinegar or acetic acidis formed from spirit. The saccharine fermentation, or the formation of sugar from starch, isinteresting, though it does not influence such operations as are included inour Domestic Manipulations. If starch is dissolved in water, a little wheatflour added and the whole exposed to a moderately warm temperature, it will befound that after a few days, varying in number with the degree of warmth, thestarch has disappeared, and the liquid has become sweet from the formation ofsugar. The same change takes place with much greater rapidity if starch is boiled with a solution of malt, whichcontains an active principle called diastase, capable of bringing about thisfermentation in a short time. The formation of sugar from starch is anoperation which constantly occurs in all growing seeds, the effect being tochange an insoluble substance, such as starch, into one which is capable ofbeing dissolved in the juices of the young plant, and nourishing it during theearly stages of its growth. In the operation of malting barley, the change isinduced artificially, for the purpose of producing sugar in the malt, which isafterwards made to undergo the second kind of fermentation, namely, the vinous,or that in which spirit is produced. When sugar, either that which naturally exists, in many plants, or as formedfrom starch as just mentioned, is dissolved in water, so as to form amoderately weak solution, and the whole exposed to a degree of warmth varyingfrom seventy to eighty degrees, it rapidly undergoes a remarkable change,provided a small quantity of any vegetable ferment is present--such as yeast,or the juice of the grape, or of many other fruits. The sugar whollydisappears, and is resolved into two substances--one a gas, termed carbonicacid, which escapes, giving rise to a slow effervescence; and the other, aportion of spirit, which remains in the liquid. This kind of fermentation ismuch more difficult to prevent than to establish; in making syrups, it is foundespecially annoying; for if the quantity of sugar used is too small, the syrupis certain to ferment and spoil; and if to much is added, it crystallizes outin the solid form; as a general rule, however, it is found that two parts, byweight, of sugar, to one part, by weight, of water, or other liquid--such asthe juice of fruits, made into a syrup by boiling for a short time--neitherferments nor crystallizes. In the act of fermentation the spirit produced by the process last describedis changed into acetic acid, or vinegar. Here, also, the presence of somesubstance capable of commencing the fermentation is requisite, for pure spiritand water will not undergo the change. The ferment employed may be thevinegar-plant--or it may be a little vinegar, which may have been previouslyformed. For the rapid progress of the acetous fermentation, a high temperature isrequisite--even as great as about eighty-six degrees--and free exposure to airis essential. The best vinegar is that made from weak wine, at Orleans; theplan followed is to introduce a portion of vinegar into the vessels, adding thewine at intervals, and never quite emptying them. In this country, a weak beeris brewed, without hops, for the purpose of making vinegar, and a smallquantity of dilute oil of vitriol is added, after the vinegar is formed, todestroy the mouldiness that is otherwise apt to be present. Vinegar may beformed from any weak spirituous liquid; but it should be borne in mind that twocircumstances are essential to success--namely, a high summer temperature,either natural or artificial, and free exposure to air. The process of distillation is one which is used for separating liquids fromeach other that boil at different degrees of heat. In domestic economy, it ismost frequently employed to obtain spirit, more or less flavored, or scented,with some volatile essential oil. The apparatus commonly used is the Still, forboiling the liquid to generate the vapor, and a long spirally twisted tubetermed the worm, which is placed in a tub of cold water, and through which thesteam passes to be condensed. The worm is the most objectionable part of themodern still; its great evil is the difficulty with which it is cleaned, so asto prevent one strong-flavored substance spoiling those which are distilled afterwards. If the coils of the worm are not verynumerous, a bullet, with a string attached, may be passed through it, and asponge or small bottle-brush, fastened to the string, may be worked backwardsand forwards; but if there are several coils, it will be found impossible to dothis, from the resistance caused by friction. In this case, the only plan is toclose one end of the worm with a cork, and fill it with a solution of causticalkali, allowing it to remain for some hours, and repeating the applicationwith fresh liquid, if it be required. Fig. 1 An illustration of a still. In Germany, the worm is being superseded by an excellent condenser, which isso superior that we are induced to give a sketch of it, hoping that it maylead to its adoption in this country. The vapors from the still passinto the tube A (Fig 1), by which they are conducted into B,a hollow globe, made to unscrew at its centre. The vapors, passing along thetubes C, are condensed, and the distilled liquid drops from D. The pipe Eshould convey a constant stream of cold water to the bottom of the tub,and this, rising as it is warmed by abstracting heat from the tubes and globe,should escape by F. All the tubes being straight, it is obvious that they canbe readily cleaned from their ends. In the laboratory, distilling is most frequently performed with vesselstermed retorts, or even from flasks; but as these are not very applicable todomestic purposes, we pass them over. In domestic practice, the still is usually employed to obtain somewater or spirit flavored with essential oil, or theoil itself, and the process should be slightly modified so as to suiteach case. The vegetable substance should not be placed on the bottom of thestill itself, as in that case it might become burnt, and so give an unpleasantflavor to the whole; but a bottom of wicker-work should be placed in the stillin the first instance for it to rest upon, or a perforated board. The substanceto be distilled should be placed in the still, covered with water, forsome hours before the fire is lighted; no more water being added thansufficient to cover it, if the preparation of oil is the object. Herbs, for distilling, should be collected on a dry day, and--unlessthe oil resides in the seeds, as in the case of caraway,anise, &c., or in the flowers, as in the rose, lavender,&c.--just before the flowers have opened, as at that period there is thegreatest quantity of essential oil in the plant. All plants cultivatedfor distillation, should be grown in a situation where they can receive a fullamount of sun-light, as shade or darkness very much tends to prevent theformation of essential oil. The liquid which comes out of the worm, is a mixture of water highlyflavored with the substance, and some undissolved oil--this latter issometimes heavier and sometimes lighter than water, either sinking orfloating; in the latter case the oil may be readily separated by fillinga bottle with the mixture, and when the oil has collected at the top,carrying it off by a few threads of cotton placed as in the figure (Fig. 2) Fig. 2 An illustration of a bottle with liquid in it and cotton threadscoming out of it to form a syphon. taking care that they aremoistened with oil before arranging them; the cotton acts as a syphon,and removes the whole of the oil. If the object of the operation is toobtain the oil and not the distilled water, the latter should bepreserved, and used again and again with fresh herbs, because having inthe first operation dissolved as much oil as it is capable of doing, itcauses no loss in the subsequent distillations. CHAPTER XXI. LAYING OUT TABLESAND FOLDING NAPKINS. THE art of laying out a table, whether for breakfast, luncheon, dinner, teaor supper, consists in arranging the various dishes, plate, glass, &c.,methodically, and adhering to the rules we are about to make known. Much trouble, irregularity, and confusion will be avoided in a house whenthere is company, if servants are instructed to prepare the table, sideboard,or dinner-wagon, in a similar manner and order daily. All tables are usually laid out according to the following rules, yet thereare local peculiarities which will necessarily present themselves, and shouldbe adopted or rejected, as may appear proper to the good housewife:-- BREAKFASTS.--The table should be covered with a clean white cloth; the cupsand saucers arranged at one end, on a tray if desirable; or the coffee-cups andsaucers may be arranged at the right-hand side of one end of the table, and thetea-cups and saucers at the left: the tea-pot and coffee-pot occupying thespace between in front, and the urn that at the back. Some persons substitutecocoa or chocolate for coffee, in which case they are to be placed the same.The slop-basin and milk-pitcher should be placed to the left; and the cream,and hot milk-pitchers, with the sugar basin, to the right. The remainder of the table should be occupied in the centre by the variousdishes to be partaken of; while at the sides must be ranged a large plate formeat, eggs, &c., and a small one for toast, rolls, &c., with a smallknife and fork for each person; the carving knife and fork being placed pointto handle; the butter and bread knives to the right of their respective dishes,which occupy the centre part, and spoons in front of the hot dishes with gravy.Salt-cellars should occupy the four corners, and, if required, the cruetsshould be placed in the centre of the table. Dry toast should never be prepared longer than five minutes before serving,as it becomes tough, and the buttered, soppy and greasy, if too long prepared.Hot rolls should be brought to table covered with a napkin. Every dish should be garnished appropriately, either with sippets,ornamental butter, water-cresses, parsley, or some one of the garnishes weshall point out in a future page. The dishes usually set upon the table are selected from hot, cold, and curedmeats; hot, cold, cured, and potted fish; game; poultry, cold or devilled;fruit, ripe, preserved, or candied; dressed and undressed vegetables; meat-piesand patties, cold; eggs; honey-comb; and savory morsels--as grilled kidneys,ham-toast, devils, &c. Déjeuners à la fourchette are laid thesame as suppers, except that tea and coffee are introduced; but in sportingcircles not until the solids are removed. When laid for a marriage or christening breakfast, a bride's or christeningcake should occupy the centre instead of theépergne or plateau. LUNCHEONS, OR NOONINGS.--The luncheon is laid in two ways; one way is tobring in a butler's tray with let-down sides, on which it is previouslyarranged upon a tray cloth, and letting down the sides and spreading the clothupon the dining table, to distribute the things as required. The other is tolay the cloth as for dinner with the pickle-stand and cruets opposite eachother; and, if in season, a small vase of flowers in the centre; if not, awater-pitcher and tumblers, which may be placed on a side-table at other times.The sides of the table are occupied by the requisites for each guest, viz., twoplates, a large and small fork and knives, and dessert-spoon. A folded napkin,and the bread under, is placed upon the plate of each guest. Carafes, with the tumblers belonging to and placed over them, are laid atthe four corners, with the salt-cellars in front of them, between twotable-spoons laid bowl to handle. If French or light wines are served, they may be placed in the originalbottles in ornamental wine vases, between the top and bottom dishes and thevase of flowers, with the corks drawn and partially replaced. The dishes generally served for luncheons are the remains of cold meatneatly trimmed and garnished: cold game hashed or plain; hashes of alldescriptions; curries; minced meats; cold pies, savory, fruit, or plain;plainly cooked cutlets, steaks, and chops; omelettes; bacon; eggs; devils andgrilled bones; potatoes; sweetmeats; butter; cheese; salad and pickles. In factalmost anything does for lunch, whether of fish, flesh, fowl, pastry,vegetables, or fruit. Ale and porter are generally served, but occasionally sherry, marsalla,port, or home-made wines, are introduced, with biscuit and ripe fruit. A good housewife should always have something in the house ready to convertinto a neat little luncheon, in case a few friends drop in, and it isastonishing how a really nice looking affair may be made out of the remains ofthe dinner served the day before: some glass, a sprinkle of plate, a fewflowers, some good ale, or a little wine, and above all, a hearty welcome. NAPKINS.--Dinner napkins should be about twenty-eight inches broad, andthirty inches long. They may be folded in a variety of ways, which impart astyle to a table, without adding much to the expense, and may be readilyaccomplished with a little practice and attention to the following directionsand diagrams. 1.--THE MITRE.-- (Fig. 1.) Fold the napkin into three partslongways, then turn down the right-hand corner, and turn up the left-handone, as in Fig. 2, A and B. Turn back the point A towards the right, sothat it shall lie behind C; and B to the left, so as to be behind D. Double thenapkin back at the line E, then turn up F from before and G from behind, whenthey will appear as in Fig. 3. Bend the corner H towards the right,and tuck it behind I, and turn back the corner K towards the left, at thedotted line, and tuck it into a corresponding part at the back. Thebread is placed under the mitre, or in the centre at the top. 2.--THE EXQUISITE.-- (Fig. 4.) Fold the napkin into three partslong-ways, then fold down two-fifths of the length from each side, as inFig. 5, at A; roll up the part B towards the back, repeat on the otherside, then turn up the corner towards the corner A, and it will appear asD. The centre part E is now to be turned up at thebottom, and down at the top, and the two rolls brought under the centre piece,as in Fig. 4. The bread is placed under the centre band, K,Fig. 4. 3.--THE COLLEGIAN.-- (Fig. 6.) Fold the napkin into three partslong-ways, then turn down the two sides towards you, so that they shall appearas in Fig. 7; then roll up the part A underneath until it looks like B,Fig. 8. Now take the corner B and turn it up towards C, so that theedge of the rolled part shall be even with the central line; repeat the same onthe other side, and turn the whole over, when it will appear as in Fig.6. The bread is placed underneath the part K. 4.--THE CINDERELLA.-- (Fig. 9.) Fold the napkin into three partslong-ways, then turn down the two sides as in Fig. 7; turn the napkinover, and roll up the lower part as in Fig. 10, A, B. Now turn thecorner B upwards towards C, so that it shall appear as in D; repeat on theother side, and then bring the two parts E together so that they shall bend atthe dotted line; and the appearance will now be as Fig. 9. Thebread is placed under the apron part, K, Fig. 9. 5.--THE FLIRT.-- (Fig. 11.) Fold the napkin into three partslong-ways, then fold across the breadth, commencing at one extremity, andcontinuing to fold from and to yourself in folds about two inches broad, untilthe whole is done; then place in a tumbler, and it will appear as in theillustration. 6.--THE NEAPOLITAN.-- (Fig. 12.) Fold the napkin into three partslong-ways, then fold one of the upper parts upon itself from you; turn over thecloth with the part having four folds from you, and fold down the two sides soas to appear as in Fig. 7; then roll up the part A underneath,until it appears as in the dotted lines in Fig. 13, at B. Now turn up the corner Btowards C, so that the edge of the rolled part shall be even with the centralline: repeat the same upon the opposite side, and turn the whole over, when itwill appear as in Fig. 12: the bread being placedunderneath the part K, as represented in the illustration. 7.--THE "FAVORITE," OR OUR OWN. (Fig. 14.) Fold the napkin into three partslong-ways, then turn down the two edges as in Fig. 7, and roll up the part A on both sides,until as represented on the right-hand side in Fig. 14; then turn it backwards (as A B) onboth sides; now fold down the point C towards you, turn over the napkin, andfold the two other parts from you so that they shall appear as in Fig. 15. Turn the napkin over, thus folded,and raising the centre part with the two thumbs, draw the two ends (A and B)together, and pull out the parts (C and D) until they appear as in Fig. 14. The bread is to be placed asrepresented in K, Fig. 14. DINNERS. Dinners. --The appearance a dinner-table presentsdoes not depend so much upon a profuseness of viands, as upon the neatness,cleanliness, and well-studied arrangement of the whole. Taste, if welldirected, may produce a handsome dinner; whereas three times the amount ofmoney may be expended upon another, and yet not make even a respectableappearance. We cannot too strongly urge the necessity of having things done in the samemanner every day as when there is company. The servants become accustomed fig. 1 An illustration of a dinner napkin folded into a shape called TheMitre. fig. 2 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into TheMitre. fig. 3 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into TheMitre. fig. 4 An illustration of a dinner napkin folded into a shape called TheExquisite. fig. 5 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into TheExquisite. fig. 6 An illustration of a dinner napkin folded into a shape called TheCollegian. fig. 7 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into TheCollegian. fig. 8 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into TheCollegian. fig. 9 An illustration of a dinner napkin folded into a shape called TheCinderella. fig. 10 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into TheCinderella. fig. 11 An illustration of a dinner napkin folded into a shape called TheFlirt. fig. 12 An illustration of a dinner napkin folded into a shape called TheNeapolitan. fig. 13 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into TheNeapolitan. fig. 14 An illustration of a dinner napkin folded into a shape called The"Favorite" or Our Own. fig. 15 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into the shape ofThe "Favorite or Our Own. fig. 16 An illustration of a dinner napkin being folded into the shape ofThe "Favorite or Our Own. to waiting properly, things arealways at hand, and they do not appear awkward when visitors drop in; thenevery thing is regular, and goes on smoothly. An illustration of a dinner bell. To Lay the Cloth. --The table should be wellpolished, and then covered with a cloth, over which a fine white damaskone should be spread. If the white cloth is to be kept on after dinner,it is customary to spread a small cloth at either end of the table where thelarge dishes are placed, to protect the long cloth from accidental spotsarising from gravy, &c.; these slips are removed after dinner, andthe cloth cleaned with crumb-brushes. In some houses an entire upper cloth isplaced upon the table instead of slips, and this being removed after dinner,does not require the tedious process of brushing the table-cloth. When the cloth has been spread, place carafes, with the tumblers belongingto and placed over them, between every four persons, a salt-cellarbetween every third person, and a large and small knife, fork, and spoon, toeach guest, with two wine-glasses, a champagne-glass, and a tumbler, tothe right of each, and the bread placed in or under folded napkinsbetween the knives, forks, and spoons; and at large entertainments or publicdinners, the name of each guest neatly written on a card in front of thenapkin, so as to prevent confusion. The centre ornament, usually a candelabrum, plateau, an épergne, or a vase of artificial flowers,must now be set on, and the mats for the various dishes arranged; then thewine-coolers or ornamental vases placed between the centre piece and thetop and bottom dishes, with the wines in the original bottles, loosely corked;the spoons for helping the various dishes, asparagus tongs, fishknife and fork or slice, and carving knives and forks, are placed in front ofthe respective dishes to which they belong; and knife-rests opposite to thosewho have to carve; with a bill of fare, and a pile of soup-plates before thosethat have to help the soup. In arranging or laying out a table, several thingsrequire particular attention, and especially the following:-- Plate should be well cleaned, and have a brightpolish; few things look worse than to see a greasy-looking épergne andstreaky spoons. Glass should be well rubbed with a wash-leather,dipped in a solution of fine whiting and stone-blue, and then dried;afterwards it should be polished with an old silk handkerchief. Plates and dishes should be hot, otherwise the guests will bedisgusted by seeing flakes of fat floating about in the gravy. Bread should be cut in pieces about an inchthick, and each round of a loaf into six parts, or if for a dinner party,dinner rolls should be ordered. The bread is placed under the napkins,or on the left of each guest, if dinner napkins are not used;some of the bread being placed in a bread-tray covered with acrochet cloth upon the sideboard. Lights, either at or after the dinner, shouldbe subdued, and above the guests, if possible, so as to be shed upon the table,without intercepting the view. Sauces, either bottle, sweet, or boat-- vegetables, and sliced cucumber, or glazed onions for stubble goose, should beplaced upon the sideboard; a plate basket for removing the soiled plates isusually placed under the sideboard, or some other convenient part of the room;and two knife-trays, covered with napkins, are placedupon a butler's tray; these are used for removing soiled carvers and forks, andthe soiled silver. It is useful to have a large-sized brad-awl, a cork-screw,and funnel, with strainer; the former to break the wire of the champagnebottles, and the latter to strain port wine, if required to be openedduring dinner. To lay out the sideboard or tray. --Little requiresto be done, except to arrange the silver, knives, cruets, and various dishes tobe placed there. The silver should be arranged on one end of the sideboard, asin Figs. 1 and 2, the gravy spoons beingplaced bowl to handle, and the cheese-scoop, marrow-spoon, and saladspoons or scissors, where most convenient. The knives are placed as in Fig. 3, for the convenience of removal,because by this means a single knife can be abstracted without disturbing theothers; carving knives and forks should be placed above the others, point tohandle. The wine-glasses, tumblers, and finger-glasses, for dessert, areplaced where most convenient, but usually in the centre of the back, withice-plates near to them, and the wine-glasses placed in thefinger-glasses, as in Fig. 4; but when only one glass is used, thatis placed in the centre, mouth downwards. At very large or fashionable dinners,the finger-glasses are sometimes placed on the dinner-table with the plain andcolored wine-glasses in them, and the same, refilled, are placed onagain at dessert. The cruets, sauces, &c., are placed at one end, and thevegetables, &c., in the centre front of the side-board. Figs. 1 & 2. An illustration of three spoons and three forks with their handlespointed to the right. Figs. 3 & 4. An illustration of four knives, handles downward and twowineglasses inside a finger glass. To place the dishes on the table. --Each servantshould be provided, at large dinders, with a bill of fare, and instructed atsmall ones, where the dishes are to be placed. No two dishes resembling eachother should be near the same part of the table. Soups or broth should always be placed at thehead of the table; if there are two, top and bottom; if four, top,bottom, and two sides, opposite each other, or alternately with fish. Fish should be placed at the head ofthe table; if there are two sorts, have fried at the bottom and boiled at thetop; if four, arrange the same as the soup. We may observe, that a whiteand a brown, or a mild and a high-seasoned soup, should occupy either side ofthe centre piece, and that it looks handsomer to have fried and boiledfish opposite each other, but they should never be placed upon the samedish. Fish is generally served upon a napkin, the corners of whichare either turned in or thrown over the fish, or upon a piece of simplenetting, which is turned in all round; but we recommend our readers to use theelegant serviette, as being more stylish. The first course generally consists of soups andfish, which are removed by the roasts, stews, &c., of the secondcourse. The second course, when there are three, consists ofroasts and stews for the top and bottom; turkey or fowls,ham garnished, tongue, or fricandeau, for the sides; with smallmade dishes for corners, served in covered dishes, as curries,ragoûts, fricassees, stews, &c. When there are two roasts, one should be white, and the other brown.Removes are generally placed upon large dishes, for, as they supply the placeof the fish and soups, they constitute the principal part of the dinner.What are termed flancs are not so large as the removes, nor so smallas the entrées, or made dishes, and are generallyserved in a differently formed dish. They are seldom used except when there areeighteen or twenty persons. Entrées, or made dishes, require great carein placing them upon the table, otherwise the gravy slops over and soilsthe dish; they are, therefore, usually served with a wall of mashedpotatoes, rice, or other vegetables, to keep them in their properplace. They should also be served as hot as possible. When there is but one principal dish, it should be placed at the headof the table. If three dishes, the principal to the head, and the othersopposite each other, near the bottom; if four, the largest to the head,the next size to the foot, and the other two at the sides; if five,place the same as for four, with the smallest in the centre; if six, place thesame as for four, with two small dishes on each side; if seven, put threedishes down the centre of the table, and two on each side; if eight, fourdishes down the middle, and two on each side, at equal distances; if nine,place them in three equal lines, but with the proper dishes at the top andbottom of the table; if ten, put four down the centre, one at each corner,and one on each side, opposite the vacancy between the two central dishes; orfour down the middle and three on each side, opposite the vacancies of thecentre dishes; if twelve, place them in three rows of four each, or six downthe middle, and three at equal distances on each side. If more than twelve,they must be arranged on the same principles, but varying according tonumber. Oval or circular dining-tables require to have the dishes arranged in ashape corresponding to the table. The third course consists of game, delicatevegetables, dressed in the French style, then puddings, creams, jellies,&c. When there are only two courses, the first generallyconsists of soups and fish, removed by boiled poultry, ham,tongue, stews, roasts, ragoûts, curries, or made dishes generally,with vegetables. The second consists of roasted poultry or game at thetop and bottom, with dressed vegetables, maccaroni, &c., succeededby jellies, creams, preserved fruit, pastry and generalconfectionery. It is generally contrived to give as great a variety as possiblein these dinners: thus--a jelly, a cream, a compôte, anornamental cake, a dish of preserved fruit, fritters, a blanc-mange, apudding, &c. Salads and celery are usually served before the puddings and pastryare introduced. In Great Britain, after the third course, cheese,ornamented butter, salad, radishes, celery in a glass bowlor on a dish, sliced cucumber (and at small parties,marrow-bones), are served. A marrow-spoon, cheese-scoop, andbutter-knife, being required upon the table, are to be placed near thedishes, a knife and fork near the celery, and a pair of salad-scissorsor a fork and spoon in the bowl with the salad. The cheese may be served in a glass bowl, and handed round from rightto left; or surrounded with the elegant serviette, and placed upon thecheese-cloth. The bread may be served as usual, piled up on a crochetcloth in a plated bread-basket placed in the centre. Waiting at Table. --Much confusion is avoided byhaving an attendant upon each side of the table; or, if the party is large,more than one, according to the number. The usual number required for partiesis given below; and if the income admit of it, the scale may be increasedaccording to the second column, which will materially add to the comfort of theguests. Guests. Servants. 6............ 1 2 12........... 2 3 15........... 3 4 20........... 4 6 30........... 6 8 40........... 9 12 50.......... 12 20 &c. Every attendant should be neatly attired, have a white neckcloth andwhite gloves on, should know where all the articles required are, wherethe dishes are to be placed, and, in fact, be acquainted with the whole routineof the party; and therefore it is better to provide each one with a bill offare. When every guest is seated, a servant appointed for that purpose shouldstand by the side of each dish, with the right hand upon the cover; and as soonas grace is said, the cover is to be removed, and placed in some convenientpart of the room. The plates for soup should then be taken singly from the pileopposite the person serving it, and carried to those guests who desire thatparticular soup, observing that ladies are to be attended to before gentlemen,and that these should commence from the head of the table, continuinguntil both sides are helped. Soon after the soup has been served, the servants may pass down each side ofthe table, and ask each guest what they will take, helping them to the dishdesired as soon as it can be procured. When champagne is given, it ishanded round upon a waiter or salver at small parties, commencing at theright-hand side of the table from the top and bottom simultaneously, withoutany distinction as regards ladies or gentlemen. In large parties--and we preferthe arrangement ourselves even in small ones--the bottle being enveloped as faras the neck with a clean dinner-napkin, the wine is helped in thesame order as before; but instead of being handed round on a salver, theservants pour the wine into the glass, at the right-hand side of eachguest. By these means there is less danger of the glasses being broken by anyawkward collision. The champagne is generally iced in summer, and coolin winter, and is served as soon as the soup is finished, or just after theguests have been helped to the second course of removes. Liqueurs are handed round when sweets are on the table. Sauces are handedround in the sauce-boat, and when served, placed on the side-board ordinner-wagon; if only a family party, they are An illustration of five knives with the blades pointingdown. returned to the table. Sweetsauces are handed round in glass dishes, and bottle sauces in a stand orbasket made for that purpose. In removing the dinner things, one servant goesround the table with a butler's tray, and the other removes and places thethings upon it. The cloth is then brushed with a crumb-brush; or the two sidesare turned in, and then the cloth dexterously jerked off the table, thelights replaced, and the dessert set on. When knives, forks, and spoons are removed from dishes or plates, theyshould be placed in proper trays covered with napkins; one being used for thesilver, the other for the steel articles. When plates or dishes are removed from the table, great care is to beobserved with respect to holding them horizontally, otherwise the gravy,syrup, or liquid, may injure the dresses of the guests. In some circles, the fashion prevails of placing finger-glasses on tableimmediately preceding dessert; but in others, cut-glass bowls, partially filledwith rose or orange flower water, iced in summer and lukewarm in winter,are handed down each side of the table, upon salvers; into these the guest dipsthe corner of the dinner napkin, and just touches the lips and the tips ofthe fingers. DESSERTS, TEAS, AND SUPPERS. THE DESSERT.--The dessert may consist of merely two dishes of fruitfor the top and bottom; dried fruits, biscuits, filberts,&c., for the sides and corners; and a cake for the centre. When the party is large, and ices are served, the ice-plates are placedround the table, the ice-pails at both ends of the table, and dishes withwafer-biscuits, at the sides. Some persons have the ices served in glassdishes, which, together with the wafer biscuits, are handed round beforethe usual dessert. When there is preserved ginger, it follows the ices, as it serves tostimulate the palate, so that the delicious coolness of the wines may be betterappreciated. The side and corner dishes usually put on for dessert, consistof:--Compôtes in glass dishes; frosted fruit served onlace-paper, in small glass dishes; preserved and dried fruits, inglass dishes; biscuits, plain and fancy; fresh fruit, served indishes surrounded with leaves or moss; olives, wafer biscuits,brandy-scrolls, &c. The centre dish may consist either of a savoy or an ornamental cake, on anelevated stand--a group of waxen fruit, surrounded with moss--amelon--a pine apple--grapes--or a vase of flowers. Each plate should contain a knife, fork, and spoon, with twowine-glasses, arranged upon a d'oyley, as in Fig. 5. These are tobe placed before each guest, and a finger-glass, with cold water insummer, and luke-warm water in winter, on the right of each plate; withgrape-scissors, and melon knife and fork, before their respectivedishes. Glass bowls containing sifted sugar, with pierced ladles, orothers filled with cream, are to be placed near the centre dish, if theyare required. A cut glass pitcher with a tumbler on either side should be Fig. 5. An illustration of a plate with a doyley in the middle of it withset of silverware and two wineglasses setting on top of it. placed in a convenient part ofthe centre of the table. The wine, either cooled or not, should be placed at both ends of thetable, or at the bottom, if only a small party, the decanters being placed incastors, though this fashion is now nearly abolished. Zests are put down after the dessert is removed, and consist chiefly ofanchovy toasts, devilled poultry and game, and biscuits,gravy toast, grills, &c. Coffee is the last thing served, and is generally handed round upon asalver; after this, the gentlemen withdraw to the drawing-room. Tea. --After a dinner party, the tea isgenerally handed round by two servants, the one having tea andcoffee, with hot milk, cream, and sugar upon onetray; the other having thinly cut and rolled bread and butter,biscuits and cake, upon another tray. If served at an evening party or dance, a servant helps the guests totea or coffee, which is arranged upon a side-table in a smallroom. The tea and coffee occupy the two ends of the table, oneither side of the urn, which is placed in the centre and back. In front of theurn are ranged the sugar-candy for coffee, sugar, hotmilk, cream, bread and butter, cake, andbiscuits. Tea, when only for a small party, may be brought in upon a tray, thetea and coffee-pots occupying the centre of the tray; the cups andsaucers the front; and the hot milk, cream, slop-basin, andsugar, the ends. The urn is placed at the back of the tray; and thebread and butter, cut or not, with cake, biscuits,muffins, crumpets, or toast, at the sides. Suppers. --The great secret of laying out a supperconsists in arranging the china, glass, silver, linen, lights,confectionery, substantials, trifles, flowers, and other articles, with a dueregard to form, color, size, and material. A supper table should neither be too much crowded, nor too scanty, norscattered and broken up with small dishes. Two dishes of the same descriptionshould not be placed near each other: dishes should not be heaped up as if fora ploughman's repast, but contain sufficient to make them look well, withoutbeing over or under-done as regards quantity. Hot suppers are now seldom served; for people dine later than they didformerly; and besides being more expensive than cold ones, they also give moretrouble. The centre of the table is generally occupied by an épergne, vase offlowers, globe of fish upon an elevated stand, a plateau, or smallfountain; around which are arranged:--Dried, preserved, frosted, or candiedfruits; custards, jellies, and trifles, in glasses; and smallbiscuits. The top and bottom of the table are furnished withgame, fowls, or meat; the sides have dishes of hamsliced; tongue; collared, potted, hung, and grated beef; brawn,mock or real; savory pies; lobsters; oysters; dressedcrab or cray-fish; prawn pyramids; sandwiches ofham, beef, tongue, anchovy, or other savorymorsels; tarts, tartlets; cake, biscuits; whipped and other creams;jellies, blanc-mange; caramel baskets; patties, &c. CHAPTER XXII. TRUSSING ANDCARVING. Poultry. --The feathers must be plucked as soon aspossible after killing--and the down singed off with lighted paper, the cropemptied by a slit cut in the back of the neck, the vent opened to clean out theentrails, the gall-bag carefully removed, and the liver and gizzard cleansed incold water. The necks are to be cut off close to the body, the skin beingpushed up above the part where it is cut, andafterwards drawn down and wrapped over the end of the neck. Before fastening itdown, pour cold water through the body of the fowl. The back-bone and two bonesleading to the pinions may be broken, and then the bird is to be trussed. Carving. --The carving-knife for poultry and game issmaller and lighter than that for meat; the point is more peaked, and thehandle longer. In cutting up wild-fowl, duck, goose, or turkey, more prime pieces may beobtained by carving slices from pinion to pinion without making wings, which isa material advantage in distributing the bird when the party is large. To Truss a Goose. --Pick and stub it clean,cut the feet off at the joint, and the pinion off at the first joint.Then cut off the neck close to the back, leaving the skin of theneck long enough to turn over the back. Pull out the throat, and tie aknot at the end. Loosen the liver and other matters at the breastend with the middle finger, and cut it open between the vent and therump. Draw out the entrails, wipe the body out clean with a cloth, beatthe breast-bone flat with a rolling pin, put a skewer into thewing, and draw the legs up close; put the skewer through themiddle of the leg, and through the body, and the same on the other side.Put another skewer in the small of the leg, tuck it close down to thesidesman, run it through, and do the same on the other side. Cut off the end ofthe vent, and make a hole large enough for the passage of the rump, asby that means it will keep in the seasoning much better. The best partsare the breast slices; the fleshy part of the wing, which may bedivided from the pinion; the thigh-bone, which may be easily divided inthe joint from the leg-bone; the pinion; and next, theside-bones. The rump is a nice piece to those who like it; andthe carcass is preferred by some to other parts. To Truss a Turkey. --When the bird ispicked carefully, break the leg bone close to the foot, hang on ahook, and draw out the strings from the thigh; cut the neck closeoff to the back, taking care to leave the crop-skin long enough to turnover the back. Remove the crop, and loosen the liver and gut atthe throat end with the middle finger. Cut off the vent, remove the gut,pull out the gizzard with a crooked wire, and the liver will soonfollow; but be careful not to break the gall. Wipe the inside perfectlyclean with a wet cloth, then cut the breast-bone through on each sideclose to the back, and draw the legs close to the crop, then put a clothon the breast, and beat the thigh bone down with a rolling-pintill it lies flat. If the turkey is to be trussed for boiling, cut the first joint of the legs off;pass the middle finger into the inside, raise the skin of thelegs and put them under the apron of the bird. Put a skewer into thejoint of the wing and the middle joint of the leg, and run itthrough the body and the other leg and wing. The liver andgizzard must be put in the pinions, care being taken to open andpreviously remove the contents of the latter; the gall bladder must alsobe detached from the liver. Then turn the small end of the pinion on theback, and tie a packthread over the ends of the legs to keep them intheir places. If the turkey is to be roasted, leave the legs on, put a skewer inthe joint of the wing, tuck the legs close up, and put the skewerthrough the middle of the legs and body; on the other side put anotherskewer in at the small part of the leg. Put it close on the outside ofthe sidesman, and push the skewer through, and the same on the other side. Putthe liver and gizzard between the pinions, and turn the point of the pinion on the back. Then put,close above the pinions, another skewer through the body of the bird. To Truss Fowls. --Fowls must bepicked very clean, and the neck cut off close to the back. Take out thecrop, and, with the middle finger, loosen the liver and other parts. Cutoff the vent, draw it clean, and beat the breast-bone flat with arolling pin. If the fowl is to be boiled, cut off the nails of the feet, andtuck them down close to the legs. Put your finger into the inside, andraise the skin of the legs; then cut a hole in the top of theskin, and put the legs under. Put a skewer in the first joint ofthe pinion, and bring the middle of the leg close to it; put a skewerthrough the middle of the leg, and through the body, and then do thesame on the other side. Open the gizzard, remove the contents, and washit well; remove the gall-bladder from the liver. Put thegizzard and the liver in the pinions, turn the points on theback, and tie a string over the tops of the legs, to keep them in theirproper places. If the fowl is to be roasted, put a skewer in the first joint of thepinion, and bring the middle of the leg close to it. Put the skewerthrough the middle of the leg, and through the body, and do the same onthe other side. Put another skewer in the small of the leg, and throughthe sidesman; do the same on the other side, and then put another through theskin of the feet, which should have the nails cut off. The prime parts of a fowl, whether roasted or boiled, are thewings, breast and merry-thought; and next to these, theneck-bones and side-bones; the legs are rather coarse--ofa boiled fowl, however, the legs are rather more tender than aroasted one; of the leg of a fowl the thigh is the better part,and therefore when given to any one should be separated from thedrum-stick, which is done by passing the knife underneath, in thehollow, and turning the thigh-bone back from the leg-bone. To Truss Chickens. --Pick and draw them inthe same manner as you would fowls; but, as their skins are verytender, plunge them into scalding water, and remove, when the featherswill come off readily. If they are to be boiled, cut off the nails, notch the sinews on eachside of the joint, put the feet in at the vent, and then peel therump. Draw the skin tight over the legs, put a skewer inthe first joint of the pinion, and bring the middle of the legs close.Put the skewer through the middle of the legs, and through the body; anddo the same on the other side. Clean the gizzard, and remove thegall from the liver; put them into the pinions, and turn thepoints on the back. If for roasting, cut off the feet, put a skewer inthe first joint of the pinions, and bring the middle of the legs close.Run the skewer through the middle of the legs and body, and do the sameon the other side. Put another skewer into the sidesman, put the legsbetween the apron and the sidesman, and run the skewer through. Having cleanedthe liver and gizzard, put them under the pinions, turn thepoints on the back, and pull the breast-skin over the neck. To Truss Pheasants. --Pick them clean, cuta slit at the back of the neck, take out the crop, loosen theliver, and gut the breast with the fore-finger; then cutoff the vent, and draw them. Cut off the pinion at the first joint, and wipeout the inside with the pinion. Beat the breast-bone flat with arolling-pin, put a skewer in the pinion, and bring the middle of thelegs close. Then run the skewer through the legs, body, and theother pinion, twist the head, and put it on the end of the skewer, with the bill fronting thebreast. Put another skewer into the sidesman, and put the legsclose on each side of the apron, and then run the skewer through all. If youwish the cock-pheasant to look well, leave the beautiful feathers on thehead, and cover with paper to protect them from the fire. Savethe long feathers from the tail; and when cooked, stick them into therump before sending to table. If the pheasants are for boiling, put the legs in the same manner asin trussing a fowl. To Truss Pigeons. --Pick clean, take offthe neck close to the back; then remove the crop, cut off the vent, anddraw out the entrails and gizzard, but leave the liver, as apigeon has no gall-bladder. If for roasting, cut off the toes, cut a slit in one of thelegs, and put the other through it. Draw the leg tight to thepinion, put a skewer through the pinion, legs, and body, and with thehandle of the knife break the breast flat. Clean the gizzard, andput it under one of the pinions, and turn the points on the back. If for boiling or stewing, cut the feet off at the joint, turnthe legs, and stick them in the sides, close to the pinions. If for a pie, they must be done in the same manner. To Truss Wild Fowl. --Pick clean, cut offthe neck close to the back, and, with the middle finger, loosen theliver and other parts. Cut off the pinions at the first joint; then cuta slit between the vent and the rump, and draw them clean. Clean themproperly with the long feathers on the wing, cut off the nails, and turnthe feet close to the legs. Put a skewer in the pinion, pull thelegs close to the breast, and run the skewer through thelegs, body, and the other pinion. Cut off the end of the vent, and putthe rump through it. All kinds of wild-fowl are to be trussed thus: To Truss Woodcock, Plover and Snipe. --Ifthese birds are not very fresh, great care must be taken in picking them, asthey are very tender to pick at any time; for even the heat of the hand willsometimes take off the skin, which will destroy the beauty of the bird.When picked clean, cut the pinions in the first joint, and with the handle of aknife beat the breast-bone flat. Turn the legs close to thethighs, and tie them together at the joints. Put the thighs closeto the pinions, put a skewer into the pinions, and run it through thethighs, body, and other pinions. Skin the head, turn it,take out the eyes, and put the head on the point of the skewer, with thebill close to the breast. These birds must never be drawn. An illustration of dressed and trussed wild fowl. To Truss small Birds. --Pick well, cut offtheir heads, and the pinions of the first joint. Beat thebreast-bone flat, and turn the feet close to the legs, andput one into the other. Draw out the gizzard, and run a skewer throughthe middle of the bodies. Tie the skewer fast to the spit when you put themdown to roast. To Truss Hare or Rabbit. -- A hare or rabbit should be paunched, or cleaned, as soon as it is killed. Theinside should be kept dry and peppered. When trussed, the sinews of thehind-legs must be cut, and the legs turned towards thehead and fastened to the sides. The fore-legs must be turned tomeet the hind-legs, and fastened, with slight skewers to the body. Thehead is thrown back and kept in place by a skewer passed through it. Thestuffing is put in, and the skin sewed up. A string fastens allcompactly together. The ears of a rabbit are to be cut off when roastedor boiled. CARVING. Ladies ought especially to make carving a study; at their own houses, theygrace the table, and should be enabled to perform the task allotted to themwith sufficient skill to prevent remark or the calling forth of eager proffersof assistance from good-natured visitors near, who probably would not presentany better claim to a neat performance. Carving presents no difficulties; it requires simply knowledge. All displayof exertion or violence are in very bad taste; for, if not an evidence of thewant of ability on the part of the carver, they present a very strong testimonyof the toughness of a joint or the more than full age of a bird: in both casesthey should be avoided. A good knife of moderate size, sufficient length ofhandle, and very sharp, is requisite; for a lady it should be light, andsmaller than that used by gentlemen. Fowls are very easily carved, and joints,such as loins, breasts, fore-quarters, &c. The butcher should have strictinjunctions to separate the joints well. The dish upon which the article to be carved is placed should beconveniently near to the carver, so that he has full control over it; for iffar off nothing can prevent an ungraceful appearance, nor a difficulty inperforming that which in its proper place could be achieved with ease. In serving fish, some nicety and care must be exercised; here lightness ofhand and dexterity of management is necessary, and can only be acquired bypractice. The flakes which, in such fish as salmon and cod are large, shouldnot be broken in serving, for the beauty of the fish is then destroyed, and theappetite for it injured. In addition to the skill in the use of the knife,there is also required another description of knowledge, and that is anacquaintance with the best parts of the joint, fowl, or fish being carved.Thus, in a haunch of venison, the fat, which is a favorite, must be served witheach slice; in the shoulder of mutton there are some delicate cuts in the underpart. The breast and wings are the best parts of a fowl, the trail of awoodcock on a toast is the choicest part of the bird. In fish a part of theroe, melt, or liver should accompany the piece of fish served; the list,however, is too numerous to mention here; and, indeed, the knowledge can onlybe acquired by experience. In large establishments the gross dishes are carvedat the buffet by the butler, but in general they are placed upon the table. Fish is served with a fish-slice, orthe new fish-knife and fork, and requires very little carving, carebeing required, however, not to break the flakes, which, from their size, addmuch to the beauty of cod and salmon. Serve part of theroe, melt, or liver, to each person. The heads of carp,part of those of cod and salmon, sounds of cod, and finsof turbot, are likewise considered delicacies. Should be deprived of thehead and tail by passing the slice across in the direction of lines 1and 2; they should then be divided down the back, so as to assist each personto a slice; but if less is required, the thicker end should be given, as it ismore esteemed. If the roe is asked for, it will be found between 1 and2. Mackerel An illustration of two mackerel laying side by side on aplatter. Barbel, Carp, Haddock, Herring, Perch,Whiting, &c., should be helped the same as Mackerel; remembering that the head of theCarp is esteemed a delicacy. Cod's Head and Shoulders. An illustration of cod's head on a plate. Pass the fish-slice or knife from 1 to 6 down to the bone;then help pieces from between 1-2, and 3-4, and with each slice give a piece ofthe sound, which lies under the back-bone, and is procured by passingthe knife in the direction 4-5. There are many delicate parts about thehead, particularly the oyster, which is the cheek, below the eye;and a great deal of the jelly kind, which lies about the jaws. Thetongue aud palate are considered delicacies, and are obtained by passingthe slice or a spoon into the mouth. Salmon. An illustration of a salmon with head and tailremoved. Give a portion of the back and belly to each person, or as desired. If awhole salmon is served, remember that the choice parts are next thehead, the thin part is the next best, and the tail the least esteemed.Make an incision along the back, 9 to 10, and another from 1 to 2, and 3 to 4;cut the thickest part, between 5-6, 10-2, for the lean; and 7-8 for thefat. When the fish is very thick, do not help too near thebone, as the flavor and color are not so good. Although carving with ease and elegance is a very necessary accomplishment,yet most people are lamentably deficient not only in the art of dissectingwinged game and poultry, but also in the important point of knowing theparts most generally esteemed. Practice only can make good carvers; but thedirections here given, with accompanying plates, will enable any one todisjoint a fowl, and avoid the awkwardness of disfiguring a joint. In the first place, whatever is to be carved should be set in a dishsufficiently large for turning it if necessary; but the dish itself should notbe moved from its position, which should be so close before the carver as onlyto leave room for the plates. The carving-knife should be light, sharp,well-tempered, and of a size proportioned to the joint, strength being lessrequired than address in the manner of using it. Large solid joints, such asham, fillet of veal, and salt beef, cannot be cut toothin; but mutton, roast pork, and the other joints ofveal, should never be served in very slender slices. A Round (buttock) or Aitch-bone of Beef. --Pare off from theupper part, of either, a slice from the whole surface, of about half an inchthick, and put it aside; then cut thin slices of both lean and fat, inthe direction from a to b. The soft fat, which resembles marrow, liesat the back of the aitch-bone, below c, but the firm fat must be cut in slender horizontalslices at a, and is much better than the soft when eatencold. Aitch-bone of Beef. An illustration of a beef roast. Ribs of Beef. --Cut along the whole lengthof the bone, from end to end, a to b, either commencing in the centre or at one side,having the thin end towards you; but if cut from the bone and formedinto a round, with the fat end doubled into the centre, it must then becut in the same manner as the round of beef. Brisket of Beef. An illustration of a piece of beef on a plate. Brisket of Beef must be carved in thedirection 1 and 2, quite down to the bone, after cutting off theoutside, which should be about three-quarters of an inch thick. Sirloin of Beef. --Cut in the same manneras the ribs, commencing either at the centre or the side, as from a to b. The under part should be cut across thebone, as at c for the lean, and d for the rich fat; many persons prefer theunder to the upper part, the meat being more tender. Sirloin of Beef. An illustration of piece of meat laying on its side. Fillet of Veal. --Carve it in the samemanner as the round of beef; but the upper slice should be cut somewhatthinner, as most persons like a little of the brown, and a portion of it shouldbe served along with each slice, together with a slice of the fat andstuffing, which is skewered within the flap. Fillet of Veal. An illustration of a piece of meat with two skewers poking out ofthe right side. Neck of Veal. --Cut across the ribs,as at a to b: the small bones, as at c to d, being cut off, divided, and served separately,for it is not only a tedious, but a vulgar operation to attempt to disjoint theribs. Neck of Veal. An illustration of a piece of meat with bones protruding from thebottom. Loin of Veal. --The joint is placed in thedish in the same manner as a sirloin of beef, but should be turned up,and the whole of the kidney and fat cut out; the fat beingusually put upon a dry toast and served as marrow. Theloin is then returned to its former position, and the meat shouldbe cut across the ribs as in the neck, serving it with a slice ofkidney. Knuckle of Veal. An illustration of a piece of meat on a platter. Knuckle of Veal is to be carved in thedirection 1-2. The most delicate fat lies about the part 4, and if cutin the line 3-4, the two bones, between which the marrowy fatlies, will be divided. Breast of Veal, being very gristly, is not easily divided into pieces. In order, therefore, toavoid this difficulty, put your knife at a about four inches from the edge of the thickestpart (which is called "the brisket"), and cut through it to b, to separate it from the long ribs: cut the short bones across, as at d, d, d, and the long ones as at c, c, c; ask which is chosen, and help accordingly.The remaining scrag part is seldom served at table, but forms an excellent stewwhen dressed in the French mode. Breast of Veal. An illustration of a piece of meat. Shoulder of Veal. --Cut in the same manneras a shoulder of mutton, beginning on the under side. Calf's Head. --Cut slices from a to b in the figure, which describes only half thehead, letting the knife go close to the bone. Many like the eyeat c, which you must cut out with the point of yourknife, and divide in two, along with some of the glutinous bits which surroundit. If the jaw-bone be taken off, there will be found some fine lean,and under the head is the palate, which is reckoned a delicacy. Calf's Head. An illustration of a calf's head on a platter. The tongue and brains are dished separately, but served insmall portions along with the head. Leg of Mutton. --The best part of a legof mutton, whether boiled or roasted, is midway between the knuckle and thebroad end. Begin to help there from the roundest and thickest part, by cuttingslices, not too thin, from b down to c. This part is the most juicy; but many prefer theknuckle, which, in fine mutton, will be very tender, though dry. Thereare very fine slices in the back of the leg; therefore, if the party belarge, turn it up and cut the broad end; not across in the direction you didthe other side, but longwise, from the thick end to theknuckle-bone. To cut out the cramp-bone, which some persons lookupon as a delicacy, pass your knife under in the direction of e, and it will be found between that and d. Leg of Mutton. An illustration of a skinned leg of mutton. Shoulder of Mutton, though commonly lookedupon as a very homely joint, is by many preferred to the leg, as thereis much variety of flavor, as well as texture, in both the upper and underparts. The figure represents it laid in the dish as always served, with its back uppermost. Cut through it from a down to the blade-bone at b; afterwards slice it along each side of theblade-bone from c Shoulder of Mutton. An illustration of a skinned mutton shoulder. c b. The prime part of the fat lies on theouter edge, and is to be cut in thin slices in the direction of d. The under part, as here represented, contains manyfavorite pieces of different sorts, as, crosswise, in slices, near theshank-bone at b; and, lengthwise, in broad pieces, at the furtherend a; as well as in the middle and sides in the mannerdesignated at c and d. An illustration of mutton shoulder turned upsidedown. Should it be intended to reserve a portion of the joint to be eaten cold,all this undermost part should be first cut away and served separately, both asit eats better hot than cold, and as the upper remaining part will appear moresightly in the table. Loin of Mutton. --Cut the joints into chopsand serve them separately; or cut slices the whole length of the loin;or run the knife along the chine-bone, and then slice it, the fatand lean together, as shown in the cut of the saddle, in the next column. Neck of Mutton. --It should be prepared fortable as follows:--Cut off the scrag; have the chine-bone carefully sawnoff, and also the top of the long bones (about an inch and a half,) andthe thin part turned under; carve in the direction of the bones. The scrag of mutton, when roasted, is veryfrequently separated from the ribs of the neck, and in that casethe meat and bones may be helped together. Saddle of Mutton. --Cut in long and ratherthin slices from the tail to the end, beginning at each side close to theback-bone, from a to b, with slices of fat from c to d; or along the bone which divides the twoloins, so as to loosen from it the whole of the meat from that sidewhich you then cut crosswise, thus giving with each slice both fat andlean. The tail end is usually divided and partly turned up. Some butchers alsoskewer the kidneys across the incision, but it is not usual at genteeltables, and the incision is better omitted. Saddle of Mutton. An Illustration of a piece of mutton. Fore-Quarter of Lamb. An illustration of a piece of lamb turned upright. Haunch of Venison. An illustration of a piece of venison turnedupright. Haunch of Mutton. --A haunch is theleg and part of the loin, and is cut in the same manner as ahaunch of venison. Fore-Quarter of Lamb. --Pass the knifeunder the shoulder in the direction of a, c, b, d, so as to separate it from theribs without cutting the meat too much off the bones. ASeville orange or lemon should then be divided, the halves sprinkledwith salt and pepper, and the juice squeezed over theunder part. A little cold or melted butter is then put between bothparts, after which the shoulder is placed in a separate dish to be helped bysome other person. Divide the ribs from d to e, and then serve the neck f, and breast g, as may be chosen. Haunch of Venison. --Have the jointlengthwise before you, the knuckle being the farthest point. Cut from a to b, but be careful not to let out the gravy;then cut along the whole length from a down to d. The knife should slope in making the first cut,and then the whole of the gravy will be received in the well. Thegreater part of the fat, which is the favorite portion, will be found atthe left side, and care must be taken to serve some with each slice. Neck of Venison. --Cut across theribs diagonally; or it may be cut in slices the whole length of theneck. The first method is equally good, and much more economical. Leg of Pork. An illustration of a leg of pork. A leg of Pork, whether boiled or roasted,is carved the same. Commence about midway, between the knuckle and the thickend, and cut thin deep slices from either side of the line 1 to 2. Pork. --In helping the roast loin andleg, your knife must follow the direction of the scores cut by the cookupon the skin which forms the crackling, as it is too crisp for beingconveniently divided, and cannot therefore be cut across the bones ofthe ribs, as in loin of mutton. The scores upon the roastedleg are, however, always marked too broadly for single cuts; thecrackling must therefore be lifted up from the back to allow of thin slicesbeing cut from the meat; the seasoning is under the skinat the larger end. Ham. An illustration of a ham wrapped in decorativepackaging. Ham. --Serve it with the back upwards,sometimes ornamented, and generally having, as in France, the shank-bonecovered with cut paper. Begin in the middle by cutting long and verythin slices from a to b, continuing down to the thick fat at thebroad end. The first slice should be wedge-shaped, that all the others may becut slanting, which gives a handsome appearance to them. Many persons, however,prefer the hock at d as having more flavor; it is then carvedlengthwise from c to d. A Tongue. An illustration of a tongue laying on a platter. A Tongue should be cut across, nearly through the middle, at the line 1, and thin slicestaken from each side; a portion of the fat, which is situated at theroot of the tongue, being helped with each. Roast Pig. An illustration of a pig split at the breast and laying flat on aplatter. Sucking-pig. --The cook usually divides thebody before it is sent to table--as thus--and garnishes the dish with the jawsand ears. Separate a shoulder from one side, and then the leg, according to thedirection given by the line along the carcass. The ribs are then to bedivided; and an ear or jaw presented with them, and plenty ofsauce and stuffing. The joints may either be divided into twoeach, or pieces may be cut from them. The ribs are reckoned the finestpart; but some people prefer the neck end, between the shoulders. Rabbit. An illustration of a rabbit trussed for cooking. Rabbits. --Put the point of the knife underthe shoulder at b, and so cut all the way down to the rump,along the sides of the backbone, in the limb b, a, cutting it in moderately thick slices; or,after removing the shoulders and legs, cut the back crosswise in four orfive pieces; but this can only be done when the rabbit is very young, orwhen it is boned. To separate the legs and shoulders, put the knifebetween the leg and back, and give it a little turn inwards at thejoint, which you must endeavor to hit, and not to break by force. The shouldersmay be removed by a circular cut around them. The back is the most delicatepart, and next to that the thighs. A portion of the stuffingshould be served with each slice. The brains and ears ofsucking-pig and rabbit are also considered epicurean titbits,which must not be neglected; wherefore, when every one is helped, cut off thehead, put your knife between the upper and lower jaw and divide them,which will enable you to lay the upper flat on your plate; then put the pointof the knife into the centre, and cut the head into two. Boiled Rabbit. An illustration of a cooked, trussed rabbit laying on itsstomach. Boiled Rabbits. --The legs andshoulders should be first taken off, and then the back cut across into twoparts, which is easily done by a bend of the knife in the joint underneath,about the middle of the back. The back is the best, and some of theliver should always accompany it. The carving of both WINGED GAME and POULTRY requires more delicacy ofhand and nicety in hitting the joints than the cutting of large pieces ofmeat, and, to be neatly done, requires considerable practice. Roast Turkey. An illustration of a dressed turkey with skewers through the wingsand legs. Roast Turkey. --Cut long slices from each side of the breast down to theribs, beginning at a b from the wing to the breastbone. Thenturn the turkey upon the side nearest you, and cut off the legand wing; when the knife is passed between the limbs and the body, andpressed outward, the joint will be easily perceived. Then turn theturkey on the other side, and cut off the leg and wing.Separate the drumsticks from the leg bones, and the pinions from thewings; it is hardly possible to mistake the joint. Cut thestuffing in thin slices, length-wise. Take off the neck-bones,which are two triangular bones on each side of the breast; thisis done by passing the knife from the back under the blade part of eachneck-bone, until it reaches the end: by raising the knife the otherbranch will easily crack off. Separate the carcass from the back by passing theknife lengthwise from the neck downward. Turn the back upwards and laythe edge of the knife across the backbone about midway between the legsand wings; at the same moment, place the fork within the lower part ofthe turkey, and lift it up; this will make the back-bone crack atthe knife. The croup, or lower part of the back, being cut off, put it on theplate with the rump from you, and split off the side-bones byforcing the knife through from the rump to the other end. The choicest parts of a turkey are the side-bones, thebreast and the thigh-bones. The breast and wingsare called light meat; the thigh-bones and side-bones darkmeat. When a person declines expressing a preference, it is polite tohelp to both kinds. Boiled Turkey. An illustration of a dressed turkey with perforations in itsbreast, a skewer through its wings and legs tucked inside. Boiled Turkey is carved in the same way asthe roast, the only difference being in the trussing; the legs in theboiled being, as here shown, drawn into the body, and in the roastskewered. Roast Fowl. --Slip the knife between theleg and body, and cut to the bone; then with the fork turn theleg back, and the joint will give way if the bird is not old. Take thewing off in the direction of a to b, only dividing the joint with your knife. When thefour quarters are thus removed, take off the merry-thought from c, and the neck bones; these last, by puttingin the knife at d, and pressing it, will break off from the partthat sticks to the breast. The next thing is to divide the breastfrom the carcass, by cutting through the tender ribs close to thebreast, quite down to the tail. Then lay the back upwards, put yourknife into the bone half way from the neck to the Roast Fowl. An illustration of a roasted fowl and a diagram on it indicatinghow it should be carved. Boiled Fowl, breast. An illustration of top of a boiled fowl. Boiled Fowl, back. An illustration of the bottom of a boiled fowl. An illustration of a fowl breast with a knife removing thewing. rump, and on raising thelower end it will separate readily. Turn the rump from you, take off thetwo sidesmen, and the whole will be done. To separate the thigh from thedrumstick of the leg insert the knife into the joint as above. Itrequires practice to hit the joint at the first trial. The breast andwings are considered the best parts. If the bird be a capon, or large, and roasted, the breast maybe cut into slices in the same way as a pheasant. The difference in the carving of boiled and roast fowls consists onlyin the breast of the latter being always served whole, and thethigh-bone being generally preferred to the wing. Roast Goose. An illustration of a roast goose laying breast up, hasperforations in the breast and a skewer through the wings. Geese. --Cut thin slices from thebreast at a to b; the wing is generally separated as inturkeys, but the leg is almost constantly reserved for broiling.Serve a little of the seasoning from the inside by cutting a circularslice in the apron at c. Pheasant. --Slip the knife between theleg and the breast: cut off a wing small from a to b; then slice the breast, and you will havetwo or three handsome cuts. Cut off the merry-thought by passing the knifeunder it towards the neck, and cut all the other parts as in afowl. The breast, wings, and merry-thought are the mostesteemed: but the thigh has a high flavor. Pheasant. An illustration of a pheasant dress with skewers through wings andlegs. Partridge. --It may be cut up in the samemanner as a fowl; but the bird being small, it is unusual to divide itinto more than three portions--the leg and wing being lefttogether, and the breast helped entire; the back, being only servedalong with some of the other parts. If the birds are very young, and the partynot over large, the whole body is not unfrequently only separated into twopieces, by one cut of the knife from head to tail. Patridge. An illustration of a partridge dressed wings skewered and the legscrossed over the breast and skewered. Quails. --Generally helped whole. Grouse, Snipe, and Woodcock. --Proceed as for partridge,except that the trail or entrails of the two latter is served up ontoast. As regards these different sorts of game, the thighof the pheasant and the woodcock is the best, and thebreast and wing of the partridge and grouse; but the mostepicurean morsel of all is the trail of the woodcock served up ontoast. Smaller birds should always be helped as they are roasted,whole. Wild-Duck, Widgeon, and most sorts of water-fowl. --Make two or three incisions, as long slices, into the breast, on which a glass of hot port- wine is poured; have ready a lemon cut in half, on one side covered with salt, and on the otherwith cayenne pepper. Put both together, then squeeze the juice over the breast; Pigeon, back. An illustration of a dressed pigeon breast up with legs tuckedinto the skin and wings skewered. Pigeon, breast. An illustration of a pigeon backside up with a skewer through itswings and legs tucked inside the skin. after which the slices and limbsmay be served round. Pigeons. --Cut them in half, through both backand breast; the lower part is generally thought the best. Fish requires very little carving; it should be carefully helped witha fish -slice, which, not being sharp, prevents the flakes from beingbroken, and in salmon and cod these are large and add much totheir beauty. NAMES OF THE VARIOUS JOINTS IN ANIMALS. 1.-- BEEF. An illustration of a steer with a diagram drawn on it indicatingthe different cuts of meat. Hind Quarter. 1.Sirloin. 2. Rump. 3.Aitch-Bone. 4. Buttock. 5.Mouse-Buttock. 6. Veiny Piece. 7. ThickFlank. 8. Thin Flank. 9. Leg. 10.Fore-ribs; 5 ribs. Fore Quarter. 11.Middle-rib; 4 ribs. 12. Chuck;3 ribs. 13. Shoulder, or Leg of MuttonPiece. 14. Brisket. 15.Clod. 16. Neck or Sticking Piece. 17. Shin. 18. Cheek. 2.-- Mutton or Lamb. An illustration of a sheep with a diagram drawn on it indicatingthe different cuts of meat. 1. Leg. 2. Loin, bestend. 3. Loin, chump end. 4. Neck, bestend. 5. Neck, scrag end. 6. Shoulder. 7. Breast. 8. Head. A Chine is twoNecks. A Saddle is two Loins. 3.-- Pork. An illustration of a pig with a diagram drawn on it indicating thedifferent cuts of meat. 1. The Spare-rib. 2. The Hand. 3.The Belly or Spring. 4. Fore-loin. 5. Hind-loin. 6.Leg. 7. Head. 4.-- Veal. An illustration of a calf with a diagram drawn on it indicatingthe different cuts of meat. 1. Loin, best end. 2. Loin, chumpend. 3. Fillet. 4. Hind-knuckle. 5.Fore-knuckle. 6. Neck, best end. 7. Neck, scrag end. 8.Blade-bone. 9. Breast, bestend. 10. Breast, Brisket end. 11. Head. 5.-- Venison. An illustration of a deer with a diagram drawn on it indicatingthe different cuts of meat. 1. Haunch. 2. Neck. 3.Shoulder. 4. Breast. CHAPTER XXIII. CULINARY UTENSILS. * THE various utensils used for the preparation and keeping of food are made *For the cuts in this chapter, and for the engravings ofhouse-keeping utensils throughout the book the Publishers are indebted to the courtesy of Messrs. J.&c. BERRIAN, whose establishment is at 601 Broadway, between Prince andHouston streets, New York. either of metal, glass, pottery ware, or wood; each of which is better suited to some particular purposes than the others. Metallic utensils are quite unfit for many uses, and the knowledge of this is necessary to the preservation of health in general, and sometimes to the prevention of immediate dangerous consequences. Waffle Iron to revolve over hole in Range or Stove. An illustration of a rectangular metal box housing four moulds and a lid. The metals commonly used in the construction of these vessels are silver,copper, brass, tin, iron, and lead. Silver is preferable to all others, becauseit cannot be dissolved by any of the substances used as food. Brimstone uniteswith silver, and forms a thin brittle crust over it that gives it theappearance of being tarnished. The discoloring of silver spoons used with eggsarises from the brimstone contained in eggs. Nitre or saltpetre has also aslight effect upon silver, but nitre and silver seldom remain long enoughtogether in domestic uses to require any particular caution. Egg Frier or Fancy Cake Baker. A metal pan with a handle.  The inside of the pan has a decorative design. Copper and brass are both liable to be dissolved by vinegar, acid fruits,and pearlash. Such solutions are highly poisonous, and great caution should beused to prevent accidents of the kind. Vessels made of these metals aregenerally tinned, that is, lined with a thin coating of a mixed metal,containing both tin and lead. Neither acids, nor any thing containing pearlash,should ever be suffered to remain above an hour in vessels of this kind, as thetinning is dissolvable by acids, and the coating is seldom perfect over thesurface of the copper or brass. Muffin Baker. An illustration of a pan made of seven round cups, four legs and a handle. The utensils made of what is called block tin are constructed of iron platescoated with tin. This is as liable to be dissolved as the tinning of copper orbrass vessels, but iron is not an unwholesome substance, if even a portion ofit should be dissolved and mixed in the food. Iron is therefore one of thesafest metals for the construction of culinary utensils; and the objection toits more extensive use only rests upon its liability to rust, so that itrequires more cleaning and soon decays. Some articles of food, such as quinces,orange-peel, artichokes, &c., are blackened by remaining in iron vessels,which therefore must not be used for them. Leaden vessels are very unwholesome, and should never be used for milk andcream if it be ever likely to stand till it become sour. They are unsafe alsofor the purpose of keeping salted meats. The best kind of pottery ware is oriental china, because the glazing is aperfect glass, which cannot be dissolved, and thewhole substance is so compact that liquid cannot penetrate it. Many of theEnglish pottery wares are badly glazed, and as the glazing is made principallyof lead, it is necessary to avoid putting vinegar and other acids into them.Acids and greasy substances penetrate into unglazed wares, excepting the strongstone ware; or into those of which the glazing is cracked, and hence give a badflavor to any thing they are used for afterwards. They are quite unfit,therefore, for keeping pickles or salted meats. Glass vessels are infinitelypreferable to any pottery ware but oriental china, and should be used wheneverthe occasion admits of it. Wooden vessels are very proper for keeping many articles of food, and shouldalways be preferred to those lined with lead. If any substance has fermented orbecome putrid in a wooden cask or tub, it is sure to taint the vessel so as toproduce a similar effect upon any thing that may be put into it in future. Itis useful to char the insides of these wooden vessels before they are used, byburning wooden shavings, so as to coat the insides with a crust ofcharcoal. As whatever contaminates food in any way must be sure, from the repetitionof its baneful effects, to injure the health, a due precaution with respect toall culinary vessels is necessary for its more certain preservation. There is akind of hollow iron ware lined with enamel, which is superior to every otherutensil for sauces or preserves; indeed it is preferable for every purpose. A kitchen should always be well furnished; there is no necessity that itshould be profusely so, but there should be a sufficiency of every thing whichcan aid in producing the dishes preparing, with the success which is soessential to the gratification of the palate. A good workman cannot work wellwith bad tools, neither can good cooks do justice to their proficiency, if theypossess not the necessary utensils suitable to the various modes of cooking.And when this important point has been realized, cleanliness in every article used should be scrupulouslyobserved; no utensil should be suffered to be put away dirty; it notonly injures the article itself materially, to say nothing of the improprietyof the habit, but prevents its readiness for use on any sudden occasion. No good cook or servant would be guilty of such an act;those who are do so either from laziness or want of system, or a naturenaturally dirty; if a very strong hint will not suffice, it is of little usespeaking out. A servant who is inherently dirty or slovenly, should never beretained; it is better and easier to change frequently until the mistress issuited, however unpleasant frequent changes may prove, than Quixoticallyattempt to cure a person of this description. Cleanliness is the most essentialingredient in the art of cooking, and at any personal sacrifice should bemaintained in the kitchen. The fixtures or fittings of a kitchen depend upon the builder, and in modernhouses sufficient attention is paid to the situations of the range, dresser,larder, &c., to embody convenience. An illustration of a large and small mix bowl both with the appropriate sized wire whisks inside the bowl. In furnishing a kitchen, there should be every thing likely to be required,but not one article more than is wanted. Unnecessary profusion creates alitter; and a deficiency too often sacrifices theperfection of a dish. The following articles, of which we give engravings, arerequisite. The Nursery Milk Warmer. An illustration of a pot inside of boiler halved to show how they function. This is a very useful apparatus, on the principle of the Bain Marie, orWater Bath. It consists of a block-tin saucepan to hold water, and a smaller one, withcover of the same material to fit within, but not to reach to the bottom of theexternal saucepan. This effectually prevents the common accident of burningwhat is intended to be boiled; for the reason that the heat cannot be increasedbeyond boiling or 212°; a represents the inner, and b the external saucepan; the cover seen at the topwill fit both saucepans. A Double Floored Griddle, the best iron Griddle in use. Very thick;therefore it gets hot or cold gradually, retains the heat longer, cooks better,and smokes less than ordinary griddles. Double FlooredGriddle. Beefsteak Maul. A long cyclindrical mallet with ridges on the working end. A Beefsteak Pounder for making beefsteak tender. Beefsteak Pounder. An illustration of wooden mallet. Wooden Moulds for moulding butter. Butter Moulds. An illustration of two blocks of wood with a design of a swan craved in them. For working butter into form, similar to Butter Hands, the Butter Board and Knife. An illustration of a square board with a butter knife laying across it. Biscuit Mould or Block. An illustration of a rectangular block of wood with six designs carved into it. The pastry is rolled into this and forms half the biscuit; others are madeand fastened together, either before or after being baked. Tea Bread Knife. An illustration of a large knife with a decorative side on the one side of the blade and a sharp edge on the other. For cutting bread; it can be regulated by screws at the ends to cut anythickness. Butter Pats. An illustration of two devices that resemble bells in there shape, but inside is carved a swan. A mould and stamp for butter by which you can have the full size of thestamp, and the butter any thickness. Apple Roaster. An illustration of a rectangular, metal box with a handle, long legs and an open side. Tin Apple Roasters are often made with a shelf, making two divisions,roasting double the quantity. Potato Masher. An illustration of a wooden mallet shaped like a bell with a long handle. Knife Washer. An illustration of a deep square metal box with handles and a metal grate on top. To wash Ivory, Pearl, or other handled knives thoroughly, without allowingthe greasy water to come in contact with and thereby soil or stain thehandles. Cheese Toaster. An illustration of a rectangular metal box with a lid and handle. Preserve Pan Enamelled. An illustration of a deep, oval pan with handles. Etna. An illustration of a glass-shaped,metal container with a lid and a handle sticking out of the side. It will boil a pint of water in three minutes. Biscuit,Cake, and Tartlet Cutters. An illustration of 4 different shaped biscuit cutters. Cake and Vegetable Cutters. An illustration of five cake and vegetable cutters shaped like a fleur de lis, swan, giraffe, seagull, and a flower. Sponge Cake Pans. An illustration of three shallow rectangular pans. Queen Cake, or Pound Cake Pans. An illustration of three pans shaped like a heart, circle and diamond. Jelly and Vegetable Moulds. An illustration of three small, round, decorative jelly moulds. Oblong and Round Jelly Moulds. An illustration of three large oblong and round jelly moulds. Jelly and Cake Moulds with Cylinder. An illustration of two jelly or cake moulds both round one with a cylinder. Sardine Opener. An illustration of a device with a handle on one end is a metal pincher used to open a can. Smoked Beef and Cabbage Cutter. An illustration of a rectangular box with no ends in the center of the box is a metal blade laying diagonally and parallel to the surface of the box. Champaigne Opener. An illustration of a sharp curly pointed knife with a decorative handle. Enamelled Porringer. An illustration of a cup with a handle on the very edge of it. Enamelled Saucepan. A deep, small pan with a lid and long handle. Bain Marie. An illustration of a deep, square pan with two round rings on opposite corners. Enamelled preserving Kettle. An illustration of a pail with a handle Oyster Knife, for Opening Roasted Oysters. An illustration of a short bladed knife with a round hilt and a handle longer than the blade. KnifeSharpeners. An illustration of two knife sharpeners one with round stones in a handle and the other with two long strips sticking out of it. Oyster Broiler, or Toast Gridiron. An illustration of two pieces of grill that have a handle and can be fastened shut. Corkscrews. An illustration of two different types of corkscrews one has a handle that allows you to pull the cork out once the corkscrew is screwed in the cork. Cucumber and VegetableSlicer. An illustration of a board with a handle and a metal blade laying parallel and at a diagnal angle in the board. Saucepan Digester. --The great importance of thedigester, not only to poor families, but to the public in general, in producinga larger quantity of wholesome and nourishing food, by a much cheaper methodthan has ever been hitherto obtained, is a matter of such serious andinteresting consideration, that it cannot be too earnestly recommended to thosewho make economy in the support of their families an object of their attention.The chief, and indeed the only thing necessary to be done, is to direct aproper mode of using it to advantage; and this mode is both simple and easy.Care must be taken in filling the digester, to leave room enough for the steamto pass off through the valve at the top of the cover. This may be done byfilling the digester only three parts full of water and bruisedbones or meat, which it is to be noticed are all to be put intogether. It must then be placed near a slow fire, so as only to simmer, andthis it must do for the space of eight or ten hours. After this has been done,the soup is to be strained through a hair sieve or cullender, in order toseparate any bits of bones. The soup is then to be put into the digesteragain, and after whatever vegetables, spices, &c., are thoughtnecessary are added, the whole is to be well boiled together for an hour ortwo, and it will then be fit for immediate use. Any thing that is to be warmed and sent to table a second time should be putinto a basin or jar, placed in hot water, which is not permitted to cometo the boiling point. If allowed to boil, the meat will harden, or thesauce will be reduced and become thick: by avoiding these chances theflavor will be preserved, and the viands may be warmed up more than oncewithout injury. The steam-apparatus now employed in most kitchens is admirablyadapted to this purpose, since the heat can be regulated to the requiredtemperature. A spacious movable screen, large enough to completely cover the fire, linedthroughout with tin, and having shelves for the warming of plates and dishes,should also be an appendage; and there should be an abundance of kitchenutensils of the best kind, kept in their proper places and strictly clean.Cleanliness is, indeed, of the first importance, and no kitchen-maid shouldever put away a metal saucepan which has been used for any other purpose thanmerely boiling pure water, without scalding it thoroughly and thendrying it. Every kitchen should be provided with a clock to keep the cook to her time;also with a large and a small marble mortar for the pounding of meat,with chopper, meat-saw, various-sized scoops for vegetables, whenrequired for haricos &c., paste-cutters, steak-tongs,&c., and those insignificant, though useful little articles,minute-glasses, to regulate the boiling of an egg; nor should aspice-box, containing whole pepper, mace, nutmegs,and cinnamon, be forgotten; together with various dried sweetherbs. Scales, with weights from 1/4 oz. to 2 lbs., should be placed on thedresser, and the weights carefully kept in regular order. A set of tin measureswith small spouts or lips, and with the contents distinctly marked upon them,from a gallon down to half a gill, will also be found very convenient. It islikewise well to have a set of wooden measures, from a bushel to a quarter of apeck. Let it be remembered, that, of liquid measure-- Two gills are half a pint. Two pints are one quart. Fourquarts are one gallon. Of dry measure-- Half a gallon is a quarter of a peck. One gallon ishalf a peck. Two gallons are one peck. Four gallons are half a bushel. Eightgallons are one bushel. About twenty-five drops of any thin liquid will fill acommon-sized teaspoon. A common tumbler holds half a pint. Four tablespoonfuls,or half a gill, will fill a common wine-glass. Four wine-glasseswill fill a half-pint or common tumbler, or a large coffee-cup. A quart blackbottle holds in reality about a pint and a half. Of flour,butter, sugar, and most articles used in cakes and pastry, aquart is generally about equal in quantity to a pound avoirdupois (sixteenounces). Avoirdupois is the weight designated throughout this book. Teneggs generally weigh one pound before they are broken. A tablespoonfulof salt or brown sugar is generally about one ounce. * Sieves, of various descriptions, are very essential. Every utensil forcookery should be of various sizes, so as to suit the quantity of which thedishes may be composed; and each should be kept in a fixed place, as well aswashed and dried immediately after using. The cook should also be charged totake care of jelly-bags, tapes for the collared things, &c., which, if notperfectly scalded and kept dry, give an unpleasant flavor when next used. *Mrs. Hale gives the following table, by which persons not having scales andweights at hand may readily measure the articles wanted to form any receipt,without the trouble of weighing. Allowance to be made for an extraordinarydryness or moisture of the article weighed or measured. WEIGHT AND MEASURE.Wheat flour. . . . . . . 1 pound is. . . . . . . . 1 quart. Indianmeal. . . . . . . 1 pound, 2 oz., is. . . . 1 quart. Butter, whensoft. . . . 1 pound is. . . . . . . . 1 quart. Loaf sugar broken. . . .1 pound is. . . . . . . . 1 quart. White sugar, powdered. . 1 pound, 1oz., is. . . . 1 quart. Best brown sugar . . . . 1 pound, 2 oz., is. . .. 1 quart. Eggs . . . . . . . . . . 10 eggs are . . . . . . . 1pound. Flour. . . . . . . . . . 8 quarts are. . . . . . . 1 peck.Flour. . . . . . . . . . 4 pecks are . . . . . . . 1 bushel. CHAPTER XXIV. LIEBIG, in his work on "The Chemistry of Food," says: "Among all the artsknown to man, there is none that enjoys a juster appreciation, and the productsof which are more universally admired, than that concerned in the preparationof our food. Led by an instinct which has almost reached the dignity ofconscious knowledge, and by the sense of taste which protects the health, theexperienced cook, with respect to the choice, admixture, and preparation offood, has made acquisitions surpassing all that chemical and physiologicalscience has done in regard to the doctrine or theory of nutrition." "I do not yet despair," says another writer, "of seeing the day when theculinary science, like others, will have its qualified professors." "The art ofcookery," another observes, "is the analeptic part of the art of physic." Dr.Mandeville says, "Physicians should be good cooks, at least in theory." Dr. Arbuthnot says--"The choice and measure of the materials of which ourbody is composed--of what we take daily by pounds, is, at least, of as muchimportance as what we take seldom and only by grains and spoonfuls. CountRumford remarks: "In what art or science could improvements be made that wouldmore powerfully contribute to increase the comforts and enjoyments ofmankind?" A quaint writer says truly: "The stomach is every man's master;" andArmstrong attributes to the good cook the useful knowledge: {quote} "How best the fickle fabric to support Of mortalman; in healthful body, how A healthful mind the longest to maintain." To prevent diseases is surely better than to cure them. The French enjoy ahappy equilibrium of spirits more constantly than any other nation; Dr.Kitchiner says, it is because "their elastic stomachs, unimpaired by spirituousliquors, digest vigorously the food they render easily assimilable by cookingit sufficiently; doing half the work of digestion by fire and water, till {quote} "The tender morsels on the palate melt, And all the force of cookery isfelt." The cardinal virtues of cookery are cleanliness, frugality, nourishment, andpalatableness. The term "gourmand" or "epicure," says a distinguished writer on thesubject, is not synonymous with "glutton," who eats as long as he can sit, likethe great eater of Kent, whom Fuller places among his worthies; telling us "heate thirty dozen pigeons at one meal; at another, four score rabbits, andeighteen yards of black pudding, London measure:" nor does the term epicuresuit a fastidious appetite only excited by dainties, such as the brains ofpeacocks or parrots, the tongues of thrushes or nightingales, &c. It meansone who has good sense and good taste enough to relish food cooked according toscientific principles; so prepared that the palate be not offended, and that itbe rendered easy of digestion. Thus the temperate man is the greatest epicure;for the perfection of enjoyment depends on the perfection of the faculties ofmind and body. The philosopher, Descartes, when a cavilling Marquis said: "What, do youphilosophers eat dainties?" replied, "Do you think Providence made good thingsonly for fools!" Boswell says, Dr. Johnson had nice discernment in the scienceof cookery, and talked of good eating with uncommon satisfaction. Boileau says, the Norman conqueror William, bestowed portions of land on hisfavorite chief cook. The Doomsday Book records a grant to Robert Argyllon, forthe service of "making in an earthen pot, in the kitchen of our lord the king,a mess called 'De la groute,'"--a kind of plum-porridge--on the day of thecoronation. This dish was served to king George IV., at his coronation. The luxury of different ages has furnished many curiosities in cookery.Among the ancients, a porpus and wild boar were highly esteemed, and the swanwas a dish of state; the crane was a dainty in William the Conqueror's time;and seals, curlews, herons, bitterns, and the peacock --this last, "the food of lovers and the meatof lords"--were fashionable at baronial entertainments. The peacock was stuffedwith spices and sweet herbs, roasted and served whole; after it was dressed,being covered with the skin and feathers, the tail spread, and the beak andcomb gilt. Some were covered with leaf-gold. These birds adorned English tablestill the beginning of the seventeenth century. The pie, full of living birds, was a favorite dish, and a common joke at oldEnglish feasts. The dwarf, Jeffrey Hudson, was served up in a cold pie about1630, before King Charles, at the Duke of Buckingham's table. The baron of beefwas a favorite of old English hospitality. Don Anthony, of Guevara, chroniclerto Charles V., says, he saw at a feast, "a horse roasted, a cat in jelly,lyzard in hot broth, and frogges fried, &c." The Roman sauces described by Cœlus Apicius, a celebrated Romanepicure, who wrote a curious cookery book in Latin, and invented a soup made ofthe livers of a peculiar fish which sometimes sold at the rate of sixty dollarsthe pound--would be hardly more palatable to us than the black broth of theSpartans which caused the citizens of Sybaris towonder no longer why the Spartans were so fearless of death. Yet one of thereceipts of Apicius required the death of three or four dozen animals. TheEsquimaux eat raw fish, and melted fat is a delicacy among Arctic natives. Manyof the northern Indians eat the intestines and blood. Tartars feed on dogs, andsome of the natives of Australia, New Holland, and other countries, were wontto regale themselves upon ants and worms, while mice were an African delicacy.Norwegians mixed the powdered bark of trees with meal to bake in cakes. La Chapelle's Nouveau Cuisinier, published in 1748, mentions thecooking of a turkey in the shape of a football or a hedgehog; a shoulder ofmutton in that of a beehive; an entrée of pigeons in the form of a spider ora frog. Such whimsical harlequinade has now become old-fashioned, though thetaste for decoration remains. By a strange misconception, cookery has in all ages been intrusted toignorant persons, who practise it without reference to those general principleswhich connect it with chemistry as much as other arts are allied to thatscience. Yet in the days of the patriarchs, the province of the cook, it seems,was not a servile one. A princess would not disdain to dress the lamb her lordhad killed and brought from the flock. In Homer's time kings and princes killedtheir own cattle and cooked the flesh. Perhaps the march of improvement may induce professors of gastronomy toelevate their calling by connecting its practice with the principles ofscience. The brewers and distillers of the present day are philosophicalchemists, understanding the principles on which they act, and their processesare more certain, economical, and manageable than formerly; why may not cooksbe philosophers? Why may not equal advantages be derived from the applicationof science to those arts which relate to the management of solidsustenance? It has been said that the best books on cookery have been written by medicalmen. CHAPTER XXV. A GLOSSARY OF FOREIGN TERMS USED INCOOKERY. FRENCH cookery is of so diverse a nature that many volumes have already beenwritten upon the subject; and new modes of dressing the same things are soconstantly being invented, that we must content ourselves with merely giving afew explanations of the terms adopted by most of our professed cooks. Atelets. Small silver skewers. Baba. A French sweet yeast cake. Bain Marie. A flat vessel containing boiling water,intended to hold also other saucepans for the purpose either of cooking orkeeping their contents hot. The Bain Marie is called in the English kitchen Beau Méré Pan. This term is old,having its origin with the alchymists, who, finding that sea-water boiled at ahigh temperature, and did not evaporate so quickly, used a pan containingsea-water; hence the term: Bain Marie; or, Sea-Water Bath. Bard. --A slice of thin bacon fat, used for coveringthe breasts of birds, the back of a hare, or any substance that requires theassistance of fat where larding is not preferred. Beignet, or Fritter. --Anything that is enveloped in a casing ofbatter or egg, and fried. Thus we have fritters of fruit, vegetables, cream,&c. Blanc. --A white broth used to improve the color ofchickens, lamb, &c. Blanch. --To set anything on the fire in cold water, and when it boils strain it off and plunge itinto cold water. Blanquettes. --A kind of fricassée, made of slices of white meat cutthin, and warmed in white sauce thickened with the yolk of eggs. Bouilli. --Beef very much boiled and served withsauce. Bouillon. --The common soup of France. Bouquet. --A bunch of parsley and scallions tied upto put in soups, &c. Bouquet garni, or Assaisonné. The same, with the addition ofcloves or aromatic herbs. Bourguignote. --A ragout of truffles. Braise. --This is a method of dressing meat, poultry,&c., without evaporation. It is done by lining a braising pan with thinslices of bacon, beef, or veal; upon which place whatever you may intend to braise; and also add carrots, onions, lemons, bayleaf, herbs, pepper, and salt. Brioche. --A French yeast cake. Buisson (en). --A fanciful mode of dressing uppastry, &c. Callipash. --The glutinous meat of the upper shell ofa turtle. Callipee. --The glutinous meat of the under shell ofa turtle. Caramel. --Sugar boiled down until the water isevaporated, and then formed in ornamental devices for decoratinggâteaux-baskets, &c. It is also used for coloring gravies whenreduced almost to the burning point, and then dissolved in water. Its use isnot much to the credit of the cook. Capilotade. --A hash of poultry. Civet. --A hash of game or wild fowl. Compeigne. --A French sweet yeast cake, with fruit,&c. Compotier. --A dish in the dessert service purposelyfor the compote. Couronne (en). --To serve any prescribed articles ona dish in the form of a crown. Court or short, to stew. --The reduction of a sauce until itbecomes very thick. Croutons. --Bread cut in various shapes and friedlightly in butter or oil. Casserole. --A rice-crust moulded in the form of apie; when baked, filled with a mince or purée of game, or with a blanquette of white meat. Also a stewpan. Compote. --Stewed fruits served with syrup. There arealso compotes of pigeons and other small birds. Consommé is a strong clear gravy, drawn fromthe long stewing of any kind of meat, to be either used as broth, or made intosoups and sauces. Coulis, or cullis, is a rich brown gravy commonlyused for the purpose of coloring as well as thickening and flavoring many sortsof soups and sauces. It is made in various ways, chiefly upon a foundation ofham and veal, slices of which are put into a closely covered stewpan, with onlya small quantity of water, and boiled over a brisk fire until the whole becomesbrown and thick. See Sauces. Croquettes. --A mince of either fish, meat, orpoultry, made very savory, with a small quantity of sauce, formed into shapesof any kind, rolled in egg and bread-crumbs, and fried crisp. Croustades, or Dresden patties, made of paste orbread baked in small moulds, and filled with mince of any kind. Dorez. --To wash pastry, &c., with yolk of eggwell beaten. Dorure. --Yolks of eggs well beaten. "En papillote." --White paper is greased with oil orbutter, and then folded over a cutlet or small fish, fastening it by screwingthe paper at the edges. Entremets. --Small ornamental dishes served in thesecond and third courses. Entrée. --A corner dish for the first course.In large dinners the side dishes are called flancs. Financière. --An expensive, highly flavored,mixed ragoût. Flan. --A French custard. Farce. --Forcemeat. Faggot. --A small bunch of parsley and thyme and abay-leaf tied up. Fricandeaux --may be made of any boned piece of veal,in pieces of not more than two or three lbs. weight, chiefly cut from thatportion of the fillet which we have described as the thick part. It is afrequent dish as an entrée at good tables, and requires great care toserve in perfection. Gûteau. --A cake or pudding. Glaze (to). --To reduce sauces to a jelly, that theywill adhere to the meat. Glace or Glaze. --Stock boiled down to a consistency, and usedto improve the appearance of all braised dishes; it should be warmed in thebain-marie, and applied with a brush. Glaze, Glace Ice, is composed of white of egg beatenwith powdered sugar. Godiveau. --A common veal forcemeat. Gras (au), --means that the article is dressed withmeat gravy. Gratin. --A layer of any article intended for thispurpose is spread over a dish that will bear the fire and is placed on a stoveor hot ashes until it burns. Hors d'œuvre. --A small dish served during thefirst course. Lard (to). --To stick bacon, or whatever meat may benamed, into poultry, meat, &c. It is accomplished with a larding pin, oneend of which is square and one hollow. The lardon is put into this hollow, thepoint is then inserted in the meat, and on being drawn through leaves the baconor lardon standing in its proper place. It requires practice to do thiswell. Lardon. --The pieces into which bacon or other meatsare cut for the purpose of larding. Liaison. --A finish with yolks of eggs and cream forragoûts and sauces. Madeleines. --Cakes made of the same composition aspound cakes. Maigre (au). --Soups, &c., dressed withoutmeat. Mask. --To cover completely. Marinade. --A liquor prepared for boiling or stewingfish or meat in: it is sometimes used cold. Meringue. --A very light preparation, made of sugarand whites of eggs beaten to snow. Matelote. --A rich stew of fish with wine. Miroton consists of small slices of meat cut thin,and not larger than a crown-piece, and made into various sorts ofragoûts; and dished up in a circular form. Nouilles. --An Italian paste resembling macaroni, butflat instead of being in pipes. Panada. --Bread soaked in milk, used principally for quenelles and fine farces. Passer. --To fry lightly. Pûté. --A raised crust pie. Poélée. --A light braise for whitemeats; the difference between this and the braise is that in the former, themeat, or whatever it may be, need not be so much done as the latter. Potage. --A term for soup. The Pot-au-feu is truly the foundation of all goodcookery, and of that we shall treat rather largely in our chapters on soups andsauces. Purée. --A culinary operation which should becarefully attended to, and which, although known for preparing pottedmeats and fish, is seldom employed by common cooks in any thingbut pea-soup. It consists in either pounding the meat orfish in a mortar until it becomes a paste, or in stewing roots orpulse in boiling water until they are softened into a thick pulp,when they are passed, first through a colander, or through a puréepresser, and afterwards through a wire or hair sieve, and being thinned withbroth, may be formed into soups of various sorts. Quenelles and Godiveaux are different sorts offorcemeat, composed of meat or fish, with bread andyolk of egg, and fat of some kind; seasoned in various ways, andeither spread upon rolled meat, or formed into balls and fried asgarnish to entrées, or served separately as entrées. To make Quenelles. --When the forcemeat ismade, take two tablespoons, fill one with the meat, dip a knife inhot water, with which smooth it over; then dip the other spoon intoboiling water, and with it remove the meat from the first spoon,and slip it into a buttered stewpan; so on until you have the number you want:then cover them with stock, and boil them about ten minutes, or untilfirm, and they are fit for use. For small quenelles use teaspoons. Rissole. --A mince of meat or fish,enclosed in paste, or made up into shapes or balls in the manner ofminced collops, and used either as side-dishes, or as a garnish for stews orhashes, now more elegantly termed fricassées and ragoûts. Roux. --A thickening for white soups orgravy, made of flour and butter. Salmis. --A hash made of game, which is cut upwhen only half roasted; whereas a hash is made from dressed game. Sauter. --To fry very lightly. Sabotière or Saubetüre. --A pewter or tin vessel in which areplaced the moulds containing whatever is intended to be frozen. Tourner or turn. --To stir a sauce; also to pare and cutroots, vegetables, and fruits very neatly. Tamis, or "tammy," a strainer of thin woollencanvas, or silk, used for straining soups and sauces. Tourte. --A kind of tart baked in a shallowtin. Vanner. --To take up sauce or any other liquidin a spoon and turn it over very quickly. Velouté. --For heightening the flavors ofsoups, made dishes, &c. Vol-au-vent. --An extremely light puff paste,in which are enclosed minces of sweetbread, poultry, game,&c. CHAPTER XXVI. CONDIMENTS. THERE is one class of materials in constant use in the kitchen:--thecondiments; without these, soups, sauces, and all made dishes, would beinsipid; and the judicious application of them is essential. If all kinds of condiments were of the same quality--that is, if all salt,pepper, and mustard, &c., were alike, receipts might be given as in aPharmacopœia, with distinct measures for each; but as nothing differs somuch as these simple condiments, everything must be left to the palate of thecook, and on him or her alone depends the flavor of the alimentary substancespartaken of. Of all condiments, that in most general use is SALT; the health of everyindividual depends upon it, and it is as much required as food or drink. Evenon those continents far away from the shores washed by the briny ocean, we findit in springs, and in crystal globules encrusting the earth. It is chemically known as chloride of sodium, being a combination ofchlorine and sodium. Its use as an antiseptic, and as a condiment, is too wellknown to be repeated here. Rock Salt is the unpurified salt, as dug from the mines. This is purified byboiling, &c., and crystallized by heat. Bay Salt is the coarse large crystal salt, taking its name from the saltthat formerly was made in pits by the overflow or letting in of the sea at thehead of Bays, and which was evaporated by the heat of the sun. Almost all thefish cured in France at the present day is doneby this kind of salt, the duty upon foreign salt being so high. PEPPER, so extensively used at present in Europe, may be said to be a moderninvention. Before the introduction of pepper, many plants, such as saffron,&c., were used, until this West Indian fruit became more general and easyto obtain.* The plant is a climbing one (piper nigrum,) and exceedingly pretty when infruit. The berry is gathered with the skin or pulp around the stone, and thatwhich is intended for black pepper is allowed to remain thus, while for whitepepper it is blanched and rubbed until the skin comes off. In all dark saucesuse the black pepper. LONG PEPPER, the fruit of the piper longum, is a plant very similiar to theformer, and, if possible, it has a more aromatic flavor than the blackpepper. I doubt if pepper was known to the Romans. If so, it would have been knownin Egypt, where we find no trace of it, although some authors have consideredit as the ammonium of the ancients. ALLSPICE, or, as it was formerly called, Pimenta, is another of thoseproductions of the climes near the Equator, which has come much into use byEuropeans. It is the fruit of the pimenta vulgaris. That which is the freshest is thebest; as the aromatic oil which it contains is not dissipated by keeping. Theessential oil it contains can be used in very small quantities in cookery, butshould not be subjected to long boiling, or it loses its flavor. {foonote} *It is a singular circumstance, that this very small fruit should be thecause of England's possessing one of the largest portions of her dominions. Inthe reign of Elizabeth, and during the war with Spain, pepper, which had thenbecome an article of necessity, rose to an extravagant price, and to obtain itcheaper, the Queen granted Letters Patent to certain merchants to trade to theEast Indies, which was the origin of the present East India Company. GINGER is the root of a plant, a native of the East Indies and Brazils, andalso naturalized in the West India Islands. The plant grows in moist places,and is of a reed-like form, bearing a yellow flower. The root, when fresh,should be of a light green, solid and heavy. A spongy or woolly root should beavoided. The virtues of ginger chiefly consist in a volatile oil which itpossesses. This is best obtained by bruising the root, and making an infusionin spirits of wine or boiling water in a closed bottle; or, if thinly slicedand infused in vinegar, it is pleasant in a salad. It is usually employed incookery by having the root desiccated by the heat of the sun until perfectlydry and hard, and then powdered till its aromatic oil is lost. It should bemore frequently used in cookery, and as a condiment as well as for dessert. CLOVES are the buds of a flower, not arrived at maturity, of an East Indiantree, called caryophillus aromaticus. This, in common with manyother buds of flowers of various kinds, contains a large quantity of essentialoil. It has a very pungent, aromatic smell. Its nature is stimulating. Itshould not be boiled too long, or its flavor is lost in evaporation. NUTMEG is the interior of a fruit belonging to a tree, a native of theIslands of the Eastern Archipelago, called Banda, and known in botany as the myristica moschata. It is strongly aromatic, andvery volatile, and considered agreeable. It is used in powder, and notsubjected to much heat, which would cause it to lose its qualities. MACE.--This is the skin which covers the shell containing the nutmeg. It iscut into small pieces and dried. This is more frequently used in cookery thanthe nutmeg, as its essential oil and aromatic flavor are not so soonevaporated. CAYENNE is the dried pod of a well- knownplant, the capsicum, now so often reared in hot-houses. It is a native of theEast and West Indies, and South America. It is of a very pungent nature, and astrongly acrid flavor. The best is of an orange color. There are several kindsof capsicums; the capsicum annuum or annual capsicum; the capsicum grossum, or hell pepper; and the capsicum cerasiforme, or cherry pepper. The pods ofthese are frequently pickled. The essence of cayenne, by infusing in alcohol,is a very excellent seasoning. CINNAMON is the under-bark of a tree, the laurus cinnamomum, a species of bay, with leaveslike laurel, found in many East India Islands, but chiefly in Ceylon. Itpossesses a very fine aromatic flavor and smell. The essential oil, whenextracted, is better to use than the bark itself. This tree bears a fruit similar in shape to the acorn, but smaller. It hasneither smell nor taste; but, boiled in water, yields an oil which, on becomingcold, is as hard as tallow: it is used as an ointment, and also to burn. Theoutside of the root of this tree yields camphor and oil of camphor. CASSIA is also a bark of a similar kind of tree to the cinnamon; the laurus cassia. It does not contain so much flavor ascinnamon; but the aromatic qualities are very similar. Its oil is often soldfor that of cinnamon. CASSIA BUDS are the pods of the seed of the cinnamon tree. They contain anoil equal in flavor and pungency to the cinnamon. They are not often used incookery, their value not being generally known. MUSTARD is the powder of the seed of the plant, the sinapis nigra. It grows wild in many places, and canbe cultivated in almost any soil. It is of a strong, pungent nature, and isdifficult to concentrate. It should be mixed with cold water and salt. Itderives its name from the French moutarde, who derive it from the Latin of multum ardet, which became corrupted into moult arde. In France they prepare it in a varietyof ways. Mustard is a condiment easily adulterated; and particular care shouldbe used in its selection. ONIONS, a bulbous root, so much used in cookery, is a native of thiscountry. By some it is eaten in the raw state; and if partaken of freely, itseffects pervade the whole system, and the person who uses them may be known atsome distance, from the peculiar odor which belongs to the root. Its moderateuse is wholesome. It is also good against many diseases of the skin; but shouldnever be eaten too freely by weak stomachs. There are several sorts. Thecommon, called the allium cepa; the GARLIC, allium stavium; the SHALOT, allium ascalonicum; the LEEK, the allium porrum; the ROCAMBOLE, the allium scordoprasum; the CHIVE, the allium chœnoprasum. The manner of using themis described briefly in the various receipts. Onions have been used in cookery from a very early period; and in Spain andPortugal form the principal food of the lower classes--being, from the natureof the climate, much milder than in this country. The next articles among the condiments are the herbs; among these, MARJORAMis that most in use; it is an herb which contains a large quantity of what maybe called essential oil, which is extracted in cooking, and imparts its flavorto the viands in which it may be used. There are several kinds of marjoram inuse, but that known as the pot marjoram, origanum onites, when well cultivated, is the bestfor general use; there is the sweet marjoram, origanum marjorana; the winter sweet marjoram, origanum heracloticum; and the common marjoram, origanum vulgare. The essence of this herb may beused in cookery; the more common plan is to dryit for use, but it should be used fresh when it can be procured. SAVORY.--There are two kinds, the winter and summer; the latter contains themost flavor--it can be easily dried and bottled for keeping. BASIL is also an herb in great use; it grows to great perfection if wellcultivated. Its aromatic smell is very similar to cloves: there are two kinds,the sweet basil, ocymum basilicum; and the least basil, ocymum minimum. The first has the best flavor andsmell. THYME.--There are two, the lemon, thymus citriodorus, and the common thyme, thymus vulgaris; the first is the best to use in alldishes wherever this herb is required. PENNYROYAL is not much in use in cookery, but can be used where mintcannot be had. MINT.--Spearmint or common mint is that most in use; itshould never be used in large quantities. Some of it infused in vinegar,and the vinegar afterwards used with a salad, gives a fine flavor and anovelty to that dish, and it is used in vinegar with lamb. SAGE is an important herb, and by many considered an agreeablecondiment; there are several kinds; that whose leaves have a purple tinge isconsidered best for culinary use. PARSLEY, although at present so prominent in use in our kitchens, wasunknown to our forefathers; it is only within a century that it has become sogeneral: it was introduced into England from Italy. There are three varieties,the common or plain-leaved, the curled or double-leaved, and the broad-leaved;the curled is the best-looking, but has not so much flavor as the common; thebroad-leaved is used for its root, which is excellent cut up thinly in soup,&c. It may be obtained all the year. To keep it well, it should be driedand cut up, and placed in well corked bottles, but should only be used whenfresh cannot be procured. TARRAGON is not so much used as it ought to be; if used more in soup,instead of the stronger herbs, it would be liked; but great care must beobserved, as its aromatic qualities are quickly dissipated by heat. It is anative of the north of Europe, and known in botany as the artemisia dracunculus. CLARY is a plant of the sage kind; its leaves are sometimesused to flavor soups, and it is liked by a few. FENNEL may be used often with advantage; it is, however, rarely usedbut with fish. CELERY, now grown to such perfection, is the cultivated wild plantknown as smallage. Celery is a great deal used in cookery, but it shouldnot be subjected to too long boiling; if its flavor is required, and no root tobe obtained, the seed of the smallage can be used instead. It is generallysupposed that the roots and leaves of smallage are poisonous; we would notrecommend them to be used, as the seed can always be obtained, and theflavor is finer. The salts of celery is a modern improvement, and agreat addition to our culinary condiments. BORAGE is not much used in cookery; its flavor is slightly bitter,and it is sometimes used to flavor ale, cider, &c., for asummer drink. HORSE-RADISH is the root of a plant; the aroma which it contains isquickly dissipated by heat--it is therefore used in a raw state by beinggrated; an essence may be obtained by infusion with spirits of wine,which, added to mustard after it is made, gives it an agreeableflavor. CHERVIL is getting more into use every day; its flavor is exceedinglypleasant, and can be employed in soups andsalads, especially in made dishes, with the greatest advantage. CAPERS are the buds of a small trailing shrub, a native of thesouth of Europe; those grown on the Rock of Gibraltar are considered the finestin the world. They are very excellent with almost all boiled meats,fish, and salads. BROOM BUDS, when pickled, sometimes replace capers. NASTURTIUMS are sometimes used in the place of capers, beingpickled in the same way, but they have not the least resemblance; they may beused for salads. The flower of the nasturtium is a very prettydecoration for boiled fish and salads. BARBERRIES are the fruit of a plant; some centuries since, theyappear to have been often used, but more modern importations have supersededthem; they have a very acid flavor, and, if pickled, could enter into thecomposition of many dishes, and also make a good preserve. GHERKINS are the young cucumber, or often the fruit ofthe uncultivated plant; they are almost always pickled, and are an elegantaddition to all salads and many entrées. BEET-ROOT is a root of a plant which of late years has beenextensively cultivated for the purpose of feeding cattle; the color which itpossesses is easily extracted, for the purpose of tinting various articlesemployed in cookery. When boiled, it is a beautiful addition to everysalad. MUSHROOMS are greatly used in domestic cookery, and are a generalfavorite; their liquor, when extracted with salt, becomes a condimentknown under the name of Ketchup, very extensively employed incookery; this may be considered wholesome, as it is known to facilitate thedigestion. The largest are the best to produce the ketchup, and thesmall button ones to use in dishes; they should be nicely trimmed, and put intoa jar with lemon-juice to blanch them; should be submitted to verylittle heat, or their delicacy will be lost, and nothing but a tough substanceleft to eat. TRUFFLE is, without doubt, a modern introduction. So late as the year1720, in the regency of Louis XV., we first hear of its being used, whenDubois, the minister, introduced it at his dinners, the Duke of Orleans gave itto his mistresses, and the gallants of the day brought it into notice in theirnocturnal repasts. It was at this period that the science of cookery made such rapidimprovement in France, and when extravagance in the preparation of the repastswas carried to the highest point; this was a period when "non ex pane solo vivit homo." Many of the saucesfirst discovered at that period have descended to the present day--such asSoubise and Bechamel, named after the noblemen who first partook of them. Thenit was that the celebrated "Dinde aux Truffes" (turkey withtruffles) first made its appearance. Since this period, thetruffle has been considered the "to kalon" of condiments, and as theindispensable ornament of all banquets; or, as Brillat Savarin says, "La truffe est le diamant de la cuisine." Within the last half century, the place (Perigord) which produces the finestof these roots, produced the first of diplomatists--namely, Talleyrand, who wasat the same time a great gourmet. The locality may have had its influence;certain it is he would never give a decision upon any momentous question untilafter dinner, and having partaken of his favorite dish, Truffe aux Vin deChampagne. They are a species of fungus, tube, or root, generally found within a fewinches of the surface of the earth, and under oak trees; known also asthe subterranean "puff-ball," tuba cibarium. The best are supposed to come from"Perigord," the next from Angoulême--theseare black; the white come from Piedmont, and the Carolinas; they oughtto be eaten fresh. On the European continent, they are found by means of dogsand pigs, trained on purpose. They should not be subjected to too long boiling, as the aroma is veryvolatile. BAY is the leaf of a species of laurel, but in using it care must be takenthat the leaf of the bay-laurel, or cherry-laurel, (prunus laurocerasus,) is not used for it, as itcontains prussic acid. This is a common evergreen in the southernStates. The bay or sweet bay, (laurus nobilis,) an evergreen of the Southof Europe, may be used to great advantage in cookery, as it imparts anagreeable and aromatic flavor, differing very widely from any spicesthat can be used for the same purposes. It is cultivated extensively ingardens, and should be used according to the directions given in thereceipts. SAFFRON was formerly--that is, in the fourteenth century--much usedin cookery in Europe. It has bulbous roots, like the onion and flowers;the fibres grow from the bottom of the bulb, having roots with coats orskin one over the other, and bears naked flowers without stem. Atpresent it is only used in the kitchen for the purpose of coloring. InPortugal, Spain, and Turkey, it is used at the present day to a greatextent. ANGELICA, a condiment much used in the confectionery department ofthe kitchen, is the stalk of a plant like celery, which grows ingardens, and is also found wild. When gathered, it is dried, preserved, andcandied. Rouen, in France, is very celebrated for it. VANILLA is used chiefly to impart flavor to various articles inconfectionery; it has also a very agreeable smell, which has caused it to beused in scenting different perfumes, and thus diminished its use in thekitchen. It is the produce of a climbing plant like ivy, having a large leafand black flower, which leaves a pod containing black peas; the form of thepod is like a scimitar, from which it takes its name, being in Spanish vargarila. When covered with tin-foil, and kept in a moist place, it will becomecovered with flakes of silver. It denotes the best quality, and is fit for use;it will do to be infused several times. SUGAR is the concentrated juice of a plant which grows in hotclimates, and is also to be obtained from other trees and vegetables,especially from beet-root. It is used very extensively in cookery,imparting a mellow flavor to all dishes; it is of an antiseptic nature, andought to be employed more abundantly in preserving animal substances than itis. This condiment was unknown to the ancients, who employed honey inplace of it. ORANGE is the fruit of a tree originally a native of China,but now grown extensively in all warm climates. The juice of thisfruit is a sweet acid, differing greatly in flavor from thelemon; its peel is of use in cookery. The Seville and Maltaoranges are a variety of this fruit. ORANGE-FLOWER, a distillation from the flower, is used a great dealin cookery. VERJUICE is the juice of a grape of that name, and on theEuropean continent was used to a great extent, until the introduction of thelemon. The grape is gathered unripe, pressed, allowed to ferment,and then put into large vats to mature; the older it is, the better the flavor.It enters into the composition of several of the sauces in use at the presentday; if pure, it may be preferable for several dishes to vinegar. OLIVE is a fruit not much used in cookery; it grows on a lowtree with long narrow leaves, rough underneath; the fruit contains along and small kernel; the fruit, when pressed, yields the oil known as olive oil. This is a mostvaluable article in cookery; it ought to be tasteless and inodorous, but whenlong exposed to the air becomes rank and unfit for use. ARROW-ROOT is the powder of the root of a tree growing in very warmand moist climates, of about two to three feet in height, known inbotany as the maranta arundinarea. In some countries, theflour of this root is mixed with that of Indian corn and makesexcellent bread. It is produced in the same way as the starchfrom potatoes. TAPIOCA is also a starch, produced from the roots of aBrazilian plant called Cassava, a very elegant but poisonous plant, withbeautiful white and pink flowers. It is now in general use, as it isfound, when mixed with a little wine or spirits, to be anexcellent stimulant to an invalid, without possessing any heating qualities. Itshould be well washed in water, and boiled until it becomes transparent,when it should be well stirred, and whatever is required to be mixed with itshould be added. It will, when mixed with other flour, make very goodbread. SALSOP is another root of a plant called orchis morio, a native of the East, where it is usedas an article of food to a great extent; it is reduced to powder, and readilydissolves in boiling water. It is a light, pleasant drink, and, topersons of a feverish constitution, is exceedingly wholesome. SAGO is another of these starches, similar to Tapioca, madefrom the pith of the palm-tree, a native of the Indies. It is preparedprecisely in the same way as Tapioca. SOY is obtained from the seed or fruit of an Indianplant, called dolichos soja, or soya; it is made like ketchup; it entersgreatly into use in the variety of sauces that are made for the table, being ofa very strong, sweet-bitter taste; it should be used in moderation incookery. CHETNEY is a production of the East Indies, which, of late years, has comeconsiderably into use; it is made by mixing together a variety offruits, and allowing them to ferment until they become acid: somespices are then mixed with them--and it is bottled for use; the older itis, the better it becomes. That made in the Vale of Cashmere is considered thebest. CURRY-POWDER is another of those Indian condiments which havelatterly come much into use, and it is only to be regretted that it is notcheaper, to allow it to be more generally used, as it is one of thosestimulating condiments which would be invaluable to the poor; its use wouldprevent the habit of taking other stimulants which produce intoxication. LEMON is the fruit of a tree, a native of the South of Europe andthe Indies; it is a most valuable production, not only for cookery, but for thehealth of the human race. Its juice, when diluted with water, andsweetened, makes a most refreshing and wholesome drink. The peel contains anessential oil, which imparts a strong pungent flavor to those dishes towhich it is added. The true flavor of this fruit can only be had whenfresh and ripe. In the time of Henry VIII., this fruit was a greatrarity, and was partaken of at dessert with a quantity of sugar mixedwith it. The LIME is a species of lemon, the juice of which ismore acid. The CITRON is also another species; the juice is sweeter. VINEGAR derives its name from the French vin aigre, or sour wine, and is known inchemistry as acetic acid. This antiseptic liquor can be produced from allherbs, plants, vegetables, and fruits, which producesugar, and even that singular production of nature known ashoney, and of which the juices will go into fermentation. These juices, when firstexpressed, are called wine, or syrup; they undergo a fermentationknown as the vinous, after which, when exposed to a certaindegree of heat, they enter into the acetous fermentation, and produce that acidpungent liquor known as vinegar. Of late years, it has also beenproduced by the distillation of wood, more particularly oak, and knownas pyroligneous acid, which is intensely acid, andhighly stimulating. When employed in cookery, it should be used judiciously,and with great care. The best vinegar is that which contains the leastvegetable matter, such as coloring, &c., and which has the strongest acidtaste, without being hot. The different flavored vinegars may be made by infusion, without the aid ofheat, of the different substances from which the flavor is required. CHAPTER XXVII. RUDIMENTS OF COOKERY. A FEW simple general directions, on a subject of so much importance tofamily and individual comfort as cooking, will be found useful, even thoughthere be some repetition in subsequent instructions. The kitchen should be furnished with long and round tables; a dresser withshelves serving as a plate rack; closets or cupboards, common chairs, benches,wooden stools and sinks. Towel rollers, plate warmers, a weighing machine,speaking tubes, a dumb waiter, a refrigerator, hot water dishes, and dishcovers of wire gauze, are also among the indispensables. The fireplace shouldhave plenty of light. The chief object of cookery is to make the meat tender and easy ofdigestion, without depriving it of its juices. Solid food, especially plainroast or boiled meat, requires to be well adapted to the digestive powers; forit is trying to many constitutions, and health is often injured by dining uponimproperly cooked "plain joints." Butcher's meat, when brought from market, should beexamined, trimmed, and wiped clean; sprinkled in summer with a little salt andpepper, and hung up. Mutton and veal must be taken down and wiped each day.Venison is hung some time before cooking, and should be wiped dry and dredgedwith ginger or pepper, to prevent the fly from settling on it; the dredgingwiped off before cooking. We will take up the simple culinary processes inturn. Boiling. --This is seldom done properly; the errormost common among American cooks is that of boiling meat fast over a strongfire, which renders it hard and nearly tasteless; whereas, a gentle simmeringfor nearly double the time, with half the quantity of fuel and water, willbetter accomplish the purpose. For instance: the most common, and almost universal dish throughout France,is a large piece of plainly boiled fresh beef, from which the soup--or "potage, " as it is there called--has been partlymade, and which is separately served up as "bouilli" accompanied by strong gravy and mincedvegetables, or stewed cabbage. Now this, as constantly dressed in the Frenchmode, is ever delicate both in fibre and flavor; while, in the English mannerof boiling it, it is always hard and insipid. The reason of which, as explainedby that celebrated cook, Carême, who superintended the kitchen of HisMajesty George IV., is this:--"The meat, instead of being put down to boil, asin the English method, is in France put in the pot with the usual quantity ofcold water, and placed at the corner of the fireplace, where, slowly becominghot, the heat gradually swells the muscular fibres of the beef, dissolving thegelatinous substances therein contained, and disengaging that portion which chemists term 'osmazome,' and which impartssavor to the flesh--thus both rendering the meat tender and palatable, and thebroth relishing and nutritive; while, on the contrary, if the pot beinconsiderately put upon too quick a fire, the boiling is precipitated, thefibre coagulates and hardens, the osmazome is hindered from disengaging itself,and thus nothing is obtained but a piece of tough meat, and a broth withouttaste or succulence." Meat, salted or fresh, should be put first into cold water just sufficient to cover it; to be warmedgradually and renewed, as it wastes away, with hot water. The scum must beskimmed off as fast as it rises. As soon as the water boils, the kettle shouldbe taken off the fire, but placed near enough to keep it simmering, which itwill do with little heat. The allowance of time in the summer is eighteen ortwenty minutes to each pound; in winter rather more. The time of reckoning mustbegin when the water boils. Salt meats require very slow simmering, andmust have more time. Allowance must also be made for age. The nice look of every thing boiled depends on skimming the pot well. If letalone, the scum boils down and sticks to the meat, giving it a coarse anduncleanly appearance. A little cold water and salt thrown in will help to bringup the scum. It is not necessary to wrap the meat in a cloth. Less heat isrequired to keep liquids boiling in copper and iron, than in tin saucepans. Dried or salted fish and meats require soaking in cold water beforeboiling. Meat and poultry will lose their flavor and firmness, if left in the waterafter they are done; as will also fish, which will break to pieces. The water in which fish, meat, or poultry has been boiled, should be saved;this pot-liquor, as it is called, may be made into soup. Remember to heat the water containing the meat, very slowly; a joint of tenpounds' weight should not boil in less than forty minutes. The more slowly itsimmers afterwards, the tenderer, plumper, and whiter it will be. An experienced cook placed a thermometer in water in that state which cookscall gently simmering; the heat was 212° viz., equal to the strongestboiling. Two mutton chops were covered with cold water; one was boiled on agallop, the other simmering gently for three-quarters of an hour; the flavor ofthe simmered chop was decidedly superior; the liquor wasmore savory, and when cold had more fat on its surface. The chop boiled quicklywas hard and insipid. Take care that the covers of your boiling pots fit closely, and only removethem for skimming. If exposed to the smoke the meat will have a bad taste. The less water the better, so that the joint is covered; a quart of water isgenerally allowed to a pound. As the water is diminished by evaporation, freshboiling water may be poured into the saucepan. Beef and mutton may be a little underdone; but lamb, pork, and veal, areuneatable unless thoroughly boiled. A fishdrainer, four skewers, or a soup plate, wrong side upwards, laid onthe bottom of the boiling pot, will prevent the lower side of the meat frombeing overdone, or burnt by sticking. The broth of every joint may be made into savory soup. Meat loses in cooking from one-fifth to one-third of its weight. Boiling isthe more economical way of cooking, if the broth be used. One pound a day foreach person in the family is a liberal allowance for dinner. The sauces sent to table with boiled meat must be served in boats, notpoured over it. Roasting. --The first preparation must be to see that the spit is cleaned with sand and water. Itshould be wiped while hot, as soon as meat is drawn from it, and scoured alwaysbefore use. Joint the meat properly for the convenience of the carver, andbalance it evenly on the spit, that its motion may be regular and the fireoperate equally on each part of it. Use balance skewers, if necessary, and donot run the spit through the prime part of the joint. Take care that the meathas been kept long enough to be tender. A leg of mutton should never bespitted, as the spit lets out the gravy, and leaves an unsightly perforationjust as you are cutting into the pope's eye. Roast meat by the radiant heat of a clear, glowing fire, otherwise it isbaked. The "old English roast beef" was not done in an oven. The Paschal lamb among the Jews, was roasted whole; among eastern nationssheep are thus brought to table; but it is not done among us, except when pigs,with apples in their mouths, grace the board at country taverns, at some Fourthof July celebration. Put the joint to roast when the fire is newly made up, that the heat mayincrease by degrees; proportion the fire to the size of the joint, making it afew inches longer. What would roast a sirloin will burn up a smaller piece.Clear the fire of smoky coals before the joint is put down. The distance fromthe fire is mentioned by Webster as from nine to thirteen inches; by Kitchiner,from ten to fourteen. It should be put at the furthest point at first. The fatparts should have paper skewered or tied over them, or be covered with a coarsepaste of flour and water, fastened on by paper and a string, and taken off intime to brown and froth the meat. Fat meat requires more roasting than lean. Inroasting by a string, pass a skewer through each end of thejoint, and turn it bottom upwards, that the gravy may flow to each part. If the joint is thicker at one end than the other, place the spit slanting,the thickest part nearest the fire. Be careful not to put meat too near thefire at first; and the larger the joint the farther off it must be kept; ifonce scorched, the outside will become hard, and the fire will not penetratethe interior. Mrs. Hale says: In stirring the fire, be careful to remove the dripping-pan,else dust and ashes may fall in. On no account let the fire get dull and low,as a strong heat is requisite to brown the meat. A thin joint requires a brisk fire; a large joint, a strong, sound and evenfire. When steam rises from the meat, it is done. Large joints should be put at a moderate distance from the fire, andgradually brought nearer; else the meat will be overdone half way through thejoint, and be nearly raw at the bone. Such meat as is not very fat should have paper placed over it, to prevent itfrom being scorched. Do not sprinkle the meat with salt when first put down, as the salt drawsout the gravy. Old meats require more cooking than young. The longer the meat has beenkilled, the less time it requires to roast it. Very fat meat requires more timethan usual. The general rule is to allow fifteen minutes to a pound for roasting with agood fire, and ten or twenty minutes over, as the family like it well done ornot. Kitchiner says: "Slow roasting is equally important with slow boiling."There should be a meat-screen to guard it from currents of air. Reckon the timeto the moment the roast will be eaten--allowing for the previous courses. If ajoint stands after roasting, it will not be "done to a turn." Its size and age,the weather, the fire, the degree of attention, and many other circumstances,have to be considered, and make this process verydifficult to perform in perfection. When the joint is half done, stir up the fire thoroughly. When it issaturated with heat, steam will begin to rise. To Baste roast meat, is to moisten it whilebefore the fire, to prevent the surface from being scorched. Meat shouldbe basted at first every ten minutes, and afterwards more frequently.Beef and mutton may be basted with their own dripping.Veal and poultry require an addition of butter, suet, ordripping. Some meats are basted with flavored material: claret,sweet-herbs and butter being used for mutton andlamb. For a pig, cream and melted butter arerecommended. For veal and other white meats, a basting is made ofthe yolk of eggs, grated biscuits, and the juice of anorange. Butter, clarified suet, and drippings, areused commonly for roast meat. To Brown Meat. --Make the fire brisker whenthe joint is half done, or add a glaze to improve the appearance. To Froth it. --Dredge the whole joint lightly withflour, when sufficiently roasted, and immediately baste it withbutter or dripping. Stir the fire, and in three minutes take down anddish the meat. Use butter to froth poultry or lamb. Theprocess plumps up the skin, and improves its appearance. Do not use toomuch flour; the meat should have a light varnish of froth, not acovering of paste. Dredgings are of flour simply, orflour and grated bread; or sweet herbs dried, powdered andmixed with flour; or powdered sugar mixed with poundedcinnamon and grated bread; or dried and pounded lemon peelmixed with flour; or fennel, or coriander seed,cinnamon and sugar, powdered and mixed with gratedbread. Dripping is the fat which drops from roastingmeat, and is used in frying, basting, or making plain pastry. When ajoint of beef is roasted, pour the melted fat into a basin ofcold, clean water; the heavy particles sink to the bottom; the meltedfat floats, and when cold, forms a clear cake of fat, fit for useseveral days in cool weather. Dripping that has been used for frying (unlessfish or pork has been fried in it) may be clarified in this way,for use a second time. Beef suet should be slowly melted, and passedthrough a sieve into cold water; when caked it may be put into a jar,and kept in a cool place. The Skimmings of Soups and Gravies --called "top-pot, " --is used by French cooks withflour, to thicken gravies and soups, and by some for frying. French Cooking. --French cooks subject theirmeats to a gradual long continued action of heat, making the fibreperfectly tender. The English and Americans cook them too fast; the Frenchwould pronounce such food only fit for barbarians. Another peculiarity ofFrench cooking is the variety of flavors imparted to meat. A greatnumber of dishes are prepared from a few original substances, and the additionof a particular sauce gives a name to the dish. In our cooking, theflavor peculiar to each meat is preserved, and no condiment is sufferedto overpower it. French dishes are more sightly; light and elegant dishes, notponderous masses, tempt the appetite. The French cooking is also moreeconomical. Nothing is wasted; and many ingredients are brought into use whichwe would cast aside as useless. Braising is an important part of the art of cooking,and, like the sauté, belongs entirely to the French school from which ittakes its name, braise being the remains of wood burnt in the oven,or live charcoal: this plan of cookery requires the action of the fireunder and over the braising pan, which is air-tight, in order that the aromaticflavor arising from its contents may be imbibedby the meat or poultry, and give it that succulence so much esteemed byepicures. Its origin is stated to be owing to a gastronomic society which wasformerly in existence in Paris, whose object was to benefit and improve the artof cookery, and who offered a reward of a silver gridiron to any culinaryartist who would discover a new mode of dressing a turkey. Although agridiron was, no doubt, intended to be used, yet a young artist named LaGacque, warmed by the offer, directed his imagination to quite a differentmode, and used the pan instead of the gridiron, and thus composed the braise,which was unanimously approved of by that scientific, gastronomic, andepicurean body, who awarded him the prize. The chief art in braising is to doit slowly, taking care that the ingredients are well proportioned. Put themeat you would braise into a stewpan, and cover it with thick slices offat bacon; then lay round it six or eight onions, a fagot ofsweet herbs, some celery, and, if to be brown, some thick slicesof carrots, and trimmings of any fresh meat-bones you have, witha pint and a half of water, or the same quantity of stock,according to what the meat is, and add seasoning. Lay on a sheetof paper, cover the pan close, and set it over a slow stove; it willrequire two or three hours, as its size and quality may direct. Then strain thegravy; keep the meat quite hot; take the fat off byplunging the basin into cold water, which will cause the fat tocoagulate; and boil it as quickly as you can till it thickens. If, however, youwish the gravy to adhere to the meat, it must be still furtherthickened; then with a brush kept for the purpose do over the meat, andif that has been larded, put it into the oven for a few minutes. This is called"glazing," and is much in use for made-dishes. A Braising Pan is a sort of oblong kettle, with abordered lid on which coals or ashes may be put. The lid shouldclosely fit the pan. Glazing is strong gravy, boiled quickly tillthick; and it is put on meat with a brush. Hams, tongues,and stewed beef may be glazed. Jerked Beef is made by cutting it into thinslices, dipping them into salt or sea water, and drying them inthe sun. This is done in the West Indies. Broiling. --The gridiron must be kept perfectly cleanand bright; always wiped when hot after use, and rubbed just before themeat is laid on it with clean fat or suet. The bars mustbe thoroughly hot, but not so as to burn. They should be concave, and terminatein a trough to catch the gravy. The fire must be clear and glowing,especially for a beefsteak, for which the passage in Macbeth is a gooddirection. "When 'tis done, then 'twere well it were done quickly."Mutton chops do not require quite so brisk a fire. If the article to bebroiled is thick, it must be warmed through more gradually. The broiling mustbe done as quickly as possible, to avoid drying up the juices andhardening the fibre of meat. Beef and mutton require ahotter fire than pork or veal, poultry, or fish. Let thesteak be uniformly thick; beefsteaks not more than half an inchthick; mutton a little thicker. Do not sprinkle the steak with salt before, or while broiling.It draws out the gravy. Pepper may be used. Do not turn thesteaks with a fork, but with a small tongs. A charcoal fire is convenient for broiling. When the chops are placedon the gridiron, set the dish to heat in which they are to be served, and sendto table as hot as possible. Soyer says: "As regards the thickness of the meat to be broiled, thatdepends in a great measure on the intensity ofthe fire, but the quicker the better, and also the sooner it is eaten aftertaken from the fire the better it will be. I have latterly, in broilingrump-steaks, added that which, by a great many, is considered animprovement; it is, on turning them the last time, to dredge them out of adredger with fine holes, in which have been placed four table-spoonfuls of finebiscuit or rusk-powder, one tablespoonful of salt, oneteaspoonful of pepper, a saltspoonful of either eschalot-powderor mushroom-powder, or finely pulverized stalks of celery, wellmixed together, and the steak to be placed in a very hot dish, with alittle mushroom-catsup, and a small piece of butter, and servedimmediately." Frying. --Though a convenient mode of cooking, thisis seldom done well. It is to roast quickly, or scorch meat, &c., infat in an iron pan. If little fat is used, it is calledsautéing. The pan should be flat and thick-bottomed, with perpendicularsides. Dripping, oil, butter, fresh lard, or clarifiedsuet--perfectly clean, fresh and sweet, must, when melted, cover thebottom of the pan; when this is heated sufficiently, the meat orfish must be put in and turned frequently, from one side to the other.When nearly done, they may be browned by being pressed firmly against thebottom of the pan. Be careful that the fat or oil is fresh, clean, and free fromsalt, else what you fry in it will be of bad color and flavor;salt will prevent it from browning. Fat or oil, to be used again, should be strained through asieve before it is set aside. Fat becomes richer from having meat fried in it, and may beused repeatedly; but the fat that has been used for fish cannotbe used again for meat. To prepare crumbs for frying, dry thoroughly in a warm oven, or before thefire, any waste pieces of bread; then pound them in a mortar and siftthem, and put them away till wanted. This is much better than gratingbread as it is needed, or using oatmeal, &c. When you wish fried things to look as well as possible, do them twice over with egg and crumbs. If eggs be very dear, a little flour and water may besubstituted for them in preparing fish to fry. In frying use a slice to lift the articles in and out of the pan, and drainthem. To make batter for frying: melt two ounces of butter in a littlewarm water, and pour it upon half-a-pound of flour; stir it andadd water enough to form a batter, thick enough to adhere to whatever isput into it; but it should run freely: add some salt and the beatenwhites of two eggs. A small shallow frying-pan, or sauté -pan, as it is called, is very useful tofry articles to be stewed: this method differs from common frying, as it onlyrequires butter enough to keep the article from sticking to the pan andburning. The fire for frying should be free from smoky coals, sharp, and even.Charcoal makes the best frying fire. The fat should be carefully drained from all fried articles; indeed,they should be so dry as scarcely to soil a cloth. Fish is best drainedby wrapping it in soft whitey-brown paper, by which it will so dry asnot to soil the napkin upon which it is served. The great secret in frying is to know when the fat is of a properheat. Put nothing in till it has done hissing, and is still. Or throw a smallbit of bread into the pan; if it fries crisp, the fat is ready;if it burns, too hot. Whatever is fried in fat not heated enough, willbe pale and sodden. Fish should be crisp and dry in a few minutes afterit is out of the pan; when it is not so, dry it on a cloth before the fire. Baking. --Baking is a very common and convenient modeof dressing a dinner in small families, and muchused in these United States. The southern cook will often stand in the midst ofa circle of portable ovens, placed on the brick floor of the kitchen, which isusually at some distance from the dwelling-house. Legs of mutton and pork, fillets of veal, and manyother joints, will bake nicely if inclined to be fat; if lean, they willnot taste well, but will shrivel up and lose much in weight. A pig, geese and ducks, a buttock, leg orshin of beef, a ham, oxcheek, and various kinds offish, make very nice baked dishes. The oven in preparing all kinds ofbread and farinaceous food, is indispensable. Stewing. --All articles to be stewed should first beboiled gently, then skimmed and set aside in an even heat: on this account,charcoal makes the best fire for stewing. All stews, or meat dressed a second time, should be only simmered, asthe meat should only be made hot through. A stewpan is the most advantageous vessel in which stews, hashes, soups, orgravies, can be made; indeed, for all purposes of boiling, a stewpan ispreferable to a deep saucepan, as, in the former, the articles are exposed tomore even heat than when they are placed one above another in the saucepan, andare likely to be broken in stirring. The best stewpans are made of copper or iron; they should be kept covered asmuch as possible, unless you wish to reduce the gravy. Be careful not to fry in a stewpan; or if so, with great care, andsufficient butter to save the tinning from melting. Most of the directions for making soups and gravies apply also tothis branch of cookery. Poëling. --Put into a stewpan with two pounds ofveal, a pound of beef suet, one of butter, one of veryfat bacon, all cut up; fry them till the veal becomeswhite; put in three pints of boiling water, a handful ofsalt, a few sprigs of thyme, a bay leaf, an onionstuck with cloves, and a bundle of parsley and greenonions. Boil the whole gently till the onion is done, strain itthrough a sieve, and set it by for use. Poële will keep for a week, and will giverelish and whiteness to everything boiled in it. Do not boil any lean ofbacon; it will give a red color from the saltpetre. Meatin poëling must be under-done. Larding. --Have ready larding-pins of differentsizes, according to the article to be done; cut slices of bacon intobits of a proper length, quite smooth, and put on a larding-needle to suit it,with which pierce the skin and a very little of the meat, leavingthe bacon in, and the two ends of equal length outwards. Lard inrows the size you think fit. The same effect with regard to flavor, may be produced by raising theskin and laying a slice of fat bacon beneath it. Doubing consists in passing bacon through meat, while larding is on the surface only. Glazing is done by brushing melted glaze orjelly over the article, and letting it cool; in some cases it isrequisite to cover the articles with two or three coats of glaze, allowing eachto cool as it is laid on. The glaze should be of a clear yellow brown, and asthick as good treacle. If you have not the glaze ready, sift a little sugar over the articleto be glazed, and finish in the oven, with a salamander, or red hot shovel. Blanching makes the article plump and white,and consists in putting it into cold water over the fire, allowing it toboil up, and then plunging it into cold water, where the article shouldremain until quite cold. Danger from Copper Saucepans. --The precise dangerfrom the use of copper saucepans, or stewpans, imperfectly tinned, is hardly understood. It appears that the acid contained instews and other made dishes, as lemon-juice, though it does notdissolve copper by being merely boiled in it a few minutes, nevertheless, ifallowed to cool and stand in it for some time, will acquire poisonous matter,as verdigris, in the form of a green band, or crust, inside the vessel.It has likewise been proved that weak solutions of common salt, such as aredaily made by adding a little salt to boiling vegetables, fish,or meat, act powerfully on copper vessels, although strong solutions or brine would not affectthem. It is, however, in vain to hope that cooks will attend to the nicedistinctions by which copper stewpans may be rendered safe; the general advicegiven by prudent physicians is, therefore, against their use at all. The kettles in which the soups are made should be well tinned, and keptparticularly clean, by being washed in hot water and rubbed dry beforethey are put away. If they are not kept well tinned, the taste as well as thecolor of the soup will be liable to be affected by the iron; and if thesoup-kettle be made of copper, and the tinning not quite perfect, everythingcooked in it will be more or less poisonous, as everything which is sweet,salt, or sour, extracts verdigris from copper. Boning, besides its other advantages, isparticularly recommended, on account of its economy: the bones ofturkeys, fowls, hares, &c., assisting to makegravy, while they are nearly useless when left in the bodies of theanimals: a boned fowl also, rendered solid by stuffing, will gomuch further than when dressed in the common way. Hares should always beboned, for the sake of the improvement in their appearance, and being so muchmore easily carved. In the hiring of a cook by persons resident in the country,it is therefore essential to ascertain whether she is mistress of that art; foras to teaching her by printed directions, it would be time thrown away, and shecan only acquire it by practice; but it may be learned by a few lessons fromthe poulterer. Napkin Rings. An illustration of two decorative rings. CHAPTER XXVIII. HINTS AND MAXIMS. IF you chance to occupy the important position of a cook, remember thatcleanliness is the first, second and third requisite in point of importance, tobe observed. Keep your flour-box, sugar, salt, and spices always covered, that dust andinsects may not get in. Never put onions or cheese on the same dish with anything else, and nevercut anything else with the knife you use for them. Keep a particular pitcherfor beer or buttermilk, or you may chance to put milk or water into theremains. Empty into some outside drain the saucepan in which you have boiledvegetables, as soon as you have done with it; and never put by anything eatablein a saucepan. This is a fearfully common practice with southern cooks. Keepyour tin and copper vessels as sweet and clean asglass or china. The saucepans are of far more consequence than tumblers orteacups. If glasses be dirty, those who drink from them are disgusted; but ifsaucepans be foul, they may chance to be poisoned. Many have died from thiscause. The sort of rust which forms in copper vessels not kept clean is adeadly poison. If a housekeeper is careful, she will look into all hersaucepans at least once a week, to see if they are well cleaned, or wanttinning. Let the dinner be served quite hot, and have the plates as hot as you canhandle them, Cold plates spoil the finest joint of meat; and it is very easy tohave plates hot. At breakfast and tea carry in the water quite boiling, andthen it will not be your fault if the tea is not good. It is a very commonfault in cooks, as soon as the teakettle boils, to set it on one side where thewater cools a little, so that it is not quite boiling when poured on the tea. The true economy of housekeeping is simply the art of gathering up all thefragments, so that nothing be lost. I mean fragments of time, as well as materials. Nothing should be thrownaway so long as it is possible to make any use of it, however trifling that usemay be; and whatever be the size of a family, every member should be employedeither in earning or in saving money. In early childhood, you lay the foundation of poverty or riches in thehabits you give your children. Teach them to save everything; not for their own use--for that would make them selfish--but for some use. Teach them to share everything with their playmates; but neverallow them to destroy anything. As far as possible, have bits of bread eaten before they become hard. Spreadthe rest out to dry to be pounded for puddings, or soaked for "brewis." This ismade of dry crusts and bits of bread soaked in hot milk, mashed, salted andbuttered like toast. An ox's gall will set any color in silk, cotton or woollen. The colors ofcalico which would fade in one washing will be fixed by it. It is worth whileto buy cheap fading goods, and set them in this way. Get out all the liquidfrom the gall, and cork it up in a large phial. One large spoonful in a gallonof warm water is sufficient. It is also excellent for taking out spots frombombazine and stiff goods, which, washed in it, look as well as new. It must bestirred into the water. After washing cloth in this water, you must wash it ifyou wish to clear it, in warm suds, not putting soap uponit. Lamps will have a less disagreeable smell if you dip the wick yarn in stronghot vinegar and dry it. Do not let coffee and tea stand in tin. Keep tinware dry, and scaldwoodenware often. Eggs will keep almost any length of time in lime water properly prepared.One pint of coarse salt, and one pint of unslacked lime, to a common pailful ofwater. If there be too much lime it will eat the eggs from the shells; and if asingle egg be cracked it will spoil the whole. They should be covered with limewater, and kept in a cold place. It is a good plan to lay down eggs in thespring and September for the winter. Few know how to keep the flavor of sweet marjoram, the best of all herbs forbroth and stuffing. It should be gathered in bud or blossom and dried in a tinkitchen at a moderate distance from the fire; when dry it should be rubbed,sifted, and corked up in a bottle. Bones from which roasting pieces have been cut may be bought in market for atrifle, and a very rich soup made of them, besides skimming the fat forshortening. Bones from the rump are full of marrow, and will yield a pint ofgood shortening without impairing the richness ofthe soup. The best pieces of beef for soup are the leg and shin; if boiled verylong, the sinews add to the richness of the soup. The shoulder of veal is the most economical for roasting or boiling; twodinners may be made from it--the shoulder roasted, and the knuckle cut off tobe boiled with pork and greens, or made into soup. Keep an old blanket and sheet for ironing, and on no account suffer anyother to be used. Have plenty of holders, and do not put towels to suchservice. Scrubbing Brush. An illustration of a square headed brush with a handle. Keep a coarse broom for the cellar stairs, wood shed, yard, &c. Neveruse a carpet broom for such places. Never drop knives into hot dishwater. Have a large tin basin to wash themin, just high enough to wash the blades without wetting the handles. Keep your castorscovered with blotting paper and green flannel. Keep your salt spoons out of thesalt, and clean them often. Do not wrap knives and forks in woollens, but in strong paper. Steel isinjured by lying in woollens. It is a good plan to rub the blades with nicegrease, and wrap them up separately, to prevent rust. Herbs should be kept from the air. Herb tea, to do any good, should be madevery strong. Herbs must be gathered while in blossom. Those who have a littleground will do well to raise the most useful herbs; apothecaries make largeprofits on them. The same pickle used for bacon is good for neats' tongues. Pigs' tongues arenice, prepared in the same way. They are sold in England for reindeers'tongues, as a great luxury. Buffaloes' tongues should soak a day and a night, and boil six hours. Molasses used in cooking should be first boiled and skimmed. One or twogallons may be thus prepared at a time. It is a prodigious improvement. Always have a heavy stone on the top of your pork in pickle. You may keep abit of fresh meat on this stone, in summer, when you fear it may spoil. Have plenty of towels in the kitchen, or Biddy will use your whitenapkins. Soap dirty clothes, and soak them in water over night. Use hard soap forclothes, and soft for washing floors. Cut lemon and orange peel, when fresh, into a bottle kept full of brandy.This brandy gives a delicious flavor to pies, cakes, &c. Roseleaves may bepreserved in brandy. Peach leaves steeped in it make an excellent seasoning forcustards and puddings. Grate horseradish when the root is in perfection, put it in bottles, fill itwith strong vinegar, and keep it corked tight, for winter use. Keep a bag for odd pieces of tape and strings, and a bag or box for oldbuttons. A little salt sprinkled in starch, while boiling, prevents its sticking; itis also good to stir it with a clean sperm candle. To separate wax from honeycomb, tie up the comb in a linen or woollen bag;place it in a kettle of cold water, and hang it over the fire. The wax meltsand rises to the surface, while all the impurities remain in the bag. A few pebbles in the bag will prevent its floating. Honey may be separated from the comb by placing it in the hot sun or beforethe fire, with two or three colanders or sieves under it--each finer than theother. Potatoes boiled and mashed hot, are good in shortcakes and puddings; theysave flour and shortening. To corn meat simply--rub in plenty of salt, and set it in the cellar for aday or two. In summer it is good to corn meat, which will not keep more than aday and a half. If you want to keep it longer, rub in more salt, and secure itfrom the flies. A little saltpetre rubbed in before you apply the common salt,makes the meat tender; but it is not best to use it in summer. Legs of mutton are good, aired in the same way as hams--six pounds salt,eight ounces saltpetre, five pints molasses, will make pickle enough for onehundred pounds. Small legs should be kept in pickle twelve or fifteen days;large, four or five weeks; and they should be hung up a day or two before beingsmoked. Lay them in the oven on crossed sticks, and make a fire at the entrancewith cobs or walnut bark, or chips, which impart a sweet taste. Smoke thesmallest pieces forty-eight hours; the large legs four or five days. If hungtill thoroughly dry, the mutton may be eaten in thin slices, like hung beef.When legs of meat are put in pickle, the thickest part should be uppermost, asthe creature stood while living; also when hung to dry; thus the juices of themeat are kept in. Meat should be turned over once or twice while smoking. Hams should be well covered in paper bags, and put in a chest or barrel,with layers of charcoal or ashes between. When you take one out to cut for use,put it away in a dark place, well covered. Let there be a place for every article, and when not in use let everyarticle be in its place. Keep every utensil ready for immediate use. The stock pot should never be suffered to be empty, as almost any meats(save salt meats) or fowls make stock; the remnants should never be thrownanywhere but into the stock pot, and should too much stock be already in yourpossession, boil it down to a glaze: waste is thus avoided. Keep your meat in a cool, dry place; your fish on ice, and your vegetableson a stone floor free from air. Cut your soap when it comes in, and let it dry slowly. Keep your sweet herbs in paper bags, each bag containing onlyone description of herb. They should be dried in the wind and not in thesun, and when ordered in a receipt should be cautiously used, as apreponderance in any seasoning spoils it. When oranges or lemons are used for juice, chop downthe peel, put them in small pots and tie them down for use. APPLES.--In choosing apples, be guided by the weight; the heaviest are the best, Apple Peeler An illustration of a vice type of device with knobs and a paddle/ and those should always be selected which, on being pressedby the thumb, yield with a slight crackling noise. Prefer large applesto small, for waste is saved in peeling and coring. Apples should be kept on dry straw in a dry place, and pearshung up by the stalk. BATTER for fish, meat, fritters, &c.--Prepare it withfine flour, salt, a little oil, beer,vinegar, or white wine, and the whites of eggs beaten up;when of a proper thickness, about the size of a nutmeg, it will drop outof the spoon at once. Fry in oil or hog's lard. CARROTS, if young, need only be wiped when boiled--if old, they mustbe scraped before boiling. Slice them into a dish, and pour over them meltedbutter. CAULIFLOWERS.--Cut off the stalks, but leave a little of the greenon; boil in spring water with a little salt in it: they must notboil too fast. CELERY.--Very little is sufficient for soups, as the flavor is verypredominating. It should be particularly cleanly washed and curled when sent totable. To curl celery, wash well, and take off the outside stalks, cutit to a proper length, split each stalk into three or four divisions with alarge needle, then place the head of celery in spring water withthe root uppermost, and let it remain for four or five hours--it may then betastefully arranged on the dish. GAME may often be made fit for eating when it seems spoiled, bycleaning it and washing with vinegar and water. Birds that arenot likely to keep, should be drawn, cropped, and picked, then washed in two orthree waters, and rubbed with salt; have in readiness a large saucepanof boiling water, and plunge them into it one by one, drawing them upand down by the legs, so that the water may pass through them.Let them stay for five or six minutes, then hang them up in a cold place; whenthey are completely drained, well salt and pepper the insides,and thoroughly wash them before roasting. GRAVIES.--The skirts of beef and the kidney will makequite as good gravy as any other meat, if prepared in the samemanner. The kidney of an ox, or the milt, makes excellentgravy, cut to pieces and prepared as other meat, and so with theshank end of mutton that has been dressed, if much gravy is notrequired. The shank bones of mutton add greatly to the richness ofgravies, but they should be first well soaked and scoured clean. Thetaste of gravies is improved by tarragon, but it should besparingly used, immediately before serving. LARD should be carefully melted in a jar put in a kettle ofwater and boiled, and run into bladders that have been strictly cleaned;the bladders should not be too large, as the lard will become rank ifthe air gets to it. While melting it, put in a sprig of rosemary. MUSTARD mixed smooth with new milk, and a little creamadded, will keep; it is very soft, and by no means bitter. SAGO should soak for an hour in water previous to using, totake off the earthy taste. SUET may be kept for a twelvemonth, thus: choose the firmest and mostfree from skin or veins, remove all traces of these, put the suetin a saucepan at some distance from the fire, and let it melt gradually; whenmelted, pour it into a pan of cold spring water; when hard, wipeit dry, fold it in white paper, put it into a linen bag, and keep it ina dry, cool place; when used, it must be scraped, and will make an excellentcrust, either with or without butter. TONGUE, which has been dried, should be soaked in water threeor four hours. One that has not been dried will require but little soaking; putit in cold water, and boil gently till tender. Raisin wine may be substituted for sherry, for sweetsgenerally. Copper vessels, when the tinning is worn off, must never be used, or thepoisoning of those who partake of whatever may have been cooked in them isinevitable. They should be sent to be re-tinned immediately they requireit. Keep tapes and jelly bags clean, or when again used they will impartan unpleasant flavor. All soups should be moderately thin and bright. Meats, such as beef, mutton, and venison, mustrather be underdone than overdone, excepting veal and pork, whichrequire to be well done. Fish should be quite done, but not overdone. Pastry must be carefully baked; it should be sent to table a pale goldcolor. Onions should be kept on ropes in a dry place--a specked one shouldbe removed or it will contaminate the others. Cold water cracks hot iron infallibly. Pudding towels should be carefully washed, and kept clean in a dry place.Put a clean round towel on the roller quite as often as necessary. Be very particular in not letting your stocks and sauces pass over two dayswithout boiling them up, and be careful to stir the thick soups and sauces allthe time they are on the fire, and change all your cold meats into freshclean dishes every morning, wiping down the dressers and shelves, and ifallowed larding cloths see that they are clean. Keep your larder door shut,free from dust and damp; do not have your baked paste in the larder, butin your kitchen cupboard, and then see to your game, wiping, andpeppering and gingering your venison, arranging the game whichrequires to be dressed first, and see that all the blood which may have droppedfrom the game or venison is cleaned from the dressers andflooring. Then see to the vegetables, removing all stale and what is notwanted, giving it to the poor, either dressed in some way or uncooked; do notbe overstocked, but always keep a little reserve. Be sure to look well, everymorning to your pickled pork and hams, keep and rub them well,and turn them, marking those to be used first. Your fish must be lookedto and well cleaned and washed, and if intended for that day's dinner, kept inwater until required; if not, keep it on the marble or stones; yourdoors should always be shut. Clean hands, always clean hands. A dirty kitchen is a disgrace to every one connected with it. With these few hints we wind up our remarks, merely adding that many of thereceipts given, which are on too large a scale for a small family, may havetheir proportions equally reduced, and an excellent dish will be the result. Insome instances also, the more expensive ingredients may be left out withoutdestroying the integrity of the receipt, discretion and judgment being alonerequired in these cases. In conclusion, the mistress of the household will understand that thewell-being of her establishment depends upon her surveillance; and though hertoo frequent presence in the kitchen would be unnecessary andannoying to the cook, An illustration of a candle stick holder with a cone shapped device sticking out of the side. yet she should not bedeterred from visiting it by any false delicacy, or deference to an absurdcustom which makes it vulgar for a lady to visit her cook in her own domains.If the cook is thrifty and clean, she will be glad to receive the praise towhich she is fairly entitled; if dirty and careless, it is very essential thatthe lady should be acquainted with the fact in order to remedy it by achange. CHAPTER XXIX. ARTICLES IN SEASON FOR EACH MONTH. JANUARY. Fish. --Eels, flounders, haddocks, lampreys, oysters,whitings, clams, muscles, striped bass, salt mackerel, smoked salmon, sardines,anchovies, fish pickled and soused. Meats. --Beef, mutton, fish, pork, ham, venison,veal, sausages, &c. Poultry and game. --Capons, fowls, ducks, geese,Scotch grouse, prairie fowls, young rabbits, partridges, pheasants, pigeons,wild birds, turkeys, woodcock, snipe, quails, ducks--canvas back, red-head,broad bill, teal--bear's meat, jugged hare. Vegetables. --Winter spinach, turnips, potatoes,sweet potatoes, rice, celery, cabbage, parsnips, carrots, dried white beans,beets, dried herbs, garlic, onions, shalots, leeks, mint, mustard, parsley,sage, rosemary, salsify, thyme, &c. Fruits. --Apples, oranges, dried figs, importedgrapes, almonds, raisins, dates, filberts, prunes, hard nuts, Brazil andMadeira-nuts, black-walnuts, hickory-nuts, peccan-nuts, butternuts,chestnuts. FEBRUARY. Fish. --Codfish, eels, flounders, haddocks, lampreys,oysters, smelts, whitings, clams, muscles, striped bass, smoked salmon, saltmackerel, sardines, anchovies, pickled and soused fish. Meats. --Beef, mutton, fresh pork, sausages, venison,ham. Poultry and Game. --Fowls, capons, ducks, geese,Scotch grouse, prairie fowls, partridges, rabbits, pheasants, pigeons, turkeys,woodcock, reed birds, quails, snipe, ducks--canvas back, red head, teal, broadbill,--hare, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Turnips, potatoes, sweet potatoes,winter spinach, rice, celery, cabbage, parsnips, carrots, white beans, beets,garlic, onions, shalots, mint, leeks, mustard, parsley, sage, salsify, thyme,dried herbs. Fruits. --Apples, oranges, figs, imported grapes,almonds, raisins, filberts, dates, prunes, hazel-nuts, Brazil and Madeira-nuts,black walnuts, hickory nuts, pecan-nuts, butternuts, chestnuts. MARCH. Fish. --Codfish, eels, haddocks, flounders, oysters,clams, whitings, striped bass, perch, smelts, lampreys, salt mackerel, smokedsalmon, sardines, anchovies, pickled and soused fish. Meats. --Beef, mutton, pork, ham. Poultry and Game. --Fowls, capons, tame ducks, geese,Scotch grouse, prairie hens, rabbits, partridges, pheasants, pigeons, turkeys,reed birds, woodcock, snipe, quails, hare, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Spinach, lettuces, cresses, turnips,potatoes, sweet potatoes, rice, radishes, celery, cabbage, parsnips, carrots,white beans, beets, garlic, onions, shalots, leeks, salsify, parsley, sage,thyme, dried herbs. Fruits. --Apples, oranges, figs, almonds, raisins,filberts, prunes, hazel-nuts, Brazil and Madeira-nuts, hickory-nuts,peccan-nuts, chestnuts, dates. APRIL. Fish. --Brook trout, codfish, halibut, shad, stripedbass, eels, lobsters, oysters, perch, roach, smelts, clams, shrimps, cray,small fish. Meats. --Beef, mutton, veal, ham. Poultry and Game. --Spring chickens, fowls, capon,turkeys, ducks, Scotch grouse, prairie hens, partridges, pheasants, pigeons,quails, woodcock, snipe, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Lettuces, spinach, turnips, cresses,potatoes, rice, radishes, parsnips, carrots, white beans, beets, garlic,onions, shalots, leeks, mint, mustard, parsley, sage, salsify, thyme, driedherbs, Jerusalem artichokes. Fruits. --Apples, oranges, figs, almonds, raisins,prunes, dates, &c. MAY. Fish. --Terrapin, fresh salmon, turtle, trout,codfish, halibut, perch, shad, carp, striped bass, eels, English soles, softcrabs, lobsters, salmon, roach, smelts, shrimps, cray fish, prunes, salt andsmoked fish. Meats. --Beef, mutton, veal, ham. Poultry and Game. --Spring chickens, fowls, capons,Scotch grouse, prairie hens, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Asparagus, lettuces, cresses,mushrooms, spinach, turnips, potatoes, radishes, rice, parsnips, carrots, whitebeans, onions, mint, mustard, parsley, sage, thyme, salsify, Jerusalemartichokes, dry herbs. Fruits. --Apples, oranges, figs, almonds, raisins,prunes, dates. JUNE. Fish. --Terrapin, fresh salmon, turtle, trout,codfish, halibut, perch, pickerel, fresh mackerel, shad, carp, sea-bass,striped bass, eels, fresh herring, king fish, English soles, soft crabs,lobsters, salmon-trout, sturgeon. Meat. --Beef, mutton, lamb, veal, ham, salt pork. Poultry and Game. --Spring chickens, fowls, capons,bear's meat, grouse, prairie fowl. Vegetables. --Asparagus, green peas, Lima beans,white beans, mushrooms, lettuces, cresses, spinach, celery, potatoes, radishes,rice, carrots, onions, garlic, mint, mustard, parsley, sage, thyme, salsify,Jerusalem artichokes, dry herbs. Fruits. --Strawberries, cherries, currants, oranges,figs, almonds, raisins, prunes, dates. JULY. Fish. --Terrapin, turtle, carp, cod, cray fish, eels,flounders, fresh salmon, herring, lobsters, fresh mackerel, perch, pickerel,salmon-trout, trout, sea-bass, striped bass, halibut, English soles, blue fish,king fish, soft crabs, sturgeon. Meats. --Beef, lamb, mutton, salt pork. Poultry and Game. --Chickens, fowls, green geese,pigeons, plovers. Vegetables. --Artichokes, asparagus, string beans,Lima and white beans, peas of some kinds, carrots, celery, chervil, cucumbers,endive, herbs of all kinds, lettuces, mint, mushrooms, potatoes, purslane,cresses, radishes, salads of all sorts, salsify, spinach, turnips, green corn,tomatoes, succory, squashes, eggplant, cold-slaw. Fruits. --Apricots, currants, strawberries,raspberries, blackberries, gooseberries, cherries, nectarines, peaches,hot-house grapes, melons of various kinds, oranges, almonds, raisins, prunes,figs, fresh figs, pine apples, damsons, plums. AUGUST. Fish. --Terrapin, turtle, perch, codfish, pickerel,carp, eels, fresh salmon, salmon-trout, brook-trout, lobster, fresh mackerel,striped bass, sea-bass, English soles, soft crabs, halibut, cray-fish,blue-fish, king-fish, sturgeon, smelts, roach,black-bass. Meats. --Beef, mutton, lamb, veal, salt pork,ham. Poultry and Game. --Chickens, fowls, ducks, greengeese, plovers, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Artichokes, string-beans, lima andwhite beans, carrots, celery, chervil, cucumbers, endive, herbs of all kinds,lettuces, mint, potatoes, purslane, radishes, cresses, salads, oyster-plant,spinach, turnips, green corn, tomatoes, succory, squashes, cold slaw, eggplant. Fruits. --Raspberries, blackberries, peaches,nectarines, green grapes, plums, gooseberries, apricots, harvest apples,mulberries, melons of various kinds, hot-house grapes, pears of differentsorts, summer pippins, green gages. SEPTEMBER. Fish. --Terrapin, turtle, perch, cod, pickerel, eels,fresh salmon, salmon-trout, trout, lobster, striped bass, sea-bass, black bass,English soles, soft crabs, halibut, cray-fish, blue-fish, king-fish, smelts,sturgeon, roach. Meats. --Beef, mutton, lamb, veal, ham, salt beef andpork. Poultry and Game. --Chickens, fowls, ducks, greengeese, meadow-larks, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Artichokes, white and lima beans,carrots, celery, chervil, cucumbers, herbs of all kinds, lettuces, mint,potatoes, purslane, radishes, salads, oyster plant, spinach, turnips, beets,green corn, tomatoes, succory, squashes, cold slaw, egg plant. Fruits. --Green grapes, magnum bonum plum, Palmer andColumbia grapes, egg plums, gooseberries, nectarines, peaches, apples, grapesof different varieties, pears of all kinds. OCTOBER. Fish. --Terrapin, salmon, striped bass, sea-bass,blue-fish, salmon-trout, lobsters, codfish, halibut, black-fish, pickerel,carp, eels, soft crabs, perch, trout, oysters. Meats. --Beef, mutton, pork, veal, venison, lamb. Poultry and Game. --Meadow-larks, chickens, capons,ducks, turkeys, partridges, wild pigeon, English snipe, grouse or prairie-hens,pheasants, quails, wild ducks, hares, rabbits, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Artichokes, cauliflower, broccoli,succory, carrots, celery, leeks, onions, parsnips, potatoes, spinach, turnips,egg-plant, lettuce, tomatoes, carrots, cabbage, rice, cauliflower, artichokes,celery, leeks, onions, parsnips, sweet potatoes, potatoes, radishes, salads,savoys, winter spinach, tomatoes, turnips, succory, beets, oyster-plant,egg-plant, dry herbs. Fruits. --Late peaches, apples, filberts, almonds,hazel-nuts, grapes, quinces, walnuts, hickory-nuts, chestnuts, chincopins,peccan-nuts. NOVEMBER. Fish. --Eels, oysters, clams, codfish, haddock,lampreys, whitings, muscles, striped bass, salt mackerel, smoked salmon,sardines, anchovies, &c. Meats. --Beef, mutton, lamb, pork, venison. Poultry and Game. --Chickens,fowls, capons, ducks, geese, Scotch grouse,prairie-hens, hares, rabbits, partridges,pheasants, pigeons, turkeys, reed-birds, woodcock,snipe, quails, canvas-back, red-head, broadbill,teal-ducks, meadow-larks, bear's meat. Vegetables. --Celery, cauliflower,cabbage, radishes, winter-spinach, turnips,potatoes, sweet potatoes, rice, parsnips,carrots, dry white beans, beets, dried herbs,garlic, onions, shalots, leeks, mint,mustard, parsley, sage, thyme, salsify. Fruits. --Late peaches, apples,oranges, almonds, raisins,filberts, prunes, figs, hazelnuts, Brazil andMadeira nuts, dates, walnuts, hickory-nuts andchestnuts. DECEMBER. Fish. --Oysters, clams,eels, haddock, lampreys, whitings, muscles,striped-bass, salt mackerel, smoked salmon, sardines,anchovies, &c. Meats. --Beef, mutton,pork, veal, venison. Poultry and Game. --Fowls,turkeys, capons, ducks, geese, Scotchgrouse, prairie-hens, hares, rabbits, partridges,pheasants, pigeons, reed-birds, woodcock, snipe,quails, ducks, canvas back, red-head, broadbill,teal,--bear's meat. Vegetables. --Cauliflower, celery,cabbage, winter spinach, turnips, potatoes, sweetpotatoes, rice, parsnips, carrots, dry beans,beets, dried herbs, garlic, onions, shalots,leeks, mint, mustard, parsley, sage,thyme, salsify. Fruits. --Apples, oranges,bananas, almonds, raisins, filberts, prunes,figs, hazelnuts, Brazil and Madeira nuts, dates,walnuts, hickory-nuts, chestnuts. PART SECOND.RECEIPTS. RECEIPTS. SOUPS. THERE is no dish, perhaps, that comes to table which gives such generalsatisfaction as well prepared soup; let the appetite be vigorous or delicate,an excellent soup will always prove grateful to it; and as this is beyondcontradiction, it should be the province of the cook to be always in a positionto produce it at a short notice. There should always be plenty of dried herbs in the store closet;these may be purchased chiefly in quantities at the beginning of the autumn, ofany market-gardener. Herbs may be very well kept, as indeed they areusually, in paper bags; they should be all labelled. When time is animportant object, the necessity for this is obvious--they are always to be hadwhen wanted, and the bag should be immediately replaced after using. There should be a saucepan, or a kettle of iron well tinned, kept for souponly; the lid should fit tightly; one will be found to answer allpurposes, being especially useful as a "stock-pot." The inexperiencedreader will understand by the term "stock-pot," that soups being of twokinds, brown and white, have different foundations, that of brown beingalways beef, and that of white, veal; there are manyingredients in each, and it is the various articles which, when put together,are called "stock," hence the soup utensil is technically termed thestock-pot. When fat remains on any soup, a teacupful of flour andwater mixed quite smooth, and boiled in it, will make it rise as scum,when it may be taken off. If richness or greater consistency be wanted, a good lump of buttermixed with flour, and boiled in the soup, will give either of thesequalities. Long boiling is necessary to give the full flavor of the ingredients,therefore time should be allowed for soups and gravies. Skim frequentlyand simmer slowly; but do not let the broth cool until it is completelymade. Be sparing in the use of pepper, salt, and spices. If onions are too strong, boil a turnip with them, and it willrender them mild. Do not keep either soups or gravies in any vessel of tin or copper;and in stirring soup, do it always with a wooden spoon. Arrow-root, or the mere farina or flour of thepotato, is far better for the thickening of soups than wheatenflour. The basis of all well-made soups, is composed of what English cooks call "Stock," or broth, made from all sortsof meat, bones and the remains of poultry or game; all ofwhich may be put together and stewed down in the"Stock-pot;" the contents of which are, by the French, termed Consommé. This is chiefly used for thepreparation of brown or gravy soups: that intended for white soups being rather differentlycompounded, though made in nearly the same manner. To the medley of ingredients, add carrots cut in thin slices,herbs, onions, pepper, and salt; when it has stewedslowly for a short time, pour in the boiling water in proportion to thequantity of meat and soup required; then stew it until it is of a richconsistency, take it from the fire, let it cool, remove the pot. If required the following day, care should be taken that the deposit orsediment is removed, as also the fat previous to warming; if kept longthe pans must be changed; there is as much danger in red glazed earthenware asin metal pans; the latter should never be employed to keep gravies in,if possible. Wherever greater richness is required, it may be obtained by theaddition of the jelly of cow-heel, or a lump of butter andflour. Remember, soup is richer and better for being made the previous day, or eventwo or three days previously to its being required, if it be warmed each day;to be really good it must be well stewed. Seasonings for Soups.--Spices should be putwhole into soups; allspice is one of the best, though it is not sohighly esteemed as it deserves. Seville orange-juice has a finer and milderacid than lemon-juice; but both should be used with caution. Sweet herbs, for soups and broths, consist ofknotted marjoram, thyme, and parsley,--a sprig of eachtied together. The older and drier onions are, the stronger theirflavor; in dry seasons, also, they are very strong: the quantity should beproportioned accordingly. Although celery may be generally obtained forsoup throughout the year, it may be useful to know, that driedcelery-seed is an excellent substitute. It is so strongly flavored, that adrachm of whole seed will enrich half a gallon of soup as much as twoheads of celery. Mushrooms are much used, and when they cannotbe obtained, fresh mushroom ketchup will answer the purpose, but itshould be used very sparingly, as nothing is more difficult to remove than theover-flavoring of ketchup. A piece of butter, in proportion tothe liquid, mixed with flour, and added to the soup, when boiling, willenrich and thicken it. The finer flavoring articles, as ketchup,spices, wines, juice, &c., should not be added till the soupis nearly done. A good proportion of wine is a gill to three pints ofsoup; this is as much as can be used without the vinous flavor predominating,which is never the case in well made soups. Wine should be added late inthe making, as it evaporates very quickly in boiling. Be cautious ofover-seasoning soups with pepper, salt, spices, orherbs, for it is a fault that can seldom be remedied; any provisionover-salted is spoiled. A teaspoonful of sugar is a good addition inflavoring soups. Vermicelli is added to soups in theproportion of a quarter of a pound for a tureen of soup for eight persons; itshould be broken, then blanched in cold water, and is better if stewedin broth before it is put into the soup. MEAT SOUPS.1.--STOCK FOR WHITE SOUPS. This is a soup, the foundation of which is veal,--the knuckle, thescrag, or calf's head being the best meat for thepurpose,--an old fowl, a little ham, or bacon,mutton, sheep's head, &c., nearly the same ingredients as forbrown soups, save that there must not be much beef, and the proportionof ham and bacon smaller in the latter than former, and when madefor white sauce, care must be taken to leave out thepepper. 2.--BROWN STOCK. Put ten pounds of shin of beef, six pounds of knuckle of veal,and some sheep's-trotters or a cow-heel, in a closely coveredstewpan, with very little water to draw out the gravy verygently, and allow it nearly to dry in until it becomes brown. Then pour insufficient boiling water to entirely cover the meat, and let itboil slowly, skimming it frequently; seasoning it with wholepeppers and salt, roots, herbs, and vegetables of anykind. That being done, let it boil gently five or six hours, pour thebroth from off the meat, and let it stand during the night tocool. The following morning take off the scum and fat, and put it awayin a stone jar for use. Or: --Put into a stewpan a piece of beef, apiece of veal, an old fowl, some slices of ham orbacon, and all the trimmings of meat that can be obtained; add tothese materials, where such things are abundant, partridge, grouse, orother game, which may not be sufficiently young and tender for the spit.Put a little water to it, just enough to cover half the meat, andstew very gently over a slow fire or steam apparatus. When the top piece isdone through, cover the meat with boiling water or broth;season with spices and vegetables; stew all together for eight or tenhours in an uncovered stewpan; skim off the fat, and strain the liquorthrough a fine sieve. Brown stock may be made from an ox-cheek, ox-tail,brisket, flank, or shin of beef; which will, either together orseparately, make a strong jelly if stewed down with a piece ofham or lean bacon, in the proportion of one-half pound to everyseven pounds of meat; but the shin of beef alone will afford a stronger and better flavor. This stock may also be reduced to a glaze by boiling the skimmed liquor as fast aspossible in a newly tinned stewpan, until it becomes of the desired consistenceand of a good brown color; taking care at the same time to prevent it fromburning. 3.--BROWN GRAVY SOUP. The meat used for making this soup should be quite fresh, and of thecommon gravy beef; if the shin be used, break the bones, as themarrow will add to its richness. Take seven to eight pounds of the meat, cut a small portion of itinto thick pieces and put it with three or four large sliced onions intoa close stewpan, with a little butter, until fried to a fine brown. Thatdone, add a shank of ham, just cover the meat with coldwater--say a couple of quarts--and let it simmer by the fire for at leastthree hours; during which time it should not be allowed to boil, but, whencoming to that point, check it with cold water, and skim it. As thepores of the meat will then be opened, and the gravy drawn, throwin three quarts of warm water, along with a handful or one quarter ounceeach of black pepper, allspice, and salt, as well as abundle of sweet herbs, a few cloves, a couple of shalots, two orthree middling-sized carrots and turnips (the latter an hourafterwards), together with a couple of heads of celery, and allow thewhole to boil slowly until the meat is done to rags, and the vegetablesbecome tender. Then strain it off, and let it stand during the night. Removethe fat on the following day, set any portion of it on the fire an hourbefore dinner, and, when thoroughly heated, season it with mushroom orwalnut ketchup, and send it up with a plate of toasted bread, cutinto small square pieces, without crust. You will thus form a gallon to five or six quarts of strong soup, accordingto the quality of the meat; but as it is a winter soup, it willbear keeping, and, if served more than once, the flavor may be varied by the addition of different sorts ofingredients, as for instance--first, plain gravy; secondly, gravyand vegetables; and thirdly, vermicelli: or if only one-half or a thirdpart of the quantity be wanted, it may be prepared in the same manner byproportionally reducing the materials. It may be also flavored with redwine. 4.--SOYER'S STOCK FOR ALL KINDS OF SOUP. Procure a knuckle of veal about six pounds in weight, which cut intopieces about the size of an egg, as also half a pound of lean hamor bacon; then rub a quarter of a pound of butter upon the bottomof the stewpan (capable of holding about two gallons), into which put themeat and bacon, with half a pint of water, two ounces ofsalt, three middle-sized onions, with two cloves in each,one turnip, a carrot, half a leek, and half a head ofcelery: put the cover upon the stewpan, which place over a sharp fire,occasionally stirring round its contents with a wooden spoon, until the bottomof the stewpan is covered with a white thickish glaze, which willlightly adhere to the spoon; fill up the stewpan with cold water, andwhen upon the point of boiling, draw it to the corner of the fire, where itmust gently simmer for three hours, carefully skimming off every particle ofgrease and scum; pass your stock through a fine hair sieve, andit is ready for use when required. The above will make a delicious broth for all kinds of clear soups,and of course for thick soups or purées; by boiling it rather fasterabout five minutes before passing, you will be better enabled to take off everyparticle of grease from the surface. In making a stock of beefproceed as above, but allow double the time to simmer; mutton orlamb, if any trimmings, might also be used; if beef, use sevenpounds; if mutton, eight; or lamb, seven; of course bonesare all included; with care, this broth would be quite clear. To give alittle color, as required for all clear soups, use a little brown gravyor browning, but never attempt to brown it by letting it color at the bottom ofthe stewpan, for in that case you would destroy the greater part of theosmazome. 5.--ANOTHER WAY, MORE ECONOMICAL. Instead of cutting up the knuckle of veal so small, cut it in four orfive pieces only, and leave the bacon in one piece; then, when thebroth is passed, take out the veal, which is very excellentserved with a little of the broth for gravy, and the baconwith a few greens upon another dish. This is as I always eat it myself; butsome persons may probably prefer a little parsley and buttersauce or piquant sauce, served with it. Should any of theveal be left until cold, it might be cut into thin slices, and graduallywarmed in either of the before-mentioned sauces. Should you make yourstock from the leg or shin of beef, stew it double thetime, preserve the vegetables boiled in the stock, and serve withbeef, or serve the beef with some nice sharp sauce over;the remainder, if cold, may also be hashed in the ordinary way. If ofmutton, and you have used the scrags of the neck, thebreast, head, or the chump of the loin, keep them in aslarge pieces as possible; and, when done, serve with a few mashedturnips, and caper sauce, separately; if any remaining untilcold, mince it. Lamb would be seldom used for stock, being muchtoo expensive; but in case of an abundance, which may sometimes happen in thecountry, proceed the same as for mutton. 6.--SOYER'S BROWNGRAVIES. Rub an ounce of butter over the bottom of a stewpan capable ofholding about three quarts; have ready peeled four onions, cut them into thick slices, with which cover the bottom ofthe stewpan; over these lay about three pounds of beef from theleg or shin, cut into thin slices, with the bone chopped verysmall; add a small carrot, a turnip cut in slices, and a coupleof cloves; set the stewpan upon a gentle fire for ten minutes, shakingit round occasionally to prevent burning; after which let it go upon a slowfire for upwards of an hour, until the bottom is covered with a blackish glaze,but not burnt; when properly done, and ready for filling up, you will perceivethe fat that runs from the meat quite clear; fill up the stewpanwith cold water, add a teaspoonful of salt; and when upon thepoint of boiling, set it on a corner of the fire, where let it simmer gentlyabout an hour, skimming off all the fat and scum which may rise to thesurface; when done pass it through a fine sieve into a basin, and put by to usefor the following purposes:--For every kind of roast meat, poultry, orgame especially; also, to give a good color to soups and sauces. Thisgravy will keep several days, by boiling it every other day. Althoughbeef is the most proper meat for the above purpose, it may bemade of veal, mutton, lamb, or even with freshpork, rabbits, or poultry. 7.--SOYER'S GLAZE. Is an almost indispensable article in a cuisine bourgeoise, and should be kept by allpersons in the middle classes of life, the advantage being that it will keepfor months together, is very simple to make, and is always useful in cookery,however humble; in fact, with it you can dress a very good dinner with verylittle trouble. Make a stock omitting the salt, which, when done, pass througha cloth into a basin; then fill the stewpan up a second time with hotwater, and let it boil four hours longer to obtain all the succulence fromthe meat, then pass it through a cloth the same as the first; then pourboth stocks in a large stewpan together, set it over the fire, and let it boilas fast as possible, leaving a large spoon in, to stir occasionally and preventits boiling over; reduced to about three pints, pour it into a smaller stewpan,set again to boil at the corner, skimming well if required; when reduced toa quart, place it quite over the fire, well stirring with a wooden spoon untilforming a thickish glaze (which will adhere to the spoon) of a fineyellowish-brown color: pour it into a basin, or, if for keeping any time, intoa long bladder, from which cut a slice and use where directed. 8.--BROWNINGFOR SOUPS. Take two ounces of coarse brown sugar, and pour upon it some thymewater; place it on the fire till it becomes burnt. Or, take two ounces ofpowdered lump-sugar, and half an ounce of fresh butter; put themtogether in a frying-pan, and keep on the fire till the mixture becomes achocolate brown, then add three table-spoonfuls of port wine, andtwo wine-glassfuls of elder wine, six shalots, half a dram ofmace, a dram of allspice, a dram of black pepper, half anounce of salt, two ounces of ketchup, and an ounce of freshlemon juice. Boil all together, let the liquor stand to settle, pour offthe clear liquor, bottle, and cork tight. Or, take some sugar,white or brown, place it in an iron spoon, heat until liquid, and thendrop into half a pint of water; repeat until sufficiently brown. 9.--PORTABLE SOUP. There are many advantages connected with this soup, which will presentthemselves to the lady housekeeper, its constant readiness for use, its formingan excellent stock for gravies, sauces, or soups; a few minutes will suffice to make a basin of soupfrom it. Take three pounds of beef, a shin of beef, the bones ofwhich break, a cowheel and two small knuckles of veal, put them in astewpan and add as much water as will barely cover them, put in threeonions and seasoning to taste, stew the meat to ribbons,strain and then put it in the coldest place you can command, when thoroughlycold take off the fat and boil it fast in a stewpan without the lid on aquick fire, let it boil and keep it stirred for at least eight hours, pour itinto a pan and let it stand twenty-four hours, then take your largest lip-basinand turn the soup into it, boil sufficient water in the stewpan to reachas high outside the basin which is placed in it as the soup is inside, but donot let any bubble into the basin, keep the water boiling until thewater is reduced to a good consistency; it will be then done; it shouldthen be poured into small jelly pots, or in saucers, so as to form cakeswhen cold, and is best preserved in tin canisters put in dry cool places. This soup may receive various flavors of herbs or any thing else, byboiling the herbs or other ingredients, and straining the simples notedthrough water, making it boil, and then melting the soup in it. 10.--WHITE STOCK. Take scrag or knuckle of veal, ox-heel, or calf'shead, together with an old fowl and the trimmings of anywhite poultry or game which can be had, and lean ham inthe proportion of one pound to every fourteen pounds of meat. Cut it allinto pieces (add three or four large un roasted onions and heads of celery,with a few blades of mace; but neither carrots, pepper,nor spice of any kind but mace); put it into a stock-potwith just water enough to cover it: let it boil, and add threeonions and a few blades of mace; let it boil for five hours, andit is then fit for use. 11.--WHITE PORTABLE SOUP. Procure as fine a leg of veal as can be obtained, bone it,remove the whole of the skin and fat, chop in pieces two dozenfowls' feet, wash them well, put them into a large iron kettlewith three gallons of water, stew until the meat is tender enoughto separate, cover down close and stew for eight hours, take a tea-cup and fillit with the soup; set it where it can quickly cool. If when cold it ishard enough to cut with a knife, strain through a sieve and remove allthe fat, pour into cups the clear jelly, put them into a stewpanwith boiling water until they are like glue; let them cool, andwhen nearly cold run a ring round them and turn them on to a piece of newflannel; it will draw all the moisture out of them; turn them in seven hoursand continue until they are quite hard. Put them in tin canisters in adry place. When any is required, cut a piece about the size of a walnut, pour apint of boiling water upon it, stir until the soup is dissolved, seasonwith salt, it will make a basin of strong broth; if for soupsteep some vermicelli in water; boil it; then to one cake of thesoup pour one pint of water. If two quarts or four pints of soup arerequired, take four cakes of the soup, and when melted set it over the fire andsimmer, pour it into a soup tureen, add thin slices of bread verylightly toasted, and upon them the vermicelli; season to palate. 12.--TRANSPARENT SOUP. Cut the meat from a leg of veal in slices as thin as possible,break the bone as small as possible, put the meat into a verylarge jar and the bones at the top, with a bunch of sweet herbs,a quarter of an ounce of mace, four ounces of blanched garden almondsbeat fine; pour upon it a gallon of boilingwater, let it simmer over a slow fire twelve hours,--all night is best;turn it into a double-bottomed tin saucepan, simmer until reduced to twoquarts, remove the scum as it rises, strain it and let it stand two hours, pourinto a saucepan, taking care not to let any of the sediment accompany it. Steep two ounces of vermicelli in water, boil it and put it inthe soup before serving up. 13.--SOUP ITALIENNE. Cut the meat from a knuckle of veal, break up the bonesand make a broth of them, cut half a pound of ham in slices andlay them at the bottom of a stewpan; upon them the meat from theknuckle of veal, with the slices of four carrots, fourturnips, a dozen peppercorns, two blades of mace, a largeonion, and a head of celery; cover down close; stew till thegravy is drawn out and the roots are quite tender, pour over them thebroth made from the bone of the knuckle until they are covered,add six spoonfuls of rice, stew four hours, work the soup through asieve, add vermicelli before serving. 14.--POT-AU-FEU. This is by far the most wholesome of all soups. Take three pounds of goodrump of beef, of any part free from bone and not too fat;put it into an earthen fire-proof pot, with three quarts of water, onelarge carrot, two turnips, two leeks, a head ofcelery, and one burnt onion; season, and let the soup boil slowly,skimming it from time to time, for at least five hours; then strain it througha fine sieve, and pour it over thin slices of bread to serve. Themeat and vegetables make a dish which is afterwards served. Thus cooked,the beef becomes tender and juicy, and is excellent cold. 15.--OCHRA SOUP. Put on six pounds of fresh beef--allowing a little less than a quartof water to each pound; after it has boiled an hour add two quarts ofochras minced fine as possible. Afterwards a dozen of ripe tomatoespared and cut up, with two turnips, a few Lima beans,herbs, and other seasoning. The ochras should bedissolved. Strain and serve it with toasted bread cut into slices, putin after it comes out of the pot. The soup may be made in winter of dried ochras. 16.--PEPPER POT. Put four cow's feet and four pounds of tripe to boil withwater to cover them and a little salt. When simmered to pieces,take them out, and skim and strain the liquor. Cut up the tripe, put itin the pot, and pour the liquor over it. Add sliced onions andpotatoes and herbs, also small dumplings made with flour andbutter, and season with pepper and salt. A littlebutter rolled in flour is an improvement. When done, serve in atureen. 17.--WHITE SOUP Take a knuckle of veal, separated into three or four pieces, a sliceof ham as lean as possible, a few onions, thyme,cloves, and mace, stew twelve or fourteen hours; an oldfowl will make it much richer if added. This soup must be made the daybefore it is required; when removed from the fire, after being sufficientlystewed, let it cool; and then remove the fat; add to it four ounces ofpounded blanched almonds, let it boil slowly, thicken it with half apint of cream and an egg; it should boil slowly for half an hour,and then be served. 18.--GRAVY SOUP. Take a leg of beef and well wash and soak it, break the boneand put it into a saucepan with a gallon ofwater, a large bunch of sweet herbs, two large onionssliced and fried to a nice brown, taking great care they are not burnt, twoblades of mace, three cloves, twenty berries of allspice,and forty of black pepper, stew till the soup is as rich as you wish itto be, then take out the meat. When it is cold take off the fat,heat the soup with vermicelli, and the nicest part of a head ofcelery boiled and cut to pieces, cayenne, and a little salt;carrot may be added with turnip cut into small pieces and boiledwith spinach and endive, or the herbs without thevermicelli, or vermicelli only; add also a large spoonful of soyand one of mushroom ketchup; a French roll should be made hot andput into the soup. 19.--JENNY LIND'S SOUP. Soyer says: This is the soup invented and often partaken of by thecelebrated cantatrice of the name it bears, who partook of it every daywhen on a visit to the talented authoress, Mrs. Anna Maria Hall, who was kindenough to forward it to me for this edition. Make about three quarts of stock, which strain through a fine sieveinto a middle-size stewpan; set it to boil; add to it three ounces ofsago; boil gently twenty minutes; skim; just previous to serving breakfour fresh eggs, and place the yolk, entirely free from thewhite, into a basin, beat them well with a spoon; add to it a gill ofcream; take the pan from the fire, pour in the yolks, stirquickly for one minute, serve immediately; do not let it boil, or it willcurdle, and would not be fit to be partaken of. The stock beingpreviously seasoned, it only requires the addition of half a teaspoonful ofsugar, a little more salt, pepper, nutmeg; alsothyme, parsley, and bay-leaf will agreeably vary the flavorwithout interfering with the quality. 20.--HARICO SOUP. Cut some mutton cutlets from the neck; trim and fry them of alight brown; stew in brown gravy soup till tender. Have ready somecarrots, turnips, celery, and onions; fry them inbutter for some time, and clear the soup from the fat; then addthe vegetables, color it, and thicken it with butter and flour;season, and add to it a little port wine and ketchup. If thegravy be ready, the soup will require no more time to prepare than maybe necessary to render the chops and vegetables tender, and is an excellentfamily dish. If wanted to be made more highly flavored, put in a littlecurry-powder. 21.--FRENCH POT-AU-FEU. Out of this earthen pot comes the favorite soup and bouilli, which has beeneverlastingly famed as having been the support of several generations of allclasses of society in France; from the opulent to the poorest individuals, allpay tribute to its excellence and worth. In fact, this soup and bouilli is tothe French what the roast beef and plum-pudding are on a Sundayto the English. No dinner in France is served without soup, and no good soup issupposed to be made without the pot-au-feu. The following is the receipt:-- Put in the pot-au-feu six pounds of beef, four quarts ofwater, set near the fire, skim; when nearly boiling, add a spoonful anda half of salt, half a pound of liver, two carrots, fourturnips, eight young or two old leeks, one head of celery,two onions and one burnt, with a clove in each, and a piece ofparsnip; skim again, and let simmer four or five hours, adding a littlecold water now and then; take off part of the fat; put slices ofbread into the tureen, lay half the vegetables over, and half thebroth, and serve the meat separately with the vegetables around.The remainder of the broth from thepot-au-feu may be used for any kind of soup instead of the stock. Thebest part of the beef for the pot-au-feu is the mouse-buttock, tops ofthe ribs, clod and stickings. 22.--WHITE SOUP. Take a large scrag or a knuckle of veal, and one-half pound oflean ham; some blades of mace and a piece of ungratednutmeg, sliced onions, and heads of celery, with a littlesalt and an equal quantity of loaf-sugar. Break the bones,and stew all gently with one gallon to six quarts of water--according tothe weight of the meat--until it is done to rags and the soup becomessufficiently strong: skim it, and strain it through a hair sieve; or, ifallowed to stand during the night, pour it into an earthen vessel, and nextmorning take off the fat. When preparing it for table, add to the liquorfrom one-quarter to one-half pound of sweet almonds, blanched and finelypounded; boil a short time and strain again; then put in one-half pint to apint of good thick cream, and the yolk of an egg; but when thecream and egg are put in, be careful not to let the soup boil, orit will curdle. The safest way to avoid this is to mix the cream andegg in the tureen and pour the soup upon it. This in French cookery iscalled "Liaison." 23.--RICE AND MEATSOUP. Put a pound of rice and a little pepper and broth herbsinto two quarts of water; cover them close, and simmer very softly; putin a little cinnamon, two pounds of good ox-cheek and boil thewhole till the juices are incorporated into the liquor. 24.--OX-TAIL SOUP. Two ox-tails, if properly stewed, with a couple of pounds of gravybeef and a bone of ham, will make an excellent soup. Cut the tailsinto joints, and boil very gently for several hours in a sufficient quantity ofwater, with the beef and ham, carrots,turnips, and celery, two or three onions, a piece ofcrust of bread, a bunch of sweet herbs, a clove or two,and some peppercorns. Take out the tails when tender, and let thebeef, &c., boil four hours longer, then strain the liquor, andremove the fat in the same manner as for clear gravy soup. Ifmade without ham bones, or other flavoring ingredients, it will requirethe addition of a little ketchup, or some of the prepared sauces, and aglass of wine, with a moderate quantity of cayenne. Add the tailsand some pieces of carrot and turnip cut into fancy shapes. When thickened ox-tail soup is preferred, proceed in the same manneras above, and thicken the broth with brown roux. 25.--SOUP A LAFRANÇAISE. Place in the stewpan six pounds of beef, add a few small vealbones, or one about a pound weight, add a couple of fowls'heads, and a small piece of calf's liver; cover with fourquarts of water; when it boils remove the scum, add three or fourleeks, a couple of turnips, a head of celery, a burntonion, a large carrot, salt, and simmer slowly sevenhours; let every particle of scum be removed, serve with sippets ofbread in the soup. 26.--TO MAKE FAMILY SOUP. Take a shin or leg of beef, that has been newly killed; thefore-leg is best, as there is the most meat on it. Have it cutinto three pieces, and wash it well. To each pound allow somewhat less than aquart of water; to ten pounds of the leg, two gallons ofwater. Put it into a large pot, and add half a tablespoonful ofsalt. Hang it over a good fire, full eight hours before you dine. Whenit has come to a hard boil, and the scumhas risen (which it will do as soon as it has boiled), skim it well; then setit on hot coals in the corner, and keep it simmering steadily, so asto continue a regular heat. About three hours afterwards, put in a couple of heads of celery,four carrots cut small, and as many onions sliced and fried, witheither a very small head of cabbage cut into little pieces, or a largeone whole, if to be eaten with the meat, or, if you have any objectionto cabbage, substitute a larger proportion of the other vegetables, orelse tomatoes instead. Put also in a bunch of herbs, tied up in athin muslin rag to prevent its floating on the surface. It will require atleast eight hours' cooking; remembering to put in the vegetables three hoursafter the meat, and the turnips only half an hour before it isdone. If you wish to send any portion of the meat to table, take thebest part of it out of the soup about two hours before dinner; let theremainder be left in the pot till you send up the soup, as by that time it willbe boiled to rags, and have transferred all its flavor to the liquid, and mustbe strained. Next day, take what is left of the soup; put it into a pot, and simmer itover hot coals for half an hour; a longer time will weaken the taste. Ifit has been well made, and kept in a cool place, it will be found better thesecond day than the first. If your family is very small, and the leg of beef large, it mayfurnish soup for several successive days. Half the leg may therefore besufficient, previously breaking to pieces all the bones with a mallet orkitchen cleaver, which, by causing them to give out their marrow, willgreatly enrich the soup. Or: --When a large quantity of any butcher'smeat is brought in for the use of the family, the joints will requiretrimming: take all the parings, adding a slice or two of bacon,beef or mutton bones, with an old fowl, or arabbit, if you have one, turnip, and all sorts of vegetables,onions, herbs, a few slices of carrot, ketchup,pepper, salt, &c.; put a piece of butter at the bottomof the pan, cover it closely, and put it over a slow fire for a few minutes,shaking the saucepan occasionally. Then pour in boiling water, and letit stew until it is rich; apportioning the water to the quantity ofmeat. If there be any solid portion of beef, of which the soup ismade, let it be taken out previous to the meat being "done to rags," andsent up along with the roots in some of the liquor, thickened and flavored withany piquant sauce: it will form an excellent stew. These receipts also, are for the standing household dish so well known inFrance as the pot-au-feu. Cheap and wholesome potages, in common use among the middling classes invarious parts of Europe, are also made in different modes, a few of which arethese:-- 27.--COTTAGE SOUP. Take two pounds of lean beef, cut into small pieces, with one-fourthof a pound of bacon, two pounds of meally potatoes, three ounces ofrice, carrots, turnips, and onions sliced, orleeks and cabbage. Fry the meat, cabbage, andonions in butter or dripping, the latter being the mostsavory; and put them into a gallon of water, to stew gently overa slow fire for three hours, putting in the carrots at the same time,but the turnips and rice only time enough to allow of their beingwell done; and mashing the potatoes, which should be then passed through acolander: season only with pepper and salt: keep the vesselclosely covered. It will make five pints of excellent soup at the cost of aboutone shilling and eight pence. 28.--SCOTCH KAIL Is chiefly made of mutton, either fresh or salted; beef is only used when mutton cannot conveniently behad. Three or four pounds of meat should be put into a gallon of coldwater, along with a moderate quantity of pearl-barley, withleeks or onions, and allowed to stew until tender; if salted, putthe meat into water over night, changing it once before boiling.Then have ready the hearts of two cabbages cut small, or greens, ifcabbages are not in season; put them into the broth, which must beallowed to boil up uncovered until reduced to two quarts. It should only beseasoned with pepper and salt; but will be much improved by theaddition of a couple of onions fried in butter; indeed, bothcarrots and turnips are also sometimes used, but their additiondeprives the soup of the title of "Kail," which is derived from the greenswhich are usually employed. The meat is served with the soup, and, in like manner as the olla of the Spaniards, or the pot au feu of the French, is the standing householddish among the middle classes of Scotland. 29.--COCK-A-LEEKIE-- Or as in Scotland called "cocky-leeky" --is there also a very ancient dish,and is recorded to have been a special favorite of James I. It is madethus:-- Stew a large fowl, a marrow-bone, and two or three pounds ofbeef, with two or three Scotch pints (four to six quarts) of water, and the white endsof two or three dozen of leeks, cut in pieces. Just before serving, addhalf a pound of prunes, which dish with the soup and the fowl;but not the meat or marrow-bone, which, when put to boil, must bedivided, and left uncovered. Or: --Put seven pounds of the upper end of a legof beef, and an old fowl, in a pot, with water enough tocover it, the white parts of two or three dozen of leeks,half-boiled and sliced, and one pound of prunes. Stew till themeat be tender, skimming it well, and, if you choose, the fowlmay be disjointed and sent up in the soup. The leeks should be blanched,and as many used as to thicken the soup; but no other seasoning isusually employed than salt and allspice, with a small quantity ofmace. 30.--SAGO SOUP. Take three pounds of lean beef, a slice of lean ham, and laythem in a stewpan with a lump of butter, draw the gravy gently,add two quarts of water, and a sliced onion which has beenbrowned by frying in fresh butter, add a bunch of sweet herbs,six cloves, a blade of mace, a teaspoonful of allspice,and one of black pepper whole, stew until the soup is rich and brown,then remove the meat and strain the soup clear, put it into a cleanstewpan, thicken it to a good consistency with sago. 31.--SHEEP'SHEAD SOUP. Have the head carefully cleaned, put it into a stewpan with a littlewater, and when it is heated through fill up the pot. When it issufficiently tender, take it up, remove the meat from the bones,and return the bones into the broth, adding onion,sweet herbs, &c., as before directed. The head and trottersmay also be put with some vegetables into an earthen jug, containing half agallon of water; cover it close up, and bake it; either cut themeat from the bones, when sufficiently tender, and put it insmall pieces into the soup, or serve up the head and trottersseparately, either whole or with the meat cut off and made into astew. In Scotland, the head is usually singed with a red-hot iron to removethe wool, but without burning or otherwise injuring the skin. Thehead is then soaked during the night, washed, scraped, and split; thebrains taken out, and either fried or made into forcemeat balls,and the head stewed in the broth till tender. 32.--SOYER'S MULLIGATAWNY SOUP. Cut up a small knuckle of veal, which put into a stewpan, with apiece of butter, half a pound of lean ham, a carrot, aturnip, three onions, and six apples, add half a pint ofwater; set the stewpan over a sharp fire, moving the meat roundoccasionally, let it remain until the bottom of the stewpan is covered with abrownish glaze, then add three tablespoonsful of curry powder, one ofcurry paste, and half a pound of flour; stir well in, and fillthe stewpan with a gallon of water; add a spoonful of salt, thehalf of one of sugar; when boiling, place it at the corner of thefire, and let it simmer two hours and a half, skimming off all the fatas it rises, then pass it through a tammy into a tureen; trim some of thepieces of veal, and put it back in the stewpan to boil, and serve withplain boiled rice separate. Ox-tails or pieces of rabbits,chickens, &c., left from a previous dinner, may be served in itinstead of the veal. The veal is exceedingly good to eat. Taste,before serving, if quite palatable. 38.--SCOTCH BROTH. Set on the fire four ounces of pearl-barley, with three Scotchpints (or six quarts) of salt water; when it boils skim it, and add whatquantity of salt beef or fresh brisket you choose, and amarrow-bone or a fowl, with a couple of pounds of either leanbeef or mutton, and a good quantity of leeks, cabbages, orsavoys; or you may use turnips, onions, and gratedcarrots. Keep it boiling for at least four or five hours; but if afowl be used, let it not be put in till just time enough to bring it totable when well done, for it must be served up separately. Or: --Take the chops from a neck of mutton;cut the remainder up in small pieces, and let it stew the whole day. Take alsoa breakfast cup of Scotch barley, and boil it in water till itgets dry; then chop fine two large onions and turnips, which putwith the barley and chops into a close stewpan, strain the stockinto it, let it boil one and a half hours and skim it well, seasoning itonly with salt and black pepper. This will make a large tureen ofbroth, besides preserving the chops for the table. 34.--HOTCH POTCH. Take any quantity of lamb chops, pare off the skin and greaterpart of the fat, trim the bones, cut the smaller end of the chopsinto pieces, and lay them along with the chops put in whole in a stewpan inthis manner:--A layer of chops at the bottom, covered with every kind ofvegetable cut into small pieces--onions, celery, lettuce,carrots, turnips, and green peas; then put on a layer ofchops, and so on with the vegetables until the whole are added; cover theingredients with water, and let it stew several hours very gently, untilboth the meat and vegetables become tender, and the soup thick. Scotch Hotch Potch is made in the samemanner, only that both beef and mutton are indiscriminately used,and minced instead of being left in chops. 35.--PEPPER-POT HOTCHPOTCH. To three quarts of water put vegetables according to the season. Insummer, peas, French beans, cauliflowers, lettuce,and spinach; in winter, beet-root and endive, * carrots,turnips, celery, and onions in both, all cut small; andstew with two pounds of neck of mutton, or a fowl and one poundof pickled pork, in three quarts of water, till quite tender. On first boiling, skim. Half an hour before serving, add a lobster orcrab cleared from the bones. Season with salt andcayenne. A small quantity of rice should be put in with themeat. *If endive be used, it should, however, be boiled in two or three waters totake off its bitterness. Some people choosevery small suet dumplings boiled with it. Should any fat rise,skim nicely, and put one-half a cup of water with a littleflour. It may be made of various things, using a due proportion of fish,flesh, fowl, vegetables and pulse. In the West Indies it is theuniversal dish of the colored people; but seasoned so highly with greencapsicums and peppers, that it is there called"pepper-pot." 36.--SOUP A LA SAP. Divide a pound of beef into thin slices, grate half a pound ofpotatoes and put them in three quarts of water, add an onion,a pint of grey peas and three ounces of rice; reduce it byboiling to five pints; cut two heads of celery and put them into thestewpan, pour upon them the five pints of soup and pulp the boiledpeas into it through a fine tammy or coarse cloth. Stew until it isquite tender, season with pepper and salt, and serve up withfried bread cut in dice. 37.--HESSIAN SOUP. Cut into slices three pounds of shin of beef, lay it in a stewpan,put in three onions, five carrots, eight potatoes, a pint anda quarter of split peas, three heads of celery, some wholepepper, salt; pour in by degrees seven quarts of water,stew until reduced to half. If the soup alone be required strain off thevegetables, if not, serve as cooked. 38.--SOUP A LA REINE VICTORIA. Take a pound and a half of lean veal, place it in a stewpan with aslice of bacon, which must not be fat, an onion with oneclove, a blade of mace, a head of celery, a handful ofsweet herbs, four ounces of fresh butter, and some whole whitepepper; set it over a clear fire, move it frequently to prevent burning, orthe flavor is ruined. Have some white gravy ready, thicken it, add twoquarts to the above ingredients with a few strips of mushrooms; let itboil, and when it reaches that point remove it; skim it clean of all scum orfat. Have ready some vermicelli which has been soaked fiveminutes in cold water and subsequently stewed in a strong broth;strain on it the soup and serve with blanched chervil leaves in it. 39.--MULLIGATAWNEY SOUP. (ENGLISH.) A calf's head divided, well cleaned, place with acow-heel in a well tinned saucepan; boil them till tender, let themcool, cut the meat from the bones in slices, and fry them inbutter; stew the bones of the head and heel for somehours; when well stewed, strain, let it get cold and remove the fat.When this is accomplished cut four onions in slices, flour them,fry them in butter until brown, add a tablespoonful and a half of bestcurry powder obtainable, cayenne pepper, one teaspoonful with alittle salt; turmeric powder sufficient to fill a dessert spoonis sometimes added, but the improvement is not manifest to a refined Englishpalate, the curry powder being deemed all that is necessary; add theselast ingredients to the soup, boil gently for about an hour and a half, add twodessert spoonfuls of Harvey's sauce; serve. 40.--SPRING SOUP May be made of a knuckle of veal--allowing a quart of water toeach pound--with four calves feet, a little cold ham, orsalt and cayenne, simmered slowly for several hours. Add then, two quarts younggreen peas and a pint of asparagus tops, previously boiled withthe juice of spinach and other green herbs or vegetables, and aquarter of a pound of butter rolled in flour.--Boil up together,and serve. 41.--SUMMER SOUP. Made of mutton neck or shoulder, simmered as above, in the sameproportion of water, with sliced turnips, carrots andonions, a quart of Lima beans, and parsley, sweetmarjoram and other herbs; green corn is an excellent additionlate in summer, or cauliflower, and a few pickled nasturtions; alsosmall dumplings, mixed with egg and butter; simmer the vegetablestill done. 42.--AUTUMN SOUP. Take six pounds of lean cut up, a quart of water to a gallon, add thehock of a ham, boil and skim it, and put in two quarts ochras,cut in small slices, an onion sliced, two quarts ripe tomatoes,cut up, one quart Lima beans; simmer four hours slowly, add the greencorn grated off eight ears, season the soup and boil till themeat is in rags and the soup thoroughly done. Dried ochras may beused in winter. 43.--WINTER SOUP. Take a shin or leg of beef, cut in pieces, salt and let itstand all night; next morning put it on with water, a quart to a pound,season with salt, pepper and mace; simmer and skim well.When boiling, put in a head of cabbage cut fine, twelve carrotssliced; a bunch of sweet herbs and parsley; add sixturnips and three potatoes, and an onion, all sliced; skim offthe fat and simmer slowly till dinner time. 44.--HOTCH POTCH.(English) Put a pint of peas into a quart of water, boil them until theyare so tender as easily to be pulped through a sieve. Take of the leanest endof a loin of mutton three pounds, cut it into chops, put it into asaucepan with a gallon of water, four carrots, fourturnips cut in small pieces; season with pepper and salt.Boil until all the vegetables are quite tender, put in the pulped peas,a head of celery, and an onion sliced, boil fifteen minutes andserve. 45.--MUTTON SOUP. Cut a neck of mutton into four pieces, put it aside, take a slice ofthe gammon of bacon and put it in a saucepan with a quart ofpeas, with enough water to boil them, let the peas boil toa pulp and strain them through a cloth, put them aside, add enoughwater to that in which is the bacon to boil the mutton,slice three turnips, as many carrots, and boil for an hourslowly; add sweet herbs, onions, cabbage, andlettuce chopped small, stew a quarter of an hour longer, sufficient tocook the mutton, then take it out, take some fresh green peas,add them with some chopped parsley and the peas first boiled, tothe soup, put in a lump of butter rolled in flour, and stew tillthe green peas are done. 46.--LAMB SOUP. May be cooked as above, save that beef should be substituted for thebacon. 47.--LEG of BEEF BROTH. Take a leg of beef, break the bone in several places, place itin a pan with a gallon of water, remove the scum as it rises and addthree blades of mace, a crust of bread, and a small bunch ofparsley; boil till the beef is tender; toast somebread, cut it in diamonds, lay it in the bottom of the tureen, put themeat on it, and pour the broth over all. 48.--VEALBROTH. Stew a knuckle of veal; draw gravy as for stock, addfour quarts of water, with celery, parsley, and anonion; simmer till reduced to half, add two or three ounces ofrice, but not until the soup is nearly cooked, so that when served therice may be no more than done. Vermicelli may be used inpreference, or for a change. 49.--MUTTONBROTH. Three pounds of the scrag of mutton, put into two quarts of coldwater; add onion and turnips, pepper and salt,a few sweet herbs, and a little pearl barley; skim well, and boilfour hours. These ingredients chiefly depend upon whether this dish is made for aninvalid; if so, the omission of any of the ingredients will be regulatedaccording to the advice of the medical attendant. 50.--BAKED SOUPS. Take a pound of any lean meat and cut it into dice, place in anearthen jar, or pot, that will hold five quarts of liquid. Slice, and add toit, two onions, two carrots, two ounces of rice washed andpreviously soaked, a pint of whole or split peas, and some pepperand salt to taste; cover all with a gallon of water, tie a clothover the top of the jar, or close the lid of the pot down very close, andbake. This is a cheap and useful soup for poor people, and may be much improved byusing the liquor that salt beef, or indeed, any meat has beenboiled in, instead of water. Cheap--for the poor. --Soak a quart of splitpeas for a day in cold water, and then put them into a boiler withtwo gallons and a half of water, and two pounds of cold boiledpotatoes, well bruised, a faggot of herbs, salt,pepper, and two onions sliced. Cover it very close, and boil very gently for five hours, or until only two gallons ofsoup remain. Another. --Take two pounds of shin of beef, aquarter of a pound of barley, a half-penny worth of parsley, twoonions sliced, salt and pepper to taste, and having cutthe meat into dice, and broken the bone, place in a gallon potand fill up with water; boil very gently for five hours. Potatoes,celery tops, cabbage, or any vegetable left from the day beforemay be added. 51.--SCOTCH BARLEY BROTH. Throw three-quarters of a pound of Scotch barley into some cleanwater, when thoroughly cleansed place it with a knuckle of veal in astewpan, cover it with cold water, let it slowly reach a boil, keep itskimmed, add seven onions, and simmer for two hours; skim again and addtwo heads of celery and two turnips cut in slices, or any shapeit pleases the cook; add as much salt as required to make it palatable,let it stew for an hour and a half; it must be well skimmed before thebroth is dished; the meat must be previously removed and thebroth alone sent to table. If it is intended to send the veal tothe table with it, dress it as follows: take two pints of the broth andput it into a stewpan over a clear fire, add two table-spoonfuls offlour to the broth, and keep the broth stirring as youshake it in until it boils; add a little cayenne pepper, twotable-spoonfuls of port, boil for two minutes, strain it over the vealand send to table. 52.--GIBLET SOUP. Scald and clean thoroughly two sets of goose giblets or twice thenumber of duck giblets, cut them in pieces, put them in three quarts ofstock; if water is used instead of stock add a pound ofgravy beef, a bunch of sweet herbs, a couple of onions,half a table-spoonful of whole white pepper, as much salt, andthe peel of half a lemon; cover all with water, stew, and whenthe gizzards are tender, strain the soup. Now put into a stewpan a paste made of an ounce of butter anda spoonful of flour, stir it over the fire until brown, pour in thesoup, let it boil, stirring it well all the while; in ten minutes skim andstrain it, add a glass of Madeira, a salt-spoonful of cayenne, a dessert-spoonful of mushroomketchup, squeeze in the juice of half a lemon, serve up withthe giblets in the soup. It should be sent to table as hot aspossible. 53.--POTAGE À LA REINE. Is so called from its having been said to be a favorite soup at the table ofHer Majesty. Stew two or three young fowls for about an hour in good fresh-madeveal broth: then take them out, skin them, and pound thebreast, or only the white meat, in a mortar until it becomesquite smooth. That done, mash the yolks of three or four hard-boiledeggs with the crumb of a French roll soaked either in thebroth or in milk, and mix this with the pounded meat toform a paste, which must be afterwards passed through a sieve. Duringthis operation the bones and skin have been left stewing in thebroth, which must then be strained, and the paste put graduallyinto it: then let it boil briskly for a short time, stirring it all the whileto ensure its thorough mixture. When that is done take it from the fire; warm apint or more of cream, and pour it gently into the soup. This being a delicate white soup, the broth should only beseasoned with salt and mace, nor should there be any othervegetable used than celery; but the cream may be flavored withalmonds. 54.--RICE SOUP. Take white stock, season it, and either whole rice boiled tillvery tender, or the flour of rice may be used; one-half pound will besufficient for two quarts of broth. 55.--VEAL POTTAGE. Take off a knuckle of veal all the meat that can be made intocutlets, &c., and set the remainder on to stew, with an onion, abunch of herbs, a blade of mace, some whole pepper, andfive pints of water: cover it close; and let it do on a slow fire, fouror five hours at least. Strain it, and set it by till next day; then take thefat and sediment from the jelly, and simmer it with eitherturnips, celery, sea-kale, and Jerusalem artichokes, orsome of each, cut into small dice, till tender, seasoning it withsalt and pepper. Before serving, rub down half a spoonful offlour with half a pint of good cream and butter the sizeof a walnut, and boil a few minutes. Let a small roll simmer in thesoup, and serve this with it. It should be as thick as middling cream,and, if thus made of the vegetables above mentioned, will make a very delicatewhite pottage. The pottage may also be thickened with rice andpearl-barley; or the veal may be minced, and served up in thetureen. 56.--VEAL BROTH. Stew a knuckle of veal of four or five pounds in three quarts ofwater, with two blades of mace, an onion, a head ofcelery, and a little parsley, pepper, and salt; letthe whole simmer very gently until the liquor is reduced to two quarts; thentake out the meat, when the mucilaginous parts are done, and serve it upwith parsley and butter. Add to the broth either twoounces of rice separately boiled, or of vermicelli, put in onlylong enough to be stewed tender. Dish the knuckle separately, and serve it withparsley and butter. 57.--MULLAGATAWNEE. Slice some onions and a few shalots, put them in a mortar with half apound of fresh butter, beat them well, add three or fourdessert-spoonfuls of curry-powder, a little cayenne pepper andsalt; cut up some India pickle, which pound well with the other ingredients; add flour sufficientto thicken the soup, and a little cold stock to work the whole into astiff paste. When beaten moisten it occasionally with broth madefrom fresh beef free from fat; when fine enough pass it through asieve, add to it the gravy that the heart was stewed in, and asmuch of the beef broth as will make the quantity of soup required. Boilit up, and add more seasoning of cayenne and salt. If not thickenough, add flour and butter, until it becomes of the consistencyof good cream. A spoonful of sugar and a little port wineare improvements. SOUPS OF GAME, POULTRY, &C. 58.--VENISON SOUP. (English.) Take four pounds of freshly killed venison cut off from thebones, and one pound of ham in small slices. Add an onionminced, and black pepper to your taste. Put only as much water aswill cover it, and stew it gently for an hour, keeping the pot closely covered.Then skim it well, and pour in a quart of boiling water. Add a headof celery cut into small pieces, and three blades of mace. Boil itgently two and a half hours; then put in one fourth of a pound ofbutter, divided into small pieces, and rolled in flour, and addhalf a pint of port or Madeira wine. Let it boil a quarter of an hourlonger, and send it to table with the meat in it. Or: --Take a breast of venison, cut it insmall pieces, and stew it gently in brown gravy soup. Serve it withroots cut in dice and French beans in diamonds, adding two glasses ofport wine when first put on. The head of the deer chopped in pieces, and the flesh stewedto a jelly, is also an excellent addition to the soup. 59.--VENISON SOUP. Cut all the meat off a forequarter and shoulder of venison,put it into a pot with two gallons of water, a large onion, ahead of celery, and some salt. Simmer it very slowly for forty-eight hours. Break all thebones and put them in an earthen pot just covered with water; adda little salt, cloves, mace, and red pepper. Placethe pot in the oven, set in a larger vessel of water, and let them stewas long as the soup. Strain the soup clear, and add the juice of the bones. Colorthe soup with a little flour and a lump of butter as large as awalnut, browned in the frying-pan. Boil it up quickly, and throw in halfa pint of port wine. 60.--TURTLE SOUP. * Hang up the turtle by the hind fins, cut off the head, andallow it to drain. Cut off the fore fins; separate the callipash (upper shell) from thecallipee (under shell), beginning at the hind fins. Cut off the fatwhich will be found adhering to the callipash and to the lean meat ofthe callipee. Then cut off the hind fins. Take off the lean meat fromthe callipee and from the fins, and cut it into pieces two inches square andput into a stewpan. The callipash, callipee, and fins, must be held in scalding(not boiling) water for a few minutes, which will cause the shell todetach easily. Cut the callipash and callipee into pieces six inches square, which put intoa stock-pot with some light veal stock. Let it boil until themeat is tender, and then take it out into cold water; free themeat from the bones, and cut it into pieces an inch square.Return the bones into the stock and let it boil gently for twohours, strain it off, and it is then fit for use. Cut the fins across into pieces about *This receipt is a most excellent one, and is in constant use by the party who favored us with it; and we may add, that some thousands of pounds weight of turtle pass through his hands every year. an inch wide, boil them in stock with anonion, two or three cloves, a fagot of parsley andthyme, a sprig of sweet basil and marjoram. When tendertake them out and add this stock to the other. Take the lean meat, put into a stewpan with a pint of Madeira,four table-spoonfuls of chopped green shalots, two lemons sliced, abunch of thyme, marjoram, and savory (about twotablespoonfuls each when chopped), one and a half tablespoonfuls of sweetbasil (chopped), and four tablespoonfuls of parsley. Pound togethera nutmeg, one dozen allspice, one blade of mace, five orsix cloves, one tablespoonful of pepper and of salt. Mixthe whole together with as much curry-powder as will lie on a shilling.Put about two-thirds of this to the lean meat, with half a pound offresh butter and one quart stock. Let the whole be gently sweateduntil the meat is done. Take a large knuckle of ham, cut it into very small dice, put into astewpan with four large onions sliced, six bay-leaves, three blades ofmace, one dozen allspice, three-quarters of a pound ofbutter; let it sweat until the onions are melted. Shred a smallbunch of basil, a larger one of thyme, savory, andmarjoram; throw these into the onions, and keep them as green aspossible: when sweated sufficiently, add flour according to yourjudgment sufficient to thicken the soup. Add by degrees the stock inwhich the callipash and callipee were boiled, and the seasoning stockfrom the lean meat. Boil for an hour; run through a tammy, and addsalt, cayenne, and lemon juice to palate. Then put in themeat; let it all boil gently about half an hour; and if more winebe required, it must be boiled before being added to the soup. This is for aturtle of from forty to fifty pounds. It should, however, be recollectedthat the animal is of various weight--from a chicken-turtle of fortypounds to some hundreds--and the condiments must be apportioned accordingly. Itshould invariably be made the day before it is wanted. 61.--MOCKTURTLE. Half a calf's head will be quite sufficient, even if it besmall, to provide soup enough for a moderate party, as it will fill a tureen oftwo quarts; but it must be fresh and unstripped of the skin, which is the mostgelatinous part. Take out the brains; clean the head carefully in hotwater, by squeezing it with the hand to press out the blood, and leave itafterwards for an hour in cold water. Then put it into five or sixquarts of warm water along with two pounds of veal, two pounds ofdelicate pickled pork, chiefly fat, a roasted onion or twostuck full of cloves, and the thinly pared rind of a lemon,together with a large bundle of savory pot-herbs, two slicescarrots, and a head of celery. Let this boil for two hours; thentake up the head and the pork. The head must be strippedof its skin, and the brain, tongue, and eye taken out; letthe bones of the head be broken and returned to the soup, andboil two hours longer--the brains being made into forcemeatballs, the tongue skinned and sliced; the black part of the eyeshould also be taken out, and the remainder minced; the skin being cutinto pieces of little more than an inch square. While the stock isboiling, put into a saucepan a small quantity of fresh butter, with someonions sliced thin, a little basil, marjoram, andparsley, a very small quantity of thyme, three bay-leaves, twoblades of mace, a few allspice; sweat all these well over thefire; when done, add sufficient flour to thicken the soup. Stir in theboiling stock by degrees to avoid its being lumpy; let it boil gentlyfor an hour, then rub it through a tammy, set it over the fire; when it boilsadd the meat. About ten minutes before you serve, season the soup to your taste with salt, a small quantity ofcayenne pepper, a couple of spoonfuls of soy, a good squeeze oflemon-juice, together with nearly a pint of either Madeira orSherry. Serve with two lemons upon a plate, cut in half, as somepeople like the soup to be somewhat acid. Mushrooms are sometimesadded. The soup will take at least seven or eight hours in preparation. Acalf's head requires half its own weight of meat to makethe broth of proper quality. 62.--NEAT'S FEET SOUP. Take two neat's feet, cut them as you do a calf's head:take five pints of any sort of broth, the juice and rindof one lemon, some parsley and herbs chopped fine; sendthese to the oven; when it comes from the oven, put in a pint of stronggravy and a cup of white wine, some hard eggs andforcemeat balls; season with cayenne pepper and salt. To these an excellent addition will be found in one pound of the belly partof very delicate pickled pork; for it will improve the flavor of thesoup, and, if cut neatly into bits, will taste nearly as rich, and quite assavory, as the fat of the head, or the gelatinous parts ofthe feet. Any of these receipts for mock turtle may be also made frompig's face and pettitoes; and in most country-houses, as well as atsea--where pigs are generally kept for fresh meat--thehead is commonly made into soup in imitation of turtle. It has become unfashionable among first-rate cooks to put those egg-balls, formerly so common, intomock-turtle; but as they are still used by those of the old school, wehere add their mode of preparation:-- Take out the yolks of some hard-boiled eggs, and beat them ina mortar with a very little salt and cayenne, and make them intoa paste with the white of a raw egg. Roll the paste intoballs not larger than marbles, put them into the soup, and boil for tenminutes. 63.--LA TORTUE--TURTLE SOUP. (Ude's Receipt, most carefullyrevised.) * This soup will be made with less difficulty if you cut off the headof the turtle the preceding day. In the morning open the turtle: which is done by leaning heavily withyour knife on the shell of the animal's back, whilst you cut it off all round.Turn it upright on its end, that all the water, &c., may run out.Then cut the flesh off along the spine, with your knife sloped towards thebones, for fear of touching the gall, which sometimes escapes theeye. When you have obtained all the flesh which is about the members, wash itclean and let it drain. Have ready a large vessel full of boiling water on the fire, put inthe shells, and when you perceive that they come off easily, take them out ofthe water, and prick all the shells of the back, belly, fins,head, &c. Boil the back and belly till you can take off thebones, without, however, allowing the softer parts to be sufficientlydone, as they must boil again in the sauce. When these latter come offeasily, lay them on earthen dishes singly, for fear they should stick together,and put them to cool. Keep the liquor in which you have blanched the softerparts, and let the bones stew thoroughly in it, as this liquor must beused to moisten the broth. All the flesh of the interior parts, the fourlegs and head, must be sweated in the following manner:-- Lay a few slices of ham on the bottom *In perfecting the above receipt for turtle soup, which the authorcan without vanity assert, is the best if not the only authentic and practical one in print, the author hasbestowed his utmost care and attention. When in manuscript he obtained a veryhigh price for it. of a very large stewpan.Lay over the ham two or three knuckles of veal, according to thesize of the turtle, and over the veal the inside flesh of theturtle, and the members over the whole. Then partly moisten it with thewater in which you have boiled the shell, and sweat it thoroughly. Youcan ascertain if the meat be thoroughly done, by thrusting your knifeinto the fleshy part of the meat. If no blood issue, moisten it againwith the liquor in which the bones, &c., have been boiling: put in alarge bunch of all such sweet herbs as are used in the cooking of aturtle: sweet basil, sweet marjoram, lemon thyme,winter savory, two or three bay-leaves, common thyme, a handfulof parsley and green onions, and a large onion stuck withsix cloves. Let the whole be thoroughly done. Observe that you must onlyput in the bunch of parsley and the stalks of the herbs, as youmust keep the tender part of the leaves to make a purée of herbs,to introduce in the sauce when finished. With respect to the members, probe them, to see whether they are done, andwhen done, drain and send them to the larder, as they are to make theirappearance only when the sauce is absolutely completed. When the flesh is also completely done, drain it on the dish, and make awhite thickening, very thin, for turtle soup must not be muchthickened; when the flour is sufficiently done on a slow fire, and has agood color, moisten it with the liquor drained through a silk sieve, and turnthe sauce over the fire till it boils. Ascertain that the sauce is neither too thick nor too thin, and thenput the stewpan on the side of the stove, to skim off all the whitescum, and all the fat and oil, that rise on the surface of thesauce. By this time all the softer parts will be cold enough; cut themabout an inch or two square, without waste, throw the whole into thesauce, which must simmer gently. Then try them again; for if doneenough, they are not to be kept on the fire any longer. Skim off all thefat and froth. Take all the leaves of the herbs from the stalks,sweet basil, sweet marjoram, lemon thyme, wintersavory, common thyme, a handful of parsley and greenonions, and a large onion cut in four pieces, with a few leaves ofmace; put them in a stewpan, with about a quarter of a pound of freshbutter. Let this simmer on a slow fire, till they are quite melted, thenpour in one bottle of good Madeira wine, adding a small bit ofsugar, and let this boil gently for one hour. When done, rub thisthrough a tammy, and put it into the sauce. Let this boil till nowhite scum rises: then take, with a skimmer, all the bits ofturtle out of the sauce, and put them in a clean stewpan; whenyou have all out, pour the sauce over the bits of turtle, througha tammy, and proceed as follows:-- Make some quenelles à tortue (turtle quenelles), which beingsubstitutes for eggs do not require to be very delicate. They are madein the following manner: Take out the fleshy part of a leg of veal,about one pound, scrape off all the meat, without leaving any sinews orfat, and soak in milk about the same quantity of crumbs ofbread. When the bread is well soaked, squeeze it, and put it intoa mortar with the veal, a small quantity of calf's udder,a little butter, the yolks of four eggs boiled hard, alittle cayenne pepper, salt, and spices, and pound thewhole very fine. Then thicken the mixture with two whole eggs, and theyolk of another. Next try this farce or stuffing in boiling hot water, toascertain its consistency; if you find it too thin, add the yolk of anegg. When the stuffing is perfected, take half of it, and put into it some chopped parsley. Let the wholecool, in order to roll it of the size of the yolk of an egg or smaller:poach it in salt and boiling water, and when very hard drain on asieve, and put it into the turtle. You must make two sorts of quenelles,white and green, those with parsley green, and the other halfwhite. Before you send up, squeeze the juice of two or three lemons,with a little cayenne pepper, and pour it into the soup. The fins may beserved as a plat d'entrée, or side dish, with a little turtlesauce; if not, on the following day you may warm the turtle in thehot-water bath, and serve the members entire with a matelottesauce, garnished with mushrooms, cocks'-combs, quenelles, &c.When either lemon-juice or cayenne pepper have beenintroduced, no boiling must take place. It is necessary to observe, that theturtle prepared a day before it is used is generally preferred, theflavor being more uniform. When lemon juice is used be very cautiousthat the lemons are good; a musty lemon will spoil all theturtle, and too much will destroy the flavor. Be particular, when you dress a very large turtle, to preservethe green fat in a separate stewpan, and likewise, when theturtle is entirely done, to have as many tureens as you mean to serveeach time. You cannot put the whole in a large vessel, for many reasons: first,it will be long in cooling; secondly, when you take some out, it will break allthe rest into rags. If you warm in a hot-water bath, the turtlewill always retain the same taste, but if you boil it often, it becomes strongand loses the delicacy of its flavor. It is not the fashion to serve eggs with turtle, but it may benecessary to inquire whether they are preferred. Some people require besides, fricandeaux, fricassees, &c., all of whichare prepared in the same manner as veal, but made with those parts offlesh that are to be found in the turtle, four in number, two in thelegs and two in the shoulders; you may likewise make blanquette,&c. 64.--MOCK TURTLE, ENGLISH FASHION. Take a calf's head very white and very fresh,bone the nose part of it; put the head into some warmwater to discharge the blood; squeeze the flesh with your hand, toascertain that it is all out. Mind, the water should never be too hotfor you to bear your hand in it; as long as you can bear it theblood will come out, but if you suffer it to be too hot it will turn thehead black. This method of disgorging the blood is to give the same heatto the blood as when the animal was alive, and if your hand will bearthe heat it shows that the blood may circulate in the veins, but if thewater be too hot the blood will curdle, as it does in black pudding.When well disgorged, blanch the head in boiling water; when firm,put it into cold water, and make a blanc to boil the head, asfollows:--Cut half a pound of fat bacon, a pound of beef suet, anonion stuck with a clove, and two slices of lemon; add tothese slices of carrot, a bunch of parsley, green onions,thyme, bay-leaves, sweet basil, salt and pepper;put all these into a vessel, with water enough to contain thehead; tie the head tightly in a clean towel, put it in the blanc,and boil two hours and a half; observe that it be not overdone; let it cool inthe liquor, then make the sauce in the following manner:-- Put into a stewpan a pound of ham cut in slices, put over theham two knuckles of veal, a large onion, and twocarrots; moisten with some of the broth in which you have boiledthe head, to half the depth of the meat only: cover the stewpan,and put it over the fire to sweat through; let the broth reduce to a very good color, turn up the meat for fearof burning. When you have a very good color, and you find that the glaze isvery brown, moisten with the whole of the broth from the head,season with a large bundle of sweet herbs, viz., sweet basil,sweet marjoram, lemon thyme, common thyme, twocloves, a bay-leaf, a few allspice, parsley, greenonions, and a few mushrooms; let this boil together for one hour,then drain it. Put into a stewpan a quarter of a pound of very fresh butter, let itmelt over a slow fire; put to this butter as much flour as it canreceive; let it go gently over a slow fire, till the flour has acquireda very good brown color; moisten this gradually with the broth, whichyou put through a silk sieve, till you have employed it all; add half a bottleof Madeira; let the sauce boil, that the flour may be welldone; take off all the scum and fat, and drain the sauce into aclean stewpan large enough to contain the calf's head; boil thewhole till done, cut the calf's head into square pieces of aboutan inch each; put them to boil in the sauce; season with salt anda little cayenne pepper. The bits of calf's head shouldalways have the skin on one side, but you should leave none of themeat on, which does not adhere to the skin, otherwise themeat will break in the soup, and look unseemly. It is out of fashion nowto use eggs, but on this head the taste of the master should beconsulted, and you may make quenelles instead. Observe, that you must not have the quenelles too delicate, for they wouldbreak in the soup and spoil the look of it; the calf's head mustnot be too much done; thrust your knife into the skin, and if the knifeenters and detaches itself easily, the meat is done enough. Some persons will have their mock turtle green; in which case youmust do as follows: Put into a stewpan a quarter of a pound of freshbutter, mince one or two onions, add a handful of each of theherbs described above, and some parsley, and sweat it all gentlyover a slow fire. When the herbs are well done, moisten with some of thesauce, and rub it through a tammy. Mix this with the sauce, andthe turtle will be green, without any alteration in the flavor.Cayenne and lemon are always added when you serve up the soup. 65.--THE GARBURE, WITH BROWN BREAD. Take a knuckle of ham, perfectly sweet, a knuckle of veal, andabout six pounds of flank of beef, which put into a pan, with anonion stuck with two cloves, a few carrots, &c.; pourover the above two ladles of broth, and let the whole sweat over a slowfire. When the meat is done through the middle, cover it entirely withboiling broth, and let the whole stew for three hours. Then take one ormore cabbages, which are to be washed clean and blanched. Braise them betweenlayers of bacon, and moisten them with the liquor in which the sweatinghas been made, strained through a silk sieve. You must observe that, if thecabbages are not made rich and mellow, they are good for nothing. Add to theabove, either sausages, bacon, or stewed legs of geese:mind above all things that the cabbage be not too briny, for the soupthen would not be eatable. When the cabbage and broth are stewedenough, cut very thin slices of rye-bread: drain the cabbage in acloth, so that there be no fat left, then take a large deep silver dish,lay a bed of bread, and over that one of cabbage, and moistenthem with a little broth; let them stew on a slow fire. When thecabbage and bread are sufficiently moistened, lay on six or eightbeds more of each, and let it simmer on the stove till the bottom of the dishis gratined, as what sticks to the bottom of the dish is most tasty andpalatable. Send up with the ham on themiddle; the bacon, the legs of geese, and sausages on theborders, and some broth separately. * 66.--POTAGE À LAREINE--(Queen Soup.) (Ude's New Receipt) † For twelve people take three fat chickens or pullets, which aregenerally cheaper and better than fowls: skin them, take out thelungs, wash them clean, and put them in a pan with a bunch ofparsley only; moisten the whole with good boiling broth: let itstew for an hour, then take out the chickens: soak the crumb of twopenny loaves in the broth; take off the flesh of the chickens,and pound it with the yolks of three or four eggs boiledhard, and the crumb of bread which has been sufficiently soakedin the broth. Rub the whole through a tammy; then put a quart ofcream on the fire, and keep stirring it continually till it boils. Pourit into the soup. It is not so liable to curdle as when the other method isused, and it tastes more of the chickens. If you think proper to addeither barley, rice, or vermicelli, let it be stewed inbroth beforehand, and pour it into the soup only when quite done. Whenyou have a great dinner, and fowls are very dear, use the fillets forthe first-course dishes, and make the soup with the legs only; the soupis as good, but not quite so white, as when made with the fillets. 67.--RICE CREAM. (Ude.) This is flour of rice, which you make yourself in the followingmanner. Take a pound of rice, well washed in different waters, and drained and wiped with a clean towel. Let it get quite dry, *This soup is never seen in this country; it requires a very deep and very large dish. †Formerly I used roasted chicken to make thispotage, but I have found this new method cheaper, and not so subject to curdleas the other method. then pound and shake it through a sieve. Take one ortwo spoonfuls of this flour, and dilute it with broth, rathercold than hot. All this time have some broth on the fire; throw theflour of rice thus diluted into the broth, and keep stirring tillyou find the soup is not too thick and may boil without the riceburning. This same kind of rice-flour may serve for soufflés, orpuffs, of the second course. 68.--MOCK TURTLE SOUP. This soup, if well made, gives general satisfaction. Take a calf'shead, thoroughly scraped and cleaned, the skin remaining on;place it in a soup pot; to this add that part of the hand of pickledpork which is free from bones, the fattest end, observing that itis proper to soak it well in water previous to using; put in sweetherbs, a couple of onions, a head of celery, if large, a fewtruffles and morels, two if small, pounded mace andpepper; add plenty of water, without quite filling the saucepan;boil slowly, until the meat has become tender, then remove it, and cutthe meat from the bone into square pieces; break the bonesand put them again into the soup; let it simmer for four or five hours, thenplace it where it can quickly cool, remove the fat and strain the soup;thicken with flour and butter; add three table-spoonfuls ofHarvey's sauce, four or five glasses of Sherry or Madeira,and squeeze a whole lemon into it; add the meat of the headand the pork cut into well shaped pieces; conclude with eggballs, or force-meat, or both, warm it and serve; it will be found adelicious soup. 69.--MOCK TURTLE SOUP. Blanch half a calf's head sufficiently to draw out thebones; cut off the ear and the tongue; take off theskin of the tongue, lay all separate until cold, and strain offthe liquor, and add it to your veal or second stock; cut themeat into large square dice, put it into astewpan with your already prepared stock, and stew it until tender,strain off some of the stock; get another stewpan, cut about one poundof lean York or Westphalia ham, one pound of lean veal, a goodfagot of basil and knotted-marjoram, two or three blades ofmace, six or seven cloves, two bay-leaves, four onions,the parings of a few mushrooms, half a pound of butter; fry themfor some time a nice light brown, dry all up with flour, then add yourstock you have previously strained from the cut pieces; if too thick addmore stock; let all boil for some time, keeping it stirred with a woodenspoon; when boiled sufficient, strain it through a tammy or tammyy-sieve intothe stewpan that has the cut pieces of the head; boil all together;season with sugar, cayenne pepper, and salt, juice oflemon and white wine; if you wish to preserve the old fashion, byhaving forcemeat balls, eggs, &c., refer for them to theprevious receipt; add them to it when they are blanched. I only puthard-boiled eggs, and, if I have any, a few quenelles. 70.--HARE SOUP. An old hare is fitted only for soup or jugging. To render it intosoup let it be cleaned, cut into pieces, add a pound and a half or two poundsof beef, to which there is little or no fat; place it at thebottom of the pan; add two or three slices of ham or bacon, or alittle of both, a couple of onions, and some sweet herbs; addfour quarts of boiling water, let it stew to shreds, strainoff the soup and take away the fat; reboil it, add a spoonful of soy orHarvey's sauce, send to the table with a few force-meatballs. 71.--HARE SOUP, OR WILD DUCK SOUP. Take a brace of Canadian hares or of wild ducks, and cut themup. Cook one moderately in an earthen pot with as much water as willcover it; some cloves, salt and black pepper; the potbeing set in a large vessel full of water, in a close oven. Simmer the other till it is done completely to rags in a gallon ofwater, and season it with cloves, salt, and blackpepper. Strain the soup clear and make forcemeat balls of the residue, withthe yolk of an egg, some fine herbs, grated lemon peel,and a little stale bread. The hare or duck cooked in the earthen pot must be cut inpieces two inches square. Color the soup with browning, throw in theforcemeat balls and cut meat; boil it up quick, and add half apint of port wine. 72.--VELOUTÉ. Take the cuttings and remains of any joint of fowls and vealyou may happen to have, weigh four pounds, and put into a large stewpan, withsome onions, carrots, parsley, scallions, three bayleaves, three cloves, and a ladleful of stock; put yourstewpan upon a brisk fire, skim well, and be careful the meat does notstick; when enough reduced add as much stock as will nearly fill thestewpan, salt it well, give it a boil, skim, and then put it on the sideof the fire to simmer for two hours, after which strain it through a tammy;make a white roux; stir into it for ten minutes a fewchampignons, then pour on it, a little at a time, the above liquor, let it boilup once, skim, and set it again by the side of the fire for an hour and a half,remove all fat, strain again and then put by for use. The veloutéshould be colorless, the whiter it is the better. 73.--PIGEON SOUP. Take half a dozen of the fattest pigeons you can get, roast them onlysufficient to warm them through; cut the meat from the bones;flour the latter well, and pound them in a mortar; stew them in a pint and a half of good gravy, add a pieceof butter rolled in flour, a bunch of tarragon,chervil, a few onions, shalots, parsley, and basil,a few turnips, and carrots sliced; season with cayenne andone blade of mace. Boil slowly two hours, pour, and pass through acullender. Pulp through a tammy, and then with the flesh of thepigeons put them into a saucepan. Let it simmer one hour and serve. 74.--SNAPPING TURTLE SOUP. Clean and dissect your snapping turtle; add water according tosize, taking care not to put in enough to thin the soup. Stew six or eighthours. Add a teacupful of browned flour, four ounces of butter,six eggs, one ounce of cloves, one ounce of mace, oneounce of allspice, half a pint of sherry wine; boil up andserve. Soup may be made in the same way of the "couter" of the South. Forcemeatballs made of veal are usually added, with the eggs found inthe couter. 75.--SAVORY JELLY. Take half a pig's head, boil it for one hour, then cut themeat into small pieces, put it again into the saucepan with half theliquor it was boiled in, add a little seasoning of pepper, salt,and mace, boil another hour; turn it into a mould to get cold. The aboveis excellent made from calf's head, which in many country-placescan be bought for a trifle; but the mould should then be lined with hardboiled eggs, cut into slices, and a little parsley added to theseasoning. This is an economical breakfast or supper dish. 76.--PARTRIDGE SOUP. When you have a brace of partridges which prove to be remarkably old,convert them into soup. Skin and cut them up, cut a handsome slice ofham as lean as possible and divide it in four, or cut as many thinslices, put them in the pan, add the partridges with an onionsliced, some celery, and four ounces of butter; brown nicelywithout burning, put them into the stewpan with one quart and a pint ofwater, throw in a few white peppers whole, a shank ofmutton, salt it to palate, strain, add stewed celery,fried bread, and previous to its boiling skim very clean and serveup. 77.--VEGETABLE SOUPS. Although many of the following soups are made purely of vegetables, yetsome--and those generally the best--are made on a foundation of some sort ofmeat-broth in which the roots are stewed. The broth is therefore the real stock on which these soups are made,though each bears the name of the vegetable which gives it flavor; butwhen made solely from herbs, roots, and vegetables, andused as the basis for the formation of soupes-maigres, the stock is then composed ofevery sort in season which can, by long stewing, be reduced to a pulp,in which every species of savory herbs--such as chervil,tarragon, and marjoram--are mixed, together with a fewchilis, shalots, and a head of garlic, seasoned with mace,whole peppers, salt, and mushroom ketchup; to which may beadded a little curry-powder. The pulp is then strained; and,being thus rather highly seasoned, may be kept for a few days, and used in aidof any other soup. It must be left to simmer during several hours; and shouldit need browning, some sliced onions, fried in butter, will beall that is necessary. Thus all the roots and most of such vegetables as can be easily made into purées, and combined with any sort ofbroth, will, in this manner, make excellent soup of differentdenominations, though all founded upon the samemeat-stock. The gravy of beef is always preferred forsavory soups, and that of veal or fowls for the moredelicate white soups: to which from half a pint to a pint ofcream, or, if that cannot be had, the same quantity of milk andthe yolks of a couple of raw eggs should be added for every twoquarts of soup; remembering, however, that the latter will not impart therichness of cream. Collect whatever vegetables are in season, take equal quantities,turnips, carrots, cabbage, spinach, celery,parsley, onions, a little mint, &c., add plenty ofherbs, cut them fine, put them into the stewpan, in which has previouslybeen placed some oil; stew gently until the vegetables become tender,then add two quarts of boiling water; stew a quarter of an hour andserve. Some cooks advocate the introduction of peas, green or white,to this soup: where they are used, they must be boiled until tender in verylittle water, then mashed into a very loose paste; the vegetableshaving been scalded are then added, and two hours will suffice for stewing;season it with salt and pepper. Be careful that it does not burn while cooking, or the whole is spoiled. 78.--TOMATO SOUP. Stew half a peck of tomatoes slowly an hour and a half in a pint ofwater; pass them through a tamis; add half a gallon of veal ormutton broth. Pass through a tamis enough stale bread to thickenthe soup. Fry twelve onions brown, and strain them the same way. Addthem to the soup with a bunch of fine herbs, and seasoning totaste. Boil up well, and serve. 79.--BEAN SOUP. Soak two quarts of dried white beans all night and put on the soupearly. To five pounds of beef allow one of bacon cut small. Boiland skim it and put in the beans, drained, and a head of celery cutsmall. Boil slowly till the beans are melted and the soup is done; strainit, and serve with toasted bread. 80.--ASPARAGUS SOUP WITHGREEN PEAS. Make a soup of roots, and when strained, boil a pint of green peas inthe liquor. Choose some middling-sized asparagus, cut them in piecesabout three inches long, blanch them in boiling water, and then throwthem into cold water; drain them and tie them in small bunches, splitthe tops and boil them with the peas. When done make a purée ofthem and mix it with the root soup, and garnish with the asparagus. Goodmeat-broth may be used instead of the root soup. 81.--SOUP DEL'ASPERGE. Cut into thin slices half a pound of bacon, lay them in the bottom ofthe stewpan, cut into lumps six pounds of lean beef and roll it well inflour, cover the pan close, shake occasionally until the gravy isall drawn, then add half a pint of old ale and two quarts ofwater; throw in some whole peppers and a spoonful of salt,stew gently for an hour, skim the fat, and when an hour has elapsedstrain off the soup, then put in it some spinach, two cabbagelettuces, the leaves of white beet, a little mint, powdered sweetaroma and sorrel, boil them, then put in the tops of asparaguscut small; when they are tender the soup is done; serve up hot with a Frenchroll in the middle. 82.--POTAGE À LA JULIENNE--(Julien Soup.) Take some carrots and turnips, and turn them ribbon like, afew heads of celery, some leeks and onions, and cut themall into fillets, thus-------. Then take abouttwo ounces of butter and lay it at the bottom of the stewpan, with theroots over the butter. Fry them on a slow fire, and keep stirringgently; moisten them with broth and gravy of veal, and let themboil on the corner of the stove; skim all the fat off, and put in alittle sugar to take off the bitter taste of the vegetables: you may insummer-time add green peas, asparagus-tops, French beans,some lettuce, or sorrel. In winter-time, the taste of thevegetables being too strong, you must blanch them, and immediately after stewthem in the broth: if they were fried in butter their taste wouldalso be too strong. Add bread, as above, in the tureen. 83.--THEJULIENNE WITH CONSOMMÉ--(or Broth of Fowl.) The same as above, only you moisten it with consommé of fowl,and put in the back of a roasted chicken, from the preceding day, whichstew with the roots; when boiled for one hour, take it out of the broth,and send up with the bread, as above. 84.--JULIENNE, OR VEGETABLEBROTH. Cut various kinds of vegetables in pieces, celery, carrots,turnips, onions, &c., and having put two ounces ofbutter in the bottom of a stewpan, put the vegetables on the top of thebutter, together with any others that may be in season; stew or fry themover a slow fire, keeping them stirred, and adding a little of the stockoccasionally; soak small pieces of crust of bread in the remainder ofthe broth or stock, and when the vegetables are nearly stewed,add them, and warm the whole up together. 85.--SOYER'S JULIENNE SOUP. This soup is entirely the hereditary property of France, and is supposed tobe so called from the months of June and July, when all vegetables are in fullseason; and to make it in reality as originally made, a small quantity of everydescription of vegetables should be used, including lettuce,sorrel, and tarragon; however, some few sorts of vegetables,mixed together, make a most estimable soup. Weigh half a pound of thevegetables in fair proportions to each other, that is, carrots,turnips, onions, celery, and leeks, which cut intosmall fillets an inch in length, and of the thickness of a trussing-needle;when done, wash dry, and pass them in butter and sugar as before,add two quarts of clear soup, adding, just before it is done, a littlesorrel, cabbage-lettuce, and chervil or peas, ifhandy, but it will be excellent without either. 86.--A SPRING SOUP. The following is recommended for purifying the blood, and consequentlyclearing the complexion:--Take a handful of fresh sorrel and a handful ofwater-cresses; cut them up fine, but do not chop them; put them intoabout two quarts of boiling water, adding a carrot cut up insmall pieces, three or four potatoes, cut in quarters, two slices ofbread (if of a sixpenny loaf), also cut up; pepper andsalt to taste. Boil well till the soup assumes a consistency, which itwill do as the vegetables and bread dissolve in it. Stir it frequently,and it will prove a very palatable soup. With a moderate fire it may beprepared in about two hours. The liquor from any boiled meat may be usedinstead of plain water. 87.--MACARONI, WITH CONSOMMÉ,OR STOCK-BROTH. Take a quarter of a pound of Naples macaroni, and boil it inwater, till it is nearly done. Strain well, and put it into a richconsommé to boil. Let it be well done;grate some Parmesan cheese, which send up separately in a plate. 88.--CABBAGE SOUP. Take four or six pounds of beef, boil with it some blackpepper whole for three hours, cut three or four cabbages in quarters, boilthem until they are quite tender, turn them into a dish, and serve alltogether. 89.--MACARONI SOUP. Take a quart of gravy soup: break two ounces of Naplesmacaroni into pieces of little more than an inch long, putting them, bydegrees, into a small portion of the boiling soup, to prevent them fromsticking together, and let them boil until quite tender, but not soft orpulpy--from fifteen to twenty minutes if quite fresh, but nearly half an hourif at all stale. Vermicelli is used in the same manner. They willimprove the consistence of the soup if the quantity above stated be added: butit is useless and does not look well to see, as at some tables, only a fewstrings of it floating in the tureen. The flavor will also be much improved ifa small quantity of Parmesan cheese be either melted in it, or gratedand served up separately. 90.--SOUP À LA CRECI, OR CARROTSOUP. Cut half a pound of lean ham in dice, three onions, fourturnips, twelve carrots, the outer side red only, a head ofcelery, a fagot of sweet herbs, two blades of mace, sixcloves, a bay-leaf, and half a pound of salt butter; fry all welldown in a stewpan until they get a little brown, then add some secondstock, and stew until all the roots are quite tender, then rub itthrough a tammy sieve or tammy cloth with two long spoons; if very thick, addmore stock. Season with cayenne and black pepper, andsalt, and a good bit of sugar; send up on a napkin some nicefried bread cut in small dice, and not greasy. 91.--GREEN PEAPORRIDGE. (A most delicious potage.) Green peas three pints, milk three pints, butterone-quarter of a pound, flour enough for thickening. Boil the peas in just water enough to cook them until they aretender; then pour in the milk; when it boils, add the butter andflour rubbed well together; let it boil long enough to cook theflour; season with pepper and salt, and serve hot. 92.--GREEN PEA SOUP. Put two quarts of green peas into a stewpan with a quarter of a poundof butter, a quarter of a pound of lean ham, cut into small dice,two onions in slices, and a few sprigs of parsley; add a quart ofcold water, and with the hands rub all well together; then pour off thewater, cover the stewpan close, and stand it over a sharp fire, stirringthe contents round occasionally; when very tender, add two tablespoonfuls offlour, which mix well in mashing the peas with your spoon againstthe sides of the stewpan; add two quarts of stock, or broth fromthe Pot-au-feu, a table-spoonful of sugar, and a little pepperand salt, if required; boil all well together five minutes, when rub itthrough a tammy or hair sieve; then put it into another stewpan, with a pint ofboiling milk; boil five minutes, skim well, and pour it into yourtureen. It must not be too thick; serve with croutons of bread. 93.--WINTER PEA SOUP. Wash a quart of split peas, which put into a stewpan with half apound of streaked bacon, two onions in slices, two pounds ofveal or beef, cut into small pieces, and a little parsley, thyme, and bay-leaf; add a gallonof water, with a little salt and sugar; place it upon thefire, and when boiling, stand it at the side until the peas are boiledto a purée, and the water has reduced to half; then take out themeat, which put upon a dish, to be eaten with the bacon, keepingit hot; rub the soup through a hair sieve or tammy, put it into anotherstewpan, and when boiling, serve. The meat may also be served in thetureen if approved of. Maigre pea soup may also be made by omitting themeat, adding half a pound of butter, one quart of milk,and omitting a quart of water. 94.--LEEK, OR ONIONSOUP. The liquor in which a leg of mutton has been boiled will do very wellfor this broth. Mix a spoonful or two of oatmeal, according tothe quantity of broth, in cold water, very smooth, the same as iffor gruel; add a little of the broth, by degrees, until the whole isincorporated; then boil the liquor with any quantity of leeks oronions--both or either--until it becomes of the consistence ofcream. Or, omit the oatmeal, and substitute flour,stirring the soup very hard for five minutes; and when you are abouttaking it from the fire, stir in the yolks of two raw eggs beat up witha little more broth, and serve it immediately. Onions, peeled, pared, and cut into pieces, then shred into a pan andfried in either oil or butter, without any broth, butsimply having boiling water poured over them, and some toastedbread, seasoned merely with pepper and salt, are consideredvery refreshing when thus made into a soup, and much used by ladies throughoutEurope after the fatigues of a ball. 95.--POTATO SOUP MAIGRE. Take some large, mealy potatoes; peel and cut them into small slices withan onion; boil them in three pints of water till tender, and thenpulp them through a colander; add a small piece of butter, alittle cayenne pepper and salt, and, just before the soup isserved, two spoonfuls of good cream. The soup must not be allowed toboil after the cream has been put into it. 96.--TOMATO SOUP. Wash, scrape, and cut small the red part of three large carrots,three heads of celery, four large onions, and two largeturnips; put them into a saucepan with a table-spoonful ofbutter, and half a pound of lean new ham; let them stew verygently for an hour, then add three quarts of brown gravy soup, and somewhole black pepper, with eight or ten ripe tomatoes; let it boilan hour and a half, and pulp it through a sieve; serve it with friedbread cut in dice. 97.--SOUP SORREL--A SUMMER SOUP. Take a good quantity of sorrel and mix with it the top leaves ofbeet-root; boil them thoroughly; press them enough to extract allthe water, and chop them until they are almost a paste; when theyare quite cold, add the coldest spring water attainable, and mix untilrather thicker than cream; cut in thin slices two cucumberssteeped in a mixture of vinegar and a little cayenne; boil threeeggs hard, and cut them in very small pieces; now, having chopped thegreen ends of young onions small, and added to the paste, pourover cream to your taste, and then add the sliced cucumber andboiled egg; serve up garnished with clean pieces of ice. 98.--TOMATO SOUP. Slice two onions and fry them in butter until brown; removethem and fry two dozen tomatoes just sufficient to heat them through, then put them into a stewpan with theirgravy and the onions, add a head of celery and acarrot sliced; stew gently for half an hour, add three pints ofgravy, stew an hour and a half, pulp the whole of the vegetablesthrough a sieve, season with white pepper, salt, andcayenne, serve with sippets of toasted bread cut in shapes. 99.--PEPPER POT. (English.) Put in a stewpan three quarts of water; to this add celery,turnips, carrots, lettuces, cut small; add the bones ofcold roast meat of any description; half a pound of bacon, thesame weight of salted pork; stew gently until the meat is tender,taking care to skim when it first boils. Boil half a peck of spinach and rub it through a colander; take thebones out of the soup and add the spinach; with it the meat ofa lobster or crab minced; season with plenty of cayennepepper, and salt to taste. Suet dumplings may be boiled with it, or a fowl, but this ismatter of taste. Mutton or beef may be substituted forbacon or pork; this will be obvious when it is understood that apepper pot is presumed to consist of an equal proportion of flesh,fish, fowl and vegetables. 100.--PURÉE ORTURNIP SOUP. Get a bunch of turnips, pare them and cut them in thin slices; onehead of white celery, one onion; fill up your stewpan withgood second white stock, boil them until quite tender, then pass it allthrough a tammy by rubbing it with wooden spoons, or a tammy sieve; season withsugar, cayenne and salt. Send up fried bread, asfor former soups; add half a pint of cream the last thing. 101.--SAUTÉ SOUP. Cut carrots, and turnips, and onions, andcelery, as straws, about one inch long, quite thin; the carrotsyou will trim, using only the red part, the yellow that is left use for yourstock pot; cut your onions in quarters, then cut them the sizeendways, blanch them for two or three minutes, strain them on the back of ahair sieve to drain; then add them to the quantity of soup required, allowinghalf a pint to each person; therefore, as you must reduce it to have the flavorof your vegetables, allow a pint more, reducing it to the quantity you require;season it with lump sugar, cayenne pepper and salt; besure and not go to the extreme. 102.--SPRING SOUP. As sauté; the same roots cut differently, and add, if to be had,spinach, cabbage-lettuce, a very little sorrel, as itturns acid on the stomach, all cut rather small, tarragon,chervil, green asparagus, young peas, cucumbers;cut the asparagus about one inch long, cut the tarragon andchervil a little, and a few French beans cut; use yourconsommé stock as before, boiling all your green partsparticularly green in water a few minutes, leaving them to besufficiently done in your stock; if you have a cauliflowerboiled, pick a few small pieces and put in the soup-tureen; the boiling soupwhen poured in will make it hot; season as before. 103.--WINTER VEGETABLESOUP. Take carrots, turnips, and the heart of a head ofcelery, cut into dice, with a dozen button onions; half boil them insalt and water, with a little sugar in it; then throw them intothe broth; and, when tender, serve up the soup: or use rice,dried peas and lentils, and pulp them into the soup tothicken it. With many of these soups, small suet dumplings, very lightly made,and not larger than an egg, are boiled either in broth orwater, and put into the tureen just beforeserving, and are by most persons thought an improvement, but are more usuallyput into plain gravy-soup than any other, and should be made lightenough to swim in it. Such are the chief soups made of vegetables on a foundation of meat;both those made solely of vegetables, without any intermixture of meatbroth, may be made into very palatable soups by using the vegetablestock. FISH SOUPS. Notwithstanding the quantity of excellent fish, this nutritious andeconomical viand is not often introduced at table in the form of soup. Nothingcould be more easy than to multiply receipts for an almost endless variety:those that follow will, however, show how much may be done with many kinds offish which are not in very high estimation. When not wanted as soupe-maigre, the foundation, or stock,though called "fish-soup," is always better if made of meat, andveal is generally preferred. We, therefore, here add a receipt for itscomposition, as it may be applied to any kind of fish; though, in thosewhich we shall hereafter specify, it is not mentioned, as they are all intendedto be maigre. 104.--STOCK FOR FISH SOUP. Take a dozen flounders, or any small flat fish, and the samenumber of perch; gut and clean them carefully; put them into astewpan with two quarts of strong veal-broth; add a few slices oflean ham, two or three carrots, celery, and onionscut in slices, some sweet herbs and salt, with a littlecayenne; stew till the fish will pass through a coarse sieve;then return it into the stewpan, with a good lump of butter and someflour to thicken it; add a couple of large glasses of white wine,and a large spoonful of garlic vinegar. The gravy from pottedherrings, anchovies, or a little Oude sauce, will alsoimprove the flavor. This stock, if once reboiled, will, in cold weather, keep well for amonth; or, if served as soup, the quantity may of course be reduced accordingto the number of the party intended to partake of it, and it will be foundexcellent. Indeed, any species of fish may be made into soup in the samemanner. If meant to be browned, the onions should be fried, and agood spoonful of mushroom ketchup or India soy be added; and redwine will be better than either sherry or Madeira. But ifleft white, cream should be substituted forketchup and soy; a glassful of ginger wine will answer thepurpose of red wine. 105.--LOBSTER SOUP. If prepared fish-stock be not used, the stock of this soup maybe made of any fish not of sufficient consequence to be dressed in anyother way. Clean and cut them in pieces, take the meat out of one or twolobsters, cut it into small pieces, and lay it aside; break the shelland add it to the fish for the stock, which should be boiledgently for several hours; take the coral of the lobster, pound itin a mortar, with a small piece of the stock, partly pounded, and makeit up into forcemeat-balls, with a little chopped parsley,bread-crumbs, and an egg. When the stock is sufficientlydone, strain it, thicken it with butter and flour, or cream: warmthe lobster in it, and send it up, cut small, with theforcemeat-balls. Season it also delicately, but yet sufficiently to giveit flavor, which can be imparted by any of the compound sauces so commonlyadvertised. 106.--LOBSTER SOUP. To one large hen lobster scalded and cleaned, take two quarts ofstrong calf's feet broth; pound theshells, small claws, eggs, fat and coral in a mortar, andsimmer three hours in the soup. Cut the tails into square pieces, and fry thembrown. Make the claws into forcemeat-balls with the yolks of twoeggs, grated lemon-peel, parsley, thyme, a verylittle olives, and grated biscuit, and fry them brown. Boil themup in the soup quickly in five minutes; add half a pint of portwine, and lemon to taste; with salt, pepper, and a little mace. (This is the best soup onrecord.) 107.--LOBSTER SOUP. (English.) Extract the meat from the shells of four hen lobsters,which have been boiled: put the spawn aside, beat the fins and small claws in amortar; then place both in a saucepan, with two quarts of water, untilthe whole goodness of the fish has been drawn; then strain the liquor.Beat in a mortar the spawn, a lump of flour and butter; rub itthrough a sieve into the soup previously strained; simmer without boiling, thatthe color may be preserved, ten minutes; squeeze in a piece of a lemon,with a little of the essence of anchovies. When this dish is sent to table as a feature, forcemeat-balls areserved with it; they are made of minced lobster, spawn, crumb ofFrench roll, egg, and mace pounded; roll it inflour, and serve in the soup. 108.--PURÉE OF LOBSTERSOUP. Get two large hen lobsters, take out all the meat, chop andpound it fine, six anchovies boned, put the shells in some secondstock to boil for some time, strain off the liquor into your poundedlobsters, boil all until tender, rub all through a tammy, add one pintof cream; season with cayenne pepper, a little sugar, andsalt, and lemon-juice. 109.--CLAM SOUP. To the liquor of fifty clams, allow three quarts of water, andput it on with a knuckle of veal, the bone chopped. Simmer threehours, put in a bunch of sweet herbs, nutmeg, mace, atable-spoonful of whole pepper, and stew an hour longer. Then strain andadd four ounces of butter rubbed in flour, and the clamschopped in pieces. Boil a quarter of an hour and serve. 110.--OYSTERSOUP. Beard four dozen oysters, preserve the liquor in opening them,which must be placed with the beards of the oysters in a stewpan; sliceany fish, small fresh-water fish will serve excellently well, andadding them, stew for five or six hours; strain and thicken it, add twospoonfuls of soy or any fish sauce, or omit it, to taste. Add theoysters, and when they are warm through, serve. 111.--OYSTERSOUP. Get four flounders, or similar portions of any fish, fourdozen of large oysters, blanch them slightly, take off the beards andgristle, put the beards and fish into some of your best whitestock, boil all together for several hours, add four anchovieswashed, strain all off and thicken it with flour and butter, addone pint of cream, put in your oysters you had taken care of, thelast thing, just boiling them up in the soup; having passed it through a tammy,season it with cayenne pepper, salt, and a small piece ofsugar. 112.--OYSTER SOUP. Take fifty oysters, blanch them, but do not let them boil; strainthem through a sieve, and save the liquor. Put one-quarter pound ofbutter into a stewpan; when it is melted, add six ounces offlour; stir it over the fire for a few minutes; add the liquor from theoysters, two quarts of veal stock, one quart of new milk;season with salt, peppercorns, a little cayenne pepper, ablade of mace, Harvey sauce and essence of anchovies, a tablespoonful each; strain it througha tammy; let it boil ten minutes; put the oysters into the tureen with agill of cream, and pour the boiling soup upon them. 113.--EELSOUP. Take any number of pounds of eels, according to the quantityrequired; add two-thirds water. If about three or four pounds ofeels, add one onion, a small quantity of mace, a littlepepper whole, sweet herbs, a crust of the top side ofbread; cover down close; stew till the fish separates, strain.Toast slices of bread deep brown, but not to burn; cut intotriangular pieces or squares, a piece of carrot two inches long, cutinto four slices lengthwise, put into a tureen with the toast, pour thesoup on; boiling cream may be added thickened with a littleflour, but it should be rich enough without it. 114.--NEW ENGLANDCHOWDER. Have a good haddock, cod, or any other solid fish, cutit in pieces three inches square, put a pound of fat salt pork in stripsinto the pot, set it on hot coals, and fry out the oil. Take outthe pork, and put in a layer of fish, over that a layer ofonions in slices, then a layer of fish with strips of fat saltpork, then another layer of onions, and so on alternately until yourfish is consumed. Mix some flour with as much water aswill fill the pot; season with black pepper and salt to yourtaste, and boil it for half an hour. Have ready some crackers soaked inwater till they are a little softened; throw them into your chowder fiveminutes before you take them up. Serve in a tureen. 115.--NEW ENGLANDCHOWDER. Cover the bottom of a pot with slices of boiled salt pork, with alittle onions; on this place a layer of fish in large pieces,season with pepper, and cover it with a layer of biscuit soakedin milk, and a layer of sliced potatoes. Put above this another layerof pork, as before, with fish, &c., the biscuit beingon the top of all. Pour in a pint and a half of water, cover, and boilit slowly an hour; then skim and turn it into a deep dish. Thicken thegravy with butter rolled in flour, and parsley. 116.--CLAM SOUP. Boil a knuckle of veal in as much water as will cover it well.When it has boiled about half or a quarter of an hour, open half a peck ofclams by placing them over the fire, in a very small quantity ofwater. Pour the juice of the clams into the pot whichcontains the knuckle of veal. Boil the soup three or four hours,seasoning it with a table-spoonful of pepper. Add no salt,as the clam juice will have made it salt enough. When theveal is quite tender, cut up the clams in small pieces (that isto say, each clam in three or more pieces), and throw them into thesoup, with a quarter of a pound of butter chopped into bits. Somepersons roll the butter in flour, which they think makes it mixwith the clam juice; others use no flour, as they dislike todetect the taste of the flour. 117.--CLAM SOUP. (Prepared bya Dublin Lady.) Put forty or fifty clams, in the shells, with as little wateras possible. When the liquor has run out from the opened shells, take theclams out and chop them fine, with an onion, a bunch of mincedcelery, and some mace and pepper. Put all in the soup, andthicken it with two tablespoonfuls of butter rolled in flour, andif you choose, add a little milk. Simmer twenty minutes; stir in thebeaten yolks of five eggs; put bits of toasted bread into thetureen and serve. 118.--LAKE AND PONDFISH SOUP. For every person take a pound each of any fresh-water fish that canbe obtained; wash them in salt and water, and stew them with atomato, carrots, leeks, fried onions, and sweetherbs, in as much water as will cover them; and let them stew untilthe whole is reduced to a pulp; then strain the liquor, and boil it foranother hour until it becomes quite smooth. Then have ready some roots of anysort that may be in season, which have been chopped small, and boiled either inmilk or water: add them to the soup, and let it simmer forone-quarter of an hour; season it, if milk has been used, withmace and celery, with a little cayenne; but if made solelywith water, then use Chili vinegar, soy, mushroom ketchup,or any of the savory sauces. FISH. Fish should be well washed, scaled, and cleaned, by drawing theentrails through a slit in the under side. The roe and livershould be separated, washed, and cooked with the fish. The roeproves the fish in season. Slimy fish may be scalded in saltand water, but must be dried before cooking. Fresh fish, when boiled, should be placed in cold, andshell-fish in boiling water. To keep oysters after washing them, lay them in a tub in a coolcellar, with the deep part of the shell undermost. Sprinkle them withsalt and Indian meal, then fill the tub with cold water.Change the water every day, and the oysters will keep fresh afortnight. Fish should be garnished with horse-radish or parsley.The only vegetable served with fish is potatoes. 119.--SALT AND FRESH-WATER FISH. When boiling fish put a little salt and a littlevinegar into the water to give the fish firmness. Becareful to let fish be well done, but not to let it break. When veryfresh, cod and whiting are very much improved by keeping a day,and rubbing a little salt down the back-bone. Fresh-waterfish often have a muddy smell and taste, which is easily got rid of bysoaking it. After it has been thoroughly cleansed in strong salt andwater, if the fish is not too large, scald it in the same, then dryand dress it. Fish that is to be boiled must be put on the fire in cold hardwater; when it boils, skim with the greatest care; throw in a little cup ofcold water to check the extreme of heat, then keep it simmering only, lest the outside break before thethick and inner part be done; but "crimped fish" should be put intoboiling water, and simmered a few minutes. When it boils up, some cold water should be put into it to check it,and keep it simmering. The cover should be kept on the kettle to preventsoot falling in and discoloring the fish. Fish should beboiled with a handful of salt, and half a teacupful of vinegar.All fish should be taken out of the water the instant it is done,or it will become woolly. To ascertain when it is done, the fish-platemay be drawn up, and, if done, the meat will leave the bone. Tokeep it hot, and to prevent it losing its color, the fish-plate shouldbe placed across the fish-kettle and a clean cloth put over thefish. If left in the water after it is ready, fish losesits firmness. Serve fish on a napkin. It is impossible to dress fish too fresh. Some kinds will bearkeeping better than others, but none are improved by it. Families who purchase a whole salmon, and like it quite fresh, shouldparboil the portion not required for the day's consumption, and lay it aside inthe liquor, boiling up the whole together when wanted. By this means the curdwill set, and the fish be equally good on the following day. The custom of serving up rich sauces, such aslobster, is unknown in salmon countries; a little lemonpeel or white vinegar being quite sufficient, added to meltedbutter. Salmon should be garnished with parsley andscraped horseradish. Small fish may be nicely fried plain, or done with egg andbread crumbs, and then fried. Upon the dish on which the fish isto be served should be placed a damask napkin, folded, and upon this put thefish, with the roe and liver; then garnish the dish withhorseradish, parsley, and lemon. To boil or fry fish nicely, after it is well washed, it should be putin a cloth, and when dry, wetted with egg and bread crumbs. Itwill be much improved by being wetted with egg and crumbs a second time.Then have your pan with plenty of boiling dripping or lard, put yourfish into it, and let it fry rather quickly till it is of a nice brownand appears done. If it is done before being nicely browned, it should be takenfrom the pan, and placed on a sieve before the fire to drain and brown. Ifwanted very nice, put a sheet of cap paper to receive the fish.Should you fry your fish in oil, it obtains a much finer colorthan when done in lard or dripping. Never use butter, as it makesthe fish a bad color. Garnish your dish with green or friedparsley. In broiling fish, be careful that your gridiron is clean; place it onthe fire, and when hot, rub it over with suet to hinder the fishfrom sticking. The fish must be floured and seasoned beforebroiling. It must be broiled over a clear fire only, and great care must betaken that it does not burn or become smoky. Broiled fish for breakfast should always be skinned, buttered, andpeppered. Fish are broiled, fried, boiled, baked, stewed, in fact cooked inevery imaginable fashion; those named are the chief methods. In every kind, thegreatest attention and cleanliness must be exercised. A broken, disfigured, orill-cooked dish of fish presented at table, is quite sufficient todestroy the taste for it for ever; on the contrary, when neatly done itheightens the relish which every one possesses more or less, and imparts anappetite where one may be wanting, while the cook is held in gratefulremembrance. 120.--MARINADE Is commonly used in France for the purpose of boiling fish, whichimbibes from it a more pleasant flavor than it naturally possesses, and hasbeen so generally adopted by professed cooks that we here insert thereceipt:--Cut up two carrots, three onions, half a dozen shalots,a single clove of garlic, and put them into a stewpan with a piece ofbutter, a bunch of parsley, and a bundle of sweet herbs;fry the whole for a few minutes, then add, very gradually, two bottles of anylight wine or of cider. Put in a handful of salt, twodozen of peppercorns, the same quantity of allspice, and a coupleof cloves. Simmer the whole together for one and a half hours, strainthe liquor, and put it by for use. This marinade, if carefully strained after the fish has been takenout, will serve several times for the same purpose, adding a littlewater each time. Fish dressed in it should simmer very gently, orrather stew than boil, as it affords to mackerel, fresh herrings,perch, roach, and any of the small river fish, the advantage ofdissolving, or so thoroughly softening their bones as to render themmore agreeable in eating. For large fish, they should be cut intosteaks before being marinaded. Instead of the wine orcider, a quart of table-beer, a glass of soy, one of essence of anchovies, and one ofketchup, may be used; or a pint of vinegar and these sauces,fennel, chives, thyme, and bay-leaves, may be added withthe wine, cider, &c. Or, choose a kettle that will suit thesize of the fish, into which put two parts water, one of light(not sweet) white wine, a good piece of butter, some stewedonions and carrots, pepper, salt, two or threecloves, and a good bunch of sweet herbs; simmer one-quarter of anhour, let it become cold, then boil the fish therein. Serve withanchovy-sauce and a squeeze of lemon. 121.--COD FISH. Fresh cod is good boiled, fried, or made into a chowder. It is toodry a fish to broil. Salt cod should be soaked in lukewarmwater till the skin will come off easily--then take up thefish, scrape off the skin, and put it in fresh water, andset it on a very moderate fire, where it will keep warm without boiling, as ithardens by boiling. It takes between three and four hours to cook itsoft--serve it up with drawn butter. 122.--TO BOIL COD FISH. Crimped cod is preferable to the plain; it is likewise better cut inslices than cooked whole; to boil it well, have the water ready boilingwith one pound of salt to every six quarts; put in your fish,draw your fish-kettle to the corner of the fire, where let it simmerslowly from twenty minutes to half an hour; when done, the bone in thecentre will draw out easily; if boiled too much, it would eat tough andstringy; should the fish not be crimped, add more salt to thewater, it will cause the fish to eat firmer. 123.--CODFISH WITH OYSTER SAUCE. Boil three slices of the fish as above, drain and dress them upon adish without a napkin, blanch three dozen oysters, by putting them intoa stewpan, with their juice, upon the fire, move them roundoccasionally, do not let them boil; as soon as they become a little firm, placea sieve over a basin, pour in the oysters, beard them, put the liquoragain into the stewpan; when boiling, add two cloves, half a blade ofmace, six peppercorns, and two ounces of butter, to whichyou have added a tablespoonful of flour, breaking it into small pieces,stir well together, when boiling, season with a little salt, cayennepepper, and essence of anchovies; finish with a gill of creamor milk, add the oysters, and sauce over. The remains ofthe fish may be taken from the bone and placed upon a dish, witha little of the above sauce (to which you have added the yolks of twoeggs), then sprinkle over with bread-crumbs, and place it twentyminutes in a hot oven till the bread-crumbs become brown. 124.--COD SOUNDS.--RAGOÛT. The sounds should not be much soaked, but thoroughly cleaned. Simmer themfor a short time, broil them, having first floured them; when they arejust tender, stew them in white gravy which has been well seasoned, adda little cream, a bit of butter, a spoonful of flour, giveit a boil, flavor with nutmeg, a small piece of lemon-peel,and a dash of pounded mace; serve. 125.--SLICES OF COD. Three slices make a small dish; put them in a baking-dish, cover them overwith some good second stock, a little essence of anchovies; whendone thicken the stock, and pass it through a tammy, pour it over yourfish, season with cayenne pepper, and salt, and lemonjuice; if for capers add them, if for maître d'hôtel,add cream and parsley chopped fine. 126.--CODFISH AUGRATIN. This is the best mode of using the remains ofa dressed codfish. Put some cold oyster-sauce at the bottom of apie-dish, then a layer of the codfish (seasoned with pepper,salt, and an atom of nutmeg), with any of the liver andsound that remains; then repeat the layers of sauce and fishuntil the dish is full; cover it with bread-crumbs, sprinkle a littlebutter over, and bake for about half an hour. 127.--CODOMELETTE. Break into small pieces the thickest parts of a dressed cod, seasonit with a little grated nutmeg and a little pounded mace, beat upsix eggs well and mix with it, forming it into a paste, fry it asan omelette, and serve as hot as possible. 128.--FISH CAKE. Take the meat from the bones of any kind of cold fish,which latter put with the head and fins into a stewpan with a pint ofwater, a little salt, pepper, an onion, and a fagotof sweet herbs to stew for gravy. Mince the meat, and mixit well with crumbs of bread and cold potatoes (equal parts), alittle parsley and seasoning. Make into a cake, with the whiteof an egg, or a little butter or milk; egg it over andcover with bread-crumbs, then fry a little brown. Pour the gravyover, and stew gently fifteen minutes, stirring it carefully twice or thrice.Serve hot, and garnish with slices of lemon, or parsley. 129.--TO COOK SHEEPSHEAD. Rub it with salt and lemon before putting it into thewater. To every six quarts of water add one pound of salt.Boil a twenty pound fish twenty minutes. Serve on a napkin; garnish withparsley, and eat it with shrimp or lobster sauce. Fried Whiting. An illustration of a fish with its tail inside of its mouth so that its entire body forms a circle. 130.--WHITING AND GRATIN. Skin the whitings, and turn their tails into their mouths; put theminto a buttered sautépan, with a table-spoonful of chopped onionsand four of brown sauce over each; sprinkle over thembread-crumbs and butter, and bake in a moderate oven half anhour. Dress them on a dish without a napkin. Put twelve table-spoonfuls morebrown sauce into the pan, with a tea-spoonful of choppedmushrooms, one of chopped parsley, one of essence ofanchovy; pepper, salt, and sugar a little; pour roundthe dish, and brown it with a salamander. 131.--HALIBUT. Halibut should be cut into slices of four pounds each, and may bebaked or fried. The skin on the back must be scored. When baked, use a sufficient quantity of butter tokeep it moist. If boiled, lay it in the kettle on a strainer, cover itwith salted water; boil it slowly half or three-quarters of an hour andskim it well. Garnish it with horseradish, serve it with meltedbutter. To fry halibut, cut it in slices less than aninch thick; and with this, as with all other fish, take care to haveplenty of butter, lard, or oil in the pan, and that it behot before the fish is put in. 132.--HALIBUT--STEWED. Put into a stewpan half a pint of fish broth, a table-spoonful ofvinegar, and one of mushroom ketchup; add an anchovy, twogood-sized onions cut in quarters, a bunch of sweet herbs, andone clove of garlic; add a pint and a half of water, let it stewan hour and a quarter, strain it off clear, putinto it the head and shoulders of a fine halibut and stew untiltender; thicken with butter and flour, and serve. 133.--TOCOLLOP HALIBUT. Cut the fish into nice cutlets of about an inch thick and fry them;then put them into a broth made of the bones, four onions,a stick of celery, and a bundle of sweet herbs boiled togetherfor half an hour. Strain this broth, thicken it, and stew thefish for half an hour, adding salt, pepper, a grating ofnutmeg and pounded mace, a spoonful of soy or fish-sauce,and half that quantity of lemon juice with a little shred lemonpeel. 134.--HALIBUT A LA CRÊME. Rub the halibut with salt and lemon; put it to boil ina kettle, allowing one ounce of salt to every six quarts ofwater; simmer over a moderate fire. A halibut of eight poundsshould simmer twenty minutes or more. When it begins to crack slightly, lift itwith a drainer, and dish it without a napkin, having it first carefullydrained, and absorbing the water that runs from the fish with anapkin. Put one pint of cream on the fire in a stewpan, and when nearsimmering add half a pound of fresh butter; stir it quickly till thebutter is melted, but do not let the cream boil; add threeyolks of eggs, season with salt, pepper and lemonjuice; pour as much over the halibut as will cover it, and serve theremainder in a boat. Or, if preferred, dish the fish on a napkin,garnish with parsley, and serve the sauce in a boat. Thissauce must not be made until the moment it is wanted. 135.--TO DRYHADDOCK. Choose the finest you can obtain; clean them, remove the eyes, the entrails,and the gills; clear away also all the blood from the backbone. Wipe them asdry as you can with a clean soft cloth, and fill in with salt the spaceswhich contained the eyes; also rub in a quantity in the inside of thefish; lay them in a cool place on a dry flag-stone, or a piece of boardfor eighteen or twenty hours, then hang them in a dry place. Four days will befound quite sufficient to prepare them for eating. 136.--TO DRESS DRIEDHADDOCK. They should be skinned, rubbed with egg, and rolled in newbread-crumbs; lay them in a dish before the fire to brown, baste withbutter, and when well browned serve with egg sauce. 137.--TODRESS HADDOCK. Clean them very thoroughly, and take off the heads and theskin; put them into boiling water, throw in two moderate-sizedhandfuls of salt; let them boil as fast as possible, and when they riseto the surface (which they will do, if they have sufficient room), they aredone enough. They are sent to table with plain butter forsauce. 138.--BAKED HADDOCK--(Soyer's.) Fill the interior of the fish with veal stuffing; sew it upwith packthread, and truss it with the tail in its mouth, rub a piece ofbutter over the back, or egg and bread-crumb it over; setit on a baking-dish, which put in a moderate oven to bake; a commonhaddock would require but half an hour. The better plan is to run thepoint of a knife down to the backbone, from which if the flesh parts easily, itis done; dress it upon a dish without a napkin, and serve a sauceround. 139.--TO BAKE HADDOCK. Cut off the heads, trim and bone them, season withpepper and salt; chop very fine a small quantity ofmushroom, onion and parsley; spread it over thefish, lay on them small pieces ofbutter, and place them in a dish with crumbs of bread; bake themfrom fifty minutes to an hour; skim the gravy, and serve up in the samedish as that in which it was cooked. 140.--HERRINGS. Herrings are dressed in a variety of fashions; they are fried,boiled, broiled, dried, potted, baked, smoked, pickled. There are three sorts of herrings, fresh, salted, and redherrings; they are cleaned like any other sort of fish; whenfresh they are boiled and served with melted butter, white sauce,&c.; the salted herring should be soaked in cold water beforeit is cooked; this is broiled. Sometimes it is cut in pieces and eaten raw; thered herring is split down the back, the head and tail taken off,and the fish broiled like the others; they may be also dressed in thefollowing manner: when they have lain in cold water some time, soak themin milk for two hours; then split them down the back; have ready somemelted butter in which have been mixed basil and bay leafminced small; the yolks of two eggs, pepper and nutmeg;rub the herrings well with this bread, then broil them over agentle fire, serve with lemon juice; the best red herrings arefull of roe, are firm and large, and have a yellow cast; of the freshherrings the scales are bright; if good, the eye is full and the gillred; the fish should be stiff. 141.--FRESH HERRINGS BAKED. Wash the herrings in clear spring water; when they arethoroughly clean drain them, and then, without wiping them, lay them in a dishor baking pan; pepper and salt them; chop finely two or threeonions, some parsley, thyme, and strew over them; coverthem with equal proportions of vinegar and small beer; tie themover, and let them bake one hour in a slow oven. They should be kept in the pickle, and make a pleasant dish whencold. 142.--TO POT HERRINGS. Take from one to two dozen herrings, according to the number youpurpose potting; choose them as large, fine, and fresh as you can. Take twoounces of salt, one of saltpetre, two of allspice; reducethem to an impalpable powder, and rub them well into the herrings; letthem remain with the spice upon them eight hours to drain; wipe off thespice clean, and lay them in a pan on which butter has beenrubbed; season with nutmeg, mace, white pepper,salt, and one clove in powder, one ounce each, save the last; layin two or three bay leaves, cover with butter, and bake gentlythree hours. When cool, drain off the liquor, pack the fish in the pots intendedfor their use, cover to the depth of half an inch with clarified butter,sufficiently melted just to run, but do not permit it to be hot; they will beready for eating in two days. 143.--POTTED HERRING. Take off the heads and tails; clean the fish and shakesalt on them to draw out the blood; leave them one night, then rub themwith black pepper and allspice. Pack them in a tin pan; putslices of onions and bay leaves between the layers, and pour onvinegar enough to cover them. Lay over them a sheet of butteredpaper, or a crust of oatmeal bread; bake them till thebones are dissolved. A little mace, whole pepper, andbutter improve them. 144.--TO STEW MACKEREL--(New Way.) Take off the heads, the fins, the tails, and, having opened thefish, and taken out all the hard roes, dry them with a cloth, anddredge them lightly with flour; place three or four of them in a stewpan, with a lump of butter the size of awalnut, to each fish; put into a small basin a teacupful ofwater, a tablespoonful of finely chopped onions, the same ofchopped parsley, a blade or two of mace, a little pepperand salt, a tablespoonful of anchovy essence, and a smallteacupful of ale or porter (if not bitter). Add a tablespoonful ofgrated bread-crust, not burnt, but a light brown: pour all theseingredients over the fish, and let them stew gently for twenty minutes;have ready the yolks of three eggs, well beaten, and when thefish is sufficiently done, take some of the gravy and mixgradually with the eggs, and, pouring them on the fish, shake thestewpan a little over the fire to thicken the whole, but not to curdle theeggs; the soft roes added are an improvement: have ready more gratedcrust, and having placed the fish whole in the dish, shake a little ofthe grated crust over the whole, so as to make it of a handsome brown. Thereceipt requires to be carefully followed. If the gravy is too thick,more water may be added; also a glass of sherry, if liked. 145.--MACKEREL Are generally served up plain boiled; put them in a kettle containing enoughboiling water according to the number, well salted; let simmer nearlyhalf an hour, take them up, drain, and dish them upon a napkin; serve meltedbutter in a boat, with which you have mixed a table-spoonful of choppedfennel, boiling it a few minutes. 146.--MACKEREL. Cleanse the fish thoroughly inside and out, remove the roecarefully, steep it in vinegar and water, and replace it; placethe fish in water from which the chill has been taken, and boilvery slowly, from fifteen to twenty minutes; the best criterion is to be foundin the starting of the eyes and splitting of the tail, when that takes placethe fish is done; take it out of the water instantly, or you will not preserve it whole.Garnish with fennel or parsley, and serve up as sauce,either, chopped fine in melted butter. Gooseberry sauce isoccasionally sent to table, but it does not suit every palate. An English cook says: They should be carefully cleaned both inside and out;then washed in vinegar and water, and left to hang a little todry before being put into the fish-kettle. A handful of saltshould be put into the water, which should be at first cold, and onlyallowed to boil gently from fifteen to twenty minutes, though some preferhaving the water boiling hot. The fish should be watched aboutthat time, as "when the eye starts and the tail splits they are done, andshould be immediately taken up; if left in the water they willbreak." The most customary sauce is that of fennel, which has partlysuperseded the gooseberry; but parsley and butter arestill in use. To Broil. --Split them down the back, rub the insidewith a little vinegar sprinkled with pepper and salt,flour them, broil on a quick fire, and serve them up with meltedbutter, parsley, fennel, or lemon sauce. Or, ifintended for breakfast, send up the fish plainly broiled without condiments or sauce,and merely rubbed, when done, with a bit of butter. 147.--TO ROASTSHAD--(Sea-shore Receipt.) Split your fish down the back after he is cleansed and washed; nailthe halves on shingles or shortboard; stick them erect in the sand round alarge fire; as soon as they are well browned, serve on whatever you have; eatwith cold butter, black pepper, salt, and a good appetite.(This is a delicious way of cooking this fish.) 148.--FOR PRESERVING SHAD. Place the shad, cleaned and washed, on a layer of salt in thebottom of the vessel, alternating the layers of shad and salt;the salt covering the top ones. Leave them twenty-four hours; then takethem out and wipe them dry. For fifty shad, make a pickle ofquarter of a pound of saltpetre and a pound of brown sugar mixedwith salt enough to cure the fish; put the shad inalternate layers with this dry preparation; and put them away. When ashad is taken out to cook, it should be soaked a few hours beforebroiling. 149.--TO BROIL A SHAD. Shad should be well washed and dried. It may be cut in half andbroiled, or you may split it open and lay a small quantity of salt overit, and lay it upon a gridiron well buttered. It will broil in about twentyminutes, and should be thoroughly done. Melted butter may be served in asauce-boat with it. Shad is even more palatable when baked thanbroiled. To bake Shad it should be stuffed with mashedpotatoes and chopped parsley. Lay it in the oven on a pan which iswell covered with butter chopped in pieces; baste the fish withthe butter and add fresh quantities as fast as it is absorbed. Half orthree-quarters of a pound of butter should be used for large-sizedshad. 150.--TO ROAST PIKE--(Soyer.) This fish, in France, is found daily on the tables of the fishepicures. It is usually baked, when dressed plain. Having cleaned thefish, stuff it, and sew the belly up; butter a saucepan, (ashallow frying-pan,) put the fish into it, and place it in the oven foran hour or more, according to the size; when done, dish it without a napkin,and pour anchovy sauce round it. The fish, before baking, shouldbe trussed with its tail in its mouth, and have four incisions cut in eachside, and well buttered over. 151.--FISH CAKES. Cold boiled fresh fish, or salt codfish, is nice minced fine,with potatoes, moistened with a little water, and a littlebutter put in, done up into cakes of the size of common biscuit,and fried brown in pork-fat or butter. 152.--TO COOKCARP. Scour a fresh caught carp, and rub clean with salt and water;but scale him not; open him, and put him, with his blood and liver intoa small pot; take a handful of sweet marjoram, thyme, orparsley, a sprig of rosemary and another of savory. Bindthem in small bundles, and add them to the carp, with four or five wholeonions, twenty pickled oysters, and three anchovies. Pouron claret wine enough to cover the carp, seasoned withsalt, cloves, mace and lemon-peel. Cover thepot, and set it on a quick fire. When done, take out the carp, lay itwith the broth into a dish. Pour over it a quarter of a pound ofbutter, melted and beaten with six spoonfuls of the broth, theyolks of two or three eggs, and some of the herbs shred;garnish the dish with lemons, and serve up, and much good to you. 153.--TO COOK TROUT. (Frank Forrester's Method.) This is the method of the woods, and in the woods I learned it: Thetrout must be cooked in the open air, by a wood fire on the ground, or acharcoal fire in a small Boston furnace. Clean and scale your fish; open, clean and wash the inside; for apound fish take two small skewers of red cedar wood; upon each thread apiece of fat salt pork half an inch square; with these fasten the belly of the fish asunder, annex himby the tail to a twig of pliant wood, which suffer to bend over the fire so asto bring the fish opposite to the blaze; place a large biscuit,or a thin slice of dry toast, under the drip of the gravy; cookquickly. For a two pound fish ten minutes will suffice; dish with thebiscuit under him, and eat with salt and lemon-juice,or with shrimp or lobster sauce; or a dash of Worcestershire orHarvey sauce; though I think these bad taste. 154.--TO DRESSPICKEREL--(Nobbs.) Open and rub the fish within with salt and claret wine;save the milt and a little of the bloody fat; cut him in two or threepieces, and put him into boiling water, with sweet marjoram,savory, thyme, or fennel, and a good handful ofsalt. Boil nearly half an hour. For the sauce, takebutter, anchovies, horseradish, claret wine, alittle of the blood, shalot, or garlic, and lemon sliced; beat alltogether, and serve. 155.--STEWED CARP. Three carps will make a dish; put them in a baking-dish, cut up inthin pieces a carrot, turnip, onion, celery, afagot of sweet herbs, a bay-leaf, a little mace, sixcloves, whole pepper, some good second stock, sixanchovies, half a pint of port wine; boil all this together, pourit over the carp while hot, put buttered paper over them, do themin the oven; when done, strain off the stock from the fish andthicken it, strain it through a tammy, add a glass more port wine,season it with sugar, lemon-juice, cayenne pepper, andsalt. 156.--SOLES, FRIED. Have about four pounds of lard or clean fat in a smallfish-kettle, which place over a moderate fire; cut off the fins of thesole, and dip it into flour, shake part of the flour off,have an egg well beaten upon a plate, with which brush the fishall over, and cover it with fine bread-crumbs; ascertain if thelard is hot, by throwing in a few bread-crumbs; it will hiss ifsufficiently hot; put in the fish, which will require nearly tenminutes' cooking, and ought to be perfectly crisp; drain it on a cloth, dishupon a napkin, garnish with parsley, and serve with shrimp saucein a boat. The above quantity of lard or fat, if carefully used and notburnt, would do for several occasions, by straining it off each time afterusing. All kinds of fish, such as eels, smelts, whitings,flounders, perch, gudgeons, &c., are fried precisely in thesame manner. Regulate the time according to the size of your fish. 157.--PIKE. Clean and stuff the interior as directed for haddocks, only addingsome fillets of anchovies, if handy, and chopped lemon-peelwith it; curl round and put in a baking-dish, spread a little butter allover, put in a moderate oven; when about half done egg over with apaste-brush, and sprinkle bread-crumbs upon it; a middling-sizedpike will take about an hour, but that according to the size and the heat ofthe oven; when done, dress upon a dish without a napkin, and sauce roundas directed for baked haddock. 158.--TO FRY SMELTS. Dry them slightly in a cloth, and dip them in flour; then have halfan ounce of butter or clear fat melted in a basin, into whichbreak the yolk of two eggs, with which rub the smelts over with abrush, dip them in bread-crumbs, fry in very hot lard, dress themon a napkin, garnish with parsley, and serve with shrimp sauce ina boat. 159.--BROILED SMELTS. When cleansed and wiped dry with a cloth, dipthem lightly into flour, and put them upon a gridiron over a slow fire,for five or six minutes, turning them carefully when half done; serve plain, orwith a little sauce. They are much relished by sick persons. I canhighly recommend any kind of white fish cooked in this manner; and it iswell known that nothing in the way of food is more digestible thanfish. Water souchet of flounders, soles, and slips may alsobe served to invalids, by proceeding the same as above. 160.--STURGEONCUTLETS. Cut in slices one-quarter inch thick; dry, flour, and eggthem; dip them in crumbs, seasoned with pepper, salt,parsley, and thyme; fry them, and serve with Indianpickle, tomato, or piquant sauce. 161.--TO STEW STURGEON. Cut the fish in slices one and a half inch thick, dip them invinegar, dry them well, flour, and broil the slices; thenflour and lay them in a stewpan with some good broth, and letthem stew gently until perfectly tender; thicken the gravy withbutter or cream, add a spoonful of Harvey's sauce,one-half a glass of wine, and serve it up with capers strewedover the top, and garnished with slices of lemon. 162.--ECONOMICALMODE OF COOKING STURGEON. Take a piece of sturgeon about two pounds' weight, and on sending a piece ofmeat to the baker's to be baked on a stand in a dish, put the sturgeonunder it, with a little water, salt, pepper, &c., anda little chopped eschalot may be used; you can also put potatoesround it. Peas, if in season, are a good accompaniment, with meltedbutter. 163.--SHRIMP TOAST--CROUTE AUX CREVELLES--(French.) Boil five pints of shrimps, and as soon as they are cold shell them; takethe heads and bruise them in a mortar, put them into barely a quart ofwater, and let them boil an hour, strain them very clear, and add threeparts to half the quantity of good veal stock. Put into a stewpan a lumpof butter the size of an egg, and when it has commenced tobubble, stir in one teaspoonful of flour, a little grated nutmeg,a sprinkling of cayenne, and a small quantity of mace, the fourthof a teaspoonful; when this browns, pour in the stock gradually, addinga glass of vin de Bordeaux, and let it boil, then add the shrimps, cut off thebottom crust of a French loaf, hollow out the crumb, and fry the crust in freshbutter until a golden brown; as soon as the shrimps are thoroughlyheated, which will be in about three or four minutes, pour them into thehollowed toast. 164.--SMELTS.--(English). This is a very delicate fish, requires delicate handling, and isquickly cooked; draw through the gills and wipe with a soft cloth, but do notwash them; dip them into the yolk of an egg beaten very smooth, andsprinkle them with bread-crumbs as finely as they can be powdered, alittle flour may be mixed with the bread-crumbs; fry them a clearlight brown; four minutes will suffice to cook them. The French method of serving is to skewer six through the gills with asilver skewer, and serve them in sixes. If dished, lay them head andtail alternately, serve with melted butter and garnish withparsley. 165.--TO BAKE SMELTS. Prepare as above, and instead of strewing forcemeat over them,employ only bread crumbs, and moisten withclarified butter; mix in addition to the gravy a glass ofMadeira, with a dash of anchovies; this must be added before thesmelts are laid in. They will be done in ten minutes. 166.--TROUT. Scale, gut, clean, dry, and flour, fry them in butteruntil they are a rich clear brown, fry some green parsley crisp, andmake some plain melted butter, put in one teaspoonful of essence ofanchovy, and one glass of white wine; garnish when the troutare dished with the crisped parsley and lemon cut in slices; thebutter may be poured over the fish, but it is most advisable tosend it in a butter tureen. 167.--TO FRY TROUT. Scale, gut, and clean them; take out the gills; egg and crumbthem; then fry in lard or oil until of a light brown. Serve withanchovy-sauce and sliced lemon. 168.--IN THE FOREIGN MODE. Cover the bottom of a small oval paper form with a few very thinslices of fat bacon; cut down the back some nicely-washed smalltrout, and, having removed the bones, lay the fish open,flat upon the bacon; sprinkle with chopped parsley,pepper, salt, a little mace, and two cloves finelypounded. Bake one-half hour in a quick oven, and serve in paper. 169.--TRUITE À LA GENEVOISE. Clean the fish as above, lay them in a stewpan with two glasses ofchampagne, two glasses of sherry, a fagot of parsley, anonion stuck with cloves, thyme, pepper, andsalt, and a piece of the well baked crust of French bread; stewon a quick fire, take out the bread when the fish is done, brownit, mix in butter rolled in flour, and boil up to thicken thesauce; the fish having been taken out when done, pour over themthe thickened sauce, serve with lemon sliced and friedbread. 170.--TRUITE À LA PRINCESSE ROYALE. Take equal parts of Madeira and water, and let them come to aboil, having emptied, cleansed, washed, and wiped perfectly dry thetrout; lay them in; they should only be just covered with the liquor,and will be done in twenty minutes if not boiled too fast; take out thefish and thicken with a piece of butter rolled in flour;add two well beaten eggs with one teaspoonful of cream to thesauce, pouring them from one vessel to another until they are of acreamy consistency; season with salt, pour the sauce upon thefish, and serve. 171.--TROUT À LA TWICKENHAM. When you have cleaned your trout, put them into a kettle ofboiling water, to which you have added a good handful of salt,and a wine-glassful of vinegar; boil gently about twenty minutes,or according to their size; dress upon a napkin, and serve meltedbutter, into which you have put a table-spoonful of choppedgherkins, two sprigs of chopped parsley, salt andpepper, in a boat. The remains of trout, salmon, or mackerel, areexcellent pickled:--put three onions in slices in a stewpan, with twoounces of butter, one turnip, a bouquet of parsley,thyme, and bay-leaf, pass them five minutes over the fire, add a pint ofwater and a pint of vinegar, two teaspoonfuls of salt andone of pepper; boil until the onions are tender, then strain itthrough a sieve over the fish; it will keep some time if required, and then do to pickle more fish byboiling over again. 172.--TROUT STEWED. This is a pleasing and delicate fish when nicely stewed. It isdressed very much in the fashion of other small fish stewed, only thatit requires perhaps more care in the different processes. First wash and clean the fish, wipe it perfectly dry; put into astewpan two ounces of butter, dredge in as it melts, flour, andadd grated nutmeg, a little mace, and a little cayenne.Stew well, and when fluid and thoroughly mixed, lay in the fish, which,having suffered to slightly brown, cover with a pint of veal gravy;throw in a little salt, a small fagot of parsley, a few rings oflemon-peel; stew slowly forty minutes; take out the fish,strain the gravy clear and pour it over the fish; it may bestrained over it; before however, it is poured over; a glass of bucellas may beadded to the gravy. 173.--TURBOT. Place the turbot, previously to cooking, to soak in salt and water inwhich a little vinegar has been poured; lay it upon its back in thefish-kettle, fill the latter three parts full with cold water,throw in a handful of salt, a gill of vinegar, let it boil verygradually, and when it boils, add cold water to check; thirty minutesare sufficient to cook it; serve it upon a cloth as boiled with its back to thedish; garnish tastefully with sprigs of parsley, and horseradishscraped into curls, or with fried smelts, or barberries, andparsley. Lobster sauce. 174.--TURBOT À LA CRÊME. Is made from the remains of a turbot left from a previous dinner: pick allthe flesh from the bones, which warm in salt and water, and haveready the following sauce: put one ounce of flour into a stewpan,to which add by degrees a quart of milk, mixing it very smoothly; thenadd two peeled eschalots, a bouquet of parsley, a bay-leaf and asprig of thyme tied together; add a little grated nutmeg, ateaspoonful of salt and a quarter ditto of pepper; place it overthe fire, stirring until it forms a thickish sauce; then take it fromthe fire, stir in a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, and pass itthrough a tammy; lay a little of it upon the bottom of a convenient-sized dish,then a layer of the fish; season lightly with a little whitepepper and salt, then another layer of sauce, proceeding thusuntil the fish is all used, finishing with sauce; sprinkle a fewbread-crumbs over, and put it into a warm oven half an hour; brown withthe salamander, and serve upon the dish it is baked on. Any remains of boiledfish may be dressed the same way. 175.--CRIMPEDSALMON--À LA CRÉME. The salmon, like cod, must be quite fresh or it will not crimp. Cut the body intoslices about two inches thick; have ready some salt and water in theproportion of three ounces of salt to a quart of water, with thesmallest knob of saltpetre about the size of a nut; dip thesalmon slices into this as they are cut, hold them for half a minute,and then rinse them in clear cold spring water, and lay them upon adish; put a lump of butter well rubbed in flour into a stewpan;while the butter is melting sprinkle in a little salt andcayenne, and when the butter is on the simmer stir in half a pintof cream, keep stirring, and as it boils squeeze in the juice ofa quarter of a lemon, and stir in a large teaspoonful of essence ofanchovies; add a little more salt to taste. Having boiled the crimped salmon slices in quick boiling waterten minutes, take them out and let them drain one minute, put them in a cleanstewpan, and pour over the prepared creamand let it simmer ten minutes; it should not if possible be suffered toboil. The lemon juice is sometimes deferred until the fish isremoved from the cream, a minute's simmer is allowed, and it is then allpoured over the salmon and sent very hot to table. 176.--TO BOIL SALMON.(Frank Forrester's own receipt.) If you are ever so lucky as to catch a salmon, where incontinentlyyou can proceed to cook him--that is to say, in the wilderness, within tenyards of the door of your own shantee, with the fire burning and the potboiling--good. Stun him by a heavy blow on the head; crimp him by a succession ofcuts on each side through the muscle, quite down to the back-bone, witha very sharp knife, in slashes parallel to the gill cover. Then place him forten minutes in a cold spring, or under the jet of a waterfall. Meanwhile, keepyour pot boiling, nay, screeching with intense heat, filled with brinestrong enough to bear an egg. Therein immerse him, having cut outthe gills, open the belly, and wash the inside; boil him at the rate of sevenminutes and a half to the pound; dish him, and serving him with nosauce, save a tureenful of the water in which he has been boiled,proceed to eat him, with no other condiments than a little salt and theslightest squeeze of a lemon. I do not object to cucumber slicedvery fine, with a dressing of oil, three tablespoonfuls to one ofvinegar, salt and black pepper to taste; but I regardgreen peas, or any vegetable, with this grand fish, as a Cockneyabomination. 177.--SOYER'S RECEIPT--SALMON AU NATUREL. Clean and prepare as before; but if he be not fresh enough to crimp, scalehim and proceed as follows: Put your fish in cold water, using a pound of salt toevery six quarts; let it be well covered, and set it over a moderate fire; whenit begins to simmer, set it on one side the fire. If the fish weigh fourpounds, let it simmer half an hour; if eight, three-quarters, and so on inproportion; dish it on a napkin, and serve lobster or shrimpsauce in a bowl. 178.--TO BOIL SALMON. Salmon is dressed in various ways, but chiefly boiled in large piecesof a few pounds' weight. The middle piece is considered, if not the richest,yet the most sightly; then that adjoining the jowl; the tail part, thoughnearly as good, being usually kept for steaks. It requires greatattention, and the boiling must be checked more than once; a piece of four tofive pounds, will take nearly an hour, but if double that weight will notrequire more than twenty minutes beyond that time, and if crimped, still lesswill be sufficient: let it, however, boil slowly, in the hardest water,on a strainer placed in a large fish-kettle, and be thoroughly done, fornothing is more disgusting than fish that is under-cooked; skim it well,or the color will be bad; the moment it is ready, lift up the strainer and restit across the kettle, that the fish may drain; cover it with a thickcloth. 179.--TO BAKE SALMON. Scale it, and take out the bone from the part to be dressed, but fillup the cavity with forcemeat, and bind the piece with tape. Thenflour it, rub it with yolk of egg, and put it into a deepbaking-dish, covering it very thickly with crumbs of bread, choppedparsley, and sweet herbs, together with shrimps, if they can begot, and put into the covering a few small bits of fresh butter; placeit in a Dutch oven, or, if already boiled and thus redressed, heat it only before the fire until browned. 180.--SALMON, PLAIN BOILED--(Soyer.) I prefer always dressing this fish in slices from an inch to twoinches in thickness, boiling it in plenty of salt and water about twentyminutes; the whole fish may be boiled, or the head and shouldersof a large fish, but they require longer boiling. Salmon eatsfirmer by not being put into the water until boiling. Dress thefish upon a napkin, and serve with lobster sauce, shrimpditto, or plain melted butter in a boat with fresh sprigs ofparsley boiled a few minutes in it. A salmon weighing about tenpounds will require an hour's gentle boiling; a head and shouldersweighing six pounds, half an hour; the remains may be dressed à lacrême, as directed for turbot. 181.--SALMON--TO BOIL. This fish cannot be too soon cooked after being caught; it should beput into a kettle with plenty of cold water, and a handful ofsalt; the addition of a small quantity of vinegar will add to thefirmness of the fish; let it boil gently; if four pounds ofsalmon, fifty minutes will suffice; if thick, a few minutes more may beallowed. The best criterion for ascertaining whether it be done, is to pass aknife between the bone and the fish; if it separates readily, itis done; this should be tried in the thickest part; when cooked lay it on thefish strainer transversely across the kettle, so that the fishwhile draining may be kept hot. Place a fish plate upon the dish onwhich the salmon is to be served; fold a clean white napkin, layit upon the fish plate, and place the salmon upon the napkin.Garnish with parsley. 182.--BROILED SALMON. Dip each piece in flour, put it on a gridiron, turn occasionally;fifteen minutes will give it a nice pale yellow color; it should be served withDutch, or caper sauce. 183.--SALMON BROILED. Cut the fish in slices from the best part, each slice should be aninch thick; season well with pepper and salt; wrap each slice inwhite paper, which has been buttered with fresh butter; fasteneach end by twisting or tying; broil over a very clear fire eight minutes. Acoke fire, if kept clear and bright is best. Serve with butter,anchovy, or tomato sauce. 184.--DRIED SALMON BROILED. Cut and cook as above, save that when it is warmed through, it is enough.Serve plain for breakfast, or with egg sauce if for dinner. 185.--TODRY SALMON. Cut the fish down, take out the inside and roe, rub the wholewith common salt after scaling it; let it hang twenty-four hours todrain. Pound three or four ounces of saltpetre, according to the size ofthe fish, two ounces of bay salt, and two ounces of coarsesugar; rub these, when mixed well, into the salmon, and lay it ina large dish or tray two days; then rub it well with common salt, and intwenty-four hours more it will be fit to dry; wipe it well after draining. Hangit either in a wood chimney or in a dry place, keeping it open with two smallsticks. Dried salmon is eaten broiled in paper, and only justwarmed through, egg-sauce and mashed potatoes with it; or it may beboiled, especially the part next the head. 186.--TO PICKLESALMON.--The Newcastle Method. Put any quantity of salmon into an earthen jar; cover it with equalparts of good vinegar and water; add cayenne pepper andsalt in proportion to the fish, and bake it in a moderate oven.This pickle will keep a long time, withthe addition of a little fresh vinegar; and if mace orcloves be added, with a few bay-leaves laid in the mouth of the jar, itwill be found an improvement. Trout may be preserved the same way.Fish thus pickled, must not be washed previously, but rubbed with a drycloth. Though generally eaten cold, yet in Newcastle it is not unfrequently warmedup in its pickle-liquor. 187.--SALMON--TO PICKLEUNDRESSED. Scale the fish, rub well with a cloth, and scrape away all the bloodabout the backbone, but do not wash it; cut off the head, and divide thefish into pieces about six inches long; then boil the pieces in apickle made of equal parts of vinegar and water, with afew cloves and two or three blades of mace until done. Skimcarefully all the time the fish is boiling, and when done remove thefish and pour the liquor into a jar or tub, so that both may becomecold; when cold, put the fish into the liquor, with one-third morevinegar, and some whole pepper. 188.--SALMON POTTED. Cut a handsome piece from the middle of the salmon; remove thescales, and wipe it with a clean cloth. Rub into it some common saltthoroughly. Beat up some mace, cloves, and whole pepper; season thesalmon with it; place it in a pan with a few bay leaves; cover itwith butter, and bake it until thoroughly done; remove it from thegravy, letting it drain thoroughly, then place it in the pots. Clarifysufficient butter to cover all the pots after the salmon has beenput into them; put it to cool. 189.--TO PICKLE SALMON. Scale, clean, split, and divide into handsome pieces the salmon;place them in the bottom of a stewpan, with just sufficient water tocover them. Put into three quarts of water one pint of vinegar, a dozenbay leaves, half that quantity of mace, a handful of salt,and a fourth part of an ounce of black pepper. When the salmon is sufficiently boiled remove it, drain it, place itupon a cloth. Put in the kettle another layer of salmon; pour over itthe liquor which you have prepared, and keep it until the salmon isdone. Then remove the fish, place it in a deep dish or pan, cover itwith the pickle, which, if not sufficiently acid, may receive morevinegar and salt, and be boiled forty minutes. Let the air bekept from the fish, and, if kept for any length of time it will be foundnecessary to occasionally drain the liquor from the fish; skim, and boilit. 190.--COLLARED SALMON. Cut off the head and shoulders, and the thinnest part of the tail,thus leaving the primest part of the salmon to be collared. Split it,and having washed and wiped it well, make a compound of cayenne pepper,white pepper, a little salt, and some pounded mace. Rubthe fish well with this mixture inside and out; roll and bandage withbroad tape; lay it in a saucepan; cover it with water andvinegar, one part of the latter to two of the former; add atable-spoonful of pepper, black and white whole, two bayleaves, and some salt. Keep the lid closed down. Simmer untilenough, strain off the liquor; let it cool; pour over the fish whencold, garnish with fennel. 191.--COLLARED EELS. The eels destined to be dressed as above should be the finest whichcan be selected: the skin must not be removed, but the bone mustbe carefully and cleverly extracted. Spread out the fish, and with some finely chopped sage, parsley,and mixed spices, rub the fish well over; then take some broadwhite tape, bind up the fish tightly; throw a good handful ofsalt into the water in which it is to be boiled, and a couple ofbay leaves. Boil three-quarters of an hour, and if the fish betaken out and hung to dry for twelve hours, it will be the better for it whenserved. Add to the water in which the fish has been boiled a pintof vinegar, a little whole pepper, some knotted marjoramor thyme. This pickle also should, after boiling about twelveminutes, be suffered to stand as long as the eels are recommended to behung; previous to serving, the fish must be unrolled so as to abrase theskin as little as possible, and put them into the pickle. Send upin slices or whole, according to taste; garnish with parsley. 192.--EELS BREAD CRUMBED. Cut into pieces same length as above, cleaned nicely and well dried; letthem be coated with yolk of egg, powdered with bread crumbs; frythem brown; serve with parsley and butter. Garnish with handsomesprigs of parsley. 193.--SPITCHCOCKED EELS. There are several ways to spitchcock eels. They are either broiled orstewed. To broil them, see that the gridiron is cleansed and rubbed withsuet, to prevent the adhesion of the skin of the fish,which must be suffered to remain on; cut the eels, which should belarge, into lengths of six or seven inches, not less, and coat them well withyolk of egg. Pound in a mortar, parsley, nutmeg,mace, cloves, and pepper; this should be rubbed over thefish, and they should be broiled a clear brown; serve with meltedbutter, fish sauce, according to palate. 194.--EELSFRIED. Cut your eels into pieces three inches long, trim them, dip thepieces into flour, egg over with a paste-brush, and throwthem into some bread-crumbs; fry in hot lard as directed forfried soles. 195.--EELS Â LA TARTARE. Fry as directed above, and serve on some Tartare sauce; or partlystew first, and, when cold, egg, bread-crumb, and broil gently.This last I much prefer. 196.--STEWED EELS. Procure as large eels as possible, which cut into pieces three incheslong, and put them into a stewpan, with an onion, a bouquet of twobay-leaves, a sprig of thyme and parsley, six cloves, ablade of mace, a glass of sherry, and two of water; placethe stewpan over a moderate fire, and let simmer about twenty minutes, oraccording to the size of the eels; when done, drain upon a cloth, dressthem in pyramid upon a dish without a napkin, with a matelote sauceover, made as directed for salmon sauce matelote, but using thestock your eels have been cooked in to make the sauce,having previously well boiled it to extract all the fat. 197.--EEL PIE. Take six skinned eels, remove the heads, and cut them intopieces four inches long; add two dozen oysters, boil them together in avery little water; take out the oysters, and bone theeels by passing them through a sieve. Take six hard boiled eggs, parsley, fried herbs,lemon-peel, black pepper, salt, mace,nutmeg, and allspice; the whole ground very fine; add these tothe eels and oysters with the broth and a bit of freshbutter. Take a large, deep dish, of yellow earthen ware; put the mass into it, andcover the dish with a fine pastry crust. Bake it in a very hot oven from halfan hour to three-quarters according to the heat. 198.--SHELL FISH. Although crabs and lobsters may be bought the whole yearround, they are yet only in high season, from the month of July till the closeof October. They should be always purchased alive. If lobsters have not been long taken, the claws will have a strongmotion when you put your finger on the eyes and press them. The heaviest, if ofgood size, are the best, but the largest are not the best. When you buy themready boiled, try whether their tails are stiff, and pull up with a spring; ifotherwise, they are either watery or not fresh. The "cock-lobster," as the male is called, isknown by the narrow back part of his tail, and the two uppermost fins within itare stiff and hard; but those of the hen are soft, and the tail broader. The male,though generally smaller, has the highest flavor; the flesh is firmer, and thecolor, when boiled, is a deeper red; but the female has that fine coralso highly prized by cooks for the improvement of their sauces, which appearswith the rudiments of the spawn. 199.--TO BOIL LOBSTERS. Put them alive, with their claws tied together, into the water whenboiling hot, and keep it so until the fish is done, which, if of a poundweight, will take about a quarter of an hour, and if larger will require notquite the same proportion of time, for if boiled too long the meat willbe stringy. Many people are shocked at the apparent cruelty of thus killingthem, but death takes place immediately, and life cannot be taken away withoutpain. When sent to table to be eaten cold, the tail and body should be split fromend to end, the claws cracked, but not unshelled, and the meat may bemade into salad, or mixed in such manner as each person pleases, and manypersons add a teaspoonful of white powdered sugar, thinking that itgives a mellowness to the whole. It is scarcely necessary to mention that thehead of a lobster, and what are called the "lady-fingers," are not to beeaten. Lobster as served. An illustration of a lobster cut into various pieces and laying on a plate in a decorative fashion. 200.--TO STEWLOBSTERS. Pick the meat out of the shell, put it into a stewpan with half apint of good gravy and a glass of claret; add an onion mincedfine, some sweet herbs, and pepper and salt, stew tilltender; add a large spoonful of mushroom ketchup, one of essence ofanchovy, and a lump of butter rolled in flour. Serve hot, andgarnish with bread sippets. If brought on cold as a supper dish, servein a shape covered with clear jelly. 201.--BOILING LOBSTERS. Put the lobsters into boiling water, with a littlesalt, and boil them till they are cooked through; the color of the shellis of importance, and is made bright by rubbing the shell with sweet oilafter it is wiped. Split the body and tail through, and crack the claws. It isthen fit to go to the table, where it must be cut up fine before eating. Adressing, made of salt, mustard, oil, cayennepepper and vinegar, mixed with the yolk of an egg, is usuallyprepared for it. The white of an egg (boiled hard, of course,)may be minced fine and strewn over it. 202.--LOBSTER CURRIED. Take the meat of a fine lobster, or two, if they should besmall, place in a stewpan two dessert-spoonfuls of curry powder, add ofbutter two ounces, an onion cut in very fine strips, and threelarge spoonfuls of fish stock. When they are stewed well, add thelobster, simmer gently for an hour, squeeze in half a lemon,season with a little salt. In the eastern method the expressed juiceof spinach is usually added. This is obtained by simply puttingspinach, without any water, into a saucepan, and when doneenough, press out the juice, and add it with butter,cayenne, and salt, to the gravy. Prawns may bedressed in this fashion. 203.--CROQUETTES OF LOBSTER. Take the meat from the shell, chop it finely, mix it with a littlesalt, pepper, and pounded mace; take one-fourth part offine bread crumbs, make it up into balls with melted butter,brush the balls with yolk of egg, and dredge them with breadcrumbs, and fry them, serving with or without gravy: if dry, theymust be sent up with crisped parsley. 204.--GRATIN OFLOBSTER. Take out all the meat from a large lobster, then wash thebody, tail, and shells if the lobster is first cut in halves down theback; then dry and butter them, and sprinkle them with breadcrumbs, chop up the meat fine, with a little parsley andshalot, a few drops of essence of anchovies, a spoonful ofvinegar, cayenne pepper and salt, a little bechamelsauce, and boil all well together; then add a yolk of egg, put itto cool, then fill your shells or paper cases, cover it with breadcrumbs and some pieces of butter, brown them in the oven, and dishon a napkin. 205.--LOBSTER SALAD. Extract the fish from the shell, place it in the centre of thedish in which it is to be served, in the form of a pyramid; arrange the saladround tastefully, and add salad mixture. This dish is not infrequentlygarnished with the smallest claws of the fish. This is a matter offancy--or it may be formed into a heap, ornamented with the claws of severallobsters. The first row is formed of cut cucumbers, the second ofeggs boiled hard, and each egg split into four pieces, andthe points laid round the salad; the third and bottom row is composed of slicesof beet-root and lobster. 206.--LOBSTERS, IN ANITALIAN SALAD. Take two lobsters, cut them into pieces by taking off the claws andtail, each of which split in two; the spawn rub through a dry sieve to garnishthe salad, made in the following manner: wash two or three cabbagelettuces, cut them in large shreds, slice a beet-root andcucumber, wash, pick, and cut into long shreds four anchovies,chop some tarragon and chervil, two boiled eggs, theyolks and whites chopped separately; if you have anycauliflowers or French beans, boil and put them with the otherthings to garnish. Having every thing prepared, place the lettuce in thecentre of the dish in a heap, and place the lobsters and other thingsaccording to your taste, and just before you serve garnish with Italian saladsauce. 207.--LOBSTER SALAD.--(Soyer's.) Dress a border of hard-boiled eggs, as directed in salad ofgame, fill the centre with some nice fresh salad, then take the fleshfrom a middling-sized lobster, which cut into as large slices aspossible, which put into a basin, and season with a little pepper,salt, oil, and vinegar, after which dress thempyramidically upon the salad, and have ready thefollowing sauce: put the yolks of two fresh eggs in abasin, with the yolk of a hard-boiled one rubbed through a sieve; addhalf a saltspoonful of salt, and half that quantity of whitepepper, and commence stirring round with a wooden spoon with the righthand, holding a bottle of salad oil in the left, dropping it in bydegrees and continually stirring; when becoming thickish add a couple ofspoonfuls of common vinegar by degrees, still keeping it stirred, thenmore oil, proceeding thus until you have used three parts of a pint ofoil, and a corresponding quantity of vinegar; by continuallyworking it will form a stiffish cream-looking sauce perfectly smooth;add a little more seasoning if required, and a teaspoonful of choppedparsley, with half that quantity of chopped eschalots; pour overthe lobster and serve. Should the sauce curdle in making, theoperation must be again performed, putting a yolk of an egg into anotherbasin, working it with a little oil until forming a stiffishpaste, then stir in the curdled sauce by degrees until the wholebecomes smooth; always choose a cool place to make it in. This requires alittle practice. 208.--ANCHOVIES, ESSENCE OF. A pound of the best anchovies, two quarts of water, twobay-leaves, some whole pepper, a little scraped horseradish, alittle thyme, two blades of mace, six shalots chopped small, agill of port wine, half the rind of a lemon, a gill ofketchup; boil them together for twenty minutes, then rub them through atammy with a wooden spoon; when cold put it into pint bottles, cork them close,and keep them in a dry place. 209.--TOAST of ANCHOVIES. Prepare toast; fillet some anchovies, pound them in a mortar,add a little butter well pounded into it, a little cayennepepper, a few drops of lemon-juice; take it out and spread it onthe toast. 210.--ANCHOVIES WITH FRIED BREAD. Cut some bread thin, then cut out with a plain paste cutterthe quantity you require, as you will put one on the other; fry them inlard a very nice brown, then fillet and pound anchovies asbefore; add a little parsley, and a grain of shalot, rub all through afine wire or hair sieve, spread one of your toasts rather thick, place anotherpiece of bread on the top; have ready some more filletedanchovies, and garnish each toast, using pickles likewise,or parsley. 211.--TO KNOW GOOD ANCHOVIES. The best look red and mellow, and the bones moist and oily, the fleshhigh flavored, and a fine smell; if the liquor and fish become dry, addto it a little beef brine. 212.--CHOWDER--A SAILOR'S DISH. Cut salmon, halibut, or any rich fish, intosteaks an inch thick; season them highly with pepper,salt, and cayenne; put a layer of sliced potatoes (raw) in thebottom of the stewpan; then a layer of broken cabin-biscuit; next thefish; then a layer of thin sliced ham. Fill the stewpan in thismanner; finish with a large piece of butter. Add water enough tomoisten the whole; stew slowly two hours, never stirring, but occasionallyshaking the pan to prevent it burning to the bottom. If it gets too dry, add alittle more water. 213.--CRAB, Though not so well-known as the lobster, is looked upon by many asbeing a better-flavored fish, and perhaps rather more digestible. The female is considered inferior to themale, and may be known by the claws being smaller, and the tail much wider. Theheaviest are usually thought to be the best, but those of a middling size arethe sweetest. If light, they are watery; when in perfection the joints of thelegs are stiff, and the body has a very agreeable smell. The eyes lookdead and loose when stale, or when the fish have died a natural death.They are boiled in the same manner as lobster, but require rather longertime, and are most usually eaten cold with oil and vinegar, asthus:--Pick out all the fish from the shell, divide it into smallpieces, mixing the rich part well with the rest; moisten it with saladdressing, and return it to the shell with an edge all round with slicedlemon. If hot, pick the fish out as above; then put themeat, with a little nutmeg, salt, pepper, bits ofbutter, crumbs of bread, and three spoonfuls of vinegar,into the shell again, and set it before the fire. You may brown it with asalamander, but it should be always served in the shell. Dry toastshould be served to eat with it. Observe to remove "the lady," as it iscalled. 214.--TO BOIL CRABS. Having boiled them twenty minutes, wipe them, crack the claws, rub theshells with oil, and dish them as lobster. To cook softcrabs, take away the claws, cut them open, and remove the sand bag andspongy part; then put some butter into a frying-pan, and do them brownon both sides. 215.--TO STEW CRABS. Pick the meat carefully out of a large crab and its claws; cutinto small pieces, mix it with about a fourth part of bread-crumbs, anda very small quantity of finely shred parsley. Season it well, andreturn it to the shell with some small bits of butter here and there,enough, when warmed, to keep it moist. Squeeze the juice of a lemon overit, or a spoonful of lemon-pickle or acid sauce. Put a thicklayer of crumbs of bread upon the top with small bits of butterlaid all over it, and bake it in the shell before the fire, or in the oven. Theshell of one crab will contain the meat of two. Or: --Boil them, take the meat out of thebodies and the large claws, put it into a stewpan with half a pint of claret, aspoonful of eschalot-vinegar, a little cayenne, some salt,and a piece of butter: let them stew for an hour over a gentle fire,until they are almost dry. Then add a small quantity of fish-stock orgravy, a table-spoonful of essence of anchovy, and a small pieceof butter rolled in flour. Serve with sippets of friedbread round the dish. Another way is to put the meat into a stewpanwith half a pint of white wine, a spoonful of eschalot orgarlic vinegar, a little parsley and thyme minced fine,the yolks of three eggs boiled hard and minced small, and somesalt and cayenne pepper. Let it stew gently till quite tender andalmost dry; then add a piece of butter, stir it about for a few minutesover the fire, wash the shells, butter them, put the stewed meatinto them, and serve on a napkin. 216.--SMALL CRABS ANDCRAYFISH Are made sometimes into soup, but more commonly plain, boiled for about aquarter of an hour and eaten cold. In the lower parts of Germany they are eatenhot, with rye-bread and butter, and are there a favorite supperdish in the heat of summer. 217.--TO STEW CRAYFISH. Boil them in salt and water, pick the meat out of the tailsand claws, put them into a stewpan with a littlebutter, some mushrooms, and truffles; moisten them with alittle fish-stock, and simmer a short time over a gentle fire. Whennearly done, beat the yolks of two or three eggs with a teacupfulof cream and a little chopped parsley; let all stew together fora few minutes, stirring it all the time, and serve up in a deep dish. 218.--SOFT SHELLED CRABS. Fry the crabs in lard, having taken off the spongy substance,and the sand bag. Crisp parsley in the fat after they come out,and add pepper and salt and rich milk, for thegravy. 219.--TERRAPINS. Put them in boiling water to kill them; then skin them andtake off the nails, wash and put them on again to boil, adding a teaspoon ofsalt to every two. When tender, remove the shells, sand bags, andgall, carefully; cut up the meat, season it with pepper,mace, and nutmeg, and put it in a stewpan with the juicethat has come out, and for every two terrapins, four ounces ofbutter in flour, a glass of white wine and the yolks oftwo eggs beaten. The wine and eggs to be added after thewhole is stewed perfectly tender. 220.--CRABS MINCED. Remove the meat, mince small and place in a saucepan with awineglassful of white wine, pepper and salt,nutmeg, cayenne pepper, and two table-spoonfuls ofvinegar. Let it stew for ten minutes; melt a piece of butter thesize of a hen's egg, with an anchovy and the yolks of twoeggs; beat up and mix well, stir in with the crab, and addsufficient stale bread-crumbs to thicken. Garnish with thin toastcut with a pastry leaf-cutter, or with the claws, and parsley.Lobster may be dressed in the same manner. 221.--CRAYFISHBUTTER. Take the shells of twenty-four crayfish, clean them well fromskin and fibre, put them into an oven to dry, without burning orbrowning, until they can be beaten to a fine powder; mix the powder very wellwith three ounces of fresh butter, then put it into a stewpan with aspoonful of hot water, mixing it well together; then squeeze the wholethrough a tamis over a stewpan of boiling water; skim and butteroff into a basin of cold water, that it may set; when cold press it in anapkin. It forms a beautiful coloring addition to many kinds of dishes, fishespecially, and, when mixed with the meat pounded after being taken fromthe shells, makes fine sauce. 222.--OYSTERS Depend very much for goodness upon the beds from which they have been taken.There are several kinds. They all come into season, according to an old saying, "so long as there isan R in the month." They are, however, not perfectly good until the beginningof October, and should go out at the end of March. When the fish is alive and strong, the shell closes on the knife.They should be eaten as opened, the flavor becoming poor if long exposed to theair. 223.--TO SCALLOP OYSTERS. Take twelve of the smaller sort, beard them, cut out the hard partwhich adheres to their shells, and leave them in their liquor; have ready aquantity of crumbs of fresh bread, not too finely grated, and mixed witha little pepper and salt; then grease ascallop-shell, strew upon it some of the crumbs with bits ofbutter, and lay upon them a layer of the oysters; then crumbs,bits of butter, and oysters, layer upon layer, until the shell is filled up; cover it with a thick coatingof the crumbs well buttered, and brown it in a Dutch oven. A dozenoysters, with a proper quantity of crumbs, will fill up the largestscallop-shell, and take an hour to be thoroughly done. Some cooks scald the oysters for five minutes, in their own liquor,and mix with them minced shalot, or chives, and pot-herbs; butthese, although they may please an epicurean palate, will destroy the naturalflavor of the oyster. 224.--TO SCALLOP OYSTERS. For one hundred oysters, take four eggs, boiled hard,and chopped very fine; mix them with a sixpenny loaf crumbled or grated, andadd pepper and salt to taste. Put some of the mixture in thebottom of a pie dish, and lay on it lightly a layer of oysters,previously rinsed and drained; add a few bits of butter, then cover theoysters with a layer of bread-crumbs and eggs; anotherlayer of oysters, and so on; covering the top with bread-crumbs.Bake it three-quarters of an hour. 225.--TO MAKE OYSTER FRITTERS. Make a batter with milk, flour, and eggs, beaten light.Have some lard quite hot; dip out a tablespoonful of the batter, put anoyster into it, and let it down into the boiling lard carefullyand fry it on both sides. This is a better plan than mixing the oystersand batter together. 226.--TO BROIL OYSTERS. Take them from the shells, beard them, and put them with their liquor intotin shapes made to imitate scallops, six in a shell (not more), with alittle pepper and butter. Put the shells upon a gridiron over agood fire, and serve them when plump and quite hot. They are delicious thisway; but to be eaten in perfection should be cooked in the room where they areeaten. Squeeze a little lemon-juice over them when they come from thefire. Or: --They may be put singly in their under shellsalong with their own liquor, a little minced parsley and spice,and a bit of butter, and thus put upon the gridiron, to be taken offwhen thoroughly heated. 227.--WITH WHITE SAUCE. Beard the oysters, wash them in their own liquor, then strain it,thicken it with melted butter, or white sauce made ofcream, not milk, and flour; season it with a blade ofmace and a few whole pepper-corns tied in a muslin bag. Simmer theoysters very gently, and serve up with sippets of bread: theywill require only a few minutes, and if allowed to boil will becomehard. 228.--WITH BROWN SAUCE. Wash the oysters in their liquor, and then strain it, add a glass ofwine, two spoonfuls of beef-gravy, some whole pepper, alittle salt, a piece of butter, and a spoonful oflemon-juice; boil the whole, stirring it until it is smooth, then putin the oysters, and warm or plump them up without boiling. 229.--OYSTER ROLLS. Take about a quart of the largest and finest oysters you can procure,stew them in their own liquor with some pepper, a very littlemace, and some green onion chopped fine, thicken them with alittle butter and a dust of flour when nearly done enough. Taketwo French rolls of the square sort baked in tins, cut a piece off thetop, and scoop out the greater part of the crumb, fill your roll with theoysters and the liquor, and set them near the fire on a chafing-dishfilled with hot coals; as the liquor soaks in fill them with more, or ifyou have not any left, add a little good gravy boiling-hot. Or: --Let them first soak; then fasten in the top,cover the entire of the roll in batter, and bake it in the Dutch oven till wellbrowned. Or: --Mince the oysters, season them only withmace and nutmeg, and fill the rolls up with cream or richwhite sauce, and bake them as above: even one large roll will make anice little dish, and is better than the smaller sort. 230.--OYSTERSAUSAGES May also be made of the larger kind, bearded and minced small, together witha moderate quantity of beef suet and bread-crumbs, to whichshould be added a forcemeat of pounded pork or veal,seasoned with spice and put into the usual skins. If wellseasoned, they will keep good for a full week: one pound of beef suetshred fine, and the same quantity of forcemeat, withbread-crumbs, should be put to each pint of oysters. Or: --Take one-half pound of lean beef ormutton, three-quarters pound of beef suet, two score ofoysters bearded and scalded in their own liquor, then dried and allchopped together, adding bread-crumbs and yolks of eggs to bindthe materials. Season well with salt, white pepper, mace,and a grate of nutmeg; or if you wish to make it very savory,leave out the mace and nutmeg, but add a little cayenne,with a minced shalot and a spoonful of garlic-vinegar. They may beeither made as sausages, or fried into shapes in the usual way. 231.--OYSTERS À L'IMPERIALE. Procure, quite fresh, a barrel of oysters, packed as for transmissionto the country. Put into a vessel large enough to contain the barrel sufficientwater, that when the barrel is in, it may be covered. Heat thewater to a boil; when it is boiling, put in the barrel of oystersjust as you have received it from the oysterseller; let it boil twelve minutes;take it out, knock off the head, and serve immediately. The flavor ofthe hot oyster will be found delicious. 232.--OYSTER CURRY. Blanch and beard six dozen oysters, leaving them in their own liquor;then cut two middling-sized onions into small dice, and sautéthem in a stewpan, with an ounce of butter; when done, mix in twoteaspoonfuls of curry powder and one of curry paste, and pass allthrough a tammy--it ought to be thick; then add the oysters with theirliquor, and keep stirring over the fire until the oysters becomeenveloped in a thick sauce, which they should be in two minutes, whenturn them out upon you dish, and serve with rice separately. 233.--ROAST OYSTERS. Large oysters not opened, a few minutes before they are wanted, puton a gridiron over a moderate fire. When done they will open; do not lose theliquor that is in the shell with the oyster; send them hot upon anapkin. 234.--AN OYSTER PIE, WITH SWEETBREADS. Blanch them and take off the beards, separate them from the liquor, blanchsome throat sweetbreads, and when cold cut them in slices, then lay themand the oysters in layers in your dish, season with salt,pepper, a few grains of mace and nutmeg; add some thicksauce, a little cream, and the oyster liquor, and somegood veal stock; bake in a slow oven. 235.--BREADED OYSTERS. Scoop out the crumb from a small loaf, or some small rolls of bread,and put into the cavity oysters stewed with butter andmace, and a little of their liquor, with two or three spoonfuls ofrich milk added as they are done. Put onthe top of the rolls, the pieces sliced off; set them in the oven a fewminutes, and serve on a dish, hot. Stewpan. An illustration of a handled pan that also has a handled lidded. 236.--STEWEDOYSTERS. The oysters should be bearded and rinsed in their own liquor, whichshould then be strained and thickened with flour and butter, andplaced with the oysters in a stewpan; add mace,lemon-peel cut into threads, some white pepper whole; theseingredients had better be confined in a piece of muslin. The stew must simmeronly; if it is suffered to boil, the oysters will become hard;serve with sippets of bread. This may be varied by adding a glass ofwine to the liquor, before the oysters are put in and warmed. 237.--SCALLOPED OYSTERS. Beard the oysters, wash in their own liquor, steepbread-crumbs in the latter, put them with the oysters intoscallop shells, with a bit of butter and seasoning ofsalt, pepper, and a little grated nutmeg; make a paste ofbread-crumbs and butter; cover, and roast them before the fire, orin an oven. 238.--PICKLED OYSTERS IN THE FRENCH WAY.--(A supperdish.) Take four dozen oysters, strain the liquor, add six blades ofmace, twelve peppercorns, a little grated lemon-peel,and two or three bay-leaves. Put the liquor to boil; when boiling, add theoysters for two minutes. (Some persons put half vinegar, halfliquor.) When cold, strain off the liquor. Place the oysters in a smalldish, and garnish with parsley. 239.--PICKLED OYSTERS. (By aLady of New York.) Scald the oysters in their liquor, or in water with a littlesalt; take them out with a skimmer, and throw them into coldwater. Take whole allspice, black pepper and mace, andboil it up in the liquor in which the oysters were boiled; when ittastes enough of the spices take it off. Let the oysters drain ona sieve. When the liquor is cold add vinegar to taste, and then put inthe oysters. 240.--TO DRESS COLD FISH. Dip a flat dish in hot water, to prevent cracking; smear it withbutter, and sprinkle white pepper on it; then a thick layer ofstale bread, grated fine; a layer of the fish, picked frombones, and broken small; a little melted butter--prepared withoutmilk--poured over another layer of bread--then of fish,with butter as before; repeated as often as required for quantity offish, and size of dish. Smooth the surface with a spoon, and sprinkleslightly fine bread, mixed with white pepper on the top. Place itfor twenty or thirty minutes, according to thickness, before a brisk fire, witha tin shade at back of dish, to reflect the heat. Cold washed mutton maybe redressed the same way; first wiping the meat, quite free fromgravy, in a napkin. Fish Scissors, to trim pan-fish for frying. An illustration of a pair of scissors. 241.--CASSEROLE OF FISH. Is a title given, among others, by Frenchcooks, to "poisson rechauffé," or fish which hasbeen left after being dressed, and is meant to be re-heated. There are almostas many modes of doing this, as of originally dressing the various sorts; butwe here only retain a few of the most simple:-- Take any kind of cold fish, and divide it into large flakes; boil twoor three eggs hard, and cut them into slices; have also some mashedpotatoes; butter a mould, and put in the fish, eggs,and potatoes, with a little delicate seasoning of white pepper;moisten the whole with cream, or thin melted butter, and aspoonful of essence of anchovies; boil the mould and turn it out. Or: --Take some fish which has been dressed,and rub it through a sieve; to half a pound of fish allow a quarter of apound of bread-crumbs, two eggs well beaten, one tablespoonful ofessence of anchovies, one of Harvey sauce, and a littlesalt and cayenne pepper; mix all well together, and put it into amould; let it boil half an hour, and serve it with a good fish-sauce inthe dish. Or: --Take half a pint of good gravy, with acouple of glasses of wine, two tablespoonfuls of anchovy liquor,and two of vinegar, seasoned high with cayenne, mustard,salt, and shalot; mince the fish, but do not put it in themortar, and either warm it as a fricassee, and bring it up in a dish withsippets; or, put it into a form, piled up high in the centre, cover it withbread-crumbs and bits of butter, and brown it with asalamander. 242.--FISH TURTLE. (English.) For this imitation, sturgeon is the best material, but, if not in season,cut some ling into handsome pieces, and fry it; then boil an equal quantity ofskate, also cut in pieces; and having cleaned and soaked two or threecod-sounds, stew them until green, with a little spinach, and cutthem into pieces; then have a sufficient quantity of good gravy, intowhich the liquor of two or three dozen of oysters has been strained;thicken it with cream or butter; put it into a stewpan with thefish already named, a lobster cut in pieces, a spoonful ofessence of anchovies, and a glass of Madeira. Warm the wholetogether, and send it to table with a lemon garnish. The sauce tothis dish must be very rich, and of a fine dark color. 243.--FISHPÂTÊ. This is a pretty mode of enclosing a fricassee of fish with apotato wall without a crust of pastry. Mash in a mortar as many potatoesas you may want, with a good piece of butter; then, with the bowls oftwo silver spoons, raise a wall of it two and a half inches high within the rimof the dish to be used. Let the upper part be a little thinner than the lower;smooth it; and, after brushing it all over with egg, put it into theoven to become hot, and a little colored. Before egging it, the outside may beornamented with flowers, leaves, &c., by the small tin shapes used to cutpaste. Beat the whole of a crab picked clean from the shell in a marblemortar, with white pepper and salt, nutmeg, and a very fewcrumbs of bread; warm it with a little gravy thickened withcream or butter and a spoonful of wine, and, whenthoroughly warmed, add a little lemon-juice. Pour it into potatowalls previously baked, but not covered like a pie, and serve it up hot, eitherbrowning it with the salamander, or covering the top with fanicfully arrangedsmall claws. 244.--FISH CAKE. Cut the meat from the bones, put them, the head and fins, over the fire to stew for gravy, with apint of water, an onion, herbs, pepper, andsalt. Mince the meat, put to it one-third part of crumbs ofbread, a little minced onion, parsley, pepper,salt, and a very small bit of mace; mix well, and make it into acake with white of egg and a little melted butter; cover it withraspings, and fry it a pale brown, keeping a plate on the top while doing. Thenlay it in a stewpan, with the fish gravy, and stew it gently a quarterof an hour; turn it twice, but with great care not to break it: cover itclosely while stewing. Cake of dressed meat, done in the same way, is remarkably good. 245.--FISH-CUTLETS. Chop a considerable quantity of herbs with a small piece of shalot,season it with pepper and salt, and put it into a stewpan withtwo ounces of butter; as the butter is melting add a teaspoonfulof essence of anchovies. Do not allow the butter to more thanmelt, and mix the whole well together; then cut any kind of white fish,dressed or raw, into handsome cutlets, and, when the herb seasoning isnearly cold, spread it on the fish thickly with a knife; dredge thefish with bread-crumbs, and cook them on buttered pans in anoven, or before the fire. Stew a few silver button-onions, or a choppedonion, with any green vegetables in season, cut it into dice in a littlebroth, add nasturtiums and a little of the pickle; keepthem in the middle of a dish, and lay the cutlets round. Or: --Take any fish previously dressed, pullit in pieces, and mix it with a little good stock, and any fishsauce which may have been left from table; spread it on a flat dish, brushit with egg and sprinkle thick with bread-crumbs, cut it out incutlets, and fry brown. 246.--KEDGEREE FOR BREAKFAST. Boil two tablespoonfuls of rice, add any fish previouslycooked (salmon or turbot is preferable), and nicely picked; beat up anegg well, and stir it in just before serving. The egg must notboil. 247.--FRICANDELLES OF FISH. Take any quantity that may be convenient of either dressed or undressedfish of firm quality; skin and bone it; mince it of thesize of dice, with a few anchovies, say two to each pound, seasoned withmace, cayenne, and a grating of nutmeg; soak the crumb ofa French roll, one to each pound, in milk, and beat it up withthe yolks of two eggs to each roll, so as to make it into apurée, and put the fish into it; warm the whole gently, and addto it a moderate quantity of cream. Put the fish thus prepared into a buttered mould, cover it thicklywith bread-crumbs, and either bake it in a Dutch oven, or warm it beforethe fire, and brown it with the salamander. A few oysters are an excellent addition; and if wine be employed instead of milk, the dish may be dressed in the samemanner, but rather more highly seasoned. 248.--A MATELOTE OF FISH.(English.) Take carp or tench, or both, together with an eel and anysmall fish; cut them into pieces, and put them along with a quantity ofbutton-onions into a stewpan containing just wine or gravyenough of any sort to cover them, and let them stew very gently until nearlydone; then have ready a couple of minced truffles and a good handful ofshrimps to mix into the sauce, which may be made of either whiteor red wine; the red may be made the more savory, but the white wine will be found the most delicate:it should be thickened with yolk of egg, and the dish garnished with sippets of fried bread. 249.--RAGOÛT OF FISH. Take carp, perch, pike, and eels; clean and scale themwell, and cut them into pieces for serving; put in your stewpan a good-sizedpiece of butter, let it fry to a pale brown, fry some flour init, and add a quart or two of good bouillon with a glass or two of redwine, and a few cloves and onions. When boiling put yourragoût into it, let it well boil, and add some lemon-juicebefore serving it up. 250.--A VOL-AU-VENT Of fish, of any sort, is an elegant side-dish when prepared eitherwith meat gravy or made up maigre. Muscles also make an excellent vol-au-vent. 251.--STEWED FISH, HEBREWFASHION. Take three or four parsley-roots, cut them into long thin slices, andtwo or three onions also sliced, boil them together in a quart ofwater until quite tender; then flavor it with ground whitepepper, nutmeg, mace, and a little saffron, thejuice of two lemons, and a spoonful of vinegar. Put in thefish, and let it stew for twenty, or thirty minutes; then take it out,strain the gravy, thicken it with a little flour andbutter, have balls made of chopped fish, bread-crumbs,spices, and the yolk of one or two eggs mixed up together,and drop them into the liquor. Let them boil, then put in the fish, andserve it up with the balls and parsley-roots. 252.--SAUCES FORFISH. The stock for fish sauces should be made of the waterin which fish has been boiled, adding the bones, fins, &c.,all well stewed down; when fish is filleted, the bones shouldalways be employed in this way: Stew them with an onion and a littlewhite pepper; strain the broth, which will be very rich, thickenit with cream, butter, and flour, or roux, and addwhatever the sauce is to be made of. The following may be generallyused, according to fancy, for nearly every species of fish: 253.--HORSERADISH SAUCE. Stew an onion in a little fish-stock until it willpulp; add a teaspoonful of grated horseradish, and one or twospoonfuls of essence of anchovies. Beat all together over a fire,thicken it with a little butter, and finish with a spoonful of lemonpickle or lemon juice. Vinegar may be substituted, in whichcase it must be mixed with the horseradish, and boiled with it; whilethe lemon, or lemon pickle, being of a more delicate flavor,should only be warmed. Or: --Scrape the horseradish thin and chop itsmall, or grate it, which is better; warm it in melted butter, adding aspoonful of mushroom ketchup, and one of walnut, or thevinegar from walnut-pickle. 254.--FOR ALL SORTS OFFISH. Take a spoonful of vinegar, one of Indian soy, the same ofmushroom ketchup and Harvey's sauce, with a littlecayenne. Add three large spoonfuls of melted butter; stir allwell, and heat it over the fire. Or: --Put equal quantities of water andvinegar into a saucepan, and thicken it with the yolk of an eggto every four spoonfuls of the water and vinegar. Make it quitehot, but do not boil it; stir it or shake the pan all the time; season it toyour liking, and add a spoonful of the liquid to every three of meltedbutter. 255.--WHITE SAUCE. Half a pint of cream, two tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup; one of essence ofanchovy, with a little cayenne pepper, and an ounce or two ofbutter rolled in flour; boil all together for five minutes. 256.--BROWN SAUCE. Fry an onion in butter and flour until it becomesbrown; then simmer it in a glass of port wine, with a tablespoonful ofsoy and walnut ketchup, seasoned with salt and cayenne;strain it, and thicken it with the necessary quantity of meltedbutter. 257.--ANCHOVY SAUCE. To about half a pint of melted butter put two tablespoonfuls of goodessence of anchovies, with the juice of half a lemon.Serve very hot. 258.--FENNEL SAUCE. This is a sauce principally used for boiled mackerel. Make thesame quantity of melted butter as in the last, to which add a goodtablespoonful of chopped fennel; it is usually served in a boat. 259.--BUTTER of ANCHOVIES. To make this butter you must have young anchovies. Take themout of the pickle and wash them well. Take off the bones andhead, and then pound them in a mortar with fresh butter, tillvery fine; rub this through a hair sieve. Put this butter when made,into a pot well covered, to use when wanted; observe, however, that it soonbecomes rank. 260.--EGG SAUCE Is generally served with salt fish or haddock. Boil sixeggs ten minutes; let them get cold; then cut them in pieces about thesize of dice; put them into a stewpan with three parts of a pint of melted ordrawn butter; add an ounce more fresh butter, with a littlepepper and salt; keep the stewpan moving round over the fireuntil the whole is very hot, and serve in a boat. 261.--CAPER SAUCEFOR FISH. Take some melted butter, into which throw a small bit of glaze, andwhen the sauce is in a state of readiness throw into it some choicecapers, salt and pepper, and a spoonful of essence ofanchovies. 262.--NEW LOBSTER SAUCE. If you use the solid flesh for salad, pound the soft part and shell together(in a mortar) very fine, which put into a stewpan, covered with a pint ofboiling water; place it over the fire to simmer for ten minutes, thenpass the liquor through a hair sieve into a basin; put three ounces ofbutter into a stewpan, into which rub (cold) a good tablespoonful offlour, add the liquor from the lobster, place it upon the fire,stirring until the point of boiling; season with a little cayenne, andadd a piece of anchovy butter, the size of a walnut; or, if anyred spawn is in the lobster, mix it with butter, as in the last,and add it, with the juice of half a lemon, just before serving.An anchovy pounded with the lobster-shells would be animprovement, and part of the flesh of the lobster might be served in thesauce. 263.--LOBSTER SAUCE À LA CRÊME. Cut a small lobster into slices the size of half-crown pieces, whichput into a stewpan; pound the soft and white parts with an ounce ofbutter, and rub it through a sieve; pour ten spoonfuls of meltedbutter, and two of cream, over the slices in the stewpan, addhalf a blade of mace, a saltspoonful of salt, a quarter ditto ofpepper, and a little cayenne; warm gently, and when upon thepoint of boiling, add the butter and two tablespoonfuls of thickcream; shake round over the fire untilquite hot, when it is ready to serve. 264.--LOBSTER SAUCESIMPLIFIED. Put the slices of lobster into a stewpan, with ten tablespoonfuls ofmilk; add a little pepper, salt, cayenne, twocloves, and half a blade of mace; set it upon the fire, and whenon the point of boiling, add a piece of butter the size of twowalnuts, with which you have mixed a little flour; shake roundover the fire, and when getting rather thick, add two spoonfuls ofcream, if at hand, and serve very hot. 265.--LOBSTERSAUCE.--(French receipt.) A hen lobster is indispensable for this sauce. Put some of thespawn of the fish into a mortar, to be pounded very fine; add to it asmall bit of butter. When very fine, rub it through a hair sieve, andcover till wanted. Break the lobster with great care, cut all the fleshinto dice, not too small; dilute some of the red spawn in melted butter,with two spoonfuls of essence of anchovies, a little salt andcayenne pepper, two spoonfuls of thick cream, and mix all wellbefore the meat is added, as that must retain its dice-like form. Do notlet this sauce boil. It must be very red. Add to it a teaspoonful ofcavice, and observe that the cavice should be very old; two or three years' agerenders it excellent. 266.--SOYER'S LOBSTER AND SHRIMP SAUCEFOR SALMON. Lobster. --Put twelve spoonfuls of meltedbutter into a stewpan; cut a middle-sized hen lobster into dice,make one-quarter pound of lobster butter with the spawn by pounding itwell in a mortar, adding one-quarter pound fresh butter and rubbing themixture through a hair sieve; add this to the melted butter when justboiling; stir it over the fire till the butter is melted; season with alittle essence of anchovy, the juice of half a lemon, anda quarter of a teaspoonful of cayenne; pass it through a tamis (a coarseflannel) into another stewpan; then add the flesh of the lobster. Serveit hot. This sauce must be red; if not red in the lobster, uselive spawn. Shrimp. --Make the melted butter asabove, but finish with essence of shrimps, and serve half a pint of pickledshrimps in the boat with it; or the anchovy sauce may be served withshrimps in it as a substitute, if there is no essence of shrimps. 267.--SHRIMP SAUCE Is also very good as follows: Pound half a pint of shrimps, skins andall, in a mortar, and boil them ten minutes in half a pint of water;pass the liquor through a hair sieve into a stewpan, and add a piece ofbutter the size of two walnuts, with which you have mixed a goodteaspoonful of flour, stir it round over the fire until upon the pointof boiling; if too thick, add a little more water; season with a littlecayenne and a teaspoonful of essence of anchovies; serve veryhot; a few picked shrimps might also be served in it. 268.--LOBSTERSAUCE. Put twelve tablespoonfuls of melted butter in a stewpan, cut up asmall-sized lobster into dice; make a quarter of a pound of lobsterbutter with the spawn, as directed; when the melted butter is uponthe point of boiling, add the lobster butter, stir the sauceround over the fire until the butter is melted, season with a littleessence of anchovies, the juice of half a lemon, and aquarter of a saltspoonful of cayenne pepper; pass it through a tammyinto another stewpan, and add the flesh of the lobster. Thissauce must be red. 269.--MATELOTESAUCE. For about a pound slice of salmon make the following quantity ofsauce:--Peel thirty button onions, and put half a teaspoonful ofsugar in a quart-sized stewpan, place it over a sharp fire, and whenmelted and getting brown, add a piece of butter (the size of twowalnuts) and the onions, toss them over now and then until ratherbrown, then add a glass of sherry; let it boil; then add half a pint ofbrown sauce and a gill of broth; simmer at the corner of thefire until the onions are quite tender; skim it well, and add a fewmushrooms, if at hand; season with a little salt andsugar, and sauce over any kind of fish where described.The addition of a teaspoonful of essence of anchovies is an improvement.Use where directed. 270.--MATELOTE SAUCE SIMPLIFIED. Proceed as above respecting the onions, only add a fourth morebutter, and fry them a little browner; then add a glass of sherryand two teaspoonfuls of flour, which stir round gently with a smallwooden spoon; add to it about a pint of water, stir now and then tillboiling, add three saltspoonfuls of salt, two of sugar, one ofpepper, and a bouquet garni; simmer and skim, add a few drops ofcoloring to give it a nice brown color; when ready to serve, add a goodtablespoonful of anchovy essence; it ought to adhere lightly to the backof the spoon, but not be too thick; sauce over or under, as directed;small pieces of glaze, if thickened with the eggs--(great care must beexercised, for if it should become too hot the eggs would curdle, andrender the sauce useless;) then add half a pint of melted butter;stir all together over the fire. 271.--OYSTER SAUCE. Blanch three dozen oysters, which again put into the stewpan, withtheir liquor (after having detached the beards); add six peppercorns andhalf a blade of mace; place them over the fire, and when beginning tosimmer, add a piece of butter the size of a walnut, with whichyou have mixed sufficient flour to form a paste, break it in fouror five pieces; shake the stewpan round over the fire, and when upon the pointof boiling, and becoming thick, add half a gill of milk, or more ifrequired; season with a little cayenne, salt, pepper, anda few drops of essence of anchovies: serve very hot. 272.--MUSSELSAUCE. Proceed exactly the same as for oyster sauce, using only the liquorof the mussels (not the beards) instead of the oysters, andserving the mussels in the sauce; about four dozen would besufficient. 273.--COD SAUCE. Take a bunch of parsley, chervil, two shalots, twocloves, a bay-leaf, some mushrooms, and a bit of butter,soak all together on the fire, adding a small spoonful of flour, andmilk or cream sufficient to boil to the consistence of asauce, and add to it some chopped parsley first scalded. 274.--EEL SAUCE. Cut the eels into large pieces and put them into a stewpan with a fewslices of bacon, ham, veal, two onions, with allsorts of roots; soak it till it catches, then add a glass of white wineand good broth, a little cullis, three or four tarragon leaves,chervil, a clove of garlic, two of spices, and a bay-leaf;simmer for an hour, skim it very well, and sift it in a sieve for use. 275.--SAUCE FOR FISH. Twenty-four anchovies chopped; ten eschalots; two ounces of horseradish, scraped; four blades ofmace; one lemon sliced; twelve cloves; quarter of an ounce ofblack pepper, whole; one gill of the anchovy liquor; one quart ofbest vinegar; one quart of water. Let the whole simmer on thefire until reduced to one quart, in a covered saucepan; strain and bottle foruse. If required for long keeping, add a quarter of an ounce of cayennepepper. 276.--LOBSTER SAUCE. Pick the meat from a lobster and cut it into small pieces.Break the shell, and stew it with the legs, &c., in a pint and ahalf of water, until reduced to the quantity required; then strain; addflour and water to thicken it. Pound some of the live spawn fromthe tail, adding a little water to it; when well pounded pour it bydegrees into the sauce; let it boil up; add fresh butter to it inthe proportion of three-fourths of a pound of butter to a quart ofsauce; throw in the lobster: season with a little anchovy,cayenne, salt, and a small quantity of lemon-juice. Itshould be thick rather than thin. Or: --Take a cold boiled hen lobster; splitthe tail, and pound the coral, which is found in the tail and in thebody, in a mortar, adding a little sweet oil. Then chop the meatof the body into very small pieces, and rub it, along with the soft parts andcoral, through a sieve. That done, cut up the flesh of the claws andtail into dice, and stir the entire mixture gradually into the proper quantityof melted butter, without suffering it to boil; as, if too much heated,the flavor and color of the sauce will be injured. The seasoningshould only be a moderate quantity of mace and cayenne, with halfa glass of white wine, or a cup of cream, to a pint tureen ofsauce. Crab Sauce is made in the same manner; butcrabs, being without coral, and the flesh less firm than that oflobster, form a rather inferior sauce. 277.--SHRIMPSAUCE. Pick the heads and skins from some fresh shrimps and stewthese offals for half an hour in a small quantity of boiling water toextract their flavor; then strain the liquor and make use of it inmelting the butter in which the shelled shrimps are to be dressed; theseare then to be put into the butter and liquor to simmer gently for abouttwenty minutes, in which time they will be sufficiently done, and their flavoris so delicate that neither anchovy sauce, mace, cayennepepper, nor any other condiment than salt, should be put to them;add a little cream. A pint of unshelled shrimps will make a tureen of sauce large enoughfor four or five persons. GRAVY, SAUCES, ETC. THERE is nothing that requires more attention on the part of the cook thanthe sauces which are wanted to all made dishes. Where a calf'shead or a breast of veal is stewed, nothing more will berequired, as both will yield an abundant supply, and it will only be necessaryto give it the proper flavor with ham, or beef-bone, andketchup. GRAVY May be made quite as good of the skirts of beef, kidney, or ofthe liver of a fat ox, as of any other kind of meat, if cut inpieces, fried with onions, and seasoned with herbs andspices, as other gravies. A clever servant will contrive tosupply at a trifling expense, as much gravy as is wanted for the use ofa small family by stewing down the trimmings ofmeat and bones. It may even be made of the shank-bones oflegs and shoulders of mutton; they should be thrown intowater, and, after a good soaking and brushing, be long boiled. Thewater in which they are done will add greatly to the richness ofgravy, as does the jelly of cow-heels. The latter must lie allnight in water, which causes the jelly to be of a good color.When boiled three hours, and become cold, let the fat be carefully takenoff; and when apparently quite clear, lay some white paper upon it,rubbing it close with a spoon, which will remove every particle ofgrease and it will be as pure as the jelly of a calf'sfoot. In preparing meat to stew for gravy, beatit with a mallet or rolling-pin, and score it across in various places, as thiswill make it give out its juices; season it with pepper andsalt, and put it into a stewpan with butter only, heating itgradually until it becomes brown, but shaking the pan frequently to see that itdoes not burn or stick to the bottom. It will generally be browned sufficientlyin half an hour. If kept in a very cool place and covered closely in a stonejar, it will keep good for two or three days in summer, and more than a week inwinter, but should not be thickened until it is meant to be used. Tarragon and knotted marjoram, by some called "Londonthyme," are a great improvement to gravies, as also all thosecondiments enumerated in the chapter on soups, but should be added only a shorttime before serving. Truffles and morels also thicken and improve the flavor ofgravies and soups; half an ounce being carefully washed of each, simmerthem in a pint of water, and add the whole. In the preparation of large dinners for company, it is indispensable toprocure strong gravy to color and impart flavor to sauces and ragouts,and this can be done by using coarse pieces of the lean of beef orveal, and the giblets or trimmings of poultry and game,with a small portion of a knuckle of ham; but for this purpose it mustbe stewed for a long time, skimmed, strained, thickened, and afterwardsflavored with whatever condiments are most suited to the dish it is toaccompany. 278.--STOCK FOR GRAVY. A good mode of making stock for gravies is to cut leanbeef thin, put it into a gravy pot without any butter orfat, and set it on a fire covered, but take care it does not burn; letit stay till all the gravy that comes out of the meat is dried upinto it again, often shaking it; put as much water as will cover themeat, and let that stew away. Then put to the meat a smallquantity of water, herbs, onions, spice, and a bitof lean ham; simmer till it is rich, and keep it in a closetrefrigerator. Do not take off the fat till going to be used. {Illistration} Closet Refrigorator Or, an excellent stock may be made in thismanner:--Put into a casserole three ounces of butter, four largecarrots, six middling-sized onions, three roots of parsleysliced; a small sprig of thyme; three cloves; three bay-leaves;two pounds of small fresh fish cut fine, with salt,pepper, and one-half a bottle of white (but not sweet)wine, and nearly as much broth. Cover close, and simmer untilthe whole be mashed; strain it through a finesieve. In another casserole stew a pint of mushrooms, a littleparsley and herbs in half a pint of water, till the flavorof all be obtained; strain both liquors, and heat them together. 279.--BEEF GRAVY. Cut a piece of the cheek or neck into pieces; strew some flourover it; mix it well with the meat, and put it into the saucepan with asmuch water as will cover it; an onion, a little allspice,a little pepper, and some salt; cover it close, and when it boilsskim it; then throw in a small crust of bread, or raspings, and stew ittill the gravy is rich and good; strain it off, and pour it into asauce boat. 280.--GRAVY FOR A HAUNCH OF VENISON. Cut off the fat from two or three pounds of a loin of oldmutton, and set it in steaks on a gridiron for a few minutes, justto brown one side; put them into a saucepan with a quart of water; coverquite close for an hour, and simmer it gently; then uncover it, and stew tillthe gravy is reduced to a pint; season with salt only. 281.--VEAL GRAVY. When all the meat has been taken from a knuckle of veal,divide the bones, and lay them in a stewpot, with a pound of the scragof a neck, an ounce of lean bacon, a bunch of parsley, alittle thyme, a bit of lemon peel, and a dessert-spoonful ofpepper; add as much water as will cover them. Boil and skim it;stop the pot down close, and let it simmer as slowly as possible three hours.Strain off, and let it stand till cold; then skim it, and take the jellyfrom the sediment. Pound some mace fine, and boil it with two spoonfulsof water, and add to the gravy. If cream is to be put toit, do not add the salt until the gravy comes off the fire. 282.--GRAVY TO MAKE MUTTON EAT LIKE VENISON. Pick a very stale woodcock or snipe; cut it in pieces (but first takeout the bag from the entrails), and simmer with as much unseasonedmeat-gravy as you will want. Strain it and serve in the dish; but if themutton be not long kept, it will not acquire the venisonflavor. 283.--VELOUTÉ. Take one pound of veal, with the remains of a fowl and a dozenfull-grown mushrooms, or a smaller number of green truffles; heatthese in melted butter, or beef fat, without browning; seasonwith salt, pepper, nutmeg, or mixed spices, towhich may be added a couple of carrots and onions, with atable-spoonful or two of flour. When boiled, skim off the fat,and let it simmer for one and a half hours, after which strain it, and keep itclosely stopped for further use. 284.--BEEF GRAVY. (French Receipt.) Trim with layers of fat bacon the bottom of a thick stewpan; cut fourlarge onions in halves, and lay the flat part over the bacon;take a few pieces of beef, put them in the same manner as in the vealgravy; moisten with the first broth only. Let this sweat, to get allthe gravy out of the beef, and when the broth is reduced,thrust a knife into the meat; let it stew gently on a slow fire till thegravy is a light brown color. Next moisten with some broth; throwin a large bunch of parsley and of green onions; a littlesalt, and a peppercorn. Let the whole boil for an hour; take thefat off, and drain it through a silken sieve, to use when wanted. 285.--GRAVY--CLEAR. Slice some beef thinly, broil a part of it over a very clear, quickfire, just enough to give color to the gravy, but not to dress it; put that with the raw into a tinned stewpanwith a couple of onions, one or two cloves, whole blackpepper, berries of allspice, and a bunch of sweet herbs;cover it with hot water, give it one boil, and skim it two or threetimes, then cover it, and let it simmer till quite strong. 286.--CURRYPOWDERS. One ounce of ginger, the same of coriander-seed, one-halfounce of cayenne pepper, and two ounces of fine pale turmeric;these ingredients to be pounded separately to a fine powder, and then warmed bythe fire, and mixed together. Put the powder into a wide-mouthed bottle, corkit well down, and put it into a dry place. Or: --One tablespoonful of coriander-seed, oneteaspoonful of cumin-seed, the same of turmeric and of cayennepepper, and one table-spoonful of common flour. When to be used mixall these ingredients in their several proportions, with two table-spoonfuls oflemon-pickle and four of cream adding this mixture to the friedonions and butter, &c. Or: --One and a half ounces of mustard-seedscorched and finely powdered, four ounces of coriander seed powdered,four and a half ounces of turmeric, three ounces of black pepper,one and a quarter ounces of cayenne pepper, one ounce of the lessercardamoms, one-half ounce of ginger, and one ofcumin-seed, all finely powdered. The flavor may be varied by theaddition of all or any of the following ingredients: cinnamon, inpowder, one ounce; cloves, ditto, one-half ounce; mace, ditto,one-half ounce. 287.--CURRY POWDER. (Kitchiner's tried Receipt.) Dry and reduce to a fine powder the following spices:Coriander-seed, three ounces, Turmeric, three ounces, Blackpepper, one ounce, Mustard, one ounce, Ginger, one ounce,Lesser cardamoms half an ounce, Cayenne pepper, a quarter of anounce, Cumin-seed, a quarter of an ounce. Thoroughly pound and mix, and keep them in a closely stopped bottle. Threeounces of the powder steeped ten days in a quart of vinegar or whitewine, will impregnate it with the flavor. 288.--DELHI CURRYPOWDER. Twenty teaspoonfuls of turmeric, eight of pounded chilis orcayenne pepper, and twelve each of cumin, coriander-seed,and dried cassia-leaves. 289.--A PLAIN CURRY. Put into a fryingpan a piece of butter, a small onion cut intopieces, and two cloves of garlic; fry these until brown, put themeat to the above, and add the curry powder, and sufficientcold water to cover the meat, and boil the whole gently until themeat is cooked; then add the juice of a lemon, and a littlesalt. 290.--THE ASPIC, A JELLY. Take a handful of aromatic herbs, such as burnet,chervil, and tarragon. Boil them in white vinegar; whenthe vinegar is well scented, pour into the stewpan some consomméof fowl reduced; season well before you clarify. When the aspic ishighly seasoned, break the whites of four eggs into an earthen pan, andbeat them with an osier rod; throw the aspic into the whites of eggs,and put the whole on the fire in a stewpan; keep beating or stirring till thejelly gets white; it is then very near boiling. Put it on thecorner of the stove, with a cover over it, and a little fire on the top ofit. When quite clear and bright, strain it through a bag, or sieve, or napkin,to be used when wanted. N. B. If this is wanted for a mayonaise, or as a jelly in moulds,make sure of its being stiff enough. Then put a knuckle of veal in asmall stock-pot, a small part of a knuckle of ham, and twocalves' feet, some trimming of fowl or game. Seasonthis with onions, carrots, and a bunch of herbs wellseasoned; pour into it half a bottle of white wine and moisten with goodbroth; let it boil gently for four hours, then skim away all thefat, and drain it through a silken sieve; put that in a stewpan, withtwo spoonfuls of tarragon vinegar, and four whites of eggs,salt, and pepper, to clarify; and keep stirring it on the firetill the whole becomes very white, then put this on the side with alittle fire over the cover; when you find it clear, drain it in a cloth orjelly-bag, and use it for aspic; if not, do not put in any vinegar:jelly for pie or galantine does not require acid. 291.--EPICUREANSAUCE. Indian soy, two ounces; walnut and mushroom ketchup, of eacheight ounces; port wine, two ounces; white pepper, bruised, halfan ounce; shalots, three ounces; cayenne, a quarter of an ounce;cloves, half an ounce. Macerate for fourteen days in a warm place;strain, and add sufficient white wine vinegar to make exactly one pint.The above forms a piquant sauce for chops, steaks, &c. Forfish, a little essence of anchovy, and an additional quantity ofvinegar, should be added. 292.--CARRACK OR INDIAN SAUCE FORCOLD MEAT. Two heads of garlic sliced, five spoonfuls of soy, five spoonfuls ofmushroom ketchup, eight spoonfuls of walnut pickle, fifteenanchovies, or five spoonfuls of essence of anchovies, threespoonfuls of mango pickle, one quart of vinegar--mix in a bottleand set it in the chimney corner; shake daily for a month. It is excellentwithout the mango. [This is an excellent sauce, and without themango would be mild.] 293.--HOT SPICE--A DELICIOUS ADJUNCT TOCHOPS, STEAKS, GRAVIES, SOUPS, &c. Three drachms each of ginger, black pepper, andcinnamon; seven cloves; mace half an ounce; cayenneone quarter of an ounce; nutmegs one ounce; white pepper, oneounce and a half; mix. The quantity of cayenne may be increased, shouldthe above not be enough to suit the palate. 294.--A RICH GRAVY. Cut beef into thin slices, according to the quantity wanted; sliceonions thin, and flour both; fry them of a light pale brown, butdo not on any account suffer them to get black: put them into a stewpan, pourboiling water on the browning in the frying-pan, boil it up, and pour onthe meat. Put to it a bunch of parsley, thyme, andsavory, a small bit of knotted marjoram, the same oftarragon, some mace, berries of allspice, whole blackpepper, a clove or two, and a bit of ham, or gammon ofbacon. Simmer till you have extracted all the juices of themeat, and be sure to skim the moment it boils, and often after. If for ahare, or stewed fish, anchovy should be added. 295.--MELTED BUTTER. Although it may be presumed that every cook who understands her businessknows how to melt butter, it is yet constantly brought to table eithertoo thick or too thin, and not unfrequently filled with lumps of flouror in a state of oil, and requires more care in the management than isgenerally thought necessary. The excellence of melted butter greatly depends upon the pains takento blend it with the flour before it is put upon the fire, the best planof doing which is to rub them together with a knife on a wooden trencher. Whenwell mixed, add two table-spoonfuls of hot water, or the same quantityof milk; put it into a small pipkin, shaking it one way until it boilsand not leaving it an instant; it must boil a minute to take off the rawness,and if made of fresh butter add a little salt.Remember that if you set it on the hot coals, or over the fire, it willbe oily; if the butter and flour be not well mixed, it will belumpy; and if you put too much water, it will be thin and poor. Byattending to these directions, and only using sufficient flour toprevent the butter from oiling, it will be rich and smooth. Or: --Mix together by degrees two spoonfuls offlour in cold water; make it smooth and thin; then put on a pintof water, let it boil, stir in the flour and water to makethe required thickness, cut half a pound of fresh butter in smallpieces, put it into the flour and water, let it boil well; it isthen fit for use; a pinch of salt may be required. When thin melted butter is required to pour overpuddings, roast veal, &c., make it the same way, adding a largerproportion of water or milk, the latter rendering it ratherwhiter than the water; and if meant to be more rich than common usecream instead of milk. Indeed the French frequently enrich meltedbutter by adding the yolk of a raw egg. 296.--MAÎTRED'HÔTEL BUTTER. Put one-fourth of a pound of fresh butter upon a plate, the juiceof two lemons, and two large table-spoonfuls of chopped parsley,half a teaspoonful of salt, and half that quantity of whitepepper; mix all well together, and keep in a cool place for use. 297.--TO BROWN MELTED BUTTER. Put a lump of butter into a frying-pan, and toss it round over thefire until it becomes brown; then dredge some flour over it, which hasbeen also browned by putting it either in the oven or before the fire, and stirit round with a spoon until the butter boils. By adding some of the flavored vinegars and compound sauces to meltedbutter thus prepared, most of the fish-sauces can be made, andmany of those in common use are composed in this simple manner. 298.--PARSLEY AND BUTTER. Scald a large handful of parsley in boiling water that hassome salt in it; when tender chop it fine, and stir it into some ratherthick melted butter. There should be sufficient parsley to makethe sauce green, and the parsley should not be put to the meltedbutter until about to be served, otherwise it will burn, brown. 299.--FENNEL SAUCE. Proceed as for parsley and butter. The first is used for the various purposes of fish, poultry, andfresh boiled meats; fennel mostly for mackerel. 300.--CAPER SAUCE, WHITE. Put whole capers into melted butter, adding a little of thevinegar they are pickled in, a pinch of salt, and sufficientcream to make it white. This is used principally for boiledmutton. 301.--CAPER SAUCE, BROWN. Take some thick brown sauce, adding the vinegar thecapers are pickled in; season it highly with cayenne andsalt. Put capers to the sauce just before serving; andthey must be used liberally. Nasturtium buds or seeds are sometimes used as asubstitute. 302.--EGG SAUCE. Boil the eggs hard, cut them in small dice, and put the pieces intomelted butter. The yolk may however be crushed to a powder, andused to thicken the butter. Or, if a more savory sauce isrequired, boil two eggs hard, mince them very fine, add a third portionof grated ham or tongue, a very little white pepper, andthe juice of a lemon; warm it up in melted butter. It is chieflyused for roast fowl and salt codfish; and if the butter besound, the salted will be found quite as good for all these purposes as thefresh. 303.--SAUCES FOR ROAST BEEF OR MUTTON. Grate horseradish on a bread-grater into a basin, then add twotable-spoonfuls of cream with a little mustard and salt;mix them well together; then add four table-spoonfuls of the bestvinegar, and mix the whole thoroughly. The vinegar andcream are both to be cold. This is a very fine sauce; it may beserved in a small tureen. Or: --Scrape the horseradish thin and chop itsmall, or grate it, which is better; warm it in melted butter, adding aspoonful of mushroom ketchup, and one of walnut, or thevinegar from walnut pickle. Or: --Scrape very fine or grate thehorseradish; add a little made mustard, and two spoonfuls ofpounded white sugar to four of vinegar: mix the whole welltogether, and place it under the meat, when nearly done, to catch thegravy which drops from it while roasting. This sauce should bevery thick. 304.--HORSERADISH SAUCE. Two teaspoonfuls of mustard, two of white sugar, half a one ofsalt, and a little more than a wineglass of vinegar--mixed andpoured over a stock of grated horseradish. This sauce isgood for beef. 305.--QUEEN MARY'S SAUCE. Take a shoulder of mutton that has hung till it is tender. When threeparts roasted, put a soup-plate under it, with three spoonfuls of hotwater, the same of port wine, a shalot, an anchovy choppedfine, and a little pepper; baste the meat with this and thegravy that drops from it. When the mutton is taken up, turn theinside upwards, score it various ways, pour the gravy over, and cover itwith a quantity of fried crumbs of bread. 306.--MANDRAM, Is a sauce commonly used in the West Indies with roast beefand mutton. It is made with a sliced cucumber, a chopped shalot,and a minced green capsicum, mixed up in a couple of table-spoonfuls ofMadeira wine and vinegar; and as capsicums can be hadgreen during great part of the autumn, it can be also made elsewhere; butneither chilis nor capsicums, if dried, will impart the sameflavor. 307.--MINT SAUCE, FOR ROAST LAMB. Pick the leaves off the stalks; wash and dry them carefully; chop them witha sharp knife very quickly to preserve their green color; put it into aboat; add sufficient vinegar to make it liquid, and powderedsugar to take off the acidity of the vinegar. 308.--MUSHROOMSAUCE. White. --Put the mushrooms into astewpan with one ounce of butter, some pepper and salt,and squeeze over them the juice of half a lemon; set them overthe fire; when they have given out their liquor, thicken it with flourand butter, and add sufficientcream to whiten the sauce. This is a very excellent saucefor fowls, rabbits, and all sorts of white fricassees. Or: --Wash and pick a pint of young mushrooms,and rub them with salt, to take off the tender skin; put theminto a saucepan with a little salt, some nutmeg, a blade ofmace, a pint of cream, and a good piece of butter rubbedin flour. Boil them up, and stir them till done; then pour it round thechickens, &c. Garnish with lemon. If you cannot get freshmushrooms, use pickled ones, done white, with a littlemushroom-powder with the cream. Brown. --It may also be made brown by either puttingthe buttons into a pipkin, and frying them with a littlebutter until they become of a delicate brown, and then stewing them instrong gravy of either beef or veal; or by making it ofold mushrooms chopped small, fried and stewed in the same manner, andthen seasoned according to taste. It is much used for cutlets and many sorts ofragoûts. 309.--CELERY SAUCE. Strip the outer parts of the stem, and, after carefully washing theremaining portion, cut it into small pieces; put to it a blade of macewithout any other spice, and stew it in good veal broth untilvery tender; it will take a good deal of time, more particularly the thickhard end of the root. After this thicken it with melted butter,and flavor it with a small quantity of white wine; or it may bethickened with boiled cream without wine. It is usually servedwith boiled turkey, but is very delicate with any kind of whitepoultry or veal. 310.--ONION SAUCE. The onions must be peeled, and then boiled till they are tender, thensqueeze the water from them, chop them, and add butter that hasbeen melted, rich and smooth, with a little good milk instead ofwater; give it one boil, serve it with boiled rabbits,partridges, scrag or knuckle of veal, or roast mutton; aturnip boiled with the onions draws out the strength. 311.--ONION SAUCE, BROWN. Peel and dice the onions; some put an equal quantity ofcucumber and of celery, into a quart stewpan, with an ounce ofbutter; set it over a slow fire, and turn the onion about till itis slightly browned, then gradually stir in half an ounce of flour, adda little broth, and a little pepper and salt, boil up fora few minutes; add a table-spoonful of claret, or port wine, andmushroom-ketchup; you may add, if you think proper,lemon-juice or vinegar, and rub it through a tammy or finesieve. 312.--OYSTER SAUCE. In opening the oysters, save the liquor, and boil it with the beards,a bit of mace, and lemon-peel; in the mean time throw theoysters into cold water, and drain it off; strain the liquor, andput it into a saucepan with the oysters just drained from the coldwater, with sufficient quantity of butter, mixed with as muchmilk as will make enough sauce, but first rub a littleflour with it; set them over the fire, and stir all the while, and whenthe butter has boiled a few times, take them off, and keep them close tothe fire, but not upon it, for if too much done, the oysters will becomehard; add a squeeze of lemon-juice, and serve; a little is agreat improvement. 313.--SAUCE, HAREVY. Chop twelve anchovies, bone and all, very small, with oneounce of cayenne pepper, six spoonfuls of soy, six ditto of good walnut pickle, three heads of garlicchopped not very small, a quarter of an ounce of cochineal, twoheads of shalots chopped rather large, one gallon of vinegar; letit stand fourteen days, stir it well twice or thrice every day, then pass itthrough a jelly bag, and repeat this till it is quite clear; then bottleit, and tie a bladder over the cork. 314.--SAUCE (Italian) FORSALADS. Mix together three table-spoonfuls of sauce tournée, one ofmustard, some tarragon and chervil shred small, with threetable-spoonfuls of Florence oil; putting in, however, a little at atime; when perfectly smooth, add also, by degrees, a glass of tarragonvinegar, and a little salt. This sauce cannot be too muchmixed. 315.--TARRAGON SAUCE. Put two table-spoonfuls of tarragon vinegar into a saucepan, andreduce it to half the quantity, then put to it six spoonfuls of good buttersauce and mix all well together, and if not sufficiently strong put to it alittle bit of glaze, and a very little more tarragon vinegar. 316.--TOMATO SAUCE. Fresh tomatoes; take out stalk, press them all tightly down in astewpan, cover them, put them on the fire, strain off the liquor that is drawnfrom them, add to the tomatoes a slice of raw ham, two shalots, a fewspoonfuls of good stock; let it stew for an hour, then rub it through atammy sieve. Have in another stewpan a little good brown sauce, put yourtomato into it, boil all together, season with cayenne,salt, sugar, and lemon-juice. 317.--ORANGE GRAVYSAUCE. Put half a pint of veal gravy into a saucepan, add to it half a dozenbasil leaves, a small onion, a roll of orange orlemon-peel, and let it boil for a few minutes, and strain it off; putto the clear gravy, the juice of a Seville orange orlemon, half a teaspoonful of salt, the same quantity ofpepper, and a glass of red wine, serve it hot; shalot andcayenne may be added. 318.--SAUCE À LA TARTARE. Take the yolk of an egg, and drop into it very slowly atable-spoonful of sweet oil, beating it up by degrees until perfectlymixed; add a table-spoonful of vinegar, a little chopped parsley,a tablespoonful of French mustard, pepper and salt; beatup the whole together: make and keep the sauce in a cold place; put itinto a dish, and lay the boiled fowl upon it. This sauce shouldbe beaten till it resembles cream. 319.--MINT SAUCE. Make mint vinegar by adding a very little cold vinegar to thechopped leaves, with powdered sugar. 320.--FENNEL SAUCE. Take as many branches of green fennel as you may require; pick andwash it in the same manner as parsley; chop it very small, scald andthen lay it on a sieve to cool; put two spoonfuls of velouté, and thesame of butter sauce into a saucepan, make them quite hot, take care tostir it well, that they may be properly mixed; rub the fennel in alittle butter, and then throw it into the sauce; mix it inthoroughly, and season it with salt, pepper, andnutmeg. 321.--FRESH PORK SAUCE. Cut two or three good-sized onions into slices, and fry them lightly,then add two spoonfuls of cullis, a little broth, a few mushroomschopped, a clove of garlic, vinegar, and spice; let itboil half an hour, reduce to a proper consistence, skim and strain it. 322.--GLAZE.--(A French Receipt.) Glaze is very seldom made on purpose, except on particular occasions. Lay onthe fire a stock-pot, with plenty of veal, and a small quantityof beef and ham; moisten with broth; when stewed for aproper time, skim it well. The glaze of sweated broth is not so bright.Season the broth with carrots and onions, a large bunch ofparsley, and green onions; but no turnips orcelery, for they give a bitter taste. If you should have a grand dinner,and wish to glaze of a nice color, put more veal into your Espagnole(Spanish sauce.) The moment it comes to a glaze, put part of it into asmall stewpan for the purpose of glazing only. The most common glaze is made ofremnants of broth, the liquor of braize, or fricandeaux, &c., whichare to be reduced on a brisk fire. If you keep your reduction too long, it willbecome black and bitter. Always warm your glaze in the hot water bath,that it may not get too brown when you have a grand dinner. 323.--SAUCE ROBERT.--(French Receipt.) Cut some onions into small dice, fry them of a fine brown, dust themwith flour, and moisten them with some Spanish sauce. Skim it,that the sauce may look bright; put in a little pepper andsalt, and just before you send up mix a spoonful of mustard. 324.--SAUCE ROBERT. Cut a few onions into dice, which put into a frying-pan with a bit ofbutter, and fry them lightly; when nicely browned, add a dessertspoonful of flour, a ladleful of stock, the same ofvinegar, some salt, and pepper; reduce it to a properthickness, and when ready for table stir in two dessert-spoonfuls ofmustard. 325.--PURÉE OF ONION, OR SOUBISESAUCE. Take a dozen white onions. After having peeled and washed them, cutthem into halves, take off the tops and bottoms, mince them as fine aspossible, and blanch them to make them taste sweeter, and take off the greencolor. Then let them melt on a small stove, with a little butter. Whenthey are thoroughly done, and no kind of moisture is left, mix four spoonfulsof béchamel. Season them well, rub the purée through a tammy, andkeep the sauce hot, but without boiling. You must also put a small lumpof sugar with the sauce if necessary. When you have the oven hot,put the onions hermetically closed in a small stewpan, and let themsimmer for one hour, with a small bit of ham. This method gives a betterflavor. 326.--BECHAMEL SAUCE. Take about half a quarter of a pound of butter, about three pounds ofveal cut into small slices, a quarter of a pound of ham, sometrimmings of mushrooms, two small white onions, a bunch ofparsley and green onions; put the whole into a stewpan, and layit on the fire till the meat be made firm. Then put three spoonfuls offlour; moisten with some boiling-hot thin cream and a ladle ofconsommé. Keep this sauce rather thin, so that whilst you reduceit the ingredients may have time to be stewed thoroughly. Season it with alittle salt, and strain it through a tammy. This sauce shouldretain no taste of flour, and be very palatable. 327.--DUTCHSAUCE.--(French Receipt.) Put into a stewpan a teaspoonful of flour, four spoonfuls of eldervinegar, a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, the yolks of fiveeggs, and a little salt. Put it on the fire and keep continuallystirring it. When it has acquired thickness enough, work it well, that you may refine it. If it should not be curdled, youhave no occasion to strain it through a tammy; season well and serve it up.Some people do not like elder vinegar; in that case use tarragonor plain vinegar. But odorous vinegar is far preferable. 328.--SAUCE BLANCHE--(Or French Melted Butter.) Put into a stewpan, a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, a spoonfulof flour, a little salt, half a gill or glass of water,half a spoonful of white vinegar, and a little grated nutmeg. Putit on the fire: let it thicken, but do not allow it to boil, for fear it shouldtaste of the flour. Serve hot. 329.--WHITEROUX*--(WHITE THICKENING.)--(A French Receipt.) Put a good lump of butter into a stewpan, let it melt over a slowfire, and, when melted, drain the butter and take out thebuttermilk; then put in the butter two or three spoonfuls of goodflour, enough to make a thin paste: keep it on the fire for aquarter of an hour, and take care not to let it color; pour it into an earthenpan to use when wanted. 330.--BROWN THICKENING. (A French Receipt.) Put into a stewpan a piece of butter proportionate to the quantity ofthickening intended to be prepared. Melt it gently; take out thebuttermilk, then put flour enough to make a paste. Fry iton a slow fire, and then put it again over very red ashes, till it be ofa nice color. Observe, this is only to be obtained by slow degrees. When of alight brown pour it into an earthen pan and keep it for use. It will keep along time. *This is an indispensable article in cookery, and serves to thicken sauces;the brown is for sauces of the same color; and the color must be obtained byslow degrees, otherwise the flour will burn and give a bitter taste, andthe sauces become spotted with black. 331.--LEMON SAUCE,WHITE, FOR BOILED FOWLS. Put the peel of a small lemon, cut very thin, into a pint of sweet,rich cream, with a sprig of lemon, thyme, and ten whitepeppercorns. Simmer it gently till it tastes well of the lemon, thenstrain it and thicken it with a quarter of a pound of butter rubbed in adessert-spoonful of flour; boil it up; then pour the juice of thelemon strained into it, stirring well; dish the fowls, and thenmix a little white gravy, quite hot, with the cream, but do notboil them together; add salt according to taste. 332.--LEMONSAUCE FOR BOILED FOWLS. Cut small slices of lemon into very small dice, and put them into meltedbutter, give it one boil, and pour it over boiled fowls. 333.--BREAD SAUCE. Cut in slices the crumb of a French roll, to which add a fewpeppercorns, one whole onion, a little salt, and boilingmilk enough to cover it; let it simmer gently by the side of the firetill the bread soaks up the milk, add a little thickcream, take out the onion, and rub the whole through a sieve;make it very hot, and serve with game or fowls. 334.--BÉCHAMEL SAUCE. Take some veal and ham, cut them into dices; somecarrots, cloves, onions, laurel leaves, shalots,parsley, and scallions, all chopped fine; pepper, gratednutmeg, a little salt and butter, a little veloutéand consommé, reduce it to half, and then put in some cream; mixit well with your sauce, boil it all together over a quick fire, shaking it constantly for an hour; if thickenough, strain it through a sieve. 335.--LIVER SAUCE. Take the livers of poultry or game, chop them very small withparsley, scallions, tarragon leaves, and shalots; soak them in alittle butter over the fire, and then pound them; add cullisstock, pepper and salt. Give the whole a boil with twoglasses of red wine, coriander, cinnamon, andsugar; reduce and strain it, thicken with a bit of butter rolledin flour; serve it in a sauce-boat. 336.--LIVER SAUCEFOR BOILED CHICKENS. Boil the livers till you can bruise them with the back of a spoon;mix them in a little of the liquor they were boiled in, melt some buttervery smooth and put to them; add a little grated lemon-peel, and boilup altogether. 337.--TRUFFLE SAUCE. Take a pound of truffles; brush and wash them carefully; put them ina stewpan with some good gravy, two wine-glasses of whitewine, a small onion, a faggot of parsley and thyme,and an ounce of bacon fat. Let them stew gently until quite tender; takethem out, strain and skim the gravy, thicken it with roux or a lump offlour and butter; peel the truffles, cut them in slices asthick as a penny-piece, warm them in the sauce, and serve. 338.--CHESTNUT SAUCE. Scald a score of chestnuts in hot water for ten minutes;skin them; let them stew gently for about half an hour in some goodgravy seasoned with a glass of white wine, a little whitepepper, salt, and mace or nutmeg; and when quite soft,serve them in the dish. Or: --Pulp them through a colander to thicken thegravy, making it either brown or white, by using in the former beef-gravy, and in the latter veal-broth, with pounded almonds, andwithout pepper. Either of these is equally fit for sauce to guinea-bird orturkey, as well as for stuffing the body of the bird. 339.--SAUCES FOR WHITE POULTRY. BOILED. Liver-sauce. --Take the livers of asmany fowls as may be required for the intended quantity of sauce,or, that of a rabbit being much larger, take one liver, boil itwith some sprigs of thyme and parsley; dissolve in thewater, after taking it out, two anchovies, boned; boil twoeggs hard, leave out one white, and shred the rest with theliver, herbs, and anchovies; pound them together in amortar, adding a saltspoonful of grated lemon-peel and a littlepepper and salt. Put it into the saucepan, squeeze upon it thejuice of half a lemon, thicken the liquor with butter anda little flour, add to it the pounded ingredients, and stir it untilfinished. Or: --If gravy be used instead of water, and butter be omitted, the above may be properlyemployed as an excellent sauce for roasted rabbit, or for full-grownpoultry. 340.--WHITE SAUCE. Boil a large blade of mace, a few cloves andpeppercorns, in half a pint of soft water, until the flavor beobtained; strain it off, put it into a saucepan with four anchovieschopped fine, a quarter of a pound of butter rolled in flour, andhalf a pint of cream: boil and stir it well two minutes. Put some in a tureen,and the remainder in the dish. 341.--FOR CHICKENS. Take the legs and necks, with a small bit of the scrag of veal or mutton; put theminto a saucepan with two blades of mace, a few white peppercorns,an anchovy, a head of celery sliced, a bunch of sweetherbs, and a small bit of lemon-peel; boil these in a quart ofwater to half a pint; strain, and thicken it with a quarter of a poundof butter and some flour; boil it five minutes, then put in twospoonfuls of mushrooms, and, having beaten up the yolks of twoeggs with a teacupful of cream, put it into the sauce, andkeep shaking it one way over the fire till it is nearly boiling; then put itinto a sauce-tureen. 342.--VEGETABLE MARROW SAUCE. Few sauces are more delicate as an accompaniment for young chickens,whether roast or boiled, than vegetable marrow when deprived of itsseeds, if stewed to a pulp and passed through a fine sieve, so asto form it into a purée, which may be then thinned either withfowl-broth seasoned with mace, or with cream andnutmeg. 343.--SAUCES FOR ROAST FOWLS. Stew any moderate quantity of ham, veal, and mushrooms,with sweet herbs, a shalot, a little allspice, and a piece ofbutter, until all become brown; then let the whole simmer gently for along time in either weak broth or water, until they form a stronggravy; strain it and season it with any additional flavor that may begiven by some of the made sauces. Serve hot in a sauce-tureen. Or: --Put into a small stewpan two slices ofham, a clove of garlic, a laurel-leaf, and sliced onion:add a little good gravy, a sprig of knotted marjoram, and aspoonful of tarragon vinegar; simmer slowly an hour, strain off, and putinto the dish or a boat. Or: --Boil some veal-gravy, pepper,salt, the juice of a Seville orange and a lemon, andone-quarter as much of port wine as of gravy; and pour it intothe dish or a boat. Or: --If wanted in a hurry cut a few slices ofcalf's liver, or any kind of brown meat; fry them with alittle lean bacon and an onion, and, when browned, pour upon themboiling water to what strength you please, and strain it. 344.--WHITE SAUCE. It is seldom necessary to buy meat for this favorite sauce, asthe proportion of that flavor is but small. The water that has boiledfowls, veal, or rabbit, or a little broth that maybe in the house, or the feet and necks of chickens, or raw ordressed veal, will suffice. Stew any of these with a littlewater, a bit of lemon-peel, some sliced onion, a fewwhite peppercorns, a little pounded mace or nutmeg, and abunch of sweet herbs, until the flavor be good; then strain it, add alittle good cream, a piece of butter, and a little flour: salt to your taste. Asqueeze of lemon may be added after the sauce is taken off the fire,shaking it well. Yolk of egg is often used in fricassee; but if you haveany cream it is better, as the former is apt to curdle. Or: --Boil a stick of celery and a bunch ofparsley in a pint of milk, adding white pepper and alittle salt; then put two ounces of butter into a saucepan, letit melt, add to it an onion sliced thin, dredge in flour until itis a paste, but do not allow it to become brown. Strain the milk,and add it by degrees to the butter and flour, stirring it verywell; then boil the whole together, stirring all the time, and boiling it untilit is quite thick and smooth; pass it through a fine sieve or tammy. If wantedto be very rich, let it cool a little, and then add an egg previouslybeaten, and mix very gradually; warm it over the fire, stirring it well, but donot let it boil, or it will curdle. Or: --Mix a teaspoonful of flour withone-quarter pound of butter, a little salt, and ground whitepepper; let them be well blended together with a wooden spoon, then add aspoonful of vinegar, and one or two of water; mix the wholetogether, stirring it one way over the fire. 345.--CULLIS. Lay over the bottom of a stewpan as much lean veal as will cover itan inch thick: cover the veal with thin slices of undressed gammon, twoor three onions, two or three bay-leaves, some sweet herbs, twoblades of mace, and a few cloves. Cover the stewpan, and set itover a slow fire; but when the juices come out, let the fire be a littlequicker. When the meat is of a fine brown, fill the pan with goodbeef broth, boil and skim it, then simmer an hour; add a littlewater, mixed with as much flour as will make it properly thick;boil it half an hour, and strain it. This will keep a week. 346.--ROUX. White. --Put two ounces of butter intoa stewpan over a slow fire, allow it to melt, then drain off thebuttermilk: make it into a paste by dredging flour overit, and keep it on the fire for a quarter of an hour, taking care that it doesnot lose its color. Brown is made in the same manner, only allowed tofry of a dark color. French cooks use no other kind of browning. 347.--LIAISON. To thicken or enrich White or FishSoups, use the following:--Pour the soup, boiling hot, on the beatenyolks of two or three fresh eggs, from which the small toughsubstance found in it, and called "the tread," should be removed, nor shouldthe soup be suffered to boil after the eggs are added, as it is then aptto curdle. Or: --Break the yolks of an egg with threespoonfuls of cream, beat them up in the tureen and pour the boiling soupupon it. This may be made in the same proportion, and kept in a basin for otherdishes. 348.--SAUCE FOR FRICANDEAU, OR ROAST VEAL. Boil an unwashed anchovy cut small, with a cup of gravy, aglass of port wine, a shalot minced, and the juice of half asmall lemon; strain, and mix in the dish with the gravy of themeat. Or use sorrel sauce. 349.--SAUCE À LAMAÎTRE D'HÔTEL. Put eight table-spoonfuls of white sauce in a stewpan with four ofmilk; boil it five minutes, then stir in three ounces of maîtred'hôtel butter; stir it quickly over the fire till thebutter is melted, but do not let it boil. This sauce should bemade at the time of serving. 350.--SAUCES FOR GEESE. For a Green Goose. --Take half a pint ofsorrel-juice, two glasses of white wine, a nutmeg quartered, acupful of fried crumbs, and two lumps of sugar; let all boil together,then beat it smooth, adding a piece of fresh butter, and serve it veryhot in a tureen, or in the dish with the goose. It should not be madetoo thick with the bread-crumbs; and if much acid should not beapproved, the wine must be equal in quantity to the sorrel-juice. 351.--GOOSEBERRY SAUCE. Wash some sorrel, put it into a cloth and press out the juice;melt a piece of butter with flour, using this juiceinstead of water; let it be very thick. Scald green gooseberriesuntil very tender, and add them to thesauce. This is a fine acid sauce if not spoiled withsugar. If not sweetened add a little cayenne pepper. 352.--APPLE SAUCE. Pare, core, and slice some apples; and put them in a stone jar, intoa saucepan of water, or on a hot hearth. If on a hearth, let a spoonfulor two of water be put in to hinder them from burning. When they aredone bruise them to a mash, and put to them a piece of butter the sizeof a nutmeg, and a little brown sugar if required; but itdestroys the slight acid flavor of the apples, and its corrective togoose and pork. 353.--SAVORY APPLE SAUCE. Pulp the apples, and, if wanted of a good color, add to them alittle juice of beet-root or cochineal: season with cayennepepper, and a glass of vinegar or lemon-pickle, taking carenot to make it too acid. This will prove a substitute for tomato orsorrel sauce, when neither can be obtained; if for the latter, a littlespinach-juice will give it a color. 354.--SAUCE FORDUCKLINGS. Take young green onions or chives; chop them very small thenput them into some thick melted butter, with pepper, salt,and a spoonful of lemon-pickle; stir it well together, and, when veryhot, put it into the dish with the ducks upon it. Should the flavor ofthe onions be thought too strong, they may be scalded previously. Or: --Mix one-quarter pint of sorrel-juice, aglass of white wine, some scalded gooseberries, some whitesugar, and a bit of butter. Boil them up and serve in a boat. 355.--SAUCE FOR SUCKING-PIG. Take the inside of a French roll and boil it to a pulp, alongwith an onion and a little salt; chop the brains and putthem into a teacupful of the gravy that runs from the pig; thentake as much butter as will be sufficient for the sauce, and putinto it a good squeeze of lemon, with half a glass of whitewine. Some cooks make a stuffing for the pig in nearly thesame manner, only making it with less butter and more bread,besides sometimes seasoning it with sage. 356.--CURRANTSAUCE. Clean an ounce of currants, and boil them in one-half pint ofwater for a few minutes, pour the whole over a teacupful ofbread-crumbs; let it soak and then add a piece of butter rolledin flour, four or six cloves, and a glass of port wine;beat it a little, and stir it over the fire until it is quite smooth. 357.--SAUCES FOR WILD-FOWL. (English.) A teaspoonful of made mustard, the same of essence ofanchovies and red pepper; a tablespoonful of ketchup, and aglass of claret. This receipt is from the Palace, and comes highlyrecommended. Or: --Simmer a teacupful of port wine, thesame quantity of good meat gravy, a little shalot, a littlepepper, salt, a grate of nutmeg, and a bit of mace,for ten minutes: put in a bit of butter and flour, give it allone boil, and pour it through the birds. In general they are not stuffed, butmay be done so if liked. Or: --Mince some shalots very fine, put them into asmall saucepan with some peppercorns, two tablespoonfuls of strong,clear gravy, and the same quantity of vinegar; when sufficientlyboiled add a little salt, and strain it through a sieve. It may beserved either hot or cold. 358.--WHITE SAUCE. (Soyer's.) Cut and chop a knuckle of veal weighing about four pounds, into large dice; also half a pound of lean bacon;butter the bottom of a large stewpan with a quarter of a pound ofbutter; add two onions, a small carrot, a turnip,three cloves, half a blade of mace, a bouquet of a bay-leaf, asprig of thyme, and six of parsley; add a gill of water;place over a sharp fire, stirring round occasionally, until the bottom of thestewpan is covered with whitish glaze; then fill up with three quarts ofwater; add a good teaspoonful of salt, and let it simmer at thecorner of the fire an hour and a half, keeping it well skimmed; pass itthrough a hair sieve into a basin. In another stewpan put a quarter of a poundof butter, with which mix six ounces of flour, stirring over thefire about three minutes; take off, keep stirring until partly cold, when addthe stock all at once, continually stirring and boiling for a quarter ofan hour; add half a pint of boiling milk; stir a few minutes longer, adda few chopped mushrooms; if handy, pass through a hair sieve into abasin, until required for use, stirring it round occasionally until cold. Theabove being a simplified white sauce, will be referred to very often inreceipts. 359.--BROWN SAUCE. (Soyer's.) Put two ounces of butter into a stewpan; rub it over the bottom; peeltwo or three large onions; cut them in thick slices; lay them on thebottom; cut into small pieces about two pounds of knuckle of veal, * all meat, or three pounds if with bone; a quarter of a pound oflean bacon, cut small, two cloves, a few peppercorns, atable-spoonful of salt, two bay-leaves, a gill of water; set iton a brisk fire; let it remain ten minutes, when stir it well round, subdue thefire, let it remain twenty minutes longer, and stir now and then until it has a nice brown color; fill your pan with three quarts of water; when boiling, set it on thecorner of the stove, with the lid three parts on the saucepan; when boiling,skim fat and all; after one hour, or one hour and a half simmering, passit through a sieve into a basin. To make the thickening or Roux for it, proceed as follows:--ROUX. Put two ounces of butter into a pan, which melt on a slow fire, then add three ounces of flour, stir it with a wooden spoonuntil getting a thin deep yellow color; this in France is called Roux, beingvery useful in cookery, and will be often referred to in these receipts. Thisprocess will take ten minutes, when remove from the fire for two minutes tocool; then add at once three pints and a quarter of the above stock;very quickly set it on the fire to boil; remove it to the corner to simmer,and skim. It ought to be entirely free from grease, and of a lightchestnut color. *Half veal and beef can be used; or if no veal, allbeef. 360.--DEMI-GLAZE--THIN BROWN SAUCE FOR MADEDISHES. When I have a small dinner-party, I always, as I told you before, make smallquantities of white and brown sauce as above, but this is a niceway of clarifying a brown sauce without much trouble, and makes it abeautiful transparent brown color; but although I have made it quite a studythat each entrée, or made dish for daily use, shouldmake its own sauce, yet I must impress upon you that this sauceis the real key to cooking a good and ceremonious dinner. Put a pint ofbrown sauce, in a middle-sized stewpan; add to it half a pint ofbroth or consommé, put it on the stove, stir with wooden spoon,let it boil as fast as possible, take the scum off which will rise to thesurface; reduce it until it adheres lightly to the spoon, pass it through asieve or tammy into a basin; stir now and then until cold, to prevent askin forming on the the top; put it byuntil wanted for use. It will keep for a week in winter, by adding half a gillof white broth every other day, and giving it a boil; the addition of atablespoonful of tomato sauce gives it a beautiful color; use whereindicated. 361.--THIN BROWN SAUCE of MUSHROOMS. Put twelve table-spoonfuls of thin brown sauce in a small stewpan toboil, then have six or eight small mushrooms, well cleaned and washed,chop them fine, and place in sauce, and boil for five minutes; taste ifit is to your liking; the addition of a little sugar is an improvement;a little cayenne, if liked, may be introduced. The sauce is goodfor cutlets, broiled fowl, and game, &c. 362.--ESCHALOT SAUCE. Chop fine about a good table-spoonful of eschalot, place it in thecorner of a napkin, and pour water over; press until dry, and put ina small stewpan with two table-spoonfuls of vinegar, one clove, alittle mace; boil two minutes, add ten table-spoonfuls of demi-glaze,boil a little longer, add a little sugar, and serve. 363.--PIQUANTOR SHARP SAUCE. Put two table-spoonfuls of chopped onions, or eschalots,cleaned as above, into a stewpan; put also four table-spoonfuls ofvinegar, and a bay-leaf, and boil; then add ten table-spoonfuls ofbrown sauce, half a one of chopped parsley, ditto of greengherkins; boil five minutes; skim, add a little sugar, taste if wellseasoned, take out bay-leaf and serve. 364.--TARRAGON SAUCE.(Soyer's.) Put eight table-spoonfuls of demi-glaze, and four of broth, into astewpan; boil for a few minutes; add a table-spoonful of vinegar; haveready picked twenty leaves of fresh tarragon; put in to summer twominutes, and serve with any kind of poultry, but especially springchickens. 365.--BROWN CUCUMBER SAUCE. Peel a small fresh cucumber; cut it in neat pieces; put in astewpan with a little suagr; add half an ounce of butter; set it on aslow fire; stir it now and then; add tweleve table-spoonfuls of of brownsauce, and eight of broth; let it simmer till tender; skim thebutter off; remove the cucumber into another stewpan; pass thesauce, reduce it a little, taste it, pour over, and serve. 367.--MINCE HERB SAUCE. Put two table-spoonfuls of finely chopped onions in a stewpan, and atable-spoonful of oil; place it on the fire; stir a few minutes, add tentable-spoonfuls of demi-glaze, and four of broth or water; boil,skim; if too thick, and the scum should not rise, add half a gill ofbroth or water; boil, and reduce to a proper thickeness, and adda table-spoonful of chopped parsley; if at hand, one ofmushrooms, and season with a little cayenne; the juice ofa quarter of a lemon; serve. I often introduce a little garlic inthis. 368.--RAVIGOTE SAUCE. Put in a stewpan one middle-sized onion sliced, with a littlecarrot, a little thyme, bay-leaf,one clove, a little mace, a little scraped horseradish, alittle butter; fry a few minutes, then add three teaspoonfuls ofvinegar, ten table-spoonfuls of brown sauce, four ofbroth; when boiling, skim, add a table-spoonful of currant jelly;when melted, pass all through a tammy, and serve with any kind of meator poultry; with hare or venison it is excellent. 369.--BROWN MUSHROOMSAUCE. Clean and cut twelve small mushrooms in slices; place them in astewpan with a little butter, salt, pepper, thejuice of a quarter of a lemon; set it on a slow fire for a fewminutes, then add ten spoonfuls of demi-glaze; boil till they are tender, andserve. A little mushroom ketchup may be introduced. 370.--ORANGESAUCE FOR GAME. Peel half an orange, removing all the pith; cut it into slices, andthen in fillets; put them in a gill of water to boil for two minutes;drain them on a sieve, throwing the water away; place in the stewpan twospoonfuls of demi-glaze, or ten of broth; and, when boiling, add theorange, a little sugar; simmer ten minutes, skim, and serve. Thejuice of half an orange is an improvement. This is served withducklings and water fowl: those that like may add cayenne andmustard. 371.--GARLIC SAUCE. Though many dislike the flavor of this root, yet those that like it oughtnot to be deprived of it. Put in a stewpan ten table-spoonfuls of demi-glaze, alittle tomato sauce, if handy; boil it a few minutes, scrape half aclove of garlic, put it in with a little sugar, and serve. 372.--MINT SAUCE FOR LAMB. Take three table-spoonfuls of chopped leaves of green mint, threetable-spoonfuls of brown sugar, and put into a basin, with half a pintof brown vinegar; stir it well up, add one salt-spoonful ofsalt, and serve. 373.--LIAISON OF EGGS. Break the yolks of two eggs in a basin, with which mix six spoonfulsof milk, or eight of cream; pass it through a fine sieve, and usewhen directed. 374.--ANCHOVY BUTTER SAUCE. Put into a stewpan eight spoonfuls of demi-glaze, or three of broth;when boiling, add one ounce of anchovy butter; stir continually tillmelted; serve where directed. 375.--SOYER'S SAUCE. Put six spoonfuls of demi-glaze into a stewpan; when hot, add four spoonfulsof Soyer's Brown Sauce; let boil, and serve with either chop,steak, cutlet, poultry, or game. 376.--PAPILLOTTESAUCE. Scrape half an ounce of fat bacon, put it in a pan with fourtable-spoonfuls of chopped onions; stir over the fire for a few minutes,then add ten table-spoonfuls of brown sauce and boil; then add atable-spoonful of mushrooms chopped, one ditto of parsley, alittle nutmeg, a little pepper and sugar, a quarter of aclove of scraped garlic; reduce till rather thickish; put on dishtill cold, and use it for any thing you may put up "en Papillotte." 377.--TOMATO SAUCE.(Soyer's.) If fresh, put six in a stewpan; having removed the stalk, and squeezed themin the hand to remove pips, &c., add half an onion, sliced, a sprigof thyme, a bay-leaf, half an ounce of celery, one ounce ofham or bacon, same of butter, teaspoonful of sugar,same of salt, a quarter one of pepper, set on fire to stewgently; when all tender, add a table-spoonful offlour, moisten with half a pint of broth, boil five minutes; adda little cayenne, taste if highly seasoned, pass it through sieve ortammy, put it back in stewpan, until it adheres rather thick to the back of thespoon, and use it for any kind of meat or poultry. If preservedtomato, proceed as for poivrade sauce, respecting the vegetables,omitting the vinegar, and adding the tomato instead of thebrown sauce, with a table-spoonful of flour and broth tobring it to a proper thickness; pass it through a sieve, and serve asabove. 378.--CURRY SAUCE. (Soyer's.) Put into a pan four good-sized onions, sliced, and two peeledapples, with a quarter of a pound of butter, the same of leanham, a blade of mace, four pepper-corns, two bay-leaves, twosprigs of thyme; stir them over a moderate fire until the onionsbecome brown and tender, then add two table-spoonfuls of the best currypowder, one of vinegar, two of flour, a teaspoonful ofsalt, one of sugar; moisten it with a quart of broth ormilk, or even water, with the addition of a little glaze; boiltill in a pulp, and adhering rather thickly to the back of the spoon;pass all through a fine sieve or tammy; give it another boil for a few minutes,put it in a basin, and use when required. Any kind of meat, poultry, andfish, or parts of game, are excellent warmed in thissauce, and served with well boiled and dry rice. I have kept thissauce in a cool place in the winter for a month, boiling it now andthen. The quantity of powder may be omitted, and a spoonful of currypaste used, or some mangoes. 379.--A VERY GOOD AND USEFUL WHITESAUCE--(quite new.) Put a quart of white sauce in a stewpan of a proper size on a fire;stir continually until reduced to one-third; put two yolks of eggs in abasin, stir them well up, add your sauce gradually, keep stirring, putback in stewpan, set it to boil for a few minutes longer, then add one pint ofboiling milk, which will bring it to its proper thickness; that is, whenit adheres transparently to the back of a spoon; pass through a tammy into abasin, stir now and then till cold. If not immediately required, and I have anystock left, I use half of it with half of milk. I also try thisway, which is very convenient; when the yolks are in, and well boiled, Iput it in a large gallipot and when cold, cover with pieces of paper; itwill keep good in winter for two or three weeks, and above a week in summer:when I want to use a little of it, I only take a spoonful or two and warm it onthe fire, and add enough milk or white broth to bring it to aproper thickness, and use when required. This sauce is very smooth, andnever turns greasy; it lies beautifully on fowl, or any whitemade dish; the addition of a drop of cream gives it a very finewhite appearance. 380.--ONION PURÉE SAUCE. Peel and cut six onions in slices; put in a stewpan, with a quarterof a pound of butter, a teaspoonful of salt, one of sugar,a half one of pepper; place on a slow fire to simmer till in apulp, stirring them now and then to prevent them getting brown, then addone tablespoonful of flour, a pint of milk, and boil till aproper thickness, which should be a little thicker than melted butter;pass through a tammy, warm again, and serve with mutton cutlets, chops,boiled rabbits, or fowl; by not passing it, it will do forroast mutton and boiled rabbit as onion sauce. 381.--PURÉE OF CAULIFLOWER SAUCE. Boil a cauliflower well in three pints of water, in which you have previously put one ounce of butter,one tablespoonful of salt; when done, chop it up, having prepared andslowly cooked in a stewpan an onion sliced, a little celery, halfa turnip, one ounce of ham, two of butter, a littlebay-leaf, mace, add then the cauliflower, stir round, add atablespoonful of flour, moisten as above for onions, pass, andfinish the same way. It may be made of Jerusalem artichoke orturnip. 382.--BROWN SHARP SAUCE, OR POIVRADE.--(FrenchReceipt.) Put a small bit of butter, a small carrot cut into dice, a fewshalots cut in the same way, some parsley roots, six greenonions, some parsley, a few slices of ham, a clove, alittle thyme, the half of a bay-leaf, a few grains of peppercornand all-spice, with a little mace, in a small stewpan. Let thestewpan be put on a slow fire, till it begins to be of a fine brown all round;then keep stirring with a wooden spoon; pour into the stewpan four spoonfuls ofwhite vinegar and a small bit of sugar. Let this reduce nearly toa glaze; then moisten with some Spanish sauce and a littleconsommé, that you may be enabled to take the fat off from thesauce; season with cayenne and a little salt. Tastewhether it be salt enough, but observe that it should not be too acid;skim off the fat, and strain the sauce through a tammy, and serveup. When this sauce is well made, not too thick, and of good color, itis good with the following entrées:--Cotelettes Maintenon, broiledchicken, broiled pigeon, fried chicken, marinades of allsorts, such as calf's feet, lamb's ears, trotters,calf's head, and generally with every thing requiring tartsauces. You may add to it a little preserved tomatoes, to give a goodcolor and sharp taste. 383.--WHITE CUCUMBER PURÉE. Peel two, or one large one, cut in slices, put in the stewpan with the samevegetables, &c. as for the cauliflower; when tender, add atable-spoonful of flour, four gills of milk or broth,boil, finishing as the cauliflower. 384.--SORREL SAUCE, ORPURÉE. Wash well six handfuls of sorrel, put it nearly dry into amiddle-sized stewpan with a little butter; let it melt, add atable-spoonful of flour, a teaspoonful of salt, half one ofpepper; moisten to a thick purée, with milk, orbroth, or cream; pass it through a sieve, put it back in astewpan, warm again, add two whole eggs, two ounces of butter,and stir well, and serve where directed. 385.--SPINAGE PURÉE. Endive purée is often used in France, and called chicorée.This purée may be made like the cauliflower, or only plainboiled, plainly chopped, put into a pan with two ounces of butter, agill of white sauce, a little grated nutmeg, and a littlesalt, pepper, and sugar. Spice Box. An illustration of a wooden box with a lid inside the lid is vent.  The box has six compartmments. 386.--INDIA-PICKLE SAUCE.Take some gravy, thicken with flour and butter; cut insmall dice some India-pickle, add a little of the vinegar, let itboil up, throw in the dice, and serve hot. This is for salmoncutlets; it is also good for broiledmackerel or for grilled chicken. 387.--SAUCE PIQUANTE. Put into a stewpan the muscles of a knuckle of veal, some slices ofham or bacon, a cupful of gravy, a spoonful or two ofstrong vinegar, a bay-leaf, a clove of garlic, a littlethyme, one clove, and a little salt; skim it, and, when ithas stewed a quarter of an hour, pass it through a sieve: then addsorrel, parsley, and mushrooms, all chopped fine, andwhole capers; heat it again, and serve it in the dish. Or: --Put one or two ounces of butter, withtwo shred onions, a carrot, a parsnip, a littlethyme, laurel, basil, two cloves, two shalots, a cloveof garlic, and some parsley, into a stewpan; turn the whole over thefire till it becomes brown, then shake in some flour, and moisten itwith some broth and a spoonful of vinegar. Let it boil over aslow fire; skim and strain it; then add pepper and salt; andserve with any dish of which you would wish to have the flavor heightened. 388.--À L'ESPAGNOLE--(or Spanish Sauce.) Besides a few slices of ham and veal, put into a stewpan anyremains which you may have of poultry and game, and let them boil forone hour in water more than sufficient to cover them; after which skimoff the fat from the gravy, add fried onions, sweetherbs, a bay-leaf, spice, mace, and mushrooms, withminced carrots, celery, shalots, and a small clove ofgarlic, and leave the whole to stew until quite mashed: it will take fulltwo hours. Then strain it, and if the gravy be not strong enough addsufficient coulis or glaze to make it so. If it wants flavor, add soy, and ifmushrooms have not been one of the ingredients, put in ketchup: if notthick enough a little arrowroot, or common flour, with a piece ofbutter, will have the effect; but if the gravy be truly rich, itwill not require the addition. Such is the foundation of the sauce; but in most cases whitewine is added, for the purpose of stewing game: it is needless tosay that Madeira and sherry are best, but Cape or gingerwine will be found good substitutes. 389.--SAUCE, À LAPROVENÇALE. Put into a casserole two spoonfuls of sweet oil, a shalot, a cloveof garlic, and some mushrooms, all minced, and placed upon the firein any sort of good strong broth, seasoned with pepper andsalt, together with pot-herbs; leave it there for half an hour;then skim it so far as to remove much of the appearance of the oil;strain it, and add some white wine to suit the taste. 390.--SAUCE MAIGRE. Fry a large quantity of onions and put them along with the above intothe casserole, with white wine, until well browned; then strain it; adda table-spoonful of salad-oil with a little flour, and mix itgently, but continually, for a few minutes, until completely mingled. 391.--A L'HOLLANDAISE. For meat, fowl, or fish. Put six spoonfuls ofwater and two of tarragon vinegar, with one ounce ofbutter, into a stewpan; warm and thicken it with the yolks of twoeggs. Make it quite hot, but do not boil it; stir it all the time; squeezein the juice of half a lemon, and strain it through a sieve.Season with salt and cayenne. It should be quite thick. 392.--SPINACH SAUCE. Pick off the stalks of the spinach; wash and drain it; then, withoutwater, stew till it will beat to a mash. Put in a good piece of butter and some milk; simmer,and stir over a slow fire till the sauce be of the consistence of thickmelted butter. Add a little pepper and salt whiledressing. 393.--PURÉE OF CUCUMBERS. Slice thin some middling-sized cucumbers, drain the liquor from them,and put them, with four onions, into a stewpan, with a piece ofbutter; when sufficiently stewed to pulp through a colander, adda large teacupful of cream, a little flour and pepper.Boil twenty minutes and, when going to serve, put in salt. 394.--SAUCE À LA SAINTE MENEHOULD. Put some butter into a stewpan, shake over it a little flour;add a cupful of cream, parsley, young onions, one-half abay-leaf, and a shalot. Put it on the fire, keeping it stirred. Then pass itthrough a sieve: put it on the fire again with some chopped parsley, alittle pepper, and minced mushrooms. Serve it over boiledfowls. 395.--LA MAGNONNAISE. Perhaps the most esteemed mode of making sauce for any sort ofcold meats or fish is that known in France by this title. Put into a round-bottomed basin the yolk of an egg and a pinch ofsalt; stir in very quickly, drop by drop, two table-spoonfuls ofsweet oil, working the spoon very rapidly round, to work in theoil; when it is thick add a few drops of tarragon vinegar, thenmore oil, until there is sufficient sauce; thin it with a littlemore vinegar. It should be quite thick, and rather acid. 396.--CARACHI. Take one head of garlic and cut each clove into two pieces;two teaspoonfuls of cayenne pepper, three tablespoonfuls of soy, threeof mushroom ketchup, three of walnut pickle, six anchoviesdissolved, two or three spoonfuls of mangoe or India pickle liquor, anda pint of the best vinegar, with sufficient cochineal to color. Both the above are thus sauces maigres, but when not intended for fast-days,may be much improved by being made into a purée with an admixture of meltedcalf's-foot jelly. 397.--SAUCE ROYALE Is made by cutting a slice of white bread, and stewing it in whitebroth until it is quite thick; then take it off the fire; pound in a mortarthe yolks of two hard-boiled eggs, and half a dozen almonds reduced to paste, with the breast of a cold roast fowl;mix this with the eggs and bread, and pound them all togetherwith a little pepper and salt; add a sufficient quantity ofcream to make it of a proper consistence, and simmer the whole over thefire, stirring it all the time without letting it boil. 398.--SAUCEÀ LA REINE Is nearly the same. Bruise the breast of a chicken to a paste,and moisten it with a consommé of veal or fowl broth; letit stew gently over a slow fire, and then pass it through the tamis and mixwith it some béchamel sauce. Then have ready the yolks of twoeggs beaten up with a large spoonful of thick cream, and stir themixture into the sauce a minute or two before serving it up. Both the above are served at the most fashionable tables, and may be usedwith turkey-poults and guinea-birds. 399.--THE ORIGINAL OUDESAUCE Is made with two ounces of butter put into a stewpan; when melted addsix onions shred; as soon as they begin totake color, put in one and a half dozen of chilis chopped fine; stir itwell together for four minutes, then put in a small quantity of dried saltfish, not exceeding two square inches, chopped very fine; keep stirring,and, as the butter dries, add a large cupful of the pulp of freshtomatoes, a teaspoonful of salt, the juice of a lemon, anda little water; mix the whole very well together, and let it be of theconsistence of a paste, though not too dry. It is eaten with coldmeat, but will not keep. 400.--CHETNEY AND QUIHI SAUCE. Take eight ounces of sharp apples pared and cored, eight ounces oftomatoes, eight ounces of salt, eight ounces of brownsugar, eight ounces of raisins, four ounces of red chilis,four ounces of ginger powdered, two ounces of garlic, and twoounces of shalots. Pound all these ingredients separately in a mortar, usingcayenne pepper if chilis are not to be had. Mix the wholetogether, and add three quarts of vinegar and one quart oflemon-juice. Place the jar containing this composition on a stove, orby the side of a fire in a heat not less than one hundred and thirty degreesFahrenheit, and stir it twice a-day for a month; then strain, but do notsqueeze it dry. Bottle the liquor, which is an excellent sauce for anykind of fish or meat, hot or cold. A teaspoonful will impart afine flavor to any ragoût, or be sufficient for a pint of broth.The residue, which is the chetney, should be put into pots or jars. It may alsobe used in sauces and gravies, or eaten like mustard with coldmeat, or spread upon grills, being an excellent ingredient for devils, wetor dry. 401.--VEAL GRAVY, OR BLOND OF VEAL. (Ude.) Put a few slices of Westmoreland ham (the lean only) into a prettythick stewpan and lay over them some fleshy pieces of veal. Therump may be used. Pour into the stewpan a sufficient quantity ofstock-broth to cover about half the thickness of the meat. Let itsweat on a stove over a brisk fire. Watch the stewpan and the contents for fearof burning. When the broth is reduced, thrust a knife into themeat, that all the gravy may run out; then stew the glaze moregently. When the whole is absolutely glazed, of a good color, let it stew tillbrown, but take care it does not burn, to prevent which, put it on red-hotashes. Keep stirring the stewpan over the fire, that the glaze may beall of the same color, and turn the meat upside down, that it may notstick. When the glaze is of a dark-red color, moisten with some hotbroth, and let the glaze detach before the stewpan is put on the fire,for it might still burn. Season with mushrooms and a bunch ofparsley and green onions. When the gravy has boiled fortwo hours, it will be done. Take off the fat, and strain it through asilken sieve. 402.--THE CULLIS--(a Brown Jelly.) Make the cullis in the same manner as veal gravy, with slices ofham and slices of veal, &c. When the glaze is of a nicecolor, moisten it, and let it stew entirely. Season it with a bunch ofparsley and green onions, mushrooms, &c. Then mix somebrown thickening with the veal gravy, but do not make it too thick, asthe fat could not be got out of the sauce; and a saucewith fat has neither a pleasing appearance nor a good flavor. Let itboil for an hour on the corner of the stove; skim off the fat, andstrain it through a tammy, &c. 403.--SAUCE TOURNÉE. * Take some white thickening, dilute it *Sauce tournée is the sauce that the modern cooks callvelouté; but velouté, properly so called, will be foundhereafter. with some consommé orbroth of fowl; neither too thin nor too thick. A sauce when toothick will never admit of the fat being removed. Let it boil on thecorner of the stove. Throw in a few mushrooms, with a bunch ofparsley and green onions. Skim it well, and when there is nogrease left, strain it through a tammy, to use when wanted. 404.--SAUCE À L'ALLEMANDE.--(German Sauce.) This is the same as the last sauce, with the addition of athickening * of eggs well seasoned. This sauce is always used forthe following sauces or ragouts, viz., blanquettes, or white fricassees,of all descriptions, of veal, of fowl, of game, or palates, ragout,loin of veal, with béchamel, &c., &c. 405.--THEVELOUTÉ. Take about the same quantity of stock-broth, and saucetournée, and boil them down over a large fire. When this sauce isvery thick, have some thick cream boiling and reduced, which pour intothe sauce, and give it a couple of boilings; season with a littlesalt, and strain through a tammy. If the ham should be toosalt, put in a little sugar. Observe, that this sauce isnot to be so thick as the béchamel. 406.--VELOUTÉ, ORBÉCHAMEL, A NEW METHOD. (Ude.) Put into a stewpan a knuckle of veal, some slices of ham, fouror five pounds of beef, the legs and loin of a fowl; allthe trimmings of meat or game that you have, and moisten withboiled water sufficient to cover half the meat; make it sweatgently on a slow fire, till the meat is done through; this you mayascertain by thrusting your knife into it; if no *This thickening is what is called in French, liaison; the yolks oftwo or four eggs. blood follows, it is time to moisten withboiling water sufficient to cover all the meat. Then season witha bundle of parsley and green onions, a clove, half abay-leaf, thyme, a little salt, and trimmings ofmushrooms. When the sauce has boiled long enough to let theknuckle be well done, skim off all the fat, strain it through a silkensieve, and boil down this consommé till it is nearly a glaze; next takefour spoonfuls of very fine flour, dilute it with three pints of verygood cream, in a stewpan big enough to contain the cream,consommé, flour, &c.; boil the flour and creamon a slow fire. When it boils, pour in the consommé, and continue toboil it on a slow fire if the sauce be thick, but on the contrary, ifthe sauce be thin, on a quick fire, in order to thicken it. Season withsalt, but put no pepper. No white sauce admitspepper, except when you introduce into it something chopped fine.Pepper appears like dust, and should therefore be avoided. Thissauce should be very thick. Put it into a white basin through atammy, and keep it in the larder out of the dust. This sauce is the foundation, if I may so speak, of all sorts oflittle sauces, where white sauces are preferred. It should always bekept very thick, as you can thin it whenever you please, either withstock-broth or with cream. If too thin, it could not be used forso many purposes. 407.--CAPER SAUCE À LA FRANCAISE. Take some capers, cut them small, put some essence of ham intoa small saucepan with some pepper; let it boil; then put in thecapers; let them boil two or three times, and they are ready toserve. 408.--CAPER SAUCE, TO IMITATE. Boil some parsley very slowly to let it become of a bad color; thencut it up, but do not chop it fine; put it intomelted butter, with a teaspoonful of salt, and a dessert-spoonfulof vinegar; boil up, and then serve. 409.--CAPER SAUCE FORMEAT. Take some capers, chop half of them very fine, and put the rest inwhole; then chop some parsley with a little grated bread, and putto it some salt; put them into butter melted very smooth, letthem boil up, and then pour them into a sauce-boat. 410.--TOMATOSAUCE FRANÇAISE. Cut ten tomatoes into quarters and put them into a saucepan with fouronions sliced, a little parsley, thyme, one clove,and a quarter of a pound of butter; set the saucepan on the fire,stirring occasionally, for three-quarters of an hour; strain the saucethrough a horse-hair sieve, and serve with the directed articles. 411.--TOMATOES, GARNITURE OF. Take thirty tomatoes, all as near of a size as possible, and of agood form, cut them in halves, press out the juice, seeds, andpieces by the side of the stalk, but do it with great care, lest theskins should be injured; make a farce as follows:--take a littleham, garlic, parsley, shalots, champignons shred, theyolks of two hard boiled eggs, crumb of bread, ananchovy, butter, salt, nutmeg, and allspice;give all these a boil, then pound them well, adding at times a littleoil, strain it through a quenelle sieve; fill the tomatoes with thisfarce, place them on a baking tin, cover them with grated bread crumbsand Parmesan cheese, moisten them with a little oil, and bakethem in a hot oven; serve the tomatoes as a garnish to a rump ofbeef, or any other joint you may think proper. 412.--TOMATOSAUCE À L'ITALIENNE. Take five or six onions, slice, and put them into a saucepan with alittle thyme, bay-leaf, twelve tomatoes, a bit of butter,salt, half a dozen allspice, a little Indian saffron, anda glass of stock; set them on the fire, taking care to stir itfrequently, as it is apt to stick; when you perceive the sauce is thickstrain it like a purée. KETCHUPS. 413.--MUSHROOM KETCHUP. Take the full grown flaps of mushrooms, wipe them clean, crush themwith the hands, throw in a handful of salt with every peck ofmushrooms, and let them stand all night; then put them into stewpans,and set them in a quick oven for twelve hours; strain them through a hair sieveand press out all the juice. To every gallon of liquor put ofcloves, Jamaica and black pepper, and of ginger,one ounce each, and half a pound of common salt. Set it on a slow fireand let it boil until half the liquor is wasted, then put it into a clean chinavessel, and when cold bottle it. Another mode of making mushroom ketchup, is to take a stewpan full ofthe large flap mushrooms that are not worm eaten, and the skinsand fringe of those you have pickled; throw a handful of salt amongthem, and set them by a slow fire. They will produce a great deal of liquor,which you must strain, and put to it four ounces of shalots, two cloves ofgarlic, an ounce of pepper, a table-spoonful of ginger,mace, and cloves; boil the liquor slowly and skim it well. Whencold, bottle and cork it close. In two months boil it again with a littleadditional spice, and a stick of horseradish,--it will then keepa year; which mushroom ketchup rarely does, if not boiled a secondtime. 414.--WALNUT KETCHUP. Take six half-sieves of green walnut-shells, put them into a tub, mixthem up well with common salt, (from two to three pounds,) let themstand for six days, frequently beating and mashing them; by this time theshells become soft and pulpy. Then by banking it up on one side of the tub, andat the same time by raising the tub on that side, the liquor will drain clearoff to the other; then take that liquor out; the mashing and banking up may berepeated as often as liquor is found. The quantity will be about six quarts.When done let it be simmered in an iron boiler as long as any scum arises; thenbruise a quarter of a pound of ginger, a quarter of a pound ofallspice, two ounces of long pepper, two ounces of cloves,with the above ingredients; let it slowly boil for half an hour. When boiled,let an equal quantity of the spice go into each bottle; when corked, letthe bottle be filled quite up; cork them tight, seal them over, and put theminto a cool and dry place for one year before they are used. 415.--TOMATO KETCHUP. Take six pounds of tomatoes, sprinkle them with salt and letthem remain for a day or two, then boil them until the skins willseparate easily; pour them into a colander or coarse sieve, and press themthrough, leaving the skins behind; put into the liquor a pint ofChili vinegar, half a pint of wine, pepper, cloves,ginger and allspice; boil them together until a third part haswasted--bottle them tight. The ketchup must be shaken before it is used.If it is boiled down to one-third, and the corks sealed, it will be muchricher, and keep for years. 416.--SAUCE FOR CHOPS AND STEAKS. Pound together in a mortar one ounce of black pepper, half an ounceof allspice, one ounce of salt, half an ounce ofhorseradish scraped, half an ounce of eschalots. Pour on thishalf a pint of mushroom ketchup, and half a pint of walnutpickle. Infuse for a fortnight, and strain for use. 417.--NASTURTIANSAUCE Is eaten with boiled mutton. It is made with the green seeds ofnasturtians, pickled simply in cold vinegar. Cut about six ounces ofbutter into small bits, and put them into a small saucepan. Mix with awine-glass of water sufficient flour to make a thickbatter, pour it on the butter, and hold the saucepan over hotcoals, shaking it quickly round, till the butter is melted. Letit just boil up, and then take it from the fire. Thicken it with the picklednasturtians, and send it to table in a boat. 418.--CRANBERRYSAUCE. This sauce is very simply made. A quart of cranberries iswashed and stewed with sufficient water to cover them; when they burstmix with them a pound of brown sugar, and stir them well. Before youremove them from the fire, all the berries should have burst. When coldthey will be jellied, and if thrown into a form while warm, will turn outwhole. 419.--CELERY SAUCE. Wash and pare a bunch of celery, cut it into pieces, and boil itgently until it is tender; add half a pint of cream, and a small pieceof butter rolled in flour; now boil it gently. This is a goodsauce for fowls of all kinds, either roasted or boiled. FARCES AND STUFFINGS. 420.--PANADA. Put into a small stewpan one ounce of fresh butter, a table-spoonfulof chopped mushrooms, a little chopped thyme and parsley, half a blade of mace, pepperand salt; stew the whole over the fire for a few minutes, then add to ita spoonful of white broth, the crumb of two French rollspreviously soaked in milk and squeezed thoroughly dry; stir over thefire until it no longer adheres to the stewpan; take it off, add the yolksof two eggs, turn it out and leave it to cool; it is then ready foruse. 421.--UDDER. Boil a calf's udder in broth or water; when coldtrim off the outside: pound and rub through a sieve. 422.--QUENELLE. This is one of the most delicate preparations of forcemeat that wehave, and requires practice, care and attention to make it in perfection. It iscalled according to the meat of which it is composed; quenelles ofrabbit, chicken, fish, or game. Take the meat of two rabbits, pound it and rub it through asieve; take the same quantity of panada, and also of udder or very sweetfresh butter, pound these ingredients for a quarter of an hour, add atable-spoonful of white sauce, two eggs, and two yolks;take a small piece, roll it in a ball, and throw it in boiling water;when done it should cut firm and consistent, yet light and delicate; if moreseasoning is required it should be added before it is taken out of themortar. To mould them: have two table-spoons, fill one with the farce, shape with aknife, dipping it in boiling water to make it perfectly smooth; dip theother spoon in hot water, with which take out the quenelle and lay it ina buttered stewpan; they should be egg-shaped, and perfectly smooth, andboiled for a quarter of an hour. 423.--PANADA FOR FISH QUENELLE, ORFORCEMEAT. Put two-thirds of half a pint of water into a stewpan holding aquart, with nearly one ounce of butter; when boiling, stir in a quarterof a pound of flour; keep it moving over the fire until it forms asmooth and tough paste. Take it off the fire, add the yolks of threeeggs. When cold, use it where directed. 424.--FORCEMEAT. Take equal quantities of cold chicken, veal, and beef,shred very small, and mixed together; season, at the same time, with a moderatequantity of pepper, salt, sweet herbs, and gratednutmeg--that is to say, if intended for white meat, or for anything delicately flavored; but if meant for a savory dish, add a littleminced ham, and an atom of garlic or a shalot. Put the whole in astone mortar, and pound it until quite fine, then make it into a pastewith a raw egg, some butter, marrow, or fat of somekind. When used, it may either be rolled into round balls and fried for anymade dish, or put into any joint of meat or poultry as stuffing;and if kept in a cool place, and well seasoned, it will keep good for severaldays. Indeed, by mixing with any potted meat or game an equal proportion of panada, which will always be lighter thanbread-crumbs, the cook will have at once a very fine species of farce,to be employed in stuffing olives, fillets of fowl, &c. The "farce" is sometimes a delicious preparation of sausage-meat, andis served up alone; but it enters into the composition of numerous otherdishes. 425.--ANOTHER FORCEMEAT. Take a pound and a half of lean veal, pound it, and pass it through asieve; one pound of chopped beef suet, and six ounces of panada, poundedwell together; add the veal, season with pepper, salt, anda little nutmeg; mix well; then add the yolks of six eggs and thewhites of three; when these are thoroughlymixed, whisk the other three whites of eggs to a very stiff froth, andadd it to the forcemeat; when all is well mixed together, it is fit foruse. 426.--FARCE CUITE. Cut in small pieces some undressed fowl; put them into a stewpan witha piece of butter, a little salt, pepper, and a littlenutmeg; shake them over the fire for ten minutes, drain, and let themcool. Put an equal portion of crumbs of bread in the same stewpan withsome broth, and a little parsley chopped fine; stir it with awooden spoon till it becomes quite soft. Let it get cold then pound thefowl until it will pass through a tamis; pound the bread also,and put it through the sieve; then put equal parts of the meat,butter, and bread together, and pound them with yolks ofeggs sufficient to make it into a proper consistence, and keep it in a jarfor use. 427.--FARCE OF HAM AND VEAL. Mince equal quantities of ham and veal, a bunch ofparsley, and some pepper; put it on the fire with a littlebroth; let it stew very gently, then pound it in a mortar; add to it anequal portion of bread soaked in milk and pounded; pound thewhole together with some butter, and mix it with the yolks ofeggs. Bacon and veal which have been used in braising, or any thinghighly impregnated with the flavor of herbs and onions, and veryrich, may be employed afterwards as a farce, pounded and mixed withpanada. * 428.--STUFFING. Take equal quantities of beef suet and crumbs of bread; chopthe suet very finely; chop together marjoram, thyme, andparsley, having as much parsley as *Farce for pies. there is thyme and marjoram together; addto them a salt-spoonful of grated lemon peel, pepper,salt, and a little grated nutmeg; add eggs sufficient tobind it together. 429.--SEASONING FOR STUFFING. One pound of salt dried and sifted, half an ounce of ground whitepepper, two ounces of dried thyme, one ounce of driedmarjoram, and one ounce of nutmeg. When this seasoning isused, parsley only is required to be chopped in sufficient quantity tomake the stuffing green. The proportions are--half a pound ofbread-crumbs, three eggs, a quarter of a pound of suet,half an ounce of seasoning, and peel of half a lemon grated. 430.--FORCEMEAT. Shred a little ham or gammon, some cold veal or fowl,some beef suet, a small quantity of onion, some parsley,very little lemon-peel, salt, nutmeg, or poundedmace, and either white pepper or cayenne, and breadcrumbs. Pound it in a mortar, and bind it with one or two eggs,beaten or strained. For forcemeat patties, the mixture as above. 431.--FOR HARE, OR ANY THING IN IMITATION OF IT. The scalded liver, an anchovy, some fat bacon, a littlesuet, some parsley, thyme, knotted marjoram, alittle shalot, and either onion or chives, all chopped fine;crumbs of bread, pepper, and nutmeg, beat in a mortar withan egg. 432.--FISH FORCEMEAT. Chop, and afterwards pound in a mortar, any kind of fish, adding ananchovy or two, or a tea-spoonful of the essence of anchovies,but do not allow the taste to prevail, and the yolk of a hard-boiledegg. If for maigre, pound butter with it; butotherwise, the fat of bacon pounded separately, and then mixed. Add a third portion of bread, prepared by soakingand pounding previously, and mix the whole up with raw eggs. Formackerel, pike, haddock, and soles, take the vealforcemeat, add a little anchovy essence, and use rather lessherbs. 433.--OYSTER FORCEMEAT. Take a dozen oysters, strain them from the liquor, mince them, andadd a quarter of a pound of finely grated bread-crumbs, one ounce and ahalf of butter broken very small, a dessert-spoonful of parsley,the grated rind of half a lemon; season with a littlemace, cayenne, and salt; mix well; then bind together withthe yolk of an egg unbeaten, and a little of the oyster liquor.Care must be taken that the oyster flavor predominates. 434.--FORCEMEAT BALLS FOR SOUP MAIGRE. Forcemeat balls for maigre soups of any description should be alwaysused to compensate for the savor of which they are deprived by the want ofmeat-broth; and may be made of fish and sweet herbs, oronly of herbs and crumbs of bread, in the following manner:-- Pound in a mortar the soft parts of a crawfish, or a few shrimps,with an anchovy, and the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, beaten upwith crumbs of stale bread, pounded mace, cayenne pepper,salt, and a very little finely minced garlic. Then work it upinto a paste with a raw egg to bind it into dough; roll it out,cut it into small balls of the size of marbles, and fry them of a finebrown. Or: --Leave out the fish, and make thementirely of bread and savory choppedherbs--chervil, tarragon, marjoram, andthyme, with a little garlic and a shalot--and bind them up asabove, with egg, butter, and crumbs of bread. Or: --Chop, and afterwards pound in a mortar, anykind of fish, adding an anchovy or two, or a tea-spoonful of theessence of anchovies, but do not allow the taste to prevail, and theyolk of a hard-boiled egg: pound butter with it; add a thirdportion of bread, prepared by soaking and pounding previously, and mixthe whole up with raw eggs. Or: --Beat the flesh and soft parts of amiddling-sized lobster, half an anchovy, a large piece of boiledcelery, the yolk of a hard egg, a little cayenne,mace, salt, and white pepper, with two table-spoonfuls ofbread-crumbs one ditto of oyster liquor, two ounces ofbutter warmed, and two eggs long beaten: make into balls, and fryof a fine brown in butter. Or: --Take a few shrimps, stripped of their shells,an anchovy, and the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, withbread-crumbs and seasoning as above, but adding some finelyminced sweet herbs, and omitting the oyster liquor: make all thisinto a paste with a little butter and a raw egg, made upin balls and fried as before. Or: --Instead of making the balls of fish andfrying them, it is a more simple way to make them merely ofbread-crumbs, hard-boiled egg, and sweet herbs seasonedwith raw egg: drop the balls, one by one, into the boiling soup a fewminutes before serving. Two eggs and a quarter of a pound ofbread should make twelve or fifteen balls. Or: --Pound in a mortar, into a smooth substance, ananchovy, the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, a head of boiledcelery, and some sweet herbs, with a couple of table-spoonfuls ofbread-crumbs, seasoned with mace, a grating of nutmeg,cayenne, and salt; then add two ounces of butter meltedand work it into a paste with a little flour and the yolk of araw egg; make it into balls the size of marbles, and fry them quitebrown. 435.--FORCEMEAT FOR TURTLE.--(As at the Bush,Bristol.) One pound of fine fresh suet, one pound of ready-dressed veal or chicken chopped fine, crumbs ofbread, a little shalot or onion, salt, whitepepper, nutmeg, mace, pennyroyal, parsley, andlemon-thyme finely shred; beat as many fresh eggs, yolks andwhites separately, as will make the above ingredients into a moistpaste; roll into small balls, and boil them in fresh lard,putting them in just as it boils up. When of a light brown, take them out, anddrain them before the fire. If the suet be moist or stale, a great manymore eggs will be necessary. Balls made this way are remarkably light; but beinggreasy, some people prefer them with less suet and eggs. They maytherefore be made thus:--Chop up the materials with a little whitepepper and salt, a sage leaf or two scalded and finelychopped, and the yolk of an egg; make them into small cakes or fritters,and fry them. 436.--RISSOLES OF ALL KINDS. Chop some dressed chicken or veal very fine, fry a littlechopped parsley, shalot, and mushrooms, very fine, and a littleslice of tongue or ham or not, fry them in one ounce ofbutter a few minutes, stirring it with a wooden spoon all the time; drythe butter up with flour, then add a few small spoonfuls of goodveal stock, a gill of cream, three spoonfuls of béchamelsauce; now put in all your chopped meat, add a littlesugar, a few drops of lemon juice, cayenne pepper andsalt, and the yolks of three eggs, boil all well until quitestiff, take it out of your stewpan on to a dish to get cold; when cold formthem into a shape, either as pears or long balls, usingbread-crumbs to form them; put them to get cold; in the mean time breaktwo eggs in a basin, and then egg the forms once or twice, andbread-crumb them; have your fat quite hot to fry them, dish themon a napkin with fried parsley. 437.--EGGS FOR TURTLE. Beat three hard yolks of eggs in a mortar, and make into apaste with the yolk of a raw one; roll it into small balls, andthrow them into boiling water for two minutes to harden. Though formerlymuch used, they have latterly gone out of fashion. 438.--PASSOVER BALLS FORSOUP. Chop an onion and half a pound of suet very finely; stew themtogether until the suet is melted, then pour it hot upon eight spoonfulsof biscuit-flour; mix it well together; add a little salt, alittle grated nutmeg, lemon-peel, and ginger, and sixeggs. Put the balls into the soup when it boils, and boil them for aquarter of an hour. The quantity of eggs and flour may appeardisproportioned, but the flour employed is of a peculiar kind, used forthe purpose in Jewish families. Nothing can exceed the excellence of the ballsmade after this receipt: they are applicable to any kind of soups. 439.--FARCE OF VEAL OR FOWL. Cut up a fowl, or some veal, form the fillet into small dice,cut in the same quantity of good fat ham cut small, and a fewtruffles, a little parsley, shalots, and a little of all kinds offine sweet herbs, and a few chopped mushrooms, and one blade ofmace, three cloves, put it all in a stewpan to draw down, withhalf a pound of butter for one hour; season it, add bread-crumbsto dry up the fat, then put it into your mortar and pound it very fine,then rub it through a wire sieve, return it back into the mortar, and work inthree or four eggs, leaving out one or two whites; mix it well uptogether, and put it into the larder until required. If you want any green,color some with prepared spinach juice; this will do for all cold pies, or game, or filling turkeys, orboned fowls, or galantine. You may make this farce with dressed meat, then you must not place itto draw down on the fire; all the rest the same, only truffles, andmushrooms as well as the rest must be first dressed. 440.--SEASONING FOR ROAST PORK, DUCKS, OR GEESE. Two-thirds onion, one-third green sage, chopped fine, breadcrumbs equal to weight of both; season with pepper and salt,and mix with a bit of butter and the yolk of an egg. 441.--FOR A SUCKING PIG. A teacupful of grated bread, two ounces of butter seasonedwith salt, pepper and nutmeg; scald and chop fine twosmall onions and thirty leaves of young sage; mix with a beatenegg, and sew it in the pig. 442.--FOR A GOOSE. Scald and chop fine the liver, crumb twice its weight inbread, chop fine four small onions, half their weight of greensage, with half an ounce of butter, the yolk of an egg, and atable-spoonful of potato starch; season highly with salt andpepper. 443.--GARNISHES. Parsley is the most universal garnish to all kinds of coldmeat, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, etc.Horseradish is the garnish for roast beef, and fish ingeneral; sometimes, for the latter, it is alternated with slices oflemon. Slices of lemon garnish boiled fowl, turkey,fish, roast veal, and calf's head. 444.--FARCESAND STUFFINGS. A veal stuffing. Chop some suet fine, a little parsley,a small piece of shalot, rub through a dry sieve a small quantity ofbasil, knotted marjoram, thyme, add these to yoursuet, a grating of half a lemon, a few grains of nutmeg, afew bread-crumbs, and one or two eggs, mix all well up together,season with pepper and salt. If for game, scrape the raw livers into the stuffing,prepared as above, only in addition pound it all fine. 445.--FORCEMEAT INGREDIENTS. Forcemeat should be made to cut with a knife, but not dry or heavy,no one flavor should predominate; according to what it is wanted for, a choicemay be made from the following list; be careful to use the least of thosearticles that are most pungent; cold fowl, or veal, orham, scraped fat bacon, beef suet, crumbs of bread,parsley, white pepper, salt, nutmeg, yolksand whites of eggs beaten to bind the mixture. Any of the followingarticles may be used to alter the taste; oysters, anchovies,tarragon, savory, pennyroyal, marjoram, thyme,basil, yolks of hard eggs, cayenne, garlic,shalots, endives, Jamaica pepper in powder, or two or threecloves. 446.--FORCEMEATS, ETC. Cold fowl, veal, ormutton. Scraped ham, or gammon. Fat bacon, or fatham. Beef suet. Veal suet. Butter. Marrow.Soaked bread, and crumbs of bread. Parsley and whitepepper. Salt and nutmeg. Cold soles. Oysters.Anchovies. Lobster, tarragon. Savoy, pennyroyal. Knottedmarjoram. Thyme and lemon thyme. Basil andsage. Lemon peel. Yolks ofhard eggs. Whites and yolks of eggs. Mace andcloves. Cayenne and garlic. Shalot and onion.Chives and chervil. Ground pepper and two or threecloves. 447.--BROWN COLORING FOR MADE DISHES. Take four ounces of sugar, beat it fine, put it into an ironfryingpan or earthen pipkin, set it over a clear fire, and when thesugar is melted it will be frothy; put it higher from the fire until itis a fine brown, keep it stirring all the time; fill the pan up with redwine, take care that it does not boil over, add a little salt andlemon, put a little cloves and mace, a shalot or two, boilit gently for ten minutes, pour it in a basin till it is cold, then bottle itfor use. BEEF. BEEF is dressed in various ways all the year round; but, for roasting, the best season is from November to theend of March. For joints, the only really good roasting pieces are--the sirloin and the long ribs; the short ribs, which arecut near the neck, never roast well, and should not be used for thispurpose; the middle ribs are the best. The under part, or fillet, of the sirloin, if cut out, may bemade into a delicious stew; or, if cut crosswise into steaks, they willbe found more tender than those of the rump. Beef requires to be hung a long time, in order to insure its beingtender. When however the weather is not favorable for keeping, it will be muchimproved by being laid for a few hours, previous to roasting, in a marinade ofthis kind--three parts water to one of vinegar, some salt,with a few peppercorns. Each joint must be carefully examined before itis spitted, and any portions that may have been injured cut away. The round is, in large families, one of the most profitable parts: it isusually boiled, and, like most of the boiling parts of beef, isgenerally sold at less than the roasting joints. The brisket is also less in price than the roasting parts; it is not soeconomical a part as the round, having more bone to be weighed with it,and more fat. Where there are children, very fat joints are notdesirable, being often disagreeable to them, and sometimes prejudicial,especially if they have a dislike to it. This joint also requires more cookingthan many others; that is to say, it requires a double allowance of time to begiven for boiling it: it will, when served, be hard and scarcelydigestible if no more time be allowed to boil it than that which is sufficientfor other joints and meats. When stewed it is excellent; and when cookedfresh, (i.e. unsalted,) an excellent stock for soupmay be extracted from it, and yet the meat will serve as well fordinner. The edgebone, or aitchbone, is not considered to be a very economical joint,the bone being large in proportion to the meat; but the greaterpart of it, at least, is as good as that of any prime part. The rump is the part of which the butcher makes profit, by selling itin the form of steaks. In the country, as there is not an equal demandfor steaks, the whole of it may be purchased as a joint, and at theprice of other prime parts. It may be turned to good account in producing manyexcellent dishes. If salted, it is simply boiled; if used unsalted, it isusually stewed. The veiny piece is sold at a low price per pound; but if hung for a day ortwo, it is very good and very profitable. Wherethere are a number of servants and children to have an early dinner, this partof beef will be found desirable. From the leg and shin excellent stock for soup may be drawn;and if not reduced too much, the meat taken from the bones may beserved as a stew with vegetables; or it may be seasoned, pounded withbutter, and potted; or chopped very fine, and seasoned withherbs, and bound together by egg and bread-crumbs; it maybe fried in balls, or in the form of large eggs, and served with agravy made with a few spoonfuls of the soup. Of half an ox-cheek excellent soup may be made: the meat, whentaken from the bones, may be served as a stew. When one or two ribs are purchased by a small family, it is a goodplan to have the bones taken out, and the meat rolled round inthe shape of a fillet; a considerable saving is effected by this plan, as, whennot so prepared, the thin part of the extremity of the bone isfrequently wasted. The bone cut out when the meat is raw willassist in making soap, and is much preferable to a coldbeef-bone. They are sometimes cut off short, and salted or stewed, butrolled is the better plan; and in this manner a single rib can beskewered into a handsome fillet; the fat and lean being marbled, and theappearance of the whole improved. 448.--TO COLLAR RIBS of BEEF. Take two or three ribs of beef; cut it from the bones; rub itwell with salt, brown sugar, and saltpetre; let it remaina fortnight, turning it every day; then season it with pepper,mace, cloves, allspice, and a clove of garlicchopped very fine; cover it well with parsley, thyme, andsweet marjoram; roll it up very tight, and bind it round with tape; putit into a pot with some water, cover it close up, and send it to theoven to be baked very slowly three or four hours; then take it out, and pressit between two boards with weights. This is an excellent dish for luncheon orbreakfast. 449.--A MARINADE TO BASTE ROAST MEATS. Chop up some fat bacon with a clove of garlic and a sprig ofparsley; add salt, pepper, a spoonful of vinegar,and four spoonfuls of oil; beat it up well, and baste the meatwith it. 450.--SIRLOIN of BEEF ROASTED. Break the upper part of the chine bones, cut them out, and cutthrough the strong gristle on the top about an inch apart, and skewer it in itsplace, which will prevent its drawing up or looking unsightly. Run the spitjust under the bark at the thin end, and bring it out between the joints. Byspitting it thus you avoid showing where the spit has gone through. Cover thefat with a sheet of buttered paper, and roast gently for three orfour hours, according to the size of the joint. The under part is sometimesstuffed with forcemeat, in the following manner:-- Carefully lift up the fat from the inside of the sirloin witha sharp knife; take out all the meat close to the bone, and minceit small; take one-half pound of suet, and chop it fine; mix with itsome grated bread-crumbs, a little lemon-peel, thyme,eschalot minced very fine; mix all together with a glass of portwine; put it back again into the same place, and cover it with theskin and fat; skewer it down neatly with small wooden skewers,and cover it with paper. The meat should be spitted before youtake out the inside; and when done do not take off the paper until thejoint is put into the dish: then serve it up garnished with scrapedhorseradish. The method of taking the meat from the bone, and rolling it soas to have the forcemeat in the middle, is easier, but adds its flavorto the whole joint; while this way keeps the upper and the under partseparate. 451.--TO DRESS THE INSIDE OF A SIRLOIN. Cut it out in one piece, if not used at table; stew it with goodbroth or gravy, a little spice, and a tablespoonful ofwalnut ketchup. Serve with chopped pickles. 452.--TO DRESSTHE INSIDE OF A COLD SIRLOIN. Out out all the meat, and a little fat, into pieces as thickas your finger, and four inches long; dredge them with flour, and fry inbutter of a nice brown: drain the butter from the meat,and toss it up in a rich gravy, seasoned with pepper,salt, anchovy, and shalot. Do not let it boil on any account.Before you serve, add two spoonfuls of vinegar and a glass of portwine. Garnish with crimped parsley. Or: --Cut the meat in slices about four incheslong, and one-half an inch thick, the fat with the lean; season themwith pepper and salt, and fry them in good fresh butter;have ready some good brown gravy, and stew them gently for half an hour;add a little mushroom ketchup, and a tablespoonful of eschalotvinegar, with a wine glass of port, and just before serving put in asmall piece of butter rolled in flour. Serve hot in a covereddish. This part is called the "fillet," and, when raw, may be either stewedwhole or in the above manner. 458.--ANOTHER WAY. Cut the inside of the sirloin into pieces, dredge it withflour, put it into a frying-pan in which some butter is boiling;when it is browned, put it into a stew-pan with some brown gravy, highlyseasoned, squeeze in half a lemon, and serve. 454.--ANOTHER WAY. Cut it in strips, as for collops, flatten it, flour, and fry inbutter; lay in the centre of a hot dish a mound of spinach, withpoached eggs on the top: lay the beef round thespinach. 455.--FILLET OF BEEF, ROASTED. If unaccustomed to the use of the knife, the butcher's aid may be obtainedto cut the fillet, which comes from the inside of the sirloin; it may belarded or roasted plain; for high dinners it is larded; baste with freshbutter. It must be a large fillet which takes longer than an hour andtwenty minutes; serve with tomato sauce, garnish withhorseradish, unless served with currant jelly, then serve as withvenison or hare, on warmed dishes and plates. 456.--FILLETOF BEEF. To dress the inside of a Sirloin of Beef to tastelike Hare. Take the inside of a large sirloin that hashung until tender; soak it twenty-four hours in a few glasses of portwine and vinegar. Have ready a good stuffing as furhare; do not spread, but put it into the middle of the beef, androll it up tight. Roast it on a hanging spit, and baste it with a glass of thewine and vinegar, mixed with a teaspoonful of Jamaicapepper, and a clove or two, in the finest powder, until it is alldried up; then baste with butter. Serve with a rich gravy in thedish, and currant-jelly sauce in a tureen. 457.--RUMP ofBEEF. If of a well-fed ox, and hung till tender, this is one of themost juicy and best flavored of all the joints of beef, but is more frequently stewed than roasted. It is generallysold in the country undivided from the aitch-bone; or cut across, andnot lengthwise, which makes it too large for one dressing, and neighter fit forboiling nor roasting. At family dinners, a Yorkshire pudding is a usual accompaniment, but nowseldom served at genteel tables. 458.--TO STEW BEEF. It should be put down in a pot with just sufficient cold water tocover the meat, and closely covered. After boiling three or four hours,according to the size of the piece, cut in small pieces, not larger than dice,two or three carrots and heads of celery, with a little sweetherbs, and put them into the pot along with peppercorns, maceand a couple of large onions stuck full of cloves, and let itthen simmer by the side of the fire for two or three hours, taking care to skimoff any grease that may appear on the top. By this time the meat will probably be tender enough; when take outthe whole onions, mince them, and fry them in bitter, to be mixed in thegravy made by the meat, which season with salt andcayenne, or Chili-vinegar, to which add some mushroom orwalnut ketchup. Thicken the gravy with a little flour, andbrown it, if necessary, with a spoonful of sugar burnt soft; which,besides, imparting its color, adds an agreeable flavor. Such is the most simplemode; but the sauce may be much improved by a glass or two of portwine and a spoonful of curry powder; if the odor of garlic benot objected to, a clove boiled in the stew will be found to give it afine flavor. Garnish with vegetables. Stewed Beef. An illustration of a piece of meat on a platter surrounded by garnishes. A small piece of beef--say of four pounds--will take the timementioned; but the large joints will require full double that time; and shouldbe put to stew overnight, adding the vegetables in the morning. 459.--RUMP OF BEEF STEW. Half roast it; then put it into a pot with three pints of water, apound of slice bacon, a bunch of sweet herbs, twowine-glasses of vinegar, and a bottle of cider or smallwine; stick cloves into a couple of large onions, add afew sage-leaves, and cover the beef closely, adding morewater should there not be suffficient gravy from the meat.Let it simmer for three hours; then strain the gravy. Boil or bake somebutton onions, and lay them round the beef; cover it also withforcemeat balls, fried ornaments of paste, and mushrooms,if in season; add to the gravy a glass of port wine, a spoonfulof soy and Oude sauce; boil down a part to a glaze, and put it on thebeef: thicken the remainder if necessary, and pour it round, garnishingthe dish with pickles. Or: --Season it high with cayenne,salt, allspice, cloves, and a blade of mace, all infine powder. Bind it up tight, and lay it into a pot that will just hold it:resting it on two or three twigs, to prevent the meat from sticking. Frythree large onions sliced, and put them to it, with carrots,turnips, a shalot, a blade of mace, and some celery. Coverthe meat with good beef-broth, and simmer it as gently aspossible for several hours until quite tender. Clear off the fat; andadd to the gravy half a pint of port wine, a small glass ofChili vinegar, and a large spoonful of ketchup; simmer half anhour, and serve in a deep dish. The herbs to be used should beburnet, tarragon, parsley,thyme, basil, marjoram, and all or any of the mostsavory sort. Or: --Prepare the beef as directed in theforegoing receipts and glaze it twice; stew some white haricot beansin good brown gravy, with an onion sliced, a carrot, someparsley, and a bunch of sweet herbs, a clove of garlic, abay-leaf, and a slice of lean ham; let all simmer gently together tillthe beans are sufficiently tender; then separate them from the othervegetables, and put them in a sieve to drain; pass the sauce andvegetables through a tammy, add a table-spoonful of vinegar, and if notthick enough, a bit of butter rolled in flour; put in the haricotbeans, make all boiling-hot, and pour the sauce into the dish roundthe beef. 460.--BRISKET OF BEEF STEWED. Stew it in sufficient water to cover the meat; when quitetender, take out the bones, and skim off the fat; add to thegravy, when strained, a glass of wine and a little spicetied up in a muslin bag. Have ready either mushrooms, truffles,or vegetables boiled, and cut into shapes. Lay them on and round thebeef; reduce part of the gravy to a glaze; lay it on the top, andpour the remainder into the dish. It is a good piece to be stewed, as it may be cut from the bone, andof any size. 461.--LEG of BEEF STEWED. Salt six pounds of the half-leg, or stiff marrow-bone ofbeef for three or four days. Make holes in it about one and a half inchesdeep, and press in, very hard, forcemeat made in the followingmanner: one and a half pounds of suet sliced very fine; pepper,salt, and a few cloves, some winter savory, and sweetmarjoram, mixed well together. The beef must be baked in a deep pan,with water reaching about three-quarters of the way up, andforcemeat spread over the top, which, when the meat is baked, istaken off, cut into shapes, and laid round the dish. 462.--BOUILLON Is the common soup of France, and is in use in almost everyFrench family. Put into an earthen stock-pot in the proportion of onepound of beef to one quart of cold water. Place it on the side ofthe fire, and let it become slowly hot. By so doing the fibre of themeat is enlarged, the gelatine is dissolved, and the savorousparts of the meat are diffused through the broth. When the objectis simply to make a good, pure-flavored beef broth, part of the shin orleg will answer the purpose, adding some vegetables, and letting it stewfour or five hours; but if the meat is to be eaten, the rump orleg-of-mutton piece should be used. 463.--BOUILLI. The rump of beef is best for this purpose, as the meat is tobe served up in a separate dish, and will make a finely flavored sort of soup.Take as much of it as may be thought necessary; but for a small party, say fromfour to six pounds, along with two or three large roasted onions, in oneof which some cloves may be stuck, and a moderate quantity of wholepepper, with a bunch of sweet herbs; to which an anchovymay be added; put it in a stewpan, covered with rather more than a pint ofcold water to every pound of meat; and let it simmer by the sideof the fire for four or five hours, or until it has become quite tender; thentake out the herbs and onions, and add carrots,turnips, and celery, either cut into small squares or sliced, andlet the whole boil until sufficiently stewed, and ready for the table. The soup should then be strained off and served separately, leaving only somuch as may be necessary for making sauce for the vegetables. Thesauce should be a little thickened, and seasoned to the palate; if a clove of garlic, or a teaspoonfulof garlic and Chili vinegar, be added, it will improve theflavor. In Ireland it is not uncommon to send up the bouilli smothered inonion sauce, the other vegetables being either not used, or brought upin the soup; in France it is very usual to dress cabbage andsausages as an accompaniment to the bouilli; in England, it is morecustomary to serve it up with the vegetable-sauce as above-stated.Cucumbers cut into dice and stewed, with a spoonful of Chilivinegar added, are served at most of the German hotels. The meat ifgently stewed until quite tender, without being boiled to rags, will be foundexcellent, and the whole an admirable dish. 464.--TO RESTORE TAINTEDMEAT. Pour a few drops of hydrochloric acid in water till of a slight sourtaste, and immerse the tainted meat in it for an hour or so, and it willbecome quite sweet again. 465.--BROILING. The cook must prepare her fire in due time. When ready, it should be clearand bright, so clear from black coal and smoke that the chop orsteak may come from the gridiron without blemish or taint ofsulphur or smoke. The best fuel for a broil is composed ofcharcoal and coke, as little smoke is emitted from either, even oncommencing the fire, and when well ignited, it is entirely free from it; coke,added to a brisk coal fire, also burns bright, and is well suited forthe operation, though with care a proper fire may be made of good hardcoal. There is this amongst other disadvantages, in cutting too thick asteak, the outside is likely to be scorched to horny hardness before theinterior is half cooked; hence, to say nothing of the misery of those who havenot large mouths, the disappointed epicure must either wait until it is putagain on the gridiron, or instead of eating it rare, be constrained to eat itraw. No gridiron should be used but those with fluted bars, which, formingchannels, the greater part of the fat which otherwise falls into thefire, and scorches the steak, is drawn off into a gutter at the bottom;the gridiron should be thoroughly heated, and the bars rubbed with beefor mutton suet previously to putting on the steak, to prevent itsbeing marked by, or adhering to, the bars. A close eye should be kept on thesteak to watch the moment for turning it. which is repeatedly doneduring the process; broiling tongs of convenient size should be used, withwhich, by a little practice, the steak may be turned with ease anddespatch; the cook must have her dish thoroughly heated to receive the broilwhen done, and the cover hot to place on it instantly. Even when she hasaccomplished her task, if the servant who is to take it to table loiters on theway, the steak will have lost its zest. A steak or chop should bebriskly cooked, speedily conveyed to table, and served with despatch. 466.--BEEF STEAKS, BROILED. Be particular that the fire is clear; it is of no use to attempt to broil asteak over a dull, smoky, or flaring fire; see that the gridiron isclean, and the bars rubbed with suet preparatory to laying on thesteak; when they are browned turn them; do not be afraid of doing thisoften, as this is the best plan to preserve the gravy. When theyare done rub them over with a piece of fresh butter, pepper andsalt them, sprinkle the shalot or onion cut very small, and sendthem to table with oyster sauce, a dish of nicely cooked greens, andwell boiled potatoes: they are frequently and pleasantly garnished with scraped horse-radish. 467.--THEENGLISH DISH OF BEEF STEAK AND ONIONS. Pound the steak, season, and fry it in a saute or fryingpan; thendredge flour over it, and add, by degrees, a cup of boiling waterwith more seasoning. Drain the onions, which must have beenboiled, cut them up, and put them into the pan, having taken out thesteak; add a lump of butter and a little more flour; stirthem to prevent scorching; and when the onions are well browned, put inthe steak, and place the whole over the fire till heated thoroughly. Inserving, heap the onions upon the steak. 468.--BEEFSTEAKS ROLLED AND ROASTED. Cut handsome steaks from the rump, and if not sufficientlytender let them be well beaten; make a rich stuffing of equal parts ofham and veal well peppered; stew it for a short time, and poundit in a mortar with bread steeped in milk, a lump ofbutter, and the yolk of two or three eggs; spread thisforcemeat over the steaks, roll them up and tie them tightly,roast them before a clear fire. They will occupy an hour and twenty minutes toan hour and a half roasting; baste well with butter while roasting, andserve with brown gravy. 469.--STEWED BEEF STEAKS. Stew the steaks in three parts of a pint of water, to whichhas been added a bunch of sweet herbs, two blades of mace, anonion stuck with cloves--say three, an anchovy, and a lumpof butter soaked in flour; pour over a glass of sherry orMadeira. Stew with the pan covered down, until the steaks aretender, but not too much so; then place them in a fryingpan with enough offresh butter, hissing hot, to cover them, fry them brown, pour off thefat, and in its place pour into the pan the gravy in which thesteaks were stewed; when the gravy is thoroughly heated, and isof a rich consistency, place the steaks in a hot dish, pour thesauce over them. The steaks should be large, the finest from therump, and have a due proportion of fat with them. 470.--BEEF STEAKS, A LA FRANCAISE. Take a fine steak and dip it into cold spring water, let itdrain a few minutes, lay it in a dish and pour over it sufficient clarifiedbutter hot, and cover it; let it remain twelve hours, then remove thebutter, and roll the steak with the rolling-pin a dozen timesrather hardly, let it lie in front of a clear fire ten minutes, turning it onceor twice, put it into a fryingpan. with water half an inch in depth, andlet it fry until it browns. Mince some parsley very fine, chop an eschalot as fine as canbe, and season them with cayenne, salt, and a little whitepepper; work them with a lump of fresh butter, and when thesteak is brown take it from the pan, rub it well with the mixture onboth sides, and return it to the pan until done enough; dish it, thicken thegravy in the pan with a little butter rolled in flour ifit requires it, and pour it over the steak and serve. 471.--BEEFSTEAKS A LA PARISIENNE. Cut thin steaks from the finest and tenderest part of therump, sprinkle pounded salt, a little cayenne and whitepepper combined, over them; lay them in a pan with an ounce of freshbutter, cut in pieces; work half a teaspoonful of flour withthree ounces of fresh butter, as much parsley minced exceedinglyfine as would lie on a shilling, roll it, and cut in large dice, lay it in adish, squeeze the half of a lemon over the butter, and when the steaks are done lay them upon thebutter; have ready a quantity of raw peeled potatoes, cut in thinslices, and washed in milk and water ready, fry them in thebutter and gravy left by the steak, and lay them round thedish; they will be done when they are a rich brown. 472.--PALATES OFBEEF. Four white skinned palates; if for a white dish lay them allnight in salt and water, wash them well, put them on to scald, take offall the skin, then put them into your stock pot, let them boilseveral hours until so tender that you can pass a straw through them, then takethem up and lay them flat on a large dish separate, placing another on the topof them with a weight to keep them flat: if to be dressed whole turn the sidessmooth, spread each with quenelle or forcemeat, roll them up and tiethem; it will take six for this dish; steam them for a quarter of an hour, takethem up and glaze them well, and take off the string; if for a turban ortimbales, cut them out with a plain round cutter, either using two small mouldsor one large; proceed with those two as you would for the timbale ofmacaroni, leaving out the cheese and any other layer; introduceslices of truffles all round, and then palates, then mushroomsuntil your mould is full, put a layer of quenelle on the top, paper iton the top with buttered paper, steam as other timbales; haricot roots,truffles, mushrooms, tomato, piquant, any of these will dofor sauces, or Italienne; glaze the tops when turned out. 473.--BEEFPALATES. Take as many as required, let them simmer until they peel, put them in arich gravy, stew until very tender, season with cayenne,salt, two teaspoonfuls of mushroom ketchup--serve. 474.--BEEF COLLOPS. Any part of beef which is tender will serve to make collops; cut thebeef into pieces about three inches long, beat them flat, dredge themwith flour, fry them in butter, lay them in a stewpan, cover themwith brown gravy, put in half an eschalot minced fine, a lump ofbutter rolled in flour to thicken, with a little pepperand salt; stew without suffering it to boil; serve with pickles,or squeeze in half a lemon, according to taste; serve in a tureen, andserve hot. 475.--A BEEF STEW. Take two or three pounds of the rump of beef, cut away all thefat and skin, and cut it into pieces about two or three inchessquare, put it into a stewpan, and pour upon it a quart of broth, let itboil, sprinkle in a little salt and pepper to taste; when it hasboiled very gently, or simmered two hours, shred finely a large lemon,add it to the gravy, and in twenty minutes pour in a flavoring composedof two tablespoonfuls of Harvey's sauce, the juice of thelemon the rind of which has been sliced into the gravy, aspoonful of flour, and a little ketchup; add at pleasure twoglasses of Madeira, or one of sherry, or port, a quarter of anhour after the flavoring, and serve. 476.--BEEF HASHED. Take the bones of the joint to be hashed, and break them small, stewthem in very little water, with a bunch of sweet herbs, and a fewonions; roll a lump of butter in flour, brown it in astewpan, pour the gravy to it, and add the meat to be hashed, cuttwo small onions in thin slices, a carrot also, and a littleparsley shred finely; stew gently until the meat is hot through,and serve. 477.--HASH BALLS. Mince cold roast meat very fine, mix it with cold boiled potatoeschopped; season with pepper and salt, and a little of thegravy; make it into cakes as large as a biscuit, cover each withbeaten egg and then with bread crumbs, and fry the cakes a lightbrown in butter, lard, or dripping. 478.--BEEFTONGUE--TO CURE. Throw a handful of salt over the tongue, seeing that it issprinkled on both sides, let it remain to drain until the following day, make apickle of a tablespoonful of common salt, half that quantity ofsaltpetre, and the same quantity of coarse sugar as ofsalt; rub this mixture well into the tongue, do so every day fora week; it will then be found necessary to add more salt, atablespoonful will suffice; in four more days the tongue will be curedsufficiently. Some persons do not rub the pickle into the tongue, but let itabsorb it, merely turning it daily; this method will be found to occupy a monthor five weeks before it will be cured. When the tongue is to be driedaffix a paper to it with a date; smoke over a wood fire four daysunless wrapped in paper, and then as many weeks will be required. 479.--TO DRESS BEEF TONGUES. To dress them, boil the tongue tender, it will take five hours;always dress them as they come out of the pickle, unless they have beenvery long there, then they may be soaked three or four hours in coldwater, or if they have been smoked, and hung long, they should be softenedby lying in water five or six hours. They should be brought to a boilgently, and then simmer until tender; when they have been on the fire about twohours, and the scum removed as it rises, throw in a bunch of sweet herbsof a tolerable size; it will improve the flavor of the tongue. 480.--A FAMILY STEW OF BEEF. Take any piece of beef good for stewing, cut it into small pieces,slice two or three large onions, and put them into the stewpan with twoounces of butter or good beef-dripping. When melted, dredge insome flour, add the meat also dredged with flour, andenough water to keep it from burning. When the gravy has drawn,fill up with boiling water, let it come to a boil gently, skim the potwell, then add a spoonful of mixed spices, and a bay-leaf or two; setthe pan by the side of the fire to stew slowly for a couple of hours. Elevenpounds of meat will take four hours. This dish may be thickened likeIrish stew, with potatoes, or it may be served with the addition of choppedvegetables of all kinds, previously fried. 481.--TONGUE LARDED. This when well cooked is especially pleasant to some palates. Take atongue which has been pickled, a small one is the best, cut off theroot, and put it into a pan; cover it with water, and let it boilfive-and-twenty or thirty minutes. Take it out, and then dip it in scaldingwater to blanch, and remove the skin. Take a piece of fat bacon, cut it into strips for larding. Make aseasoning of pounded sweet herbs, eschalot, mace,and a little cayenne pepper mixed with white pepper andsalt; sprinkle the bacon strips with it, and leaving a line fordivision down the centre of the tongue. Lard it all over. Braisethe tongue, and then glaze; separate it in the space left, but leave itattached at either end, so that when laid open on the dish it is not entirelydivided in two. Have ready some brown sauce, flavored with mincedcapers, sliced pickled gherkins, the juice of half alemon, and half a small teaspoonful of cayenne pepper. Pour it when ready into a dish; lay the tongueupon it, and serve as hot as possible. 482.--BEEF OLIVES. Cut some handsome steaks, flatten them well with a roller, dredgethem well with a small quantity of white pepper and salt, havesome forcemeat, made with the fat and lean of veal mixedtogether, a small bit of lean ham or bacon, parsley, andsweet herbs, with a few bread crumbs, all beaten in a mortar, andmixed with an egg; lay a little over each steak, and roll them uptightly, fastening with a skewer; dip them in the yolk of an egg, thenin crumbs of bread, and fry them of a pale brown; rolling up eachseparate steak, and binding it together with thread; dish them withbrown sauce, in which put a glass of white wine, with some stronggravy, seasoned with cayenne. 483.--BŒUF TREMBLANT. Cut a handsome piece of beef from the rump, either a fillet orsquare; hang it up for four days, then put it all night to soak in a pickleof salt and vinegar; put it into a stewpan, and let it be coveredwith water; add a seasoning of whole pepper andsalt, a bundle of sweet herbs, and an onion. Let it simmervery slowly as long as it will hang together, taking care to skim it well.Strain the gravy, and add to it carrots previously boiled, andcut into pieces an inch long; add also a few capers and amushroom, with a glass of wine and the juice of a lemon.When the beef has been sufficiently stewed take it up, and set it for ashort time in a Dutch oven, and glaze it, or brown it with a salamander. 484.--SPICED BEEF. A joint from the round, rump, or flank, from ten to fourteen pounds,is the usual weight of the piece intended to be thus dressed. Make a mixture ofthe following ingredients, and let them be well amalgamated; pound finely asmuch mace as will quite fill a teaspoon, grind a nutmeg topowder, and add it, also two spoonfuls of cloves, one-fourth of thatquantity of cayenne pepper, and half a pound of coarse brownsugar; rub the beef well with this mixture for three days, turningit each day once; add three-quarters of a pound of salt, and thencontinue rubbing well each day, for ten days more; at the expiration of thattime dip it into some cold clear spring water, twice or thrice, secureit into a handsome shape, put it into a stewpan with a quart of good beefbroth, let it come to a boil, skim as the scum rises, and as soon as itboils put in three carrots cut in slices, a bundle of sweetherbs, a little parsley, and an onion; stew gently fourhours. If it is intended to serve this dish cold, let it remain until it is cool inthe liquor in which it was boiled, but take the precaution to put themeat into a clean pan, and pour the liquor over it. 485.--APICKLE FOR BEEF. To one gallon of water put two pounds and a half of commonsalt, one ounce of saltpetre, half a pound of coarse sugar,boil it for a quarter of an hour, and be particular while boiling to removeevery particle of scum while rising, that it may be as clear as possible, letit be cold when poured upon the beef. If it is desired to make thepickle last for a very long time, add a gallon of spring water tothe above quantity, which should, if for keeping, be also spring water,add three ounces of saltpetre, two pounds of bay salt, and apound and a half of coarse brown sugar. Whatever joints are put intothis pickle, they should be kept closely covered down. Prepare thus thebeef for pickling, keep it as long as you can without taint, spread overit coarse sugar, and let it remain for two days to drain. Rub thebeef thoroughly with the pickle, and let it remain in it eight, ten, twelve, or fourteen days, according to itssize and quantity; a considerable quantity of beef may be pickledtogether, indeed the closer it is packed the better, so that it is covered withthe pickle and kept tightly down; when they are taken out of thepickle, lay some sticks across the pan and let them drip into it, whenas much has fallen from them as will, wipe them dry, and they may either becooked at once or dried; if the latter be determined upon, after having welldried them, smoke eight hours over burnt sawdust and damp straw, or sew them ina cloth and send them to the baker, and let them hang seven or eight days. Donot, as in the other receipt, boil the pickle before using the firsttime, but after it has been once used, and every succeeding time, observingthat it must be kept skimmed, and each time of boiling add a quart ofwater and a couple of pounds of salt. This pickle willanswer equally well for hams or tongues. 486.--HUNGBEEF Take twelve to fourteen pounds of the flank of beef, throw over it ahandful of salt; let it drain twenty-four hours. Make a brine ofone pound of salt, one ounce of saltpetre; let them be quite dry,and pound them to a fine powder before using, a quarter of a pound of baysalt and two ounces of coarse sugar. If it is intended to makethe beef red, add three grains of cochineal; rub the beefwith this brine for a week, and then turn it; let it remain two days,and then rub it again for seven or eight days; then let it drain from thepickle. Send it to the baker's to be smoked. When wanted for dressing,put it into cold water more than enough to cover it, boil graduallyuntil enough, and put it under a heavy weight while hot. It may be served withcarrots and greens, or, if for grating, choose a lean piece, put it inboiling water; keep it boiling rapidly; four pounds will take anhour. 487.--BEEF HUNG. The best piece is the navel piece, it must be hung up in a cellar until itis a little damp, but not long enough to change, take it down and wash it wellin brown sugar and water, dry it with a cloth, cut it in two orthree pieces, take half a pound of brown sugar, two pounds of baysalt dried and pounded small, six ounces of saltpetre dried andbeat fine, rub it well into the beef, then rub common salt overit as much as will make it salt enough; let it lie together ten days,changing the pieces from the bottom to the top; hang it where it may have thewarmth of the fire, but not too near; when it is dressed boil it in hay andwater until tender; it will keep two or three months; when mouldy dip itin water. 488.--DUTCH HUNG BEEF. Rub a lean piece of beef--about twelve pounds--with molasses,and turn it frequently, in three days wipe it dry, salt it with a poundof salt and an ounce of salt-petre in fine powder, rub well in,turning every day for fourteen days, roll it as tightly as you can in a coarsecloth, lay a heavy weight upon it, hang it to dry in the smoke from wood,reversing it every day, boil in spring water, press it while hot andgrate or rice it to fancy. 489.--RUMP STEAK STEWED. Cut a steak about an inch thick with a good bit of fat, fry itover a brisk fire, place it in a stewpan with the gravy, a little goodstock, a little port wine, and some chopped mushrooms,stew gently; when tender put into it some good brown sauce, shake itgently about; dish it, and put scraped or grated horseradish on the top;if for oysters or mushrooms, see those sauces; season withsalt, cayenne pepper, and sugar. 490.--RUMP STEAK PLAIN BROILED. Cut your steak not so thick as for the former; have ready a goodclear fire, put your gridiron to get quite hot, then put on the steak atfull length, frequently stirring it with your steak tongs, a few minutesaccording to taste will do it. place it on your dish, put a good slice ofbutter rubbed all over it, and now pepper and salt it.Horseradish on the top of it, and frequently sauces. 491.--BAKEDBEEF. A Rump of twenty to twenty-five pounds weight.--Take two ounces eachof pepper and allspice; one ounce of pounded cloves, andthe same quantity of mace; rub this all over the joint, which should behung up for a fortnight or three weeks, according to the weather--taking careto keep it dry, and to occasionally renew the seasoning. When ready forbaking, wash off the spice with port wine, and lard therump throughout--not in the common mode used by poulterers, but byinserting large lardoons in different parts of the meat. Then put alarge quantity of suet, shred fine, both under and over it, and cover itwith coarse flour and water paste, between which and thesuet you may put a few bay-leaves or some sweet herbs. If eatenhot, the dough, bay-leaves, and suet must all be taken off; the jointbasted, sprinkled with a little salt and flour, over which asalamander should be passed; and served up with strong gravy or brownsauce. If cold, leave on the dough till wanted. Self-Basting Dutch Oven. An illustration of barrel on its side with five hooks hanging from the top and two chimney pipes on the outside top. It should be baked in a moderately-heated oven, and will take, according tothe size, from six to eight hours' baking. A Round of Beef may be dressed in the samemanner; but the bone should in that case be taken out, and the holefilled up with forcemeat. The flap should be filled in like manner,skewered, and tightly bound round with linen or strong tape, in which case thedough and the larding may be omitted, though the latter will be found animprovement. It should be always left until cold. 492.--BEEF BRAINSFRIED. Let your brains be properly marinaded, then leave them to drain; makea preparation with warm water, a little butter, and salt,some flour, and a spoonful of oil, and the whites of eggswhipped to snow, mix all together till like batter; dip your brains intothis batter, and then fry them a nice brown color; when fried let them drain ona dry cloth, garnish with fried parsley. 493.--BEEF BRAINSÀ LA SAUCE PIQUANTE. Cook your brains in a marinade; drain them, put them on a dish, andpour a sauce piquante all over them. 494.--BUBBLE AND SQUEAK. Sprinkle some slices of cold boiled beef with pepper; fry themwith a bit of butter of a light brown; boil a cabbage, squeeze itquite dry and chop it small; take the beef out of the frying-pan and laythe cabbage in it; sprinkle a little salt and pepper overit; keep the pan moving over the fire for a few minutes; lay the cabbagein the middle of the dish and the beef around it. 495.--BUBBLE AND SQUEAK Cut slices from a cold boiled round or rump of beef 5 let them befried quickly until brown, and put them into a dish to be kept hot. Clean thepan from the fat 5 put into it greens and carrots previouslyboiled and chopped small, or, instead of these, large onions sliced thinand fried, though both the latter are sometimes omitted. Add a littlebutter, pepper, and salt; make them very hot, and put themround the beef with a little gravy. Cold pork boiled is thought by some to be a better material forbubble and squeak than beef, which is sometimes hard. In eithercase the slices should be very thin, and lightly fried. 496.--OX-TAILS. Cut the tails in pieces; lay them in a stewpan, with butter and alarge onion; set them over a smart fire to make them brown; peeland boil a couple of dozen of button onions in about three pints ofwater, for fifteen or twenty minutes; set them by and pour the liquorthey were boiled in upon the tails, adding sufficient boiling water tocover them; put in six ounces of carrots, and eight of turnips,cut into slices, or balls the size of nutmegs 3 put in thecarrots twenty minutes before the turnips. Be careful that theyare not stewed too fast or too much. When they are tender, pass thegravy through a sieve; skim off the fat, and pay great attentionin doing so, as the fat rises while the tails are stewing. Keep themeat and vegetables hot. Thicken the gravy by putting an ounce ofbutter into a stewpan; when melted, stir in as much flour as willstiffen it. Pour the gravy in by degrees, stirring it till it boils;strain it through a sieve into a stewpan, and let it simmer gently till themeat and vegetables are dished. Lay the tails round the dish, and thevegetables in the middle; pour the gravy over; minced gherkins orcapers may be added. Pour boiling water over the onions towarm them, and put them round the dish the last thing. or: --Divide them at the joints, blanch, and parboilthem; put them into a stew-pan with just water or weak brothenough to cover them; let them simmer over a gentle fire, and remove the scumcarefully as it rises; then put in an onion, a blade of mace, anda little pepper and salt; put them on again to simmer, and whensufficiently done add a spoonful of essence of anchovy and someflour rolled in butter. This is an excellent and nourishingdish. 497.--TRIPE. Tripe may be dressed in several ways, but whatever mode may beemployed, it will always be found an improvement to soak it for a whole nightin milk. Some say, seven or eight days in salt and water. Ifleft in the milk until that gets sour, the acidity thus imparted to itwill render it still better. Take two pounds of fresh tripe, cleaned and dressed by thetripe-dresser; cut away the coarsest fat, and boil it in equalparts of milk and water; twenty minutes to half an hour will belong enough. Boil in the same water which boils the tripe, fourlarge onions; the onions should be put on the fire at least halfan hour before the tripe is put in the stewpan, and then made into arich onion sauce, which serve with the tripe. Tripe is cleaned, dried, cut into pieces, and fried in batter, andserved with melted butter. Tripe is cut into slices; three eggs are beaten up with mincedparsley, sweet herbs, onions chopped exceedingly fine,parsley, and mushrooms. The tripe is dipped into thismixture, and fried in boiling lard. Tripe may be cut into collops, covered with a mixture ofparsley, onions, and mushrooms, minced exceedingly fine, and fried in clarified or freshbutter. Serve mushroom sauce with it. Tripe can be stewed in gravy in which put parsley,onions, and mushrooms, or in lieu of the latter, mushroomketchup. Thicken the gravy with flour and butter. Whenthe tripe is tender, it will be done. A lemon may be sent to tablewith it. 498.--TO STEW OX-CHEEK. Clean the head nicely, then soak it for some hours in coldwater; put it into a stewpan, and let it simmer gently till it is quitetender; then take out the bones, and tie the meat up in a cloth;put a weight upon it, and let it stand till the next day; make aforcemeat of any white meat, and boil six eggs hard; cutthe cheek in slices; put some at the bottom of a dish, then a layer offorcemeat, then one of the sliced eggs, another of meat,and so on till the dish is full; season with pepper and salt, andpour in as much of the gravy as the dish will hold; either stew it inthe usual way, or cover it with a coarse paste and send it to the ovento be baked slowly. The paste to be removed before brought to table. 499.--BEEF TONGUE. If it has been dried and smoked, before it is dressed it should be soakedover-night; but if only pickled, a few hours will be sufficient. Put it into apot of cold water, and set it over a slow fire for an hour or two before it comes to a boil; then put itaside, and keep it simmering for three and a half to four hours, according toits size: you can ascertain when it is done by probing it with a skewer. Peelit, trim the root, glaze it and before serving surround the root with apaper frill, and stick a flower or two on the top. Tongue Garnished. An illustration of tongue garnished. Its appearance, and its flavor, also, may be improved by rubbing it over,when skinned, with yolk of egg, on which crumbs of bread andfinely minced sweet herbs may be strewed; then slightly basting it withbutter, and browning it with a salamander. 500.--TO STEWTONGUE. Salt a tongue with saltpetre and common saltfor a week, turning it every day; boil it tender enough to peel; when done,stew it with a moderately strong gravy; season with soy,mushroom-ketchup, cayenne pepper, pounded cloves, andsalt, if necessary. Serve with truffles, morels, andmushrooms, stewed in gravy. 501.--AN EXCELLENT WAY OFPREPARING TONGUES TO EAT COLD. Season with common salt and salt-petre, brown sugar, alittle bay-salt, pepper, cloves, mace, andallspice, in fine powder, for a fortnight; then take away thepickle, put the tongue into a small pan, and lay somebutter on it; cover it with brown crust, and bake it slowly till sotender that a straw will go through it; put it into a tin mould, and press itwell, laying in as much fat as possible. The thin part of tongues, if hung up to dry, grates like hungbeef, and also makes a fine addition to the flavor of omelets. 502.--TO ROAST A BEEF TONGUE. Take a fine large fresh tongue, scald it, and take off theskin; cut it off at the root and trim it neatly; stick a few cloves here and there in it, and put it in acradle-spit; sprinkle it with salt, and baste it well withbutter. Serve it with a good sauce in a sauceboat, made asfollows:--Put into a stewpan half a pint of port wine, with about halfthe quantity of well seasoned gravy; reduce it to one-half 5 then stirin a good piece of butter and a tablespoonful of flour; add asqueeze of lemon; when the butter is melted and the saucedone, place the tongue in a dish, and serve hot with the saucepoured round. In Spain, the sauce is strongly impregnated withsaffron. 503.--FRESH BEEF TONGUE. Take a green tongue, stick it with cloves, and boil it gentlyfor three hours; then brush it over with the yolk of an egg, dredge itwell with bread-crumbs, and roast it, basting it well withbutter. When dished, serve it with a little brown gravy flavoredwith a glass of wine, and lay slices of currant-jelly round it. Apickled tongue, well washed, may be dressed in the same way, andbeef-udders also. 504.--A FRESH NEAT'S TONGUE AND UDDER May be roasted together in the manner thus described; but when ready to bedished, instead of currant-jelly, put half a pint of gravy into asaucepan, with the juice of a Seville orange, two lumps of sugar,a glass of claret, and a piece of butter: toss the whole over the fire,and serve it up with the tongue and udder, garnishing the dishwith slices of lemon. The udder should be stuck withcloves, and both should be continually basted. 505.--BRISKET OFBEEF, STEWED. Take any quantity of brisket of beef required, say eight or tenpounds, cover it with water, stew it tender, bone the beefand skim off the fat, strain the gravy, add a glass of portwine, flavor with spice tied in a bag. Have boiled vegetables ready;cut them into squares, and garnish the beef from the gravy roundit, and serve. 506.--ENTREES Are, in common terms, what are called made-dishes; of course, these are thedishes upon which, in the high class of cookery, the talent of the cook isdisplayed. Great care should be observed in dishing them up, for the eye is agreat assistance to the palate: it often happens that the carelessness of theservant destroys the labors of the cook, by the manner in which the dish istaken from the kitchen to the dining-room. In some measure to avoid that, Soyerdirects a small thin border of mashed potatoes, about half an inch wide anda quarter of an inch deep, to be placed on the bottom of the dish, which keepseach object in its place; they should always be served exceedingly hot. 507.--COW-HEELS. Ox-feet, or Cow-heels, are not highly esteemed, but theycontain much nutriment, and may be dressed in the various ways already statedfor tripe, with which they are commonly boiled. They are frequentlyeaten cold, with mustard and vinegar. Soak them well; boil, and serve in a napkin, with thick meltedbutter, a large spoonful of vinegar, and a little mustardand salt. Or boil, and then stew them in a brown gravy. Or cutthe heel in four parts, dip each in egg, flour, and fry them inbutter. Or fry, and serve with onions fried and put round them:sauce as above. The water in which they are boiled will make equally goodjellies, either relishing or sweet, with that of calves'feet, if duly prepared; and at a far less expense. This jellygives great additional richness, likewise, tosoups and gravies. 508.--TO FRY OX-FEET, OR COW-HEEL. After preparing them as above, cut them into small pieces; have ready somebread finely crumbled, dip the pieces into the yolk of an eggbeaten up, and roll them in the bread-crumbs mixed with choppedparsley, pepper, and salt; fry them in butter orfresh lard, of a fine brown color. 509.--TO POT OX-FEET, ORCOW-HEEL. Boil them in fresh water till the bones can be easily removed;cut them into small pieces, add a little of the liquor, just enough to moistenit, and mix with it a spoonful of vinegar, some pepper andsalt, and a little pounded mace; put it into a mould and turn itout when cold. It is eaten with vinegar and mustard. 510.--MARROW-BONES. If too long to serve undivided, saw them in two; cover the open end with alump of paste and a cloth floured and tied close; thepaste must be removed before sent to table. Boil one and a half or twohours according to the size; put a ruffle of paper round each, and servein a napkin, with very hot toast. The marrow is spread upon thetoast, and seasoned with pepper and salt. 511.--BOEUFA-LA-MODE. Cut out the bone from the beef; then stuff the orifice withrich forcemeat, made with veal and oysters, and the crumbof a roll steeped in milk. Half roast it, and before it is put into thestewpan insert in the top dried and pickled mushrooms, addingmushroom-powder in the orifices; then put in two quarts of gravymade from the bones and trimmings, a large onion stuck withcloves, and two carrots cut in slices. When the beef hasstewed till it is quite tender, strain and thicken the sauce; add to ita glass of wine, mushrooms and oysters, and sippets offried paste; either the mushrooms or oysters may beomitted, if the pure flavor should be more desirable: warm a fewpickles with the garnish and send it up very hot. 512.--BEEFA-LA-MODE.--(a Philadelphia Receipt.) Out the bone out of a round of fresh beef, and put intoseveral incisions a dressing made of bread-crumbs, sweet herbs,and two small onions, chopped fine, with seasoning of salt,pepper, mace, and butter. Lard the beef, andfasten up the slits, and tie it firmly with tape. Put into a kettle a pint and a half of water, with a few slices ofpork; and put in the beef, stuck with a few cloves; coverclosely, and bake it several hours. When it is cooked through, dish it and pourover the gravy, which may be increased in quantity by the addition of alittle boiling water, and flour to thicken it, with a spoonful ofbrown sugar, and a glass of wine. Serve this gravy in atureen, moistening the meat with it, and garnishing with slicedcarrots and beets, and parsley or celery. 513.--THE BATH RECEIPT. Take three pounds of the rump, or any part of the beef whichwill stew well; trim it nicely, and cut off all the fat. Chop all sortsof sweet herbs together very finely, with a little shalot and a greatdeal of spice, and put them into a saucer that has been rubbed withgarlic, and cover them with vinegar. Gut fat bacon into longslips, dip it into the herbs and vinegar, and let theherbs be very thick upon the bacon; lard the beefregularly on both sides, if neces-sary, in order that it should be thorough- ly flavored. Rub the beef over with theremainder of the herbs and spice. Flour the meat,add a piece of butter, the size of a walnut, rolled inflour, and a pint of water. Bake the beef in an oven,strain the gravy, which will scarcely require either thickening orbrowning, and serve it up with pickles on the top. It is most excellentwhen cold, but should be served up hot at first. The gravy may be boiledto a glaze if necessary. It will require a good deal of spice, atea-spoonful of cayenne pepper, one of white pepper, asalt-spoonful of allspice, half the quantity of poundedcloves, and a blade of mace pounded. 514.--FILLETS OFBEEF. Cut the inside of a sirloin or rump in slices half an inchthick; trim them neat-ly; melt a little butter in a saute orfry-ing-pan; season the fillets; fry them lightly; serve with tomatosauce, sorrel, anchovy butter, or gherkin sauce. 515.--FILLET OF BEEF BRAISED. Take the inside of a sirloin of beef, stuffed or plain, but rolledtogether so as to bring the fat into the centre. Then strew the bottomof the stewpan with a few slices of ham, in which a small quan-tity ofgravy has been put, just to pre-vent the bottom of the pan from burning;and on this place the meat, covering it with chopped carrots,celery, button onions, and a pickled chili, together witha sliced gherkin, sweet herbs, salt, mace, and alittle allspice, and simmer until tender, then brown it before the fireor with a salamander, skim and season the sauce, and send themeat, sauce, and veg-etables up in the same dish. 516.--BEEFSTEAK A LA FRANCAISE Must be cut either from the sirloin or some other prime part of thebeef, as rump steaks are not known in France. Pour over it twolarge spoonfuls of the best Lucca oil, and let it remain all night; thenput it and the oil into a frying-pan, with some finely-choppedparsley, pep-per, and salt; fry it until the gravy driesup and it becomes rather brown. Pour the contents of the pan over thesteak as sauce. The steaks are usually garnished withslices of fried potatoes. As butter is not known in the southernstates of Europe, oil is there constantly used in lieu of it, and thisParisian practice is borrowed from those countries. 517.--BEEF IN AMARINADE. Out the inside of a sirloin in slices, put them into a marinade madeas follows:-- Take equal quantities of vinegar and water, slicesome carrots and onions, add some salt and a fewpepper-corns with a clove of garlic. Let all stew together till thegoodness be extracted from the vegetables, then strain it. and let it standtill cold. Let the meat lie in this pickle for twenty-four hoursbefore it is dressed; then let it stew gently in a little good gravytill quite tender. Add a wine-glassful of port wine, atable-spoonful of mushroom ketchup, a teaspoonful of shalotvinegar, and some butter rolled in flour; place themeat neatly in the dish, and pour the sauce over it. 518.--BEEF A LA POLONAISE. Take a few pounds of the best beef, without bones, and, afterhaving beaten it for some time with a rolling-pin, make in it deep incisions,but without cutting the meat asunder. Mince some onions, mix themwith bread-crumbs, butter, pepper, and salt; fillthe incisions with this forcemeat, and skewer up the meat. Put itwith some butter into a stewpan, and stew it upon a moderate fire. Itshould be served with brown sauce made from the gravy which isdrawn from the meat. 519.--A LAHOUSSARD. Take any piece of fresh beef, prepared as nearly as possible in thesame manner; but instead of forcemeat, fill the incisions with pledgetsof fat ham or bacon: sea-son with pepper, salt, andonion; lay it in an iron stewpan that has a cover to fit quite close,and set it by the side of the fire without water. Take care it does notburn, but it must have a strong heat; in two or three hours it will be quitetender, and then serve with its own gravy. 520.--BEEF A LAMODE. There are several methods of making this dish; the hash erroneously termedalamode beef, sold at eating-houses, is a very different dish to thetrue beef a la mode. The following is called the " old Bath "receipt. Take a quantity of the buttock, or the leg-of-mutton piece,the clod, or where ex-pense is not an object, the rump of beef as leanas possible; cut away the fat if there is any, make a mixed powder ofcloves, about twenty or thirty, the same quantity of mace, withhalf an ounce of allspice, savory, parsley, a handful ofthyme, knotted marjoram, and all other sweet herbs choppedvery fine; mix them in a glass of vinegar. Take some fat bacon,cut it into slices as long as the beef is thick, and about a quarter ofan inch in thickness, roll it well in the pow-dered spice and"herbs, make incisions of the requisite depth, and insert thebacon in the beef, which may be rubbed well over with whatremains of the powdered spice, &c., in the vinegar; thendredge flour over the beef, place it in a baking dish with a lumpof butter rolled in flour, with a pint of water; bake itin the oven, strain the gravy, and serve with pickles on the top;if after being larded it should, instead of being baked, be put into thestewpan, add to it as much water as will cover it, four onionschopped fine, half a dozen cloves of garlic, as many bay leaves,a few champignons, half a pint of ale, as much port wine; addwhite pepper, cay-enne pepper, and salt, a teaspoonful ofpyroligneous acid; strew three parts of a pint of fine bread raspingsover it, cover down close and stew six or eight hours, according to the size ofthe beef; when it has stewed sufficiently, take out the beef,keep it hot over boiling water, strain the gravy, remove thefat, champignons, &c.; boil up again, season to palate, pour thegravy over the beef and send to table. This is sometimes preferred cold, in which case serve it cut in slices, withthe gravy, which will be a jelly. 521.--BEEF A LAMODE. (Soyer's.) Have ready six pounds of rump of beef, cut into pieces two inchessquare, each of which lard through with two or three strips ofbacon; have also two pounds of streaked bacon, which clear fromthe rind, and cut into squares half the size of the beef, put thewhole into an earthen pan, with two calf's feet, (cut up small,)half a pint of sherry, two bay-leaves, a sprig of thyme, a bunchof pars-ley, four onions, with a clove stuck in each, ablade of mace, and half a pint of water, cover the pan as in thelast, and put it in a moderate oven for three hours; when done, do not removethe lid until three parts cold, then take out the meat, lay some of thebeef at the bottom of a stewpan, (not too large.) then a littlebacon, then more beef, and so on alter-nately, press them lightlytogether, pass the gravy through a hair sieve over, and leave it untilquite cold and set, when dip the stewpan into hot water, and turn it outupon a dish to serve. The calf's feet may be made hot in a littleof the stock, to which add two pats of butter, with which youhave mixed a teaspoonful of flour, season with a little choppedparsley and half a spoonful of vinegar, and serve as an entree.The above is excellent either hot or cold. 522.--ALAMODE BEEF. (Kitchiner's Receipt.) Take about eleven pounds of the mouse buttock, clod, or blade-bone ofbeef, or like weight of veal; cut it into pieces of three or fourounces each; put two or three ounces of beef drippings, and a couple oflarge onions, into a large deep stewpan; as soon as it is hot,flour the meat and put it into the stewpan, stirring itconstantly with a wooden spoon; when it has been on about ten minutes, dredgeit with flour and keep doing so till you have stirred in enough tothicken it; then cover it with boiling water, added by degrees, andstirring all together, (it will take about a gallon,) skim it when it boils,and then put in one drachm of ground black pepper, two ofallspice, and four bay-leaves; set the pan by the side of the fire, andlet it stew very slowly about three hours; when the meat is tender, putit into a tureen, and it is ready for the table. A nice salad may be servedwith it. 528.--A FRICANDEAU OF BEEF. Take a nice piece of lean beef; lard it with bacon veryclosely; put it into a stewpan with a pint of broth, a glass of whitewine, a bundle of parsley, all sorts of sweet herbs, aclove of garlic, a shalot or two, four cloves, pepper andsalt. When the meat is become tender, cover it close; skim thesauce well, and strain it; set it on the fire, and let it boil till itis reduced to a glaze. Glaze the lard-ed side with this, and serve themeat on sorrel sauce. 524.--POTTED BEEF. To a pound of common salt, put a quarter of an ounce ofsaltpetre, and two ounces of coarse sugar, Rub three pounds oflean beef with this, and let it remain in the brine fifty hours.Drain and dry it, pepper it well with black pepper, put it into apan; cut half a pound of butter in slices, and lay round it; lay apaste crust over it, and bake it very slowly for four hours and a half.Let it get cold, and then cut off the meat, being careful to separatethe stringy pieces from it: pound it in a mortar, working up with it fourounces of fresh butter, and some of the gravy from themeat when baked, seasoned with ground allspice, a littlemace, and pepper. When the meat has been combined with thebutter and gravy, until it is worked into an even paste,put it into jars, and cover with clarified butter. If it is purposed to keep it long, cover it with bladder skin. Thebeef may be potted without in the first instance being salted, but if itis done it should have salt worked up with it, and be soon eaten afterpotting. Some persons make their potted beef of meat that has beenpreviously cooked, but the above will be found to be the best receipt. 525.--COW-HEEL. Having been thoroughly washed, scald-ed, and cleaned, cut them into piecesabout two inches long, and one wide; dip them into yolk of egg, coverthem with fine bread-crumbs mixed with parsley minced,cayenne pepper, and salt, and fry them in boilingbutter. 526.--ANOTHER WAY. Having cleaned the feet, bone them, boil them, and stew themin a rich brown gravy; serve them with Indian pickle. Or, ifplainly cooked, boil until enough; then serve them on a napkin, with meltedbutter, flavored with a spoonful of vinegar, and one of mademustard. Lemon pickle may be served with them. 527.--BEEFSAUSAGES. To three pounds of beef, very lean, put one pound and a half ofsuet, and chop very finely; season with sage in powder, allspice, pepper, and salt;have skins thoroughly cleaned, and force the meat into them. 528.--BEEF HEART. Wash it very carefully, stuff it the same as you would a hare 5 roastor bake it, and serve with a rich gravy and currant jelly sauce,hash with the same and port wine. 529.--BEEF HEART ROASTED. Wash thoroughly, stuff with force-meat, send it to table as hot as itis possible with currant jelly sauce; it will take about forty minutesroasting, but this depends upon the fire. 530.--BEEF HEART. Let it be thoroughly well cooked, and the skin removed. Wipe it drywith a clean cloth; stuff it with veal stuffing; roast two hours and aquarter. Make a brown gravy, as for hare; and serve with thegravy and currant jelly. The most pleasant way to the palate of dressing this dish, is to roast theheart for rather less than two hours, let it get cold, cut it in pieces,and jug it the same as hare. 531.--STEWED RUMP of BEEF. Half roast the beef; then place it in the stewpan, add three pints ortwo quarts of water, according to the weight of the joint, twowine glasses of vinegar, three of red wine, more if expense benot considered, a bottle not being too much; cider is sometimes used,but the meat may be stewed without it; add three spoonfuls of walnutketchup, two or three blades of mace, a shalot, a dessert-spoonfulof lemon pickle, cayenne pepper, and salt, cover thestewpan close down, stew gently for two hours, or three if the rump ofbeef be large, take it up and place it in the dish in which it is to beserved, keeping it hot in the manner previously prescribed; remove the scumfrom the gravy in which it has been stewed, and strain it; add half apint of mushrooms, three table-spoonfuls of port wine, aspoonful of Harvey's sauce, thicken with flour and butter,pour over the beef, garnish with pickles, forcemeat balls,and horseradish. 532.--HUNTER'S BEEF. Hang for three days a round of beef of twenty pounds; at theexpiration of that time rub it with brine composed of three ounces ofsaltpetre, twelve ounces of salt, a spoonful of allspice,one of black pepper, an ounce of coarse brown sugar; before it isrubbed with this mix-ture it must be boned, and it must be rubbed well everyday, turning for a fortnight. When it is to be dressed put it into a stewpan,pour in a pint of water, shred a quantity of mutton suet, coverthe meat with it, lay over it a thick crust, attaching it round the edgeof the pan, tie over securely with paper, and bake for six hours in anoven moderately heat-ed; take away the paper and crust, chop someparsley very fine, sprinkle it over the beef, and serve itcold. It will keep some time; the gravy will make a good flavoring forsoups. 533.--MINCED BEEF WITH CUCUMBERS. Take a fine rump-steak undressed, and with a sharp knife shred itvery fine. Put it into a stewpan with a little clari-fied butter andsome salt; stir it over a quick fire for a few minutes, then add half apint of good beef gravy; let it boil gently till it becomes of a properthick-ness. Out two fine cucumbers in slices the thickness of acrown-piece, and put them with an onion sliced in a stewpan with someclarified butter, a little vinegar, a lump of sugar, andfry them of a fine brown color; put them into a stewpan with some plain sauce; let it simmer gently tillsufficiently done; then lay the mince in the dish, and pour the cucumbers overit; thicken the sauce with a little flour and butter; addthe squeeze of a lemon just before serving. 534.--BEEF COLLOPS. Out the inside of a sirloin, or any other convenient piece, intocircular shapes, the size and thickness of a half-crown, flour and frythem; sprinkle with pepper, salt, chopped parsley, andshalot; make a little gravy in the pan; send to table withgherkin or tomato sauce. SOYER'S RECEIPTS. 535.--BUBBLE ANDSQUEAK. I am certain you must know, as well as myself, our hereditary dish calledbub-ble and squeak; but, like the prepara-tion of other things, there is a goodway and a bad; and, as you prefer the former to the latter, proceed asfollows:--Boil a few greens, or a savoy cabbage (which has beenpreviously well washed), in plain water until tender, which then drainquite dry in a colander or sieve, put it upon a trencher, and chop it ratherfine with a knife; then for a pound of salt beef you have in slices, putnearly a quarter of a pound of butter into a fry-ing-pan, in which sautethe beef gently but not too dry; when done, keep it hot, put thecabbage in the frying-pan, season with a little salt andpepper, and when hot through, dress it upon a dish, lay the beefover, and serve. Endive or large cabbage-lettuces may be used instead ofcabbage, but care must be taken to drain off all the water. 536.--BROILED B0NES. Divide them, rub with mustard, pep-per, and salt, and broilover a clear fire; serve with fried potatoes; and a little gravy maybe added. 537.--TRIPE, LYONS FASHION. When there is any remaining from a previous day, dry it on a clean cloth;cut them into pieces an inch square; put into an omelette or saute pan one ortwo ounces of butter, according to the quantity; slice thin a largeonion, which fry in the pan; then add the tripe, saute them forfive minutes, season with salt, pepper, and a spoonful ofvinegar; serve very hot. 538.--OX TAILS A LA JARDINIERE. Cut and cook two ox tails as directed for soup, but just before theyare done, skim well, and take out the pieces of tails, which put upon a dish;then in another stewpan put two ounces of butter, to which, when melted, addthree ounces of flour, stirring it over the fire until forming abrownish roux (thickening), then mix by degrees two quarts of the stockthe tails were boiled in, and boil all together ten minutes; then put in thetails, with one carrot and two tur-nips (cut into small dice, or anyother shape, with a vegetable cutter), and about thirty button onions;let the whole sim-mer very gently upon the corner of the fire, keeping itwell skimmed, until the vegetables are tender, and the saucesufficiently thick to adhere to the back of the spoon; dress the meatupon a dish, re-duce the sauce, which pour over and serve. 539.--OX TAILS AU GRATIN. Cook two ox tails as before, and when cold, dry them upon a cloth,season with pepper and salt, have a couple of eggs wellbeaten upon a plate, into which dip each piece singly, afterwards throwing theminto a dish of bread-crumbs, to cover every part, then beat them lightly with a knife, and again egg andbread-crumb them, broil them upon a gridiron, or place them in a veryhot oven until of a brownish color, when serve with any sauce you mayfancy, or a little plain gravy. 540.--OX HEART. This dish, although not very recherche, is a good family one, and remarkablefor its cheapness. Put it into lukewarm wa-ter, one hour to disgorge; then wipeit well with a cloth, and stuff the interior with a highly seasoned vealstuffing; tie it up in paper, and pass a small spit through thesides; set it before a good fire for about two hours to roast, keep-ing it wellbasted--being almost deprived of fat, basting is thus required; whendone, take off the paper, and serve with any sharp sauce, or alittle plain gravy. Two hours will be sufficient to roast a largeheart; but if smaller of course less time in proportion would berequired. I have also stuffed a heart with sage and onion,and even ventured the apple sauce; both succeeded admirably, and it canbe baked as well as roasted. I remember, when in business, upon one occasion; having a few friends pop inunexpectedly about luncheon-time upon a Saturday (which is a day I alwayscontrive to keep my larder as short as possible), and having nothing but aheart as a meal to give them, I immediately gave orders to the cook tocut it into slices half an inch thick 5 dip each piece in flour, andafterwards egg and bread-crumb them; then to put four spoonfulsof oil in the frying-pan, lay part of the pieces in, and saut6 of a nicecolor, then to keep them hot in a dish, and saute the remainder; and when alldone, to pour off part of the oil; put a teaspoonful of flour inthe pan, mixing it with the remaining oil and gravy, then pouringin a gill of water, season with a little pepper and salt,four spoonfuls of the vinegar from piccalilly, and a little of thepickle finely chopped; boil the whole a minute; pour over theheart, and serve very hot. It pleased very much, and they made a heartymeal from it; and I have since had some with a little plain gravy, andbroiled bacon: in both instances it was very good. 541.--POTATOSANDWICHES. Saute the slices of beef as directed for bubble and squeak, cover oneside of each piece with mashed potatoes a quarter of an inch in thickness,egg and bread-crumb over, then proceed the same with the othersides; fry in hot fat of a light brown color, as you would asole, and serve. Any kind of fresh meat may be used the sameway. 542.--FILLET OF BEEF SAUTE After having cut the fillet in slices, put two ounces of butter intoa clean frying-pan, which set upon the fire, and when melted, lay in themeat, seasoned with a salt-spoonful of salt, and half thatquantity of pepper to each piece; turn them over three or four timeswhilst cook-ing, and, when done, dress upon your dish, with eitheranchovy or maitre d'hotel butter. 543.--ANOTHER METHOD. When the fillets are dished up, put a table-spoonful of choppedonions into the pan they were cooked in, which cook for about a minute,but not letting them burn, then pour off part of the fat, if too much,and add two teaspoonfuls of flour; stir with a wooden spoon untilbecoming brownish, then add nearly a pint of water, a table-spoonful ofvinegar, and a few drops of browning; let it boil a few minutes,seasoning with a little pepper, salt, and sugar;when of the consistency of a thin sauce, pour over the fillets andserve. A few chopped pickles of anydescription (but not too hot) might be introduced, but then half the quantityof vinegar would be sufficient. A spoonful of Harvey's sauce maybe added, and a little glaze improves it. Mutton, lamb, orpork-chops, or veal-cutlets, may be dressed in a similarmanner. 544.--MINCED BEEF. Cut a pound and a half of lean cooked beef into very small dice,which put upon a plate; in a stewpan put a good teaspoonful of finely choppedonions, with a piece of butter of the size of a walnut,which stir over the fire until the onions become lightly browned, whenstir in half a table-spoonful of flour, with which mix by degrees half apint of broth (or water) to which you have added a few drops ofbrowning and a teaspoonful of vinegar; let it boil five minutes,stirring it the whole time, then throw in the meat, season rather highlywith a little pepper and salt, and, when hot, pour it into a deepdish, and serve with sippets of toasted bread round, or poachedeggs on it. 545.--CROQUETTES OF BEEF. Proceed precisely as in the last, but omitting the vinegar; whendone, stir in two yolks of eggs quickly, stir another minute over thefire, then pour it upon a dish until cold 5 have a couple of eggs wellbeaten upon a plate, also some bread-crumbs in a separate dish, thendivide the preparation into about a dozen pieces, which roll up into roundballs, or any other shape, and throw them into the bread-crumbs, movethem over until well covered, then roll them into the egg, then thebread-crumbs again, from which take them gently, patting the surfacelightly with a knife, put them into very hot lard or fat to fryof a yellowish-brown color, being careful not to break them whilst frying; whendone, drain them upon a cloth, and serve either upon a napkin, or with friedparsley. 546.--A FAMILY FRENCH SALAD FOR THE SUMMER. Cut up a pound of cold beef into thin slices, which put into asalad-bowl, with about half a pound of white fresh lettuce, cutinto pieces similar to the beef, season over with a good teaspoonful ofsalt, half that quantity of pepper, two spoonfuls ofvinegar, and five of good salad oil, stir all together lightlywith a fork and spoon, and when well mixed it is ready to serve. For a change, cabbage-lettuce may be used, or, if in season, a littleendive (well washed), or a little celery, or a few gher-kins; also, tovary the seasoning, a little chopped tarragon and chervil,chopped eschalots, or a little scraped garlic, if ap-proved of,but all in proportion, and used with moderation. White haricot beansare also excellent with it. Remains of cold veal, mutton, orlamb may be dress-ed the same way. 547.--POTATOES AND MEATSALAD. Proceed as in the last, but omitting the lettuce; if any coldpotatoes remain from a previous dinner, peel and cut them in halves ifsmall, but in quarters if large, and then into pieces the size of a shilling,but four times the thickness; put them into a salad-bowl with the meat,seasoning as before, but using more oil and vinegar, andadding a teaspoonful of chopped parsley. A small quantity of anydescription of pickles might be added to this salad, as also someancho-vies or olives. The remains of any fowls or turkeymay be mixed in salads, but according to our habits, many persons would fancythey were not nutritious; of that I can assure them to the contrary. The quantity of the meat and vege- table should pretty equally balance with each other; after such a meal, a man'sappetite is perfectly satisfied, and he is ready for an afternoon's work ifrequired. It also does not require the aid of any fire, which we soungratefully abhor in hot weather. Mr. B. very much approves of this dish oncea week in summer 548.--OX KIDNEYS. Out a nice fresh ox-kidney into slices, each being about the size ofa half crown piece, but double the thickness (avoiding the white part,or root, which is tough and indigestible), then put a quarter of a pound ofbutter into a stewpan upon the fire, and when very hot but not black,put in the pieces of kidney, stirring them round with a wooden spoonthree min-utes over a brisk fire; then add for each pound weight ofkidney, half a table-spoonful of flour, half a teaspoonful ofsalt, half that quantity of pepper, and a little sugar,moisten with a gill of water and half a glass of sherry, add alittle browning, if handy, and let simmer gently for five minutes, stirringthem round occasionally 5 if too thick, add a few drops more water, thesame should be sufficiently thick to adhere to the back of the spoon, pour themout upon your dish, and serve very hot. Broth might be used instead ofwater if conve-nient, but then the seasoning should be a littlediminished, a little chopped escha-lot, parsley, or a fewmushrooms, would be an improvement. By cutting an ox-kidney lengthwise in three slices, it might bebroiled or sau-teed; if for gentlemen season rather highly, but if ladies areto be the par-takers, season more moderately; a little gravy may beserved with it, to which you have added at little ketchup; the root ofthe kidney must not be cut away in this case, although not eatable.Ox- kidneys are also an excellent addition to beef-steakpuddings and pies. 549.--OX-FEET OR COW-HEELS Are very nutritious, especially when well boiled: they may be served ineither of the methods directed for tripe, or with a plainparsley-and-butter sauce, to which, for a change, the juice ofa lemon or a drop of vinegar may be added. Should any be left fromthe first day's dinner it may be served a la Lyonnaise, as directed for coldtripe. 550.--REMAINS OF OX-TONGUE. The remains of a tongue from a pre-vious dinner may be again servedthus:--Cut it into thin slices, put a small piece of butter into afrying-pan, lay the pieces of tongue over, which warm a few min-utes ina saute-pan, and serve with veal or fowl if any; when at homealone, I frequently have it with mashed potatoes under it; it makes a verygood dish for luncheon. The pieces of tongue might also be egged andbread-crumbed pre-vious to cooking as above, and served with a plaingravy, or any sharp sauce, (See SAUCES.) Or should you have anytongue, and veal, and beef remaining, sprinkle a littlechopped shalots at the bottom of a pie-dish, lay a layer of meat over,season with a little salt, pepper, and chopped parsley,then a layer of the tongue; have some yellowish crusts of breadgrated, a teaspoonful of which sprinkle over the tongue, then again alayer of the meat, proceeding thus until the dish is nearly full, whensprinkle more of the brown bread-crumbs over the top, placing a smallpiece of butter here and there; pour in two wine-glass-fuls ofwater, set it in a warm oven half an hour, and serve very hot. Orinstead of bread-crumbs, make a little good mashed potato, whichspread over it smoothly with a spoon or knife, bake half an hour in a warmoven, and serve. Should the remains of a tongue be but small, and if well pickled andboiled, the root and all would be excellent in any kind of beef,lamb, mutton, veal, or pork, hashed, or in pies orpuddings made from these meats. 551.--REMAINS OF SALT BEEF. The remains of salt beef are very ex-cellent served in the fewfollowing ways, no matter from what joint, or from what part of the joint: Cutas large and thin slices as possible, dip each slice into some vinegarfrom mixed pickles, previously poured upon a plate in small quantities;lay about a pound of the meat thus pre-pared upon a flat dish, pour awine-glass-ful of water over, warm it through in the oven, orbefore a slow fire, and serve. Another way is, after having dipped thebeef in the vinegar, roll them in flour, and proceed asabove, adding double the quantity of water. Another way is to saute theslices with a little butter in a frying-pan, have ready some nice mashedpotatoes very hot, lay the beef over, and serve. 552.--COLDBEEF. If any be left from a previous dinner, put it in a dish, placing themeat in the centre, rather higher, cover over with some delicate mashedpotatoes, about two inches in thickness, to form a dome, rub some eggover with a paste-brush, and sprinkle crumbs of bread (eithergrated or otherwise) upon the top, and set it in the oven until well browned,when serve. 553.--BEEF BROTH. Take a leg of beef, wash it clean, crack the bone in two orthree parts, put it into a pot with a gallon of water, skim it well,then put two or three blades of mace in a little bundle ofparsley, and a crust of bread, let it boil till the beefis quite tender, toast some bread, cut it into dice, put theminto a tureen, lay in the meat, and pour the soup over it. 554.--MARROW BONES. They must be sawn into convenient sizes; cover the ends with a little doughmade of flour and water, and tie them in a floured cloth,boil them an hour and a half, serve on a napkin with dry toast. 555.--BAKED MARROW BONES. The bones should be prepared as above and laid in a deep dish, thenput into an oven and bake gently for two hours. They are sometimes cooked inbatter, but if so, the marrow should be cleared from the bonesand put in buttered cases made of clean foolscap paper; let them lie inthe batter and serve with them in it; when the batter is baked themarrow will be also done. 556.--CURRIED BEEF, MADRAS WAY. Take about two ounces of butter, and place it in a saucepan, with twosmall onions cut up into slices, and let them fry until they are of alight brown; then add a table-spoonful and a half of curry powder, andmix it up well. Now put in the beef cut into pieces about an inchsquare; pour in from a quarter to a third of a pint of milk, and let itsimmer for thirty minutes; then take it off. and place in a dish, with a littlelemon juice. Whilst cooking stir constantly, to prevent it burning. Sendto table with a wall of mashed potatoes or boiled rice round it. It greatly improves any curry to add with the milk a quarterof a cocoa-nut, scraped very small, and squeezed through muslin with alittle water; this softens the taste of the curry, and, indeed,no curry should be made without it. 557.--BEEF PALATES. Simmer them in water several hours, till they will peel; then cut thepalates into slices, or leave them whole, as you choose, and stew them in a rich gravy till quite tender. Before youserve, sea-son them with cayenne, salt, and ketchup. Ifthe gravy was drawn clear, give it a boil with some butter andflour. If to be served white, boil them in milk, and stewthem in fricassee-sauce; adding cream, butter,flour, and mushroom powder, and a little poundedmace. 558.--PRESSED BEEF. Procure a piece of brisket of beef, cut off the bones, andsalt it, adding a little sal prunella to the brine and alittle spice; let the beef remain in pickle rather betterthan a week; when ready to cook, roll it round, tie it in a cloth, and let itsimmer gently in plenty of water about seven hours if a whole one, butfour hours if only the thin end; when done take it up, remove the string, andtie the cloth at each end, put it upon a dish with another dish over, uponwhich place half a hundred weight, leaving it until quite cold, then take themeat from the cloth, trim and glaze it lightly, and serve gar-nishedwith a few sprigs of fresh parsley. 559.--PICKLE FORBEEF A LA GARRICK. Take twenty pounds of salt, three-quarters of a pound ofsaltpetre, four cakes of sal prunella, two pounds of moistsugar, two cloves of garlic, with which rub the meat well,and leave it rather more than a week, rubbing and turning it over everyday. This pickle is adapted for any thing that is required red. 560.--SPICED BEEF. Procure a piece of thin flank of beef about ten pounds in weight,which salt as the last for about a week; when ready split it open with aknife and lay it out flat upon a dresser, having previously prepared sixonions chopped very fine, with about ten sprigs of parsley, andthe leaves of ten sprigs of thyme, the same of marjoram, twoounces of mixed spice, (without cinnamon,) and half an ounce ofblack pepper, mix all together, spread half upon the beef as itlays before you, then fold it over to its original shape, lay on the remainderof the preparation, roll it up tightly in a cloth, boil, press, and serve asdirected in the last article. 561.--TO FRICASSEE COLD ROAST BEEF. Out the beef into slices, which should be very thin, put it with somestrong broth into a stewpan, add parsley chopped small, anonion scored, and a piece of butter, simmer fifteen minutes, adda glass of port wine, a teaspoonful of pyro-ligneous acid, and theyolk of a couple of eggs; mix well, stew quickly, pot the dish,rub it with a shalot, pour fricassee into it, and serve. 562.--BEEFFRICANDEAU. Take a piece of beef as lean as you can obtain it, lard itwell over on one side with pieces of bacon. Place in a stewpan aneschalot, a bunch of sweet herbs, a faggot of parsley, alittle cloves, three parts of a quart of good broth, one glass ofsherry, and pepper and salt to palate. A clove ofgarlic may be added to the eschalot if it is not found of sufficientstrength to flavor it without. Put on the meat, and stew until tender,take out the gravy, keep the meat covered down close, skim andstrain the sauce, boil it until reduced to a glaze. Glaze thebeef with it on the side larded, and serve with sauce piquante,or sauce sorrel. 563.--STRASBURG- POTTED MEAT. Take a pound and a half of the rump of beef, cut into dice, and putinto an earthen jar, with a quarter of a pound of butter at the bottom,tie the jar close up with paper, and set over a pot to boil; when nearlydone, add cloves, mace, all- spice, nutmeg, salt, and cayenne pepper to taste;then boil till tender, and let it get cold. Pound the meat, with fouranchovies washed and boned, add a quar-ter of a pound of oiledbutter, work it well together with the gravy, warm a little, and addcochineal to color. Then press into small pots, and pour melted muttonsuet over the top of each. 564.--A CULLIS. You must take meat according to the number of guests; if ten ortwelve, a leg of veal and a ham will be necessary, with all thefat, skin, and outside cut off; cut the leg of veal intopieces about three or four inches thick each way, place them in a stewpan, andthen the slices of ham, two carrots, and an onion cut intwo, cover it close, let it stew gently at first, and as it begins to brown,take off the cover and turn it to color on all sides the same, but take carenot to burn the meat; when it has a pretty brown color, moisten yourcullis with broth made of beef or other meat, season thecullis with a little sweet basil, some cloves, and a littlegar-lic; pare a lemon, cut it in slices and put it into the cullis withsome mushrooms. Put into a stewpan a good lump of but-ter, and set itover a slow fire; put into it two or three handfuls of flour, stir itwith a wooden ladle, and let it take a color; if the cullis be pretty brown youmust put in some flour, the flour being brown with the cullis,pour it gently into the cullis, keeping it stirring with a wooden ladle, thenlet the cullis stew softly and skim off all the fat; put in two glassesof champagne or other white wine, but take care to keep thecullis very thin, so that you may take the fat well off and clarify it;you must clarify it by putting it into a stove that draws well, cover it closeand let it boil without uncovering until it boils over, then un-cover and takeoff the fat that is round the stewpan, then wipe it off the cover alsoand cover it again; when the cullis is done take out the meat and strainthe cullis through a silken strainer; this cul lis is for all sorts of ragouts,fowls, pies, and tureens. 565.--BUBBLE AND SQUEAK. (New Receipt.) Cut into pieces, convenient for frying, cold, roast or boiled beef;pepper, salt, and fry them; when done, lay them on a hot drainer,and while the meat is drain-ing from the fat used in frying them,have in readiness a cabbage already boiled in two waters; chop it small,and put it in the frying-pan with some butter, add a littlepepper and salt, keep stirring it, that all of it may be equallydone. When taken from the fire, sprinkle over the cabbage a very littlevinegar, only enough to give it a slight acid taste. Place thecabbage in the centre of the dish; and arrange the slices of meatneatly around it. 566.--LOBSCOUS. Mince, not too finely, some cold roast beef or mutton. Chopthe bones, and put them in a saucepan with six potatoes peeled andsliced, one onion, also sliced, some pepper and salt; ofthese make a gravy. When the potatoes are completely incorporatedwith the gravy, take out the bones, and put in the meat;stew the whole together for an hour before it is to be served. 567.--BEEF RISSOLES. Mince and season cold beef, and flavor it with mushroom orwalnut ketchup. Make of beef dripping a very thin paste,roll it out in thin pieces about four inches square; enclose in each piece someof the mince, in the same way as for puffs, cut-ting each neatly all round; frythem in dripping of a very light brown. The paste can scarcely be rolledout too thin. SEA COOKERY. 568.--FIRST WATCHSTEW. Cut pieces of salt beef, and pork into dice, put them into astewpan with six whole peppercorns, two blades of mace, a fewcloves, a teaspoonful of celery seeds, and a faggot ofdried sweet herbs; cover with water, and stew gently for anhour, then add fragments of carrots, turnips, parsley, or anyother vegetables at hand, with two sliced onions, and somevinegar to flavor; thicken with flour, or rice, remove theherbs and pour into the dish with toasted bread, or freshly bakedbiscuit broken small, and serve hot. When they can be procured, a fewpota-toes improve it very much. 569.--SEA PIE. Make a thick pudding crust, line a dish with it, or what is better, a caketin, put a layer of sliced onions, then a layer of salt beef cutin slices, a layer of sliced potatoes, a layer of pork, and anotherof onions; strew pepper over all, cover with a crust, and tiedown tightly with a cloth previously dipped in boiling water andfloured. Boil for two hours, and serve hot in a dish. VEAL. THE failing of this meat is its tendency to turn; should it show anysymptoms of doing this, put it into scalding water and let it boil forseven or eight minutes, with some pieces of charcoal affixed; plunge itinto cold water immediately after taking it out of the hot, and put itinto the coolest place you have at command; the skirt from the breast,and the pipe from the loin should always be removed in hot weather. Veal of about two or three months old is the best; the flesh ought tobe white, approaching to pink, and the fat firm; it is cut up thesame as mutton, except that, in the hind-quarter, the loin is cutstraight, leaving the aitch-bone on it, which may be either dressed onthe loin or separate. The fore-quarter consists of the shoulder,neck, and breast. The hind-quarter, of the knuckle, leg,fillet, and the loin. The head and pluck consist of theheart, liver, nuts, skirts, melt, and the heart,throat, and sweetbread. The bull-calf is the best; the flesh is firmer grained or redder, andthe fat more curdled than the cow-calf, which latter is ingeneral preferred, being more delicate and better adapted for made dishes, ashaving the udder. To keep veal, we have to observe--the firstpart that turns bad of a leg of veal is where the udder isskewered back. The skewer should be taken out, and both that and the whole ofthe meat wiped every day; by which means it will keep good three or fourdays in hot weather, if the larder be a good one. Take care to cut out the pipethat runs along the chine of a loin, as you do of beef, to hinderit from tainting. The skirt of the breast is likewise to be taken off.and the inside wiped and scraped, and sprinkled with a little salt. If veal is in danger of not keeping, wash it thoroughly, and boil thejoint ten minutes, putting it into the pot when the water is boilinghot; then put it into a very cool larder, or plunge it into cold watertill cool, and then wipe and put it by. If in the least tainted, it can-not berecovered, as brown meats are, by the use of charcoal orpyroligneous acid. 570.--VEAL--THE FILLET. The fillet derives much of its pleasant flavor from being stuffed.Veal in it-sel being nearly tasteless, the stuffing should beplaced in the hollow place from whence the bone is extracted, and the joint should be roasted a beautiful brown; itshould be roasted gradually, as the meat being solid will require to bethoroughly done through without burning the outside; like pork, it issufficiently indigestible without being sent to table and eaten half cooked; adish of boiled bacon or ham should accompany it to table, alemon also. In roasting veal, care must be taken that it is not at first placedtoo near the fire; the fat of a loin, one of the most delicate joints ofveal, should be covered with greased paper; a fillet also, shouldhave on the caul until nearly done enough: the shoulder should be thorough-lyboiled; when nearly done dredge with flour, and produce a finefroth. 571.--FILLET OF VEAL, BOILED. Bind it round with tape, put it in a floured cloth and in coldwater, boil very gently two hours and a half, or if sim-mered, which isperhaps the better way, four hours will be taken; it may be sent to table inbechamel or with oyster sauce. Care should be taken to keep it as white as possible. 572.--FILLET OF VEAL ROASTED. Take out the bone, fill the space with a fine stuffing, andlet the fat be skewered quite round; stuff it also well under theskin with bread, sage, chopped onions andparsley, as much depends on the quan-tity and flavor of thestuffing, and send the large side uppermost. Put a paper over thefat; and take care to allow a sufficient time for roasting; put it agood distance from the fire, as the meat is very solid, and must be sothoroughly done as not to leave the least appearance of red gravy; serveit with melted butter poured over, and gravy round. Ham orbacon should be served with it, and fresh cucumbers if inseason. Although considered very indigestible, it is a favorite joint and generallyroast-ed, although it may be easily divided into three parts and each dressedsepa-rately; that piece known in a " round of beef" as the " silverside," being roasted, and the remaining two stewed in different ways. In Paris, a longe de veau is cut some-what in the shape of a haunch ofmutton, with the fillet and part of the loin joined together. 573.--TO ROAST A fillet of veal, it should be stuffed with the followingingredients: thyme, marjoram, parsley, savory,finely minced lemon-peel, mace, pepper, nutmeg,with bread-crumbs; to which add two eggs, and four ounces ofmarrow-suet: lay this stuffing in the udder, and, if anyremain, in such holes as you think proper made in the fleshy part. Serve withmelted butter, and garnish with the lemon-peel sliced. 574.--FILLET OF VEAL BOILED. (English.) Choose a small delicate fillet for this purpose; prepare as for roasting, orstuff it with an oyster forcemeat; bind it round with a tape; afterhaving washed it thoroughly, cover it with milk and water inequal quantities, and let it boil very gently three and a half or four hours,keeping it carefully skimmed. Send it to table with a rich white sauce,or, if stuffed with oysters, a tureen of oyster sauce; garnishwith stewed celery and slices of bacon. A boiled tongueshould be served with it. 575.--LOIN of VEAL ROASTED. Take a loin of veal; run a lark-spit along thechine-bones; then tie the ends of the lark-spit on the usualspit, draw-ing down the flap over the kidney. Cover it well withbuttered paper, and tie it up carefully;let it roast gently for three hours. When about to serve, remove thepaper, sprinkle well with salt, dredge it with flour, andfinish basting with a small piece of fresh butter. This joint is frequently divided; the kidney end and the chump. Thekidney end sent up with a toast under the fat; the chumpend should be stuffed like the fillet, or sent up with balls of stuffingin the dish; pour melted butter over the joint, and gravy round.It also forms an excellent stew if served up in winter with rice, and insummer with green peas. 576.--BREAST of VEAL. Cover it with the caul, and if you re-tain the sweetbread, skewer itto the back, but take off the caul when the meat is nearly done; it willtake two and a half to three hours roasting. Or: --Remove the tendons, and insert in their place astuffing; then roast as before. Or: --Raise the skin, and force in as muchstuffing as possible; skewer it up; this will give a very good flavor tothe joint. A Breast of Veal Roasted. An illustration of a piece of meat on platter with a diagram on it. 577.--TO STEW. Cut a breast, or a portion, in pieces; fry them with a littlebutter, an onion and a cabbage-lettuce shred small; whenbrowned, add a little flour, shake it well together; then add a smallquantity of broth or water; let it stew gently; when nearly done,throw in green peas suffi-cient for the dish; when the peas aredone, add a little pounded sugar, pepper, and salt. It mayrequire a little more thickening, in which case knead a little flour andbutter together. 578.--LOIN of VEAL BOILED. Take a loin about eight pounds, skewer down the flap withoutdisturbing the kidney, put the loin into a kettle with enoughcold water to cover it, let it come gradually to a boil (it cannot boiltoo slowly), continue for two hours and a quarter, but it must boil; remove thescum as it rises, send it to table in bechamel, or with parsley andmelted butter. 579.--KNUCKLE OF VEAL. Get a knuckle of a leg of veal, saw it in three parts, but not toseparate it, scald it, and put it for a few minutes in cold water, thenplace it in a stewpan with some good second stock, an onion ortwo, a faggot of herbs, a few sprigs of parsley, a carrot,a turnip, and a head of celery, a blade of mace, a sliceof raw ham, fat and lean; stew it for several hours, until thegristle is soft, take out the veal, cover it over to keep itwhite; strain the liquor, wash a pound of rice and boil it inthis liquor, add half a pint of cream or milk, when therice is done put your veal again into it, to make hot; dish yourveal carefully, and season the rice with pepper andsalt, and pour over the veal; if with parsley andbutter in-stead of water, use the stock from it, and chopfine some boiled parsley and mis into it. 580.--KNUCKLE OFVEAL, BOILED. Put sufficient water over it to cover it, let it boil gently, andwhen it reaches a boil as much salt as would fill a dessert-spoon may bethrown in, keep it well skimmed, and boil until tender, serve with parsley and butter, and a saltedcheek. Allow twenty minutes to each pound. Three quarters of a pound of rice may be boiled with it, or greenpeas, or cu-cumbers; turnips and small spring onions may beput in, allowing them so much time from the cooking of the veal as theywill require. 581.--KNUCKLE OF VEAL STEWED. Place your knuckle of veal in a stew-pan, if the knuckle is a verylarge one it may be divided into two or three pieces for the sake ofconvenience, put in the pan with it a few blades of mace, a littlethyme, an onion, some whole pepper, a burnt crust ofbread, and cover with from three to four pints of water, cover downclose, and boil; when it has boiled place it by the side of the fire and let itsim-mer for at least two hours, take it up, keep it hot while you strain itsliquor, then pour the gravy over it, and send it to table with alemon garnish. 582.--NECK OF VEAL WITH PEAS. Add to themeat, half an hour previous to its being done, one quart of peas,twelve button onions, and a little more sugar 5 remove thefat, and serve as before. 583.--NECK of VEAL WITH NEWPOTATOES. As before, using new potatoes in place of the peas. Any othervegetable, as French beans, broad beans, &c., may be served withit in the same way. Neck of veal. An illustration of a piece of meat with garnish around and on top of it. 584.--NECK OF VEAL May be boiled or roasted--the latter only if it be the best end, and sent totable garnished as in the above engraving--it may be broiled in chops, but isbest in a pie; it may be, however, larded and stew-ed as follows:-- 585.--NECK OF VEAL STEWED. Lard it with square pieces of ham or bacon which havebeen previously rubbed in a preparation of shalots, spices, pep-per, andsalt; place it in the stewpan with about three pints of whitestock, add a bay or laurel leaf, and a couple of onions; add adessert-spoonful of brandy or whiskey, the latter ifbrandy is not at hand, stew till tender, dish the meat, strainthe gravy, pour over the joint, and serve. 586.--BREAST OFVEAL FORCED. After taking out the tendons and all the rib bones, trim theveal, spread it all over with forcemeat, sprinkle over, if youhave got it, a little chopped truffle or mushrooms, sprinkle alittle pepper and salt over it, then roll it tightly up and tieit, then put it into a cloth and stew it for several hours, take it up, andtake off the cloth and strings; dry it and glaze it, have some goodsauce. 587.--SHOULDER OF VEAL. Remove the knuckle and roast what remains, as the fillet; it may or may notbe stuffed at pleasure; if not stuffed, serve with oyster or mushroomsauce; if stuffed, with melted butter. 588.--NECK OF VEALBRAISED. This is done much in the same manner as the neck of veal stewed; itis larded with bacon rolled in chopped parsley, pepper,salt, and nutmeg, placed with the scrag in a tosser, in whichplace lean bacon, celery, carrots, one onion, aglass of sherry or Madeira, with sufficient water to coverit all, stew over a quick fire until it is sufficiently tender, remove theveal and strain the gravy, place the veal in a stewpan in which some butter andflour has been browned, let the bones be uppermost, when theveal is nicely colored it is enough; boil as much of the liquor as maybe required, skim it clean, squeeze a lemon into it, pour it over themeat, and serve. 589.--VEAL CUTLETS. The cutlets should be cut as hand-somely as possible, and about threequarters of an inch in thickness, they should before cooking be well beatenwith the blade of a chopper, if a proper beater be not at hand, they shouldthen be fried a light brown and sent up to table, garnished with parsleyand rolls of thin sliced, nicely fried bacon; they are with advantagecoated previously to cooking with the yolk of an egg, and dredged withbread-crumbs. 590.--VEAL CUTLETS. A very nice way to cook cutlets is to make a batter with half a pint ofmilk, an egg beaten to a froth, and flour enough to renderit thick. When the veal is fried brown, dip it into the batter, then putit back into the fat, and fry it until brown again. If you have anybatter left, it is nice dropped by the large spoon-ful into the fat, andfried till brown, then laid over the veal. Thicken the gravy andturn it over the whole. 591.--ANOTHER WAY. Procure your cutlets cut as above, coat them with the yolk of eggswell beaten, strew over them bread-crumbs powdered, sweet herbs,and grated lemon-peel and nutmeg, put some fresh butterin the pan, and when boiling put in your cutlets; now make some goodgravy; when the cutlets are cooked take them out and keep them beforethe fire to keep hot, dredge into the pan a little flour, put in a pieceof butter, pour a little white stock, squeeze in juice oflemon to taste, season with pepper and salt, addmushroom-ketchup, boil quickly until a light brown; pour it over thecutlets, and serve, the cutlets being laid in a circle round the dish, and thegravy in the centre. 592.--VEAL CUTLETS CURRIED. The cutlets may be prepared as for collops by cutting them into shape,dip-ping them into the yolk of eggs, and seasoning them with finebread-crumbs about four table-spoonfuls, two spoonfuls ofcurry-powder, and one of salt; fry them in fresh butter;serve with curry sauce, which may be made with equal parts ofcurry-powder, flour, and butter, worked well together intoa paste; put it into the pan from which the cutlets have been removed,moisten with a cup-ful of water in which cayenne and salthave been stirred; let it thicken and serve very hot. 593.--VEALCUTLETS--CRUMBED OR PLAIN. If you have not got the leg of veal or the cutlet piece, get athick slice of veal and cut fourteen good sized cutlets, not too thin,flatten each, and trim them a good shape, wet your beater in cold waterto keep the veal from sticking, if for plain cutlets flour themwell and dry them, then again have ready your saute-pan or fryingpan quite hot,with a good bit of lard or butter, then put in your cutlets, andfry a nice light brown; pepper and salt them; if to bebread-crumbed, trim them as be-fore; have ready a little clarifiedbutter, some chopped parsley, and shalot, pepper, andsalt, all mixed together with a yolk or two of eggs wellmixed; have ready some bread-crumbs, put a spoonful of flouramongst them well mixed; dip each cutlet into this omelet, and thinbread-crumb them, patting: each cutlet with your knife to keep itin the proper shape, making the bread-crumbs stick to the cutlet; melt some lard in your saute-pan, andplace your cutlets in it ready to fry a nice brown. 594.--VEALCUTLETS--A LA MAINTENON. Half fry your cutlets, dip them in a seasoning of bread-crumbs,parsley, sha-lots, pepper and salt, and the yolk of anegg; enclose them in clean writing paper, and broil them. 595.--COLLOPS OF VEAL. The piece of veal as before named, or if you have it, a leg ofveal; if not, get a cutlet and cut it into thin pieces, and beatvery thin, saut them off, and when all done trim them round the size of a crownpiece; pepper and salt them, place in a stewpan with somebrown sauce if for brown, and if for white bechamel sauce;add some forcemeat balls, some stewed mushrooms, and some wholedressed truffles; season with pepper, salt, sugar,and lemon; dish the collops round as you would cutlets, putting themush-rooms, and balls, and truffles in the middle. 596.--TENDONS OFVEAL. This is from a breast of veal. Turn up the breast and with asharp knife cut off the chine-bone all along, taking care you do nottake any of the gristle with the bone; when you have cut off thisbone, place your knife under the gristle and follow it all along untilyou have raised it up; then cut off the tendons by keeping close to the ribbones; when you have got it out cut twelve or four-teen tendons endwise,keeping your knife slanting, as each may be the size of a small pattie round,but not too thin; then put them on in cold water to scald, then put themin cold again; prepare a stewpan lined with fat bacon or ham,trim each tendon round, throw the tur-nip in your braise, cover them withsecond stock, and some of the skim-mings; let them stew gently for sixor seven hours; be careful in taking them up, and place them separately upon adrying sieve; glaze them two or three times; dish them on a border; they shouldbe so tender that you might suck them through a quill. 597.--GALANTINEVEAL. Take a large breast of veal; take off the chine-bone, thentake out the gristle called tendons, then take out all the rib bones;flatten it well, have ready some good forcemeat or sausage meat;spread it all over with your forcemeat, then make a line of greengherkins, then a line of red capsicums, then a line of fatham or bacon, then some hard boiled yolks of eggs, then aline of truffles; if you have any boiled calves' feet leftfrom jelly stock, sprinkle it in with pieces of breast of fowl;sprinkle pepper and salt all over it, then roll it up tightly,and likewise do so in a cloth; tie it up lightly; stew it for two hours ormore; take it up and press it flat; let it lie until quite cold; take off thecloth. It will make excellent cold dishes. 598.--OLIVES ofVEAL--ROTI. Cut some cutlets a moderate thickness from the chump end of the loin ofveal, beat them and trim them, eight or a dozen, according to dish; getsome slices of ham or bacon, cover the veal withforcemeat and with the fat, sprinkle be-tween a little choppedmushrooms, pep-per and salt, roll each up, and tie and skewereach, then egg and bread-crumb them, bake them in the oven withbut-tered paper over them, cut the string when done, and before you sendthem to table, draw the skewer, put asparagus sauce, tomato, ormushroom in the dish. 599.--POTTEDVEAL. This may be potted as beef, or thus:-- pound cold veal in amortar, work up with it in powder mace, pepper, and salt,shred the leanest part of tongue very finely, or ham is sometimesused; place in a jar or pot a layer of the pounded veal, and upon that alayer of the tongue, and continue alternately until the pot is full,seeing that every layer is well press-ed down; pour over the top meltedclarified butter. If it is desired, and which is frequently done, tomarble the veal, cut the tongue or ham in square diceinstead of shredding it, but care must be taken that they do not touch eachother or the effect is destroyed. 600.--LOIN of VEAL BRAISED. This joint generally weighs from twelve to fourteen pounds, when off a goodcalf. Have the rib bones carefully divided with a saw, so as notto hurt the fillet, prepare the braising-pan, and proceed with the addition ofone pint of water, but take care not to cover the meat, whichmight happen if your stew-pan was too deep, (this would be boiling instead ofbraising;) it will take about three hours: be careful to remove the fat,as this joint produces a great deal* Taste the sauce before serving, incase more seasoning is required, which might be the case, depending onthe nature of the veal. A good cook should taste ail sauces beforeserving. 601.--CALF'S-HEAD RAGOUT. Parboil the head, and cut off the meat into thin broad pieces,return the bones to the water in which it was boiled, with abeef-bone or a piece of gravy beef, and ham or baconbones; add herbs, and, making two quarts of good gravy,strain it, and put in the meat. When it has stewed three-quarters of anhour, add an anchovy, a little beaten mace, cayennepepper, two spoonfuls of lemon pickle, half an ounce oftruffles and morels, a slice or two of lemon, and a glass ofwine: thicken the gravy with butter and flour,adding forcemeat balls fried, paste fried; and brain-cakesas a garnish. 602.--BOILED CALF'S HEAD. Boil the head gently until the bone will leave the meateasily; take some fine forcemeat, made with ham,egg-balls, and small pieces of very nice pickled pork previouslyboiled; lay them evenly over the inside of one half of the head, androll it up; tie it lightly in a cloth; put it into a stewpan to braise: cut theother portion of the head into small pieces; thicken and flavor thestock in which it was boiled, and warm it up in it, addingforcemeat and egg-balls, brain cakes, and friedpaste. Place the rolled head in the centre of the dish, with thehash round, and the brain cakes, fried paste, and slices oflemon as garnish. Truffles may be added with advantage to any dishcom-posed of calf's head. 603.--HASHED VEAL. If to be hashed, from any joint not over-done, cut thin slices, remove theskin and gristle, put some sliced onions and a shalot over thefire with a piece of but-ter and some flour; fry and shake them. Put insome veal gravy and a bunch of sweet herbs; simmer ten minutes;strain off the gravy, and put it to the veal, with someparsley chopped small, and a little grated lemon peel andnutmeg; let it simmer one minute. If to be stewed, then add the yolk of two eggs, beaten up with twospoonfuls of cream and a very little pepper, and stir over thefire one way until it becomes thick and smooth; squeeze a little lemonjuice in, and serve. 604.--SCOTCHCOLLOPS. If brown, cut the collops thin, beat them a little, fry them inbutter for about two minutes, after having seasoned them with a littlebeaten mace; place them in a deep dish as they are fried, and cover themwith gravy. Put some butter into the frying-pan, and allow itjust to change color. Then strain the collops through a colander from thegravy, and fry them quickly; pour the burnt butter from the pan,and put in the gravy, adding a little lemon-juice. Thegravy may be made of the trimmings of the veal; serve it up withforcemeat balls. If white, cut the collops the size of a crown piece, and not muchthicker; but-ter the bottom of the stewpan and lay the meat piece bypiece upon it, having shaken a little flour upon the butter; addtwo blades of mace and a little nut-meg. Set the stewpan on thefire, and toss it together until the meat is very white; then addhalf a pint of strong veal broth and one quarter of a pint ofcream; toss the whole, and when sim-mered enough, let them just boil;add a little lemon juice, some forcemeat balls, and eitheroysters or mushrooms, which must both be very white; ifnecessary, thicken the sauce with the yolk of eggs, but do notlet it boil afterwards. 605.--TO DRESS COLLOPS QUICKLY. Cut them as thin as paper with a very sharp knife, and in small bits.Throw the skin, and any odd bits of the veal, into a littlewater, with a dust of pepper and salt; set them on thefire while you beat the collops; and dip them into a seasoning of herbs,bread, pepper, salt, and a scrape of nutmeg, butfirst wet them in egg. Then put a bit of butter into afrying-pan, and give the collops a very quick fry; for as they are so thin, twominutes will do them on both sides: put them into a hot dish before the fire;then strain and thicken the gravy. Or: --Cut the collops thin; flatten them with abeater; have a large dish, dredge it with flour, and sprinkle a littleblack pepper over it; as the collops are flattened, lay them in thedish; put a piece of butter in a frying-pan, and when it is melted andhot, lay in the collops; do them quickly; when lightly browned, dish them up,and serve with a mushroom sauce. 606.--CALF'S HEADCURRY Is usually made with the remains left from a previous dinner; if about twopounds of meat remaining upon the bone, cut it whilst cold intothin slices, then cut two onions and two apples into small dice,which put into a stewpan with an ounce of butter and half a clove ofgarlic cut in slices, stir with a wooden spoon over the fire until sauteednice and brown, when add a table-spoonful of curry powder, half one offlour, mix well, then pour in a pint of broth, add a littlesalt, and boil twenty minutes, keeping it well stirred; then put in thecalf's head, and let it remain upon the fire until quite hotthrough; add the juice of half a lemon, which stir in very gentlywithout breaking the meat, dress it upon a dish, and serve withrice separately. Curry sauce may be passed through a sievepre-viously to putting the head in. 607.--VEAL CUTLETS ENPAPILLOTE. Prepare, half-fry,--and put them in a pie-dish and pour the sauceover, and let them remain until cold; then cut a sheet of foolscap paperin the shape of a heart and oil or butter it; lay one ofthe cutlets with a little of the sauce on one half of the paper,turn the other half over, then turn and plait the edges of the paperover, beginning at the top of the heart and finishing with an extratwist at the bottom, which will cause thesauce to remain in it; broil slowly on a gridiron for twenty minutes ona very slow fire, or place it in the oven for that time, and serve. 608.--CUTLETS AND RICE. Boil a cupful of rice in milk until quite soft, then pound itin a mortar with a little salt and some white pepper; pound alsoseparately equal parts of cold veal or chicken: mix them togetherwith yolk of egg, form them into cutlets, brush over with yolk ofegg, and fry them; send them up with a very piquant sauce, made ofgood stock, thickened and flavored with lemon juice, lemonpickle, or Harvey's sauce. The cutlets may be sent to table coveredwith the small pickled mushrooms. 609.--CUTLETS AND CELERY. The cutlets may be cut from the best part of the neck, taking care inremoving the meat from the bones to cut it in a good shape; makegravy of the bones; stewing them with three or four heads ofcelery cut and scalded, a little salt, pepper, and stewedonion; strain the gravy, returning the celery into it;thick-en it with butter and flour, and pour it boiling hot uponthe cutlets. Stew them till they are quite tender, and garnish with lemonand small forcemeat balls fried. 610.--A L'ITALIENNE. Chop a quantity of sweet herbs, pars-ley being predominant;melt a little butter on the fire and then warm the herbs in it;cut the cutlets into handsome shapes, brush them with the yolk of anegg, then lay on the butter and herbs with a knife, and coverthem well with bread-crumbs; this process should be re-peated; fry themof a fine brown; if glazed, they must be put between papers to press allthe grease out. then brush them over with the glaze, and send them totable. Serve with Italian sauce. 611.--A LA HOLLANDAISE. Out some large cutlets from a fillet of veal, beat them with arolling-pin, then dip them into batter made very rich with egg. Make afine forcemeat with pound-ed ham, chopped oysters,&c., lay it upon the cutlets, roll them up, dip them again inegg-batter, roll them in bread-crumbs, and tie them up; roastthem upon skew-ers or in a Dutch oven; chop and pound the trimmings of theveal, add them to the oysters and ham forcemeat with tworaw eggs, make it into balls and fry them; have some stock readyand stew it with an anchovy, a shalot, some white pepper andsalt; strain, and thicken it with butter, add the juice ofone-half a lemon and a glass of white wine; give it one boil and pourit into the dish, with the rolled cutlets in the centre and the balls roundthem. 612.--A LA HOLLANDAISE, WITH WHITE SAUCE. Cut thin slices of undressed veal, hack them with the back of a knifeeach way, dip them in eggs and bread-crumbs, with a littlechopped parsley; fry them in but-ter, lay them on a sieve as they aredone, and serve them with white sauce as for fricassee. 613.--FARCIES OF VEAL. Chop off the thick bone of a small neck of veal to the end ofthe fifth rib; divide the cutlets, and with a broad knife beat themeat of each flat, and cover it with forcemeat of lean veal,beef suet, parsley, a small bit of garlic, a littlesalt, mace, and pepper. Then roll the meat roundthe bone, the end of which leave out at one extremity, put over a thinslice of fat bacon, and, having stuffed in the remainder of the forcemeat at the ends of the roll, bindup with twine. At the bottom of a small stewpan lay slices of turnip,onion, three inches of celery, and two large carrots cutlengthways, and the steaks over: add as much water, or beefbroth, as shall half cover them; set the pan on a moderate stove, and somewood embers on the lid; simmer slowly for two hours, then remove the twine, andplacing the bones upwards, leaning on each other, strain thegravy over them. Or: --Take cutlets from the chump end of a loin ofveal; beat them well; cover them with slices of bacon, then with afine forcemeat; roll them round: tie them into shape; then dip them inthe yolks of eggs and the raspings of bread; roast them, bastingwell with butter; then put them into a sauce thickened withmushrooms; squeeze lemon juice over them; let them stew till verytender, and serve them up. 614.--ROLLED VEAL. The breast is the best for this purpose. Bone a piece of thebreast, and lay a forcemeat over it of herbs,bread, an anchovy, a spoonful or two of scraped ham, avery little mace, white pepper, and chopped chives; thenroll, bind it up tight, and stew it in water or weak broth withthe bones, some carrots, onions, turnips, and abay-leaf. Let the color be preserved, and serve it in veal gravy, orfricassee sauce, with mushrooms and artichoke bottoms. Or: --Put the breast into a stewpan with justwater enough to cover it, an onion, a stick of celery, anda bundle of sweet herbs; let it stew very gently, adding morewater as it stews, until it is tender; then take out the bones,and remove the skin; return the bones into the liquor, which willbe a fine jelly, and serve as the sauce for several dishes. Coverthe veal with a fine forcemeat, season it well, addegg-balls, and roll it up, securing it with tape. Put it into a stewpanwith the fat procured from pork chops, a slice or two of fatbacon or a lump of butter, and a teacupful of the liquor it wasstewed in; shake the stewpan about until the fat has melted, and turnthe veal in it, that it may be all equally done, adding an onionand another bunch of herbs; let it braise one and a half or two hours,then strain the gravy, and thicken it; garnish withforcemeat-balls, egg-balls, and fried paste cut in shapes.Peeled mushrooms may be given by way of variety. When well done, this isan excellent dish. 615.--CALF'S LIVER.--(English way.) Cut the liver into thin slices, dip them in flour, and put itin a saute or frying-pan in which some slices of bacon have beenpreviously cooked, with sufficient fat left in it; saut6 theliver until quite brown and rather crisp, when take out and place itupon a dish with the bacon, then dredge a spoonful of flour inthe pan, or enough to absorb all the fat in it, then add a littlebroth or water so as to make it a thinnish sauce, seasonit, and add two spoonfuls of Harvey's sauce or mushroom ketchup.If the above is nicely done, and the pieces cut the size of cutlets, it willmake a nice entree for an ordinary dinner. It should be served immediately, andvery hot. 616.--STEWED CALF'S LIVER.--(Soyer's.) Choose a nice fat one, rather white in color, lard itthrough with bacon, put one-quarter of a pound of butter in apan; when melted, add a table-spoonful of flour, keep stirring until anice yellow color, then put in the whole of the liver; turn round nowand then until it is a little firm, then add a pint of broth orwater, and a glass of any kind of wine, a bouquet ofparsley, thyme, bay-leaves, alittle salt, pepper, and sugar, thirty buttononions; simmer one hour; take the fat off and the bouquet out, dishthe liver with the onions around it, reduce the sauce, sothat it adheres lightly to the back of the spoon, sauce over and serve.Any vegetables may be used, as carrots, turnips, peas,haricots; and if a little gelatine or isinglass is added to thesauce, and the liver with the sauce only put into a roundbasin and pressed down and left until cold, it will make a nice dish forsupper, lunch or breakfast. If required to be rewarmed, cut into slices, put itin the pan with a drop of water added to the gravy. 617.--CALF'S LIVER FRIED Out in slices, and fry it in good beef-dripping or butter; letthe pan be half full, and put the liver in when it boils, which is whenit has done hissing; have some rashers of toasted bacon, and lay roundit, with some parsley crisped before the fire; always lay thebacon in boiling water before it is either broiled, fried, ortoasted, as it takes out the salt, and makes it tender.Sauce--plain melted butter, a little poured over theliver, the rest in the sauce-boat. 618.--CALF'SHEAD CHEESE. Boil the head until the bones will come out, then put thehead, tongue, and brains, into a mould with spicesand parsley chopped fine until the mould is quite full; put a plate anda weight over it, and when cold turn out. Serve with parsley, and slicesof rolled ham, placed round the dish. 619.--FRICANDEAU OFVEAL. In France the fricandeau is not unfrequently larded in the interior as wellas the outside, by having pieces of the size of a little finger cut off themeat with an instrument something like a cheese-taster, and thenrefilled with pledgets of bacon, or " lardons. " The meat is alsovery generally served upon spinach, dressed with cream orsorrel. The meat, being cut into a handsome shape, should be larded, and putinto a stewpan of small size, with just sufficient water, or vealbroth, to cover it, and there allowed to simmer gently over a slow fire forabout three hours: or until it has become so tender as to be cut with afish-slice. The gravy is then seasoned at pleasure, but mostgenerally made into white sauce. Or: --Cut a nice piece from the fillet, lardit all over as thickly as possible; put it into a stewpan with a few slices offat bacon, some trimmings of veal, a carrot,turnip, and a head of celery, a few allspice, two bladesof mace, and four bay-leaves; let it stow very gently, until thoroughlydone, boil the gravy down to a glaze, cover the veal with it, andserve it upon a puree of sorrel. Grenadines of veal are cooked inthe same way, only made of smaller pieces, four for a dish. 620.--FRICANDELS Take three pounds of the best end of a loin of veal, chop thefat and lean together very fine; then soak a French roll in somemilk; beat three eggs; add pepper, salt,nutmeg, and mace. Make the mixture up about the size, andsomewhat in the shape, of a chicken; rub it over with egg andbread-crumbs, fry until it is brown, pour off the fat, boilwater in the pan, and stew the fricandels in this gravy; two willmake a handsome dish. Thicken the gravy before it is sent to table. 621.--MIROTON OF VEAL. Chop very fine some cold dressed veal and ham or bacon;mix it with a slice of crumb of bread soaked in milk, two onions chopped and browned, a littlesalt, pepper, and a little cream. Put all theseingredients into a stewpan until they are hot, and are well mixed together;then add one or two eggs according to the quantity, butter amould, put in the whole, and bake it in an oven until it is brown; turn out ofthe mould, and serve with fresh gravy. 622.--A GALANTINE. Take out the long bones from a breast of veal, and beat theveal for four minutes with the flat part of a hand-chopper, in orderthat it may roll easily. Spread it on the table, and brush it over thickly withthe yolk of an egg, and then sprinkle it with chopped herbs;season with pepper, salt, and pounded mace; make twoomelettes, one of the yolk and one of the white of egg; cut themin strips; lay them upon the veal, with layers of pounded ham orfarce between; cut some pickled cucumbers or mushrooms into smallpieces, with some sweet herbs well seasoned; strew them over thesurface, then roll up the veal very tightly, tie it in a cloth, and letit stew gently for six hours; then put a heavy weight upon it, and let it standtwo days before it is cut. Serve it in slices, with savory jelly; anykind of boned game or fowl may be added. It requires to be highlyseasoned. 623.--VEAL OLIVES. Cut long thin slices; beat them, lay them on thin slices of fatbacon, and over these a layer of force meat seasoned high with someshred shalot and cayenne. Roll them tight, about the size of twofingers, but not more than two or three inches long; fasten them round with asmall skewer, rub egg over them, and fry of a light brown. Serve withbrown gravy, in which boil some mushrooms, pickled or fresh.Garnish with balls fried. 624.--HARICOT OF YEAL. Take the best end of a small neck; cut the bones short, butleave it whole; then put it into a stewpan just covered with browngravy; and when it is nearly done, have ready a pint of boiled peas,four cucumbers pared and sliced, two cabbage-lettuces cut intoquarters, and half a pint of carrots and turnips cut in shapes,all stewed in a little good broth; put them to the veal, and letthem simmer ten minutes. When the veal is in the dish, pour thesauce and vegetables over it, and lay the lettuce withforcemeat-balls round it. 625.--VEAL CURRY. Cut up about two pounds of lean veal into small square pieces, halfthe size of walnuts; then put a large onion cut into small dice,in a stewpan, with a clove or garlic and one apple cutinto slices, and one ounce of butter; keep them stirred over a moderatefire, until lightly browned, when stir in a good table-spoonful of mildcurry powder, half a one of flour, mix well, then add a pint ofwater, let it just boil up, put in the veal, which stir round twoor three times, to mix with the curry, and put the stewpan over a slowfire, or in a warm oven for an hour and a-half; when done (which you mayascertain by pressing a piece between the finger and thumb, if done it would bequite tender and separate,) add the juice of a lemon and a littlesalt, stir the whole round three or four times very gently, to mix, andturn it out upon your dish; serve with rice separately. Should you require a veal curry made in less time, the better planwould be to saut6 the veal in butter previously, then putting itwith its own gravy to the curry, and boiling the whole gently aquarter of an hour. To make a veal curry with curry paste, saut6 the vealin butter; when becoming slightlybrowned, add a good table-spoonful of the paste, with half a pint ofwater; leave it to stew about half an hour, when it will be ready toserve. Beef, mutton, lamb, and pork curries are madeprecisely the same as directed for veal curries. 626.--CALF'SHEART BAKED. Clean and stuff as for roasted beef heart; then bake instead ofroasting, and afterwards serve with rich gravy or liversauce. 627.--CALVES' FEET. Stewed. --When properly cleaned, rub the feetover with pepper, a very little salt, a little groundginger, and mace; cut the feet into moderately sizedpieces, and put them into a stewpan with a little shalot, and abeefsteak also cut into pieces. Cover all with cold water, andlet them simmer together for three hours. When quite tender, take them off thefire 5 strain the gravy through a sieve. The next day when cold, takeoff all the fat; boil a small quantity of saffron incream, and a little cayenne pepper; mix it with the gravy,and warm the whole without boiling; one foot and one pound ofsteak will make a dish. Fricasseed. --Boil the feet in wateruntil the bones will come out, with an onion and a bunch ofsweet herbs; take the bones out, and when the meat is coldstuff it nicely with a very fine farce, or forcemeat; make the pieces upinto handsome shapes of an equal size; then take some of the stock inwhich the feet were boiled, removing the fat, and straining itwhen melted; make this into thick white sauce with cream androux; warm up the calves' feet in it, and send it to table eitherplain or with a quantity of asparagus tops, previously boiled, and cutinto small pieces. Or: --Boil tender two feet in a shallow pan.observing not to break them; throw them into cold water for an hour;divide and lay them in a little weak veal broth, and simmer them half anhour, with a blade of mace and a bit of lemon peel, which takeout when you add half a tea-cupful of cream, and a bit of flourand butter. Fried. --Take calves' feet which havebeen boiled until very tender; remove the bones; let them get cold; cutthem into well-shaped pieces; season them with white pepper andsalt; dip them into butter, fry them, and serve them up with asharp sauce or garnish of pickles. Calves' feet may also be plainly boiled, and served withparsley and butter, or eaten cold with oil andvinegar. 628.--QUEUES BE VEAU. Having nicely cleaned and soaked four calves' tails, cut off thesmall ends, and blanch them; dry, flour, and fry them a fine brown inbutter; drain the fat from them, and having ready a pint of weakbroth, with a bunch of sweet herbs, chi-bols, two bay-leaves,half a pint of mushrooms, pepper and salt boiled up andskimmed; wipe the sides of the casserole, put the tails in, and simmer veryslowly until they are quite tender; keep them hot while the gravy isstrained, and boiled to a glaze, to cover them. If you have nomushrooms, mix a little of the powder into gravy just beforeserving; have ready small onions, and peel to one size to send up in thedish. 629.--CALVES' EARS STUFFED. The hair being scalded off the ears, after they have been cut quiteclose to the head, scald and clean them as well as possible; boil themquite tender, and blanch them in cold water. Observe that the gristlenext the head be cut so smooth as to allow the ears to standup-right; they may be boiled in white gravy instead of water, winch will make them richer. Whenbecome cold, fill up the cavity with a fine stuffing of calf'sliver, fat bacon, grated ham, bread soaked incream or gravy, herbs, an unbeaten egg, a littlesalt, and a small piece of mace; rub egg over theears and stuffing, dip in bread-crumbs, and fry of abeautiful light brown. Serve in brown or white gravy, ortomato-sauce. If the ear be large, one will be sufficient for acorner dish. Or: --When prepared as above, boil them quite tenderin gravy, and serve them in chervil-sauce; or else boilchervil to a mash, put to it melted butter, pass it through asieve, and add to it white sauce, or use the latter solely, in whichcase put a little mushroom-powder into it; the same forcemeat maybe used, or the ears may be served without. They likewise eat well, cutinto slices, served in white or brown gravy. In the latter case,fry them before stewing in gravy. 680.--CALVES'BRAINS. Remove all the large fibres and skin; soak them in warm waterfor four hours; blanch them for ten minutes in boiling water, with alittle salt and vinegar in it; then soak them three hours inlemon-juice in which a bit of chervil has been steeped; drythem well, dip them in batter, and fry them. Make hot a ladleful of glaze, someextremely small onions browned in butter, artichokebottoms divided in half, and some mushroom-buttons, and serve round thebrains; or, after preparing as above, serve in a rich whiteacidulated sauce, with lemon-juice or tomato-sauce. Or: --Blanch the brains, and beat them up withan egg, pepper, and salt, a small quantity of choppedparsley, and a piece of butter. Make them into small cakes, putthem into a small frying-pan, and fry them. Or: --Prepare them as above; wet with egg, andsprinkle crumbs, salt, pepper, and chopped parsley, andfinish dressing in a Dutch oven. Serve with melted butter, with orwithout a little mushroom-ketchup. 631.--CROQUETTES OFBRAINS. Take calf's brains, blanch, and beat them up with one or twochopped sage-leaves, a little pepper and salt, a fewbread-crumbs soaked in milk, and an egg beaten; roll theminto balls, and fry them. 632.--CERVELLES DE VEAU AU MARINADE. Cut a carrot, a turnip, and an onion into pieces; letthem stew in a little butter; then add a bundle of sweet herbs,and pour over them a pint of vinegar and water in equal parts;then strain the liquor, and pour it over calves' brains cleanedand blanched; let them stew in it till they are firm, then fry them inbutter, and serve up with crisped parsley. 638.--CERVELLES BEVEAU FRICASSEES. Having cleaned and blanched the brains, render them white andfirm by squeezing lemon-juice over them; then put them into a stcwpanwith a piece of butter; stew slowly, that they may not brown; dredge ina small quantity of flour; add a bunch of parsley, and one ofchives; moisten with clear veal broth; let the brains stewuntil they are firm; then send them up in the sauce, thickened with alittle cream and flour and butter. 634.--FRIEDLIVER AND BACON, ETC. Cut the liver rather thin, say about half an inch thick, but firstsoak it in warm water about one hour; chop a quantity of parsley,season it with pepper, and lay it thick upon the liver; cut slices of bacon, and fry both together, butput the bacon first into the pan; add a little lemon-pickle tothe gravy made by pouring the fat out of the pan,flour-ing, and adding boiling water, or:--Out the liver inhandsome pieces, lard them very nicely, and chop some parsley andspread it over the surface with a little pepper and salt; put asmall piece of butter well mixed with flour in the bottom of astewpan, and put in the liver, and allow it to stew gently in its ownjuices until it is done enough. 635.--TO DRESS LIVER ANDLIGHTS. Half boil an equal quantity of each; then cut them-into a middling-sizemince; put to it a spoonful or two of the water they were boiled in, abit of butter, flour, salt, and pepper; simmer tenminutes, and serve hot. 636.--TO DRESS CALF'S HEART. Stuff and roast the same as beef heart; or, being sliced andseasoned, make it into a pudding as directed for steak or kidneypudding. It may be either roasted or baked, but in either way should be wellbasted, stuffed with forcemeat as for veal, but made rather moresavory, and served up in the same manner as beef heart. When the kidney is cut from the loin and dressed separately,chop the kidney, with some of the fat; likewise a littleleek or onion, pepper, and salt. Vealforcemeat may also be used, but it rather weakens the pungency of theseasoning. Roll it up with an egg into balls, and fry them. 637.--SWEETBREADS. For every mode of dressing, sweetbreads should be prepared byblanching, or rather parboiling them. They may be larded and braised; and, being of themselves rather insipid,they will be improved by a relishing sauce, and by a large quantity ofherbs in the braise. Slices of lemon put upon the sweetbreadswhile braising, will heighten the flavor and keep them white, which isvery desirable when sent to table with white sauce. Stuffed withoysters, they make a very good vol-au-vent . 688.--SWEETBREADS A LADAUBE. Blanch two or three of the largest sweetbreads; lard them; putthem into a stewpan, with some good veal gravy, a little browning, andthe juice of half a lemon; stew them till quite tender, and justbefore serving thicken with flour and butter; glaze them; servewith their gravy, with bunches of boiled celery round thedish. 689.--SWEETBREADS STEWED. After blanching, stuff them with a forcemeat of fowl, fat andlean bacon, an anchovy, nutmeg, lemon-peel,parsley, and a very little cayenne and thyme; when wellmixed, add the yolks of two eggs, and fill the sweetbreads.Fasten them together with splinter-skewers, and lay them in a pan, with slicesof veal over, and bacon under them; season with pepper andsalt, mace, cloves, herbs, and sliced onion;cover close over the fire ten minutes, then add a quart of broth, andstew gently two hours; take out the sweetbreads, strain and skim thebroth, and boil it to half a pint; warm the sweetbreads in it,and serve with lemon round. 640.--FRIED. Cut them in slices about three-quarters of an inch thick, dry andflour, egg them, and dip them in fine bread-crumbs; frythem of a light brown; serve on spinach, endive, or sorrel; orcut some toasted bread, dish them on it,and serve them with a sauce piquante. For an invalid, boil them well,cover them with bread-crumbs, a little pepper and salt,with a small bit of butter; brown them lightly with a salamander. 641.--ROASTED. Blanch, dry, egg and bread-crumb them; pass a small skewerthrough each; tie on a spit; roast gently; baste with fresh butter;serve nicely frothed, and a mushroom sauce under them. 642.--SWEETBREADS FRICASSEED WHITE. Blanch and slice them; thicken some veal gravy with flour andbutter mixed; a little cream; a little mushroom powder,and add white pepper, nutmeg, and grated lemon-peel;stew these ingredients together a little, then simmer the sweetbreadstwenty minutes. When taken off the fire, add a little salt andlemon-peel; stir well, and serve. 643.--IF FRICASSEED BROWN. Out them about the size of a walnut, flour, and fry them of afine brown; pour to them a good beef gravy, seasoned with salt,pepper, cayenne, and allspice; simmer till tender; thickenwith flour and butter. Morels, truffles, andmushrooms may be added, and mushroomketchup. 644.--CROQUETTES. Take two sweetbreads or half a pound of roast veal, oneonion chopped fine, mixed with a small piece of butter, oneegg, and a little cream; season with white pepper,cayenne, and salt. This will make eight or nine croquettes. Rollthem in egg and then in bread-crumbs; fry them in lard anice brown color; strew them in a circle round the dish, and serve friedparsley in the centre. Cold veal chopped, and stewed in a little gravy, and when coldmade up as above, makes excellent rissoles. 645.--TO ROASTSWEETBREADS. Sweetbreads should be soaked in warm water, and then blanchedby being thrown into boiling water, boiled for a few minutes, and thenput into cold water. They may then be larded and roasted or fried, andafterwards stewed in butter with crumbs of bread.Sweetbreads may also be larded and braised, and being of themselvesrather insipid, they will be improved by a relishing sauce and by alarge quantity of herbs in the braise. Skins of lemon put upon thesweetbreads while braising will heighten the flavor, and keep themwhite; which is very desirable when sent to table with whitesauce. The usual sauce with which they are served is butterand mushroom ketchup. They may be roasted in a Dutch oven. 646.--CERVELLE DE VEAU A LA MAtTRE D' HOTEL. Let them be prepared. Cut some bread into the shape of cocks'-combs,which fry in butter till of a fine color. Dish them between each half ofthe brains, which you have divided, and cover the brains overwith a maitre d' h6tel sauce, two spoonfuls of bechamel, a small bit offresh butter, some parsley chopped fine, the juice of halfa lemon, and let it be well seasoned. 647.--TONGUE, ETC. Neat's tongue should be boiled full three hours. If it has been insalt long, it is well to soak it over night in cold water. Put itto boil when the water is cold. If you boil it in a small pot, it iswell to change the water, when it has boiled an hour and a half; thefresh water should boil before the half-cooked tongue is put in again. It is nicer for being keptin a cool place a day or two after being boiled. Nearly the same rules apply tosalt beef. A six pound piece of corned beef should boil fullthree hours; and salt beef should be boiled four hours. 648.--CROQUETS OF SWEETBREAD. (French Receipt.) Take such sweetbreads as have already been served, cut them into assmall dice as possible. Have some good veloute boiled down ready. Throw thedice of sweetbreads into the veloute, and give them a boil, that theymay taste of the sauce. Then lay them on a plate to cool. When cold,roll them into any shape you like, round, oval, or long. Of all things avoidgiving them the shape of pears, as some persons do, for in that casethey must be more handled, without at all improving the quality. Serve up withparsley, fried green, in the middle. If you have some mushroomsleft in the larder, cut some likewise in dice, and mix them with thecroquets. 649.--ESCALOPES DE RIS DE VEAU AUX POIS, OR SCOLLOPS OFSWEETBREADS WITH GREEN PEAS. Take four fine sweetbreads, let them disgorge, and blanch themthoroughly. Next, cut them into scollops, as large as possible. Mark them in asaute-pan, or fryingpan, with melted butter and a little salt. Aquarter of an hour before you send up, fry them lightly over a stove, with aclear fire; turn them round, and when done, drain the butter, and put alittle glaze into the pan. Keep stirring the sweetbreads in the glaze;dish them miroton way, and send up the peas in the middle. When you havesweetbreads left at table, cut them into scollops, make them hot in alittle light glaze, and after having dished them miroton way, mask them withthe peas. Scollops of sweetbreads are easier to dress when youput them between a slice of fried bread cut round, and the greenpeas in the middle; without the fried bread they do not keep theshape in which you dish them. 650.--FOIE DE VEAU A LA PO$LE, OR SCOLLOPS OFCALF'S LIVER WITH FINE HERBS. Take a nice calf's liver as white as possible, cut itinto slices of a good and equal shape. Dip them in the flour, and frythem in a black fryingpan, of a nice color, with a little butter. Whenthey are done, put them in a dish, and take some fine herbs which yonhave previously chopped fine, such as parsley, shalots,mushrooms, &c. Stew them slowly on the fire with a littlebutter, and when the herbs are sufficiently done add ateaspoonful of flour, and moisten with gravy, if you have any, orwith water, and add a small bit of glaze. When done, put theliver in the sauce, which warm, but do not allow it to boil; adda little salt, pepper, lemon, and serve very hot. This is again a common dish, yet it is very palatable. You may put theliver in the sauce; but mind that it does not boil. It is a dishfor a breakfast a la fourchette. 651.--CALF'S HEAD. Let the head be thoroughly cleaned, the brains andtongue be taken out, boil it in a cloth to keep it white, (it isas well to soak the head for two or three hours previously to boiling,it helps to improve the color,) wash, soak, and blanch the brains, thenboil them, scald some sage, chop it fine, add pepper,salt, and a little milk, mix it with the brains; thetongue, which should be soaked in salt and water for twenty-fourhours, should be boiled, peeled, and served on aseparate dish. The head should boil until tender, and if intended to besent to table plainly, should be served as taken up, with melted butterand parsley; if otherwise, when the head is boiled sufficientlytender, take it up, spread over a coat of the yolk of egg well beatenup, powder with breadcrumbs, and brown before the fire in a Dutch orAmerican oven. 652.--CALF'S HEAD BAKED. Butter the head, and powder it with a seasoningcomposed of bread-crumbs, very fine, a few sweet herbs andsage, chopped very fine, cayenne, white pepper, andsalt. Divide the brains into several pieces, not too small,sprinkle them with breadcrumbs, and lay them in the dish with thehead. Stick a quantity of small pieces of butter over thehead and in the eyes, throw crumbs over all, pour in three parts of thedish full of water, and bake in a fast oven two hours. 653.--CHITTERLINGS. Or calf's tripe, stewed tender and served on toast witha sauce of onions boiled and mashed in milk, with butteradded, form a nice dish. They are eaten with pepper andvinegar. 654.--HASHED CALF'S HEAD. Put into a stewpan one table-spoonful of chopped onions, and three ofvinegar, take the remains of the head which cut into slices,place them on a dish, add a table-spoonful of flour to them, atea-spoonful of salt, a quarter of one of pepper, put the stewpanon the fire to boil for one minute, add the pieces of head, and moistenwith half a pint of broth, water, or milk; let it simmerfor ten minutes and serve on toast or plain, or with sippets round. Theaddition of a few gherkins sliced or any mixed pickle is animprovement. A little thyme or bay-leaf, if at hand, may be added. Ifwith water or gravy a little coloring will improve theappearance. This receipt is for one pound of meat. It may also be warmedin curry-sauce, and is excellent. 655.--CALF'S HEAD 1LA TORTUE. Bone a calf's head whole; after being well scalded andcleaned cut off the ears, take out the tongue, cut the gristleand bones from the tongue; prepare a good forcemeat, addsome chopped truffles into it, and some mushrooms; lay thehead on a clean cloth on the dresser, spread it thickly over with theforcemeat, blanch and take off the skin of the tongue; cuteach ear in half longways, place them in different parts on theforcemeat and the tongue in the middle, lap it over keeping ithigh in the middle, tie the ends, and brace it all over tightly with some loosestring, as by doing so it will leave all the marks appearing when glazed likethe back shell of turtle, then tie it up in a cloth; it will take somehours to boil; when done, which will be in your second stock, take it upand take off the cloth, put it upon the dish, dry it and glaze it severaltimes; have ready cut from the crumb of bread the form of a turtle'shead and the four fins, fry them a nice light brown, and glaze them withthe head, placing them to the head on the dish, as to look like aturtle crawling, for the eyes use whites of hard boiled eggs; asauce you will find among the sauces. 656.--CALF'SHEAD. Choose one thick and fat, but not too large; soak for ten minutes inlukewarm water, then well powder with rosin, have plenty of scaldingwater ready, dip in the head, holding it by the ear,scrape the hair off with the back of a knife, which will come off easily ifproperly scraped, without scratching the check; when perfectly clean, take theeyes out, saw it in two lengthwise, through the skull, without spoiling thebrain, which take carefully out, and putto disgorge for a few hours in lukewarm water; pull the tongueout, break the jaw-bone, and remove the part which contains the teeth,put the head into plenty of water to disgorge for one hour; makethe following stock and boil for about two hours and a half, and it willbe ready to serve. The stock is made by putting into a braising-pan two carrots,three onions, a quarter of a pound of butter, six cloves,a bouquet of parsley, thyme, and bay-leaves; set it on the firefor about twenty minutes, keep stirring it round, then add a pint ofwater, and when warm mix a quarter of a pound of flour, add agallon of water, one lemon in slices, and a quarter of a pound ofsalt, then lay the head in; take care it is well covered, or thepart exposed will turn dark; simmer gently till tender. 657.--RIS DE VEAUEN CAISSES. Blanch three sweetbreads, and simmer in a strong, well flavoredgravy till quite done. Have ready three round pieces of whitepaper oiled, and lay them thereon; having left them lightly wetted withgravy, sprinkle over them the finest crumbs or raspings of bread,pepper, salt, and a very little nutmeg; do them slowly ona gridiron, and serve in the cases. Any of the vegetable sauces may be servedwith them. 658.--GARNITURE EN RAGOUT. Having prepared and blanched sweetbreads of veal or lamb(house-lamb is the best), liver of lamb and rabbits,truffles and mushrooms, simmer gently half an hour in richveal broth; then divide the several articles into fit bits for helping,and stew the whole until very tender. If, when finished, the gravy wantsconsistence, boil up in it a good piece of butter rolled inflour. Season it fifteen minutes before serving, with whitepepper, salt, and nutmeg only. Have ready and hot,forcemeat balls, in which finely scraped ham, beef suet,the breast of a fowl, or cold veal, are the principalingredients. It may be served in a tureen as soup, or in an ornamented crust previouslybaked. If to be white, beat as many yolks of eggs as the quantitymay require, and simmer in the ragout two minutes: it must not boil. Sometimesone or two whole pigeons, nicely prepared, form a part of this muchadmired dish, which in one way or other is rarely omitted on well coveredtables. 659.--VEAL CAKE. Bone a breast of veal, and cut it in slices; cut also slicesof ham or lean bacon, and boil six eggs hard;butter a deep pan, and place the whole in layers one over the other,cutting the eggs in slices, and seasoning with choppedherbs and cayenne pepper, and wetting the herbs withanchovy or other highly-flavored sauce. Cover up the whole, letit bake for four hours, and when taken from the oven, lay a weight upon it topress it well together. When cold, turn it out. 660.--ANOTHER. Boil six or eight eggs hard; cut the yolks in two, and laysome of the pieces in the bottom of the pan; shake in a little choppedparsley, some slices of veal and ham, and then eggsagain, shaking in after each some chopped parsley, with pepperand salt, till the pan is full. Then, put in water enough tocover it, and lay on it about an ounce of butter; tie it down with adouble paper, and bake it about an hour. Then press it close togetherwith a spoon, and let it stand till cold. It may be put into a small mould, andthen it will turn out beautifully for a supper or side dish. 661.--ANOTHER. Chop very finely cold dressed veal and ham or bacon;mix it with a slice of bread-crumb soaked in milk, twoonions chopped and browned, a little salt, pepper, and anegg beaten. Put all these ingredients into a stewpan until they are hotand are well mixed; then oil or butter a mould, put in the whole,and bake it in an oven until it is brown; then take it out, and send it totable with fresh gravy. 662.--VEAL BOLLS Are cut from any cold joint, or prepared in the same manner from the rawmeat. Out thin slices, and spread on them a fine seasoning of avery few crumbs, a little chopped or scraped bacon, parsley andshalot, some fresh mushrooms stewed and minced, pepper,salt, and a small piece of pounded mace. This stuffing mayeither fill up the roll like a sausage, or be rolled with themeat. In either case, tie it up very tight, and stew very slowly in agravy and a glass of sherry. Serve it when tender, after skimmingit nicely. 663.--BLANQUETTES. Melt a piece of butter the size of a walnut in a stewpan; then putin a little thyme, parsley, or any herbs you like theflavor of, and a little onion, all chopped fine, with a pinch offlour. Brown the herbs; add pepper and salt, with aclove or two. Then put in cold or undressed veal, cut in thinslices the size of half a crown; add gravy or broth, half a pint,or according to the quantity of meat you want to dress. It should not betoo large a dish. Let it stew very gently over a stove; if of dressedmeat, one hour will be sufficient; add half a teacupful of cream,and stir it well together for a few minutes; then take it up, and before youturn it out have two yolks of eggs well beaten, and add to your dish.Give it a few shakes over the fire. It must not boil, or it will curdle. Or: --Cut rabbits, fowl, veal,or lobster in pieces, steep them (except the veal andfish) in water for half an hour, changing the water. Putsome butter in a stewpan to melt, but do not let it fry; put in themeat with a very little flour, and keep shaking it well; pour inby degrees some broth made of white meat, add a bunch ofparsley, an onion, salt, mace, and whitepepper. Stew it well a quarter of an hour before it is dished; take out theparsley and onion, and add some raw parsley chopped, andthe yolk of an egg and cream beaten together. You must nevercease shaking the pan until the blanquette is put over the dish. 664.--VEAL A LA CHARTREUSE. Line a copper mould with fat bacon, lay sliced carrots andturnips round the edges, then cover with a forcemeat, and put ina fricassee of veal or fowl. Cover the top of the mould with apaste, steam it an hour, and serve it turned out upon a dish. 665.--TO MARBLE VEAL. Boil tender, skin, and cut a dried neat's tongue in thinslices, and beat it as fine as possible, with half a pound of butter andsome mace pounded. Have ready some roasted fillet of veal, beatenwith butter, and seasoned with white pepper and salt; ofthis put a thick layer in a large potting-pot, then put in the tongue,in rough irregular lumps, not to touch each other; fill up the pot withveal, and press it down quite close. Pour clarified butter thickover; keep in a dry cool place, and serve in thin slices, taking off thebutter. Garnish with parsley. 666.--SCALLOPS of COLDVEAL. Mince the meat extremely small, and set it over the fire, with ascrape of nut-meg, a little pepper and salt, and alittle cream, for a few minutes; then putit into the scallop-shells, and fill them with crumbs of bread,over which put some bits of butter, and brown them before the fire. Either veal or chicken looks and eats well prepared in thisway, and lightly covered with crumbs of bread fried; or these may be puton in little heaps. 667.--TO MINCE VEAL. Cut cold veal as fine as possible, but do not chop it; put to it avery little lemon-peel shred, two grates of nutmeg, somesalt, and four or five spoonfuls of either broth, milk, orwater; simmer these gently with the meat, but take care not tolet it boil, and add a bit of butter rubbed in flour. Put sippetsof thin toasted bread, cut into a three-cornered shape, round thedish. Fried crumbs of bread lightly strewed over, or served in littleheaps on the meat, are an improvement to the look and flavor. A littleshred of shalot may occasionally be added. Or: --Stew a few small mushrooms in their ownliquor and a bit of butter a quarter of an hour; mince them very small,and add them (with their liquor) to minced veal, with also a littlepepper and salt, some cream, and a bit of butterrubbed in less than half a teaspoonful of flour. Simmer three or fourminutes, and serve on thin sippets of bread. 668.--THE TURKISH MODE Take equal quantities of cold dressed veal, minced very fine,fat, and crumbs of bread, and season it well; add choppedonions, parsley, salt, and cayenne pepper; wet itwith one or two eggs, according to the quantity, adding, if necessary, alittle cold melted butter; make the mixture into balls oregg-shapes, and roll them in as much boiled rice as they willtake round them. Stew them for an hour and a half in good gravy, wellseasoned, and serve them up in it. In all these modes, the addition may be made of sauce auxtruffles, or any of the approved sauces; and a squeeze of lemon willin all cases be found to give a pleasing zest to their flavor. 669.--CURRY of VEAL. Out part of a breast of veal in moderate sized pieces, put it in astewpan with an onion and a shalot sliced fine, a slice o lemon,one ounce of butter, a little parsley and thyme, and atable-spoonful of curry-powder mixed with the same quantity offlour; add sufficient broth or water for the sauce;let it boil gently till the veal is done; strain the saucethrough a sieve, pour it over the veal quite hot, and serve withrice in a sepa-rate dish. 670.--A ROAST BEEF of LAMB.* Take the saddle and the two legs of a lamb, cut on the middle of eachleg a small rosette, which is to be larded, as also the fillets. Roastthe whole, and glaze the larded parts of a good color. In France it is servedup with maitre d'hdtel sauce, but in England with gravy under it,and mint-sauce in a boat. MUTTON. THIS is a delicate and a favorite meat. It is susceptible of manymodes of cooking, and should always be served very hot and with very hotplates, except of course in cases where it may be sent to table as a cold dish.It is a meat which {Footnote} * The appellation of "roastbeef of lamb" must sound very extraordinary to an American ear, butthe singularity of the name is as nothing when compared with the importance andnecessity of the dish. At a very great dinner, it is essential to have somedish of magnitude. This has a very good appearance, and is truly excellent. Ibeg to recommend the trial of a maitre d'hotel sauce under, as thebutter, parsley, salt, pepper, and lemon-juice, agree well with the gravy of themeat.--UDE. requires care in the cooking,which it will amply repay. The roasting parts are the better for hanging sometime, especially the haunch or saddle, but not for boiling, as the color is aptto be injured. One of the most favorite dishes is the 671.--HAUNCH OFMUTTON. The haunch should be hung as long as possible without being tainted; itshould be washed with vinegar every day while hanging, and driedthoroughly after each washing; if the weather be muggy rubbing withsugar will prevent its turning sour; if warm weather, pepper andground ginger rubbed over it will keep off the flies. When ready for roasting, paper the fat, commence roasting somedistance from the fire, baste with milk and water first, and thenwhen the fat begins dripping, change the dish and baste with its owndripping; half an hour previous to its being done remove the paper fromthe fat, place it closer to the fire, baste well, serve with currantjelly. 672.--TO STUFF A LEG of MUTTON. Take a leg of mutton, cut off all the fat, take thebone carefully out and preserve the skin whole; take outthe meat and mince it fine, and mix and mince with it about one pound offat bacon and some parsley; season the whole well with popper andsalt, and a small quantity of eschalot or chives choppedfine; then put the meat into the skin and sew it up neatly on theunder side; tie it up in a cloth and put it into a stewpan with two or threeslices of veal, some sliced carrots and onions, a bunch ofparsley, and a few slices of fat bacon; let it stew for three orfour hours, and drain the liquor through a fine sieve; when reduced to a glaze,glaze the mutton with it and serve in stewed French beans. 673.--TO DRESS A LEG of MUTTON WITH OYSTERS. Parboil some fine well-fed oysters, take oif the beards and hornyparts; put to them some parsley, minced onion, and sweetherbs, boiled and chopped fine, and the yolks of two or threehard boiled eggs. Mix all together, and cut five or six holes in thefleshy part of a leg o mutton, and put in the mixture; and dressit in either of the following ways: --Tie it up in a cloth and let it boilgently two and a half or three hours, according to the size. Or: --Braise it, and serve with a pungent brownsauce. 674.--SADDLE OF MUTTON. This joint, like the haunch, gains much of its flavor from hanging for someperiod. The skin should be taken off, but skewered on again until withinrather more than a quarter of an hour of its being done; then let it be takenoff, dredge the saddle with flour, baste well. The kidneys may beremoved or remain at pleasure, but the fat which is found within thesaddle should be removed previous to cooking. 675.--LEG of MUTTONROASTED. Like the haunch and saddle, should be hung before cooking, should be slowlyroasted and served with onion sauce or currant jelly. 676.--ROAST LEG of MUTTON.--ANOTHER RECEIPT. Put the leg into an iron saucepan with enough cold water tocover it, let it come to a boil gently, parboil it by simmering only 5 have thespit or jack ready, and take it from the hot water and put it to thefire instantly; it will take from an hour to an hour and a half if large, andless time if small. 677.--ROAST LEG of MUTTON BONED AND STUFFED. Theprincipal skill required in accomplishing thisdish is the boning; this must be done with a very sharp knife. Commence on theunderside of the joint, passing the knife under the skin until exactlyover the bone, then cut down to it, pass the knife round close to thebone right up to the socket, then remove the large bone of thethickest end of the leg, seeing the meat is clear of thebone; you may then draw out the remaining bones easily. Put inthe orifice a highly seasoned forcemeat, fasten the knuckle end tightlyover, replace the bone at the base of the joint, and sew it in; roast itin a cradle spit or on a jack; if the latter let the knuckle end be downwardsas it is less likely to suffer the forcemeat to drop out. It must bewell basted, and should be sent to table with a good gravy. 678.--LEG of MUTTON BOILED. Should be first soaked for an hour and a half in salt and water, carebeing taken that the water be not too salt, then wiped and boiledin a floured cloth; the time necessary for boiling will depend upon theweight; two hours or two hours and a half should be about the time; it shouldbe served with turnips mashed, potatoes, greens, and capersauce; or brown cucumber, or oyster sauce. 679.--LEG ofMUTTON BBAISED. Procure a leg of mutton of choice flavor, take off the knuckleneatly, divide it into two or three pieces, trim the leg of all thesuperfluous edges, and then half roast it; place it with the broken knuckle ina stewpan, add the trimmings with half a dozen slices of rich fat bacon,thyme, knotted marjoram, and other sweet herbs, anonion stuck with cloves, and about half an ounce of butterrolled in flour; stew the whole gently, shaking it occasionally and turnit while stewing; when it is tender take it up, skim the gravy, strain,boil it fast until reduced to a glaze, make a puree or soup of vegetables andplace the mutton upon it, cover the mutton with the glaze, andserve. 680.--TO SEND A LEG of MUTTON NEATLY; TO TABLE WHICH HAS BEENCUT FOR A PREVIOUS MEAL. Too much must not have been cut from the joint or it will not answer thepurpose. Bone it, cut the meat as a fillet, lay forcemeatinside, roll it, and lay it in a stewpan with sufficient water to coverit; add various kinds of vegetables, onions, turnips,carrots, parsley, &c., in small quantities; stew two hours,thicken the gravy, serve the fillets with the vegetables round it. 681--SADDLE OF MUTTON, À LA POLONAISE. (Soyer's.) This is my economical dish, par excellence, and very much it is liked every timeI use it. Take the remains of a saddle of mutton, of the previous day,cut out all the meat close to the bone, leaving about one inchwide on the outside, cut it with a portion of the fat, into small dice;then put a spoonful of chopped onions in a stewpan, with a littlebutter; fry one minute, add the meat, with a table-spoonful offlour, season rather high with salt, pepper, and a littlegrated nutmeg; stir round, and moisten with a gill or a little more ofbroth, add a bay-leaf, put it on the stove for ten minutes, add twoyolks of eggs, stir till rather thick, make about two pounds of mashedpotatoes firm enough to roll, put the saddle-bone in the middle ofthe dish, and with the potatoes form an edging round the saddle, so as togive the shape of one, leaving the middle empty; fill it with your mincemeat, which ought to be enough to do so; if you should not have enoughwith the remains of the saddle, the remains of any other joint of muttonmay be used; egg all over, sprinkle bread-crumbs around, put in rather a hot oven, to get a nice yellowcolor, poach six eggs, and place on the top, and serve browngravy round; white or brown sauce, if at hand, is animprovement. You may easily fancy the economy of this well-looking and gooddish; the remains of a leg, shoulder, loin, neck ofmutton, and lamb, may be dressed the same way, keeping their shapeof course. 682.--SOYER'S NEW MUTTON CHOP. Trim a middling-sized saddle of mutton, which cut into chops half aninch in thickness with a saw, without at all making use of a knife (the sawingthem off jagging the moat and causing them to eat more tender,) then trim theminto shape; season well with salt and pepper, place them upon agridiron over a sharp fire, turning them three or four times; they wouldrequire ten minutes' cooking; when done dress them upon a hot dish, spread asmall piece of butter over each, (if approved of,) and serve; by addinghalf a table-spoonful of good sauce to each chop when serving, andturning it over two or three times, an excellent entrée is produced: thebone keeping the gravy in whilst cooking, it is a very greatadvantage to have chops cut after this method. At home, when I have a saddleof mutton, I usually cut two or three such chops, which I broil, rubmaître-d'hôtel butter over, and serve with fried potatoesround, using the remainder of the saddle the next day for a joint. The aboveare also very excellent, well seasoned and clipped into egg andbreadcrumbs previous to broiling. Lamb chops may be cut preciselythe same, but require a few minutes' less broiling. You must remark that, by this plan, the fat and lean are betterdivided, and you can enjoy both; whilst the other is a lump of meat nearthe bone and fat at the other end, which partly melts in cooking,and is often burnt by the flame it makes; the new one not being divided at thebone, keeps the gravy in admirably. If well sawed it should notweigh more than the ordinary one, being about half the thickness. Do try them,and let me know your opinion. 633.--NECK OF MUTTON Is particularly useful, as many dishes may be made of it. The best end ofthe neck may be boiled for one hour and a half, and served withturnips; or roasted; dressed in steaks; in pies;à-la-Turc; or en haricot. The scrag may be stewed into broth; or with asmall quantity of water, some small onions, a fewpeppercorns, and a little rice, and served together. 684.--SHOULDER OF MUTTON Must be well roasted and sent to table with skin a nice brown; it is served with onion sauce. This is the plainest fashion, and for smallfamilies the best. 685.--A SHOULDER OF MUTTON WITH RICE. Take a shoulder of mutton and half boil it, then put it into astewpan, with two quarts of mutton gravy, a quarter of a pound ofrice, a teaspoonful of mushroom powder, with a little beatenmace, and stew it till the rice is tender; then take up themutton and keep it hot; put to the rice half a pint ofcream, and a piece of butter rolled in flour; stir it wellround the pan, and let it boil a few minutes; lay the mutton in thedish, and pour the rice over it. 686.--LOIN of MUTTON STEWED. Remove the skin, bone it, and then roll it; put it in astewpan with a pint and a half of water, two dessert-spoonfuls of pyroligneous acid, a piece of butter,sweet herbs, and an onion or two; when it has stewed nearly fourhours, strain the gravy, add two spoonfuls of red wine, take upand serve with jelly sauce. 687.--BREAST OF MUTTON May be stewed in gravy until tender, bone it, score it, seasonwell with cayenne, black pepper, and salt; boil it, andwhile cooking skim the fat from the gravy in which it has beenstewed, slice a few gherkins, and add with a dessertspoonful ofmushroom ketchup; boil it, and pour over the mutton whendished. 688.--BREAST of MUTTON CRUMBED OR GRATIN. If one breast of mutton, cut off the chine-bone down to thegristle; if you have a stock pot on, put the breast of muttoninto it, let it boil until tender, then take it up to cool; have ready as forthe crumbed cutlets, adding in the butter and egg a littlechopped mushroom; put it all over the breast with a pastebrush, then put it on a dish and in the oven to brown; the sauce will beunder it when dished. 689.--NECK of MUTTON. This dish is most useful for broth, but may be made a pleasant dishby judicious cooking. To send it to table merely boiled or baked is to disgustthe partaker of it. When it is cooked as a single dish, first boil it slowlyuntil nearly done, then having moistened a quantity of bread-crumbs andsweet herbs, chopped very fine, with the yolk of an egg, let themutton be covered with it, and placed in a Dutch or American oven beforethe fire, and served when nicely browned. The breast may be cooked inthe same manner. 690.--STEAKS FROM A LOIN of MUTTON Are donein the same way, only trimming some of the fat off. Cut thick and stewinstead of frying them. 691.--MUTTON STEAKS. The steaks are cut from the thick or fillet end of a leg ofmutton, and dressed as rump steaks. 692.--MUTTON CHOPSBROILED. Cut from the best end of the loin, trim them nicely, removingfat or skin, leaving only enough of the former to make thempalatable; let the fire be very clear before placing the chops on the gridiron,turn them frequently, taking care that the fork is not put into the lean partof the chop; season them with pepper and salt, spread a littlefresh butter over each chop when nearly done, and send them to tableupon very hot plates. 693.--MUTTON CHOPS FRIED. The fat in which the chops are to be fried should be boiling when thechops are put into it. They should be pared of fat and well trimmedbefore cooking; they should be turned frequently, and when nicely browned theywill be done; of course if they are very thick judgment must be exercisedrespecting the length of time they will occupy in cooking. Mutton Chop. An illustration of a piece of meat with a bone in it. 694.--CHOPS AS BEEFSTEAKS. Cut thick from a leg of mutton, and rub each steak with ashalot; boil over a quick fire; rub your dish with shalot; when on the dishpepper and salt it; send it up quite hot. 695.--MUTTON CUTLETS. Loin chops make the best cutlets. Take off the vertebræ orthickest end of each bone and about an inch off the top of thebone; put the chops into a stewpan in which has been previously melted alittle butter seasoned with salt; stew for a short time, but notuntil they are brown, as that appearance is accomplished in another manner.Chop some parsley very fine, add a little thyme, mix it withsufficient yolk of egg to coat the chops, which will have been sufferedto cool before this addition to them; then powder them with breadcrumbsover which a pinch of cayenne pepper has been sprinkled; broil them upona gridiron over a clear but not a brisk fire; when they are brown dish them;lemon-juice may be squeezed over them, or the dish in which they areserved may be garnished with thin slices of lemon in halves andquarters. 696.--MUTTON CUTLETS--ANOTHER WAY. Not a very fat neck, take off the scrag and the breast bones,leaving the remainder the length you intend the cutlets, then take the chinebone clean off then the skin and some of the fat; you willnow have the mutton free from bones to cut your cutlets; you willfind you can cut fourteen good cutlets from this trimmed neck withoutany hacking; beat each cutlet with your beater, trim them neatly; besure to cut out the pac-wax, and leave a little fat to eachcutlet. If for gratin or bread crumbed, prepare some choppedparsley and shalot, and bread-crumbs; put some butter tomelt in a stewpan, a little of the parsley and . shalot and some yolkof egg, mix it well up together; put your bread-crumbs on a sheet ofpaper, add to it a little salt and pepper; dip eachcutlet into melted butter, put down the bread-crumbs withyour knife, lay them on a buttered sauté-pan until wanted to fry. 697.--CUTLETS SAUTÉ. Cut your neck of mutton precisely as for the crumbed cutlets; haveready a piece of butter melted in your sauté-part; dip eachcutlet both sides in the butter; when required fry them a verylight color, pepper and salt them; when done take them up todrain from the fat, have some good glaze melted, and glaze eachcutlet both sides; dish them round with or without a rim of mashedpotato. 698.--MUTTON CUTLETS--MAINTENON. Trim the cutlets as for former cutlets; half fry them, then cover them withfine herbs and bread-crumbs, and season with pepper andsalt. Lay all to cool; have some fresh parsley to add to thealready fried herbs and shalot. When cool, spread the butter andherbs thick upon each cutlet; sprinkle them withbreadcrumbs; wrap them in buttered foolscap paper, and broil themover a slow fire until done. 699.--BRAISED CUTLETS. Trim your mutton from the bones as before; then put it wholeinto a good braise; let it stew gently until tender; put it aside to get cold;when so, cut your cutlets as thick as the former; trim them neatly, make themhot and glaze them. 7OO.--FILLET OF MUTTON. Choose a very large leg; cut from four to five inches in thicknessfrom the large end of the leg; take out the bone, and in itsplace put a highly savory forcemeat; flour and roast it for twohours. When done, it may be sent to table with the same accompaniments as afillet of veal, with melted butterpoured over it, or a rich brown gravy and red currantjelly. 701.--FILLET OF MUTTON STEWED. Cut and prepare stuff as above, flour and brown in a littlebutter, and put it into a stewpan with a pint and a half ofgravy; with it a small bundle of sweet herbs, two or three smallonions, or eight or ten small button onions peeled, a teaspoonfulof whole black pepper; stew slowly three hours and a half. The filletmay be salted, and being half roasted may be stewed with its trimmings. 702.--FILLETS IN MARINADE. Cut from the loins of mutton; prepare some carrots,turnips, onions, and celery, thyme, mace,cloves, and whole pepper; cut up in thin slices; boil a littlevinegar and water, put your fillets in a deep dish, pour thevinegar over the roots and mutton when cold; let it lie allnight; next day trim neatly and braise them; take them out, and when requiredglaze them, sauce under them. 703.--BLANQUETTE DE MOUTON Is generally made from a former day's saddle of mutton; cutting outthe fillets, trimming it neatly, you will be able to cut clearly pieces thesize of a shilling, which you will put into some good sauce, you maythen put two or three gherkins into it; this is dished better in atin. 704.--HARICOT OF MUTTON. Cut a neck or loin of mutton into thin chops; flour andfry them brown in a small quantity of butter; drain them on a sieve;then put them into a stewpan and cover them with gravy; add acarrot, two leeks, a faggot of parsley and thyme;two or three blades of mace, some allspice, a whole onion,and two turnips; stew them until the meat is tender; then takeout the chops, strain the gravy, and, skim off all the fat; put alittle butter mixed with flour into the stewpan; stir it untilmelted and made quite smooth, adding the gravy by degrees, stirring allthe time; then put in the chops, with some carrots and turnipsready blanched and cut into pretty shapes, with a dozen silver onionswhole, and also half boiled; season slightly with pepper andsalt, a very little soy, and a teaspoonful of Tarragon vinegar;stew the whole gently for a quarter of an hour, and serve them while quitehot. 705.--MUTTON HARICOT. Take a loin of mutton, cut it into small chops, season it withground pepper, allspice and salt; let it stand a night,and then fry it. Have good gravy well seasoned with flour,butter, ketchup, and pepper if necessary. Boilturnips and: carrots, cut them small, and add to themutton, stewed in the gravy, with the yolks of hard boiledeggs and forcemeat balls. Some green pickles will be animprovement. 706.--HARICOT MUTTON--ANOTHER WAY. Cut into chops the best end of the neck of mutton; fry them a lightbrown in fat made boiling-hot before the chops are put into it; somepieces cut from the neck will be the best, dredge them withflour; sprinkle them with pepper and salt, put in astewpan three parts of a pint of water, an onion stuck withcloves, parsley, a few spring onions, and a bay-leaf; stewgently till the meat is nearly done, then add turnips andcarrots cut small; fry a large onion cut in slices brown; add itto the gravy, which when just done must be thickened; take out thesweet herbs when the whole; has stewed an hour, and serve. 707.--MUTTON KEBOBBED. Take all the fat out of a loin ofmutton, and that on the outside also if veryfat, and remove the skin; cut it into steaks; mix a smallnutmeg grated with a little salt and pepper, crumbs, andherbs; dip the steaks into the yolks of three eggs, andsprinkle the above mixture all over them; then place the steaks togetheras they were before they were cut asunder, tie them, and fasten them on a smallspit; roast them at a quick fire; set a dish under, and baste them with a goodpiece of butter and the liquor that comes from the meat, butthrow some more of the above seasoning over. When done enough, take itup, and lay it in a dish; have half a pint of good gravy ready besidesthat in the dish, and put into it two spoonfuls of ketchup, and rub downa teaspoonful of flour with it; give this a boil, and pour it over themutton, but first skim off the fat. Mind to keep the meathot, till the gravy is quite ready. 708.--HASHED MUTTON. This is a favorite method of disposing of the cold shoulder, especially ifit should happen to be underdone; cut it into slices, take the bones (ifof a shoulder or leg break them), and put them in a stew-pan with thetrimmings; cover them with water, put in a faggot of thyme,parsley, whole pepper, allspice, &c., cover down andsimmer for three-quarters of an hour; while the bones, &c., arestewing, fry an onion brown in a little butter and flour;put it into the stewpan with the gravy, stew gently twenty minutes,strain it, lay in the slices of mutton in the stew-pan, pour over themthe strained gravy; pour in a spoonful of walnut ketchup, or anysuitable preferred sauce, season it, simmer until the meat is hotthrough, dish and serve. A spoonful of curry powder is sometimes added, and is always apalatable addition. 709.--IRISH STEW. Cut a neck of mutton as for the haricot; blanch the chops inwater; take and put them into another stewpan with four onionscut in slices; put to it a little of your second stock, let it boil aquarter of an hour; have ready some potatoes pared; put them into thestewpan with the mutton, with salt and pepper; as somelike the potatoes whole and some mashed as to thicken the stew, you mustboil them accordingly; dish the meat round and the vegetables in themiddle. 710.--CHINA CHILO. Mince a pint basin of undressed neck of mutton or leg, andsome of the fat; put two onions, a lettuce, a pint ofgreen peas, a teaspoonful of popper, four spoonfuls of water, andtwo or three ounces of clarified butter into a stewpan closely covered;simmer two hours, and serve in the middle of a dish of boiled rice; ifcayenne is approved, add a little. 711.--CHINA CHILO--ANOTHER WAY. Chop very fine two small young lettuces, two onions, a pint ofgreen peas, and a couple of young cucumbers, or the fourth of apint of mushrooms; season with a teaspoonful of salt and half ateaspoonful of pepper; mince the meat of a neck of muttonuncooked, and mix it with the vegetables in a stewpan; add four table-spoonfulsof water and two ounces of butter, clarified will be proved thebest; let them well amalgamate over a slow fire; keep them stirred for fifteenminutes, then cover down close and simmer very slowly for two hours; serve itin the centre of boiled rice. 712.--MINCED MUTTON. Mince dressed meat very finely, season it, make a very goodgravy, warm the meat up in it, and serve with fried breadround the dish, or with poached eggs. Or: --Mince cold leg of mutton freed from theskin and fat, warm it with stewed cucumbers, taking carethat it does not burn after the meat is put in. 713.--AU GRATIN, ORAS SCALLOPS. Mince dressed mutton with a very little fat, season lightlywith pepper and salt, and put into scallop-shells abouthalf full. Then put potatoes mashed with a little milk, and a verysmall bit of butter; smooth with a spoon, and brown in a Dutch oven. 714.--AS RISSOLES. Enclose the minced meat in a paste or browning of eggand crumbs of bread, but season it as if for forcemeat. 715.--MUTTON LIKE VENISON. A haunch or leg will be the most appropriate. The joint should behung as long as it can be with safety, and dressed exactly like a haunch ofvenison, and served with the same sauces, but to make the taste moreperfectly resemble that of venison it should, after having been hung tothe turn, be skinned, and laid in a pan with vinegar and water;two parts of the former to one of the latter, not enough to cover it; put in afagot of herbs, a clove of garlic, one or two bay-leaves, aspoonful of whole pepper, and a couple of onions cut in slices;let it soak three days, dry it well, hang it for a day and roast asvenison. It may also be put into a stewpan with half a pint ofgravy, and simmered four hours; serve with venison sauce. 716.--TO MAKE A SCOTCH HAGGIS. Take the stomach of a sheep. The washing and cleaning is of moreconsequence than all, as it will be of a bad color and a bad taste if not wellcleansed; when clean, turn it inside out, then let it lie for a day or two insalt and water. Blanch the liver, lights, and heartof the sheep, lay them in cold water, chop all very fine; theliver you had better grate, chop a pound of the suet very fine,dry in the oven a pound of oatmeal; mix all this well together, seasonwith pepper and salt, a little chopped parsley, and alittle chopped onion; then sew up the bag; before you finish sewing it,add a few spoonfuls of good white stock; put it in a stewpan with adrainer; boil it in water, keeping it well covered all the time, prickit all over with a small larding pin to keep it from bursting; it will takeseveral hours to boil; be careful in taking it up, and let your dish be largeenough. 717.--ROGNON DE MOUTON A LA FRANÇAISE. Take half a dozen fine mutton kidneys, clear them of fat andskin, and cut them into thin slices; powder them immediately withsweet herbs in fine powder, parsley which has been chopped,dried, and powdered, cayenne, and salt: put into a stewpan twoounces of clarified butter or fresh if the former is not in reach, putin the slices of kidney, fry them; they will brown very quickly, theymust be done on both sides; dredge flour over them, moisten withlemon juice; in five minutes the kidneys will be done; lift themout into a very hot dish around which are laid sippets fried; pour into thegravy two glasses of champagne, give it a boil, pour it over thekidneys, and serve. It may here be stated that the French cooks vary constantly the herbswhich they employ, according to any known preference for the palate of thosefor whom they cook. Various kinds of wines and sauces may be used forflavoring, and this is constantly done as much for variety and the ability ofgiving a new name to a dish, which is varied only in some such smallfeature. 718.--LOIN 0F MUTTONLIKE VENISON. (French Receipt.) Remove the skin from the joint and bone it, and do it neatly;lay it in a stew-pan with about a pint of weak broth, an onionstuck with cloves, two glasses of red wine, and a teaspoonful ofpyroligneous acid; let it boil, put in a bundle of sweet herbs; stew,turning frequently; add as it progresses a little gravy; some very goodmay be made from the bones; it will take from two hours and a half tothree hours. 719.--TO DEESS MUTTON HAMS. Soak the ham for five or six hours in cold spring water,unless it has only recently been cured, then one hour will suffice; put it intocold water, boil gently; it will be done in two hours and a half. It iseaten cold. 720.--MUTTON KIDNEYS BROILED. Skin and spit without parting asunder, skewer them through the outeredge and keep them flat, lay the opened sides first to the fire, which shouldbe clear and brisk, in four minutes turn them, sprinkle with salt andcayenne, and when done, which will be in three minutes afterwards, takethem from the fire, put a piece of butter inside them, squeeze somelemon juice over them, and serve as hot as possible. 721.--SHEEP'S TONGUES STEWED. Put them into cold water and let them boil; when they aresufficiently tender to remove the skin easily, take them out, splitthem, and lay them in a stewpan with enough good gravy to cover them.Chop parsley, and mushroom, with a little eschalot finely,work a lump of butter with it, add pepper and salt toflavor; stew them in the gravy until the tongues are tender, laythem in a dish, strain the gravy and pour it hot over thetongues, and serve. 722.--CÔTELETTES À LA MAINTENON.(Ude's Eeoeipt.) Pare the chops neatly. Chop fine some sweet herbs, such asparsley, shalots, and mushrooms, which fry in a littlebutter. When they are done, fry the chops a little in thatseasoning till nearly done, let them cool in the herbs; then havesome strong foolscap paper cut in the form of the cutlet, putsome of the herbs and ham chopped very fine, if you have it readyin the larder; put the cutlets in and a little of the herbs over them;wrap them in the paper, and broil them on a very clean gridiron and veryequal fire till of a good color; serve them very hot, and a little Italiansauce separate. Mind to wipe the grease with a clean towel beforeserving them. 723.--MUTTON CUTLETS WITH SOUBISE, OR ONIONSAUCE. Take a neck of mutton, and cut the chops one by one withoutflattening them; cut off some of the flat bone at the extremity of thechops. Put them into a stewpan with all the parings, together with the paringsof the onions to make the soubise. Season the whole well withcarrots, a bunch of parsley, and green onions,salt, and a very small quantity of spice, &c.; throw in fouror five spoonfuls of good broth to braize them. When done, drain them,and let them cool. Strain the liquor through a silk sieve. Then reduce it to aglaze. Next pare the chops nicely, and put them with the glaze. This beingcompleted, dish them miroton way, and pour the soubise or onion sauceinto the middle. Some persons take two necks of mutton, cut two bones to eachchop, lard them with bacon, and braize them as above; butmutton, being in general fat, is better without being larded.With regard to the two bones, you musttake care not to let them be too thick; if they are too thick you cannot dishthem well. 724.--ANOTHER, AND A MUCH BETTER METHOD OF PREPARING CUTLETSÀ LA SOUBISE. Cut the mutton chops a little thicker than when youwish to broil them. Pare them nicely, and put them into a stew-pan, where theymay all lie flat. Put an onion or two, a few carrots, a littlesalt, a bundle of parsley and green onions seasoned, fouror five spoonfuls of good consomme, and sweat the whole till it is entirelydone. Then take out the roots, put in a little glaze, and reduce over a largefire. When entirely boiled down to a glaze, take them off the fire for a fewminutes, let the cutlets settle in the glaze, take out the trimmings andvegetables, turn over the cutlets in the glaze, and take out the greaseor fat, lay them on a cover to drain the fat, and serve up beforethey can get dry.--This method is preferable to the other. You must not ineither case lard your chops with bacon. These cutlets may beserved up with all sorts of puree of vegetables. 725.--FOR CÔTELETTES DEMOUTON EN RAGOÛT. Take off all the fat from the cutlets, dredge the meat withflour, and put them into a stewpan with the fat melted, a bundleof sweet herbs, and two shalots minced; let them brown, then strain thegravy, add a glass of wine, and one of good sauce;thicken, if necessary, with a little roux, and let the whole stew until verytender. 726.--TO DRESS CÔTELETTES DE MOUTON A LA POLONAISE. Remove all the fat, put the meat into a covered stewpan, witha carrot and a turnip sliced, two onions, a bundle ofsweet herbs, a little pepper and salt, and enoughbroth to moisten the whole; let it stew very gently until themeat is perfectly done, then take it out, strain the gravy, putit over a brisk fire, and reduce it to a glaze; then cover the cutlets with theglaze, and serve them up with tomato-sauce, or a vegetable pur6e of anykind. Mutton Cutlets. An illustration of a piece of meat on a platter with garnish in the middle/ 727.--FOR CÔTELETTESÀ LA MAINTENON. Cut and trim cutlets from a neck or loin of mutton; chop veryfinely a quantity of parsley, a little thyme, and a shalot; putthem with butter into a stew-pan, and fry the chops a little; then takeout the chops; allow them to cool; add to the herbs some freshparsley chopped and a few crumbs of bread, and seasoning:spread this over the cutlets with a knife, wrap them in buttered paper,and broil them over a slow fire. Serve a sauce piquant in a boat. Or: --Cut them handsomely from the loin orback end of the neck; half fry them, and then cover them with,herbs, crumbs of bread, and seasoning; lay this on verythickly, and put them into a stewpan with a little gravy; stew untiltender, then wrap them in writing-paper, and finish them on thegridiron. 728.--CÔTELETTES AUX HARICOTS VERTS. Having dressed French beans as usual, drain the water fromthem, and simmer them with pepper and salt in a good piece ofbutter. A few minutes before serving add the beaten yolk of anegg, and shake the pan over the fire; but they must not boil. In the mean time have ready three muttoncutlets, neatly trimmed, seasoned with pepper, salt, and a fewcrumbs, and nicely fried; and serve them on the French beans. 729.--SCRAGS OF MUTTON À LA SAINTE MENEHOULD. Order the narrowpart of a neck of small mutton to be cut off before thesheep be divided; which leaves the two scrags united. Soak in warmwater, then hang it two days; lay it in a stewpot, with slices of fatbacon over and under, two pounds of scrag of veal, three largecarrots, three onions, a large bunch of sweet herbs, twobay-leaves, and a table-spoonful of whole white pepper; cover the wholewith beef broth, and simmer four hours. Drain the gravy from themeat, which cover on all sides with crumbs of bread mixed withpepper and salt, and brown it with a salamander. In the mean timeboil the gravy, uncovered, very quickly, having strained it first, andserve in the dish; add salt. Serve in the dish endive, tomatosauce, or stewed spinach. 780.--MUTTON KIDNEYS. Split, pepper, and broil them, broiling the cut side first, whichwill make a cup for the gravy when the outer part is turned to the fire.Chop some parsley very fine, mix it well with a little freshbutter, the juice of a lemon, pepper and salt, andput a little on each, A sheep's heart may be split open, and broiled inthe same way. With a very sharp knife cut mutton kidneys in the thinnest possibleslices; flour, and fry quickly till they are quite crisp. While frying,add pepper and salt. Serve them in a good gravy, to whicha bit of garlic has given a very slight flavor. 731.--ROGNONS, AUVIN DE CHAMPAGNE. Slice or mince them, and fry them with a little chopped parsley andeschalot until they become of a light brown, seasoning them withpepper and salt; then dust them with flour, moisten themwith a little strong gravy and a glass of Champagne, and let themstew for a few moments. 782.--SHEEP'S TAILS AND KIDNEYS. Cut the tails, boil them for fifteen minutes, then put them into a stewpanwith half a pint of gravy, an onion stuck with cloves, alittle salt, and cayenne pepper. Stew till tender, strain thegravy, thicken it with flour and butter, and add thejuice of half a lemon. Boil until the whole is very smooth, broilhalf a dozen kidneys, and place them in the middle of a dish with thetails and sauce round. These are the most tasty modes, but kidneys, when meant forbreakfast, are usually broiled upon the gridiron, without parsley orlemon; being only split open, well peppered, and a bit of butterput upon them when broiled. They must not be much done, and may be brought tothe table in less than ten minutes. If not quite hot, they are not wortheating. 733.--MUTTON RUMPS AND KIDNEYS. Stew six rumps in some good mutton-gravy half an hour; thentake them up, and let them stand to cool. Clear the gravy from thefat; and put into it four ounces of boiled rice, an onionstuck with cloves, and a blade of mace; boil them till therice is thick. Wash the rumps with yolks of eggs wellbeaten; and strew over them crumbs of bread, a little pepper andsalt, chopped parsley and thyme, and gratedlemon-peel. Fry in butter of a fine brown. While therumps are stewing lard the kidneys, and put them to roastin a Dutch oven. When the rumps are fried, the grease must bedrained before they are put on the dish, and thepan being cleared likewise from the fat, warm the rice in it. Laythe latter on the dish; the rumps put round on the rice, thenarrow ends towards the middle, and the kidneys between. Garnish withhard eggs cut in half, the white being left on; or withdifferent-colored pickles. 784.--SHEEP'S HEAD.--(English.) Though this may be seen in every part of London inhabited by the workingclasses, and may be procured ready cooked, I prefer always to prepare it athome, and very good it is. Choose a fine one. as fat as possible, andput it into a gallon of water to disgorge for two hours; wash it well,saw it in two from the top, take out the brain, cut away part of theuncovered part of the skull, and also the ends of the jaws; wash it well, putinto the stewpan, with two onions, one carrot, two turnipscut in slices, a little celery, four cloves, a bouquet of foursprigs of thyme, a bay-leaf, one ounce of salt, a quarter of anounce of pepper, three quarts of water; set on the fire; whennear boiling, add half a teacupful of pearl or Scotch barley; let itsimmer for three hours, or till tender, which try with a fork; take outvegetables, cut in dice, remove bouquet, skim off the fat, and pour allinto tureen. Or, lay the head on a dish, and serve with either onionsauce over, parsley and butter, or any sharp sauce; oregg and bread-crumb it over, put it in an oven for half an hourtill getting a nice yellow color, and serve with sharp sauce under. Or,with the brain, thus: having boiled the brain for ten minutes ina little vinegar, salt, and water, cut it in pieces, warmit in parsley and butter, season it a little, and put it underthe head and serve. 735.--SHEEP'S HEADS, HEARTS,TAILS, AND TONGUES. A great variety of excellent dishes may be made from a sheep's head, which in India, whereveal is not so easily procurable, answers all the purposes for mockturtle, rolled head, rich hash, or ragoût: the bonesmake excellent jelly, either savory or sweet. Parboil thehead; cut the meat from the bone; stew the former in alittle of the liquor until quite tender; send it to table with a glass ofwine in the sauce, forcemeat-balls and brain-cakesfor garnish; or roll up the pieces seasoned in the inside with a thick coveringof chopped herbs well seasoned; brush the outside with yolk ofegg; dredge it with bread-crumbs; fry it; and send to table with arich gravy made of the bones and pickles warmed up in it. Take a sheep's heart and stuff it throughout, usinga considerable quantity of chopped bacon in the stuffing; halfboil it, and when cooled a little rub it over with pepper andsalt, and wrap it in paste in the shape of a cone. Rub thepaste over with the yolk of an egg, and strew vermicelliloosely over it. Set it with the broad end downwards, and bake it in the oven.When baked, send it to table with gravy sauce. 736.--SHEEP'STAILS AND TONGUES. Take three tails and three tongues, cut the tails in half and splitthe tongues. Stew them gently for three hours in as much water aswill cover them, adding three spoonfuls of vinegar, three onions,a teaspoonful of mixed spices, and one of salt: these ingredientsto be put in after the pot has been skimmed. When the tails, &c., are verytender, take them out, score them, dip them in drawn butter, roll themin grated bread-crumbs, and let them lie for a few minutes, then put onmore butter with a knife, and additional bread-crumbs, whichlatter should be slightly seasoned; brown them before the fire. Strain thegravy, enrich it with butter, squeeze lemon juice over thetongues and tails, and serve them in the gravy. 737.--SHEEP'S TROTTERS. Boil the trotters, or rather stew them gently, for several hours, until thebones will come out. The liquor they are boiled in will make excellentstock or jelly. Take out the bones without injury to theskin, stuff them with a fine forcemeat; stew them for half anhour in some of the stock, which must be well flavored withonion, seasoning, and a little sauce; take out thetrotters, strain the sauce, reduce it to a glaze, and brush it over thefeet. Serve with any stewed vegetable. Or: --Prepare them in the same way, and dip them in abatter and fry them. The paste, or batter, for frying, is best madethus: mix four spoonfuls of flour with one of olive-oil, and asufficient quantity of beer to make it of the proper thickness; then addthe whites of two eggs well beaten and a little salt. Serve withtomato sauce. Or: --Simply boil them, and eat them cold withoil and vinegar. 738.--SHEEP'S TROTTEBS.--(Soyer.) Iget a dozen of them from the tripe-butcher, all cleaned and ready, andbeg of him to extract the long bone from them. I put a quarter ofa pound of beef or mutton-suet in a stewpan, with twoonions and one carrot sliced, two bay-leaves, two sprigs ofthyme, one ounce of salt, a quarter of an ounce of pepper;put on the fire, and cook five minutes; add two tablespoonfuls of flour,and stir it round; add two quarts and a half of water, then put in thefeet, stir till boiling; simmer for nearly three hours, or until thefeet are perfectly tender; when done, take them out, and lay on a sieve;take a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, a teaspoonful of salt,the same of flour, a quarter of one of pepper, a little gratednutmeg, the juice of a lemon; mix all these well together on aplate with the back of a spoon; put the feet with a gill of milkin a stewpan on the fire; when very hot, put in the butter, stircontinually till melted, having previously well mixed two yolks of eggswith five table-spoonfuls of milk, which put in the stewpan; keep movingthe pan round over the fire continually for one minute, serve in a very hotdish with croutons of fried bread cut in triangular pieces round thedish. The stock may be used for any puree or thick soup. 789.--FRENCHRAGOUT OF MUTTON. Take about two pounds of the scrag of the neck,breast, chump, or any other part, with as little fat as possible,cut it into pieces of about two inches square, put into a pan two ounces ofbutter, or good fat; when melted, add two table-spoonfuls offlour, stir with a wooden spoon till forming a brownish roux, add themeat, and stir it round for twenty minutes; add a little water,but not enough to cover the meat; one salt-spoonful ofpepper, four ditto of salt, and four ditto of sugar, abouquet of six sprigs of parsley, stir till boiling, set it to simmer.Having previously peeled a few turnips, cut in large dice one inchsquare, about thirty pieces, put some fat in the fryingpan, and fry theturnips until rather brown, take them out, and put them in a stewpanwith the meat when it is done, which will be in about one hour from thetime it was put on; when ready to serve, take out the meat andturnips, squeeze the bouquet, which throw away, skim off the fat;if too thick, add a little broth or water; or, if too thin, boilit a little more, dish it up by placing the pieces in a circle and theturnips in the centre, sauce over, and serve very hot--(if not,it is spoiled.) For those who like it, a small piece of scraped garlicmay be added. Onions, carrots,peas, &c., may be used in place of the turnips. This is avery favorite dish in France; I learnt it from an old Frenchémigré, who used to visit us about ten years since. When I havecompany, I use the chops of the neck, dress them in a crown, placing thevegetables in the centre; I find them very much liked. I have at some housespartaken of harico-mutton which has been tolerably good, but nothing inflavor to this plan. If there is any left, it is good warmed again, or evencold. 740.--IRISH STEW. Cut up about two pounds of the neck of the mutton into smallcutlets, which put into a proper sized stewpan with some of the fat ofthe mutton; season it with half a table-spoonful of salt, aquarter of an ounce of pepper, the same of sugar, sixmiddle-sized onions, a quart of water; set them to boil andsimmer for half an hour, then add six middling-sized potatoes, cut them inhalves or quarters, stir it together, and let it stew gently for about one hourlonger; if too fast, remove it from the top, but if well done the potatoeswill absorb all of it, and eat very delicate; any other part of themutton may be served in the same way. 741.--TURESICUS. Mince very fine part of a cold boiled leg of mutton, and mix it withrice, season it very high with black pepper, add salt, andmake it into balls the size of a cabbage-leaf. Tie each ball separately in a cabbage-leaf; boil it about half anhour, and serve immediately, very hot. 742.--A SCOTCH HAGGIS. Take the stomach of a sheep; wash it with cold water untilperfectly clean; then turn it inside out, scald it, scrape it with a knifequickly, and then put it into cold salt and water till wanted.Take the liver, lights, and heart, and parboil them; gratethe liver, and mince the other parts quite fine; mince also half a poundof suet, three or four onions, toast half a pound of roundoatmeal cakes before the fire, and pound them into powder, which is tobe thickly sprinkled over the mince; mix all well together; season withpepper and salt; then fill the bag, and before sewing it up putin a large teacupful of any kind of strong broth or gravy. Putthe bag, neatly sewed up, in a pan with enough of boiling water to coverit, and a small plate under it; prick over with a needle to prevent itbursting, and let it boil four or five hours, keeping the haggis constantlycovered with boiling water. 743.--THE ENGLISH MODE IS To mince the heart, the tongue, the kidneys, and a partof the liver of the sheep, with a third of its weight in fatbacon, two anchovies chopped small, and the crumb of a penny-rollgrated, a salt-spoonful of grated lemon-peel, pepper,salt, two eggs beaten, and a glass of wine; mix all welltogether; butter and mould; put in the mixture, and let it boil for twohours: or it may be boiled in a veal caul. 744.--A CAMP DISH. Take any joint of mutton, put it into a pot with a good manyonions cut small, and as many vegetables as can be obtained to add toit; two table-spoonfuls of vinegar, five of port wine; season itwith black and red pepper; add a spoonful of flour, and, if athand, four dessert-spoonfuls of Harvey's sauce and essence ofanchovies. Cover the meat with water, and let it stew one anda half hour; it should be stirred frequently to prevent it from burning, as there should be only watersufficient to cook it. Should there be a steam apparatus do not add thewater. This is an excellent dish in camp, and it also suits a familywhere there are many persons to be fed from one joint. A fowl may beadded to or substituted for the mutton. 745.--SHEEP'S TONGUESWITH TURNIPS. Take eight tongues of an equal size; let them disgorge in a littlewater and flour, and next blanch them. When thoroughly blanched,put them in a stew-pan, to braise them. In case you should have a braise ofbeef, or of mutton, or any others, they will all equally answerthe purpose for sheep's tongues; when they are done, peel them and cutthem in two. Dish them miroton way, and cover them with the sauce of theharicot, the turnips of course being put in the middle. It is customaryin French cookery to call any thing made with turnips haricot. 746.--THE SAME WITH CABBAGE LETTUCES. The tongues are to be braised as above, the same as those you wish tocook in any way whatever. Take a dozen and a half of goodcabbage-lettuces, wash them very clean and blanch them. When they arecold and you have squeezed all the water out of them, open them in two,take off the stalks, powder a little salt and pepper over them;then shut them and give them a good form; mark them in a stew-pan, surroundedwith layers of bacon; moisten them with a little braise, or any thing togive them a good taste; otherwise take the pot-top, with a little brothand salt. When the lettuces are quife done, drain them, and squeeze themin a cloth to extract the grease. Dish them in rosettes, atongue, a lettuce, and so on successively. Put a largetongue in the middle, to improve the look of the rosette. Another timecut the tongues in two, and dish them miroton way, that is, one half ofa tongue, and lettuce, alternately. In this case, put ajardiniere in the middle, and cover both the tongues and thelettuce with the Espagnole (Spanish sauce.) This is likewise acommon dish in a first course. 747.--MUSETTE OF MUTTON WITH ENDIVE.(MUTTON BAGPIPE WITH ENDIVE.)Take a shoulder of mutton that has been kept for some while;bone it without taking off the thin skin that is found near thejoint; powder it over with a little pepper and salt. Then pass apiece of packthread round, as tailors do round a button, fasten the packthread,and mould the shoulder of mutton quite round. You must preservethe knuckle so that it may resemble a bagpipe. Braise it, and season it well.After having drained and glazed it, send it up with either endive orsorrel. N. B. It may also be stuffed and larded, and a floweret larded in the toppart, and sent up with white beans à la Lyonnaise. This is alsoa common dish. Meat Safe, of wood and wire. An illustration of a cabinet with long legs and wire screening over openings. LAMB. 748.--FORE-QUARTER OF LAMB.This is the favorite and indeed the best joint. Do not put it too near thefire at first, when it gets heated baste it well; the fire should be quick,clear, but not fierce; the usual weight of afore-quarter is between nine and eleven pounds, it will take two hours; when itis done, separate the shoulder from the ribs, but before it is quitetaken off lay under a large lump of butter, squeeze a lemon, andseason with pepper and salt; let it remain long enough to quitemelt the butter, then remove the shoulder and lay it on anotherdish. Fore-Quarter of Lamb. An illustration of a skinned front carcass of a lamb. 749.--SADDLE OFLAMB. Roast it quickly, but be very careful neither to scorch it nor to take itfrom the fire until it is done; baste with the fat and gravywhich fall from it, and in an hour and three-quarters it will be done, unlesslarger than common, and then it will take two hours; serve with mint andcucumber sauce. 750.--TO ROAST A LEG of LAMB. The rules laid down for roasting mutton must be scrupulously observedwith respect to lamb; let it roast gradually, and commence a distancefrom the fire; a leg of five pounds will take an hour and a quarter, oneof six pounds will take an hour and a half. 751.--TO BOIL A LEG ofLAMB. Put it in sufficient clear cold soft water to cover it let it remainhalf an hour, a table-spoonful of vinegar or half a handful ofsalt may be thrown in; put it into a thin white cloth which hasbeen floured, and boil it in enough water to cover it. Agood-sized bundle of sweet herbs may be thrown into the saucepan; if sixpounds it will be done in an hour and a half; serve with spinach orFrench beans; if sent to table cold lay handsome sprigs ofparsley about it tastefully; it may, while hot, be garnished withparsley, with thin slices of lemon laid round the dish. 752.--ASHOULDER OF LAMB Will be found best cooked when done with the fore-quarter, but if roastedsingly will take an hour. 758.--SHOULDER OF LAMB LARDED. Cut your lardons small, of fine white fat bacon, cover them withpounded mixed spices, cayenne pepper, and salt;bone the shoulder of lamb, lard the under side, roll thejoint, and bind it with narrow white tape; braise it, and when doneglaze it. Serve it on mushroom sauce; any sauce applicable tolamb will serve except mint sauce, which should not be eaten withthis dish. 754.--TO GRILL A LOIN of LAMB. Boil half an hour, take it out and score it like pork, brush it allover with well beaten yolk of eggs, and powder over itbread-crumbs mixed with minced parsley, put it into an Americanoven and roast it until brown; serve with melted butter and lemonpickle, or tomato sauce, the last especially, if cold. A shoulderand breast may be dressed in the same manner. 755.--SHOULDER OFLAMB FORCED AND BRAISED. Take out the bone from the shoulder; you must be very particular andcareful in removing the blade bone that you do not cut a hole throughthe skin; when you have done it fill up the vacancy with some goodveal forcemeat, cover it with fat bacon or ham; then putit into a good braise and let it boil gently for about an hour, when requiredglaze it well; you can make it after you have putin the forcemeat and sewed up the cut part, either as a shoulder oflamb, or form it into a swan by adding the shank bone for aneck, and form the beak or bill with paste; if plain, put apaper ruffle or ornamented silver skewer; the sauce as may beapproved of, as peas, or spinach, or puree, turnips, orFrench beans, or truffles, or mushrooms. 756.--STEWEDLOIN of LAMB. The loin may be stewed whole or in steaks; in the former theflap being secured by a skewer, is put into a stewpan, with a quarter of apound of butter, and covered down close; let it simmer one hour, thenturn it, let it simmer again for an hour and a quarter, and then have readysome rich brown gravy hot, lift out the meat, pour thegravy over it, and send it to table with mint sauce, alettuce, and a few radishes and spring onions. 757.--NECK of LAMB À LA JARDINERE. Plain roast the neck, as you would that of mutton; and whilstit is roasting, cut one middle-sized carrot in small dice, the samequantity of turnip, and thirty button onions; wash all in coldwater, put them in a small stewpan, with one ounce of butter andhalf a teaspoonful of sugar, place on the fire till no liquid remains inthe stewpan; add to it a gill of brown sauce, half a one ofbroth, add a small bouquet of parsley and bay-leaf; after onceboiling, set it to simmer on the corner of the stove, skim off all thefat; when ready, taste if very palatable; it must be a nice brown color,and the sauce lightly adhere to the back of the spoon; serve on thedish, place the neck over; white sauce maybe used instead ofbrown, only add a spoonful of liaison when ready to serve. The sauce isequally good with almost any kind of meat, game, and poultry; itwill often be referred to, therefore be particular in making it; you can shapethe vegetables in twenty different ways, by using either green peas,French beans, or Brussels sprouts; sprue-grass may be added, whenin season, but should be boiled separately, and added just previous toserving. 758.--SADDLE OF LAMB, RUSSIAN FASHION. Roast a small saddle of lamb, keeping it pale; having had it coveredwith paper, take ten good-sized boiled potatoes, mash them with abouttwo ounces of butter, a teaspoonful of salt, a quarter ditto ofpepper, a table-spoonful of chopped parsley, and a little gratednutmeg; mix all well together with a fork, adding half a gill ofmilk and one egg; when cold, roll them into a long shape the sizeof plover's eggs, egg and bread-crumb twice, and fry lightcolored; dress the saddle, surround it with the potatoes, make asauce of melted butter and maitre d'hdtel butter, put init, and pour it round, and serve. All joints of lamb can be dressedthus. 759.--LEG OR SHOULDER OF LAMB WITH PEAS. These must be plain roasted; when done, serve with peas in the bottomof the dish. 760.--LEG OR SHOULDER WITH FRENCH BEANS. Plain roast as before; prepare beans as directed. 761.--BOILED LEGOF LAMB WITH SPINACH. Procure a very small leg, and cut the end of the knuckle-bone,tie it up in a cloth and place it in cold water, with two ounces ofsalt; boil it gently according to size; when done, remove the cloth, anddish it up with spinach under it, prepared as directed. (See) VEGETABLES. 762.--SHOULDER OF LAMB BRAISED. Take the blade bone from a shoulder of lamb, and have readyten long strips of fat bacon, which season rather highly withpepper, salt, and a teaspoonful of chopped parsley; placethe pieces, one after the other, in your larding needle, which draw quicklythrough the fleshy part of the shoulder, leaving the bacon in themeat; after having used all the bacon, roll the meatround, and tie it up with a piece of string; then put it into a stewpancontaining a quarter of a pound of butter, over a slow fire, stirring itoccasionally until of a light golden color, pour in a quart of water orbroth, and add forty button onions and a bunch of parsley;let simmer very slowly until the onions are quite tender, then take upthe meat, pull off the string, and dress it upon a dish with theonions round; take the parsley out of the liquor, carefully skimoff all the fat, and reduce it until forming a thinnish glaze, when pourit over the meat and serve. Mushrooms may be added ten minutesbefore sending to table. 763.--BREAST of LAMB BRAISED, BROILED. Saw off the breast from the ribs of lamb, leaving theneck of sufficient size to roast, or for cutlets; then put twoonions, half a carrot, and the same of turnip, cut intothin slices, in a stewpan with two bay-leaves, a few sprigs of parsleyand thyme, half an ounce of salt, and three pints ofwater; lay in the breast, which let simmer until tender, and thebones leave with facility; take it from the stewpan, pull out all thebones, and press it between two dishes; when cold, season with a littlesalt and pepper, egg and bread-crumb it lightlyover, and broil gently (over a moderate fire) of a nice yellowish color,turning it very carefully; when sufficiently browned upon one side, serve withplain gravy in the dish, and mint sauce separately, or withstewed peas or any other vegetable sauce; tomato sauce islikewise very good served with it. 764.--LAMB'S HEAD. Parboil the head, rub it over with yolk of eggs, cover itthickly with chopped herbs, crumbs of bread, and clarifiedbutter, and put it into a Dutch oven before the fire. Mince theheart and the liver very finely, and stew them in a little goodgravy, adding a spoonful of lemon-pickle; make someforcemeat-balls and brain-cakes, and fry them; place the mince inthe dish with the head upon it, and garnish with the balls,brain-cakes, and lemon sliced, or pickles. 765.--LAMB'S FRY. Take about a pound and boil for ten minutes in half a gallon ofwater, take it out and dry on a cloth; have some fresh crumbs, mix withthem half a spoonful of chopped parsley, salt, pepper;egg the fry lightly with a paste-brush, dip it in the crumbs, fryfor five minutes, serve very hot on a clean napkin in a dish, with friedparsley over. 766.--LAMB'S HEAD WITH HOLLANDAISE. If you want it very white, make stock as for sheep'sfeet, put it to stew, when done lay on dish with about twelve newpotatoes (boiled) round it, pour over some cream-sauce, andserve. 767.--LAMB'S HEAD WITH BRAIN OR LIVER. Blanch the brain or liver, and mince them as for sheep'shead, introducing only the yolk of an egg; mix with a littlemilk, stir in quickly, add a table-spoonful of chopped parsley,the juice of half a lemon, lay it on the dish with thehead over, and serve. 768.--TOBONE A QUARTER OF LAMB. Take the fore quarter, remove the shoulder and take out the bone;stuff it with fine forcemeat, and skewerit in a handsome shape. Braise it with two ounces of butter, add ateacupful of water, stirring the braise until the gravy is drawn.Then cut the brisket into pieces, and stew them in white gravy; thickenit with cream and eggs so that it shall be very white; cutthe long bones into chops and fry them; thicken the gravy of thebraise, add to it haricots, minced truffles, or any thing else ofvegetable in season. Place the shoulder in the centre of a dish with its ownsauce, lay the brisket covered with white sauce round it, andplace the fried chops at the edge. 769.--LAMB À L'ESPAGNOLE. An entire lamb is frequently roasted in the Peninsula, without anyother preparation than merely skinning it, taking out the fry, and cutting offthe feet. It is then, however, extremely young--not more than perhapssix weeks or two months old; the bones eat like gristle, and themeat is singularly delicate. It is sometimes, but only rarely, stuffedwith bread and sweet herbs, and served with bread-sauce;but more frequently eaten with lemon-juice. 770.--AU PASCAL. May be a little older, and is also roasted whole, but boned from theneck up to the shoulders, and the legs fixed into the body, whichis then covered with slices of bacon, kept on with small skewers, ortied with twine; all, however, being removed when the meat is nearlydone. Both should be placed in a cradle-spit, and will take about two hours inroasting. 771--TO FRICASSEE LAMB-STONES WITHOUT ANY ADDITION. Skin, wash, and parboil, and then cut them in half, dry andflour them; fry of a beautiful brown in hog's lard. Serve withthe following sauce: thicken some veal gravy with a bit offlour and butter, and then add to it a slice of lemon, alarge spoonful of mushroom ketchup, a teaspoonful oflemon-pickle, a grate of nutmeg, and the yolk of an eggbeaten well in two large spoonfuls of thick cream. Put this over thefire, and stir it well till it is hot and looks white: do not let itboil, or it will curdle. Then put in the fry, and shake it about for a minuteor two. Serve in a very hot dish. 772.--TO STEW A BEEAST OF LAMB. Cut it into pieces, pepper and salt well, stew in sufficientgravy to cover the meat until tender, then thicken thesauce, pour in a glass of sherry, serve on a dish of stewedmushrooms. 773.--CHEVAUX-DE-FRISE LAMB. Get two necks of lamb of the same size, take off thechine-bone, not leaving a particle of bone adhering to theribs, or it cannot be carved clean down between the bones when attable; blanch them a few minutes, put them to cool, then scrape about one inchdown from the ends of the ribs between each bone, theskin, and fat; then put the bones to meet regularly, andput one between the other, which will form a chevaux-de-frise; braise them thesame as the former; when done, glaze the fat and meat but not thewhite rib bones: any of the sauces named or cucumbers. 774.--CHEVAUX-DE-FRISE WITH LAMB SWEETBEEADS. Do the same as before; when it is done and glazed, have ready some goodlamb sweetbreads, about six larded ones and glazed, put them on the topbetween the bones, when the two necks are put together. 775.--BLANQUETTE D'AGNEAU À LA PRO-VENQALE. Of the best end of the brisket take two orthree pounds, cut it into dice of four inches, rinse them in clearwater, wipe them with a cloth, and flour them; take two ounces ofthe fat of boiled bacon, five of fresh butter, chop someparsley, and boil ten minutes; put in the lamb dice, cut up anonion small, squeeze in the juice of half a lemon, andseason with pepper and salt; let it simmer gradually for twohours; beat up the yolk of three eggs, and add them to the gravy;keep the pan moving about the fire for three minutes: dish and serve. 776.--LAMB CHOPS. Lamb chops and lamb cutlets are cooked in the same manner asmutton chops and cutlets, but require more care in the cooking; they aresent to table with various garnishes, and arranged in many forms, frequentlyaccompanied with a puree of vegetables, or ranged round a pyramid of mashedpotatoes; the most simple manner is to garnish with crispedparsley. 777.--ANOTHER. Take a loin of lamb, cut chops from it half an inch thick, retainingthe kidney in its place; dip them into egg andbreadcrumbs, fry and serve with fried parsley. When chops are made from a breast of lamb, the red bone at theedge of the breast should be cut off, and the breast parboiled inwater or broth, with a sliced carrot and two or threeonions, before it is divided into cutlets, which is done by cuttingbetween every second or third bone, and preparing them, in everyrespect, as the last. If brown, season them with pepper, salt,nutmeg, grated lemon-peel, and chopped parsley; but dipthem first into egg; fry them quickly. Thicken some gravy with alittle flour and butter, and add to it a spoonful of portwine. 778.--SWEETBREADS. Two good throat sweetbreads or three will make an entrée;blanch them until fit to eat, take them up and lay them in cold water;when cold dry them well, egg and bread-crumb them with or withoutherbs; put them on a dish and brown them in the oven; mushroomsauce, or endives, or sorrel, or spinach, or tomatowill do if approved of. 779.--SWEETBEEADS FRICASSEED, WHITE. Blanch, and cut them in slices. To a pint of veal gravy put athickening of flour and butter, a table-spoonful of cream,half a teaspoonful of mushroom powder, grated lemon-peel andnutmeg, and white pepper, to flavor. Stew ten minutes, add thesweetbreads, let them simmer twenty minutes. Dish, add salt, thinpieces of lemon-peel; mix up, and serve. 730.--SWEETBEEADSFRICASSEED, BROWN. Cut them in small pieces, flour, and fry them. When a good brown,pour over them a pint of good beef gravy, highly seasoned; stew gentlyuntil the sweetbreads are tender. Add a little flour andbutter to thicken; add truffled and mushroom ketchup to flavor;morels or mushrooms may be substituted, or all may be cooked with thesweetbreads. 781.--TO STEW SWEETBREADS--RIS DE VEAU. Make a forcemeat of the tenderest parts of boiled or roastfowl, some bacon, a little parsley chopped, a littlethyme, lemon-peel, the yolks of two eggs, cayennepepper, and nutmeg. Lay the sweetbreads in a pan, upon alayer of slices of veal, cover them with slices of bacon, put ina bunch of sweet herbs, an onion sliced, a little mace,and pepper and salt. Pour in aquart of good broth, and stew for two hours; remove them, and reduce byboiling the broth to a fourth: heat the sweetbreads in it,garnish with lemon in slices. 782.--SWEETBEEADS LARDED--A LA DAUBE. Blanch and lard them with bacon, put them into a stewpan witha pint of veal broth; add a little browning, with the juice ofhalf a lemon. Stew until tender; thicken the gravy with a littleflour and butter. Lay bunches of boiled celery round thedish when you serve. 783.--PIEDS D' AGNEAU. Have six lambs' feet scalded, take out the shank-bonevery carefully, so as not to cut or break the skin; soak for three hoursin cold water; put them in a stew-pan with cold water and thejuice of two lemons; let it boil for ten minutes, take out thefeet, throw them into cold water, cut off the bones of thecleft part of the foot, and remove the curl of hair that lies in thecleft. Boil very gently for three or more hours in some poclee (which see), tokeep them very white. Serve with asparagus, peas, andmushroom, or white cucumber sauce. 784.--HEARTSWEETBEEADS LARDED WITH BACON OR TRUFFLES. The same quantity, either one larded and two plain, or two if fine lardedwith bacon; when blanched for two or three minutes, put them in a smalldish or stewpan, with a little stock; cover them over, and boil themeither in the oven or over the fire for about twenty minutes; take them up andglaze them several times, keeping them hot; lamb sweetbreads will takeeight for a dish, and require to be neatly trimmed, cutting away the pipe anddish them on a rim of forcemeat or mashed potatoes, orspinach. 785.--SWEETBREADS AS CUTLETS. If you cannot get heart sweetbreads, you must use the throat. Blanchthem for about ten minutes, then put them to cool into cold water; takethem out and dry them in a cloth, then cut longways, twelve or fourteen piecesfor cutlets, making them a nice shape; if you wish them to be whitesaut6 cutlets, you must put some butter or lard in yourcutlet-pan, a juice of lemon, a little white pepper, andsalt; do not color them, take them up and lay them upon whitepaper to soak up the grease from them; dish them round upon atureen, pouring the sauce in the middle. 786.--ROAST SWEETBEEAD. Boil sweetbreads, either heart or throat, trim them and drythem, then egg and bread-crumb them, brown them before the fireor in the oven; put good clear gravy under them, andwater-cresses, as a garnish. 787.--SWEETBEEAD CUTLETS-CRUMBED AUGRATIN. Cut the sweetbreads as before, a nice thickness, but not too thick;dry them, then egg and bread-crumb them as you would vealor other cutlets; use any sauce that may be preferred. 783.--LAMB'S HEAD AND EMINCES. Wash well a lamb's head and pluck, take out the brains, blanchthem by themselves, boil the head and pluck for about a quarter of anhour, take it up to cool, take out the tongue, trim the two halves ofthe head neatly, then score it, then egg and bread-crumbthem as you would cutlets, and brown them in the oven or before the fire. Cutup in small dice in equal quantities, the tongue, liver,heart, and lights; fry in a stewpan a little choppedparsley, shalot, and mushroom if you have it, to a nice light brown, dry up the butter with flour,use some good second stock or brown sauce; season withlemon, cayenne pepper, salt, and a dust of sugar;put the mincees under the head, the brains, egg, andbread-crumb in four pieces and put round. 789.--SHEEP OELAMBS' TROTTEES. Get a dozen or two of trotters, stew them for several hours, until all thebones will come from them; save this liquor; do not break theskin; stuff them with good quenelles or forcemeat; return themagain into the same stock, boil them about fifteen minutes, glaze them;soubise sauce or tomato sauce is good with them, or you may frythem with butter. PORK. The proportion of persons who are fond of pork to those who dislikeit, are as a hundred to one, and yet it is falsely considered a vulgar taste.The passion for it possessed by the Chinese has been illustrated by many tales,and when in season, the frequency of its appearance upon a homely English tableis no small proof of the estimation in which it is held. It should bethoroughly cooked to place its digestibility beyond a doubt. In roasting, or inboiling, ample time should be allowed for the joint. Pork is alwayssalted for boiling, and is much liked in this form. When sent to table roasted,apple sauce should in every case accompany it. It is universally used in every family, and little used for company. The griskin and the sparerib are certainly improved by being powdered withchopped sage, but this is all a matter of taste. The skin of theleg and loin must be scored previous to roasting; but take careto preserve the skin, or crackling, of a fine brown as many persons look uponit to be the best part of the pork; it should therefore be well basted,and guarded from being burned by a sheet of oiled paper. Send both upwith a glass of vinegar mixed with two teaspoonfuls of mademustard in the dish. If you kill a young pig of four or five months, take off theskin of the fore-quarter, roast it, and serve with mint sauce andsalad. 790.--PORK GRISKIN Is usually very hard; the best way to prevent this is to put it intoas much cold water as will cover it, and let it boil up 5 then instantlytake it off, and put it into a Dutch oven; a very few minutes will do it.Remember to rub butter over it, and then flour it, before you putit to the fire. Lay it in a dish on melted butter and mustard. Itshould be seasoned with pepper and salt before roasting. 791.--SPARERIB Should be basted with a very little butter and a little flour,and then sprinkled with dried sage crumbled. 792.--TO ROAST ASUCKING PIG. A sucking pig, which should be about three weeks old, must be dressedas soon after being killed as practicable. When scalded and prepared forcooking, lay in the belly a stuffing of bread, sage andonions, pepper and salt, with a piece of butter;sew it up, rub the skin of the pig with butter, skewer thelegs back, that while roasting, the inside as well as outside of thepig may be thoroughly browned; it must be put to a quick fire, but atsuch a distance as to roast gradually, and a coating of flour should bedredged over it that it may not blister, or itshould not be left a minute; if floured, when the pig is done,scrape the flour off with a wooden, or very blunt knife, and rub it witha buttered cloth; cut off the head, and dividing it take out thebrains, mix them with a little gravy or bread sauce,divide the pig in half, from neck to tail, and lay each insideflat upon the dish, so that the two edges of the back touch; place each half ofthe head with the outer side uppermost at each end of the dish, and anear on each side; the gravy should be poured in the dish hot, andthe whole served as hot as possible; as a matter of convenience it is oftensent to the baker's oven; a large piece of butter should accompany itfor the baker to baste it with, and upon its return it should be cut and servedas above. The gravy may be heightened in its flavor by various additions, ortwo or three sauces and gravies may be served with it, such as vealgravy thickened and flavored with wine, lemon-juice, andcayenne, and also bread sauce and a plain gravy; this maybe a matter of taste. It is usual to procure the pig from the butcher ready prepared forcooking, but in the event of its being required to scald it after killing, wesubjoin the following receipt. 798.--TO SCALD A SUCKING PIG. Plunge the pig into cold water the instant it is killed, letit remain five minutes, have ready pounded resin, and rub well with itover the skin, plunge it into a tub of scalding water, letting itremain only half a minute, remove it, and immediately take off the hair; loseno time, if the hair should not come freely from some parts, rub it again withresin, and put it into the scalding water, and then remove thehair. When it is all off wash it well with warm water, and then in cold,changing the water several times that no flavor of the resin maybe retained; cut off the feet at the first joint, slit down the belly,and remove the entrails; put aside the heart, liver andlights, with the feet, wash again inside and out the pig,dry it well, and keep it from the air by covering it with a cloth. 794.--TOROAST A PIG. (Philadelphia.) Take a pig not more than a month old, remove the eyes andtongue, trim the ears, cut off the feet, and clean itthoroughly. Wash and dry it; rub it well, inside and outside, with sageand seasoning of salt and cayenne pepper. Boil twenty good sizedpotatoes, mash them while hot, add butter, a little milk, andtwo minced onions and minced sweet herbs, with seasoning ofsalt and pepper, and bread-crumbs. Stuff the pig, andfasten the opening with skewers. Roast (or bake) it for three hours in a pan,with water sufficient to form the gravy, thickened with a littleflour, and well stirred. Baste the pig, while roasting, withoil or butter, to make it brown; and, if necessary, add a littleboiling water to the gravy. The taste of a pig roastedbefore the fire is preferable to one baked in an oven. Make the sauce of the feet, tongue, liver andheart. The tongue must be scalded and skinned, then boiled withthe feet, liver and heart; and when done, minced fine andseasoned, with the addition of an onion, parsley and sweetherbs. Boil all together; rub a little butter with flour, andstir it in with more seasoning if desired, adding a glass of winewhen the sauce is taken up. 795.--HIND-QUARTER OF SUCKINGPIG. (Yorkshire Fashion.) Cut off the skin, cover with paper, and roast before a quickfire about three-quarters of an hour; ten minutes before being ready, removethe paper and baste it; serve with gravy under, and mintsauce and salad. 796.--ROAST PIG. Soak in milk some light bread, boil some sage andonions in plenty of water, strain it off and chop it all veryfine, press the milk from the bread, and then mix the sageand onion with pepper and salt; in the bread putthe yolk of an egg to bind it a little, put this in the inside of thepig, rub the pig over with milk and butter,paper it, roast it a beautiful brown, cut off the head before itis drawn from the spit, and likewise cut it down the back, and then you willnot break the skin; take out the spit, cut off the ears from thehead, and crack the bone and take out the brains, put themin a stew-pan with all the inside stuffing and a little brownsauce; dish the pig, the backs outside, and put the sauce inthe middle, and some in a boat, the ears at each end. 797.--A LEG OF PORK ROASTED. The pork should be young and dairy-fed; score the skin with asharp penknife, a little fresh butter is sometimes rubbed over theskin to make it brown, and crisp without blistering. Chop somesage that has been scalded, very fine, add to it an onionparboiled, mix breadcrumbs and a small portion of apple choppedvery fine, mix all together, season with pepper and salt, make anincision, separating the skin from the fat in the under andfillet end of the leg, and place the stuffing there; the time ofroasting will depend upon the size of the leg; serve up with applesauce. 798.--A LEG of PORK BOILED. After having been salted, it should be washed in clean cold water,and scraped thoroughly white and clean preparatory to cooking; it shouldthen be put into a floured cloth and into cold water on the fire;when the rind is quite tender the pork will be done; let thewater be well skimmed, and serve with such vegetables as are in season;should the joint be large allow a quarter of an hour to each pound, with anadditional twenty minutes from the time it boils. 799.--LOIN of PORK Should, like the leg, be scored before roasting, and well jointed tomake the chops separate easily, and then roast as a loin of mutton; orit may be put into enough water to cover it, simmer until it is nearlydone, then take it out, take the skin off, coat it well with yolk ofegg and bread-crumbs, roast for about a quarter of an hour, until itis thoroughly done. 800.--A FILLET OF PORK TO RESEMBLE VEAL. The fillet should be cut from the leg of a very large pig; removethe bone and fill the orifice with veal stuffing; roast it untilit is more than half done, then take some thin broth and put it in thestewpan, put in the pork, stew until it is thoroughly done, then thickenthe gravy, and send it to table with force-meat balls andlemon cut in slices. 801.--NECK OF PORK ROLLED. Bone it, chop sage finely, mix it with well powderedbread-crumbs, cover the meat with it on both sides, roll thepork, fasten it securely, and roast it gently. A hand and spring are sometimes dressed thus. 802.--SPARERIB OFPORK--ROAST. You must paper and joint this down the middle, and sprinkle it with alittle ine sage and salt; baste and flour it well;apple sauce in a boat. 803.--SPARERIB. A sparerib will take two hours and a half to roast unless very large, andthen three hours will be required to cook itthoroughly; while roasting baste with butter and dredge withflour; pound some sage and powder the sparerib with it abouttwenty minutes before it is done; a pinch of salt may be added. 804.--CHINE OF PORK. This joint is usually sent to table with turkey; it should be saltedfor about sixty or seventy hours previous to cooking, and then be roasted; itis usually prepared so. 805.--LEG of PORK To Bake. --Rub it well over with salt andsaltpetre mixed; let it lie five or six days in the brine; thenhang it up to smoke for five or six days. Take off the skin, put it intoan earthen dish, and pour a little red wine over it; stick a fewcloves in it, or beat them to powder, and rub them over it. When it hasbeen in the oven a short time, take some hard biscuit, pounded withsugar, and spread it all over. Serve it up with gravy, andport wine sauce. To Roast. --Choose a small leg of fine youngpork: cut a slit in the knuckle with a sharp knife, and fill the spacewith sage and onion chopped, and a little pepper andsalt. Score the skin in slices, but do not cut deeper than theouter rind. Put it at first a good distance from the fire, but baste itfrequently to prevent its scorching: then, when about three parts done, rub theskin rather firmly with raw butter, after which flour itlightly, and put close to the fire to crisp the crackling. Apple sauceshould be served with it. To Boil. --Salt it eight or ten days, turningit daily, but do not rub it after the first. When it is to be dressed weigh it:let it lie half an hour in cold water to make it white: allow aquarter of an hour for every pound, and half an hour over, from the time itboils up: skim it as soon as it boils, and frequently after, but do not boil itfast, or it will be hard. Allow water enough. Save some of thewater to make pea-soup. Some boil it in a cloth, floured,which gives a very delicate look, but destroys the value of the liquor formaking soup. 806.--PORK CUTLETS. Perhaps few things of a simple nature, and served in a plain way, are betterthan a hot pork chop, cut about half an inch thick, trimmed neatly, andbroiled upon the gridiron. Or: --Fry in salad-oil; serve withsauce Eobert or gherkin sauce, the gherkins being shredfine into some good thick brown gravy. or:--Marinade the cutlets four hours in oil with an onion inslices, parsley, bay-leaf, pepper, and salt; fry them inthe marinade; serve with tomato sauce. 807.--MOCK GOOSE, ORLEG of PORK ROASTED WITHOUT THE SKIN. Parboil it, and take off the skin; then put it down to roast; basteit with butter, and make a savory powder of minced or driedsage, ground black pepper, salt, and finebread-crumbs; add a little very finely minced onion: sprinkle theleg with this when almost roasted; put half a pint of made gravyinto the dish, and garnish the dish with balls of this dressing fried orbroiled.-- (Recommended by a Lady of New York.) 808.--CHINEOF PORK Generally used at Christmas. This, when properly cured, is mostly used cold;boil it in a cloth, with a sauce of red cabbage, or sauer krautif cold; garnish with parsley. 809.--ALL ROAST PORKS. Be sure to cut the skin lengthways into small strips, not very deep,to reach the meat; send up apple sauce to all roast porks. 810.--TO PICKLE PORK. Dredge it with salt, pounded nearly as fine as flour; placeupon four sticks crossed upon a dry cold flag-stone, or in an earthenware dish;let it remain to drain from eighteen to twenty-four hours, then rub it well inwith a brine, consisting of one pound of salt, half a pound ofcoarse brown sugar, two ounces of saltpetre, and a quarter of anounce of salt prunel; the last, if the pork is delicate, may beomitted. If many pieces are being salted, put them into a tub and pack themclosely, filling up the interstices with common salt, place a weightupon the top to keep the meat down, as well as to prevent the admittanceof any air, and when taken out for cooking, scrape off the salt, washthe pork in several waters, or place it under a water tap,letting the water run upon it two or three minutes, turning itoccasionally, or it may lie in soak half an hour; it should be put to boil incold water, and when the rind is tender it will be doneenough. 811.--BOILED PORK OF ALL KINDS. The leg you must skin the same as ham, and dish itsback part upwards, and glaze it; place a ruffle at the knuckle; sauce,sauer kraut, or stewed red cabbage; peas pudding to allpork when boiled. 812.--PIG'S CHEEK--A HALF ONE. Boil and trim in the shape of ham, and if very fat, carve itas a cockle shell; glaze it well, or put bread-crumbs and brown them:sauce as before. 813.--PIG'S CHEEK. (A new method.) Procure a pig's cheek nicely pickled; boil well until it feels verytender, tie half a pint of split peas in a cloth, and put them into astewpan of boiling water, boil about half an hour, take them out, passthrough a hair sieve, put them into a stewpan with an ounce of butter, alittle pepper and salt, and four eggs, stir them over thefire until the eggs are partially set, then spread it over thepig's cheek, egg with a paste-brush, sprinklebread-crumbs over, place in the oven ten minutes, brown it with thesalamander, and serve. 814.--PIG'S FACE FOR BREAKFAST. Cut the ears off, and take out the tongue and brains,then lay them in salt for two days, take them out of that, and then usethe ingredients as for tongues, and dry them the same ashams. 815.--PORK CUTLETS. Cut from a neck, or what is called fore-loin of pork, the bestend, trim it as you do lamb or mutton, leaving a littlefat; scrape the bone, rub or chop some sage fine, with avery little piece of shalot, mix it up with only sufficient breadcrumbs,put black pepper and salt into the crumbs, herbs, disheach cutlet in clarified butter or melted lard, press thecrumbs well upon the cutlets, have a sautepan greased with lard, laythem into it, fry them a nice light brown, take them up and dry them onpaper, dish upon mashed potatoes, use sauce Robert, orsoubise, or tomato, or any other to taste. 816.--PORKCUTLETS. Out them from a small delicate loin of pork, bone, and trimthem neatly, fry them a light brown, put into a small stewpan a littlevinegar, and eschalot chopped very finely, two table-spoonfuls of tomato sauce, and sufficient browngravy to make it tasty; stew the cutlets in the sauce five minutes,and send them to table dished handsomely; if the cutlets are broiled they maybe dipped in yolk of egg and bread-crumbs, and broiled over aclear fire, and served with tomato sauce, or sauce Robert. 817.--PORK CHOPS OR STEAKS. Cut from the best end of the loin, or from the chump or leg ifsteaks; remove the fat and skin, turn them frequently andquickly while broiling; if your gridiron be of the old fashion, it is better tokeep it aslant on the fire, the handle being the lowest part, it prevents verymuch of the fat from falling into the fire, the flare of which is apt toimpart a disagreeable flavor to the chops; this observation applies also tomutton chops, and will be found useful if followed: sprinkle them withsalt when nearly done, and rub with a little fresh butterprevious to serving; if for a side dish garnish with crispedparsley. 818.--PORK SAUSAGES. There are many receipts for the making of pork sausages. Thepeculiarity in sausages being the quantity and variety of herbsintroduced, the prevalence of some particular one gives the flavor, as well asthe peculiarity to each. The presence of so many herbs is, however, notalways considered an agreeable feature, and many palates are offended at thatwhich forms to others the great merit. The following is a very simplereceipt. Take of the fat of pork one pound, that of the loin of a largerichly fed pig, or the inward fat of a small one. Chop it finelywith half a pound of lean pork; add to it four or fivesage-leaves finely chopped, some lemon thyme in a small quantity,and three dessert-spoonfuls of crumb of bread powdered; be careful notto put too much of the latter, as it tends to turn the sausages sour ifkept. Amalgamate these ingredients well, dust on grated nutmeg,mace, and cloves in powder, and finish with black pepperand salt, being sure to season well; the meat may then be putinto the skins, or may be put in jars covered down from the air, to beused for rolls or stuffing, or any required purpose. All skin must be pared from the fat before chopping, and everysinew removed from the lean pork, as well as any bone, or anything which may impair the taste when eaten. 819.--SAUSAGES. (Mrs.Ellis.) Chop fresh pork very fine, the lean and fat together. Thenfill the skins, which should be previously cleaned thoroughly. A littleflour mixed in with the meat, tends to prevent the fatfrom running out when cooked. Sausage-meat is good done up in smallcakes and fried. In summer, when fresh pork cannot be procured, verygood sausage-cakes may be made of raw beef, chopped fine withsalt pork, and seasoned with pepper and sage. Whensausages are fried, they should not be pricked, and they will cook nicerto have a little fat put in the fryingpan with them. They should becooked slowly. If you do not like them very fat, take them out of thepan when nearly done, and finish cooking them on a gridiron. Bolognasausages are made of equal weight each, of ham, veal, andpork, chopped very fine, seasoned high, and boiled in casings tilltender, then dried. 820.--THE UNIVERSITY RECEIPT FOR PORK SAUSAGES. To a couple of pounds of lean pork, young, white, anddelicate, put three quarters of a pound of minced beef suet; thepork must first be chopped very fine; add three dessert-spoonfuls ofbread which has been dipped in port wine, dried and grated fine; work it together with the yolks ofthree eggs smoothly beaten: season it with pepper and salt,and dried sage; a very little cayenne may be introduced, and avery small piece of garlic. Work the whole well together in a mortaruntil it forms a paste; it may then be put into wide skins, orpressed down into jars for future use. It is cut into square pieces, dredgedwith flour, fried in fresh butter, and sent to table on atoast as a breakfast dish. 821.--SAUCISSES À L'ESPAGNOLE. Cut into chops the loin of a good sized pig, bone it,and cut the meat into dice, keeping the fat and lean separate,three quarters of an inch square. Chop two corns of garlic fine, add toit black pepper, Spanish pepper, and salt; mix it welltogether, and season the meat with it: pour over it half a pint of anacid wine, and when it has been drawn in by the meat, add more,until the expiration of a week; then lay the meat in skins,alternately fat and lean, and if any moisture appears to be requiredgive a little more wine. Twist the skin, and tie it in thelengths you require, and keep them in a cool dry place. They may be boiled,fried, broiled, grilled, toasted, served with poultry or veal, or may beeaten with bread alone. 822.--PORK SAUSAGES. Chop, particularly fine, about two or three pounds of lean pork, andan equal quantity of fat; have ready some sage, either dry orgreen, either passed through a sieve or chopped very fine, a small piece ofshalot, a few grains of ground cloves, season it with pepper andsalt, mix a few fine bread-crumbs up with it, have yourskins ready cleaned; then fill them, or if preferred roll into balls andfry them; you will tie them the length you wish the sausages to be,prick the skins with a fork before you fry them; you may do them in theoven if it should be hot. 823.--ANOTHER WAY. Chop the pork as before, only add half the quantity of leanveal, a pound of suet chopped equally fine, have ready a Frenchroll soaked in milk but no crust, season it well with pepperand salt, mix it all well together. 824.--LIVER PUDDING. Boil pigs' livers, mince, and season them with pepper,salt, and chopped sweet marjoram and sage, addingcloves. Put them in skins, prick them, and boil slowly an hour orso. Keep them, in covered jars, to eat cold in slices, or to fry in largerpieces. Boiled pigs' feet may be mixed with thelivers. 825.--BOLOGNA SAUSAGES. To ten pounds of beef take four of pork; chop and mix it,season well with six ounces of salt, and some black and cayennepepper, cloves powdered, and chopped garlic. Put the mixtureinto beef skins, tie them, and put them into brine strong enoughto bear an egg, for three weeks, turning them every day. Then dryand hang them up to smoke. 826.--HEAD CHEESE. Boil the head, tongues, and feet of freshly-killedpigs; taking the skin from the head first. When tender,chop the meat, season it with salt, pepper, cloves,minced sweet herbs, and mix thoroughly. Put the mixture into deep pans,press it down, cover it with an inverted plate, and place a heavy weight on thebottom of the plate. In three days take it out. and serve in slices, to beeaten with mustard and vinegar, at breakfast or supper. 827.--A DIFFERENT TO A DIFFERENT PALATE. Chop pork as before, and an equal quantity of fat, and thequantity of lean veal, and the same ofsuet, and two or three handfuls of fine bread-crumbs; have readya few sage-leaves, a few of knotted marjoram and one shalot;pound all well together, season with white pepper and salt,either put them in skins or roll them, and fry them as above. 828.--SPICED SAUSAGES. Rub well into a piece of pork some saltpetre, allspice,and black pepper, let it lie several days, rubbing it each day, thenchop it small, and add to it two shalots chopped fine, have ready cleaned wellan ox-gut, fill it with this meat quite tight, tie both endsfirm, let it be smoked as hams, wrap it in a thin cloth, then let it bewell dried; you may tie it into what lengths you please before smoking; thiswill eat hot or cold. 829.--WHITE SAUSAGES. Have ready some well-dried oat-meal, two or three onions toboil in milk, chop them very fine, chop two pounds of suet veryfine, mix about a pint of oatmeal to the suet, add theonions, season all with pepper and salt, ratherpredominant with pepper and onions, filling the skins asfor former sausages; if approved of add a few currants and boiledrice in milk to them. You may make sausages of any dressedmeats, either chicken or rabbits; chop up the meatvery fine, adding onions and seasonings as in the above, with choppedparsley and a few grains of pounded mace; add some baconchopped instead of suet, mix all together with two yolks of eggs,a few bread crumbs and a few drops of lemon-juice; fill thisin the skins as before, and broil or fry them. 830.--SAUCISSES AUXCHATAIGNES.--STEWED SAUSAGE MEAT WITH CHESTNUTS. Take twenty or thirty sound chestnuts, roast them over a slow fire,and when sufficiently roasted to remove the husk take them off, peelthem, removing the inner skin as well as the husk, and put themaside sufficiently near the fire not to cool too readily. Out into diamondshalf a dozen thin slices of sausage meat, and fry them brown in a littlefresh butter. When they are a good color, take them out, and pour threeparts of the butter in which they have been fried into a smallwell-tinned or earthenware saucepan. Thicken it while heating with a spoonfulof flour, and pour in gradually a pint of good gravy, with aglass of old brown sherry, or two of Madeira. Put in a fagot ofherbs, and season to palate, a little cayenne may accompany thecommon pepper. As soon as it boils, lay the sausage cakes roundthe saucepan close to the sides, leaving the centre clear, and in this spaceput the chestnuts. Let them stew slowly three quarters of an hour; thendish them, arranging the sausage meat and chestnuts in the samemanner as in the stewpan; pour the gravy over them, removing the fagotof herbs first, and serve. 831.--TO COLLAR A PIG'S HEAD. Clean thoroughly, and put it in pickle for a week, boil it tender,then take out the bones carefully, turn the upper part of one cheek tothe snout of the other cheek, season them with pepper and salt,roll it lightly in a cloth, and secure it, then boil until it is very tender.Do not remove the cloth when done, but place it upon an earthenware dish, lay aheavy weight upon it, and unbind when cold; if the cheek is a large andfat one, it will be improved by laying a slice or two of leanpork, or ham, between the cheeks before binding them in thecloth. 832.--PIG'S HEAD BAKED. Let it be divided, and thoroughly cleaned; take out the brains, trimthe snout and ears, bake it an hour and a half, wash the brainsthoroughly, blanch them, beat them up with anegg, pepper, and salt, and some finely chopped or poundedsage, and a small piece of butter; fry them or brown them beforethe fire; serve with the head. Pig's head is profitable to buy. It is often despised because cheap;but well cooked, it is delicious. Well cleaned, the tip of the snout choppedoff, and put in brine a week, it is in order for boiling. The cheeks arebetter than any other pieces of pork to bake. The head is goodbaked an hour and a half, and yields abundance of sweet fat forshortening. The butchers of Philadelphia make what they call scrappleout of pig's cheek, boiled and chopped very fine. The water inwhich this meat has been boiled is thickened with buckwheat andIndian meal boiled in it till sufficiently done. The meat isadded. When cold, it forms cakes, which are sold in market--and fried in slicesfor breakfast by the purchaser. 883.--PIG'S HEAD BOILED. This is the most profitable dish, though not so pleasant to the palate; itshould first be salted, which is usually done by the pork butcher; itshould be boiled an hour and a quarter, it must boil gently or the meatwill be hard; serve with vegetables. 834.--PETTITOES. Put them in just sufficient water to cover them, add the heartand liver, boil them ten minutes, take out the liver andheart, and mince them small, and return them to the feet, stewuntil quite tender, thicken with flour and butter, season withpepper and salt, serve up with sippets of plain bread, ortoasted bread; make a pyramid of the minced heart andliver, and lay the feet round them. When pettitoes are fried, they should be first boiled, then dipped inbutter, and fried a light brown. 835.--PIGS' FEET 1 LAST. MENEHOULD. Clean the feet perfectly, cut them down in two, then bind them with atape to prevent their shrinking or opening, and boil them gently until they arerather soft, with carrots, onions, parsley, thyme,allspice, and bay-leaf; let them cool in the liquor. When required foruse, take off the tape, dip them in yolks of eggs and butterabout three parts melted; season them, then cover them with crumbs ofbread and finely minced parsley, with the smallest quantity ofshalot. Broil them until highly browned, and serve dry, or with sauceRobert. 836.--SOUSE. Take pigs' feet, ears, &c., well cleaned, simmerfour or five hours, till they are too tender to be taken out with a fork. Takefrom the boiling water and put them into cold water. Boil thejelly-like liquor in which they were cooked, with an equal quantity ofvinegar; add cloves, allspice, cinnamon, andsufficient salt to the souse, pack it down tight, and put the liquorover it. 837.--SOUSE. Take pigs' ears and feet, cleanthem thoroughly, then soak them in salt and water, for several days.Boil them tender and split them, they are then good fried. If you wish to sousethem when cold, turn boiling vinegar on them, spice withpeppercorns and mace. Cloves improve the taste, but turnthem a dark color. Add a little salt They will keep good pickled five orsix weeks. Fry them in lard. 838.--PIGS' FEET STEWED. Clean, split, and boil tender, put them into a stewpan with enoughgravy to cover them, an onion sliced, a few sage leaves,whole black pepper, allspice, and salt; stew fortyminutes, strain off the gravy, thickenwith flour and butter, add two spoonfuls of vinegar or onedessertspoonful of lemon pickle; serve it up with the feet. 889.--PIGS' FEET AND EARS FRIED. They must be well cleaned, and boiled until tender, and laid invinegar and water, with salt in it, until they arerequired for use; to prepare them for cooking, cut the feet in two,slice the ears, dip them in butter, dredge with flour, frya nice color, and serve with melted butter and lemon pickle. 840.--PIGS' HARSLET Is made with the liver and sweetbreads, which must be wellcleaned; add to them pieces of pork both fat and lean, chopfinely sage and onions, season with pepper andsalt, and mix with the preceding; put them in a cowl, tie it closely,and roast. It may also be baked. Serve with a sauce of port wine andwater and mustard, just boiled up, and put it into the dish. 841.--BAKED FAGOTS. Having procured your pig's-fry, (the quantity to be regulated by thesize of family,) wash and set it on the fire, in a saucepan, with justsufficient water to cover; add a bunch of sage, and four or fiveonions; let all boil ten minutes; take out the meat, and cut inslices; then take out the sage and onions, and chop it all finelytogether; season with pepper and salt; cut the caul in pieces,and fill with the meat about the size of an ordinary teacup; place themon a tin and bake in a moderate oven; do not throw away the water it wasboiled in, but boil it down to a sufficient quantity to serve with the fagotsas gravy. 842.--WHITE PUDDINGS Are made with beef suet and oatmeal, flavored and seasoned.Take a pound and a half of beef suet, chop it very fine, and, havingboiled a pound of oatmeal, tightly wedged down in a small whitebasin closely covered with a cloth for five hours, scrape it into powder, andmix it with the suet, two small onions boiled and chopped fine,and season well with white pepper and salt; a small quan tity ofthyme and marjoram may be added at pleasure. Boil them an hour.Like all sausages they must be pricked while cooking, to suffer the hotair generated to escape, or they will burst. 843.--BLACK PUDDINGS. Stir three quarts of sheep's blood with one spoonful of salttill cold boil a quart of grits in sufficient water to swellthem, drain, and add them to the blood with a pound of suet, a littlepounded nutmeg, some mace, cloves, and allspice; apound of the hog's fat cut small, some parsley finely minced,sage, sweet herbs, a pint of bread-crumbs, salt,and pepper; mix these ingredients well together, put them into wellcleaned skins, tie them in links, and prick the skins, that whileboiling they may not burst. Let them boil twenty minutes, and cover them withclean straw until they are cold. 844.--BLACK AND WHITE PUDDINGS. Procure the pig's blood, then add half a pound of half-boiledrice, set it to cool keeping it stirred, take a little more riceboiled in milk, add it to the blood, cut up about one pound of fatpork into large dice, melt half a pound of lard and pour into theblood and rice, then add your fat, with a fewbread-crumbs, three shalots, a little parsley, some blackpepper, cayenne pepper, and salt; mix all well together, thenfill into skins as before; tie them the length you wish them, then boilthem a quarter of an hour, take them out and laythem on some new clean straw until cold, then give them another boil for a fewminutes, then turn them as before until wanted; put them in the oven when yourequire them, or fry them or broil them. 845.--TO MELT LARD. Take the inner fat of a newly killed pig and strip off theskin completely and carefully, slice it and put it into a jar, a sprigof rosemary may be placed with it, and set the jar in a pan ofboiling water; let it melt, and when perfectly fluid pour it into dryclean jars, and cover them closely; it may be kept some time in a dry place,and when used may be mixed with butter for pastry, for fryingfish, and many other purposes in cooking. 846.--HOG-'SLARD Should be carefully melted in a jar put into a kettle of water andboiled: run it into bladders that have been extremely well cleaned. The smallerthey are the better the lard keeps, as, after the air reaches it, itbecomes rank. Put in a sprig of rosemary when melting. This being a mostuseful article for frying fish, it should be prepared with care. Mixedwith butter, it makes fine crust for tarts. 847.--HAMS--BOILED HAM. The ham should be soaked about twelve hours, then wrapped in a cleancloth, and laid upon stone flags for two days, the cloth being kept moistenedwith clean soft water; this will render it tender when cooked; let it bethoroughly scraped and cleaned, and placed in the kettle, which in smallfamilies will be found the most convenient mode of cooking it; they should beput in sufficient water to cover them, which water, when theham is cooked, will be found of the greatest service in making stocksfor soups; the time it will require to boil will depend upon the weight of theham: a small one three hours and a half, which may progress according tothe weight to six hours; when it is done remove the skin, if possible,without breaking it, it prevents the ham when cold becoming dry; spreadover the ham bread-raspings, the dish should be garnished with slicedboiled carrots. 848.--TO COOK A HAM. An excellent manner of cooking a ham is the following: Boil it threeor four hours, according to size; then skin the whole and fit it for thetable; then set in the oven for half an hour, cover it thickly with poundedrusk or bread-- crumbs, and set back for half an hour longer. Boiledham is always improved by setting it in an oven for nearly an hour,until much of the fat dries out, and it also makes it more tender. 849.--HAM, TO BOIL IN A SUPERIOR WAY. Parboil the ham, then allow it to remain in the water allnight, and finish boiling the next day, so as to be in time; for dishing up;skim, and dust with raspings, the same as directed before, and you will have amore tender ham than one dressed almost any other way. 850.--ECONOMICAL DISH. Out some pretty fat ham or bacon into slices, and fry of anice brown; lay them aside to keep warm; then mix equal quantities ofpotatoes and cabbage, bruised well together, and fry them iia thefat left from the ham. Place the mixture at the bottom, and laythe slices of bacon on the top. Cauliflower or broccoli,substituted for cabbage is truly delicious, and, to any one possess-inga garden, quite easily procured--as those newlyblown will do. The dish must be well seasoned with pepper. 851.--TOCURE A HAM. For a ham of sixteen pounds, take a pound and a half of commonsalt, with an ounce of saltpetre. Leave it some days, then put inone pound of molasses; let the ham lie a month in thepickle; then hang it up. 852.--PRACTICAL HOUSEWIFE'S CHRISTMASHAM. Soak the ham. be the weight whatever it may, half the usual time inwater; remove, wash well with cold water, place in a pan largeand deep enough to con tain it, cover with beer or good ale, andlet it remain until the required time for soaking a ham of the size usedhas expired. Boil as usual until the skin can be readily removed; thenplace the ham in a tin or an earthenware dish, and cover with a commonflour and water paste, or surround with batter. Bake in amoderately heated oven until done, remove the paste or batter, coverwith bread-raspings, and serve hot. Cooked in this manner, a ham acquires the most delicious flavor. 853.--HAMS. Skimmed milk, or milk and water, will be foundpreferable to plain water for soaking hams; and they may also beboiled in milk and water. Where vegetables are plentiful, it is desirable to boil ham withthree heads of celery, a couple of turnips, half a dozen smallonions, and a large bunch of sweet marjoram, thyme,&c., put in after the pot has been skimmed. These will extract thesalt and soften the meat. A piece of coarse fresh beef, orany kind of meat, in addition, will materially improve the ham,as, in this manner of boiling it, the juices of the meat andvegetables insinuate themselves between the fibres of the ham, afterhaving dislodged the salt, by which means the meat is enrichedand rendered tender. At first sight this will appear an extravagant way ofboiling a ham, but it should be considered that the broth willserve the purposes of the family." If the meat and vegetables are notapproved, two pounds of fresh beef dripping will answer nearly aswell. 854.--TO BOIL. If long hung, soak it for twenty-four hours in lukewarm water,changing it frequently. Wash and brush it well: trim off any rusty parts; putit into a boiler of water, and let it simmer from three hours and a halfto five hours, according to its size. It is best to allow time enough, as itis easy to take up the ham when done, and keep it hot over boilingwater, covered closely. Take off the skin as whole as you can, as itkeeps the cold ham moist when skewered on again after dinner. There can be no doubt that the fore going is an excellent mode of boiling aham, but many people prefer to have it baked, in which case send it tothe oven in a deep pan, with half a pound of suet over it to baste itoccasionally; or skin it, cover it with a crust of coarse paste,and, when taken from the bakehouse, strip off the crust, rub it with yolk ofegg, on which put finely powdered crumbs of bread strewed with adredging-box, in the same manner as when the ham is boiled. In Spain and Portugal, where the hams are generally fine, the methodof dressing them is to put the ham in cold water with a largehandful of brown sugar, to which some persons add a quantity of the common country wine, and let it simmer on the fire until parboiled, keepingthe pot well skimmed; when taken out, the skin is stripped off, and theham covered with brown sugar to the thickness of an inch, after which it is sent to the oven and baked untilthoroughly done. A ham of fifteen pounds should be al lowed nearly two hours beforethe water begins to boil, and as much more for sim mering until halfdone; then from three to four hours' baking, according to the heat of the oven,which however should never be allowed to be too hot. When cold, twist someneatly fringed letter-paper round the shank-bone. 855.--TOROAST. Take a very fine ham (a Westphalia, if you can procure it), soak itin lukewarm water for a day or two, changing the waterfrequently. The day before you intend to cook it, take the ham out ofthe water, and, having removed the skin, trim it nicely, and pourover it a bottle of an inferior white wine; let it steep till nextmorning, frequently during the day wash ing the wine over it; put it ina cradle-spit in time to allow at least six hours for slowly roasting it; bastewith hot water continually. When done, dredge it with fine breadraspings, and brown before the fire. 856.--SPRING, OR FOREHAND OFPORK. Out out the bone; sprinkle salt, pep per, and sagedried, over the inside; but first warm a little butter to baste it, andthen flour it; roll the pork tight, and tie it; then roast by ahanging jack. About two hours will do it. 857.--HAM GRAVY. Take the wine in which the ham was steeped, and add to it theessence or juice which flowed from the meat when taken from thespit; squeeze in the juice of two lemons; put it into a saucepan, andboil and skim it; send it to table in a boat. Cover the shank of the ham(which should have been sawed short) with bunches of double parsley, andornament it with any garnish you may think proper. 858.--TO BOIL MUTTONHAM. Put it on the fire in cold water; let it warm quickly, and allow itto boil only twenty minutes; then leave it in the pan of water tillcold. This plan renders it moist, and answers when it is to be eaten cold. 859.--HAM AND EGGS FRIED. Out some nice slices of ham, put them in a frying-pan; cover themwith hot water, and set the pan over the fire. Let it boil up once ortwice; then take out the slices and throw out the water; put a bit oflard in the pan; dip the slices in wheat flour or finely rolledcrackers, and when the fat is hot, put them into the pan;sprinkle a little popper over; when both sides are a fine brown, take them on asteak dish; put a little boiling water into the pan, and put itin the dish with the meat. Now put a bit of lard the size of alarge egg into the pan; add a salt-spoon ful to it; let it becomehot; break six or eight eggs carefully into a bowl; then slip them intothe hot lard; set the pan over a gentle fire. When the white begins to set, pass a knife-blade, so as to divide an equal quantity ofwhite to each yolk; cut it entirely through to the pan, that theymay cook the more quickly, When done, take each one up with a skimmer spoon,and lay them in a chain around the edge of the meat on the dish. Friedeggs should not be turned in the pan. Spinach boiled and pressed free from water, and chopped small,may be put on the centre of a steak dish; lay the fried ham onit; pour the gravy over; place the fried eggs around it.Vinegar may be eaten with the spinach. 860.--POACHEDEGGS WITH FRIED HAM. Fry the ham as above directed; take a clean frying or omelette-pan;nearly fill it with boiling water; set it over a gentle fire; break theeggs singly into a cup, and slip each intothe boiling water; coyer the pan for four or five minutes. When done,take them up with a skimmer on to a dish; sprinkle a little pepper andsalt over; add a small bit of butter, and serve in a dish or overthe ham. 861.--TO CURE HAMS. [The lady from whom this receipt is procured, prides herself much on hercuring; and often when asked her opinion of a ham at the houses of herfriends--speaking well of what is before her, will add, "It is not likehams of my own curing, of course; but very nice," &c.]-- EDITOR. One ounce of saltpetre, one ounce of allspice, one ounce ofcayenne pepper, one pound of brown sugar, one pound ofsalt, for every two hams; mix and rub well over the hamsfor three or four days, laying them with the skin down in the tub inwhich you mean to keep them. Then make a pickle strong enough tobear an egg, of cold water and salt: add to thepickle about a pound of sugar, and one ounce of saltpetre;if for sixteen hams, less in proportion. After lying three weeks inpickle the hams will be fit to smoke. After the hams comeout, I al ways put in the pickle some plate pieces, rumps androunds of beef; so that nothing is wasted. 862.--TO CUBEHAMS. Pound some rock salt, saltpetre, and common salt, andsome coarse brown sugar, mix it all well together, then put it all toget hot, and while hot rub the hams well with this, repeating it everymorning for a week; let them lie in the brine for another week, untilall is well incorporated in the meat; then take them out to drain ondishes, flour them and hang them up to dry; you must be guided a gooddeal by the size of the hams. The Virginia method of curing hams, (which is considered verysuperior,) is to dissolve two ounces of saltpetre, two tea-spoonfuls ofsaleratus, in a salt pickle, as strong as possible; for everysixteen pounds of ham, add molasses in the proportion of onegallon to a hogshead of water, then put in the hams and let themremain three or four weeks. Then take them out of the brine and smokethem with the hocks downward, to preserve the juices. They willsmoke tolerably well in the course of a month; but they will be much better toremain in the smoke-house two or three months. Hams cured in this mannerare well flavored, and will keep a long time. 863.--TO RESTORE PORK. In warm weather, the brine on pork frequently becomes sour andthe pork tainted. Boil the brine, skim it well, and pour it backon the meat boiling hot. This will restore it even when it is muchinjured. 864.--TONGUES You will first lay in salt; then use the same hot preparations daily;about ten days will do for the tongues; sheep's tongues may bedone the same, but less time. 865.--ANOTHER RECEIPT TO CURE HAM. Let the ham hang for three days, sprinkle it well during the timewith salt. Make a pickle of eight ounces of rock salt, anequal quantity of common salt, two ounces of saltpetre, the sameof black pepper, half a pound of common brown sugar, and a quartof beer; boil it, pour hot upon the ham, turn it every day in thepickle for three weeks, wipe it as dry as possible, and bury it in bran.Smoke it for a month over wood smoke; it must be sewed in a coarse strongwrapper. 866.--TO BAKE A HAM. Put the ham in soak previous to dress ing it; if an old one, twohours will be required, but if not very old, anhour will suffice. Wipe it very dry, and cover it with a paste about aninch in thickness. The edges being first moistened must be drawn together andmade to adhere, or the gravy will escape. Bake it in a re gular wellheated oven; it will take from three to six hours, according to its weight;when done remove the paste, and then the skin. This must be donewhile the ham is hot. If well baked and not too salt, it willprove of finer flavor than if boiled. 867.--TO MAKE HAM SUPERIOR TOWEST-PHALIA. (Ude.) As soon as the pig is cold enough to be cut up, take the twohams, and cut out the round bone, so as to have the hamnot too thick: rub them with common salt, and leave them in a large panfor three days; when the salt has drawn out all the blood, throw thebrine away, and proceed as follows: for two hams of abouteighteen pounds each, take one pound of moist sugar, one pound of common salt, and two ounces of saltpetre, mix them together, and rubthe hams well with it, then put them into a vessel large enough tocontain them in the liquor, always keeping the salt over them; afterthey have been in this state three days, throw over them a bottle of goodvinegar. One month is requisite to cure them; during which period theymust be often turned in the brine; when you take them out, drain themwell, powder them with some coarse flour, and hang them in a dry place.The same brine will serve again, except that you must not put so muchsalt on the next hams that you pickle. If the hams are smaller, put only three-quarters of a pound of salt, but the salt will not do any harm if you do not let them remain too long in thebrine; if you can get them smoked, they are then not so subject to beinfested by ver min; no insect whatever can bear the bitterness of thesoot; the smoke of wood is preferable to the smoke of coal. Beparticular that the hams are hung as far as possible from the fire,otherwise the fat will melt, and they will become dry and hardand rank. 868.--TO BRAISE A HAM IN THE FRENCH FASHION. It is prepared for cooking in the same manner as in the preceding receipt,but when cleaned it is placed upon a layer of new hay, which has previouslybeen laid evenly upon a clean white "cloth, which should also be thin,that the flavor of the braise may be imparted. It is then placed in a stewpan,with two parts water to one part vin ordinaire, or any light whitewine, and suffered to come to a boil. The scum must be removed, and thenvegetables added; four carrots, three onions, a fagot ofherbs, and, if approved, a little corn of garlic, perhaps less ofthat powerfully flavored root. Simmer from three hours and a half to six,according to the weight 5 when tender it is enough. The skin should thenbe stripped off carefully, and bread raspings strewed over it. Powderedherbs, or parsley chopped very fine, are sometimes mixed with theraspings, but taste must regulate its admission or omission. 869.--TOBRAISE A HAM. Put the ham into water the night pre vious to cooking, andnext day wash it in warm water, trim it by cutting away all the yellowfat and rusty parts; take off the knuckle, and pare down all the underpart; put it in a stewpan, and just cover it with water; lay in a sliceof beef cut into pieces, a few onions, a fagot of sweetherbs, three small carrots, and, a little allspice; simmerfrom three to six hours; it must depend entirety upon the size and weight. Takeout the ham, and skin it; glaze, and serve it upon a puree ofvegetables. The braise may be made into a rich brown soup, thickened and flavored with wine; it may serve also for theflavoring of soups. 870.--HAM RASHERS OR SLICES May be toasted, broiled, or fried. May be served with spinach andpoached eggs, or boiled green peas. Stewed with greenpeas, or cut in thin slices, divided in four pieces, each piece rolled andfastened with a skewer, roasted in a Dutch oven, and served with peas.They should in all cases be cut an even thickness, and cooked without injuringthe color. Bacon may be dressed in the same manner. 871.--TO CUREBACON.--COBBETT'S RECEIPT. The two sides that remain, and which are called flitches, are to be curedfor ba con. They are first rubbed with salt on their insides, or fleshsides, then placed one on the other, the flesh sides upper most, in a saltingtrough which has a gut ter round its edges to drain away thebrine, for to have sweet and fine bacon, the flitches must not besopping in brine, which gives it the sort of taste that barrelpork and sea pork have, and than which nothing is more villanous;every one knows how different is the taste of fresh dry salt from thatof salt in a dis solved state, therefore change the salt often,once in four or five days; let it melt and sink in, but let it not lie toolong; change the flitches, put that at bot tom which was first on the top, dothis a couple of times; this mode will cost you a great deal more insalt than the sopping mode, but without it your bacon will not beso sweet and fine, nor keep so well. As for the time required in making yourflitches sufficiently salt, it depends on circumstances, the thicknessof the flitch, the state of the weather, the place wherein the salting is goingon; it takes a longer time for a thick than a thin flitch; it takes longer indry than in damp weather 5 it takes longer in a dry than in a damp place; butfor the flitches of a hog of five score, in weather not very dry ordamp, about six weeks may do 5 and as yours is to be fat, which receiveslittle injury from over salting, give time enough, for you are to havebacon until Christmas comes again. The place for salting should, like a dairy, always be cool, but always admitof a free circulation of air; confined air, though cool, will taint meatsooner than the mid-day sun accompanied by a breeze. With regard to smoking thebacon, two precautions are necessary: first, to hang the flitches whereno rain comes down upon them, and next, that the smoke must proceed from wood,not peat, turf, nor coal. As to the time it requires to smoke a flitch,it must depend a good deal upon whether there be a constant fire beneath, andwhether the fire be large or small; a month will do if the fire be prettyconstant, and rich as a farm-house fire usually is; but over-smoking, or rathertoo long hanging in the air, makes the bacon rust; great attentionshould therefore be paid to this matter. The flitch ought not to be dried up tothe hardness of a board, and yet it ought to be perfectly dry; before you hangit up lay it on the floor, scatter the flesh side pretty thickly over withbran, or with some fine sawdust, not of deal or fir; rub it on the flesh, orpat it well down upon it; this keeps the smoke from get ting into the littleopenings, and makes a sort of crust to be dried on. To keep the baconsweet and good, and free from hoppers, sift fine some clean and dry woodashes. Put some at the bottom of a box or chest, long enough to hold aflitch of bacon. Lay in one flitch, and then put in more ashes,then another flitch, and cover this with six or eight inches of theashes. The place where the box or chest is kept ought to be dry, andshould the ashes become damp, they should be put in the fire-place todry, and when cold put back again. With theseprecautions, the bacon will be as good at the end of the year, as on thefirst day. It may be as well to observe in refer ence to the above receipt, given bythe very celebrated William Cobbett, in his Cottage Economy, that most countiesin England have their peculiar method of curing hams and bacon,each varying in some slight degree from the other, and, of course, each isconsidered orthodox. But for simple general rules, the above may be safelytaken as a guide; and those who implicitly follow the directions given, willhave at the expiration of from six weeks to two months, well flavored, and wellcured bacon. 872.--TO CURE BACON FOR LARDING. It is of little use preparing a small piece of bacon for larding, fordifferent joints require lardings of different lengths; a piece of beef,for example, will, if of a tolerable size, require very lengthy lardings, as a fowl will require but small ones. Ten to twenty pounds shouldat least be prepared. Take fifteen pounds, and the fatter it is the better; rubit well with a pound and a half of pounded common salt; if in one piece,lay it upon a board with another over it; if in more than one piece, let eachpiece have a board with a weight at the top; keep it in a cool place four orfive weeks; hang it to dry but not to be smoked. 873.--TO BOILBACON. If very salt, soak it in soft water two hours before cooking.Put it into a saucepan with plenty of water, and let it boil gently; iftwo or three pounds, it will take from an hour to an hour and a quarter; iflarger, an hour and forty minutes will suffice. If a fine piece of the gammonof bacon, it may when done have the skin, as in hams,stripped off, and have finely powdered bread raspings strewed over it.It will improve the ap pearance when sent to table. 874.--BACON, TOBROIL. Make up a sheet of paper in the shape of a dripping-pan, cut yourbacon into thin slices, cut off the rind, lay the bacon onthe paper, put it over the gridiron, set it over a slow fire, and itwill broil clearly. 875.--BACON, TO MAKE. Rub the bacon with a little common salt, and let them lie tillthe brine runs from them; in a week rub off all the salt, and putthem in a tub, then rub into the flitches a pound of saltpetre poundedand heated, the next day do the same with common salt, also heated; letthem life a week, often rubbing them; do the same for three weeks or a month,at the end of that time dry and hang them up for use. 876.--BACONAND CABBAGE. Boil some fine streaked part of bacon with a little stock, andthe ends of eight or ten sausages, boil in the same stock somewhite cabbages for two hours; add: salt and spice, andserve very hot; place your sausages and cabbage round your dish,and the bacon in the middle. 877.--MOCK BRAWNS. Put four feet, two ears, and two chops of a pig intotwo quarts of water, and let it boil for several hours, till thebones can be picked from the meat; then pour it into a basin;skim off the fat, and take away all the bones; put it again intoa saucepan with a little chopped parsley and sweet herbs, driedand rubbed small, cayenne pepper, salt, and pounded mace,let it boil for ten minutes; dip a mould into cold water, pour in themixture; let it get cool; turn out, and garnish with parsley andbarberries, or slices of lemon. 878.--EXCELLENT SAUSAGECAKES. Chop some lean pork very fine, having previously detached all theskin and bone, and to every poundof meat add three-quarters of a pound of fat bacon, half an ounceof salt, a salt-spoonful of pepper, the quarter of anutmeg grated, six young green chopped onions, and a littlechopped parsley; when the whole is well chopped, put into a mortar andpound well, finishing with three eggs; then have ready a pig'scaul, which cut into pieces large enough to fold a piece of the abovepreparation the size of an egg, which wrap up, keeping the shape of anegg, but rather flattened, and broil very gently over a moderatefire. 879.--PIGS' FEET. (Soyer.) Procure six pigs' feet nicely salted, which boil inwater, to which you have added a few vegetables, until well done, cuteach one in halves, take out the long bone, have somesausage-meat as in the last, and a pig's caul, which cut intopieces each large enough to fold half a foot, well surrounded withsausage-meat; when well wrapped up broil slowly half an hour over amoderate fire, and serve. Or, when the pigs' feet are wellbroiled, egg over, and throw them into some grated crust ofbread, with which you have mixed a little parsley, broil a nicecolor, and serve with a little plain gravy. This is called a la Ste.Menehould. 880.--PIGS' KIDNEYS. Out them open lengthwise, season well with pepper and salt,egg over with a paste brush, dip into bread-crumbs, withwhich you have mixed some chopped parsley and eschalot, run askewer through to keep them open, and broil for about a quarter of an hour overa good fire; when done place them upon a dish, have ready an ounce ofbutter, with which you have mixed the juice of a lemon, a littlepepper and salt, and a tea-spoonful of French or commonmustard; place a piece upon each of the kidneys, place in theoven for one minute, and serve. Pigs' kidneys may also be sautedas directed for ox kidneys. DISHES FROM THE REMAINS OF PORK.881.--HASHED PORK. Put two spoonfuls of chopped onions into a stewpan, with awineglassful of vinegar, two cloves, a blade of mace, anda bay-leaf; reduce to half, take out the spice and bay-leaf, add half apint of broth or water, cut some pork previously cookedinto thin, small slices, season well upon a dish with pepper andsalt, shake a good teaspoonful of flour over, mix all together,and put into the stewpan; let simmer gently ten minutes, pour out upon yourdish, and serve with slices of gherkins in it; a little mustardmay be added, if approved of. or a little piccalilly with the vinegar isexcellent. The remains of salt pork, though very palatable cold, ifrequired hot, may be cut into large thin slices, and placed in a buttered sauteor fryingpan, with a little broth, or merely fried in the butter,and served with a puree of winter peas, made by boiling half a pint ofpeas until tender (tied up in a cloth); when done, put them into astewpan with two ounces of butter; season with pepper andsalt, add a gill of milk or cream, pour into the dish, anddress the pork over. It may also be cut into thin slices and put into a soup plate, and pour someketchup or Harvey sauce over it, and let it remain for half anhour; butter the inside of a pudding basin, and lay some of the remainsof peas pudding round it, and then place in the pork, cover itwith some of the pudding, place it in a sauce-pan with a littlewater to get hot, for about half an hour, and then turn it out andserve. Should you not have quite pork enough, you may make it up with alittle sausage-meat or any other kind of meat. 882.--FRITADELLA. (Twenty receipts in one.) Put half a pound of crumb of bread to soak in a pint of coldwater, take the same quantity of any kind of roast or boiled meat,with a little fat, chop it up like sausage-meat, then put yourbread in a clean cloth, press it to extract all the water,put into a stewpan two ounces of butter, a table-spoonful of choppedonions, fry for two minutes, then add the bread; stir with awooden spoon until rather dry, then add the meat, season with ateaspoonful of salt, half the same of pepper, a little gratednutmeg, the same of lemon-peel, stir continually until veryhot; then add two eggs, one at a time, well mix together, and pour on adish to get cold. Then take a piece as big as a small egg, and roll itto the same shape, flatten it a little, egg and bread-crumb over,keeping the shape; do all of it the same way; then put into a saute-pan, aquarter of a pound of lard, or clean fat, or oil; whenhot, but not too much so, put in the pieces, and saute a very nice yellowcolor, and serve very hot, plain, on a napkin, or on a border of mashedpotatoes, with any sauce or gar niture you fancy. These can be madewith the remains of any kind of meat, poultry, game, fish,and even vegetables; hard eggs, or cold mashed potatoes may beintroduced in small quantities, and may be fried instead of sauted, in whichcase put about two pounds of fat in the frying-pan, and if care is usedit will do several times. This is an entirely new and very economical andpalatable dish, and fit for all seasons, and if once tried would be oftenrepeated; the only ex pense attending it is the purchase of a small wire sievefor the bread-crumbs. The reason I call it twenty receipts in one is,that all kinds of food may be used for it, even shrimps, oysters, andlobsters. 882.--RAMIFOLLE. These are a little more expensive than the fritadella, and worthy the tableof a crowned head. The flesh of fowls in stead of lamb orveal, with the addition of one or two fat livers cut in dice.Proceed as in the former receipt, using the crumb of French rolls, andone or two truffles cut fine: then make some pancake batter, and sautetwo pancakes about one-eighth of an inch thick, cover one with the meat.&c., and lay the other over, and put by until cold; when so, cut them toany shape you like, but if like cutlets add the small bone of fowl orpigeon, or the stalk of a sprig of pars ley; egg andbread-crumb them, and saute them in oil or lard of a niceyel low color, and dish them like cutlets, with any of the sauces or garnituresde scribed for mutton cutlets; or if plain, with fried parsley.They may be made of any kind of meat, fish, or poultry, I havelatterly had them sent up to table when we have had a few friends, and theyhave been very much liked; and, on inquiring the name, I baptized themRamifolle, without any particular mean ing, which name having pleased as much,as the dish, therefore let them be called Ramifolles. They may be made a plainer way with various meats or liver,and spread over one pancake, which roll over, and when cold cut it into threeequal lengths, egg, bread-crumb, and saute as above. 884.--PRUSSIAN OUTLETS. Take a piece of veal, say one pound, from any part of thecalf, free from nerve, with a little fat, chop it up, but not toofine, add to it two teaspoonfuls of chop ped eschalot, one ofsalt, half a one of pepper, a little grated nutmeg, chopit a little more, and make it into pieces of the size of two walnuts, towhich give the shape of a cutlet; egg and bread-crumbeach; insert a small bone at the small end, saute it in fat,oil, lard, or butter, give it ten minutes on a slowfire till a nice brown color, dish and serve withdemi-glaze sauce, in which you have put a spoonful of Harvey's, andserve with any brown or white sauce of stew ed vegetables you like. Anykind of meat may be used. 885.--CUTLETS A LA VICTIME, OR VICTIMIZEDCUTLETS. Invented by a culinary artist in the time of Louis XVIII., of France, at thepalace of the Tuileries, and first partaken of by that intellectual monarch andgourmet, who, at the end of his stormy reign, through a serious illness, wascom pletely paralyzed. The functionary or gans of his digestion were much outof order; being a man of great corpulence, and a great admirer of the festiveboard, much food was required to satisfy his royal appetite: and the difficultywhich his physicians experienced was to supply this want of food in thesmallest com pass. The head-cook, on being consult ed, begged a fewhours for reflection be fore he could give an answer to so im portant aquestion, as nothing but mut ton entirely deprived of fat was to compose his Majesty's meal. After profound study by the chief and his satellites,a voice was heard from the larder, which was a considerable ways from thekitchen, crying, "I have found it, I have found it." It was that of a young manof the name of Alphonse Pottier, who, in say ing so, made his appearance in thekitchen with three beautiful mutton cut lets tastefully trimmed and tiedtogether; he then, with a small skewer, fastened them to a spit, and placedthem, to the astonishment of all present, close to the bars of the grate: twoof the cutlets soon got brown (observe, not a word was to be said until thetrial was made), from brown they soon turned black; every one gazed at eachother with as tonishment, whilst Pottier, with quite a composed countenance,terminated his scientific experiment, took them off the spit, drew the skewerout, cut the string, threw the two burnt cutlets away, and merely served themiddle one, which seems to have received all the nutriment of the other two; itwas served, and greatly approved of by the physicians, as well as by thegourmet potentate, who, in consequence of two being sacri ficed for one, namedit, "Cutlet a la Vie time," and often afterwards used to par take ofthem when in the enjoyment of health. 886.--CUTLET À LAVICTIME. Cut three cutlets from the neck of mutton, about half an inch thick,trim one very nicely, free from fat, leave the other two as cut off, putthe trimmed one between the two, flatten them to gether, so that the fatof the outside ones meet over the middle one; tie them together thus, and broilover a very strong fire for ten minutes; remove it from the fire, cut thestring, and dish up the middle one only on a very hot dish, with a littlesalt sprinkled over it. If wanted roasted, proceed as above. SAUSAGES AND FORCE-MEAT. 887.--SAUSAGES. IN making sausages there is so great a variety of both meatand condiments, that the cook need not be tied down to any rule of composition.The usual mode is to put the preparation into the cleaned skins of theentrail-puddings of the smaller animals; in which the sausages, beingalways well seasoned, will keep sound for a few days, and are then broiled as agarnish for large dishes, or fried for breakfast. As these skins are,how ever, not always to be found, the sausage-meat may then be boundtogether with the yolk of egg andbread-crumbs, made into the form of sausages, or as croquettes ofany small size; then flour ed, nicely warmed, and browned in thefrying-pan or Dutch oven until perfectly done. If more be made than is wantedfor immediate use, it may be put away in a cool place, packed closely down, ina stone jar, and securely covered for some other occasion. For the spicing ofsau sages no rule can be laid down, as tastes and custom are constantlyvarying. 888.--COMMON SAUSAGE-MEAT. Take any quantity of lean beef or pork, with half the quantityof fat. and having freed the lean of every particle of skin,sinew, and gristle, then mince both it and the fat as fine as possible;putting to each pound of meat a large teaspoon ful of pepper andthe same quantity of salt; strew this on the meat, and mix thewhole thoroughly together, as a :stock for further seasoning. Take six pounds of meat, fat and lean; cut the fat intosmall pieces, and pound the lean portion in a mortar, with two table-spoonfulsof salt, one of moist sugar, a teaspoonful of saltpetre,and two table-spoonfuls of mixed spices. To this may be added the gratedpeel of a lem on, and a small portion of sage and thyme, wellchopped. Or: --To the meat of a leg of pork of aboutfour pounds' weight, add two pounds of fat from the fore loin,chop both very fine; then add two nutmegs grated, twenty cloves,a teaspoonful of pounded or grated lemon-peel, two or three blades ofmace pounded, one ounce of the best salt, and one-half ounce ofblack pepper; mix all together and stuff it into the skins, whichshould be well cleansed, and salted the night before. This sausage-meatwould be much im proved for immediate use, by pounding the meat andmixing it with a third por tion of white bread soaked in milk andalso pounded, Vending the whole to gether with a beaten egg. 889.--BEEF SAUSAGES. Though not nearly so good as those of pork, yet, if made at home, maybe found a pleasant and economical mode of using the scraps of raw meat.Proceed as for pork sausages. 890.--MUTTON SAUSAGES. Take a pound of undressed mutton, or that which has been underdone,chop it very small, and season it with pepper, salt, and beatenmace. Chop also half a pound of beef suet, two anchovies,a pint of oysters, a quarter of a pound of grated bread, and aboiled onion; mix the whole with the oyster liquor, and thewhites and yolks of two eggs well beaten; pound the whole in amortar. Roll into lengths, corks, or balls, and fry them. 891.--ANEXCELLENT SAUSAGE TO EAT COLD. Season fat and lean pork with some salt,saltpetre, black pepper, and allspice, all in fine powder,and rub into the meat; the sixth day cut it small, and mix with it someshred shalot, or garlic, as fine as. possible. Have ready anox-gut that has been scoured, salted, and soaked well, and fill it withthe above stuffing; tie up the ends, and hang it to smoke as you wouldhams, but first wrap it in a, fold or two of old muslin. It must behigh-dried. Some eat it without boiling, but others like it boiled first. Theskid should be tied in different places, so as to make each link about eight ornine inches long. 892.--OYSTER SAUSAGES. Take one pound of veal and a score of oysters bearded, thenpound the veal very finely in a mortar with a little suet, season with a little pepper, soak a piece ofbread in the oyster-liquor, pound, and add it with theoysters cut in pieces to the veal; beat up an egg to bindthem together, and roll them into little lengths, like sausages; frythem in butter a deli cate brown. Or: --Take half a pound of lean mut ton orbeef, with three-quarters of a pound of beef suet, and two scoreof oysters bearded. Mince the whole and add bread-crumbs, withtwo yolks of eggs to bind the materials together. Season withsalt, white pepper, a little mace, and mushroompowder. Put it either in skins, or fry the sausage-meat of a lightbrown in small pieces. 893.--VEAL AND POULTRY SAUSAGES. Sausages may also be made of the re mains of veal,turkey, or fowl, which have been dressed. Of either of these putequal quantities of meat and bread-crumbs, with half that ofham, seasoned with parsley, lemon-thyme, andchives. Mix the materials with a little pepper, salt, andpounded mace, the yolk of an egg, and half a teaspoonful offlour; make it up as saugages or small rolls to garnish fricassees orminced meat, or as a nice supper dish, piled round asweet-bread. Or: --Chop equal quantities of lean veal andfat bacon, a handful of sage, a little salt andpepper, and a few ancho vies, beat all in a mortar; and when used, rolland fry it, and serve it with fried sippets, or on stewed vegetables, or onwhite collops. 894.--FOWL OR RABBIT SAUSAGES. Take the remains of a fowl, rabbit, or hare; whenboiled or roasted, free it from the bones, and cut it small. Boil someonions in strong gravy; when the onions are quite softpound them, season with salt, pepper, parsley, twocloves, and a blade of mace; pound the meat also, cut somebacon into small pieces, and add it. Mix up these ingredients with theyolk of an egg, add a little lemon-juice orlemon-pickle, or chop a little sorrel with the herbs, fill theskins, and broil them. Such are the sausages usually made in this country, and most commonlyeaten fresh; but, in Europe, many sorts are made of a rather large size, seasoned in different modes, and smoked, with the intention of keeping them goodfor a long time, as the Brunswick, Bay onne, and Bologna, which mayalways be found in the foreign oil-shops in Eng land. There is, however,another kind, which we Jo not recollect to have ever seen in London, thoughconstantly used throughout the peninsula. 895.--SPANISH AND PORTUGUESESAUSAGES Are made from the fat and lean of the back and loins of a well-fedtwo-year old hog, cut into small pieces of less than half an inchsquare, and then either fine ly minced or pounded together, and stronglyseasoned with cloves of garlic and green or red capsicums orchilis; but as these cannot always be conveniently procured in thiscountry, cayenne pepper may be substituted. The whole should then becovered with any sort of strong, dry wine, until absorbed by theingredients, which will occupy perhaps a few days, according to thequantity. Fill the largest skins you can get with the meat, fatand lean, alternately, occa sionally adding some of the wine. Tie up inlinks, and hang them in a room where they will not get damp or become too dry,and they will keep twelve months. They are sometimes fried, and eaten either alone or as a relish withpoultry, but more frequently put into stews; and, in Spain, always boiled along with the olla, under the name of "Chorisos." 896.--BLACK PUDDINGS. The blood must be stirred with salt till cold. Put a quart of it, orrather more, to a quart of whole grits, to soak one night; and soak thecrumb of a wheat loaf in rather more than two quarts of new milkmade hot. In the mean time prepare the guts by washing, turning, andscraping, with salt and water, and chang ing the water severaltimes. Chop fine a little winter savory and thyme, a goodquantity of pennyroyal, pepper, and salt, a few cloves,some allspice, ginger, and nutmeg; mix these with threepounds of beef suet, and six eggs well beaten and strained; andthen beat the bread, grits, &c., all up with theseasoning; when well mixed, have ready some hog's fat cut intodice, and, as you fill the skins, put it in at proper distances. Tie inlinks only half filled, and boil in a large kettle, pricking them as theyswell, or they will burst. When boiled, lay them between clean clothes, or uponstraw, till cold, and hang them up in the kitchen. When to be used, scald thema few minutes in water; wipe, and put them into a Dutch oven. If there are not skins enough, put the stuffing into basins,and boil it covered with floured cloths; and slice and fry it whenused. Or: --Soak all night a quart of bruised gritsin as much boiling hot milk as will swell them, and leave half a pint ofliquid. Chop a good quantity of pennyroyal, some leaves of sage,savory, and thyme, with salt, pepper, andallspice finely pow dered. Mix the above with a quart of the blood,prepared as before directed; then half fill the skins, after they havebeen cleaned thoroughly, and put as much of the flare (that is, the inwardfat) of the pig as will make it pretty rich. Boil as beforedirected. A small quantity of leeks, finely shred and well mixed, is agreat improvement. 897.--WHITE PUDDINGS. To two parts of beef suet chopped, add one part of oatmealpreviously toasted before the fire; boil an onion or two, and chop themwith pepper and salt; mix the whole well together; put theingredients into skins, and boil them for an hour, pricking them as theyboil to prevent their bursting. They will keep for some time in bran after theyhave been allowed to become cold. Parboil them when wanted, and then broil themon a grid iron. The quantity of suet may seem dispro portioned to the oatmeal;but unless there are two-thirds of the former to one of the latter, thepuddings will be dry and fat. They require to be highly seasoned withpepper and onions. FORCEMEAT. French cooks pride themselves, and very justly, on the pains which they bestow on the elaboration of their force-meat, or farce. It is an art inwhich they have attained superior excellence, but in which there is no greatdifficulty. At many tables, where every thing else is well done, it is common to findvery bad stuffing, which, according to what it is wanted for, should bea judicious se lection, observing that of the most pun gent articles least mustbe used. A gen eral fault is, that the tastes of lemon-peel andthyme overcome all others, therefore they should only be used in smallquantities; and except in a few very savory dishes, cayenne, andpepper of all kinds should be sparingly used. No one flavor shouldpredominate great ly; yet if several dishes be served the same day, thereshould be a marked variety in the tastes of theforcemeats as well as of the gravies. The forcemeat should be consistent enough to be cut with a knife, butnot dry and heavy. Herbs are a very essen tial ingredient, and it is thecopious but judicious use of them that chiefly gives the cookery of the Frenchits superior flavor. Bacon or butter must always be sub stituted for suetwhen the forcemeat is to be eaten cold. The flavor given to the bread, or panada, is considered to be ofgreat importance, and the highest point of perfection may be obtained byattending to the following directions:-- 898.--HOW TO MAKE QUENELLES OFFORCEMEAT. Have two table-spoons, dessert or teaspoons, according to the size youintend making quenelles; fill one of them with the forcemeat; dip theother spoon into boiling water, and with it remove the forcemeatfrom the first spoon, and slip it from that into a buttered saute-pan,proceeding thus until you have as many as you require; then cover them withsome second stock, and boil them about ten minutes, or until firm, andthey are ready for use. 899.--PANADA FOE FORCEMEATS. Put two-thirds of half a pint of water into a stewpan holding aquart, with near ly an ounce of butter; when boiling, stir in a quarterof a pound of flour; keep it moving over the fire until it forms asmooth and toughish paste; take it out of the stewpan, and when cold,use it where directed. 900.--STUFFING FOR VEAL. Chop up half a pound of beef suet very fine; put it in a basin, witheight ounces of bread-crumbs, a table-spoonful of choppedparsley, a little powdered thyme and marjoram, half therind of a lemon grated, and the juice of half a one; sea son with aspoonful of salt, and a quarter one of pepper, and one-quarter ofa nut meg; mix the whole with three whole eggs; this will do alsoto stuff turkey or baked fish, adding some more choppedparsley. 901.--STUFFING FOB HARE OR TURKEY. Take half a pound of beef suet chopped very fine, someparsley, a little thyme, pepper, salt, andspices, the same quantity of crumbs of bread as of suet,an egg or two, and mix the whole with a little milk. It would notbe amiss to put to it a very small bit of butter, and to pound the wholein a mortar for a short time. This stuffing may be used with baked pike,or with either roasted or boiled turkey, roasted hare, &c.;in short, with all such articles as will be mentioned in this work. If thetaste of shalot is not objected to, it will be found to add to the flavor ofthe stuffing. If you do not like to put it into the mortar, take theroll ing-pin and mix it with it on the table, which is a better method. CURING MEAT, POTTING, AND COLLARING. 902.--CURING. In salting all meat, care should be taken to remove the kernels,otherwise it will soon become tainted. It should be sprin kled with a handfulof common salt to fetch out the blood, the brine thrown away onthe following day, and the meat wiped with a dry cloth; it is then readyto be cured in any of the undermentioned ways. Too much care cannot be taken inthe first salting to rub between every muscle or under every flap of themeat; as for want of this care it may have an unpleasant taste, thoughsufficiently salted. The brine will serve again, by being boiled and skimmed, which may bere peated as long as any scum will rise. Hams should be laid with therind-side downwards: and it is a good plan to heat a quarter peck ofcommon salt in a fry ing-pan, and lay it at the bottom of the pan. Asmall quantity of saltpetre is necessary to produce the fine red coloreither in ham or beef; but much will make the meat hard,and the proportions of sugar and salt should be varied accord ingto the preference given to highly salted provisions, or those which are curedmilder. 903.--TO CORN BEEF. A Round of Beef of eighteen or twenty pounds' weight.--Mix an ounceand a half of sal-prunella, three ounces of brown sugar, half anounce of black pepper, six ounces of fine salt, a quarter of anounce of cloves pounded, the same of nutmeg, and half a pound ofcommon salt: take out the bone, and rub the piece over withcommon salt: let it remain for a day or two, and then rub into it theabove in gredients finely powdered and thoroughly mixed; let it lie afortnight, and turn it daily. It should then be hung up in a dry place; and, ifpossible, smoked till wanted for use, when it should be either boiled gently,or baked in a deep dish covered with coarse paste. This, it mayhowever be observed, is rather a superior mode; as the common way is merely touse fine salt, with occa sionally a little saltpetre to give atinge of redness to the meat, which is seldom smoked, except for verylarge joints. Many persons, indeed, think the meat best when stewed; inwhich case, put no more water in the pot than will barely cover themeat, and keep it gently sim mering for four, five, or six hours, according to the size of the joint. 904.--TO SALT BEEF RED. Choose a piece of beef with as little bone as you can (theflank is the best), sprinkle it, and let it drain a day; then rub it withcommon salt, a small propor tion of saltpetre, fine salt,and a little coarse sugar; you may add a few grains of cochineal,all in fine powder. Rub the pickle every day into the meat for aweek, then only turn it. It will be excellent in eight days. In sixteen, drain it from thepickle; and let it be smoked at the oven's mouth when heated with wood,or send it to the baker's. A few days will smoke it. It is extremely good eatenfresh from the pickle, boiled tender with greens or car rots. If to begrated, then cut a lean bit; boil it till extremely tender, and while hot. putit under a press. When cold, fold it in a sheet of paper, and it willkeep in a dry place two or three months, ready for serving on bread andbutter. 905.--THE DUTCH WAY TO SALT BEEF. Take a lean piece of beef; rub it well with treacle orbrown sugar, and turn it often. In three days wipe it, and saltit with common salt and saltpetre beaten fine; rub them well in,and turn it every day for a fortnight, Roll it tight in a coarse cloth, andpress it under a heavy weight; hang to dry in wood-smoke; but turn it upsidedown every day. Boil it in pump water, and press it; it will grate orcut into shivers, and makes a good breakfast dish. To twelve pounds of beef the proportion of common salt is onepound. 906.--SPICED BEEF. Make a brine with half a pound of salt, half an ounce ofsaltpetre, half a pound of sugar, thirty cloves, as manyallspice and black peppercorns, six bay-leaves; crack thespice; put it on to boil for a few minutes in a pint of water;when cold, pour it over a piece of beef about ten pounds. Turn it everyday for a fortnight When required for use, put the beef into a deep pan with thebrine, a little water, and about one pound of suet. Bakeit until tender; let it get cold in the brine. 907.--HUNGBEEF. (the Derrynane Receipt.) Rub the beef well with salt and saltpetre, in theproportion of two ounces of saltpetre and seven pounds of salt tofifty pounds of beef. Put the beef into a cask or tub, place aboard over it, and weights upon that; leave it so for about a fortnight, thentake it out and hang it in the kitchen to dry, which will gene-rally take aboutthree weeks. Some persons leave it for a longer time in the tub, which theymerely cover without the weight; but the above is the better way. 908.--TOCUBE TONGUES. Neats' tongues cured with the whole root on look much larger,but have not any other advantage, being too hard to cut pleasantly whensalted. If the root is to be removed, cut it off near the gullet, but withouttaking away the fat that is under the tongue. The root must besoaked in salt and water a night, and extremely well cleaned before itbe dressed, when it is very good stewed with gravy; or it may be saltedtwo days, and used for pea-soup. Having left the fat and a littleof the kernel under the tongue, sprinkle it with salt and let itdrain until the next day. Then for each tongue mix a large spoonful ofcommon salt, the same quantity of coarse sugar, half as muchsaltpetre, a teaspoonful of ground pepper, and two cloves ofgarlic or shalot chopped very fine; rub it well in, and do so every day fora week 5 then add another large spoonful of salt. If rubbed daily, atongue will be ready in ten days; but if only turned in thepickle, it will not be too salt in four or five weeks, but shouldnot be kept longer. When to be dried, write the date of the day onparchment, and tie it on. Smoke three days, or hang them in a dry place withoutsmoking. When to be dressed, boil the tongue extremely tender; allowfive hours, and if done sooner it is easily kept hot. The longer it is keptafter smoking, the higher will be the flavor; but in the estimation of manypersons, they are best dressed out of the pickle; if hard, it mayrequire soaking four or five hours. or: --Put the tongue into an earthen pan, rubinto it a table-spoonful of saltpetre, a good handful of salt,and the same quantity of coarse brown sugar; allow the tongue toremain in the pickle for three weeks, and rub it over every day. Thentake it out and put it into the meat-screen before the fire for two orthree days, till the pickle has entirely drained from it. Then sprinkleit over with bran, and hang it up in any part of the kitchen with the root-enduppermost; sew salt tongues up in coarse linen. 909.--TO CURESHEEP'S TONGUES. Let the tongues be well washed and cleaned, and lay them in springwater for half an hour. Take one pound of salt, a gill ofmolasses, and half an ounce of saltpetre 5 rub the tongueswell with it, and put them into the pickle: a week or ten days will besufficient to cure them. 910.--FOR CURING HAMS. Choose the leg of a hog that is fat and well fed, as well asof a certain age; for if poor, it is not worth curing, and if not one year oldit will never acquire the fine flavor of a mellow ham. Sprinkle it witha little salt, and let it drain for a day; then put to it one pound eachof coarse salt and the coarsest sugar, with a large handful of common salt and four ounces ofsaltpetre; rub it thoroughly with this; lay the rind downwards,and cover the fleshy parts with the salt, with which baste itfrequently, and turn it every second day. Keep it in this for four weeks, thendrain it and throw bran over it; hang it up in a cool place to dry, then sew itup in a coarse linen wrapper rubbed with lime, and do not dress it untilfull three months old. The better way is, however, to smoke it. In country places this is notuncommonly done by hanging it in a kitchen chimney where wood is burnt, or inany spare chimney where a smothering fire can be kept up, made of wet straw andhorse-litter, with sawdust or shavings; I but be particular to have them ofoak, for, if of pine, it will give the ham a bad flavor. It willtake three weeks smoking. or: --Hang the ham, and sprinkle it withsalt as above; then rub it every day with the following, in fine powder:a pound of common salt powdered fine, two ounces of salt-petre,and two ounces of black pepper, mixed with one and a half pints ofmolasses. 911.--ANOTHER WAY, THAT GIVES A HIGHER FLAVOR. When the weather will permit, hang the ham three days; mix one ounceof saltpetre with half a pound of common salt, and also of coarsesugar, and a quart of strong beer; boil them together, and pourthem immediately upon the ham; turn it twice a-day in the picklefor three weeks. One ounce of black pepper, and the same quantity ofallspice, in fine powder, added to the above, will give still moreflavor. Or: --Sprinkle the ham with salt, afterit has hung two or three days 5 let it drain; make a pickle of a quartof strong beer, half a pound of molasses, one ounce ofcoriander-seeds, two ounces of juniper-berries, one ounce ofpepper, the same quantity of allspice, one ounce ofsaltpetre, half an ounce of sal-prunella, a handful of commonsalt, and a head of shalot, all pounded or cut fine. Boil these alltogether a few minutes, and pour them over the ham: this quantity is forone of ten pounds. 912.--FITZSIMOM FAMILY RECEIPT FOR CURING HAMS. Mix one ounce of saltpetre, one pound of common salt; and onepound of coarse brown sugar, all together, and rub the ham well.Let it lie for a month in this pickle, turning and basting it every day;then hang it in wood-smoke in a dry place, where no heat can come to it, and,if to be kept long, hang it for a month or two in a damp place, and it will eatfirm and short. Observe, hams thus made need not be soaked; put theminto cold water, and let them be three or four hours before they boil,skimming the pot well and often until it boils. These hams have beenmade with a less quantity of salt and an additional quantity ofsaltpetre, and it has been found to answer well, the hams beingin that case soaked before boiling. 913.--WESTPHALIA HAMS. Prepare the hams in the usual manner by rubbing them with commonsalt and draining them; take one ounce of saltpetre, half a pound ofcoarse sugar, and the same quantity of salt; rub it well into theham, and in three days pour a pint of vinegar over it, A fineforeign flavor may also be given to hams by pouring old strongbeer over them, and burning juniper-wood while they are drying:molasses, juniper-berries, and highly-flavored herbs, suchas basil, sage, bay-leaves, and thyme, mingledtogether, and the hams well rubbed withit, using only a sufficient quantity of salt to assist in the cure, willafford an agreeable variety. 914.--MUTTON HAM. Out a hind quarter of mutton in the shape of a ham, and allowit to hang for two or three days. Mix half a pound of coarse salt, twoounces of saltpetre, half a pound of common salt, and half apound of coarse sugar, all well pounded together, and make them quitehot before the fire. Then rub it well into the meat, turning it in theliquor every day; after four days add two ounces more of common salt.Let it remain twelve days in the brine, then take it out, dry it, andhang it up in wood-smoke for a week. Another pickle for mutton-ham may be made with one ounce ofsaltpetre to one pound of coarse sugar, and one pound ofsalt; the ham to be kept in this pickle for a fortnight,then rolled in sawdust, and hung in wood-smoke for fourteen days. 915.--GOOSE HAMS Are made by splitting the goose down the back, rubbing it with aquarter of an ounce of saltpetre, and then salting it well withcommon salt and coarse brown sugar; let it lie in picklefor ten days in summer and fourteen in winter, rub and turn it every day, rollit in sawdust and smoke it. In Pomerania, on the shores of the Baltic, where vast numbers are cured, thebreasts are prepared separately as hams, and being much dried insmoking, are always eaten without further dressing. In the fens of Lincolnshirethe geese, when their feathers have been plucked, are also salted. 916.--BACON. The method of curing Malines Bacon, 15* so much admired for its fineflavor.--Cut off the hams and head of a pig, if a large one 5take out the chine and leave in the sparerib, as they will keep in thegravy and prevent the bacon from rusting. Salt it firstwith common salt, and let it lie for a day on a table that the blood mayrun from it; then make a brine with a pint of bay-salt, a quarterof a peck of common salt, about a quarter of a pound ofjuniper-berries, and some bay-leaves, with as much water as will,when the brine is made, cover the bacon; when the salt isdissolved, and when quite cold, if a new-laid egg will swim in it, thebrine may be put on the bacon, which after a week must be rubbedwith the following mixture:--half a pound of saltpetre, two ounces ofsal-prunella, and one pound of coarse sugar 5 after remainingfour weeks it may be hung up in a chimney where wood is burned; shavings, withsawdust and a small quantity of turf, may be added to the fire at times. 917.--THE BLACK POOL RECEIPT FOR CURING BACON. For a middling-sized hog take twelve pounds of the best commonsalt, and one pound of saltpetre pounded very finely; rub it inwell, and cover the meat about an inch thick, hams, chaps, andall; placing it with the rind downwards. Let it remain for a week; thentake off the salt; turn the whole with the rind upwards; then laythe salt on again for another week. Then remove the salt, andturn it a second time; lay on the salt and let it remain four clayslonger. It will then be properly salted. Wipe it clean; rub it all over withdry salt; and hang it where it will have a little air of the fire, untilit is dry. Then sew it up in whity-brown paper, and hang it in a dryplace where no heat can come to it; and, if these precautions are taken, itwill not get rusty. The meat must be salted on a board that is well perforated withholes, to let the brine run from it; and it must be covered up closelywith a coarse cloth to keep out the air; and, while salting, take care to laythe pieces as close as possible one upon the other. 918.--WILTSHIREBACON. Sprinkle each flitch with salt 5 and let the blood drain off fortwenty-four hours. Then mix one pound and a half of coarse sugar, thesame quantity of fine salt, six ounces of saltpetre, and fourpounds of coarse salt; rub this well on the bacon, turning andwetting it in every part, daily for a month; then hang it to dry, andafterwards smoke it ten days. 919.--TO CURE BACON FOR LARDING ANDBRAISING. Take the fattest part of the pork, and to every ten pounds use onepound of pounded salt; rub it very well over; put the pieces one uponanother upon boards, and lay boards with a heavy weight upon the top 5 leave itin a dry cool place for about a month; then hang it up to dry without smoking.The hardest is the best for larding; and bacon cured in this way ispreferable for culinary purposes, since the saltpetre usually employedwill turn veal or poultry red, when braised with any portion of thelean. 920.--HOG'S CHEEKS. Cut out the snout; remove the brains; and split the head,taking off the upper bone, to make the chowl a good shape; rub it wellwith salt; next day take away the brine, and salt it againthe following day with three quarts of common salt, and a pound and aquarter of brown sugar; put into a gallon and a half of springwater; stir it until the whole is dissolved. This quantity will besufficient for three pair of chaps 5 be careful to turn them in thebrine at least every other day, and to keep them well covered. Dry themin wood-ashes. 921.--BRAWN. Split and nicely clean a hog's head; take out the brains; cutoff the ears, and rub a good deal of salt into the head;let it drain twenty-four hours 5 then lay upon it two ounces ofsaltpetre, and the same of common salt, for three days; lay thehead and salt into a pan, with just water to cover it. fortwo days more. Wash it well, and boil until the bones will come out; remove them,and chop the meat as quickly as possible in pieces of an inch long; butfirst take the skin carefully off the head and the tongue;the latter also cut in bits. Season with pepper and salt. Put theskin of one side of the head into a small long pan; press thechopped head and tongue into it, and lay the skin of theother side of the head, over, and press it down. When cold, it will turnout. The head may probably be too fat; in which case, prepare afew bits of lean pork with the head. Boil two ounces ofsalt, a pint of vinegar, and a quart of the liquor, and, whencold, pour it over the head. The ears are to be boiled longerthan the head; cut in thin strips, and divided about it, the hair beingnicely removed. Reboil the pickle often. 922.--ANOTHER MOCK BRAWN. Boil a pair of neat's feet very tender; take the meat off, andhave ready the belly-piece of pork, salted with common salt andsaltpetre, fur a week. Boil this till nearly done 5 take out thebones, and roll the feet and the pork together. Then rollit very tight with a strong cloth and coarse tape. Boil it till very tender;then hang it up in the cloth till cold; after which keep it in a sousingliquor. 923.--TO KEEP BRAWN, THE CAMBRIDGE WAY. To two gallons of water, put one pound of wheat-bran, and one pound of salt; boil one hour; when cold,strain it; and keep the brawn in it. In ten or twelve days fresh picklewill be required. If, by length of carriage or neglect, the brawn be kept toolong out of pickle, make as above; and when rubbed well withsalt, and washed with some of the pickle, it will be quiterestored to its former goodness. 924.--TO PICKLE PORK. Take half a bushel of common salt, one pound of coarse salt,half a pound of saltpetre, and six pounds of coarse brown sugar;make hams of the legs. Take the sides of the pork, and rubthem well with common salt; lay a thin bed of salt in the tray,and place one of the sides in it; sprinkle with salt to cover it; laythe other side on the top, and sprinkle it also. Let them lie two or threedays, rubbing the salt well in; then cover the whole with the otheringredients; and, as soon as the salt begins to give, rub them well in;turn the sides frequently, and let them be covered with brine; it willbe fit for use in six or eight weeks. 925.--A PICKLE That will keep for years, for hams, tongues, or beef,if boiled and skimmed between each parcel of them.--To two gallons of springwater put two pounds of coarse sugar, two pounds of coarse, and twoand a half pounds of common salt, and half a pound of saltpetre,in a deep earthen glazed pan that will hold four gallons, and with a cover thatwill fit close. Keep the beef or hams as long as they willbear before you put them into the pickle; and sprinkle them withcoarse sugar in a pan, from which they must drain. Rub the hams,&c., well with the pickle; and pack them in close, putting as muchas the pan will hold, so that the pickle may cover them. Thepickle is not to be boiled at first. A small ham may lie fourteendays; a large one three weeks; a tongue twelve days; and beef inproportion to its size. They will eat well out of the pickle withoutdrying. When they are to be dried, let each piece be drained over the pan; andwhen it will drop no longer, take a clean sponge and dry it thoroughly. Six oreight hours will smoke them; and there should be only a little sawdust and wetstraw burnt to do this; but if put into a baker's chimney, sew them in a coarsecloth, and hang them a week. Add two pounds of common salt, and twopints of water, every time you boil the liquor. 926.--POTTING ANDCOLLARING. To pot and collar are only different modes of preserving fish andmeat for a longer time than they could be kept fresh; chiefly, in theinstance of potting, by pounding the materials with seasoning, whendressed, and then putting small portions in closely covered jars or pots; whilecollaring is done by slicing portions of the meat or fish; and,when well seasoned, rolling it in round pieces; to be eaten cold, assavory dishes, at breakfast and luncheon. In potting, take care to wait until the meat is cold; press themeat firmly into the pots; but, before putting it there, drain thegravy thoroughly from the meat or the gravy will turn itsour; then cover well with clarified butter, and tie over itoil-skin, or oiled paper, to exclude the air. 927.--TOCLARIFY BUTTER. Put your boat into a saucepan of cold water, and set it over a slowfire until it melts; then take it off the fire; take off the scum, and againwarm it gently. After being used, it will still serve for basting, or formeat-pie paste, and is also excellent for fish sauce. InCollaring, be careful to roll the meat tightly, and bind it firmly. Letit also be thoroughly done; left in a cool place;sometimes rubbed with pickle, but always wiped perfectly dry. 928.--TO POT SHELL-FISH. Boil lobsters and shrimps in salt and water; pick themeat out of the tails and claws; put them into a stewpan, with a littlebutter, some chopped mushrooms or truffles, and simmer ashort time over a gentle fire. When nearly done, beat the yolks of twoor three eggs, with a teacupful of cream, and a little choppedparsley; let all stew together for a few minutes, until rendered asconsistent as paste, and set it as above stated. or: --When boiled, take them out of their shells, andseason them with salt, white pepper, and a very littlemace and nutmeg; but use the spice very sparingly, onlyjust sufficient to preserve the fish for a few days in a freshstate, as they: will not keep good much longer. Press them into a pot; lay alittle butter over them; and bake in a slow oven for ten minutes. Whencold, cover with clarified butter. Shrimps may also be potted whole, by putting them for a few minutes inclarified butter, seasoned as above, and gently heated; then put intopots, and cover with more butter, to totally prevent the admission ofair. Cover the pots also with oil-skin. 929.--TO POT POULTRY ANDGAME. Chickens.--Take as much lean of boiled ham as you may thinkproper, and half the quantity of fat; each cut as thin as possible; beatit very fine in a mortar, with a little clarified butter, poundedmace, pepper, and salt--if the ham be notsufficiently impregnated. To this add the white part of the fowl,also pounded, but without seasoning, as it is only intended to qualifythe savoriness of the ham. Then either mix the whole together, or put alayer of ham ana chicken alternately; press it hard in thepots; bake in a cool oven for half an hour; pour over it clarifiedbutter to the thickness of a crown piece, and paste over it a pieceof paper, which may be oiled when the paste is dry. Let them be quite fresh; clean them carefully, and season them withsalt and pepper; lay them close in a small deep pan 5 for, thesmaller the surface, and the closer they are packed, the less butterwill be wanted. Cover them with but-ter; then with very thick paper; tiedown and bake them. When cold, put them dry into pots that will hold two orthree in each; and pour butter over them, using that which was baked aspart. Observe that the butter should be pretty thick over them if theyare to be kept. If pigeons were boned and then put in an oval form intothe pot, they would lie closer and require less butter. They may bestuffed with a fine forcemeat made with veal, bacon,&c. If a high flavor is approved of, add mace, allspice, anda little cayenne, before baking. 930.--PARTRIDGES ANDPHEASANTS. Clean them nicely, and season with mace, allspice, whitepepper and salt, in fine powder, or seasoning spice. Rubevery part well; then lay the breasts downwards in a pan, and pack thebirds as close as you possibly can. Put a good deal of butter on them;then cover the pan with a coarse flour paste, and a paper over;tie it close, and bake. When cold, put the birds into pots, and cover them withbutter. or: --When baked and grown cold, cut them into properpieces for helping; pack them close into a large potting-pan, and (if possible)leave no spaces to receive the butter. Cover them with butter,and one-third part less will be wanted than when the birds are donewhole. 931.--HARE. Hang up a hare four or five days, with the skin on; then caseit, and cut it up as for eating; put it in a pot, and season it withmace, pepper, and salt; put one pound of butterupon it; tie it down, and bake in a bread oven till tender. When itcomes out, pick it from the bones, and pound to a smooth consistencewith the fat from the butter, and pot it in the usual way. 932.--RABBITS. Out up two or three young, but full-grown ones 5 and take theleg-bones off at the thigh 5 pack them as closely as possible ina small pan, after seasoning them with pepper, mace,cayenne, salt, allspice, all in very fine powder. Make thetop as smooth as you can. Keep out the liver and the carcases; but takeoff the meat above the neck. Put a good deal of butter;and bake the whole gently. Keep it two days in the pan 5 then shift it intosmall pots, adding butter. The livers also should be added, asthey eat well. 933.--BEEF POTTED. Take three pounds of lean beef, salt it two or three days withhalf a pound of salt and half an ounce of saltpetre; divide itinto pieces of a pound each, and put it into an earthen pan just sufficient tocontain it; pour in half a pint of water, cover it close withpaste, and set in a slow oven for four hours. When taken from the ovenpour the gravy from it into a basin, shred the meat fine, moistenit with the gravy poured from the meat, and pound it thoroughlyin a marble mortar with fresh butter until it becomes a finepaste; season it with black pepper and allspice, orcloves pounded, or nutmeg grated; put it in pots, press it downas close as possible, put a weight on it and let it stand all night 5 next day,when quite cold, cover it a quarter of an inch thick with clarifiedbutter, and tie it over with paper. 934.--BEEF POTTEDLIKE VENISON. Take a whole thin flank of beef, pull off the inward skin, andcut it across and across, particularly in the thickest parts, lay it for sixhours in hard water, take as much saltpetre as the quantity of anegg, mix with about two pounds of white salt, and rub it wellinto the meat; then sprinkle upon it nearly a pint of winevinegar, and then let it lie for three or four days, turning and rubbing itonce a day, then rinse it out of the brine with a pint of claret, andseason it with cloves, mace, and nutmeg, white andJamaica pepper, of each a quarter of an ounce; bake all together withsavory, thyme, sage, and the rind of a lemon shredtogether, and then well rubbed into the cuts and slashes on the inside; thenbind it up with tape, and lay it in a long pot; put in the claret, and lay theskins at the top to save it, then bake it. 935.--BIRDS POTTED--HOWTO PRESERVE WHEN THEY BEGIN TO GROW OLD. When birds are sent a long way they often smell so bad that they can hardlybe borne, from the rankness of the butter 5 by doing them in thefollowing way they will be as if only fresh done. Set a large saucepan ofclean water on the fire, when it boils take off the butter at thetop, then take the fowls one by one, throw them in the saucepan ofwater half a minute, take one out and dry it well inside and out, do sotill they are all done, scald your pot clean; when the birds are quite coldseason with mace, pepper, and salt, according to taste:put them down close in a pot, put clarified butter over them. 936.--CHICKEN AND HAM POTTED. Season some pieces of chicken with mace, cloves, and pepper, and bake it for about two hoursin a close covered pan, with some water, then pound them quite small,moistening with either melted butter, or the liquor that they are bakedin, pound some, and put this with the chicken in alternate layers, inpots or pans 5 press them down tight, and cover them with butter. 937.--GAME OF ALL KINDS. Any dressed game you may have in your larder. Pound well in yourmortar all the tender meat free from skin and bone; add toit some pounded mace, allspice, cayenne pepper,salt, and white pepper, a few grains of powdered sugar, anequal quantity, if you have it of good fat ham. When well pounded rub itthrough a wire sieve; if you have no ham use an equal quantity ofbutter instead; mix it well up again, and place it tightly in earthenshapes; cover each jar over with clarified butter or lard; turnout with warm water; when required either for breakfast or luncheon, ora second course, dish in or on aspic, garnish with fresh parsley. 938.--PIGEONS POTTED. Be careful that they are fresh, clean and season them with salt andpepper, lay them close together in a small deep pan, for the closer theyare put the less butter they will take. Cover them with butter,tie them over with a thin paper, and bake them; when cold put them todry in pots that will hold two or three in each, and pour butter overthem, using that which was baked as some; mind, the butter should bethick over them; if they are done for keeping the pigeons would liecloser and want less butter, if they are boned and put into the pot inan oval form. They may be stuffed with forcemeat, made with vealand bacon, &c., and they will eat very well. If a highseasoning is preferred, add more allspice, and a littlecayenne pepper, before baking. Woodcocks are done the same way. 939.--SMELTS POTTED. Draw out the inside, season with salt, mace pounded andpepper; lay them in a pan with butter on the top, bake them; whennearly cold take them out, lay them on a cloth, put them into pots, clear offthe butter from the gravy, clarify, and pour it over them. 940.--VEAL POTTED. Take one pound of lean veal, put it into a stewpan, with two ouncesof fresh butter, the juice of a lemon, pepper,salt, sifted mace, a bay-leaf, allspice, cloves,nutmeg, cinnamon, and mushroom powder, a small quantity ofeach; a little thyme, savory, and a couple of shalots, choppedfine; stew them ten minutes, then pound them, add a pound of the mellow part ofa boiled tongue beaten to a paste, half a pound of cold freshbutter; mix all well together, with two eggs, well beaten, thenpress the mixture down tight in small pots, cover them with paper, andput them into a moderate oven, bake twenty minutes, then pour over themclarified butter. 941.--VENISON POTTED. Put the venison into a pan, and pour red wine over it, andcover it with as pound of butter; put a paste over the pan, setit in the oven to bake. When done take the meat out of the gravy,beat it well with the butter that has risen to the top, add more ifnecessary, season with pepper, salt, and mace pounded; putinto pots, set them in the oven for a few minutes, take them out; when coldcover with clarified butter. 942.--NEAT'S TONGUE. Rub it with one ounce of saltpetre and four ounces of brown sugar; let it lie two days, then boil it till it isquite tender; take off the skin and all the fibrous part of the root,cut it in thin pieces, and pound it with one pound of clarified butter,and seasoning to your taste. 943.--TO POT BEEF IN IMITATIONOF VENISON. Put eight or ten pounds of lean beef into a deep dish; pour over it apint of red wine, and let it lie in it for two days, seasoning itwell with mace, pepper, salt, and a clove ofgarlic; then put it into a closely covered pot along with the wine,and another glassful if it be not sufficient, and bake it for three hours in aquick oven; when cold, pound it to a paste, and pot it as above.Venison may itself be potted in the same manner; but if it be stale, rubit previously with pyroligneous acid. 944.--HAM CAKE. Take the remains of a ham that may be getting dry, pound it in amortar very finely, with all the fat; season it with pepper andmixed spice; add to it clarified butter sufficient to make itmoist; put it into a mould, and place it in an oven for about half an hour; itshould be prepared the day before it is wanted: put the mould for a few minutesin warm water in order that it may turn out properly. This may be madewith equal quantities of cold beef pounded separate-ly, and placed inlayers in the mould, or put together in lumps to look like marble.Tongue may also be substituted for the ham, but it must be mixedwith a larger quantity of butter in the pounding. If not wanted at thetime, it may be potted with veal, and covered with clarifiedbutter. It will keep well in winter if properly seasoned. 945.--TO POTMUSHROOMS. Choose large buttons, or those in which the inside is not yet the leastbrown; peel and wipe out the fur of the larger ones; and to every two quartsput half a drachm of pounded mace, two drachms of white pepper,and six or eight cloves in powder: set them over the fire, shake, andlet the liquor dry up into them. Then put to them two ounces of butter,and stew them in it till they are fit for eating; pour the butter fromthem, and let them become cold. Pack them close into a pot, making the surfaceas even as possible; add some butter lukewarm, and then lay a bit ofwhite paper over them, and pour clarified suet upon it to excludethe air. The cottar ing of Meat and Fish is an excellent method ofpreparing it to be eaten cold, having the advantage of keeping for a long time,and being at all times ready for breakfast or luncheon. 946.--COLLAREDEEL. Out off the head, then split and take out the bone, but do notskin the fish; season them with mixed spices, someparsley and sweet marjoram shred very fine, and a few choppedsage leaves; sprinkle a little dry isinglass over them; roll themtightly up in a cloth, bind it well with strong tape. Boil them in goodgravy with a little vinegar, accord-ing to the quantity ofeels collared, a few pepper-corns, a sprig of sweet marjoram,two or three onions, four bay-leaves, a blade or two of mace, anda dozen allspice. Boil them until tender; take them up and tie themwithout taking out of the cloth, let them stand until cold, then glaze them.They may be sent whole to table, or cut in slices, and garnished withjelly and barberries. As a standing dish, and only eaten cold as a relish, it ought always to behighly seasoned. 947.--TO "CAVEACH" FISH. Bone the tail of a cod, and cut it into slices, season them with white pepper andsalt, then fry them, and when cold put them into a pickle made ofvinegar boiled with peppercorns, a few cloves,mace, and bay-leaves; add when cold a teacupful of sweet oil; laythe fish in a jar with slices of onion between each, and coverthe whole with vinegar. Salmon may be pickled in the same manner.When served up at table put a sufficient number of pieces in the centre of thedish, and raise round it a wall of salad. 948.--TO COLLAR BEEF. Make a pickle with six ounces of brown sugar, four ounces ofcommon salt, and one ounce of saltpetre. Then take a flank ofbeef, and leave it in the pickle for ten days or a fortnight,turning it every day. When taken out, remove the bone and gristle, butleave on the outer skin; lay it upon the table, with the skindownwards, and beat the inside well with a rolling-pin or wooden mal-let untilquite tender; that done, score the flesh in rows, down and across, about thebreadth of two fingers; but in doing so take care not to cut the outsideskin. Then fill the scores alternately with slices of the fat ofbacon and corned pork, and sweet herbs of all sorts, chopped,and seasoned with spice, till you have filled them all; after which,roll the flank up very tightly, and bind it round with coarse broad tape, wrapit in a cloth, and boil it gently, but steadily, for four or five hours,according to the size of the joint. When quite cold, take it out of the cloth,unbind the tape, and fasten the roll with small skewers. If you wish to improveits appearance, you may also glaze it, or rub it with yolk of egg, andbrown it with a salamander. Another mode is, to take either the flank or brisket, and prepare it, asabove, for boiling; but stew it with a very little water, and, whendone, cover the meat with a coating of chopped parsley,thyme, chives, or shalot seasoned with a little cayenne;then put it under a board, and lay weights upon it for an hour or two, to pressit close together; but before it becomes quite cold, remove the weights, androll the piece up in the manner already directed. 949.--AN ECONOMICAL WAY. Take the best part of a shin of beef, of which soup has been made(for it must be stewed until very tender), and an ox-tail, also wellstewed; cut them into small pieces, season them well, add a glass ofwine and a glass of ketchup, and put it into a stewpan coveredwith a part of the liquor in which the ox-tail has been boiled; stew itfor about twenty minutes, and then put it into a mould. It must be very coldbefore it is turned out. This is a good way of employing the beef andheel when soup or jelly is made; a few chopped sweet herbs may beadded, and hard eggs cut into slices, or pickles, such as slicedcucumbers, intermingled. The flavor may be varied in many ways. 950.--TO COLLAR CALF'S HEAD. Scald the skin of a fine head, clean it nicely, and take outthe brains. Boil it tender enough to remove the bones; then haveready a good quantity of chopped parsley, mace, groundnutmeg, salt and white pepper, mixed well: season, it highwith these; lay the parsley in a thick layer, then a quantity of thickslices of fine ham. or a beautifully colored tongue skinned, andthen the yolks of six nice eggs stuck here and there about. Rollthe head quite close, and tie it up as tight as you can. Boil it tillthe tape slackens, and then lay a weight upon it (without removing the bandage)till quite cold. Keep it in a pickle of the liquor, vinegar, andsalt. A cloth must be put under the tape, as for other collars. Ox-cheek may be collared in the same way. 951.--BREAST ofVEAL. Bone it, take off the thick skin and gristle, and beat themeat with a rolling-pin. Season it with herbs chopped very fine,mixed with salt, pepper, and mace. Lay some thick slicesof fine ham, or roll into it two or three calves' tonguesboiled first an hour or two, and skinned. Bind it up tight in a cloth, and tapeit. Set it over a slow fire to simmer in a small quantity of water, tillit is quite tender: this will take some hours. Lay it on the dresser, with aboard and weight on it, till quite cold. Pigs' and calves' feet boiled, and taken from thebones, may be put in or round it. The different colors laid in layerslook well when cut; and you may put in yolks of eggs boiled,beet-root grated ham, and chopped parsley, in differentparts. When it is cold, take off the tape, and pour over it the liquor, which mustbe boiled up twice a-week, or it will not keep. 952.--BREAST ofMUTTON. Collared in this way, will also be found very nice. Bone themeat, and rub it over with yolk of egg, over which grate somelemon-peel and nutmeg, with a little pepper andsalt; then mince a large spoonful of capers with a couple ofanchovies, shred a handful of parsley and a few sweetherbs, mixed with crumb of a French roll; strew it over themutton, and roll it up tight 5 boil it gently for two hours, and, whentaken up, put it in the same kind of pickle as that of the calf'shead. 953.--TO COLLAR A PIG. Take a fine fat pig of a month or five weeks old, prepared for thetable; cut off the head and split the pig down the back, andbone it; chop a handful of sage very small, mix it with twonutmegs and three or four blades of mace beaten fine; add to it alarge handful of salt, and season the pig all over 5 roll ithard, tie it with tape, sew it in a clean linen cloth, and boil it inwater with a little oatmeal and a good seasoning of salt;boil till very tender, which will take several hours. Keep it in the cloth inwhich it was boiled until quite cold. Then take the cloth from the pig,and let it lie for eight days in a marinade. Eat it with mustard,sugar, and vinegar. 954.--TO COLLAR PIG'S HEAD. Scour the head and ears nicely; take off the hair and snout,and take out the eyes and the brains 5 lay it in water one night:then drain, salt it extremely well with common salt andsaltpetre, and let it lie five days. Boil it enough to take out thebones 5 then lay it on a dresser, turning the thick end of one side ofthe head towards the thin end of the other, to make the roll of equalsize; sprinkle it well with salt and white pepper, and roll itwith the ears; and, if you approve, put the pig's feet round theoutside when boned, or the thin parts of two cow-heels. Put it into acloth, bind with a broad tape, and boil it till quite tender; then put a goodweight upon it, and do not take off the covering till cold. If you choose it to be more like brawn, salt it longer, let theproportion of saltpetre be greater, and put in also some pieces oflean pork; and then cover it with cow-heel to look like thehorn. This may be kept either in or out of pickle of salt and water boiled,with vinegar 5 and is a very convenient thing to have in the house. If likely to spoil, slice and fry it either with or withoutbutter. 955.--A MARINADE FOR COLLAREDMEATS. Make thin water-gruel of oatmeal; season it well withsalt; add half a pint of white wine and half a spoonful ofwhite pepper; boil it all together for half an hour; allow it to becomecold before the collar is put into it. 956.--TO SALT OR CORN ABOUND OF BEEF. Rub into it a pound and a half of salt, dried before the fire; thenput it into a salting-pan, set it in a cool place, and the brine thatmelts should be poured on the meat every day. It may remain insalt from three to ten days. 957.--BEEF PICKLE. Five quarts white salt, one of coarse salt, one pound brownsugar, fourteen quarts soft water; keep it simmering till it comesto a boil; then add four ounces saltpetre, and give it a boil. Pack your"beef in a close vessel, and when the pickle is cold, pour itover it. 958.--TO PICKLE MEAT. To four gallons water put six pounds salt; boil and skim well,and let stand till cold; then put it into the vessel for your meat; boilthe pickle over in two months, adding one pound salt, and skimwell; keep a weight on the meat to keep it under the pickle; ifany part should be bloody, sprinkle salt on it, and let it stand allnight; then scrape and wipe it before it goes into the pickle. 959.--TEAL POTTED. Pound the remains of a cold fillet with mace, peppercorns, twoor three cloves, and a little salt, and press it well down intopots, then cover with clarified butter. Alternate layers of poundedham and veal, or both mixed, form a fine compound for theluncheon or breakfasttable. 960.--HERRINGS, TO PICKLE. Let the fish be well cleaned and gutted, but not opened; takesalt, pepper, mace, nutmeg, pound and mix thesespices well, then rub a pan with an onion, strew some of thespices over the bottom, and put as many fish as will lie flat onthe bottom, then put a layer of sliced onions, and then fish, andso on alternately till the pan is filled; strew the pounded spicebetween each layer, pour over the best vinegar so as to cover the whole,tie a brown paper over the pan, and bake till the bones aresoft. Sprats and mackerel are likewise done in this way. The heads and tails must be cut off. 961.--SOYER'S SIMPLIFIED WAYOF MAKING THE SAVORY JELLY CALLED ASPIC. Put a galantine in a stewpan with two onions, a carrot, half ahead of celery, two cloves, a blade of mace, a good bunchof parsley, a little thyme, and bay-leaves, a knuckle ofveal, the bones of a turkey, two calf's feet, twoounces of salt: add sufficient water to cover the whole 5 and setthe stewpan upon the fire, until upon the point of boiling; then draw it to thecorner; skim, and let simmer for three hours; then take it from the fire,leaving it in the stock until nearly cold; then take it out; remove thestring from the napkin, and roll the galantine up tighter, tying the napkinagain at each end only; then place it upon a dish; the breast partupwards; set another dish upon it, on which place a fourteen pounds' weight,which will press and cause it to cut firm; when quite cold, it is ready toserve; having removed the napkin, and the string with which it was sewed; thestock, however, should be clarified as directed in the next receipt, tomake a savory jelly, which, when cold and firm, is cut in croutons andchopped; with some also the galantine should be tastefully garnished. Although at first I had some difficulty with this receipt, I can now see thevariety to which it leads, as the same process answers for fowls, greengeese, ducklings, pheasants, grouse, partridges, &c.,using game with the veal or pork for the interior, andstewing them according to their size; the bones of game being stewedwith the stock, will give the flavor to the savory jelly. 962.--TO CLARIFY MEAT JELLY. Having passed the stock (made as in the last) through the sieve intoa basin, leave it until quite cold; then take off all the fat verycarefully; ascertain if sufficiently, or too stiff, by putting a small pieceupon ice; savory jelly requires to be rather stiffer than sweet; if toostiff, add a little more broth; if the contrary, the stock mustbe reduced upon the fire until of the proper consistency. When the stockis boiling, and you are perfectly assured of its strength, have the white offour eggs with their shells in a basin, with half a pint of water,two spoonfuls of tarragon or common vinegar, and a glass ofsherry; whisk all together; then whisk the stock quickly a fewseconds, and pour in the other ingredients while whisking; continue whisking afew minutes until again upon the point, but not boiling; then take it from thefire, and taste if palatable; place a cover upon the stewpan, which stand alittle distance from the fire, putting a few red-hot cinders upon the lid forfive minutes; tie a napkin by the four corners upon a jelly-stand, throughwhich pass the jelly, having a basin beneath to catch it; pour the firstthat runs through again into the napkin until it runs quite clear 5 when allthrough, pour it in a plain mould or sauté-pan, which place upon iceuntil the jelly is quite firm; then dip the bottom of the mould inhot water; turn the jelly out upon a cloth, and cut it intowhatever shapes you please, to garnish and ornament any cold savorydish; the jelly when warm, might be divided, one part kept white,and the other colored with a little brown gravy or coloring, thusenabling you to variegate in garnishing. Should the jelly be required to ornament tongues, hams,pies, salads, or any article, when no galantine is made; then to make thestock, cut the veal into small pieces, and split thecalf's foot in two; put a quarter of a pound of butter ina convenient-sized stewpan, with the veal, foot, a small piece oflean ham, and the other ingredients as directed for galantine; pour inhalf a pint of water; put on the lid, and stand it upon the fire untilthe bottom of the stewpan is covered with a white glaze; then add agallon of water; let simmer three hours, keeping it well skimmed; passand clarify as above. The knuckle of veal and foot may be served hot with a littleparsley and but-ter, for a dinner previous to your party, with a littlefried bacon separately 5 but for my own part I prefer them plain as theyleave the stewpan. 963.--SOYER'S COLD HAM. Procure a very nice but small ham of about nine pounds in weight,which soak about ten hours in cold water, and simmer three hours inplenty of water 5 when done, take out and let remain until cold; thencut off the skin as thinly as possible, but without leaving the marks ofit; let a piece remain upon the knuckle about two inches and a half in breadth,which either festoon or vandyke; carve the fat neatly to form a shell,if you can, and glaze it over lightly; serve with a paper frill upon theknuckle, and garnish with savory jelly, or, if plain, with a few bunchesof fresh green parsley. A handful of fresh hay put in the waterwhen boiling, is an improvement. POULTRY. Always have good and fat poultry where possible; in the country youmay command it. About three weeks before you want to use them, six or twelvefowls, according to your consumption, should be put into the coop, andas you kill one or more replace them to keep up the stock; for the firstweek feed them alternate days with boiled rice and soaked breadand milk: the remainder of the time mix Indian meal with theskim-mings of your stockpot and a spoonful of moist sugar. The windowsof your poultry house must be darkened. Fowls should be carefully drawn, so that the gall bladder isuninjured, and this should only be done through the vent. Roast with a brisk and clear fire. A capon will take five-and-thirtyminutes; smaller fowls a less time in proportion. A turkey offourteen pounds will take two hours; the time will increase or decrease withthe weight. The same rule applies to geese: a large one will take anhour and a half; chickens take half an hour, pigeons ten minutesless. It must be understood that the adherence to the time will depend on thestate of the fire, &c.; a slow fire will make a longer time necessary, andat the same time spoil the poultry. The French adopt the following method tomake old poultry eat tender:--Let the bird soak in cold water fortwenty-four hours, with a handful or two of wood-ashes; pick off thefeathers, and let it hang for another twenty-four hours; truss it, and let itboil for a quarter of an hour in a little veal-broth; take it out,lard, and roast it; when nearly done, baste it with very hot butter. Byobserving these directions, you will impart to an old bird all the delicateflavor of a young chicken. 964.--TO BONE BIRDS. Begin to bone any birds by first taking out the breast bone,when you will have sufficient space to remove the back with a sharp knife andthen the leg bones; the skin must not be broken, but themeat of the legs must be pushed in-wards. 965.--TURKEYWITH SAUSAGE MEAT. At the messes of European regiments in India, it is no uncommon thing tobone a turkey and a fowl, and put one inside the other,filling the interstices with sausage-meat, a small pig beingkilled for the purpose. A turkey thus prepared will take a long timeroasting, and must be placed at a great distance from the fire at first. Whencarved the slices should be cut quite through; and epicures aver that it is oneof the finest dishes that come to table. 966.--TURKEY ROAST. It is stuffed with either sausage meat or fillet of vealstuffing, or crumbs of bread and veal. While roasting, apiece of paper should be placed over the part stuffed, as being bulky itwill catch, the fire and become scorched; but keep the heat well to thebreast, in order that it may be as well done as the rest of the bird.Baste well, and froth it up. Serve with gravy in the dish, and breadsauce in a tureen. To the sausage meat, if used, add a fewbread-crumbs and a beaten egg. Turkey is sometimes stuffedwith truffles; they are prepared thus: they must be peeled, and chopped,and pounded in a mortar, in quantities of a pound and a half will be foundsufficient: rasp the same weight of fat of bacon, and mix it with thetruffles. Stuff the tur-key with it; this stuffing is usuallyplaced in the turkey two days previous to cooking: it is supposed toimpart a flavor to the flesh of the fowl. Cut thin slices of fat bacon and place over the breastof the turkey. Secure it with half a sheet of clean white paper,and roast. Chestnuts dressed in the same fashion are found an excellentsubstitute for truffles. Two hours will roast it. If you wish to makeplain stuffing, pound a cracker, or crumble some breadvery fine, chop some raw salt pork very fine, or use butter; siftsome sage, (and summer-savory, or sweet mar-joram, if you havethem in the house, and fancy them), and mould them all together, season with alittle pepper. An egg worked in makes the stuffing cutLetter. 967.--TURKEY BOILED. A hen bird is considered the best. It may be stuffed withtruffles, chestnuts, or sausage meat. Boil it in a cleanfloured cloth 5 throw some salt into the water in which itis boiled. Cover close, and simmer for two hours; remove the scum frequently.White sauce, or pars-ley and butter; the latter is nowscarcely ever brought to table. 968.--BOILED TURKEY. Fill the body with oysters, and let it boil by steam without anywater. When sufficiently done, take it up, strain the gravy thatwill be found in the pan, and which, when cold, will be a fine jelly;thicken it with a little flour and butter, add the liquor of theoysters intended fur sauce, also stewed, and warm theoysters up in it; whiten it with a little boiled cream, and pourit over the turkey. 969.--TURKEY WITH SAUSAGE MEAT ANDTONGUE. Bone the turkey, then fill the inside with sausagemeat, with or without tongue: if with tongue thetongue should be boiled the day before; cut off the root and tip to thelength of the turkey; if you have a fowl to spare, wrap thetongue in this after it is boned, and place it in the middle of theturkey surrounded with sausage meat; introduce truffles ifyou like; if roasted, a slow fire, and it will take a long time to roastthrough; if for boiling, cover it with fat bacon and slices of lemontied in a cloth, pour whatever sauce you propose over theturkey. 970.--TURKEY HASHED. Cut up the remains of a roasted turkey, put it into a stewpan withhalf a gill of sherry wine, shalots, truffles, mushrooms,chopped parsley, salt, pepper, two spoonfuls of cullis,and a little stock; boil half an hour, and reduce to a thicksauce. When ready add a pound of anchovies, and a squeeze oflemon. Skim the sauce free from fat, and servealtogether. 971.--FORCED TURKEY OR FOWL. Take all the bones from the turkey, fill it in again witheither good sausage meat or veal forcemeat, with or withouttruffles as may be required, braise it in a cloth keeping it a goodshape; when done glaze the breast a good color 5 use silver skewers toornament with, and any of the sauces named or a fricandeau sauce underit. French Cooks' Knife. An illustration of large knife. 972.--TURKEY POULT Should be roasted without stuffing; it will be done with a clear firein twenty minutes. Serve with bread or gravy sauce. 973.--TURKEY WITH FLAT SAUSAGE CAKE. Roast as before; fry thirty oval flat sausages, the same quantity ofthe same sized pieces of bacon, a quarter of an inch thick; make a border of mashed potatoes about thesize of a finger, one inch inside the edge of the dish, dress yoursausages and bacon on it as a crown alternately, put yourturkey in the middle, and gravy over, or glaze, if at hand. Plainboiled tongue may, of course, be served with the turkey, orseparate on a dish of greens. If any remains of tongue from a previousday, it may be served instead of the sausages, cut the same shape assausages, and warmed in a pan; if so, put a nice green sproutbetween each piece. Bread sauce is generally served with this dish. 974.--SOYER'S BOILED BRAISED TURKEY. Truss it thus: cut the neck, leaving the skin on; cut thelegs off; then run the middle finger into the inside, raise theskin of the legs, and put them under the apron of theturkey, put the liver and gizzard in the pinions, turn thesmall end of the pinions on the back, run a packing needle with string throughthe joint of the wing and middle joint of the leg, and throughthe body, and out at the opposite leg and wing, bring it roundand tie it on the back, then run the needle and string through the ends of thelegs or drumstick, press it through the back, and tie strongly; it isthen ready. When the turkey is trussed, then stuff it; and if intendedto have oyster sauce with it, chop about two dozen of oystersinto small dice and mix them with the stuffing, and place inside thebreast. Then rub the breast with half a lemon, and put itinto a two-gallon pan, and cover it with cold water, to which are addedtwo ounces of butter, one ounce of salt, four onions, astick of celery, one carrot, two turnips sliced, a largebouquet of parsley, two bay leaves, two sprigs of thyme;set it on the fire, when beginning to boil skim it, let it simmer two hours ormore if large; try the breast with a needle, if it goes in and outeasily it is done; take it out and set it on a dish to drain, remove thestring, serve on a fresh dish with a pint of good thick oyster sauceover it. By omitting the oysters in stuffing, you may serve theturkey with celery sauce, tomato, or mushroom, orgood parsley and butter; and, as an accompaniment, a piece ofabout two pounds of nice streaked bacon, which has been boiled with theturkey, and from which you have removed the skin, and serve onsome greens, or Brussels sprouts, over which you have thrown a littlesalt, pepper, and two ounces of oiled butter. You see,dear ----, that this dish can be varied without much expense and trouble;observe, that this way, the broth is good for soup the same day, by theaddition of two pounds of veal cut in small pieces, a quarter of a poundof lean bacon, one onion, one blade of mace, aleek, a wineglass of water; put it into a separate stewpan, stewon fire till forming a white glaze, then add it to the turkey,when on the point of boiling; when done, skim off all fat, pass itthrough a tammy or cloth; you may use it for any clear soup by adding a littlebrown gravy or coloring, and also for any kind of puree; or, by reducingit a little, make white or brown sauce, adding to the last theproper color. I must observe, that this will be almost inpracticable when you have aparty; the only plan would be to get the turkey done one hour before yourequire it, keeping it hot with its breast in some of the stock;but, as the broth will keep well in small quantities, it can bereserv-ed for the next day. That is my plan of boiling, but the following is mynew way of giving the flavor of vegetables to all poultry, which is a decidedimprovement. The aroma from the bird when the cover is removed is quiteinviting, and the ap-pearance of it, which is as white as alabaster, andcuts also full of juice: I call it. 975.--ROAST BRAISED TURKEY (Soyer.) Peel and wash two onions, one carrot, one turnip, cutthem in thin slices, also a little celery, a few sprigs ofparsley, two bay-leaves, lay three sheets of paper on the table,spread your vegetables, and pour over them two or three tablespoonfuls ofoil; have your turkey, or poularde, trussed the same as forboiling; cut a few slices of lemon, which you place on the breastto keep it white, then cover with thin slices of bacon, and placethe back of the bird on the vegetables; tie the paper round with string,then pass the spit and set it before the fire; pour plenty of fat overto moisten the paper and prevent it from burning, roast three hours at apretty good distance from the fire: capons will take two hours,pou-lardes one hour and a half, fowls one hour, and chickens halfan hour. This way it may be served with almost any sauce or garniture,as stewed peas, oyster sauce, jardiniere, stewed celery,cauliflower, stewed cucumbers, Jerusalem artichokes, whichshould be turned in the shape of a pear: these should be dished on aborder of mashed potatoes; that is, an artichoke and a Brusselssprout alternately, or a small piece of white cauliflower, and asmall bunch of green asparagus, or stewed peas, or stewedcelery, of two inches long, never more; or any other vegetable, accordingto season, which taste or fancy may dictate. When I want to serve them withbrown garniture or sauce, I remove the paper and vegetablestwenty minutes before it is done, and give it a light golden color, then Iserve it with either a ragout financier, or mushroom, or Englishtruffle. I also often stuff it thus: I put two pounds of sausagemeat in a basin with a little grated nutmeg; I then take twotable-spoonfuls of chopped onions, put them in a saute-pan with a littlebutter, and let them do for two minutes, which add to the meat,also two eggs well beaten up, and a quarter of a pint of whitesauce, if at hand, and fifteen fine roasted chesnuts; add this to thestuffing, and fill the bird as usual, not too full at the breast;roast as above, giving half an hour longer for the forcemeat; put aquart of demiglaze and a glass of sherry in a stewpan, reduce it to apint and a half, add in it fifty button onions previously stewed, andtwenty-five roasted chesnuts; sauce under. 976.--TURKEY, IFOLD. The French stew it exactly like the ribs of beef, Soyer says:--Put aquarter of a pound of butter into a convenient-sized stewpan, such aswill conveniently hold it; cut one pound of lean bacon in ten or twelvepieces, put a few minutes in the pan on the fire; then add your turkeytrussed as for boiling, breast downwards; set it on a moderate fire forone hour, and until it is a nice color; add two table-spoonfuls offlour, and stir well round until it forms a roux; then add two quarts ofwater or broth; when you have it on the point of boiling, addfifty pieces of carrot the size of walnuts, the like ofturnip, ten button onions, a good bouquet of sprigs ofthyme, two bayleaves, and ten of parsley, a small glass ofrum, a clove, a piece of garlic, and let it stew gentlyfor four hours. If you use water, season in proportion. Take theturkey out, and put the vegetables and sauce in a smallerstewpan, which ought to be nearly full; let it simmer on the corner of thefire, so that the fat rises and may be removed, and reduce it to ademiglaze; dish up the turkey, and serve with the sauce over it;small new potatoes, about twenty, when in season, may be added to thesauce, or roasted chesnuts. The remains are excellent when cold, or willwarm again with the addition of a little broth or water. FOWLS. FOWLS, in a general sense, mean all kinds of poultry; but, in alimited view, one species of bird. We distinguish this kind in cookery, as thechicken, capon, pullet, cock, and hen. Chickensfrom their age cannot be otherwise than tender. Capons should have afat vein under the wing; thick belly and rump; comb shortand pale; spurs short and blunt, and legs smooth. Pullets are best inthe spring, just before they begin to lay. Cocks should have their spurs short,legs smooth, and comb short, smooth, and a bright color. Hens,legs and comb smooth, and full breast. Black legs are bestfor roasting and entrees, and white for boiling. For preparing them for table, M. Soyer invented a plan:--by cutting thesinews of the bird, it not only appears fuller and plumper when cooked, as theheat is liable to contract the sinews, but it also af- fords facility forcarving when the sinews are divided; they are trussed in the usual way, onlyusing strings instead of skewers. 977.--TURKEY PULLED AND GRILLED Is a mode of preparing the remains of cold turkey, by mincing thewhite meat and fricasseeing it with white sauce; the legsbeing scored, peppered, and salted, broiled, and sent up over the mince. Or devilled, as thus:--On the rump, gizzard, and a drumstick,put salt, pepper, and cayenne. Let them be broiled, andbrought to table as hot as possible; cut them in small pieces; pour over them aladle of mustard, ditto of melted butter, a spoonful of soy,ditto of lemon-juice, and some of the gravy out of the dish;mix quickly and hand round. It forms an admirable relish; fowls may betreated in the same manner. 978.--CAPON, OR POULARDE. Should be stuffed and roasted, or otherwise dressed, in precisely the sameman-ner as turkey. They are the male and female of the commonfowl, but, when caponed, grow nearly to the size of tur-keys, and arevery rarely, if ever, boiled. 979.--A LA PROVENÇAL. Half roast the fowl; cut it in pieces; take a dozen onions;cut them in rings; add a little parsley chopped. Place them in astewpan, laying a bed of onions and parsley, then fowl,till the whole are used; add a glass of oil or cream, with one ortwo bay leaves and salt, let them simmer slowly; dish thefowl; put the onions in the middle; add a little sauce,and send it to table. 980.--POELEE TO BOIL FOWLS IN. Take two pounds of veal and two pounds of bacon; cut both intolarge dice; cut also two large carrots and two onions into dice;put them, with a pound of butter, into a stewpan, the juice of fourlemons, a little thyme or sweet fennel, and twolaurel-leaves bruised; season it with salt and pepper; put themon a good fire; add a spoonful of boiling broth, and boil it. 981.--FOWLS, FORCED. Cut a large fowl down the back; re-move the skin from thewhole of the body very carefully; cut the flesh from the bones, and chopit up finely with half a pint of oysters, and an ounce of beefmarrow; then season with pepper and salt. Add sufficientcream to mix it well; lay the meat on the bones; draw theskin over, and sew up the back. Lay thin slices of bacon on thebreast; tie them on in diamonds, and roast it an hour by a moderatefire. Pour a good brown gravy sauce into the dish. Remove thebacon from the fowl, and then place the fowl in the dish.Garnish with oysters or mushrooms, and serve hot. 982.--ROAST FOWLS. If nicely trussed, make a stuffing with butter and somepepper, dry up the butter with bread-crumbs, baste itwell, and flour and salt before you take it from the fire. Ifapproved of, stuff the fowl with some good sausage-meat,truffles, or chestnuts, roast it twenty minutes, unless a veryfine one, and then it will take three quarters of an hour; serve with breadsauce, or parsley and butter; egg sauce is sometimessent to table with it. If a small lump of salt butter, well covered with blackpepper, is placed within the fowl previous to roasting, it will befound to improve the fowl by removing the dryness which is met withinthe back and side bones. 983.--BOILED FOWLS. Flour a white cloth, and put the fowls in coldwater; let them simmer three quarters of an hour serve with parsleyand butter, or oyster or celery sauce. The fowlsmay be covered with a white sauce if sent cold to table, garnished withcolored calf's-foot jelly of the hue of beet-root. Boiled with Oysters. --Take a youngfowl, fill the inside with oysters, put it into a jar, and plungethe jar in a kettle or saucepan of water. Boil it for an hour and ahalf. There will be a quantity of gravy from the juices of thefowl and oysters in the jar; make it into a white sauce,with the addition of egg, cream, or a little flour andbutter; add oysters to it, or serve it up plain with thefowl. The gravy that comes from a fowl dressed in thismanner will be a stiff jelly the next day; the fowl will be verywhite and tender, and of an exceedingly fine flavor--advantages notattainable in ordinary boiling--while the dish loses nothing of its delicacyand simplicity. 984.--TO BRAISE A FOWL. Bone the breast, and fill it with forcemeat. Lay thebones, and any other poultry trimmings, into a stewpan, and thefowl on them. Put to them a few onions, a fagot of herbs,three blades of mace, a pint of stock, and a glass or two ofsherry. Cover the fowl with slices of bacon, and then withwhite paper, cover the whole close, and put it on a slow stove for onehour. Then take it up, strain the braise, and skim off the fatcarefully; set it on to boil very quickly to a glaze, and put it over thefowl with a brush. Serve with a brown fricassee of mushrooms.Before glazing, put the fowl into an oven for a few minutes, to give alittle color. With Rice. --The fowl should be stewedvery slowly in some clear veal or mutton broth, well skimmed, andseasoned with pepper, salt, mace, and an onion.About half an hour before it is ready add a gill of rice, well washedand soaked; simmer until tender, then strain the rice from thebroth, and lay it on a sieve before the fire to swell; then dish thefowl with the rice round it. White sauce is the most fashionable accompaniment, the old method ofdishing with parsley and butter being on the decline; but asparsley still maintains its ground with many people, it is advisable toboil a sufficient quantity: press and chop it, garnishing the dish with smallmounds thus prepared, which may be mixed at table with the white sauceby the guests who like the flavor of parsley. Liver-sauce issometimes served with boiled fowls, but celery oroyster-sauce is preferable. 985.--FOWL HASHED. This receipt will serve for any but the very larger species of poultry orgame; joint them and cut a cutlet from each side of thebreast. If it has not been eaten when previously dressed, break thebones of the body, and put all into a stewpan with a pint of water, a small faggot of sweet herbs, onecarrot sliced, and an onion; let it stew an hour and threequarters, or two hours, skim the fat from the gravy as it rises,strain it, skim again, and pour it into another stewpan; thicken with a littlebutter and flour, flavor with Harvey's sauce, or anysauce applicable to such a dish, a little pepper and salt,and ground nutmeg, or mace for seasoning; add thefowl, and heat it thoroughly through without permitting the hash to cometo a boil. Sippets of toasted or fried bread cut in dice surround thedish, in the centre of which the fowl is handsomely laid. 986.--FRIED FOWL. When you have cut the pieces as before, put them into a basin with a littlesalt and pepper, a spoonful of oil, and two ofvinegar, and a little chopped eschalot; stir them well in it, andlet remain for half an hour; have ready a quantity of batter, and take a forkand dip each piece one after the other into it, and then let it drop into thefrying-pan, in which is sufficient hot fat to cover them; fry a nicecolor, and serve in the form of a pyramid, with fried parsley over, orany sauce you like under. 987.--FOWL PILLAU. Put one pound of rice into a frying-pan with two ounces ofbutter, which keep moving over a slow fire, until the rice islightly browned; then have ready a fowl trussed as for boiling, "whichput into a stewpan, with five pints of good broth; pound in a mortarabout forty cardamom seeds with the husks, half an ounce ofcoriander seeds, and sufficient cloves, allspice,mace, cinnamon, and peppercorns, to make two ounces in theaggregate; which tie up tightly in a cloth, and put into the stewpan with thefowl; let it boil slowly until the fowl is nearly done; then addthe rice, which let stew until quite tender and almost dry; have readyfour onions, which cut into slices the thickness of half crown pieces;sprinkle over with flour, and fry, without breaking them, of a nicebrown color; have also six thin slices of bacon, curled and grilled, andtwo eggs boiled hard; lay the fowl upon your dish, whichcover over with the rice, forming a pyramid; garnish with thebacon, fried onions, and the hard-boiled eggs cut intoquarters and serve very hot. 988.--TO BROIL A FOWL. Split the fowl down the back 5 season it very well withpepper, and put it on the gridiron with the inner part next the fire,which must be very clear. Hold the gridiron at a considerable distance from thefire, and allow the fowl to remain until it is nearly half done; thenturn it, taking great care that it does not burn. Broil it of a fine brown, andserve it up with stewed mushrooms, or a sauce with pickledmushrooms. A duck may be broiled in the same way. If the fowlis very large, half roast it; then cut it into four quarters and finish it onthe gridiron. 989.--FRICASSEE OF FOWL. Put the fowl into a jar, with sliced onion, parsley,salt, and a piece of butter rolled in flour; let it remainin a kettle of water on the fire until three parts done; then skim andstrain the liquor, and after draining, wipe the fowl dry. Put it into astewpan, with a piece of butter and a slice or two of ham; throwin a little flour, and shake it until it is of a good color. Moistenwith the liquor taken out of the jar, adding parsley, youngonions, a bay leaf, a clove, sorrel, andmushrooms cut into pieces; skim it, and let it stew until done; thentake out the herbs, and thicken the sauce with a littlecream, but do not let it boil: finishwith a little lemon-juice, and pour the sauce over all. or: --Rather more than half-boil in a small quantityof water: let the fowl cool; then cut up, and put to simmer in alittle gravy made of the liquor it is boiled in, and a bit ofveal or mutton, onion, mace, andlemon-peel, some white pepper, and a bunch of sweetherbs. When quite tender, keep it hot while you thicken the sauce inthe following manner: strain it off, and put it back into the saucepan with alittle salt, a scrape of nutmeg and a bit of flour andbutter; give it one boil; and when you are going to serve, beat up theyolk of an egg, and half a pint of cream, and stir them over thefire, but do not let them boil. 990.--POELE. (French.) Poele is almost the same operation as braising; the only difference is, thatwhat is poele must be underdone, and a braise must be done through. As the poele has no translation, it retains its name; it is indispensable infine cookery, and is made as follows:-- Take one pound of beef suet, one pound of very fresh butter,and one pound of very fat bacon; cut the suet and thebacon into very large dice; put them into a stewpan with two pounds ofveal cut in the same manner, fried till the veal becomes verywhite, and then moisten with about three pints of clear boilingwater, a handful of salt, one bay leaf, a few sprigs ofthyme, one onion stuck with three cloves, and a greatbundle of parsley and green onions: let the whole boil gentlytill the onion is done; then drain it through a hair sieve, and use itfor any thing that may want pole. The use of pole is to make every thingboiled in it very white and tasty: in the winter it keeps for a week,and is very useful in the larder, particularly if you do not put in any of thefleshy part of the bacon; otherwise the meat that you boil in itwill turn quite red, on account of the saltpetre used in curing thebacon. 991.--RISSOLES. Pick from the bones and skin any kind of cold poultry; weighit, and add one-third of grated bread-crumbs, a little cold meltedbutter, a small onion, previously boiled and finely minced,pepper, salt, and the yolks of two eggs, to bind ittogether. Roll out, thin, some trimmings of puff-paste; cut it in twoinch square pieces; put in the middle of each a teaspoonful of the mince; foldthe paste over it, and shape it with a cutter. Egg the shapes;dip them in bread-crumbs, and fry them in lard; serve dry;garnish with fried parsley, and take care that the edges be perfectlyclosed. or: --Pound any kind of cold meat; thicken alittle good gravy with cream or butter; season themeat, and mix it with the sauce, until it is well moistened; thenroll out some paste into oval pieces; lay a large table-spoonful of themeat on one end; double it over; press the edges together, andscallop them; brush the paste over with yolk of egg;sprinkle vermicelli upon it, and fry them. 991.--PUREE DE VOLAILLE. Mince the white part of a cold fowl or turkey veryfinely; then pound it in a mortar: put in two or three spoonfuls of whitesauce, and pass it through a sieve, adding a little salt andwhite pepper, and warm the whole. It may be served up with thelegs grilled. It should not be too thin, but can be made the propercon-sistence by a greater or smaller quantity of white sauce orcream. Garnish with fried bread, or paste cut in shapes.It may also be served up in a casserolle, or wall of rice and mashedpotatoes, or with poached eggs. 993.--BOILED CHICKENS. Chickens should be plump, or they form a meagre dish; they shouldreceive much attention in the boiling; they re-quire less time than afowl, and are sent to table with white sauce, and garnished withtufts of white broccoli. 994.--CHICKENS PULLED. Remove the skin carefully from a cold chicken, then pull theflesh from the bones, preserving it as whole as you can. Flourthem well, fry them a nice brown in fresh butter; draw them, and stew ina good gravy well seasoned; thicken a short time before serving withflour and butter, and add the juice of half alemon. 995.--CURRIED CHICKENS. Lay the pieces of a dressed chicken into a stewpan with a slicedonion fried brown, a clove of garlic, and some good whitegravy: simmer till the chicken is tender, add a spoonful of currypowder, flour rubbed smooth with a lump of but-ter; a quarter of apint of cream, with a little salt, may be added twenty minutesbefore serving: squeeze a little lemon into it, and put an edging ofrice round the dish. 996.--TO BRAISE CHICKENS. Bone the chickens, stuff them with forcemeat, place inthe stewpan the bones and trimmings: lay the chickens upon themwith a braise of sweet herbs, onions, mace whole, somethin slices of bacon, about three parts of a pint of stock, or,if that is not handy, water, two glasses of sherry: thebacon should be added last. Cover close, and stew for two hours. Thentake out the chickens, strain the braise, remove the fat, andboil the braise rapidly to a glaze, paint it over the chickens with abrush while the braise is being boiled 5 brown the chickens before thefire; it adds to their appearance. When glazed, fowls may be braised inthe same manner. 997.--FRIED CHICKEN A LA MALABAR. The Indian receipts for cooking chicken are very numerous; weselect the fol-lowing. Cut up the fowl as for a stew, removing thejoints carefully and carving the body into handsome shapes; remove all moisturewith a clean dry cloth, and powder every part with curry; fry it infresh butter, to which half a teaspoonful of curry has beenadded, a pale brown; cut into small pieces two or three onions, and fryin clear butter, sufficient to keep the pan from burning; but not morethan should be absorbed by the onion after some time frying. It is aswell here to say, that as onions are frequently used in the curriedpoultry by the Indian cooks, they employ the following method, When tobe cut small, they slice the onions and then separate them into rings,cutting these rings into the sizes they may require, which, if a little morelabor, yet presents a better appearance; when they are fried sufficiently tohave absorb-ed the grease in the pan without in any degree having beenburned, spread them over the chicken and serve; a whole lemon shouldbe sent to table with them. 998.--PIGEONS ROASTED. Veal stuffing for pigeons improves the flavor; they must befresh and well cleaned; butter and parsley may be served withthem, but parsley alone as a stuffing, though frequently used, isby no means so palatable as the veal stuffing, or one made withveal, the fat of bacon and the crumb of bread soaked inmilk and well seasoned. Let your pigeons be picked clean andwashed, then stuff the whole inside of the pigeon with finestuffing. To Broil. --Split the backs, season them highly, laythem over a clear brisk fire; serve with mushroom sauce. To Cook as Woodcocks. --Toast somebread as for woodcocks, butter it, and drop a few drops ofessence of anchovies on the butter, spread it all over thetoast, then put the toast under the pi-geons while roasting. To Stew. --Take a white cabbage, cut it as forpickling, rinse it in clear cold water, drain it well, put it into asauce-pan with equal quantities of milk and water, boilit, strain off the milk, and take a portion of the cabbage andlay it in a stewpan; soak the pigeons for half an hour in coldmilk and water, season them well with salt and pepper,adding a little cayenne; place them in the stew-pan with thecabbage, cover them over with what remains, add some white broth,stew slowly until the pigeons are tender, thicken with a littlecream, flour, and butter; let it boil, and serve up thepigeon with a pur6e of the cabbage. Lard and braise themin the same man-ner as chickens. 999.--COMPOTE OF PIGEONS. Blanch four pigeons, then stuff them, place them in a stewpan, put inan on-ion, a slice of lemon, and a small handful of mushrooms;lay over them slices of fat bacon, add half a pint of good gravy,and stew gently until the pigeons are tender; take them out of thegravy and keep them hot, strain off the gravy, skim it clear,then thicken with half a spoon-ful of flour, and a lump ofbutter, the size of a small walnut; season with salt,pepper, and a little cayenne; a few force-meat ballsmay be added at pleasure; pour half into the dish with the pigeons, andserve the remainder in a tureen. 1000.--PIGEONS IN JELLY. Make some jelly of calf's fool or if you have the liquor in which aknuckle of veal has been boiled, it will answer the same purpose; placeit in a stewpan with a bunch of sweet herbs, a blade of mace,white pepper, a slice of lean bacon, some lemon-peel,and the pigeons, which, being trussed and their necks propped upto make them appear natural, season to your palate. Bake them; when they aredone remove them from the liquor, but keep them covered close, that their colormay be preserved. Remove the fat, boll the whites of a couple ofeggs with the jelly to clear it, and strain it; this is usuallydone by dipping a cloth into boiling water, and straining it through it,as it prevents any thing like scum or dirt sweeping through the strainer. Putthe jelly rough over and round the pigeons. 1001.--PIGEONS OR ANT BIRD IN ASPIC JELLY. Get three pigeons, take out the bones, leaving on theneck and head; fill the birds with some forcemeat, makingthem the shape of the bird, cover them with fat bacon, put them on adish, place them in the oven until done, take them out to get cold, have readysome very light colored aspic jelly; either chop your jelly roundthem on the dish or in a mould, if in a mould place the breastdownwards, let the jelly be quite cold and beginning to set before youpour it in; but if you intend to ornament your mould, do it with green, red,and white devices, with what may then be in season 5 radishes,whites of hard eggs, cucumbers, French beans,truffles, and any other eatable and wholesome thing: never use any thingthat is injurious to health; set it to get stiff, turn out with warmwater. 1002.--LARKS OR SMALL BIRDS. Be very particular in roasting; melt a little butter, add to it ayolk of egg, and with your paste-brush egg all over them,and then bread-crumb them; while roasting frequently baste them andflour them, and before you take them up flour 366 and salt them; send them up with some brownbread-crumbs. 1003.--GUINEA FOWLS. These birds must be very young, for, being naturally very dry, they are noteatable if more than twelve months old; they are generally larded, and servedplain roasted, rather well done; they are trussed like the common fowl,and require nearly three-quarters of an hour to roast. It has very much theflavor of the pheasant, and should be allowed to hang as long as it canwithout being too far gone. Serve with a rich brown gravy and breadsauce; it will take from forty-five to fifty minutes. 1004.--PEAFOWLS. These magnificent birds make a noble roast, and when young are veryexcel-lent; they are larded, or plain roasted, and served with the tailfeathers which have been preserved, stuck into the bird, the head, withits feathers on, being left folded up in paper, and tucked under thewing; roast about an hour and a half; take the paper from thehead and neck; dress it upon your dish with water-cresses,and the gravy and bread sauce separate in a boat. MADE DISHESOF POULTRY. 1005.--FOWL A LA PROVENCAL. Partly roast the fowl; cut it up, detaching the wings andlegs, carefully dividing side bones, neck bones,breast, and back in as handsome pieces as possible; take eight or tenlarge onions, which cut in slices of moderate thickness, make in astewpan a layer of the sliced onion with some chopped parsley,then lay upon it some of the fowl, again a layer of the onion andparsley until the whole of the fowl and onion are used;place in two bay-leaves and about as much salt as would fill a largeteaspoon, four table-spoonfuls of olive oil, or, if that is not to thepalate, substitute cream; it should simmer gently until enough, and thenbe dished, the onion in the middle: serve with a little sauc 1006.--FOWL A LA BECHAMEL. If you have had a roast capon for the second course the day before,and only a little cut from the breast, take a sharp knife and cutthrough the breast bone down nearly to the rump, left of thebreast, take off the skin and cut it up as you would for pulledfowl; have ready in a stewpan a little good white sauce, choppedparsley, and shalot, a little piece of mushroom chopped; boil allthis to gether, keeping it quite thick, scrape out any thing remaining in theinside of the fowl, then season with lemon-juice, salt,and cayenne pepper: fill in the fowl, imitating a wholefowl, cover it with bread-crumbs, sprinkle clarifiedbutter all over the bread-crumbs, butter paper and tie roundthe fowl, put it into the oven to brown the top and get hot through;when done a light brown take off the paper, and put it into your dishwith a good sauce under it. 1007.--AN INDIAN PILAU. Truss a fowl as for boiling, pass it a few minutes in the oven,raising it up with fat bacon or buttered paper; fry someonions, a few bruised coriander seeds, and a few cardamomseeds whole: fry a nice light color four onions cut in slices, addto this a gill or more of cream, having all fried in a littlebutter; put in your fowl with some good veal stock, haveready some rice boiled in milk for two minutes, skim it off andadd it to the fowl frequently looking at it and moving it to keep itfrom sticking or 367 burning: let yourfowl stew for a quar-ter of an hour before you add the rice: donot let the rice get mashed; season with cayenne pepper andsalt, put all the rice and liquor round the fowl: you canuse rabbits, or chickens, or quails, or veal, instead of fowl, the same way. Gravy may be made thus: Nicely wash the feet of a fowl, andcut them and the neck into small pieces, simmer them with a littlebrowned bread, a slice of onions, a bit of parsley, andthyme, some pepper, and salt, and the liver andgizzard in a quarter of a pint of water; simmer them till theyare reduced to a half; take out the liver, bruise it, and strain theliquor to it, then thicken it with flour and butter, and add ateaspoon-ful of mushroom ketchup. 1008.--CURRY of CHICKEN. Out up a raw chicken; put into a stewpan, with two ounces ofbutter, half a large onion sliced thin, a few sprigs ofparsley and thyme, and two ounces of lean ham; let thewhole sweat over the fire for a few minutes; add a heaped table-spoonful ofcurry-powder, and a small one of flour; shake the whole togetherfor five minutes over the fire; put to it a pint of either gravy orwater; let the whole go gently until the chicken is done; takeout the chicken, rub the sauce through a sieve, boil it up, skim,put in the chicken, season with salt and lemon-juice topalate. Plain boiled rice to be served in a separate dish. Croquettes. --Take the lean of the re-mains of afowl from a previous dinner, and chop it up in small pieces, then putinto a stewpan a teaspoonful of chopped eschalots, with half an ounce ofbutter: pass them for about three minutes over the fire, add ateaspoonful of flour, mix well, then add the fowl, and a gill ofwhite sauce, or more if not sufficiently moist; season withpepper, salt, and sugar; then stir in the yolks of twoeggs very quickly, stir it a little longer on the fire, and turn it out ona dish to cool; when cold, take twelve pieces, each the size of awalnut, roll them out an inch and a half in length, andbread-crumb twice over; fry a good color. 1009.--DUMPOKHT.* Clean and truss a fowl, or rabbit, as for roasting; then stuffit with sultana raisins, pistachio-nuts, and boiled ricein equal parts. Rub fine one ounce of coriander-seed freed from thehusks, four onions, a dozen peppercorns, sixcloves, and a teaspoonful of pounded ginger. Set twelve ounces ofbutter in a stewpan over the fire, rub the pounded ingredients over thefowl or rabbit, and let it fry until perfectly well browned andtender. Have boiled in a quart of white broth twelve ounces ofrice, two ounces of raisins, two ounces of pistachio-nuts,and two of almonds, the two latter blanched, and cut into thin slices.When the rice is nearly tender, strain off the broth, and add therice to the fried fowl; stir the whole well, that thebutter may completely saturate the rice, and keep it near thefire to swell till wanted. In serving surround the fowl with therice. Observe that, in pounding the onions, the juice onlyis used with the spices. 1010.--TURKEY GIBLETS A LABOURGEOIS. The giblets consist of pinions, feet, neck,liver, and gizzard; scald, and put them into a stewpan with apiece of butter, parsley, scallions. garlic, thyme,bayleaf, basil, mushrooms, and a clove or two; moistenwith stock, season with pepper and salt, make it hot,thicken with a little flour, and when almost done add a fewturnips fried slightly in a little butter. A dish mentioned in the Arabian Nights as the kid stuffed withpistachio-nuts. 1011.--TO ROAST AGOOSE. Goose in itself is of a strong rich fla-vor, and requires both nicetyin the cook-ing as well as in the stuffing to obviate that strength offlavor. There are many modes of stuffing; for one mode, take twomoderate sized onions and boil them rapidly ten minutes, then chop themfinely, mince sage to the quantity of half the onion, add ofpowdered bread twice as much as of onion, pepper andsalt it, introducing a little cayenne, and then bind it with thebeaten yolk of an egg. Potatoes mashed are sometimes introduced, butnot frequently into the body; they should be mashed with flourypotatoes mixed with cream and a little fresh butter ratherhighly seasoned with cayenne and salt. Both ends of thegoose should be secured when trussed, that the seasoning may notescape. It should be roasted before a quick fire and kept constantly basted; apiece of white paper may be placed over the breast while roastinguntil it rises, and then it may be removed; it will take from an hour and ahalf to an hour and three-quarters: serve with a rich brown gravy andapple sauce. Previous to sending to table, a flavoring may be made as follows: to adessert-spoonful of made mustard add a quarter of a teaspoonful ofcayenne pepper, about the same quantity of salt, mix it evenlywith a glass of port wine and two glasses of rich gravy, make ithot, cut a slit in the apron of the goose, and pour it through justpreviously to serving. A Green Goose is seldom or never stuffed; theinside may be well peppered and sailed, and it should be roasted be-fore abrisk fire about three-quarters of an hour; it should be sent to table with noother accompaniment than a good brown gravy and apple orsorrel sauce. 1012.--PRESERVED GOOSE FOR THE FARM OR COUNTRYHOUSE. In case you have more geese in condition and season than what youconsume kill and cut them up into pieces, so that there shall be as littleflesh left on the carcass as possible, and bone the leg; rub intoeach piece with your fingers some salt, in which you have mixed a littlesaltpetre; put them into an earthen pan, with some thyme,bayleaf, spice, a clove of chopped garlic, rub them for acouple of days, after which dip each piece in water, and dry on a cloth5 when you have chopped fine and melted all the fat you could get fromthe goose, and scraped a quarter of a pound of fat bacon andmelted with it, pass through a sieve into a stewpan, lay the pieces in it andbake very gently in a slow oven, until a stiff piece of straw will go throughit, then lay it in a sieve; when nearly cold put it in a bowl or roundpreserving jar, and press a smaller one on the top, so that it all forms onesolid mass, pour the fat over, when cold cover with a piece of bladder,keep it in a cold place, and it will be good for months together, and isexcellent for breakfast, luncheon, or supper, having previously extracted thefat. Last winter I kept some for three months quite sweet; having half aone left, I put it by in the above way, bones and all, in a basin, andcovered with the fat produced by roasting, and put it in the larder, andit was excellent. Ducks may be served in the same way. Marbled Goose. --Take a fine mellowox-tongue out of pickle, cut off the root and horny part at thetip, wipe dry, and boil till it is quite tender then peel it, cut a deep slitin its whole length, and lay a fair proportion of the following mixture withinit:--Mace half an ounce, nutmeg half an ounce, clove halfan ounce, salt two tablespoonfuls, and twelve olives. Theolives should be stoned, and all the ingredients well pounded together.Next take a barn-door fowl and a good large goose, andbone them. Lay the 369 tongueinside the fowl, rub the latter outside with the seasoning, andhaving ready some slices of ham divested of the rind, wrap themtightly round the fowl 5 put these inside the goose, with theremainder of the seasoning, sew it up, and make all secure and innatural shape with a piece of new linen and tape. Put it in an earthen pan orjar just large enough to hold it, with plenty of clarified butter, andbake it two hours and a half in a slow oven; then take it out, and when coldtake out the goose and set it in a sieve; take off the butter andhard fat which put by the fire to melt, adding, if required, moreclarified butter. Wash and wipe out the pan, put the bird again into it,and take care that it is well covered with the warm butter; then tie thejar down with bladder and leather. It will keep thus for a long time. Whenwanted for the table, the jar should be placed in a tub of hot water soas to melt the butter, the goose then can be taken out, the clothtaken off it, and sent to table cold. A most delicious dish for breakfasts,suppers, picnics, &c. DUCKS. Ducks may be roasted as soon as killed. Keep a clear bright fire. Letthem be done of a light brown, but if wild they should not be much roasted, orthe flavor will be spoiled. They take about an hour to roast, and should bewell basted. The livers and gizzards are parboiled, chopped fine,and thrown into the gravy. Canvas back ducks are roasted in half an hour; they should always beserved with currant jelly. For tame ducks apple sauce is moreappropriate. 1013.--TO STEW DUCKS. There is a difference between a stewed duck and stewed duck,and it is not the a alone:in the one case the duck is stewed whole, andin the other in pieces. To stew a duck or ducks, they should bestuffed and roasted for twenty minutes, and then placed in a stewpan with anonion cut in slices, a little sage and mint, and sweetherbs chopped fine, and about a pint of good beef gravy, seasonedwith pepper and salt; let it stew gently for about twentyminutes, take out the duck carefully and keep it warm, strain thegravy, pour it into a clean stewpan, and add to it when well heated theduck and a quart of green peas; let it simmer for half an hour,if not sufficiently thick add a little flour and butter, a glassof good old port wine, and send to table with the peas in thesame dish as the duck. 1014.--TO STEW A DUCK WITH CLARET. Make a gravy of the giblets; rub the duck inside andoutside with pepper and a little salt; peel and mince two orthree onions, and having half roasted the duck, put it into astewpan with the gravy and onions. Stew it gently for two hours,adding toward the end a glass of claret or port wine. Squeeze thejuice of a lemon over the duck, and serve it with toastedbread. "What remains of a roasted wild duck, may be warmed the next day inheaters with a little currant jelly, when it is excellent. Ducks may he hashed and stewed with a glass of port wine,thrown into the gravy. 1015.--TO BOIL DUCKS. Clean and pluck them, let the skin be preserved from rents whileplucking, salt them for about thirty hours previous to cooking,flour a clean white cloth and boil them in it; a moderate sizedduck will take about an hour's boiling, make a rich onion saucewith, milk, and send it to table with the duck. When theduck 370 is boiled fresh it may be stuffedas for roasting, and served with the same de-scription of gravy. 1016.--STEWED DUCK AND PEAS. Procure a duck trussed with the legs turned inside, which putinto a stewpan with two ounces of butter and a quarter of a pound ofstreaked bacon, let remain over a fire, stirring occasionally untillightly browned, when add a tablespoonful of flour mixed well, and aquart of broth or water: stir round gently until boiling, whenskim, and add twenty button onions, a bunch of parsley, with abay-leaf, and two cloves, let simmer a quarter of an hour, then add aquart of nice young peas, let simmer until done, which will take abouthalf an hour longer, take out the duck, place it upon your dish (takingaway the string it was trussed with), take out the parsley and bay-leaf,season the peas with a little pepper, salt, andsugar, skim the fat, reduce a little if not sufficiently thick,pour over the duck, and serve. 1017.--DUCKLING WITH TURNIPS Is a very favorite dish among the middle classes in France. Proceed as inthe last, but instead of peas use about forty pieces of goodturnips cut into moderate-sized square pieces, having previously friedthem of a light yellow color in a little butter or lard, anddrained them upon a sieve; dress the duck upon a dish as before, seasonthe sauce with a little pepper, salt, and sugar:reduce until rather thick, a thin sauce not suiting a dish of thisdescription; the turnips must not, however, be in puree; sauceover and serve. 1018.--WILD DUCKS, OR TEAL. You must be very particular in not roasting these birds too much; baste themvery frequently; teal will of course take less time; but your fire and motionof the spit must be attended to, and when you dish it, unless preferred to bedone by the gentleman at the table, draw your knife four times down thebreast; have ready a little hot butter, and juice of alemon, cayenne pepper, a little dust of sugar, a glass ofport wine, pour it all hot, the last minute, over your ducks; theremainder left of those birds the next day makes excellent salmi or hash,taking care of all the gravy that may re-main. They must be roasted at a very brisk fire; they take from twelve to twentyminutes, according to taste. Some people are of opinion that they should onlyfly through the kitchen: by epicures they are considered to be in perfectionwhen they come up dry and brown, and, when cut flood the dish withgravy. The means of insuring success consists in a very ardent fire,rapid motion of the spit, and constant basting. The carver should score thebreast of the duck, put a piece of butter on it, and cut alemon in half, putting on one half a spoonful of salt, and on theother a cayenne-spoonful of cayenne; put the two together, andsqueeze vigorously over the duck. To stew .--Shred thyme, winter savory,and sage, very small, put them into some strong broth, with alittle pepper, salt, and two spoonfuls of wine: stew themtogether for one quarter of an hour; nearly roast the ducks, add thegravy that falls from them, but not the fat; then place a deepdish under them, and pour this sauce through, and over them into it.Remove the ducks, cut them up, and put them with the sauce into astewpan over a stove, and let them stew till they are done enough. Canvas Buck Duck should be cooked likewild duck, but nearer the fire, the fat being so delicate, thatit requires to be cooked quickly; good plain gravy is all that is required to make them perfect. 1019.--PLOVERS. Roast the golden plover in the same way as woodcocksand quails, without drawing; and serve on a toast. Grey Plovers .--Draw them: they may be either roastedor stewed with gravy, herbs, and spice. Plover's Eggs .--Boil them ten minutes, andserve either hot or cold; the former on a napkin, the latter on moss. Send totable with the second course. 1020.--PARTRIDGES. being less dry than pheasants, do not require stuffing,although they are improved by it, made either of chesnuts or trufflesand bacon. They are sometimes roasted, wrapped in bacon andvine leaves: bread-crumbs are essential. In some placespartridges are sent up with forcemeat-balls in the dish. 1021.--TO STEW PARTRIDGES. Truss them with the wings over the back, and the legs drawnin; cut a piece of pork or bacon in long strips, and put theminto a stewpan with a piece of butter the size of a walnut. Frythe bacon brown, and when quite done put in the partridges, andkeep turning them until they are very brown, taking care that the baconshall be as much on the breast as possible; then add about a tea-cupfulof gravy, and some trimmings of meat and vegetables. Have ready alarge cabbage boiled; when well drained, slice it with butter,pepper, and salt, put it while warm with the gravy to thepartridges, and let them stew gently for an hour, turning the birdsfrequently. Serve up with the bacon underneath, and the cabbageround them, squeezed dry, and the sauce well skimmed. 1022.--SALMIOF PARTRIDGE. Half roast the partridges, cut them up neatly, take off theskin; put the trimmings in a stewpan, with a bit of butter and atablespoonful of flour; stir the whole over the fire; then add a glassof white wine and a little gravy or stock, some shalots;chopped parsley, thyme, bay-leaf, pepper, salt; letit boil fast for half an hour; strain, skim, add the juice of a lemon,and make the joints of the partridge hot in the sauce. Or: --Roast the partridges, leaving themunderdone. When cold, cut them into pieces, taking off the skin. Putthree spoonfuls of oil in to a saucepan, a glass of claret, salt,pepper, a shalot, and the juice of a lemon. Toss thepartridges in this sauce until they are sufficiently done to sendto table. Or: --Cut up and place on a dish the breasts,wings, and legs of any roasted game you may have left;cover it with another dish, or tin cover, and set it over a pan of boiling water to keep warm. Then pound the small bones of the carcase, with the inside, in a mortar, and put them into a saucepan with a littlegravy thickened with some flour rolled in butter, awine-glass of port wine, a spoonful of ketchup, a verysmall piece of shalot chopped fine, cayenne pepper, and salt.When it has been boiled for half an hour, strain it through a sieve, to form itinto a perfect purée, and pour it over the game inyour dish; garnish with forcemeat-balls, and slices of lemon cutthin. 1023.--BROILED PARTRIDGE. Cut the bird down the back; break the merrythought, which will allow it tobe made quite fat; cut off the feet at the joint, and skewer itas a fowl to broil; dry, flour, egg, and sprinkle it withchopped herbs and bread-crumbs, well seasoned; broil and servewith a little good gravy, with amushroom or two chopped up small. 1024.--GROUSE. Mix a small lump of butter with a few bread-crumbs, and put itin the inside of the birds--not in the crop--it keeps them moist. They requireto be nicely roasted and well basted. 1025.--RABBITS. To Fricassee a rabbit cut it in pieces, reservethe liver; put a piece of bacon cut in slices into a stewpan,brown it well and lay it aside; put the rabbit in the pan with a pieceof butter; turn and toss the rabbit well until it is quitewhite. When it is getting brown dredge a spoonful of flour overit, turning all the while, and when the flour is dry, put therabbit in a plate. Then add another piece of butter to theremaining sauce, and stir it well together, and when brown, add a cupfulof water; continue stirring, and put in the rabbit with plenty ofvery small onions, the bacon, some mushrooms, a bunch ofparsley, and some salt and pepper; let it stew very gentlyover a slow fire for four hours. Add the liver and a glass of portwine one hour before serving, and should there not be sufficientsauce, a little gravy from time to time, put in hot. When a rabbit is roasted, it should first be well stuffed. Serve itwith sauce made of liver, parsley, and meltedbutter. Truss it like a hare. Rabbits may be stewed, or fried, or baked in a pie. Rabbits, being rather dry meat, are much improved by larding.Should the process be deemed too troublesome upon common occasions, a goodeffect may be produced by lining the inside of the rabbit with slices offat bacon previously to putting in the stuffing. This is a veryeasy method of improvement, and ought never to be neglected. A boned rabbit, larded, stuffed, and braised, affords a cheap andelegant side-dish for a dinner-party. 1026.--TO MAKE RABBIT TASTEMUCH LIKE HARE. Choose one that is young, but fullgrown, hang it in the skin three orfour days, then skin it, and lay it without washing in a seasoning ofblack pepper and all-spice in a very fine powder, a glass of portwine, and the same quantity of vinegar. Baste it occasionally forforty hours; then stuff it and roast it as a hare, and with the samesauce. Do not wash off the liquor that it was soaked in. 1027.--TOROAST HARE. After it is skinned, let it be extremely well wiped; and, if old,lard it, which will make it tender, as will also letting it lie invinegar. If, however, it is put into vinegar, it should beexceedingly well washed in water afterwards. Put a large well-seasonedstuffing into the belly, and then sew it up. Baste it well withmilk till half done, and afterwards with butter. The hareshould be kept at a distance from the fire at first. Serve with a fine froth,rich gravy, and currant jelly sauce; little gravy in thedish. For stuffing use the liver pounded, an anchovy, somefat bacon, a little suet, herbs, pepper,salt, nutmeg, crumbs of bread, and an egg to bindit all. The ears must be nicely cleaned, singed, and made crisp, beingreckoned a dainty. 1028.--JUGGED HARE. Skin the hare, and cut it in pieces, but do not wash it; strewit over with pepper and salt, fry it brown. Make aseasoning of two anchovies, a sprig of thyme, a littleparsley, a nutmeg grated, a little mace, a fewcloves pounded, and a teaspoonful of grated lemon-peel. Strew this over the hare, after havingcarefully taken it out of the pan clear of fat, slice half lb. ofbacon very thin, put it into a jug or jar, a layer of hare andone of bacon upon it, until the whole is put in, then add rather lessthan half a pint of ale; cover the jug very closely, so as per-fectly tokeep in the steam; put it into a kettle of cold water, lay a tile on thetop of the jug, and let it boil three hours if the hare be young, orfour or five if an old one. Take the jug out of the kettle, pick out all thebacon which has not melted, and shake the hare up in a stewpan,with a little mushroom ketchup, a glass of port wine, a littlemushroom powder if at hand, and a little butter and flour,well mixed together to thicken the gravy. A teaspoonful oflemon-pickle, and one of browning, will heighten the flavor. 1029.--PILAU OF RABBIT. Cut up a rabbit or fowl; pound acouple of onions in a mortar; extract the juice, and mixit with a saltspoonful of ground ginger, a teaspoonful of salt,and the juice of a lemon: rub this into the meat; cut up twoonions in slices, and fry them in a quarter of a pound of butter.When brown take them out and put in the meat; let them stew together.Have one pound of rice half boiled in broth; put the wholemeat, &c., into a jar, with half a pint of milk, some wholepeppercorns, half a dozen cloves, and a little more salt.Secure the mouth of the jar, and bake it until done enough, adding a littlebroth, should the butter and milk not be sufficient tomoisten it. 1030.--TO CRISP PARSLEY. Pick some bunches of young parsley, wash them, and swing them in acloth to dry; put them on a sheet of paper in a toaster before the fire,and keep them frequently turned, till they are quite crisp, which will be inabout six or eight minutes. 1031.--TO FRY PARSLEY. When the parsley has been washed and thoroughly dried, throw it intolard or butter which is on the point of boiling; take it up witha slice the instant it is crisp, and lay it on a paper on a sieve beforethe fire. A wire basket is the nicest thing to use for frying parsley,or any thing requiring to be fried. 1032.--FRIED BREAD FOR GARNISHING. Take slices of stale bread about a third of an inch thick, cut theminto shapes with a paste-cutter, fry them in fresh butter a lightbrown, lay them upon a cloth to dry, and place them round the dish. They may be made to adhere by brushing the under part with a little flour mixed with white of egg. Bread crumbs. --All game and smallbirds are improved by the addition of bread crumbs, either fried ortoasted; the latter is the more delicate preparation: grate the crumbs, and put them into a tin shallow dish before the fire, shaking them occasionally, until they are well browned: send them up in the dish; with a tureen of good brown gravy made from the insides and trimmings of the birds, but without any kind of seasoning. 1033.--RABBITS, TO SKIN, &c. Cut round the skin at the first joint of the hind legs, andpull the skin up a little, then run the knife between the sinew and thebone of the leg, so as to make a hole to hang it on a nail in awall, with the head downwards; run a knife along the skin insidethe thigh as far as the tail, so as to cut it, then run the hand underthe skin, and it will easily separate from the body; pull it downtowards the head, taking care not to tear the belly: when you havearrived as far as the head, pull up the fore legs, cutting thefeet off at the first joint; then pull up the ears by running a skewer between the skin and the head, and pull the skin off, cutting the nose and lips; remove itfrom the nail, cut off the hind feet at the first joint; cut open the body, remove the inside, reserve the liver, heart, and kidneys, and throw away the remainder; wash out the inside. If for roasting, make the following stuffing ; take the liver, heart, and kidneys, blanch them, put them into a fryingpan with a little fat, and one small onion chopped up; sauté a little, then remove and chop them up with two ounces of pork fat orbacon, a little parsley, and mix with bread crumbs and the yolk of an egg; stuff and sew up the belly. Truss as follows: bring the hind and forelegs close to the body towards the head, run a skewer througheach, then run a skew-er in at the mouth and through the neck, to keepit upright; it should be exactly as if it was sitting Put a string round the body from skewer to skewer, and it is ready. VENISON 1084.--THE HAUNCH. "The observed of all observers" when epicureans sit at table; it is a joint, if properly kept, properly cooked and served hot, which must prove delicious. The delicacy of its flavor is obtained by hanging only: if it be cooked while fresh, it will not equal in any respect a haunch of mutton. The haunch of venison, when about to be roasted, should be washed inwarm milk and water, and dried with a clean cloth; if it has hungvery long and the skin smells musty, it will be the safest plan toremove the skin and wrap the whole of the haunch in paper wellgreased with fresh butter; during the time it is at the fire, do not beafraid of basting it too much. If it be a buck haunch and large, it will take nearly four hours within five or ten minutes; if comparatively small, three hours and a half will suffice; if a doe haunch, three hours and a quarter will be enough. All venison for roasting should have a paste made oflard over it; after first having papered the meat with butteredpaper, then your stiff paste upon the top of that, either dangleit or put it in a cradle spit; a few minutes before you require to take it up take off the paste and paper, baste it with some butter,salt it and flour it, when done give it a few more turns round,send it up very hot; your dish and gravy is to be very hot also; any drypieces and the shank you will boil down with a little brown stock forthe gravy; send currant jelly in a boat, and French beansin a vegetable dish. 1035.--VENISON STEAKS. Cut them from the neck; season them with pepper andsalt. When the gridiron has been well heated over a bed of brightcoals, grease the bars, and lay the steaks upon it. Broilthem well, turning them once, and taking care to save as much of thegravy as possible. Serve them up with some currant jelly laid oneach steak. 1036.--TO HASH VENISON. Carve your venison into slices: let them be thin, and put them in a stewpan with two small glasses of port wine: add a spoonful of browning, one of ketch-up, an onion stuck with cloves, and half an anchovy choppedsmall, let it boil, then put in your venison, make it thor-oughly hotthrough. Lay sippets of toast, in various shapes in a soup dish, pourthe hash upon it, and serve with currant jelly. 1037.--VENISON FRIED. Cut the meat into slices fry a light brown, and keep hot before thefire. Make gravy of the bones andany trimmings, add a little floured butter, and stir until it isthick and brown, then add lemon-juice and port wine to taste,with pepper or cayenne. Warm the venison in thegravy, place in a dish, and strain the gravy over it. Serve withcurrant jelly in a glass. 1038.--A SHOULDER OF VENISON STEWED. If you should have a very lean shoulder, stew it in preference to roasting; bone it, cover it with slices of mutton fat, which sometimes are first steeped in port to give a richer flavor, roll it up and bind it tightly. Lay it in a stewpan with a quantity of beef gravy, and the bonesyou have taken from the venison, add two glasses of port, a dessert-spoonful of whole pepper, and the same quantity of allspice. Cover down closely, and simmer until the venison is tender, take it out and remove the fat, thicken the gravy with flour and butter, and strain it over the meat. 1039.--ROAST SHOULDER OF VENISON. Take the bones out of a shoulder of venison. Fill the cavitywith the fat of a loin of mutton. Roast before a quick fire, basting itconstantly with the drippings and a little port wine. It shouldbe served underdone with a sauce of port wine, currant jelly andred pepper. The neck and shoulder, as together they may be termed the haunchjoint, may be dressed exactly like the haunch, covered with a thinpaste, and greased paper over that. GAME ought not to be thrown away even when it has been kept a verylong time; for when it seems to be spoiled, it may often be made fit for eating by nicely cleaning it, and washing with vinegar and water. Ifthere is danger of birds not keeping, draw, crop, and pick them; then wash in two or three waters, and rub them with salt. Have ready a large saucepan of boiling water, and plunge them into it one by one, drawing them up and down by the legs, that the water may pass through them. Letthem stay five or six minutes in; then hang them up in a cold place. Whendrained, pepper and salt the inside well. By this method the most delicate birds may be preserved. Before roasting, wash them well. But, as a rule, no game should be washed, for one-half the game that is sent to table is spoiled by being saturated with water. In dressing Game be careful to keep a clearfire. Let it be done of a bright brown, but not much roasted, or the fineflavor will be destroyed. It requires to be continually basted, and to be sent up beautifully frothed. Wild-fowl take a much shorter time than domestic poultry. 1040.--TO DRESS A FAWN OB KID. They should be dressed as quickly after being killed as it is convenient. If they are full grown they should be roasted in quarters, but if very young may be dressed, trussed, and stuffed exactly as a hare; the quarters will be improved in flavor when the fawn is full grown, if they are covered with fat bacon, and basted as venison; serve venison sauce with it. 1041--PHEASANTS. (English receipt.) Pheasants are rarely stuffed, it is more customary to send them to table accompanied by forcemeat in the, dish, in many cases with the simple gravy, only; the real epicurean in game prefers the flavor of the birduncontaminated by any accessories save those which just assist to remove the dryness common to most game. Pheasants are sometimes larded, but as the flavor is entirely disguised by the taste of the bacon, incorporated with the flesh of the fowl, unless it is done more for appearance than palate, we would not advise it. In dressing the pheasant it should be drawn and cleaned as othergame and trussed, should be roasted before a clear, not a fierce fire,and will take forty minutes; it must not be done too much, but must not on any account be sent to table underdone. 1041.--WOODCOCK, SNIPE, ETC. To roast these birds, put them on a little spit, take a slice of wheaten bread, and toast it brown, then lay it on a dish under the birds; baste them with a little butter, and let the trail drop on the toast. When they are roasted, put the toast in the dish, lay the woodcocks on it, and have a quarter of a pint of gravy; pour it in a dish, and set it over a lamp or chafing-dish for three minutes; and send them to table. Epicures say you should never take any thing out of a woodcock or snipe. The head of the woodcock is considered a great delicacy. To roast pheasants, partridges, quails, and other small birds, pick and draw them immediately after they are brought in. If they are of a nature to be improved by it, lard them with small slips of the fat of bacon drawn through the flesh with a larding-needle. To roast reed-birds or ortolans, put into every bird an oyster, or a little butter mixed with some finely sifted breadcrumbs. Dredge them with flour. Run a small skewer through them, and tie them on the spit. Baste them with lard or with fresh butter. They will be done in about ten minutes. Reed-birds are very fine made into little dumplings with a thin crust of flour and butter, and boiled about twenty minutes. Each must be tied in a separate cloth. VEGETABLES. The fresher all green vegetables are used after being taken from the ground the better; and therefore nothing can be comparable to cutting them from your own garden; but, when purchased in the market, care should be taken that those of the cabbage tribe should appear crisp and vividly green: not too small, nor yet overgrown in size. When about to be used, the outer leaves should be stripped, the stalks cut short, and the vegetable immersed for an hour or two in cold water, into which should be put a handful of salt for the purpose of thoroughly cleansing it from slugs, and those insects with which the leaves are commonly infested. All green vegetables should be put into boiling water. Never boil any species of greens with meat. Boil them in plenty of pure water, with salt, to which a little vinegar may be added with advantage; do not cover the saucepan, but keep up a steady fire, so that they shall not be allowed to stop boiling until thoroughly done: drain them  instantly, for if overboiled they lose their flavor and become insipid; they should be well done, for if that be neglected for the purpose ofpreserving their crispness, they will be rendered indigestible. Hard water spoils the color of such vegetables as should be green, but a very small bit of soda or carbonate of ammonia will soften it, and even improve their brightness. The practice of putting pearlash in the pot to improve their color, should be strictly forbidden, as it imparts an unpleasant flavor; as will also soda if not cautiously used. 1042.--POTATOES Require no attention for the preservation of their color, but their flavor will be spoiled if their dressing be not attended to, which, although of the most simple nature, is frequently ill performed. The best mode of doing it is to sort the potatoes, and choose them of an equal size; wash them with a scrubbing-brush, and put them into cold water sufficient to cover them, and no more. About ten minutes after the water has come to a boil, take out the half of it, and replace with cold water, to check it; the reason assigned for which is, "that the cold water sends the heat from the surface to the heart, and makes the potatoes mealy." Then throw in a large: handful of salt, leave the pot uncovered, and let it remain upon the fire to simmer until the potatoes are done; this is the moment to be watched, for if overboiled, they will become waxy. The cook should, therefore, occasionally try them, by piercing them to the heart with a fork, and, when they are tender, the pot should be instantly taken off the fire, and the potatoes passed through a colander to drain; which being done, and the water thrown out, they should then be replaced upon a folded flannel, in the same pot, which should be left by the side of the fire to keep hot and to cause the evaporation of thesteam. When served, they should be wrapped in a warmed cotton napkin. If of moderate size they will take about half an hour boiling, to which fifteen minutes must be added for evaporation, ere they can be sent to table. Potato Steamer and Saucepan. An illustration of a potator steamer and saucepan. An iron pot is the best vessel for boiling potatoes in, since, after the water has been poured off, it retains sufficient heat to dry them thoroughly. A good and economical mode of dressing potatoes, when soup, meat, or other eatables are to be boiled, is to have a tin strainer fitted to the mouth of the saucepan, so as to allow the steam to ascend from the boiler. Notwithstanding the directions here given for cooking potatoes, there is a point, on which there exists a difference of opinion, that is respecting the peeling of the roots, whether before or after their being boiled? In Lancashire, England, where they are largely grown and admirably boiled, they are first peeled; while in Ireland they are invariably brought to table "with their jackets on." Count Rumford also recommends their being boiled in their skins; the cuisinier Bourgeois likewise thinks that "les pommes des terre sont meuilleures en robe de chambre." 1043.--TO KEEPPOTATOES. Buy them as dug from the ground, without taking off the earth which adheres to them, and never wash them until wanted to be dressed. Place them in a dry cellar, upon straw, and cover them in winter with straw ormats, to guard them from the frost. 1044.--NEWPOTATOES Should be dressed as soon as possible after being taken from the ground, and are always best when grown in frames. When washed, they should be rubbed with a coarse cloth, and a little salt to take off the thin outer skin, but they should not be peeled. Put them into boiling water; they will require but a few minutes to do them; send them to table in a hot napkin, unless covered with white sauce, which should be seasoned with a little salt and a slight grating of nutmeg. When quite young they should never be sliced nor fried. 1045.--POTATO FLOUR. Rasp the potatoes into a tub of cold water, and change it repeatedly until the raspings fall to the bottom like a paste; then dry it in the air, pound it in a mortar, and pass it through a hair sieve. It is nearly as nutritive, and much lighter than wheaten flour; it is, therefore, preferable for making puddings and pastry for infants and invalids; a portion of it also improves the appearance of household bread, and dealers constantly pass it off as arrowroot. If kept dry, it will remain good for years. Jelly is made from the flour; only boiling water must be poured upon it, but care must be taken that it beabsolutely boiling or the complete change into jelly will not take place. It does not take many minutes to thus change a raw potato into this substance, which is not only highly nutritive, but extremely agreeable to the palate, when flavored with a little sugar, nutmeg, and white wine. 1046.--POTATO-WALL Or edging, to serve round fricassees, forms also a pretty addition to a corner dish.--Mash in a mortar as many boiled potatoes as you may want, with a good piece of butter; then, with the bowls of two silver spoons, raise a wall of it two and a half inches high within the rim of the dish to be used. Let the upper part be a little thinner than the lower; smooth it; and, after brushing it all over with egg, put it into the oven to become hot and a little colored. Before egging it, the outside may be ornamented with bits of paste cut into shapes. 1046.--TO MASH POTATOES. Let them be thoroughly boiled; peel them, and take out allthe specks, and little hard lumps which are sometimes found. Beat them till quite fine in a wooden bowl or mortar, or break them thoroughly with a three-pronged fork; sprinkle a little salt, and mix them up smoothly with butter or boiling milk. Take care that the potatoes shall not be too wet, or they will become heavy and watery; great smoothness, lightness, and a rich taste are required in mashed potatoes : if required to be very fine, rub them through a colander or sieve before adding the boiling milk and butter. (Potato Masher.) An illustration of a potato masher. 1048.--POTATO-LOAVES Are very nice when eaten with roast beef or mutton, and are made of any portion of the mashed roots, prepared without milk, by mixing with them a good quantity of very finely minced raw shalot, powdered with pepper and salt thenbeating up the whole with a little butter to bind it, and dividing it into small loaves of a conical form, and placing them under the meat to brown, that is, when it is so nearly done as to impart some of the gravy along with the fat. 1049.--TO BROWNPOTATOES. While the meat is roasting, and an hour before it is served, boil the potatoes and take off the skins; flour them well, and put them under the meat, taking care to dry them from the dripping, before they are sent to table. The kidney potatoes are best dressed in this way. The flouring is very essential. Potatoes, when boiled, if either waxy, or to be eaten with cold meat should be peeled and put whole upon the gridiron until nicely browned. Potatoes should always be boiled a little before being put into stews, &c., as the first water in which they are cooked is of a poisonous quality. Fried Potatoes may be cut from raw potatoes, pared round and round like an apple; cut them in slices one half inch thick; fry quickly, in plenty of hot fat, and with as little color as possible; dry them well from the grease, and sprinkle with salt. When nicely done and piled up properly, fried potatoes make a beautiful side dish, which is always eaten with great relish. 1050.--POTATORISSOLES. Boil the potatoes floury; mash them, seasoning with salt and a little cayenne; mince parsley very finely and work up with the potatoes, adding eschalot also chopped small; bind with yolk of egg; roll into balls and fry with fresh butter over a clear fire. Meat shred finely, bacon or ham may be added. 1051.--POTATOSOUFFLÉ. Take any number of large potatoes, the less eyesand the firmer the skin the better. Clean them thoroughly and then bake them; after which cut out a round piece, not quite so large as a half-crown, out of each potato, and remove as much of the inside as can be obtainedwithout damage to the skin. Mash the potatoes with cream, addinga little butter, sprinkle over a little salt, and put to it half a pint of good milk; give it all a boil; take the white of three eggs, whip them until they froth, add them to the potatoes whilethey boil, and then make the potatoes into a paste: return them through the orifice in the skin of the potato until each skin is full; bake them, and serve. 1052.--POTATOES Á LA MAITRE D'HÔTEL. Boil the potatoes ; before they are quitedlone take them up, place them aside, and let them get cold; cut them in slices of a moderate thickness; place in a stewpan a lump of fresh butter, and a teaspoonful of flour; let the butter boil, and add a teacupful of broth; let it boil and add the potatoes, which you have covered with parsley, chopped fine, and seasoned with pepper and salt; stew them five minutes, remove them from the fire; beat up the yolk of one egg with a table-spoonful of cold water and a little lemon-juice. The sauce will set, then dish up the potatoes and serve. Or, Cold potatoes that have been boiled should be used for this purpose. Lay them in a frying pan with sufficient milk (or cream) to cover them, add a little butter, salt, and chopped parsley, and fry them until the milk thickens. They will besufficiently cooked in a quarter of an hour, and make an excel-lent dish for breakfast. To Roast .--Clean thoroughly; nick a small piece out of the skin, and roast in the oven of the range; a little butter is sometimes rubbed over the skin to make them crisp. 1058.--POTATOOMELETTE. May be made with a mashed potato or two ounces of potato-flour and four eggs and seasoned with pepper, salt, and a lit-tle nutmeg. It should be made thick, and, being rather substantial, a squeeze of lemon will improve it. Fry a lightbrown. 1054.--BISCUITS OF POTATOES AND POTATO FLOUR. (French.) Take fifteen fresh eggs, break the yolks into one pan and the whites into another. Beat the yolks with a pound of sugar pounded very fine, scrape the peel of a lemon with a lump of sugar, dry that, and pound it fine also; then throw into it the yolks, and work the eggs and sugar till they are of a whitish color. Next, whip the whites well and mix them with the yolks. Now sift half a pound of flour of potatoes through a silk sieve, over the eggs and sugar. Have some paper cases ready, which lay on a plafond, with some paper underneath. Fill the cases, but not too full; glaze the contents with some rather coarse sugar, and bake the whole in an oven moderately heated. Julienne Mill. An illustration of a julienne mill. 1055.--GREEN PEAS. A delicious vegetable, a grateful accessory to many dishes of a more substantial nature. Green peas should be sent to table green ; no dish looks less tempting than peas if they wear an autumnal aspect. Peas should also be young, and as shorta time as possible should be suffered to elapse between the periods of shelling and boiling. If it is a matter of consequence to send them to table in perfection, these rules must be strictly observed. They should be as near of a size as a discriminating eye can arrange them; they should then be put in a cullender, and some cold water suffered to run through them in order to wash them; then having the water in which they are to be boiled slightly salted, and boiling rapidly, pour in the peas; keep the saucepan uncovered, and keep them boiling swiftly until tender; they will take about twenty minutes, barely so long, unless older than they should be; drain completely, pour them into the tureen in which they are to be served, and in the centre put a slice of butter, and when it has melted stir round the peas gently, adding pepper and salt; serve as quickly andas hot as possible. It is commonly a practice to boil mint with the peas ; this, however, is very repugnant to many palates, and as it may easily be added if agreeable to the palate, it should not be dressed with the peas, although it may accompany them to table for those who may desire theflavor. 1056.--TO DRESS SPANISHONIONS. Take off two skins, be particular in not cutting the stalk on the root of the onion too much away, if you do, when done it will drop to pieces. Take four large onions, put them in a stewpan sufficiently large, so that they may not touch each other, put in a small piece of lean York ham and a quarter of a pound of salt butter, cover them close, put them on a slow stove or oven, keeping them turned carefully until all sides are pro-perly done: they will take about two hours: then take them up and glaze them, thicken the gravy, and season with pepper and salt. 1057.--SALSIFY ANDSCORZANERA. Blanch several heads until the skin will peel off; when you have done that, cut them all in equal lengths; if to be done in batter, dry them in bread crumbs, if for sauce make them hotin a little veal stock, dish them, and pour a good white or brown sauce over them. 1058.--ASPARAGUS. Great attention is necessary to boil as-paragus. It must be carefully washed and cleaned, the horny part must be cut away, leaving only enough to take it up with the fingers. After the white horny part has been well scraped, cut them all off at one length and tie them up in separate bundles; lay them in boiling water with a little salt. Boil them briskly, and they are clone enough when tender. Dip a round of toasted bread in the liquor, and lay it in the dish; then pour some melted butter over the toast, and lay the asparagus on the toast entirely round the dish. Serve with melted butter in a sauce-tureen. 1059.--ASPARAGUSLOAVES. Boil three bunches of asparagus; cut off the tops of two bunches when tender, leaving two inches of the white stalk on the rest, and keeping it warm; stew the tops in a pint of new milk, with three tablespoonfuls of butter, rubbed in flour, the yolks of three eggs, nutmeg and mace; when it boils put the mixture into loaves of rolls, with the crumb scooped out; put on the tops of the rolls; make holes in the tops, and stick in the remaining asparagus. 1060.--ASPARAGUSFORCED. Scoop out the crumb of three or four French rolls, preserving the piece cut from the top, which will have to be fitted on to the part it was cut from; put into a pan with some fresh butter, the rolls, and fry them brown, beat up with a pint of cream, the yolks of six eggs, flavor with some grated nutmeg and a little salt, put it into a stewpan, and over a slow fire; let it gradually thicken, stirring it all the time. Have ready the tops of a bundle of asparagus, say a hundred, and having boiled them tender, put them into the cream and fill the rolls with the mixture, reserving a few tops to stick in each roll by way of garnish. 1061.--ASPERGE EN PETIT POIS, OR ASPARAGUS PEAS. If the asparagus be properly dressed, it shouldtaste like green peas. Take some young asparagus, which pick with great care; then cut them into small equal pieces, avoiding to put in such parts as are hard or tough. Wash them in several waters, and throw them into boiling water, with a little salt. When the asparagus are nearly done, drain them first through a sieve, and next wipe them quite dry with a towel. Then put them into a stewpan with a small bit of butter, a bunch of parsley and green onions, and toss them in the stewpan over the fire for ten minutes. Now add a little flour and a small lump of sugar, and moisten with boiling water. They must boil over a large fire. When well reduced, take out the parsley and green onions, and thicken with the yolks of two eggs beaten with a little cream and a little salt : remember that in this entremet sugar must predominate, and that there is to be no sauce. Asparagus are always to be dressed in this manner when to be served in the second course; but for first course dishes, throw them into some good sauce tournee, well reduced. Boil them a few times over a large fire, then powder a little sugar, and make a thickening of one egg. The sauce must be made thick, on account of the asparagus always yielding a certain quantity of water, which will thin the sauce. 1062.--EGG PLANT. Cut the egg plant in slices half an inch thick, and let it lie for several hours in salted water, to remove the bitter taste. To fry it put the slices in the frying-pan with a small quantity of butter, and turn them when one side is done, Be sure that they are thoroughly cooked. Stuffed egg plant is sometimes preferred to fried. Peel the plant whole, cut it in two, and let it lies in salted water. Then scoop out the inside of the plant, chop it up fine, mixing crumbs of bread, salt and butter with it; fry it, return it to the hollow egg plant, join the cut pieces together, and let them bake awhile in an oven. The best way of cooking is to slice them, dip the slices into egg and bread-crumbs, and fry very brown in butter or lard. 1063.--SALSIFY OR OYSTERPLANT. Scrape the salsify, cut it in long slips and parboil it, then chop it up fine and fry it with egg batter. It is sometimes served with the roots whole, having been first thoroughly boiled and then fried in egg batter. 1064.--CAULIFLOWER DRESSED LIKE MACCARONI. Boil a cauliflower in milk and water, with a little butter, half an hour, skimming well; when tender, drain, and divide it small; put a quarter of a pound of butter, half as much grated cheese, half a gill of milk, in a pan to boil up, and put in the sprigs of cauliflower -- stew five minutes; then put it into a dish, grate over it as much more cheese, and brown it with a shovel. To dress Cauliflowers, separate the green part, and cut the flower close to the bottom from the stalk; let it soak an hour in clear cold water, and then lay it in boiling milk and water, or water alone, observing to skim it well. When the flower or stalk feels tender, it is done enough, and should be instantly taken up. Drain it for a minute, and serve it up in a dish by itself, with plain melted butter in a sauce -tureen. 1065.--SPINACH. Pick it clean, and wash it in five or six waters. Drain it, and put it in boiling water. Ten minutes is generally sufficient time to boil spinach. Be careful to remove the scum. When it is quite tender take it up, and drain andsqueeze it well. Chop it fine, and put it into a saucepan with a piece of butter and a little pepper and salt. Set it on hot coals, and let it stew five minutes, stirring it all the time. 1066.--TURNIPS. White turnips require about as much boiling as potatoes . When tender, take them up, peel and mash them--season them with a little salt and butter. Yellow turnips require about two hours boiling--if very large, split them in two. The tops of white turnips make a good salad. 1067.--BEETS. Beets should not be cut or scraped before they are boiled, or the juice will run out, and make them insipid. In summer they will boil in an hour--in winter, it takes three hours to boil them tender. The tops in summer are good boiled for greens. Boiled beets cut in slices, and put in cold spiced venegar for several days, are very nice. 1068.--PARSNIPS ANDCARROTS. Wash them, and split them in two-- lay them in a stewpan, with the flat side down, turn on boiling water enough to coverthem--boil them till tender, then take them up, and take off the skin, and butter them. Many cooks boil them whole, but it is not a good plan, as the outside gets done too much, before the inside is cooked sufficiently. Cold boiled parsnips are good, cut in slices and fried brown. 1069.--SEA-KALE Requires to be very well done; there is little occasion to fear doing it too much; tie in bundles after washing and trimming, boil it in equal parts of milk and water, and serve it with melted butter. It may be laid on toast or not, according to taste. After being well boiled it must be thoroughly drained before laying upon the toast; five-and-twenty minutes will be found sufficient to boil it. Or, after being drained, it can be put in a stewpan and stewed in a rich gravy. 1070.--TO STEWCELERY. Wash the heads, and strip off their outer leaves; either halve or leave them whole, according to their size, and cut them into length of four inches. Put into a stewpan with a cup of broth or weak white gravy; stew till tender; then add two spoonfuls of cream, a little flour and butter, seasoned with pepper, salt, nutmeg, and a little pounded white sugar; and simmer all together. Or: --Parboil it, cut it into quarters, fry it, and serve it on a napkin, or with beef gravy. Celery is a great improvement to all soups and gravies, and much used as a white sauce, either alone or with oysters. 1071.--SAUER KRAUT. Or Sour-Kraut, is a German preparation of cabbage, fermented in layers, between which salt is laid, and the whole pressed closely down with weights for a few days, at the end of which it becomes acid, and the greater part of the juice is drawn off. In preparing it, the outward leaves and the stalk are removed, the latter being sliced, and the whole cabbage cut into small pieces, which are pressed heavily down, and placed in barrels in a warm cellar until the fermentation is over; when that is complete, put the kraut into a cool place, and it will re-main good for years. Some people think it improved by a mixture among the layers of caraway, whole pepper, andjuniper- berries, or to have the barrels smoked with the latter. It is extensively used throughout the northern parts of Europe, as apleasant vegetable, particularly with salted meats and sausages; and is considered so excellent an antiscorbutic that it is largely employed in our navy. It requires nothing but care in the making; and, when properly prepared, may be served at any gentleman's table. Boil it for two hours, and skim the water, or change the water for gravy, and stew it. 1072.--TO SERVESOUR-KRAUT. Take out as much sour-kraut as you wish from the cask, and soak it for at least two hours in cold water, then take it into a colander to drain; put it into a large stewpan or dinner-pot put on it a piece of corned pork or bacon, and put hot water over nearly tocover it; cover the pot and set it over a moderate fire for an hour or more until the pork is done. Serve with the meat on it. Or cut the bacon or pork in slices, strew pepper over them; lay the sour-kraut on, put hot water nearly to cover it, cover the pot close and set it over a moderate fire for an hour and a half. Or it may be boiled with water, and fried sausages put over it and served; or the sausages may be boiled with it, and the skins taken off, before serving. 1078.--ARTICHOKES. Out away the outside leaves and make the stalk as even as possible, put them into boiling water with some salt; if they are very young they will be tender in half an hour, if rather old they will require an hour before they are thoroughly tender; drain and trim the points of the leaves, serve with melted butter. They are better for being kept two or three days. The bottoms are sometimes added to ragouts or meat pies. If dried you must soak them well for some time, then stew them in somegood second stock until tender; take up the artichokes and reduce the stock, add to it a little brown sauce seasoned with pepper, salt, and sugar, a few green peas in the middle of each or alternately, some scooped turnips boiled, and put into each; glaze the artichokes before you add those to them; sauce in the dish. For Salad .--The artichokes should be very young, the choke having scarcely formed, clean them and let them soak thoroughly, drain them, take off the stalks close and even, and send them to table with the vegetables to form the salad. This is a favorite mode in Paris of dressing them. 1074.--JERUSALEMARTICHOKES. Pare them after being well washed, very smooth and of some kind of shape, boil them in milk and water, pay great attention to them, as, if not taken up the minute they are soft, they will break; they are served up with various kinds of sauces, white and brown, or fried in butter, and dished upon a napkin with fried parsley. 1075.--FRENCHBEANS. When very young the ends and stalks only should be removed, and as they are done thrown into cold spring water when to be dressed put them in boiling water which has been salted with a small quantity of common salt; in a quarter of an hour they will be done; the criterion iswhen they become tender; the saucepan should be left uncovered, there should not be too much water, and they should be kept boiling rapidly. When they are at their full growth, the ends and strings should be taken off and the bean divided lengthways and across, or according to the present fashion slit diagonally or aslant. A small piece of soda, a little larger than a good-sized pea, if put into the boiling water with the beans, or with any vegetables, will preserve that beautiful green which it is so desirable for them to possess when placed upon the table. 1076.--FRENCH BEANS Á LA MAITRE D'HÔTEL. Prepare your beans as for boiling; put into astewpan a piece of butter, shred parsley, and green onions; when the butter is melted add the French bean s, turn them a few times over the fire, shake in some flour, and moisten with a little good stock well seasoned; boil till the sauce is consumed, then put in yolks of three eggs, beat up with some milk, and add a little vinegar. Cullis of veal gravy may be used instead of the eggs. They may be fricasseed with a teacupful of gravy, and two spoonfuls of cream thickened with butter and flour. l077.--BAKEDBEANS. Soak a quart of dried beans over night, in cold water; drain off the water in the morning and stew for half an hour in a little water, put them in a deep dish, with one pound of salt pork, cut the rind in strips, and place in the centre of the dish. The pork should be sunk a little below the surface of the beans . Bake for three hours and a half. A lump of saleratus should be thrown in while the beans are boiling, and a pint of water be added, when they are put into the bake-pan. 1078.--LIMA BEANS. Should be gathered young. Shell them, lay them in a pan of cold water, and then boil them about two hours, till they are quite soft. Drain them well, and add to them some butter. 1079.--SUCCOTASH Ismade by boiling young lima bean s with green corn cut from the cob. A slice of fat pork may beboiled with it, and the mixture must have a lump of butter stirred in before serving. The beans should be boiled before the corn is added, asthey take longer to cook. 1080.--PONE OF SWEETPOTATO. To three pounds of sweet potatoes grated, add a pound of butter and a pound of sugar, with six eggs, atea-cup of sour cream or buttermilk, and a teaspoonful of soda. Bake in a buttered dish, and serve hot. 1081.--SQUASHES ORCYMBELINS. Cut up the squashes in pieces of an inch thick,having first pared the squash; if old, extract the seeds and boil the pieces until they break, mash them with a spoon, boil them alittle longer, and when they are done, squeeze them through a colander. Mix them with a little salt and a small quantity of butter. 1082.--WINTERSQUASH. Winter squashes are stewed in the same manner asothers, but they require to remain over the fire a little longer. If kept in a dry place, they will remain good all winter; but if they are once frozen, they lose their flavor, and are apt to decay. They are richer and firmer than the summer kind. After paring a winter squash, cut it in pieces, and, having taken out the seeds, boil it till it is tolerably soft in a small quantity of water. When you think it sufficiently done, press out all the water, mash the squash, and add a little butter, salt, and, if you fancy it, pepper. 1083.--SWEETCORN. Corn is much sweeter to be boiled on the cob. Put a little salt into the water, and put in the corn when it is cold. It requires boiling from fifteen to thirty minutes, according to its age. 1084.--GREEN CORNPUDDING. Twelve ears of green corn, grated a quart of milk, four ounces butter, the same of sugar, four eggs beaten light. Bake in a buttered dish, and eat with butter and sugar sauce. The corn may be previously boiled, when the pudding will bake more quickly. 1085.--GREEN CORNOMELET. Grate the corn from twelve ears of corn boiled, beat up five eggs, stir them with the corn, season with pepper and salt, and fry the mixture brown, browning the top with a hot shovel. If fried in small cakes, with a little flour and milk stirred in to form a batter, this is very nice. 1086.--GREEN CORNFRITTERS. Six ears of boiled corn, grated, two eggs, a little milk, and just enough flour to mix it. Drop a spoonful of the batter into a frying-pan, and fry in butter. 1087.--ONIONS. It is a good plan to boil onions in milk and water, it diminishesthe strong taste of that vegetable. It is an excellent way of serving up onions, to chop them after they are boiled, and put them in a stew-pan, with a little milk, butter, salt, and pepper, and let them stew about fifteen minutes. This gives them a fine flavor, and they can be served up very hot. 1088.--TOMATOES. If very ripe, will skin easily; if not, pour scalding water on them, and let them remain in it four or five minutes. Peel and put them into a stew-pan, with a tablespoonful of water, if not very juicy; if so, no water will be required. Put in a little salt, and stew them for half an hour; then turn them into a deep dish with buttered toast. Another way of cooking them, which is consideredvery nice by epicures, is to put them in a deep dish, with fine bread crumbs, crackers pounded fine, a layer of each alternately; put small bits of butter; a little salt and pepper on each layer-- some cooks add a little nutmeg and sugar. Have a layer of bread crumbs on the top. Bake it three-quarters of an hour. 1089.--SCOLLOPEDTOMATOES. Scald ripe tomatoes and peel them; put them in a dishwith bread crumbs, layer over layer, seasoning with salt and red pepper. Have the bread crumbs on the top, and bake three hours. 1090.--TOMATOES, TOSTUFF. Take some fine tomatoes and scoop the inside out, whichshould be set aside until required. Chop or mince fine some beef, mutton, or other fresh under-done meat, mix with a little pepper, salt, and a little sweet herbs; or make a forcemeat, and mix with the scoopings of the tomatoes; form into a good consistence, and stuff the inside of the vegetable with the mixture. Set the prepared vegetables in a dish with a little lard in a slow oven, and bake until tender; then serve with the liquor that exudes during the process; but if not brown enough, color by means of a salamander held over the top of each. A good rich beef gravy poured over all, improves the flavor very much. This is the best way to dress these vegetables, and serves also to make cold meat more palatable, in addition to forming a pretty and economical side dish. 1091.--GUMBO Two quarts fresh ochras, the same of ripe tomatoes scalded and peeled; put them in a pan to melt with butter, pepper and salt; strain through the colander, and dish the jelly, to eat with toast. 1092.-- HOPPING JOHN (A CAROLINA DISH.) This is made by boiling a kind of small bean, called cowpeas at the South, with an equal quantity of rice, and sending them mixed and hot to the table. 1098.--SPLIT-PEASPUDDING. Take any quantity, say one pint, of yellow split peas; allow them to remain in water the whole night before you wish to use them; after which take them out and put them into a cloth so loose as to allow the peas to swell; boil them for four hours, or until they are quite tender, then rub them through a colander, so as to render them perfectly smooth; add to the pulp a lump of butter and some salt. After being well mixed put the peas again into a cloth, tie tightly, and boil for about half an hour. Pour over it melted butter. A richer pudding may be made if two well-beaten eggs are added along with the butter. It is served with boiled pork. 1094.--STEWEDBEANS. Boil them in water in which a lump of butter has been placed, preserve them as white as you can, chop a few sweet herbs with some parsley very fine, stew them in a pint of the water in which the leaves have been boiled, to which a quarter of a pint of cream has been added; stew until quite tender, then add the beans, stew five minutes, thicken with butter and flour. 1095.--BEANS, PUREE OF,WHITE. Chop some onions and fry them lightly in a little butter and flour, and moisten with a teaspoonful of broth; let the onions be done; boil the beans in this for half an hour, season them well, use brown pepper, and strain them through a tammy; reduce the puree over a brisk fire, take off the white scum, and before you serve refine it with a bit of fresh butter and two spoonfuls of thick cream, garnish it with fried crust of bread; this may be made brown by frying the onions brown. 1096.--TO PRESERVE PEAS FOR WINTER USE. * Shell, scald, and dry them: put them on tins or earthen dishes, in a cool oven, once or twice, to harden. Keep them in paper bags hung up in the kitchen. When they are to be used, let them lie an hour in water; then set them on with cold water and a bit of butter, and boil them till ready. Put a sprig of dried mint to boil with them. Appert's method.--Have the peas gathered when ripe, for if too young they will be watery and not fit to keep. The peas, when shelled, should be put into strong jars or open-mouthed bottles, and shaken, so as to make them sit closely to gether. This done, the jars must be very tightly corked and tied down. The jars are then placed upright in a bain-marie, or any iron pot largeenough to contain them, with hay placed between each, to prevent collision and breakage; the pot is filled with cold water up to the neck of the jars, placed upon the fire, and allowed to boil for an hour and a half if in cool moist weather, but for two hours if it be hot and dry. The jars should not be taken out of the pot until the water be comes cold. French bean s and asparagus may be preserved in the same manner; they maintain their color, but lose much of their flavor, and require a little sugar to improve it. The bellow note appeared at the end of page 387 in the originaltext. *As practised in the kitchen of the Emperor ofRussia. 1097.--HARICOTROOTS. Pare three turnips, and scrape two or three good-colored carrots, about two dozen button onions, a head of celery; cut out with a scoop-cutter sufficient car rots and turnips to pair the button onions; lay them for a few minutes in boiling water, keep all your roots in wa ter until all is done, cut your celery to correspond as to size with the other roots; when done blanch them, then strain them off, return them into the stewpan, and put to them some good brown stock; boil them until reduced to nearly a glaze, then add some brown sauce to them, sugar, pepper, and salt, do not stir with a spoon to mash the roots, which should be quite perfect. 1098.--WHITE HARICOTBEANS.--(Spanish Receipt.) Take a pint of beans, pour a quart of boiling water upon them and let them re main in soak until the next day; cut a lettuce in four pieces and put it with the beans in some fresh hot water, throw in a small fagot of parsley, and a slice of ham, boil them until the whole are tender. Chop up some onions, with a clove of garlic, fry them and then put them into a stewpan, put the beans to them with a well beaten egg and some spice, heat them and send them to table. 1099.--BEET-ROOTS. Cut in equal-sized slices some beet root, boiled or baked, of a good color, make it hot between two plates in the oven, dish it as you would cutlets, round; make a good piquant sauce, boil some button onions white and tender, throw them in the middle of the dish with the sauce; or, boil simply, and serve the slices with melted butter. 1100.--FRENCH WAY OF DRESSING COLD BEET-ROOT. Take your cold beet-root --chop it very small and put it in a saucepan to heat, with a little cream; immediately before serving, put in a spoonful of vinegar and a little brown sugar; serve hot. 1101.--BROCCOLI AND BUTTERED EGGS. Keep a handsome bunch for the middle, and have eight pieces to go round; toast a piece of broad to fit the inner part of the dish or plate: boil the broccoli. In the mean time have ready six (or more) eggs beaten, put for six a quarter of a pound of fine butter into a saucepan, with a little salt, stir it over the fire, and as it becomes warm add the eggs, and shake the saucepan till the mixture is thick enough; pour it on the hot toast, and lay the broccoli as before directed. This receipt is a very good one, it is oc casionally varied, but without improve ment, the dish is however nearly obsolete. 1102.--CABBAGE--TOBOIL. Nick your cabbage in quarters at the stalk, wash it thoroughly clean, put it into boiling spring water with a handful of salt and a small piece of soda, boil it fast, when done strain itin a colander, press it gently, cut it in halves and serve. Savoys and greens may be boiled in the same manner, they should always be boiled by themselves. Should the cab bage be left, it may be chopped, put into a saucepan with a lump of butter, and pepper, and salt, and made hot and sent to table. Small, close cabbages laid on a stone floor, before the frost sets in, will blanch and be very fine, after many weeks' keeping. 1103.--STEWEDWATER-CRESS. The following receipt may be new, and will be found an agreeable and wholesome dish:--Lay the cress in strong salt and water, to clear it from insects. Pick and wash nicely, and stew in water for about ten minutes; drain and chop, season with pepper and salt, add a little butter, and return it to the stewpan until well heated. Add a little vinegar first before serving: put around it sippets of toast or fried bread. --The above made thin, as a sub stitute for parsley and butter, will be found an excellent covering for a boiled fowl. There should be more of the cress considerably than of the parsley, as the flavor is much milder. 1104.--MUSHROOMS. The mushrooms proper to be used in cookery grow in the open pasture land, for those that grow near or under trees, are poisonous. The eatable mushrooms first appear very small, and of a round form, on a little stalk. They grow very rapidly, and the upper part and stalk are white. As they increase in size, the under part gradually opens, and shows a fringed fur of a very fine salmon color, which continues more or less till the mushroom has gained some size, and then turns to a dark brown. These marks should be attended to, and likewise whether the skin can be easily parted from the edge, and middle, and whether they have a pleasant smell. Those which are poisonous have a yellow skin, and the under part has not the clear flesh color of the real mushroom; besides which, they smell rankand disagreeable, and the fur is white or yellow. In Stewing, if you wish to have the full taste of the mushroom only, after washing, trimming, and peeling them, put them into a stewpan with a little salt and no water. Set them on coals, and stew them slowly till tender, adding nothing to them but a little butter rolled in flour, or else a little cream. Be sure to keep the pan well covered. 1105.--BROILEDMUSHROOMS. Pare some large open mushrooms, leaving the stalkson, paring them to a point; wash them well, turn them on the back of a drying sieve to drain. Put into a stewpan two ounces of butter, some chopped parsley, and shalots, fry them for a minute on the fire; when melted place your mushroom stalks upwards on a saute pan, then pour the butter and parsley over all the mushrooms; pepper and salt them well with black pepper, put them in the oven to broil; when done put a little good stock to them, give them a boil, and dish them, pour the liquor over them, add more gravy, but let it be put in hot; an hour and a quarter before it is done add four table-spoonfuls of red wine and the liver; serve very hot. 1106.--LETTUCES ANDENDIVES Are better, I think, only cut into pieces or into quarters, and dished neatly round; but they must be done in some good stock and not put into the thick sauce, but when you take them out after being done, you will press and form them, then boil down their liquor to a glaze, which will, when added to your already thick sauce, give the desiredflavor; glaze the quarters before dishing them, pour the sauce under and round. 1107.--TURNIPS,WHOLE. Pare several large turnips, scoop them out with an iron cutter for the purpose, throw them in water as you cut them, when done blanch them, then strain them off, if for white add bechamel to them; if for brown, brown sauce; season as before. 1108.--PUREE OFTURNIPS. Pare and cut up several turnips into slices, put themon to boil in milk and water until tender, strain them on the back of a sieve, throw away the liquor, and rub through the turnips; when done put them into a stewpan with a piece of but ter, a spoonful of flour, a gill of cream, a little sugar, salt, and cayenne pepper. 1109.--TRUFFLES. The truffle, like the mushroom, is a species of fungus common in France and Italy. It grows about eight or ten inches below the surface of the ground. As it imparts a most delicious flavor, it is much used in cooking. Being dug out of the earth, it requires a great deal of washing and brushing before it can be applied to culinary purposes. When washed, the water should be warm and changed fre quently; it loses much of its flavor when dried. Truffles with Champagne.--Take ten or twelve well-cleaned truffles, put them into a stewpan on rashers of bacon, add a bay leaf, a seasoned bouquet, a little grated bacon, some slices of ham, some stock, and a bottle of champagne; cover them with a piece of buttered paper, put on the lid, and set the stewpan in hot ashes, put fire on the top, and let them stew for an hour; when done drain them on a clean cloth, and serve on a folded napkin. To keep them.--After opening a fresh bottle and not requiring them all, return them into the bottle, filling up the bottle with some boiled sherry, cork them down until wanted again. 1110.--MORELS. The morel is a kind of mushroom, and for a ragout or garnish they are prepared as follows:--take the largest morels, take off their stalks and split them in two or three pieces, wash and put them into a basin of warm water to free them from the sand and earth, then blanch and drain and put them into a stewpan with a piece of butter and lemon juice, give them a turn and moisten with white or brown sauce. They should be dried slowly, put in paper bags, and kept in a dry place. 1111.--SIDNEY SMITH'S RECEIPT FOR SALAD. Two large potatoes, passed through kitchensieve, Unwonted softness to the salad give. Of ardent mustard add a single spoon-- Distrust the condiment which bites so soon: But deem it not, thou man of herbs, a fault To add a double quantity of salt; Three times the spoon with oil of Lucca crown, And once with vinegar, procured from town. True flavor needs it, and your poet begs The pounded yellow of twowell-boiled eggs. Let onion atoms lurk within the bowl, And, scarce suspected, animate the whole; And, lastly, on the flavored compound toss A magic teaspoon of anchovy sauce. Then, though green turtle fail, though venison 's tough, And ham and turkeys are not boiledenough, Serenely full the Epicure may say,-- Fate cannot harm me--I have dined today! 1112.--CHICKENSALAD. Mince the meat of two cooked fowls, with a little ham or tongue; cut up fine a nice lettuce head; put it in a dish, with the chicken in the centre; for the dressing, take the yolks of four eggs beaten, two teaspoonfuls of mixed mustard, two table-spoonfuls of vinegar, and four of oil, half a teaspoonful of Cayenne pepper : boil the mixture, and when cold pour it over the chicken, and ornament it with sliced white of egg and of beets. 1113.--SALAD DRESSING FORLETTUCE. Two hard-boiled eggs, the yolks mashed with four teaspoonfuls of sweet oil, a saltspoon of salt, and ateaspoonful of mustard, with two table-spoonfuls of vinegar. Add the lettuce cut up fine, and mince the white of egg to throw over it. 1114.--SALADS. Coss- lettuce and blanched endive make the best salad, the green leaves being stripped off, and leaving nothing but the close, white hearts, which, after being washed and placed for an hour or two in cold water, should be wiped quite dry. To this should be added a head or two of celery, a couple of anchovies (which are far preferable to the essence), and several chives, or young onions, all cut small, while the lettuces shouldbe di vided lengthwise into quarters, and cut into rather large pieces. The mixture or dressing. --For four persons bruise only the yolk of one hard-boiled egg (leaving out altogether the white ), with some salt, arid make it into a paste with two large teaspoonfuls of moûtarde de maille; or, if obliged to use common mustard, add to it a drop or two of asafoetida, which will impart to it a slight flavor of garlic. Then add oil and vinegar in the following proportions, without using so much as to make the sauce thin, and taking care to have the finest Provence or Lucca oil, and the very strongest species of real French vinegar : namely, to every one spoonful of vinegar add two of oil; one spoonful of the vinegar being impregnated with chilis, which will add warmth to the salad, much more agreeably than cayenne. A little tarragon may be an improvement, and a spoonful of Quihi or walnut ketchup is not objectionable; but mushroom ketchup will destroy the pun gency of flavor, and both may be left out without inconvenience. When this is done, mix the sauce well, but lightly, with the salad, to which a few slices of boiled beet-root, and the white of the egg sliced, will be a pretty addition. The excellence of a salad consists in the vegetables being young and fresh, and they should be prepared only a short time before they are wanted; the salad mixture being either poured into the bottom of the bowl or sent up in a saucetureen, and not stirred up with the vege tables until they are served. In summer salads the mixture must not be poured upon the lettuce or vege tables used in the salad, but be left at the bottom, to be stirred up when want ed, as thus preserving the crispness of the lettuce. In winter salads, however, the reverse of this proceeding must be adopted, as thus: the salad of endive, celery, beet, and other roots being cut ready for dress ing, then pour the mixture upon the in gredients, and stir them well up, so that every portion may receive its benefit. In doing this, it should likewise be re collected that the spoon and fork should always be of wood, and of sufficient size to stir up the vegetables in large quantities. * The below note appeared at the end of chicken salad (english) in the original text. *As a substitute for egg in salad, rub down a dessert-spoonful of a mashed potato with mustard and salt, and some cream or thick melted butter, which answers for oil when that is not at hand; then add the vinegar. 1115.--CHICKEN SALAD.(English.) Pull the meat off the bones, put it into a small pan with a shalot cut in thin slices, a few sprigs of parsley, anda ta ble-spoonful each of oil and tarragon vinegar; season the chicken well with pepper and salt; let it soak for about three hours. Boil three eggs hard, cut them in four pieces lengthways;chop two anchovies, six olives, and a dessert spoonful of capers; take three lettuces, reserve the small hearts to garnish with, cutting them in four, shred fine the other leaves, that are white, and cut roughly some small salad; put a layer of salad on the dish, then the chicken, sprin kle the chopped anchovy, &c., then more salad and chicken until you have used up the whole of your materials; then mask it with a thick Mayonnaise sauce : garnish it round the bottom withthe lettuce-hearts and eggs alternately. This salad is much improved if the dish can be placed on pounded ice whilst it is being prepared. The remains of veal and white poultry, when minced and left cold, instead of being fricasseed, will thus be found an excellent addition to the dinner of a summer's day, with added slices of cu cumber. 1116.--CHICKENSALAD. Boil a chicken that weighs not more than a pound and a half. When very tender, take it up, cut it in small strips, and make the following sauce, and turn over it--boil four eggs three minutes-- then take them out of the shells, mash and mix them with a couple of table-spoonfuls of olive-oil, or melted butter, two-thirds of a tumbler of vinegar, a tea-spoonful of mixed mustard, ateaspoon-ful of salt, a little pepper, and essence of celery, if you have it--if not, it can be dispensed with. In making chicken salad, the dressing should not be put on till a few minutes before the salad is sent in; as by lying in it, the chicken and celery will become hard. 1117.--SALAD OFFOWL. Proceed as for that of game, so far as the eggs and the salad are concerned; then have a chicken, which has been previously plain roasted, or in vegetables, and cut it into ten neat pieces, put it into a basin, season with a teaspoonful of salt, quarter ditto of pepper, two table-spoonfuls of oil, one of vinegar, one on ion sliced, and a few sprigs of chopped parsley; mix them well, and let them remain for a few hours, if time will per mit. Take the pieces of chicken, and place in a dish with salad, as directed for grouse, with the sauce, &c., and serve. Nothing is better for ball-suppers than these kind of dishes; they may be made of all kinds of solid fish, and the sauce is excellent; any kind of cold meat, cut in slices, dressed round with the sauce over, may be served for supper or lunch eon. It may be served with the same sauce or dressing as for lobster salad; or make the following one, which differs a little:--Put into a middle-sized, round-bottomed basin,the yolk of two eggs, half a spoonful of salt, quarter of one of pepper, half a one of sugar, ditto of fine chopped onions, ditto of parsley, tarra gon, or chervil stir with the right hand with a wooden spoon, while you pour some oil out of the bottle by keeping your thumb on its mouth, so that it runs out very slowly; when a few spoonfuls are in it, it will become quite stiff; pour also, by degrees, a few spoonfuls of vine gar, and so on until you have made enough for your salad; try if the flavor is good and relishing; as the quality of these two last ingredients vary so much, I must leave it to your palate and correct judgment. If you should fail at first, try again until you succeed, and I am certain you will be delighted with the result; it ought to be made in a cold place, particularly in summer. Great taste should be observed in the decora tion of the border, for which you should see the "Gastronomic  Regenerator." 1118.--FISH SALADS. All fish salads are made from the re mains of fish from a previous dinner, especially turbot and salmon; but for fil lets of soles they must be dressed thus: --When filleted, melt an ounce of butter in a sautepan, lay the fillets in, season with pepper and salt, and the juice of half a lemon; saute them on a slow fire until done,which may be from four to five minutes, and put by to get cold; cut inmiddle-sized pieces and use as lobster. 1119.--MAYONNAISE. The following receipt is contributed to "The Practical Housekeeper" by Mr. Delmonico, proprietor of the well-known establishments at the Irving House and at the corner of Beaver and William streets, New York.] In a middle-sized dish placed in cracked rice, put the yolks of two fresh eggs, a little salt, some white pepper, and some vinegar a Pestragon. Stir this mixture briskly with a wooden spoon, and as soon as it begins to thicken, mix in gradually a table-spoonful of oil and a little vinegar, taking care to beat the sauce against the sides of the dish. On this repeated beating depends the whiteness of the sauce Mayonnaise. In propor tion to the bulk add oil and vinegar together, putting in but little at a time. As it comes nearer perfection it grows thick and strong-bodied. When finished add a squeeze of citron and some drops of water. This sauce is delicious for chicken salad--mayonnaise de volaille-- and serves for all kinds of fish and poultry. 1120.--LOBSTERSALAD. Take out the meat of the claws and body, cutting it into small pieces, and micing it with the lettuce or endive; but previously separate the soft part of the fish adhering to the shell, with the redspawn of the hen-lobster, and blend them with the materials prepared for the dressing. It will perhaps require a little more pungency of flavor, which can be imparted by a small additional quantity of chili or tarrogon vinegar. Crab, or shrimps, may be used in the same manner; and a great improvement in either will be found by throwing in a portion of savory calf 's- foot jelly, divided into pieces. Although shell- fish are very decidedly the best mixture to be put into this salad, yet any sort of firm fish, which have been dressed, and partly left cold, may also be prepared in a similar way. PICKLES AND STORE-ROOM SAUCES. Although meat, when cured and dried, is called "pickled," yet in thatoperation salt alone is employed as brine, while in the pickling of vegetables,of which we are about to treat, the means chiefly used is vinegar. In the making of all sorts of pickles, salads, and sauces, in which vinegaris employed, it is of much importance to have it of the strongest quality, aswell as of the best flavor. If the flavor of chilis, capsicums, tarragon,eschalots, gar lic, or any root, is wished to be imparted to the vinegar, it isonly necessary to put a portion of either (say one oz.) into a bottleful of theliquid; cork it closely, and in a very few weeks it will be found thoroughlyimpregnated with the pecu liar taste; then strain it off, and fill the bottleup again, as it will answer for more than once. The flavor of any herb willalso be communicated by boiling it for a short time in the acid; as well as afew fruits, the flavor of which is very de licious when imparted tovinegar. Pickles should be made at home, as both cheaper and better. The picklesshould be kept either in glass bottles, or in stone or unglazed jars, as thevinegar, or even soured vegetables, will corrode the glazing of the jars,which, being made from lead, is poisonous. Use saucepans lined with earthenwareor stone pipkins to boil your vinegar in. If you are com pelled to use tin, donot let your vinegar remain in it one moment longer than ac tually necessary;employ also wooden knives and forks in the preparation of your pickles. Fillyour jars three parts full with the articles to be pickled, and then addvinegar up to the neck of the jar or bottle. When greening, keep the pickles cov ered down, or the evaporation of thesteam will injure the color; a little nut of alum may be added to crisp the pickles, but it should be very small in pro portion to the quantity, or it willgive a disagreeable flavor. If any symptoms appear of the pickles becoming mouldy, boil the vinegaragain, adding a little more spice; keep them also close stopped, as exposure tothe air makes the pickle soft. 1121.--TO PICKLEONIONS. Silver Sort. --Choose small button onions, asnear of a size as possible; throw them into warm water, which willprevent their affecting the eyes so much, while peeling them. As they arepeeled, throw them into a strong brine of salt and water, with a smallbit of alum; let them remain in this till the next day, then put them onthe fire, and boil them in it for a minute. Or, as they are peeled, throw theminto milk and water; drain them from this when they are all done,put them into a jar, and pour the brine on them boiling hot; cover themclose, and set them aside till the next day; drain and dry them in a cloth; putthem into cold vinegar, with a few blades of bruised ginger, somewhole pepper, and, if approved, a little mace and sliced horseradish; keep them always well covered with vinegar; cork thejar close, and put it in a cool dry place. Full-grown Sort. --Peel and slice large onions, and sprinkle them with salt. To every gallon take about adozen capsi cums, either dry or green, slicing only a part; add a few cloves, some pepper and allspice, all whole. Put the onions into jars, distribute the spices pretty equally amongthem, fill up the jars with vinegar, andset them in a pan of cold water over the fire, taking care that they areclosely tied down with a bladder: keep a wet cloth over them to prevent thebladder from bursting. In about an hour and a half the onions will besoft enough. Onions and Cucumbers. --To every dozenof cucumbers put three large onions, cut both in thick slices,and sprinkle salt over them. Next day drain them for five or six hours,then put them into a stone jar, pour boiling vinegar over them, and keepthem in a warm place. Repeat the boiling vinegar, and stop them up againinstantly, and so on till green; the last time put pepper and ginger; keep in stone jars. The vinegar is very good for wintersalads. 1122.--GARLICPICKLE. Steep one quarter of a pound of ginger in strong salt and water for five days, then cut it into slices and dry it in thesun; put it into a large stone jar with a gallon of the best white-winevinegar. Peel one pound of garlic, salt it well, and let itstand in the salt three days; wipe it, and dry it in the sun, then putit into the pickle; add also a quarter of a pound of long pepper steeped in salt and water and well dried, one pound of mustard-seed bruised, and a quarter of a pound of turmeric. Shakethese ingredients well in the jar, and add any thing that it is desirable to pickle as it comes into season, salting and drying them previously inthe sun. When completed, the pickle should be kept a year or two be foreit is used. Shalots may be pickled in the same way; or if put,as we have already stated, in a bottle of cold vinegar, their flavorwill be imparted to it in the course of a month. 1128.--CUCUMBERS. If full-grown, the small long sort are the best forpickling. Let them be fresh-gathered; pull off the blossoms, but do not rubthem; pour over them a strong brine of salt and water boiling hot, coverthem close, and let them stand all night. The next day stir them gently to takeoff the sand, drain them on a sieve, and dry them on a cloth; make a pickle with the best white-wine vinegar, ginger, pepper (long and round), and a little garlic. When the pickle boils throw in the cucumbers, cover them, and make themboil as quickly as possible for three or four minutes; put them into a jar withthe vinegar, and cover them closely; when cold, put in a sprig of dill, the seed downward. They will be exceedingly crisp and greendone in this manner; but if they do not appear to be of a fine color, boil upthe pickle the next day, and pour it boiling on the cucumbers. 1124.--MUSHROOMS. To pickle Mushrooms White. --Take the verysmall buttons, clean and rub them with a flannel, then put them into colddistilled vinegar, and allow it to come to a boil very slowly; drain andlay them in a cloth till cold, and then put them into fresh distilled vinegar. If very small, they should not be allowed to boil, as so stronga heat might destroy them. It will, therefore, be sufficient to warm them; andwhen dried, they may be again put into the vinegar in which they hadbeen originally placed, after it has been cooled. As to spice, a little mace will improve their flavor, but no hot pepper should be used.Those which are red underneath, may also be used; but those which are black aretoo old, and only fit for broiling or to make ketchup. To pickle Mushrooms Brown. --Choose themolder, but see that they be fresh, and of a nearly pink color underneath;clean, and sprinkle them with salt, put them in layers, and let themstand for a couple of days; then add some whole pepper, cover them very close, and put them into an oven when bread is baking. That done, take them out, strain off the liquor, intowhich put cloves, mace, and allspice, and let the wholeboil for a little while. While that is doing, put the mushrooms into thestewpan for a short time, then take the whole off the fire, and when perfectlycold pot them, with the addition of a little vinegar. An excellent way to preserve the flavor of mushrooms when beingpickled, is, to rub them with a bit of flannel and salt, and fromthe larger take out the red in side; when they are black they will not do,being too old. Throw a little salt over, and put them into a stewpanwith some mace; as the liquor comes out, shake them well, and keep themover a gentle fire, till all of it be dried into them again; then put as much vinegar into the pan as will cover them, give it one warm, and turn allinto a glass or stone jar. They will keep two years, and are delicious. 1125.--MUSHROOMPOWDER. Wash a half peck of large mushrooms while quite fresh,and free them from dirt and grit with flannel; scrape out the black part clean,and do not use any that are worm-eaten; put them into a stewpan over the firewithout water, with two large onions, some cloves, aquarter of an ounce of maces, and two spoonfuls of white pepper, all inpowder; simmer and shake them till all the liquor be dried up, but be carefulthey do not burn. Lay them on tins or sieves, in a slow oven, till they are dryenough to beat to powder; then put the powder in small bottles corked and tiedclosely, and keep in a dry place. A teaspoonful will give a very fine flavor to any soup or gravy, orany sauce. It is to be added just before serving, and one boil given toit after it is put in. 1126.--TO PICKLEWALNUTS. Gather the walnuts when tender, and put them in salt and water: prick each with a needle several times; let them stand two orthree days, changing the water every day. Make a brine of salt andwater strong enough to bear an egg; it must be quite coldbefore being used, and be well skimmed while boiling. To every hundred walnuts allow one gallon of water. Let the walnuts soak six days,then change the brine, and let them stand six more; then drain them, andexpose them to the sun that they may turn black; pour over them, in a jar, a pickle of the best white-wine vinegar, with a good quantity of pepper, pimento, ginger, mace, cloves, mustard-seed, and horseradish, all boiled together, but cold. Toevery hundred walnuts allow six spoonfuls of mustard-seed, with anounce of whole black pepper, and two or three heads of garlic orshalot, but the latter is least strong; let them be quite covered with vinegar. This done, they will be good for several years, if closelycovered. The air will soften them. They will not, however, be fit to eat undersix months. 1127.--TO PICKLERADISH-PODS. Gather the radish -pods when they are quite young,and put them into salt and water all night; then boil the salt andwater, and pour it over the pods in jars, and cover them closely to keep inthe steam. When the brine is cold boil it, and pour it hot upon the podsagain, repeating the process until they are green; then put them in a sieve todrain, and make a pickle for them of white-wine vinegar, mace, ginger, long pepper, and horseradish; pour itboiling hot upon the pods, and when nearly cold boil it again, and pour it overthem. When cold, tie down the jars. 1128.--TO PICKLE FRENCHBEANS. Gather them before they become stringy, and, without taking off the ends, put them into a very strong brine until they become yellow; drain the liquor from them, and wipethem dry with a cloth. Put them into a stone jar by the fire, put in a littlebit of alum, and pour boiling vinegar upon them every twenty-fourhours, preventing the escape of the steam. In four or five days they willbecome green. Boil a little mace, whole pepper, and ginger in the vinegar. Do samphire the same way. 1129.--NASTURTIUMS Somuch resemble capers, both in flavor and the mode of pickling, as to befrequently used in the same manner; the seeds should be allowed to getripe after the buds and flowers have gone off. Gather them upon a dry day, andkeep them for a few days after they have been gathered; put them into a jar,and pour boiling vinegar well spiced upon them; when cold, cover thejar. They will not be fit for use for some months, but will be finely flavoredafter keeping, and are sometimes preferred to capers, for which they arean excellent substitute, being useful also in serving up all dishes in which pickles are warmed with the gravy. Young red capsicums and elder -flowers before they open may be done in the same way. 1180.--TO PICKLE REDCABBAGE. Take those of a deep red or purple color, strip off the outerleaves and cut out the stalk; quarter the cabbage lengthwise and cut itcrosswise, but not in very thin slices; put it into a sieve and sprinkle itwith salt and saltpetre; let it drain for twenty-four hours, thensqueeze it until it is very dry; make a pickle with sufficient vinegar to cover the cabbages well, and made with equal quantities of cloves and allspice, with a little mace --to be put inwhole, to which if a very small quantity of cochineal be added, it willgreatly improve the color; boil the vinegar and spices togetherfor full five minutes, and strain it; then, having put the cabbage intoa stone jar, pour the vinegar over it boiling hot. This is opposed to the practice of some persons, who object to boiling the vinegar, and pour it cold upon the cabbage. 1131.--CABBAGE, WHITE,PICKLED. Slice your cabbage thin, then lay it in salt for twenty-four hours; strain it very dry, then put it in a stone jar with allspice, mace, and vinegar, and pour it on boiling hot,tie it very close, repeat the vinegar three times, and it will be fitfor use. 1182.--CABBAGE, PURPLE, TOPICKLE. Take two cauliflowers, two red cabbages, half a peck of kidney beans, stick with six cloves of garlic on each stick, wash allwell; give them one boil up, then strain them in a sieve, lay them leaf by leafupon a large table and salt them with coarse salt; then lay themto dry in the sun, or in a slow oven, until as dry as cork. 1188.--CELERY, TOPICKLE. Separate the stalks from the head, clean themthoroughly, and put them into salt and water strong enough to bear an egg; let them remain in this for a week or ten days, oruntil wanted to pickle; then take them out, wash them well in c leanwater, drain dry, place in a jar, and pour boiling vinegar over, towhich any ap proved spices may have been added. As is usual for picklingkeep it well covered with vinegar; if the celery is allowed toremain a long time in salt and water, it will be necessary to soak it inc lean water for a day or two, changing the water occasionally. 1184.--TO PICKLECAULIFLOWERS. Take the closest and whitest cauliflowers you can get and pull them in bunches, and spreadthem on an earthen dish, and lay salt all over them, let them stand forthree days to bring out all the water, then put them in earthen jars,and pour boiling salt and water upon them, and let them stand allnight, then drain them on a hair sieve, and put them into glass jars, and fillup your jars with vinegar, and tie them close down with leather. 1135.--PICKLEDTOMATOES. The tomatoes should not be very ripe. Mix in a large stone jar, one ounce of mustard, and half the samequantity of cloves and black pepper, and fill the jar half fullof the best vinegar. Lay in the tomatoes, mixing with them adozen or more whole onions. The jar should not be opened for a month, when the pickles will befit for use; great care must be taken to close the jar well whenever pickles are taken out. This done, they will keep a year. Another. --Take a peck of ripe tomatoes, prickthem with a fork, and lay them in a jar with layers of salt. Let themremain eight days in salt; then take them oat and put them fortwenty-four hours in fresh water with a little vinegar. Take them out, press them gently, and lay them on a sieve to drain. Slicetwelve large onions, or more smaller ones. Put a layer of the tomatoes in a stone jar, and cover them with a layer of slices of onion. Over this strew mustard, allspice, blackpepper, and cloves --all but the cloves ground fine. Thenplace on the mass another layer of tomatoes, with another of sliced onions and the mixed spices. Place the layers alternately tillthe jar is filled. Then pour over it the best vinegar, filling the jar,and cover closely. The pickles will be fit for use in ten days. 1136.--TO PICKLELEMONS. Take the finest with the thickest rind you can get, cutthem deeply from end to end in more than one place, but not quite through, andfill the incisions with salt; put each on end, and lay them in a dishnear the fire, or in the sun if the weather be hot, to dissolve the salt, and repeat this during three weeks; then put them into a jar, witha handful of white mustard-seed if it be large, one-quarter toone-half a pound of bruised ginger, half that quantity of cloves and allspice, a few chilis, and a very little turmeric; boil in vinegar, and pour it upon the lemons when cold. It wasoriginally prepared by the cook of the first Earl of Orford. Some people, however, add to it either shalot or garlic. It canhardly be ready in less than six months, but will keep for many years. For limes, or very small lemons, the samemethod must be pursued, only they will not require above half the time. 1137.--MANGOES. Out apiece off the top or side of young mush- melons, and remove the pulp and seeds; tie on the pieces green them, and fill the insidewith grated horseradish, spices, cloves, ginger, mustard-seed, onion or garlic, and slices of the core of cabbage. Tie on the pieces again, pour on them scalding vinegar, four days in succession, and keep them in covered jars. Mangoes may be made of peaches. Observe that there be plenty of vinegar, as pickles arespoiled if not well covered. Large cucumbers, called "green turley,"prepared in the same way, are excellent, and are sooner fit to be eaten. The greater number of times boiling vinegar is poured over eithersort, the sooner it will be ready. 1138.--MIXED PICKLE. Toone gallon of vinegar put four ounces of ginger bruised, two ounces of white pepper, two of allspice, two of chilis, four of turmeric, one pound of mustard-seed, one-half pound of shalots, one ounce of garlic, andone-half pound of coarse salt. Boil all together except the mustard-seed, which must be added afterwards. Then mix very smoothlyone-quarter of a pound of made mustard with some of the vinegar, when cold, in a basin, and add it to the remainder with the seed. Take broccoli, radish -pods, French bean s, or any othervegetables or small fruit 5 blanch the vegetables, lay them on a sieve,and sprinkle a little salt over them to draw out the water. Letthem stand in the sun till very dry, then pour the vinegar boiling overthem, slicing in some horseradish if approved. Pickle of this kind can be rendered hot at pleasure, by additions of chilis, green and red capsicums --which, when gathered young, addexquisite flavor-- and all sorts of foreign peppers. As the springadvances, a portion of every small root produced in a garden, if collected andthrown into cold vinegar, till it can be conveniently made into aregular pickle, will be found most excellent, at no greater expense thanthe cost of the spice and vinegar, and the trouble of mixingit. 1139.--INDIA PICKLE Ismade in nearly the same manner. Put two hundred gherkins, three pints ofsmall onions, one quart of nasturtiums, one ditto of radish -pods, one quart of French bean s, six cauliflowers, and two hard white cabbages sliced, into a pan, and sprinkle them with salt, the onions having been previously peeled and laid in salt and water for a week to take off their strength. Then, after a dayor two, take them out of the pan and dry them thoroughly in a warm place in theshade: they must be spread out separately. To two gallons of vinegar putone and a half ounces of allspice, the same of long pepper and of white, and two of ginger, tied up in muslin bags. When cold, mixwith the vinegar one and a half pounds of flour of mustard, andtwo table-spoonfuls of cayenne pepper. Boil it well together, and pourit on the pickle : the vegetables mentioned, not being all procurable atthe same time, may be added separately, at different periods, but they must allundergo the salting and drying process. In choosing those vegetables some discrimination may also be used: when inseason, few things add a higher flavor to the pickle than the buds andflowers of the elder. 1140.--PLUMS, TO PICKLE LIKEOLIVES. Take the plums before they are quite ripe, and put theminto a saucepan with some white wine vinegar, salt water, fennel seed, and dill, as much of each as will impart a flavor tothe pickle; when it boils put in the plums, let it boil again,then take it off, let it stand till cold, then put them into jars. 1141.--QUINCE, TOPICKLE. Pare and cut half a dozen quinces into small pieces,and put them with a gallon of water and two pounds of honey intoa large saucepan, mix them together well, and set them on a slow fire for halfan hour, strain the liquor into a jar, when quite cold wipe the quinces perfectly dry, and put them into it; cover them very close. 1142.--PEACHES ANDAPRICOTS. Take those of a full growth, but perfectly green. Put to agallon of vinegar half an ounce of cloves, the same quantity of peppercorns, sliced ginger and mustard-seed --add salt and boil the vinegar --then turn it on the peaches scalding hot. Turn the vinegar from themseveral times. Heat it scalding hot, and turn it back while hot. 1143.--TO PICKLE GREENPEPPERS. The peppers must be pickled when half ripe, and thesmallest ones chosen. Make a small hole at the top and another at the bottom ofthe pepper, and extract the core and seeds. A penknifeshould be used in performing this operation. Simmer the peppers for awhole day in salt and water over a very moderate fire--stir them everyonce and awhile that those at the bottom may not burn. Leave them over night tocool, and the next morning lay them gently into a jar, sprinkle a smallquantity of mustard over them, and fill up the jar with coldvinegar. 1144.--BUTTERNUTS. The nuts for pickling should be gathered as early as July. When a pin willgo through them easily, they are young enough to pickle. Soak them in salt and water a week--then drain it off. Rub them with a cloth, to getoff the roughness. To a gallon of vinegar put a teacup of salt, atablespoonful of powdered cloves and mace, mixed together, halfan ounce of allspice, and peppercorns. Boil the vinegar and spices, and pour it hot on the nuts. In a week scald the vinegar, and pour over them again. They will be fit for use in afortnight. 1145.--TO PICKLE GHERKINS ANDKIDNEY BEANS. Put the beans and gherkins, dried with flannel,in salt and water that will bear an egg, leave them tillquite yellow, stirring every day. Then put them in a brass kettle with cabbage leaves under and around them, so that they do not touch thebrass. Put in one third vinegar and two of water, put a leafover, and cover close, so as to confine the steam. Put them on a slow fire, butdo not let them boil. Change the leaves as often as they grow yellow. Whengreen, take out the pickles, and put them on a dish to cool and dry.Boil the vinegar with a spoonful of black pepper, and one ofbruised ginger to a quart; throw it boiling over the pickles, andcover them closely in small jars. 1146.--BARBERRIES. Barberries make very good pickles, and are always useful in ornamenting certain dishes. Leave thebarberries on the stem, lay them in a stone jar and fill it up with coldvinegar. 1147.--GRAPES. Cutthem, when hardly ripe, in bunches, put them in a jar with vine leaves between each layer of grapes until the jar is filled; then take as much spring water as will cover the grapes and the leaves. As it heatsput in as much salt as will make a brine sufficiently strong to bear an egg, you may use common salt : when it boils skimit, strain it through a flannel bag and let it stand to settle; by the time itis cold it will be quite settled; strain it a second time through a flannelbag, then pour it into a jar upon the grapes, which must be wellcovered; fill the jar with vine leaves, then tie it over with a doublecloth and set a plate upon it; let it stand for two days, then take off thecloth, pour away the brine, then take out the leaves and the grapes, and lay them between two cloths to dry, then take two quarts of vinegar, one quart of spring water, and one pound of coarse sugar, boil it for a short time and skim it very clean as it boils; letit stand till it is quite cold. Wipe the jar very clean and dry, lay some fresh vine leaves at the bottom between every bunch of grapes and onthe top; then pour and strain the pickle on the grapes, fill thejar, let the pickle be above the grapes, tie up a thin piece of board in a flannel, lay it on the grapes to keep them under the pickle, tie them down with abladder, and over that a leather, always keeping the grapes under the pickle. 1148.--APPLE CODLINGS, TOPICKLE. Gather the codlings when of the size of a large double walnut; take a pan and make a thick layer of vine leaves at thebottom; put in the codlings and cover them well with vine leaves and spring water, and put them over a slow fire till they are sufficientlytender to pare the skins with ease with a small sharp knife, put theminto the same water with vine leaves as before; cover them close,and set the pan at a short distance from the fire until they are of a finegreen, then drain them in a colander till they are cold; put them into jarswith some mace and a clove or two of garlic, according tothe quantity of the apples, and cover them with distilled vinegar; pour over mutton fat, and tie them down with a bladderand leather very tight. 1149.--ARTICHOKESPICKLED. Boil the artichokes till you can pull the leaves off;take out the choke and cut away the stalk, be careful that the knife does nottouch the top; throw them into salt and water; when they have lain anhour take them out and drain them, then put them into glasses or jars, and puta little mace and sliced nutmeg between; fill them with vinegar and spring water, cover your jars close. VINEGARS. 1150.--VINEGAR FOR INDIAPICKLE. Prepare a gallon of vinegar, more or less, according tothe quantity of pickles to be done, in the following manner:-- Mix gradually one-quarter of a pound of the best flour of mustard, and two ounces of powdered turmeric, with some of the coldvinegar at first, to ensure its being properly mixed; then add the rest,with one-quarter of a pound of white mustard-seed. Bruise one-quarterof a pound of ginger, two ounces of white pepper, and one ounceof chilis, and tie them in a muslin bag. Boil the whole gently fortwenty minutes or half an hour, and pour it whilst boiling on the pickles, having previously drained off the vinegar they werefirst put in. In ten or twelve days repeat the boiling, pour it over the pickles whilst boiling hot, and they will be ready for use whencold. 1151.--WALNUTVINEGAR. Put green walnut-shells into a brine of salt andwater strong enough to float an egg; let them lie covered inthis ten or twelve days; take them out, and lay them in the sun for a week; putthem into a jar, and pour boiling vinegar on them; in about a week orten days pour off the vinegar, make it boiling hot, and pour over themagain. In a month it will be fit for use, and will be found excellent to eatwith cold meat, and particularly useful in making sauces. 1152.--CUCUMBERVINEGAR. Pare and slice fifteen large cucumbers, and put themin a stone jar, with three pints of vinegar, four large onions sliced, two or three shalots, a little garlic, two large spoonfuls of salt, three teaspoonfuls of pepper, and half a teaspoonful of cayenne. After standing four days, give the whole a boil: when cold,strain, and filter the liquor through paper. 1153.--CAMPVINEGAR. Slice a large head of garlic, and put it into awide-mouthed bottle, with half an ounce of cayenne, two teaspoonfulsof real soy, two of walnut ketchup, four anchovies chopped, one pint of vinegar, and enough cochineal to give it the color of lavender-drops . Let it stand six weeks; thenstrain off quite clear, and keep in small bottles sealed up. Another: --Infuse in a quart of the best white-wine vinegar, a quarter of a pint of walnut ketchup, thesame quantity of mushroom ketchup, and the same quantity of soy, half anounce of cayenne, four heads of garlic, ten shalots, two ouncesof black and two ounces of white pepper, the same quantity of pimento and ginger, one ounce of nutmeg, three blades of mace, and ten cloves, in a wide-mouthed, two-quart bottle; andcover very closely with cork, leather, and bladder. Let it remain near the firea month, shaking it frequently. When any is taken out, put in as much fresh vinegar. This is not only a very fine sauce, but a greatpreservative against infectious diseases, if taken freely. 1154.--NASTURTIUMVINEGAR. Pick full-blown nasturtium flowers; fill awide-mouthed bottle with them; add half a clove of garlic and amoderate-sized chalot chopped; pour as much vinegar as the bottle willtake; in two months' time rub the whole through a fine sieve; add a little cayenne pepper and salt. 1155.--TARRAGON AND ELDER-FLOWERVINEGAR. Take either the young leaves of tarragon when theplant is going into bloom, or the buds of elder -flowers, and to everyhalf peck put one gallon of vinegar, leaving it for a fortnight in a jugto ferment. Then drain it through a flannel bag, put into it a small bit ofdissolved isinglass, and bottle it. The flavor of the herbs may also be extracted by boiling the herbs or leaves in vinegar, without fermentation: a mixture ofboth is very agreeable. 1156.--RASPBERRYVINEGAR. To one quart of common vinegar put two quarts of fresh raspberries; let them stand twenty-four hours; then drain them off, butdo not squeeze them. Put in two quarts more, let them stand as before, and thismust be repeated a third time. After which, put the vinegar into a jar,measure it, and to every pint put one pound of lump- sugar. Set the jarup to the neck in boiling water, and let the vinegar boilfor ten minutes, stirring it frequently. There should on no account be fewer raspberries than the proportion mentioned, and the vinegar willnot be fit for use until the following summer. 1157.--SUGARVINEGAR. To every gallon of water put two pounds of coarse brown sugar. Boil and skim this. Put it to cool in a clean tub; whenabout lukewarm, add a slice of bread soaked in fresh yeast. Barrel it in a week, and set it in the sun in summer or by the fire in winter,for six months, without stopping the bung-hole; but cover it with thin canvassor an inverted bottle to keep out the flies. 1158.--CIDERVINEGAR. Put a pound of white sugar to a gallon of cider and shaking them well together, let them ferment for four months; a strong andwell--colored vinegar --will be the result. 1159.--FLAVOREDVINEGARS. These are a cheap and agreeable addition to sauces, hashes,&c. For one, infuse a hundred red chilis, fresh gathered, into aquart of good vinegar; let them stand ten days, shaking the bottle everyday. A half ounce of cayenne will answer the same purpose. This is goodin melted butter for fish sauce, &c. 1160.--CELERYVINEGAR. Pound a half ounce of celery seed, and steep it for ten days in a quart of vinegar; strainand bottle it. 1161.--HORSERADISHVINEGAR. Pour a quart of strong vinegar, boiling hot, on threeounces of scraped horseradish and a teaspoonful of pounded blackpepper, and half the quantity of cayenne. Let it stand four days,tightly covered, then strain and put it in the cruet for use. It is good oncold roast beef, and excellent in the gravy for chops, steaks, &c. 1162.--GOOSEBERRYVINEGAR. Boil water, and when cold put to every three quartsone quart of bruised gooseberries in a large tub. Let them remain sixtyhours, stirring often; then strain through a hair bag, and to each gallon ofliquor add one pound of the coarsest sugar. Put it into a barrel, and a toast and yeast; cover the bung-hole with a bit of slate. Set thebarrel in the sun, observing that the cask be well painted, and the iron hoopsall firm. The greater the quantity of sugar and fruit, thestronger the vinegar; and as this is particularly useful for pickles, it might be well to make it of double the strength for thatpurpose. 1168.--CHILIVINEGAR. Fill a bottle with the chilis or capsicums --each of which will impart the proper warmth of flavor--andcover them with vinegar; cork it up closely, let it stand for threeweeks or a month, then pour off the vinegar, and fill up the bottleagain: chilis are the most commonly used, but good capsicums willflavor several additions of vinegar, If capsicums are notprocurable, put one ounce of cayenne pepper to a quart of vinegar, and let it stand some time, shaking it occasionally. Thenstrain it off, and fill the bottle up again. 1164.--LEMON FLAVORING FORPUDDINGS. Peel six lemons very thin indeed; put the peel into aglass bottle, and add a table-spoonful of bitter almonds, blanched, orthe same quantity of peach or apricot kernels. Cover the wholewith brandy; shake it frequently, and in a month strain it, and if keptclosely corked it will keep for years. 1165.--MUSHROOMKETCHUP. Take the full-grown flaps of freshly-gathered mushrooms, crush them with the hands, throw a handful of salt into every peck, and let them stand a night or two; then put them into pans,and set them in a quick oven for twelve hours; strain them through a hairsieve, and press out all the juice. To every gallon of liquor put of cloves, Jamaica and black pepper, and ginger, oneounce each, and half a pound of common salt. Set it on a slow fire, andlet it boil until half the liquor is wasted; then put it into another vessel,and, when cold, strain and bottle it; at the same time corking it up closely,and covering the cork with oiled paper. or: --Take the largest broad mushrooms, breakthem into an earthen pan, strew salt over, and stir them now and thenfor several days, till there is a thick scum over: strain and boil the liquorwith Jamaica and black peppers, mace, ginger, a clove or two, and some mustard a seed. Cayennepepper is too hot, but a very little chili vinegar is animprovement. When cold, bottle it, and secure the corks as above, leaving the spice in. At the end of three months strain the liquor and boil it withfresh spice, which put into the bottles; and in a cool place it willkeep two or three years. We strongly recommend the addition of a moderate quantity of port wine -- from half a pint to not quite apint to every four quarts--both as greatly improving the flavor of the ketchup and ensuring its betterpreservation. With regard to the spice, care should be taken not to allow itto overpower the natural flavor of the vegetable. 1166.--WALNUTKETCHUP. Thoroughly bruise one hundred and twenty young walnuts ; put to them three-quarters of a pound of fine salt and aquart of vinegar; stir them every day for a fortnight; then strain;squeeze the liquor from them through a cloth; add to this one ounce of whole black pepper, forty cloves, half an ounce of nutmeg bruised, half an ounce of ginger, and a few blades of mace. Boilthe whole for half an hour; strain and bottle it for use. Walnut Ketchup of the finest quality --Boil orsimmer a gallon of the expressed juice of walnuts when they are tender, andskim it well; then put in two pounds of anchovies, bones, andliquor, ditto of shalots, one ounce of cloves, ditto of mace, ditto of pepper, and one clove of garlic. Let all simmer till theshalots sink; then put the liquor into a pan till cold; bottle and divide the spice to each. Cork closely, tie the bladder over, and put it in smallbottles. It will keep twenty years in the greatest perfection, but is not fit for usethe first year. Be very careful to express the juice at home, for it isgenerally adulterated if bought. Irish mode: --Take a few hundred green walnuts, scoop out all the whites, beat them in a mortar, andstrain the juice through a cloth; let it stand a day and night, strainit, and pour it off clear. To one pint of this liquor put half a pint of vinegar with half a pound of anchovies, and to each pint thusmade a clove or two of garlic, two or three shalots, some horseradish, and one onion cut in quarters; boil it two hours,and then strain it off. When strained add to every pint of liquor half aquarter of an ounce of mace, the same quantity of cloves, ofnutmeg, and of whole black pepper, half a pint of port wine, and two table-spoonfuls of soy. Boil them together for half an hour. Then pourit off into an earthen jar, and let it remain covered until it is cold; bottleit off into clean dry bottles, distributing the spice equally in each;cork it down closely; take care in boiling to keep the saucepan covered. 1167.--CUCUMBERKETCHUP. Take an equal quantity of large cucumbers and large onions, pare and slice them; throw over them a handful of salt, and let them stand all night in a sieve placed over a pan. Take the liquor andboil it up. with a quarter of a pound of anchovies to every dozen of cucumbers, one pint of white wine, a nutmeg, a quarter ofan ounce of mace, and half an ounce of whole pepper; strain it,and when cold bottle it; tie it down with bladder. It will keep for twoyears. The Suffolk Receipt. --Take a dozen well-grown cucumbers and four large onions, slice them into an earthen panwith a good handful of salt; let them stand till the liquor begins torun, break them into small pieces, and let the whole stand another day andnight: then strain it off; to every quart put the same quantity of white, but not sweet wine, half a pound of anchovies, anda large stick of horseradish; boil them together for half an hour, thenstrain it again, and to every quart put a quarter of an ounce of whitepepper, half the quantity of mace and nutmeg, all pounded,and boil it well again. When cold, bottle it with the spice, and put apiece of ginger into each bottle, A tablespoonful in a sauceboatful of cream or melted butter makes delicious white sauce for fowls or made dishes of veal. 1168.--TOMATOKETCHUP. Take two dozen of ripe tomatoes and a handful of salt; slice the tomatoes, and put a layer into a jar, sprinkle salt over it, then another layer of tomatoes and salt, until thejar is full. Stir the contents now and then for three or four days, keeping thejar in a warm place by the fire; at the expiration of which time press the juice from the tomatoes by rubbing them with a wooden spoon through asieve, and boil it with mace, pepper, allspice, ginger, and cloves, in the proportion of about two ounces in allto one quart of juice, a few blades of mace, twelve cloves, a spoonful of pounded ginger, and the remainder pepper and allspice. In three months boil it again with fresh spice. 1169.--TOMATO SAUCE FOE WINTERUSE. One peck of tomatoes, six onions sliced, two heads of celery, a dozen shalots, one ounce of cayenne pepper, half an ounce of black pepper, one ounce of mace in powder. Slicethem into a well-tinned saucepan, mixing the seasoning with them as theyare cut up; boil, keeping them well stirred; when thoroughly soft, drain offthe water, and rub through a hair sieve. Boil it again until it is asthick as apple-sauce Put it into bottles, and cork close. Put thebottles into a stew-pan, fill it with cold water, and let it boil fortwenty minutes. Keep in a cool place. Examine the bottles occasionally, and ifthere is the least indication of a change turn it into the kettle again, boiland skim it, keeping it well stirred from the bottom that it may not adhere,and put it into the bottles again. When required for use, warm what is wantedwith a little gravy. It is as nice as when fresh done, and will be foundexcellent with calf 's head or brains, veal, beef, mutton, pork, or goose. An onion or ashalot, boiled in the gravy with which it is mixed, will be animprovement. 117O.--CAMPKETCHUP. Take two quarts of old strong beer and one of whitewine, add a quarter of a pound of anchovies, three ounces of shalotspeeled, half an ounce of mace, the same of nutmeg, three largeraces of ginger cut in slices; put all together over a moderate firetill one third is wasted. The next day bottle it with the spice and theshalots. It will keep for many years. Or: --A pint of claret, the same quantity of ketchup, four ounces of anchovies, one ounce of fresh lemon-peel pared thin, two cloves of garlic minced fine, halfan ounce of allspice, the same of black and of red pepper, onedrachm of celery-seed bruised, and half a pint of pickle -liquor.Put these ingredients into a wide-mouthed bottle; stop it close, shake it everyday for a fortnight, and then strain it off. 1171.--SEVEN-YEARS'KETCHUP. Take two quarts of the oldest strong beer, put to itone quart of red wine, three-quarters of a pound of anchovies, three ounces of shalots peeled, half an ounce of mace, the same of nutmegs, quarter of an ounce of cloves, three large races of ginger cut in slices, and boil all together over a moderate fire tillone-third is wasted. When quite cold put it into a large jar, covered up, andleave it there for a week or two until the sediment is wasted, and the clearliquor is perfectly transparent; then strain it through a fine hair sieve,taste it, and add to it a little of any essence of spice, oil, or vinegar, which you think may improve it, and, if the liquid be notlucidly clear, give it one smart boil: let it rest till cool, and bottleit in very small bottles to prevent its frequent exposure to the air. It will improve by age, and may be carried on a voyage round the world. As may also Sauce à la Militaire, made thus:-- Putinto an earthen pot six shalots sliced, a clove of garlic split, twolaurel-leaves, a handful of thyme, basil, and tarragon -leaves, half an ounce of mustard-seed bruised, oneteaspoonful of grated Seville orange -peel, quarter of an ounce of cloves, the same quantity of mace, half an ounce of longpepper, two ounces of salt, the juice of a lemon, sixspoonfuls of the strongest vinegar, and half a pint of whitewine. Stop the pot very closely, and put it into an oven, or upon hot ashes, for twenty-four hours, to allow the whole to infuse properly.Then allow it to settle, and strain it until it is quite clear: bottle it, andclose the bottles tightly: a very small quantity will be sufficient, and it maybe used with all sorts of meat, game, or fish. 1172.--ARTIFICIAL SAUCES FORFISH. Those most commonly used are soy and anchovy, merelymixed from the cruets into melted butter by each individual of thecompany; the butter, when brought to table in a prepared state, shouldbe made as follows:-- For Anchovy Sauce, the foundation should besome of the fish stock or gravy which has been already made andkept in the house for future use. Take two or three anchovies, scrape,but do not wash them, and boil them along with a minced shalot in some of the gravy, until they are soft enough to be pounded to a paste. Thenstrain the gravy and thicken it with the body of the fish, afterhaving removed the heads, tails, and bones. When that is done,put it, for about a quarter of an hour, in the stew-pan along with a glass of red wine, a squeeze of lemon, and the necessary quantity of butter. The common mode is, to chop three anchovies, melta quarter of a pound of butter in a teacupful of the water inwhich the fish is boiled, add a spoonful of vinegar, and a little flour. Stir it well over the fire until it is quite thick. Or: --Not unfrequently two or three spoonfuls of theprepared essence of anchovy are put into the melted butter, seasoned with a little cayenne pepper. The savory store sauces for fish, as prepared and sold in theshops, are all to a certain degree agreeable to some palates, but anchovy and soy seem the prevailing sort for fish. 1173.--STORE SAUCES. 1.Take two wine -glasses of port, two of walnut and four of mushroom ketchup, four anchovies pounded, with two shalots, a table-spoonfulof soy, and a tea-spoonful of cayenne pepper. Boil all well together;when cold, put it into bottles well corked; it will keep good for more than atwelvemonth. 2. Take half an ounce of mace, one ounce each of cloves, ginger, and allspice, one pound of anchovies, a bottle ofeither white or red wine, half a pint of vinegar, a coupleof shalots and a clove of garlic chopped, and a stick of scraped horseradish, together with a bundle of pot- herbs. Let all simmerover a slow fire till the anchovies are dissolved; then strain theliquor, bottle it when cold, and when wanted for use add a table-spoonful ofthe sauce to quarter of a pound of melted butter. 3. Thicken a quarter of a pound of butter with flour, andbrown it; then put to it one pound of the best anchovies cut small, sixblades of pounded mace, ten cloves, forty berries of blackpepper and allspice, a few small onions, a fagot of sweetherbs (namely, savory, thyme, basil, and knotted marjoram ), and a little parsley and sliced horseradish; onthese pour half a pint of the best sherry and a pint and a half ofstrong gravy. Simmer all gently for twenty minutes, then strain it through a sieve, and bottle it for use. The way ofusing it is, to boil some of it in the butter while melting. 4. Put into a saucepan a pint of fine port wine, a gill of mountain,half a pint of fine walnut ketchup, twelve anchovies, and theliquor that belongs to them, a gill of walnut pickle, the rind and juice of a large lemon, four or five shalots, some cayenne to taste, three ounces of scraped horseradish, threeblades of mace, and two teaspoonfuls of made mustard : boil it allgently, till the rawness goes off, then put it into small bottles for use. Corkthem very close, and seal the top. 5. Chop twenty-four anchovies, not washed, and ten shalots, andscrape three spoonfuls of horseradish; which, with ten blades of mace, twelve cloves, two sliced lemons, half a pint of anchovy liquor, a quart of hock or Rhenish wine, and a pint of water, boil to a quart; then strain off; and when cold, add three largespoonfuls of walnut ketchup. All or any of these will be found excellent for family use; as, when addedto any common sauce for fish, or even to plain melted butter, a moderate quantity will impart to it a very fine flavor, and inmany cases they may be used also for meat, if eaten cold. Pontac Ketchup is for this purpose both very simple and very good. Put ripe elderberries, picked from the stalk, into a stone jar, with as muchstrong vinegar as will cover them. Bake with the bread; and,while hot, strain. Boil the liquor with a sufficient quantity of cloves, mace, peppercorns, and shalots to give it a fine flavor. Whenthat is obtained, put in half a pound of the finest anchovies to everyquart of liquor; stir, and boil only until dissolved. When cold, put it intopint bottles, and tie double bladders over each cork. The same methodshould be observed for preserving all ketchups. An excellent and not common Pickle, called "Salade," may be made thus:-- Fill a pint stone jar with equal quantities of onions, cucumbers, and sour apples, all cut into very thin slices,shaking in, as you go on, one teaspoonful of salt and three parts of ateaspoonful of cayenne. Pour in a wine -glass of soy, the same of white wine, and fill up the jar with vinegar. It will be fit foruse the same day. Quin's Sauce is also excellent. Half a pint of common mushroom ketchup, half a pintof walnut-liquor, eight anchovies, eight cloves of garlic, four bruised and four whole, three teaspoonfuls of cayenne pepper, threeof mushroom -powder, all boiled together for five minutes, and bottledwhen cold. 1174.--CAYENNEPEPPER May be made by pounding the dry peppers, or chilis, to a fine powder, with salt, and keeping it inbottles. 1175.--FRENCHMUSTARD. To mustard ground, add tarragon vinegar and oil, with salt and garlic. Tarragon vinegar is madeby covering the leaves with vinegar, and steeping them in it. PASTE--MEAT PIES--FISH PIES. 1176.--VARIOUS SORTS OFPASTE. In making paste for pies great care should be takenthat the flour be well dried; for the finer kinds of paste itought also to be sifted. The very best salt butter is perhaps the bestmaterial for making paste. Some persons employ lard, or equalparts of lard and butter; and clarified dripping is an excellentsubstitute. An adept in pastry never leaves any part of it adhering to the board or dishused in making. The best thing to make it upon is a slab of marble or slate;which substances cause less waste, being cold and smooth. The coolest part ofthe house, and of the day, should be chosen for the process; the hands shouldbe previously washed in very hot water, and the less they touch the paste the better and lighter it will prove; nor should it be rolledmuch. In whatever way paste be made, wetting it much will render ittough. Salt butter of the best quality makes a fine flaky crust; for sweetthings, wash it. In making pie-crust lard is, however, better than butter; and in making the paste it is sometimes mixed with the flour in a dry state. Heating the oven properly is a very essential point in baking the varioussorts of paste to be here enumerated. Raised pies must be put into a quick oven, or thecrust will fall. The cook should accurately know the proper heat for eacharticle, as opening the door to observe their progress lets in the air, andoften spoils them. They require from one half to a full hour more than whenbaked in a dish. 1177.--CRUST FOR RAISEDPIES. Boil water with a little fine lard, and an equalquantity of fresh dripping, or of butter, but not much of either. Whilehot, mix this with as much flour as you will want, making the paste as stiff as you can to be smooth, which you will make it by goodkneading and beating it with the rolling-pin. When quite smooth, put a lumpinto a cloth, or under a pan, to soak till nearly cold. In raising paste it should be brought to a firm consistence, and ofsufficient thickness to hold the meat together; it should therefore notbe too rich, and it is easier to be worked if moderately warm than cold. Theproper way to raise the crust is by placing the left hand on the lump of paste, and with the right keep working it up the back of the hand, tillall be of the proper shape and thickness; a mould, or a decanter, may be used.When worked into the desired form the meat is then put into the pie,and, when quite full, the lid is put on and fixed to the wall or side; the topbeing ornamented with some device, also made of paste. Before putting itin the oven glaze it all over with white of egg. Those who have not a good hand at raising crust may roll the paste ofa proper thickness, and cut out the top and bottom of the pie, then a longpiece for the sides; then cement the bottom to the sides with egg, bringing the former rather farther out, and pinching both together; put egg between the edges of the paste to make it adhere at thesides. Fill the pie, put on the cover, and pinch it and the side crusttogether. The same mode of uniting the paste is to be observed if thesides are pressed into a bin form, in which the paste must be baked,after it shall be filled and covered: * the tin should be buttered, and carefully taken offwhen done enough; and as the form usually makes the sides of a lighter colorthan is proper, the pie should be put into the oven again for one quarter of anhour. For Venison Pasty or Périgord Pie. --To one quarter of a peck of fine flour use two and a half pounds of butter and four eggs : mix into paste with warmwater, and work it smooth and to a good consistence. Put a paste round the inside, but not to the bottom of the dish; and let the cover be pretty thick, to bear the longcontinuance in the oven. The bellow note appeared at the bottom of page 407 in the originaltext. *In lining a tin form, put in the sides first, havingcut the paste rather deeper than the tin, so as to allow for its lying alittle on the bottom, and that no joint may appear; then cut a piecesufficiently large to cover the whole bottom. 1178.--PUFF PASTE FOR PATTIES ORFIRST COURSE DISHES. One pound of butter salt or fresh, and onepound of flour will make a good dish of patty cases, or a large case fora vol-au-vent, and the remainder into a good dish of second course pastry. Put your flour upon your board, work finely in with your handslightly a quarter of the butter, then add water sufficient tomake it the stiffness or softness of the remaining butter; each shouldbe the same substance; work it up smooth, then roll it out longways half aninch thick; place the remainder of the butter cut in slices half way onthe paste; dust flour lightly over it, and double it up, press itdown with your rolling-pin, let it lie a few minutes, then roll it three timesthinner each time, letting it lie a few minutes between each roll, keep it freefrom sticking to the board or rolling-pin. This paste is ready for pattycases or vol-au-vent, or meat pies. 1179.--PUFF PASTE. Toobtain this in perfection much will depend on the quality of the butter used, and on its being rolled out or turned a sufficient number of times, sothat the butter may be mixed with the paste in minute layers. Salt butter will make as good, if not better paste than fresh.When salt butter is used, it should be broken into small pieces, and putinto a pan or pail of c lean cold water; well work or squeeze it betweenthe hands in the water, which will deprive it of the greatest portion ofthe salt it contains; take it from the water and put it on acloth, and mould or work it well, in the same manner as you would a piece of paste; when the water is all worked out, and the butter appears dry and firm, make it in a roll and put it in a cold place for use.Fresh butter should be moulded in the same manner as directed for salt, but it does not require being first put into water. Insummer a few pieces of ice may be put into the water with the butter, to harden it. Scales. An illustration of a scale. Weigh one pound of butter and one pound of sifted flour. Taketwo ounces of the butter and rub in with the flour; make a holein the middle, in which put a teaspoonful of salt, and pour insufficient cold water to make it into a paste of nearly the sameconsistence as the butter. This should be more particularly observed insummer, as the heat then causes the butter to become very soft duringthe rolling of the paste, and to break through the surface, unless thedough is made of considerably less consistence in the first place, in order toallow for this. To each pound allow two eggs, well-beaten and mixed withthe water. Mix the dough into a clear, smooth paste, without toughness, byrubbing it well with the heel of the right hand on the board until it hasacquired a clear, smooth, shining appearance; mould it into a round lump, thenpress all the moisture from the remainder of the butter, and form itinto a ball, taking care not to soften it; put this upon the paste andpress it down, then enclose it with the paste like an apple -dumpling; flour the marble well and roll it out; this iscalled the "first turn;" then fold it in three, and roll it out again, whichwill be a second turn; now fold it again in the same manner, and put it in acold place, if convenient on ice, covered with a damp cloth, until it is required to be rolled out for use.Experience alone can determine when the paste has been sufficientlyrolled. 1180.--VERY LIGHTPASTE. Mix the flour and water together, roll the paste out, and lay bits of butter upon it. Then beat up the white of an egg, and brush it all over the paste before it isfolded; repeat this when rolling out, and adding the butter each timetill the whole of the white of egg is used. It will make the paste very flaky. 1181.--TRANSPARENT CRUST FORTARTS. Beat an egg, till it be quite thin; have ready twelveounces of the purest, well-washed butter, without salt, meltedwithout being oiled; and when cool mix the egg with it, and stir it intoone pound of fine flour well dried. Make the paste very thin;line the pattypans as quickly as you can, and, when putting the tarts into theoven, brush them over with water, and sift sugar on them. If theyare baked in a lightly heated oven, they will look beautiful. 1182.--BRIOCHEPASTE. This paste is essential in many of the finer kinds ofcookery, and, though rather troublesome to make, will repay the pains bestowed,since, with a small addition of sauce, it will afford an excellentside-dish in itself, and it will enter into the composition of, and improve,all the more elaborate entrées. Take seven fresh eggs two poundsof flour dried and warmed at the fire, and one pound of fresh butter. Take half a pound of this flour, and pour into the middleof it a dessert-spoonful of yeast, which has been prepared by pouring water over it, stirring it, and allowing it to stand to settle, and thendraining the water off. It is the sediment which must be employed. Poura little warm water over the yeast, and mix the paste upwith it, which forms the leaven; flour the pan, lay the leaven in itbefore the fire to rise, and slit it on the top. As soon as the paste has risen, proceed thus:--Make a hole in the middle of the remaining flour, put into it a little salt, about a saltspoonful, the samequantity of powdered sugar, to take off any bitter taste in the yeast, and a little water to melt it; the butter brokeninto small pieces, and the eggs : work it all well together, and knead itthoroughly, spreading it out and working it well: then spread it out entirely,and lay the yeast or leavened paste all over it, taking thegreatest care in kneading and shifting the paste about to mix both welltogether. When completed, flour a towel, wrap the paste up in it,and put it into a pan; if in cold weather in a warm situation, and if in hotweather in a cold one. It is best made a day before it is wanted. Very minutepieces, shaped in any way, add greatly to the excellence of soup, to be boiledwith it, or stewed in the gravy of a vol-au-vent, and strewed over the top. It is cutinto shapes also, and fried as the accompaniment of braised dishes of everykind. It is an exquisite case for lobster and other patties, or, brushedover with egg, may be fried in shapes for a side-dish: or it may beboiled in cups, six in a dish, and served up with asparagus cut smalland heaped upon the top, and a white sauce round. In fact, a clevercook, by employing different flavoring ingredients, either sweet or savory, may make endless dishes of brioche. It should not, however,predominate; and, therefore, it is best only to make a small quantity at atime, where the consumption of the family is not great. It will not keep long. 1183.--MEAT PIES, PATTIES,&c. There are few articles of cookery more generally liked thanrelishing pies, if properly made; and they may beformed of a great variety of things. Raised Pies may be made of any kind of flesh, fish, fruit, or poultry, if baked in a wall of paste instead of a baking-dish; but they are generally eaten cold, and made so largeand savory as to remain a long time before being consumed, for whichreason they also bear the name of "standing pies." In making them, thecook should always take care to have a good stock that will jelly, made from the bones and trimmings, to fill up the pie whenit comes from the oven, and also that when cold there may be enough jelly. For want of this precaution pies become dry before they can beeaten. The materials are of course frequently varied, but the mode ofpreparation is so nearly the same as not to require the recital of more than afew prominent receipts. 1184.--SEASONING FOR RAISEDPIES. Three pounds of salt dried and pounded, three ounces of white pepper, half an ounce of cayenne pepper, two ounces of cloves, two ounces of allspice, one ounce of basil, oneounce of marjoram, one ounce of thyme, one ounce of bay-leaf, oneounce of nutmeg, one ounce and a half of mace. Pound the spices and herbs by themselves and sift through afine sieve; then mix with the salt, and put away in a stoppered bottle:three-quarters of an ounce is sufficient for one pound of farce, and half anounce for one pound of boned game. 1185.--JELLY FOR MEAT OR RAISEDPIES. Take a quart of veal gravy, dissolve two ounces of isinglass in a little of it; add the remainder with a quarter of a pintof tarragon vinegar; boil all together for a quarter of an hour. Clarifyit with the whites of six eggs, then pass it through a bag. 1186.-- PIE RAISED HOT,RUSSIAN. Take a salmon and a liver, cut them intoscollops, and simmer both, but separately, in some butter, with shred parsley, mushrooms, truffles, shalots, salt, pepper, nutmeg; mince the yolks of a dozen hardeggs. Make a raised crust in the usual manner, put in a layer of rice previously boiled in chicken broth, but cold, as should beall the materials; on this lay some of the scollops of salmon, on whichstrew a layer of egg, then a layer of liver, strew the egg, then the salmon again, and so on till your pie is full; thenpour in the butter and herbs, cover the whole with rice, and finish the pie according to the above directions. 1187.--PIE RAISED, TO BE SERVEDHOT. Make a stiff paste as directed for raised pies, which mixwith warm water; when well mixed together roll it out thin, cut a pieceout for the bottom and two for the sides, according to the shape of the dish; egg the edges you intend to join, and press them well together so thatthe joining may not be seen; shape it, garnish it with leaves or festoons,according to your taste fill it nearly to the top with bran, egg it, andlet it be baked in a moderate oven; when done of a light color turn out thebran, and set it ready for what you intend to put in, which may be cutlets of mutton stewed with vegetables, partridge farced with a brownsauce, chickens cut up, a ragout in a brown sauce, or stewed eels. 1188.--RAISED PIE OF FOWLS.(Soyer.) Make the paste and forcemeat, bone ayoung fowl, which lay flat upon a clean cloth, breast downwards;season the interior with a little pepper, salt, and chopped onions; spread a layer of forcemeat over, half an inch inthickness; have ten pieces of veal, of the thickness of your finger, andthe same length as the fowl, and the samenumber of pieces of fat bacon, lay half of the veal and bacon alternately upon the fowl, well seasoned with pepper and salt, cover over with more forcemeat, then another layer of veal and ham, cover with more forcemeat; then roll the fowl over, making the skin meet at the back; you have previouslylined a raised pie mould with paste, then line the pie with forcemeat, half an inch in thickness, lay in the fowl, sprinkle alittle pepper and salt over, cover with the remainder of the forcemeat, to form a dome, place a pat of butter and twobay-leaves upon the top, and bake; when done, pour in a gill of gravy made from the bones of the fowl; serve cold. 1189.--RAISED PIE OFPHEASANT. Proceed precisely as for the pie of fowl, but ofcourse using a pheasant; an old one would answer the purpose if keptlong enough, but all the sinews of the legs must be taken out in boningit; the fillets of the breast also, being very thick, may be partly cutout and used with the veal for the interior; if in a situation to obtain rabbits, the fillets of them might be used instead of veal forthe interior, and the legs for forcemeat. For gravy, break up the bones of the birds, which put into astewpan with a glass of sherry, an onion, a few sprigs of thyme, parsley, and a bay-leaf; let it simmer a minute over thefire, then add a pint of broth and a little isinglass or gelatine, let the whole simmer for an hour, giving it a nice browncolor, when pass it through a sieve into a small stew-pan, place it again uponthe fire, skim off all the fat, and reduce it to half a pint, and whenthe pie is baked, pour it in, shaking the pie a little to mix well; serve whencold. Pies of grouse, partridges, moor fowls, &c., are madeprecisely in the same manner, using one or more according to the size you wishto make your pie. The fillets of hares are likewise excellent in pies,whilst the legs might be jugged or converted into soup. Capons, poulards, green geese, or ducklings, may also beserved in a pie, (proceeding as directed for fowls ), by managing thesize of the pie, and seasoning in proportion. Pigeon pie can also be made in the same way, but then the meat with which the interior of the birds are filled must be cut much smaller, andrequires less time in cooking. 1190.--HOT LAMB PIE(raised.) To make this an oval, a tin or copper pie mould would berequired, which you would choose of a size most generally useful. Butter the interior of the mould, which stand upon a baking sheet, then make thefollowing paste : put a quarter of a pound of butter and the sameof chopped suet into a stewpan, with three-quarters of a pint of water, or more if required, and let the whole boil together one minute,when strain it through a sieve into a basin containing two pounds of flour, mixing it first with a spoon, and when cool enough with the hand,until forming a smooth paste; when partly cold roll it out into a sheethalf an inch in thickness, with which line the mould, pressing the paste evenly at all parts; have ready cut sufficient small lamb chops from the loin, neatly cut away the bones, and lay them round the interiorof the pie alternately with slices of raw potatoes (a quarter of an inch inthickness), season rather highly as you proceed, with pepper, salt, chopped onions, and parsley : make a neat cover with the trimmings of the paste, and bake it rather better thantwo hours in a moderate oven; when done lift the cover, pour out as much of the fat as possible, add a little gravy, and serve. 1191.--OTHER VARIOUSPIES. Hot raised pies may also be made with mutton by followingthe above directions. They are also very good made with fillet of beef cut into thin slices of thesize of the lamb chops, or of rump steak, by laying a piece at the bottom, seasoning and filling alternately with potatoes and the meat; veal and ham pies are also excellent,but the potatoes in them had better be omitted, the veal, however,seasoned and dipped in flour. Pies may also be made with veal sweetbread and ham, but thenabout three parts of a pint of white sauce should be poured in after thepie is baked. Fowls or rabbits may likewise be cutinto joints, and put into a stewpan, with a piece of butter, previouslywell seasoning them with pepper, salt, and chopped eschalots; cover the stewpan close, and leave it twenty minutes over aslow fire, add a pint of white sauce, and simmer ten minutes longer;when cold build them up in the interior of the pie, which cover and bake anhour in a warm oven. Pies of the above description can of course be made of anysize, either large enough for a family meal, or very small and round, for acorner dish for a dinner party; most people who are in the habit of makingthem, keep two different-sized moulds for the purpose. 1192.--RUMPSTEAKPIE. Procure two pounds of rumpsteaks, which cut into slices half aninch thick, and season well with pepper and salt; dip each pieceinto flour, and lay them in a small pie-dish, finishing the top in theform of a dome; add a wineglassful of water, then have ready half apound of plain paste, cut off a small piece, which roll into a band, andlay round the edge of the dish, having previously wetted it with a paste -brush dipped in water, then roll out the remainder of the paste to about the size of the dish, damp the band of paste uponthe dish, and lay the other piece over, make a hole with a knife at the top,press the edges evenly down with your thumbs, trim the pie round with a knife, egg over the top with a paste -brush, and ornament it with thetrimmings of the paste, according to fancy; bake it rather better thanan hour in a moderate oven, and serve either hot or cold. 1193.--VEAL AND HAMPIE. Cut about a pound and a half of veal into thin slices, asalso a quarter of a pound of cooked ham; season the veal ratherhighly with white pepper and salt, with which cover the bottom ofthe dish, then lay over a few slices of ham, then the remainder of the veal, finishing with the remainder of the ham, add a wine -glassful of water, and cover and bake as directed for beef-steak pie: a bay-leaf will be an improvement. 1194.--MUTT0NPIE. Procure the chumps of three loins of mutton, from whichcut the meat in moderately thin slices, put a layer at the bottom of thedish, which season well with chopped parsley, eschalots, pepper, and salt; then put a layer of slices of raw potatoes and again a layer of mutton, seasoning as before, proceeding thusto the top, which form in a dome, finishing with mutton, cover with paste, and bake as directed for rumpsteak pie. 1195.--PÁTÉ DEFOIES GRAS. [This receipt is fornished by Mr. DEL-MONICO, expresslyfor this work.] Prepare a stuffing of fresh pork, a pound of lean to a poundand a half of fat; mince and chop it: add your preparation of livers inthe same manner as with truffles, seasoning the mixture with salt, pepper, spices, and aromatic herbs bruised and passed through a sieve. Have inreadiness two fine, fat livers, wellcleaned. Make ready a pie of two and a half pounds of paste : surroundthis pie with thin slices of fat, and, in the bottom, place some stuffing : season the livers, cover them with stuffing and truffles, and place them in your pie or dish,which fill up with stuffing and truffles, placing on the top apiece of fresh butter. Cover this with slices of fat and over itplace a laurel-leaf. Moisten the edge of the pie and cover it with a crust of paste : fasten this on well, cut off the edges equally and crimp ordecorate it. Make a covering of puff paste, and, in the middle, make ahole which is called the chimney. Wash it over with eggs and let it bakein an evenly-heated oven, for three and a half hours. When cold, fill it withgood meat -jelly. 1196.--LAMB PIE. Cut asmall neck of lamb into chops, which must not be too fat, seasonthem lightly with pepper and salt, and lay them in your pie-dish,with a few new potatoes in slices, pour in a little water, then coverand bake as directed for rumpsteak pie. 1197.--CHICKEN PIE. Cutup a nice plump chicken into joints, which lay upon a dish, and seasonlightly with chopped parsley, white pepper, and salt, thenlay the back, cut into three pieces, at the bottom of a pie-dish with the two legs on either side; have half a pound of cooked ham or bacon in slices, a layer of which cover over, then lay in the two wings, and over them the breast, cut into two pieces, which, withthe remainder of the ham or bacon, form into a dome in themiddle, pour half a pint of white sauce over, if handy, or a little broth or water, cover with paste, and bake as directed forthe last. If no white sauce, dip each piece lightly in flour. 1198.--GIBLET PIE. Whenthe giblets have been taken from the goose, place them with theexception of the liver, but with the pinions, feet, head, and neck, into boiling water to blanch; remove the skin from the feet and beak; put into a stewpan a piece of butter thesize of a walnut, one onion cut in slices, a bay-leaf, a little salt, pepper, and sugar : place it on the fire until the onion is brown; place in the giblets with the head cut intwo, let them remain on the fire for about three minutes, stirring them round,then add one quart of boiling water, and let them stew gently for twohours, remove from the fire, and let them get cold. Take a pie-dish and place apiece of steak on the bottom, then place over that the giblets with the liver, and steak again over them, add the liquor the giblets were stewed in, season and cover with half puffpaste. 1199.--RABBIT PIE. Cuta nice rabbit into joints, splitting the head in halves, and laythem in lukewarm water half an hour to disgorge, then dry them upon acloth, season well with pepper, salt, chopped eshalots, parsley, two bay-leaves, and a spoonful of flour; have alsothree-quarters of a pound of uncooked streaked bacon, cut into squarepieces the size of walnuts, build up the pieces of rabbit and bacon together, in a pie dish, commencing with the worst pieces, andforming a dome; pour in a little water, cover with paste, andbake as directed for rumpsteak pie. 1200.--PIGEON PIE. Linethe bottom of a pie-dish with a pound of rumpsteak, cut into slices not toothin, seasoned with a little salt, pepper, and cayenne, and dipped into flour; have ready picked and drawn a couple of pigeons, cut off the feet, turn the legs in, fold up thepinions of the wings, and lay them breast to breast uponthe meat, have the yolks of four hard boiled eggs, whichput at the sides, sprinkle a little pepper and salt over the pigeons, lay a bay-leaf upon the top, pour in alittle water, cover with paste, stick the feet in the top,and bake as directed for the last. The pigeons may be stuffed with alittle veal stuffing, if handy. 1201.--PARTRIDGEPIE. Line the bottom of a pie-dish with slices of veal, cutmoderately thick, and rather lightly seasoned with white pepper and salt; have ready picked, drawn, and trussed, a couple of young partridges, pour one glass of sherry over the veal, one of water, and lay in the partridges breast to breast, layinga piece of fat bacon over each, cover with paste, sticking the feet of the partridges in the top of the pie, and bake asbefore. 1202.--GROUSEPIE. Roast, very underdone, a couple of nice plump grouse; when cold,cut into joints, having the two wings, two legs, and the breasts in two pieces each, season them lightly, and lay them in apie-dish, building them to form a dome, then break up the back- bone andother trimmings, which put into a stewpan, with a glass of sherry, abay-leaf, an onion in slices, a few sprigs of parsley, three orfour whole allspice, set the stewpan over the fire a few minutes untilthe wine boils, when add half a pint of brown sauce, and half apint of broth, stir it over a fire until again reduced to half a pint,strain it through a sieve, over the grouse; when quite cold cover with paste, as directed for rump-steak pie, and bake, in a very hotoven; about half an hour would be sufficient, as the paste requires tobe laid on thinner, the contents of the pie having been previously cooked. 1208.--POT PIE. Twopounds of veal meat, two pounds of flour, one-quarter of a poundof lard or butter, half a dozen potatoes, one-quarter of apound of pickled pork, cut into small pieces. Make the paste verysoft, and roll it very thin; put in the potatoes and meat, then the paste, layer after layer, with cold water enough to cover it;boil it half an hour slowly. 1204.--EELPIE. Skin and cleanse three good-sized eels, which cutinto pieces about two inches in length, put a good-sized bunch of parsley, thyme, and three bay-leaves, all tied together, into astewpan, with an onion, into which you have stuck four cloves, aglass of port- wine, and a pint of broth, lay in the pieces of eels, and set them upon the fire to simmer for ten minutes, take themout, laying them upon a cloth to drain, skim off all the fat from the stock the eels were cooked in, to which add rather more than halfa pint of brown sauce, let the whole boil until reduced to three partsof a pint, when dress the pieces of eels up in a pie-dish, strain the sauce over through a sieve, and when cold, cover with paste, asdirected for rumpsteak pie, and bake about an hour in a moderate oven; serve ithot. If for a small pie they may be used raw, and season accordingly, afterhaving rolled each piece in flour. 1205.--BEEFSTEAKPUDDING. Put a pound of flour upon a dresser, with which mixhalf a pound of beef suet, very finely chopped, make a hole in themiddle, into which put a teaspoonful of salt, and sufficient water to form a rather stiffish paste, mix it well together,using a little more flour to dry it and prevent its sticking; thenlightly butter the interior of a round-bottomed pudding basin, roll outtwo-thirds of the paste to half an inch in thickness, with which linethe basin; have ready cut into slices, about the size of the palm of thehand, and a quarter of an inch in thickness, twopounds of rumpsteak with a little of the fat included; lay them upon adish, season with two teaspoonfuls of salt and one of blackpepper, sprinkle a little flour over, move them about a little untileach piece is well covered with flour and seasoning; then laythem within the paste, also putting in whatever seasoning mayremain upon the dish, (some add two dozen of oysters, blanched andbearded, which is excellent,) pour a gill of water over, moistening theedges of the paste; then roll out the remainder of the paste toform a lid, which place over, pressing it down with the thumb, then tie thebasin in a pudding-cloth, and put into a saucepan, containing about a gallon of boiling water, and keep continually boiling for nearly two hours, addinga little more water occasionally to keep up the quantity; then take itup, untie the cloth, run a sharp-pointed knife into the pudding, and if the meat feels tender it is done (if not, it will require more boiling),turn it over upon your dish, lift the basin carefully from it, and serve,without opening the pudding to add gravy, as many persons do, for apudding made as above ought to be full of gravy when cut at table. 1206.--MUTTONPUDDING. Line a pudding-basin with paste, as directed in thelast; then have ready cut into slices the meat from two loin -chumps of mutton, which lay upon a dish, and season with ateaspoonful of chopped onions, the same of chopped parsley, rather more than half that quantity of black pepper, and salt inproportion; then put a layer of meat into the pudding, then a layer ofraw potatoes cut into slices; proceeding thus until you have filled it up,but finishing with meat, cover it up as in the last, likewise tie it ina napkin, and boil, but rather better than two hours would be sufficient; serveas before directed. 1207.--LAMB PUDDING. Ifconvenient, procure the entire ribs of a lamb, sawing off the breast almost close to the lean part of the neck; the breast may be cooked; cut the neck into rather thin cutlets,which season lightly with white pepper, salt, and a littlechopped parsley and onions; you have previously lined apudding-basin with paste as before, fill it with the meat thusprepared, intermixing a few new potatoes cut in slices, finish the pudding,boil, and serve as before directed. 1208.--VEALPUDDING. Cut two pounds of veal from any part of the leg into slices, about the size of the palm of the hand, and a quarter of an inchin thickness, put two ounces of butter into a frying-pan, and whenmelted lay in the veal, and a few slices of streaked bacon, season the whole with pepper and a little salt, add one bay-leaf,and a few sprigs of thyme; place the pan over a slow fire, sautéthe veal gently for a quarter of an hour; then take it from the fire,and leave it in the pan until cold, then have a pudding-basin lined with paste as before, lay in the veal and bacon, pouring the gravy over, cover, and boil as before, but an hour would besufficient. 1209.--PORKPUDDING. Line a pudding-basin with paste as before, and spreadthree-quarters of a pound of sausage-meat of an equal thickness over theinterior, have a pound and a half of lean pork, from the leg ifpossible, cut into square pieces of the size of walnuts, which seasonrather highly with pepper, salt, a teaspoonful of chopped eschalots, and half that quantity of dried sage; put the meat into the centre of the pudding, cover overwith a quarter of a pound more sausage-meat, over which put on the coverof paste, tie it in a cloth, and boil two hours and a half, as directedfor beefsteak pudding. 1210.--KIDNEYPUDDING. Procure one ox or eight mutton kidneys, whichcut into slices the thickness of half-a-crown piece; lay them upon a dish, seasoning well with black pepper and salt, and shaking oneounce of flour over; mix all well together, to absorb the flour and seasoning; then have a pudding-basin, lined as directed for beefsteak pudding, finish, boil, and serve as there directed. A pudding made with one pound of steak and a beef kidney isalso very excellent. 1211.--RABBITPUDDING. Cut a rabbit up in joints, (splitting the head in halves,) and lay them in a basin of lukewarm water an hour todisgorge; line a pudding-basin with paste as directed for rumpsteakpudding, dry the pieces of rabbit upon a cloth, and lay them in thepudding with half a pound of streaked bacon cut into square pieces, and seasoning rather highly with chopped eschalots, salt, pepper, and chopped parsley; cover, tie it in a cloth, boil ittwo hours, and serve as before directed. 1212.--OYSTER PIE. Asyou open the oysters separate them from the liquor, which strain 5parboil sweetbreads, and, cutting them in slices, lay them and the oysters in layers; season very lightly with salt, pepper, and mace; then put half a teacupful of liquor, and the same of vealgravy. Bake in a slow oven; and before you serve, put a teacupful of cream, a little more oyster -liquor, and a cup of whitegravy, all warmed, but not boiled. 1213.--OYSTER PIE. (Englishway.) Lay a tender beefsteak in the bottom of a dish and on it oysters and bread crumbs, with pepper and salt. Fill the dish with layers of beafsteak and oysters; pour over it theliquor of the oyster, cover with a light paste and bake twentyminutes in a quick oven. 1214.--YORKSHIREPUDDING. Put six tablespoonfuls of flour into a basin, with six eggs, a pinch of salt, and a quarter of a pint of milk, mix well together with a wooden spoon, adding the remaining three-quarters of apint of milk by degrees; you have previously set a shallow tin dishunder a piece of roasting beef before the fire; an hour before servingpour in the batter, leaving it under the meat until quite set and ratherbrowned upon the top, when turn the pudding over upon the dish you intendserving it upon, and again place it before the fire until the other side israther browned, when it is ready to serve with the meat. This pudding is very excellent baked under a small piece of beef ofabout five or six pounds. It is also frequently baked beneath a shoulder ofmutton; and sometimes in an oven separate, if the fire is not large enough,(with a few spoonfuls of gravy added). 1215.--TOAD IN AHOLE. Make a batter as directed for the Yorkshire pudding, but withthe addition of a spoonful more flour and six ounces of chopped beefsuet; butter a rather deep baking-dish, into which pour the batter,lay a solid piece of lean gravy beef about three pounds, in the centre,or a beef skirt, and bake it an hour and a half in a hot oven. Another method is to cut up about three pounds of rumpsteaks into about sixpieces, and putting them in the bat- ter atvarious distances apart, but the former method is most common. Any remains of cooked beef, veal, mutton, pork, roasted or boiled, salt or fresh, or game and fowl, cut inpieces, and seasoned to taste, may be used in this dish, by adding it to thebatter when in the dish. 1216.--FISHPUDDING. Out a slice of salmon half an inch thick, and weighingabout one pound; remove the skin and bone, mix a salt -spoonful of salt, half one of pepper, one of finelychopped onions and parsley, and a spoonful of flour in aplate, and rub the fish with it; make half a pound of flour into paste, roll it half an inch thick, place a pudding-cloth in amiddle-size basin, flour the cloth, lay the paste in it, place inthe salmon with a little water and white wine, and abay-leaf, bring the paste over so that the edges meet in the middle,having reserved a small piece which you have rolled out to place over thejoint, after having wetted it. Tie the cloth, but not too tight, round the paste; place it in a gallon of boiling water, let it simmer forone hour and a half, take it out, remove the cloth, and serve it with shrimpsauce over or separate. Fillets of soles, mackerel, turbot,or other fish, may be used. 1217.--VEAL PIE IN ADISH. First of all get all your ingredients ready, namely, hop, parsley, shalots, or onions, mushrooms, pepper and salt, mint, four eggs boiled hard, a little goodsecond stock, now your paste. After you have made patties or anyfirst or second course pastry, the paste that remains will do, be sureto put an edging of paste to your dish; first lay a layer of lean and fat ham, or mild bacon, then sprinkle it over with the preparedingredients, then a layer of veal, and part of an egg, thenanother layer of ham and parsnips as before, and keep onrepeating it until quite full, letting the middle be much higher than thesides; put a little drop of second stock into it, bake it in a slowoven; be sure and cut a hole in the top, and if you like ornament it withleaves of paste; after egging the top, well notch the edge. Pour somegood white stock into it when done and hot. 1218.--BEEFSTEAKPIE. Take some good steaks, beat them with a rolling-pin,season them with pepper and salt; fill a dish with them, addingas much water as will half fill it, then cover it with a good crust, andbake it well. 1219.--COLD VEAL OR CHICKENPIE. Lay a crust into a shallow tart dish, and fill it with thefollowing mixture:-- shred cold veal or fowl, and half thequantity of ham, mostly lean, put to it a little cream, seasonwith white and cayenne pepper, salt, a little nutmeg, and a small piece of shalot, chopped as fine as possible: coverwith crust, and turn it out of the dish when baked, or bake the crust with apiece of bread to keep it hollow, and warm the mince with a little cream, and pour in. 1220.--CALF'S HEADPIE. Stew a knuckle of veal till fit for eating with two onions, a little isinglass, a fagot of sweet herbs, ablade of mace, and a few peppercorns in three pints of water; keep the broth for the pie. Take off a little of the meat for forcemeat balls, and let them be used for the family,but boil the bones until the broth is very good: half boil the head, and cut it into square pieces; put a layer of ham at thebottom of them, some head, first fat then lean, with forcemeatballs, and hard-boiled eggs cut in half, and so on till the dish isfull, but be careful not to place the pieces close together or the pie will be too solid, and there will be no space for the jelly. The meat must be first pretty well seasoned with pepper and salt, and a little nutmeg; put a little water and a little stock into the dish, and cover it with athickish crust, bake it in a slow oven, and when done, pour into it as much gravy as it will possibly hold, and do not cut it till perfectly cold,in doing which use a very sharp knife, and first cut out a large slice, goingdown to the bottom of the dish, and when done thus thinner slices can be cut.The different colors and the clear jelly have a beautifulappearance. 1221.--DUCKPIE. Bone a full-grown young duck and a fowl, wash them and season with pepper and salt, a little allspice and mace pounded; put the fowl within the duck, and on the former a calf 's tongue pickled red,boiled very tender and peeled, press the whole close, the skins of the legs should be drawn inward, that the body of the fowl may bequite smooth; if approved, the space between the sides of the crust may befilled with a fine forcemeat. Bake it in a slow oven, either in a dishor raised pie-crust, ornamented. 1222.--FISH PIE. Thispie may be made of any fish, salmon, pike, eel, or anyother. Scale your fish and cut it into pieces, line your pie-dish with agood crust, put in the fish with a bunch of sweet herbs, a little salt, some bruised spices, and a layer of butter on thetop, put on the crust and bake for an hour and a half; when done remove the fat and put in a vegetable ragoût made thus:--Stir a little butter and flour over the fire until a pale brown, moisten withhalf a pint of sherry, some soup maigre, add a few mushrooms, alittle salt, and a bunch of herbs; let it boil half an hour, andthen put the ragoût into the pies. Any vegetable ragoût may beused. 1223.--GAME PIE. Cut upyour game, and use truffles and whole mushrooms if youhave them; the seasonings as before, but no hard-boiled eggs, and add alittle port wine with your gravy or stock. If you take the bones from the birds or hare, use some forcemeat as layersinstead as in former pies, veal and steaks, but no eggs; if boned you will prepare a good stock from the bones, making thepie taste of the very essence of the game, or poultry, or whatever itmay consist of. 1224.--SNIPEPIE. Bone three snipes, fill them with a light forcemeat, adding the trails and some truffles pounded, put thebirds in a deep dish, with a small layer of forcemeat all round; coverwith a puff- paste, egg it, ornament it to fancy, and put it intothe oven. When about three parts done, lift up the lid, pour in some goodcullis, a glass and a half of Madeira, Season with cayenne pepper and lemon-juice, cover down, and finish baking. 1225.--GREEN GOOSEPIE. Bone two young green geese of a good size, butfirst take away every plug and singe them nicely, wash them clean, and seasonthem high with salt, pepper, mace, and allspice. Put one inside the other and press them as close as you can, drawing the legs inwards; put a good deal of butter over them, and bake themeither with or without crust; if with the latter a cover to the dish must fitclose to keep in the steam, it will keep long. Gravy jellied may beadded when served. MACKENZIE'S PERIGORDPIE. Take six partridges and tie their legs like chickens to be boiled; season them with pepper, salt, cloves, and beaten mace. Put twopounds lean veal, and one pound of fat bacon cut into small bits,in a stew pan with half a pound of butter, shalots, chopped herbs, and seasoning; stew till tender; strain and pound the meat in a mortar; mix the pulp with some of the liquor; put this forcemeat around and over the partridges in a raised pie, and layover thin slices of bacon. Cover with paste; bake three hours ina moderate oven. Worcester sauce, good with savory pies, is said to be made ona basis of good walnut ketchup with additional spices. 1227.--HARE PIE. Seasonthe hare after it is cut up, in the same manner as if to be jugged; andbake it, with eggs, and forcemeat partly made of the liver, in a raised crust or dish. When it is to be served, raise thelid, and, if in a crust, cover it with jelly 5 but, if made in a dish,with warm gravy, mixed with a large glassful of port wine. 1228.--TIPPERARY CURRY (anexcellent Picnic Dish). Boil four chickens, and stuff two ofthem when cold with a forcemeat made of crumbs of bread, a fewslices of ham or tongue, sweet herbs, and a shalot wellpounded and mixed with the yolk of an egg. Stuff the other two withboiled rice, lay them in a mould or dish, with eight hard-boiledeggs cut in half, a few mushrooms, a little pickled lemon, cut in thin rings. Pour over the chickens a gravy made asfollows:--Fry an onion in a little butter, add a table-spoonfulof curry -powder, one of vinegar, one of mushroom -ketchup,a little salt, and a little more than a pint of good veal broth; if the broth does not jelly, isinglass must be put into itto make it do so. When cold turn it out on a dish. It is a great improvement to bone the chickens, the bones helping to make the gravy. 1229.--FRENCH PIE. Makea raised crust upon a buttered tin, and brush it with yolk of egg; coverthe bottom with forcemeat, then fill up the pie with sweetbread cut into small pieces, oysters, hard eggs, legs ofchicken, turkey, or rabbit, boned; artichoke -bottomsin small pieces, asparagus -tops, forcemeat -balls, and mushrooms, taking care to lay them regularly, and to season the wholelightly and evenly: bake it in a moderate oven. When it is done pour in somestrong gravy and cream thickened with flour and butter. Sausage-meat may be mixed with the forcemeat, and in winter truffles substituted for the vegetables; the seasoning should beof mace, cloves, and cayenne pepper. 1230.--VEGETABLEPIE. Scald and blanch some broad beans ; cut young carrots, turnips, artichoke -bottoms, mushrooms, onions, lettuces, parsley, celery, and add peas; or use any ofthem you may have. Make them into a nice stew, with a little good vealgravy; season with pepper and salt; bake a crust over a dish,with a little lining round the edge. When baked, pour the stew into the dish,and lay the crust over it. Winter vegetables may be used in the same way, and acup of cream is a great improvement. 1231.--COLD PIES. When meat pies are prepared to be eaten cold, suet should not be put into the forcemeat that is used with them. If the pie is made of meat thatwill take more dressing, to make it extremely tender, than the baking of thecrust will allow, prepare it in the following way:-- Take three pounds of theveiny piece of beef that has fat and lean; wash it, and season it with salt, pepper, mace, and allspice, in fine powder, rubbing them well in. Set it by the sideof a slow fire, in a stewpot that will just hold it; put to it a piece of butter of about the weight of two ounces, and cover it quite close; letit just simmer in its own steam till it begins to shrink. When it is cold, addmore seasoning, forcemeat, and eggs : if it is made in adish, put some gravy to it before baking; but if it is only in crust, donot put the gravy till after it is cold and in jelly. Forcemeat may be put both under and over the meat, if preferredto balls. 1232.--VEAL AND SWEETBREADPIE. Out the veal from the chump end of the loin; seasonit well; clean and blanch a sweetbread, cut it into pieces, and seasonit; lay both in the dish with the yolks of six hard-boiled eggs and a pint of oysters. Strain the oyster liquor, add to it a pintof good gravy; line the sides of the dish with a puff paste halfan inch thick, and cover it with a lid of the same. Bake it in a quick oven foran hour and a quarter; and when it is sent to table cut the lid into eight orten pieces, and stick them round the sides, covering the meat withslices of lemon. 1233.--VEAL AND SAUSAGEPIE. Cover a shallow dish with paste, lay a well-beaten vealcutlet at the bottom, slightly seasoned; cover it with a Bolognasausage freed from the skin and cut into slices; then add another cutlet and a layer of the Bologna sausage; cover the whole with paste, and put no water to it: the veal will give outsufficient gravy, while it will be rendered very savory by the sausage. It is excellent eaten cold. 1234.--VEAL AND OYSTERPIE. Make a seasoning of pepper, salt, and, a smallquantity of grated lemon-peel. Out some veal -cutlets, and beatthem until they are tender: spread over them a layer of pounded ham, androll them round; then cover them with oysters, and put another layer ofthe veal fillets, and oysters on the top. Make a gravy ofthe bones and trimmings, or with a lump of butter, onion, a little flour and water; stew the oyster liquor, and putto it, and fill up the dish, reserving a portion to put into the pie when itcomes from the oven. 1235.--EXCELLENT PORK PIES TOEAT COLD. Raise the crust according to the directions already given,into either a round or oval form, as you choose; have ready the trimmings andsmall bits of pork cut off when a hog is killed; and if these arenot enough, take the meat off a blade- bone. Beat it well with arolling-pin, cut it into dice, season with pepper and salt, andkeep the fat and lean separate. Put it in layers, quite close up to thetop; lay on the lid; cut the edge smooth round, and pinch it; bake in a slowsoak-ing oven, as the meat is very solid. The pork may be putinto a common dish, with a very plain crust, and be quite as good. Observe toput no bone or water into pork pie: the outside of thepieces will be hard unless they are cut small and pressed close. Both these and veal and chicken pies are generally eaten cold,and, as they are always seasoned highly, will keep good for several days in thehottest weather. In England it is not uncommon to take off the cover and fillthe pie up, when cold, with clouted cream, which is a very deliciousaddition. 1236.--CALF'S-HEAD ORCALF'S-FOOT PIE. Either must be well stewed before being put into thepie. They must be cut into nice pieces, free from bone, and well seasoned, or otherwise they will be tasteless. If to beeaten hot, sausage-meat or fresh mushrooms or oysters willbe an improvement, in addition to the ham, eggs, and forcemeatballs; and if cold, the small pickled mushrooms should be added, ora little mushroom powder in the gravy. The excellence of the piewill chiefly depend upon the seasoning and flavor, and the quantity offine savory jelly which it will contain; and therefore the meat should not be closely packed, in order to leave room for the jelly. 1237.--CALF'S-FOOT AND KIDNEYPIE. Take from a cold roasted loin of veal slices of the kidney fat, cover them with pounded ham, and put them into a dishwith the kidney cut into pieces, and the meat from a calf 's foot; put in a few hard-boiled eggs and forcemeat balls, made very savory with oysters, an anchovy, and the fat of bacon, as this pie should be eaten cold.Put the juice of a half a lemon, or a spoonful of Harvey sauce into a gravy. Sweetbread may be employed instead of kidney. 1238.--BEEF-STEAK AND OYSTERPIE. Prepare the steaks as above, and put layers of them and of oysters. Stew the liquor and beards of the latter with a bit of lemon-peel, mace, and a table-spoonful of walnutketchup. When the pie is baked, boil with the above three spoonfuls of cream, and one ounce of butter rubbed in flour; to which,however, many people object as injuring the savoriness of the pie; in whichcase, should any addition be required, a few spoonfuls of beef gravy and port wine will answer the purpose. Strain it, and pour it into the dish:for a small pie a dozen large oysters will be sufficient, and the piemay be baked in a couple of hours. 1239.--MARROWPATTIES. Make a paste with four ounces of sweet almonds blanched, moistening them with orange flower water; mix this paste with a handful of flour, a drop of warm water andthe yolks of three eggs; then line several shallow moulds with it, glazeand bake them in a slow oven. When done put into each of them a little cream about the thickness of a crown piece, made with beefmarrow, lemon peel, and cream, cover it with a spoonful of white of egg whipped to a snow, sprinkle sifted sugar over, andserve them very hot. 1240.--SQUAB PIE Is afavorite dish in some parts of England, and is there generally made of mutton. Cut apples as for other pies, and lay them in rows with mutton chops and shred onion; sprinkle with pepper and salt, and also some sugar. Bake the pie in a deep dish, cover itwith a thick crust and eat it hot; it must be well done, and will take two tothree hours baking. It is often made of beef cut into dice, with some lean bacon seasoned and mixed with the apples. 1241.--VENISONPASTY. The neck, breast, and shoulder are the only partsof the deer used for a pasty; and even the neck is more generallyroasted. Cut the venison in pieces; put it into a stewpan with a little port wine, two shalots, an onion, bay-leaf, fagot of parsley and thyme, pepper, salt, and a little gravy. Cover it close and let it stew gently until tender; take out the meat, and pull out the bones; reduce the gravy, and whenthoroughly cold remove the fat 5 then proceed to make the pasty . Line the sides of the dish with crust, but not the bottom; lay in the meat with fat between each piece, season with pepper and salt, put to it a pint of the gravy and a few bits of butter, cover with a good crust, and bakeit thoroughly. Keep the remainder of the gravy till the pasty comes from the oven,put it by means of a funnel into the middle quite hot, and shake the dish tomix it well. The pasty must be well done, requiring generally two hours'baking. A want of fat may be supplied by the fat of a loin of mutton steeped for twenty-four hours in port wine and garlicvinegar. 1242.--TO MAKE A PASTY OF BEEFOR MUTTON TO EAT LIKE VENISON. Bone a small rump orpiece of sirloin of beef, or a fat loin of mutton, after hangingseveral days. Beat it very well with a rolling-pin; then rub ten pounds of meat with four ounces of sugar, and pour over it a glass of port,and the same of vinegar. Let it lie five days and nights; wash and wipethe meat very dry, and season it very high with pepper, Jamaica pepper, nutmeg, and salt. Lay it in the dish, andto ten pounds put three-quarters of a pound of butter; spread it overthe meat. Put a crust round the edges, and cover with a thick one, or itwill be overdone before the meat be soaked: it must be done in a slowoven. Set the bones in a pan in the oven, with no more water thanwill cover them, and one glass of port, a little pepper and salt, that you may have a little rich gravy to add to the pasty whendrawn. 1243.--YORKSHIRE GOOSEPIE. Bone a goose, a fowl, and a pigeon; season them well with pepper, taking care to cover the whole of theinterior, or otherwise it will turn sour before it can be eaten; put the pigeon into the fowl, and the fowl inside the goose, filling the interstices with various kinds of force and sausage meat and hard-boiled eggs. The liver and gizzard of the fowl and pigeon will assist in the forcemeat, which must be very well compounded; sew up the goose, and put it into a thick crust. It will take several hours to bake. Make savory jelly, which must also be well seasoned, pour it into the piewhen it comes from the oven; ornament the top, and let it be movable, so thatthe pie may have a good appearance to the last, as the crust is not to beeaten. A calf 's foot, boned and cut small, may be added,especially if used for the jelly. 1244.--A CHRISTMASPIE. Bone a large goose and a fowl. Parboil a smoked tongue; peel it and cut off the root. Mix together a powdered nutmeg, a quarter of an ounce of powdered mace, a tea-spoonful of pepper, the same quantity of salt, and season the fowl and goose. Roll out the paste near an inch thick, and divide it into threepieces; cut out two of them in an oval form for the top and bottom; and theother into a long straight piece for the sides or walls of the pie. Brush the paste all over with beaten white of egg, and set on the bottomthe piece that is to form the wall, pinching the edges together, and cementingthem with white of egg. The bottom piece must be large enough to turn upa little round the lower edge of the wall piece, to which it must be firmlyjoined all round. When you have the crust properly fixed, so as to be bakedstanding alone without a dish, put in first the goose, then the fowl, then the tongue. Fill up what space is left with pieces ofthe flesh of pigeons, or of partridges, quails, or any game that is convenient. There must be no bones in the pie. Youmay add also some bits of ham, or some forcemeat balls. Cover theingredients with half a pound of butter, and put on the top crust which,of course, must be also of an oval form to correspond with the bottom. The lid must be placed not quite on the top edgeof the wall, but an inch and a half below it; close it very well, and ornamentthe sides and top with festoons and leaves cut out of paste; notch theedges handsomely, and put a paste flower in the centre; glaze the wholewith beaten yolk of egg, and bind the pie all round with a double foldof white paper; bake it four hours. If the weather is cold, and the pie kept carefully covered up from the air,it will be good for two or three weeks, the standing crust assisting to preserve it. 1245.--PATTIES. Rollout puff paste half an inch thick, and, with a two-inch round cutter,cut as many pieces as are required for the dish. Take an inch cutter, dip it in hot water, and press it in the middle of the paste about halfthrough. Brush the pieces over with yolk of egg, bake in a quick oven,take out the piece marked with the inch cutter, remove the soft parts from theinside, fill them with a mince of any kind, dish them on a napkin, garnish withfried parsley. To make the tops, roll out the trimmings thin, cut somepieces with the inch cutter, egg them over, and bake them. Of Beef .--Shred underdone dressed beef with a little fat, season with pepper, salt, and a littleshalot or onion. Add gravy, half a glass of Madeira, and afew bread-crumbs. When hot, fill the patty-cases. Of Veal .--Mince some veal that is notquite done, put to it a little parsley, lemon-peel, nutmeg, and salt; a little cream and gravy just tomoisten the meat; if you have any ham, it will be an improvement.Do not warm it till the patties are baked. Of Turkey .--Mince some of the white part; and with grated lemon, nutmeg, salt, a very little white pepper, cream, and a very little bit of butter warmed, fill the patties. A good Mince for Patties .--Two ounces of ham, four of chicken or veal, one egg boiled hard, three cloves, a blade of mace, pepper and salt, in finepowder. Just before you serve, warm the above with four spoonfuls of rich gravy, the same of cream, and one ounce of butter. Fill asusual. Of Oyster .--Take off the beards of the oysters, cut the other parts in small bits, put them in a small tosserwith a grate of nutmeg, a little white pepper and salt, amorsel of lemon-peel cut very small, a little cream, and asmall quantity of the oyster liquor. Simmer a few minutes before youfill. or: --Beard and chop the oysters, boil alittle cream, with an onion and a small quantity of mace; chop fine the crust of a French roll, mix it with the oysters, add the cream; let it boil. Season with nutmeg, cayenne, and salt. Of Lobster .--Mince the fish in thesame manner, mingling with it a little of the coral, and make with thesame seasoning, a little cream, and the smallest bit of butter. Of Shrimps .---Pick a quart of shrimps; if they arevery salt, season them with only mace and a clove or two.Mince two or three anchovies; mix these with the spice, and thenseason the shrimps. Put a glass of sharp white wine. They do not takelong baking. 1246.--VOL-AU-VENT. Take puff paste, rollit about three-quarters of an inch thick, cut it round or oval according to theshape of the dish; make the knife hot in water, so as not to drag the paste in cutting it; mark the cover an inch from the edge, brush it overwith yolk of egg; bake it in a quick oven;when done take off the top, clean out the soft paste, return it to theoven for a few minutes to dry; dish it on a napkin. Care must be taken in taking out the soft part not to break the outside. It may be filled with ragot of sweetbread, fracasse of chicken, quenelles, lobster, or oysters, but is never madeof a large size. 1247.--VOL-AU-VENT OFCROQUETTES. Make croquettes of the size of a pigeon's egg, ofveal and ham and of calves ' brains, an equal quantityof each, fry them of the palest gold color; make a rich white-sauce, andput into it the very smallest mushrooms or minced truffles; giveit an acid flavor with lemon or lemon-pickle, and put it into thevol-au-vent when it is to be sent to table. 1248.--VOL-AU-VENT OFVEAL. Cut veal into thin pieces the size of half-a-crown, beatthem, and fry them a pale brown; make some forcemeat and egg-balls, fry the former, put the whole into a rich brown gravy, fill the vol-au-vent, and serve it up hot. 1249.--VOL-AU-VENT OF PIGEONSAND SWEETBREADS. Cut off the pinions, legs, and backs of threeor four pigeons, and bone the breast, making it as largeas possible: cut three or four pieces of blanched sweetbread the samesize, put them together, securing them with tape, and put them into a stewpanwith a piece of butter, the trimmings, an onion, a bunch of sweet herbs, a slice of fat bacon, and a small teacupful of water. Let them stew till quite tender; remove the tape, strain andthicken the gravy, and put them into the paste when it coniesfrom the oven. 1250.--CODFISHPIE. Take dressed codfish and cold oyster-sauce; put alittle of the sauce at the bottom of a pie-dish, then a layer of flakesof codfish, with a little of the liver cut in small pieces;season with black pepper and salt, and a very little nutmeg; repeat the layers until the dish is full, cover it with breadcrumbs and bits of fresh butter; bake for three-quarters ofan hour, and let the top be quite brown. A couple of sounds well soaked, boiledtender, and cut in small pieces, are a great improvement. or: --Take a piece of the middle of a small codfish, and salt it well one night; next day wash it, cut it inslices, season with pepper, salt, and a very little nutmeg, mixed; place it in a dish, and put some butter on it,with a little good broth of any kind. Cover it with a crust; and whendone, raise it, add a dozen oysters, one quarter of a pint of cream, a little flour and butter, a grate of lemon and nutmeg, and give it one boil. Bake it a full hour. 1251.--A REMARKABLE FINE FISHPIE. Boil two pounds of small eels; having cut the fins quiteclose, pick the flesh off, and throw the bones into the liquor with alittle mace, pepper, salt and slice of onion; boiltill quite rich, and strain it. Make forcemeat of the flesh, an anchovy, parsley, lemon-peel, salt, pepper, and crumbs, and four ounces of butter warmed, and lay itat the bottom of the dish. Take the flesh of soles, small cod, ordressed turbot, and lay them on the forcemeat, having rubbed it with salt and pepper; pour the gravy over, and bake. FRUIT PIES, PUFFS, PUDDINGS, &c. All pies made either with summer fruit or with winter preserves will beimproved by a mixture of apples, pared and sliced. They are especially goodwith fresh cherries, currants, &c, and will be found an agreeable additionto cranberries. Equal portions also of cranberries and any very sweet jam willimprove both. When apples are mixed with jam, they should be sliced thin; andif syrup be wanted, a few slices boiled with a little of the jam in sugar andwater. In making pies of green gooseberries, apples, or rhubarb, the sugarshould be clarified--that is, boiled in a little water, but no water pouredinto the pie, as it destroys the flavor of the fruit. For fresh fruits short crust is very suitable. For a good common pie-crust allow half a pound or three-quarters ofshorten ing to a pound of flour. Pie-crust looks the nicest made entirely oflard, but does not taste so good as with some butter. In winter, beefshortening, mixed with butter, makes good plain crust. Rub half of theshortening with two-thirds of the flour--to each pound of flour put ateaspoonful of salt and add just sufficient cold water to render it moistenough to roll out easily. Divide the crust into two equal portions-lay one ofthem aside for the upper crust, take the other, roll it out quite thin,flouring your rolling-board and pin so that the crust will not stick to them,and line your pie plates, which should be previously buttered-fill your plateswith your fruit, then roll out the upper crust as thin as possible, spread onthe reserved shortening, sprinkle over the flour, roll it up, and cut it intoas many pieces as you have pies to cover. Roll each one out about half an inchthick, and cover the pies-trim the edges off neatly with a knife, and pressthe crust down round the edge of the plate with a jagging iron, so that thejuices of the fruit may not run out while baking. Pastry should be baked in aquick oven. 1252.--PUFF PASTE, ORCONFECTIONERS PASTRY. Weigh out a pound and a quarter of sifted flour, and a pound of butter. Rub about one-third of the butter with two-thirds of the flour, and a teaspoonful of salt. When the butter is thoroughly mixed with the flour, add one beaten egg, and cold water to moisten it sufficiently toroll out. Sprinkle part of the reserved flour on a board, cut the butter left into small pieces, and roll them out as thin as possible.Lay the butter, as fast as rolled out, on a flour ed plate, eachpiece by itself--roll out the pastry as thin as it can be rolled, cover it withthe rolled butter, sprinkle on part of the reserved flour, androll the crust up. Continue to roll out the crust, and put on the reserved butter and flour, till the whole is used. Roll it out lightly,about half an inch thick, for the upper crust, or rim to your pies--plain piecrust should be used for the under crust. Or, instead of flour, sprinklesome " baking powder " on each layer of butter; when the butter melts, it will cause the powder to effervesce and puff up the paste. To make the " baking powder, " take one ounce of carbonate of soda, and seven drachms of Tartaric acid, mix well:it may be conveniently applied by means of a common pepper -pot kept forthe pur pose. Puff pastry, to be nice, should be baked in a quick oven till ofa light brown color. If it browns before the fruit in the pie issufficiently baked, cover it with thick paper. 1253.--FLAKY PASTE. (By a Ladyof New York.) Wet half a pound of dried flour with coldwater enough to make a hard, stiff paste; roll it one wayonly; roll in half a pound of butter with a knife, in small bits at atime. 1254.--RHUBARBPIES. Take the tender stalks of the rhubarb, strip off the skin, and cut the stalks into thin slices. Line deep plates with piecrust, then put in the rhubarb, with a thick layer of sugar toeach layer of rhubarb --a little grated lemon-peel improves thepie. Cover the pies with a crust--press it down tight round the edge of theplate, and prick the crust with a fork. Rhubarb pies should be bakedabout an hour, in a slow oven--it will not do to bake them quickly. Some cooksstew the rhubarb before making it into pies, but it is not so good aswhen used without stewing. 1255.--PUMPKINPIE. Halve the pumpkin, take out the seeds --rinse the pumpkin, and cut it into small strips--stew them over a moderate fire,in just sufficient water to prevent their burning to the bottom of thepot. When stewed soft, turn off the water, and let the pumpkin steam, over a slow fire, for fifteen or twenty minutes, taking care that itdoes not burn. Take it from the fire, and strain it when cool, through a sieve.If you wish to have the pies very rich, put to a quart of the stewed pumpkin two quarts of milk, and twelve eggs. If you likethem plain, put to a quart of the pumpkin one quart of milk andthree eggs. The thicker the pie is of the pumpkin, the less willbe the number of eggs required for them. One egg, with atable-spoonful of flour, will answer for a quart of the pumpkin, if very little milk is used. Sweeten the pumpkin with sugar, and very little molasses --the sugar and eggs should be beaten, together. Ginger, grated lemon-rind, cinnamon and spices or nutmeg, are good for the pies. Pumpkin pies require a very hot oven. 1256.--PUMPKIN PUDDING. (By aLady of New York.) One quart stewed pumpkin, nine beaten eggs, three pints cream, sugar, mace, nut meg and ginger. Bake in paste. 1257.--POTATOPUDDING. Boil Carolina or mealy Irish potatoes until they are quitesoft. When peeled mash and strain them. To a quarter of a pound of potatoes, put a quart of milk, three table-spoonfuls of melted butter, fourbeaten eggs, a wine -glass of wine --add sugar and nutmeg to the taste. 1258.--PEACH PIE. Takemellow juicy peaches --wash and put them in a deep pie plate, lined withpie crust. Sprinkle a thick layer of sugar on each layer of peaches, put in about a table-spoonful of water, and sprinkle alittle flour over the top--cover with thick crust and bake from fifty tosixty minutes. 1259.--FANCYPASTRY. Use some fancy cutter, cutting the paste a quarter ofan inch thick, egg them and glaze them, and bake them a light brown;when cold put different colored sweetmeats, such as apple jelly, and red currant jelly into devices upon the top of each piece; dishthem upon a napkin. 1260.--GLAZING FORTARTS. Mix sifted sugar and water into a thick paste like cream, and brush it over the crust. 1261.--COCOA-NUTPIE. Cut off the brown part of the cocoa- nut, grate the white part, and mix it with milk, and set it on the fire and let it boil slowly eight or ten minutes. To a poundof the grated cocoa- nut allow a quart of milk, eight eggs, four table-spoonfuls of sifted white sugar, a glass of wine, asmall cracker, pounded fine, two spoonfuls of melted butter, andhalf a nutmeg. The eggs and sugar should be beatentogether to a froth, then the wine stirred in. Put them into the milk and cocoa- nut, which should be first allowed to get quitecool--add the cracker and nutmeg --turn the whole into deep pieplates, with a lining and rim of puff paste. Bake them as soon as turnedinto the plates. 1262.--A PLAIN CUSTARDPIE. Boil a quart of milk with half a dozen peachleaves, or the rind of a lemon. When they have flavored the milk, strain it, and set it where it will boil. Mix a table-spoonful of flour, smoothly, with a couple of table-spoonfuls of milk, andstir it into the boiling milk. Let it boil a minute, stirring itconstantly--take it from the fire, and when cool, put in three beaten eggs --sweeten it to the taste, turn it into deep pie plates lined with paste, and bake the pies in a quick oven. 1268.--MINCEPIES. Fresh tongue must be used. It should be for two days wellcovered with equal quantities of salt, brown sugar, and pow dered cloves. After boiling it until it is thoroughly done--say twohours-- skin it and mince it fine. Pick, wash, and dry three pounds of currants, grate the rind of five lemons, and extract their juice, blanch and pound an ounce of bitter almonds and a pound of sweet al monds, powder four nutmegs, and grindtogether a dozen cloves and a dozen blades of mace; chop up threepounds of beef suet, six pounds of Sultana raisins, and six ofthe best pippin apples after paring and coring them. Mix them to gether,pouring over them a quart of Madeira wine and a pint of brandy. This mince- meat should be placed in a tolerably deep dish and bakedwith puff paste. It should be thoroughly baked. Most persons prefer toeat these pies warm, but they are by no means unpalatable when cold. These pies are richer when the mince meat has been left for a fewdays in a stone jar, closely covered with a paper which has been dippedin brandy. When taken out, a little more sugar and a smallquantity of brandy should be added to the mixture before the pies aremade. 1264.--CRACKER PIE. One soda biscuit and a half, one teacup of white sugar, one lemon, one teacup of boiling water. Break the biscuit intosmall bits, pour over them the boiling water, cover, and leave them toswell. Grate the yellow part of the rind of the lemon, add to itthe juice and the sugar, mix with the cracker when it issuf ficiently swelled; make a nice crust, and prepare as apple pies.Sift sugar over the pies when baked. 1265.--MINCE MEAT FOR CHRISTMASPIES. (Miss Jane Strickland's Receipt.) Take equal quantities of finely shred and chopped beef suet; cold roast beef, well roasted; currants, washed, dried, and picked;and raisins stoned and chopped; and apples, pared, cored, andchopped fine. Mix all these prepared ingredients well together, and sweetenwith good moist Jamaica sugar, to taste; grate off with loafsugar the peel of two lemons, and grate in two nutmegs. Having well mingled all these materials together, add to them in the proportionof your mince meat, thus:--If you have two pounds of every thing--namely meat, suet, currants, raisins, and apples, and not quite two pounds of sugar, pour over the mixture a pint of rum, or French brandy, andhalf a pint of raisin wine. If spirits are disliked, raisinwine of a fine quality or Lisbon must be added; but the spirits willkeep it three months. Fill a jar with your mince- meat, cram down as hard as possible, and cover with a close-fitting lid, tied down withbrown paper. Be careful whenever you take out your meat, to cramdown that in the jar with a spoon, and cover close. Line your tin dishes withpuff or family paste; fill with mince meat heaped up in themiddle, cut slices of candied orange, lemon, and citronpeel, and put on your meat, cover in with paste; markprettily with a knife, and bake in a quick oven; heat them for table. It was formerly the custom in England for married couples to keep theanniversaries of their wedding days, and on those occasions as many small mincepies were placed on one dish on the table, as the host and hostess had beenmarried years. 1266.--MINCE MEAT (furnished bya New York Lady). One boiled tongue; half its weight of finelychopped beef suet; two pounds currants, two pounds raisins, one quart of brandy, one of wine; apples and sugar at discretion; cloves, cinnamon, mace, citron, orange -peel. The mince meat made at Windsor Castle every year, and made one monthprevious to using, is as follows: Two hundred and forty pounds of raisins, four hundred pounds currants, two hundred pounds lump sugar, three pounds cinnamon, three pounds nutmegs, threepounds cloves, three pounds ground all spice, two pounds ginger, three hundred pounds beef, three hundred and fifty pounds suet; twenty-four bushels of apples, two hundred and forty lemons, thirty pounds of cedret, seventy-two bottles of brandy, three pounds mace, sixty pounds lemon-peel, sixty pounds orange-peel . 1267.--APRICOTTART. Take some apricots, cut them in two, and break thestones, put them into paste with sugar, a small quantity of preserved lemon, and a few of the kernels, close it, sprinkle sugar over, and glaze it. If the apricots are not ripe, boil thema short time in water, and drain them well. 1268.--APPLE PIE. Pare,core, and quarter the apples; boil the cores and parings in sugar and water; strain off the liquor, adding more sugar; grate the rind of a lemon over the apples, and squeeze the juice intothe syrup; mix half a dozen cloves with the fruit, put ina piece of butter, the size of a walnut, and add or omit a glassof wine; cover with puff paste. Gooseberry, Currant and Raspberry, Cherry, Plum, Damson, Pear, Quince, Mulberry, Whortleberry and Raspberry, Dewberry and Raspberry, or Cranberry, may all be made in the same way, in winter. A little whipped cream may be placed in the top, for a variety. 1269.--CODLINGTART. Scald the fruit; when ready, take off the skin, and lay them whole in a dish; put a little of the water that the apples were boiled in at bottom, strew them over with powdered lump sugar; whencold, put a paste round the edges, and over. When the tart isbaked, smear the crust with white of egg, and sift over it some powdered sugar. Serve with custard. Or: --Line the bottom of a shallow dish with paste; lay the apples in it, sweeten, and lay little twists of paste over in bars. The mode of making the new-fashioned Apple -pie is to pare andquarter the apples, scald them, beat them with a spoon with some of theliquor, add grated lemon-peel, the juice of a lemon or Seville orange, or a part of a quince, when they are to be got, cloves, white sugar finely pounded, and a piece of butter; put a paste round the dish, and cover it with bars or flowers of paste --the excellence of the pie consisting of the sort of apple and the goodness of the paste; the fruit should be raised in themiddle, as it shrinks in the baking. 1270.--TO MAKE ASIMNEL. One pound of flour, one quarter of a pound of butter, one quarter of a pound of lump sugar, one pound of currants, two ounces of candied lemon, one quar ter of an ounceof carbonate of soda mixed with an egg, and a little milk; to be put in a tin mould, and baked till enough. 1271.--EXCELLENT LIGHTPUFFS. Mix two spoonfuls of flour, a little grated lemon-peel, some nutmeg, half a spoonful of brandy, alittle loaf-sugar, and one egg; then fry it enough, but notbrown; beat it in a mortar with five eggs, whites and yolks; puta quantity of lard in a frying-pan, and when quite hot drop adessert-spoonful of batter at a time; turn as they brown. Serve themimmediately with sweet sauce. Spanish Puffs. --Put one ounce of fresh butter into a quart stewpan; when hot, put in four spoonfuls of flour; stir itover the fire for five minutes; have ready boiling a gill of milk, whichstir in by de grees so as to avoid making it lumpy; when it is thoroughlyboiled, take it off the fire, stir in six eggs, a pinch of salt, a little nutmeg, chopped lemon-peel, and a handful of currants, with sugar to palate, and sufficient orange-flowerwater to flavor it; let it get cold; when wanted for use have some lard boiling, make the batter into balls the size of a small wal nut, fry them until they burst; drain; dust them over with powderedsugar; serve with wine-sauce. German Puffs .--Put half a pound of butter into a breakfast-cupful of milk, place the pan upon the fire, and whenit boils add a cupful of flour; beat all well together, and, when cold,mix in six eggs, leaving out two of the whites; beat up some sugar and grated lemon-peel with the eggs, and bake thepuffs in a moderately heated oven. Irish Puffs .--Pound one quarter of a pound of sweetand one ounce of bitter almonds, but not too finely; take one quarter ofa pound of loaf-sugar pounded and sifted, the whites of two eggs beaten to a thick froth; mix all together, and put the puffs into pattypanscovered with paste; then sift powdered sugar over them thickly,and bake them a light brown. The flavor may be improved by pounding the almonds with orange-flower water or a little essence oflemon. 1272.--GAUFFRES. Takefour or five ounces of flour, three ounces of pounded sugar, halfa pint of whipped cream, four or five eggs, a small stick ofpounded vanilla, a grating of nut meg, and a little salt, with a glass of cu-raçoa or ratafia. Place the flour, sugar, and salt in a basin, then addthe yolk of eggs, the vanilla, and the spirit, mixing themwell together, and gradually adding the whipped cream. Just before usingthe batter, add the whites of eggs, whipped to a froth, and mix them inlightly, so as to thoroughly incorporate, them with it. Bake these gauffres in tongs made for the purpose, observing, however, thatthe iron be very carefully heated, and the superfluous heat allowed to go offpre viously to filling them with batter; rub thetongs with fresh butter; fill the bottom part with batter, and fasten onthe top, then turn it, and when a fine brown on both sides, shake some pounded spice and sugar over them, and send them to table. They may be spread with any kind of preserve or jelly. 1273.--LENT PIES. Boila dozen eggs quite hard, and chop the yolks very fine;chop also a dozen of moderate-sized juicy apples, peeled and cored,together with two pounds of stoned raisins; add two pounds of currants, one pound of sugar, and a table-spoonful each ofpowdered cinnamon, nutmeg, and beaten mace; take also the juice and grated peel of three ripe lemons, with half a pound of citron cut into slips; mix all these thoroughly, and moisten the wholewith a pint each of white wine and brandy. If at hand, a little rose-water may be added, and ratafia may be used instead of brandy. 1274.--SWEETPATTIES. Chop the meat of a boiled calf 's- foot, of which you use the liquor for jelly, with two apples, one ounceof orange, and lemon peel candied, and some fresh peel and juice; mix with them one-half of a nutmeg grated, the yolk ofan egg, a spoonful of brandy, and four ounces currants, washed and dried. Bake in small patty pans. 1275.--VOL-AU-VENT Means light as wind; you musttherefore make this paste very delicate. It is used for first or secondcourses. Of all things in pastry the vol-au-vent requires the most care andprecision; they that can make a good vol-au-vent may be stamped as goodpastry-cooks. Make a pound of puff paste, giving it seven rolls and ahalf, leave it an inch in thickness, make a mark upon the top either round oroval, and according to the size of your dish; then, with a sharp-pointed knifecut it out from the paste, holding the knife with the point slantingoutwards; turn it over, mark the edges with the back of your knife, and placeit upon a baking-sheet, which you have sprinkled with water; egg over the top, then dip the point of the knife into hot water, and cut aring upon the top a quarter of an inch deep, and half an inch from the edge ofthe vol-au-vent; set in a rather hot oven; if getting too much color, coverover with a sheet of paper; do not take it out before done, or it wouldfall, but when quite set, cut off the lid and empty it with a knife: be carefulto make no hole in the side or bottom; if for first course it is ready, but iffor second sift sugar all over, which glaze with the salamander.Regulate the thickness of the paste from which you cut the vol-au-vent,accord ing to the size you require it, the smaller ones of course requiringthinner paste. A vol-au-vent for entrées will take about half anhour to bake, and as the common iron ovens often throw out more heat upon oneside than the other, it will require turning two or three times to cause it torise equally; it ought to be when baked of a light gold color. Vol-au-Vent of Peaches .--Put half a pound of sugar in a sugar -pan, with the juice of a lemon and abouthalf a pint of water, place it upon the fire, and boil it till becominga thickish syrup; then have eight peaches not quite ripe, whichcut in halves, break their stones and blanch the kernels, throw six halves withthe kernels into the syrup, boil three minutes, take them out with askimmer, lay them upon a dish, and take off their skins, stew the restin syrup in like manner, four at a time; when all done pour what liquorruns from them again into the syrup, which reduce to a goodthickness, pass it through a tammy into a basin,when cold pour a little over the peaches, and leave until ready toserve; dress the peaches in your vol-au-vent with the syrup over. Vol-au-vent with Fruit .--These do not requireto be so high as the other, especially as the fruit ought to be dressedin the form of a pyramid; if they are cut about three-quarters of an inch inthickness it will be enough; when nearly done, sift some powdered sugar over them, and put it back in the oven to glaze well; if not hot enough use thesalamander; remove the interior, taking care not to make a hole in the bottomor sides, and fill with any kind of fruit you like, but never mix twokinds together, except currant and raspberry. Sweet Vol-au-Vent with Rhubarb .-- In thespring of the year this makes a very inviting and wholesome dish, and itsqualities purify the blood, which the winter's food has rendered gross; cutabout twelve sticks of rhubarb into lengths of one inch, put it in astewpan holding about two quarts, put over it a quarter of a pound of sugar, and a table-spoonful of water, set it on a sharp fire,stirring it; do not let it get brown, or it would spoil, and lose its flavor;it will take but a few minutes to do; when tender, put it in a basin to cool; afew minutes before serving fill the vol-au-vent with it, and serve cold. Sweet Vol-au-vent with green Goose-berries .--A quart of green gooseberries, a quarterof a pound of powdered sugar, the juice of half a lemon, and a table-spoonful of water; put on the fire and move it about for tenminutes, or till tender, and forming a thick green marmalade; put it ina basin till cold; serve in pyramid in the vol-au-vent; a little thick syrup, if handy, poured over, im proves the appearance. Sweet Vol-au-vent with Orange .--Well peel six oranges, removing all the pith, divide each into six or eight pieces,put them in a pan, with a quarter of a pound of sugar, and the juice of an orange, set it on a slow fire, with the cover on,stir it now and then--ten minutes will be sufficient time for it; take out thepieces one after the other, lay them in a basin, reduce your syrup to aproper thickness; when ready to serve, dish your pieces of orange in it,and pour over the syrup. 1276.--COCOA-NUTCUSTARD. Boil one quart of milk, when it boils sift in threetable-spoonfuls of farina. Take off the fire, stir in one-quarter of apound of butter, and let it stand until quite cold. Beat six eggs, the yolks and whites separate, until very light; addto the yolks three-quarters of a pound of sugar, and the grated pulp of one cocoa- nut. Stir the mixture into the boiled milk, add the beaten whites of the eggs, line tin pie plates witha nice crust, fill with the mixture, and bake. 1277.--SMALL FRUITTARTS. The next in order to sweet vol-au-vents, and which are easierto make, are tartlets, their appearance being inviting, and their expenselimited, and very easy to serve. They may be made from the trimmings of any puff paste which re mains, and should be enveloped in paper, andkept in a cold place, or in the flour -tub. Make them as follows:--Haveready twelve or more small tartlet pans, which butter, line each with abit of puff paste cut with a cutter the size of a crown-piece, force upthe edges with your thumb and finger, put a small ball (made of flour and water ) in each, bake them nicely in a very hot oven; when done, takeout the ball (which may be kept for other occasions) from the tartlets, andshake powdered sugar over the bottom of each, and glaze with asalamander, turn them over, and shake sugar in the interior, which also salamander; fill with any kind of preserve, marmalade, or fruit, for sweet vol-au-vents.They may be made with cream as follows:--Make your tartlets as before,placing cream instead of the ball of flour, made thus:--Put halfa pint of milk in a stewpan, when boiling, add half a stick of vanilla, reduce the milk to half in another stewpan, have the yolks of two eggs and a quarter of an ounce of powdered sugar, and one ounce of sifted flour, with a grain of salt, pour in the milk, taking out the vanilla, place over a slow fire, keepstirring till it thickens; when cold, fill the tartlets, and bake nicely in amoderate oven; when cold, add a little jam, have ready a meringue of four eggs, lay a teaspoonful of each upon them, spreading it quite flat witha knife; ornament the top with some of the mixture, put into a paper cornet,sift sugar over, place in a slow oven till a light brown color, and themeringue quite crisp; if the oven be too hot, cover with paper, dress,and serve in pyramid on a dish. They should be light-colored. 1278.--LEMONTARTLETS. Pare, rather thick, the rinds of four lemons, which boil tender in two waters, and beat fine; add to it four ounces ofblanched almonds cut thin, four ounces of lump-sugar, the juice ofthe lemons, and a little grated peel; simmer to a syrup; whencold, turn it into a shallow tin tart dish lined with a rich thin puff paste, and lay bars of paste over; as soon as the paste is baked, serve it. 1279.--GREEN APRICOTTARTLETS. When the wall- fruit trees are thinned, take thethinnings before the stone is formed; stew them gently in sugar and water. When tender, reduce and thicken the syrup, and put it withthe fruit into pattypans; or, if covered with a paste, it is thencalled a pie. This also applies to grapes. 1280.--PRUNE TART. Give prunes a scald, take out the stones and break them; put the kernels intoa little cranberry -juice, with the prunes and sugar :simmer, and when cold make a tart of the sweetmeat. It must be almost needless to say that tartlets of damsons, plums, and most sorts of stone- fruit, may be made in the samemanner. 1281.--TARTLETS À LAPAGANINI. Beat up the whites of three eggs to a froth, and thenadd five ounces of pounded sugar; beat it well up, and have yourpattypans ready covered with paste, upon which put any quantity youplease of jam or marmalade; bake them for about a half an hour, and whendone fill them with the whip. This quantity will fill sixteen pattypansof a small size. 1282.--TO PREPARE CRANBERRIESFOR TARTS. Simmer them in moist sugar, without breaking, twentyminutes; and let them become cold before being used. A pint will require nearlythree ounces of sugar. 1288.--ALMONDPASTE. Take a pound of sweet almonds, blanch them in boilingwater; take off the peel, and let them soak in cold water fourhours, then pound them well in a mortar; add a little water to preventthem from turning to oil; after they are very fine and quite in a paste, put in three-quarters of a pound of sugar well pounded,and mix all together in the mortar. If your paste is quite fine, take itout of the mortar, put it into a stewpan over a slow fire, and stir it with awooden spoon till it becomes white and dry; then put it again into themortar, and mix with it a little melted gum thathas been strained through a towel; take care to keep it covered, to prevent itdrying. You may give what scent you please, as lemon, vanilla, rose, orange, &c. &c. If you use almond-paste to makevases, baskets, or tartlets, keep it always free from dust, spread it on amarble with a rolling-pin as thin as possible, and if you put it into a mould, butter the mould lightly, and give the paste the form of it. Bakein a moderate oven. Almond-paste should always be kept in a gallipot, covered with a damptowel to prevent its drying. 1284.--TARTLETS OF ALMONDPASTE. Butter some tartlet-moulds, and after having spread the paste on the dresser, cut it with a cutter to the size of the moulds;put a little sweetmeat in the middle, and a small rosette in the middleof that. Bake in a moderate oven. 1285.--TARTLETS OF ALMOND PASTEWITH STRAWBERRIES. Spread some almond-paste over thepastry-table, and cut it with a fluted cutter the same size as other tartlets; butter slightly the moulds, and put them into a moderate oven. When the paste is done almost white, take them out of the mould, andgarnish with currant jelly, raspberry or apricot jam, &c. &c. When the sweetmeats do not go to the oven, they arealways of a better color and taste. 1286.--APRICOT SWEETMEAT FORTARTS. Take a pound of ripe apricots, remove the stones, breakthem and blanch the kernels, add one pound and a half of green gages andone pound and a quarter of lump sugar; simmer it until the fruit becomes a jam. It must not boil, and must be kept well skimmed; clarifiedsugar will be found the best to use for this preserve. 1287.--GOOSEBERRY (GREEN)TART. Use either whole gooseberries; or make a marmalade of them with a good syrup; the last method is perhaps the best, as youcan tell easily how sweet they are and ought to be; if made of marmalade the seeds ought to be taken out. Green currants and grapes the same way. 1288.--ORANGETARTS. Take some oranges, pare them very thin, soak them in water for two or three days, changing the water often, then boilthem till they become soft and lose their bitterness; when cold cut a thickslice off the top and bottom, and the rest the thickness of a crown piece; linethe tart let-pans with puff paste, and fill them with layers of sugar and orange alternately. Pears, raspberries, cherries, &c., are simply putinto the paste with sugar, and baked. 1289.--CROUSTADE OR DRESDENPATTIES. Slice some stale bread about half an inch thick; cutfrom it, with a round paste -cutter, as many croustades as will berequired: mark the centres with a smaller cutter, scoop out the insides as in paste patties, then fry them a light brown, drain them well, and fillthem with any hot compote of fruit or hot pre serve. The croustade maybe filled with any sort of minced meat or fowl and served as anentree in the first course. They are very nice made with the rounds of a French roll; it should be pared very thin, then cut in rounds of suchthickness, as to allow the centres to be taken out; dip them in milk, and let them drain; do not let them break; brush then with egg, and siftthe rasping of the roll over them; fry, them a pale brown, and fill with oysters, stewed mushrooms, &c., or, as above, with fruit or preserve. 1290.--PATTIES RESEMBLING MINCEPIES. Chop the kidney and fat of cold veal, apple, orange, and lemon-peel candied, fresh currants, a little wine, two or three cloves, a little brandy, and a bit of sugar. Bake as before. 1291.--PATTIES WITHCURDS. Take some very rich milk, put into it some lemon-juice or vinegar, place it on the fire that it maycurdle, drain off the whey through a sieve; add to the curds the yolkof an egg beaten up in two spoonfuls of milk, a few currants, and a little pounded cinnamon. Make the paste and prepare thepatties in the same way as in the preceding receipt. 1292.--CHEESECAKES. Strain the whey fromthe curd of two quarts of milk; when rather dry crumble it through acoarse sieve, and mix with six ounces of fresh butter, one ounce ofpounded blanched almonds, a little orange-flower water, half aglass of raisin wine, a grated biscuit, four ounces of currants, some nutmeg and cinnamon in fine powder, andbeat all the above with three eggs and half a pint of cream tillquite light: then line the pattypans with a thin puff paste, and fillthem three parts full. 1293.--BREADCHEESECAKES. Slice a loaf as thin as possible, pour on it a pint ofboiling cream, let it stand two hours; then take eight eggs, halfa pound of butter and a nutmeg grated, beat them well together,put in half a pound of currants well washed and dried before the fire,and bake them in raised crusts or pattypans. 1294.--MISS BRATTY'SCHEESECAKES. The yolks of eight eggs, eight ounces of sugar finely powdered and sifted, eight ounces of sweet almonds powdered, beat all together till very white. Line the pans with a thin paste; immediately before you put them into the oven, mix the size of a walnut of butter melted into them over a fire. If the oven be too hot,they will fall when taken out. Or: --Ten eggs, leave out half the whites, one pound of sugar finely powdered and sifted, half apound of flour, three ounces of butter, three ounces of sweetalmonds, with a glass of brandy put into them while they arepounding. Beat them all together, and butter the pans very well. 1295.--LEMONCHEESECAKES. Mix four ounces of sifted lump sugar and fourounces of butter, and gently melt it; then add the yolks of twoand the white of one egg, the rind of three lemons shredfine, and the juice of one and a half one Savoy biscuit, someblanched almonds pounded, three spoonfuls of brandy. 1296.--ORANGECHEESECAKES. When you have blanched half a pound of almonds, beat them very fine, with orange-flower water, half a pound of fine sugar beaten and sifted, and one pound of butter that has beenmelted carefully without oiling, and which must be nearly cold before you useit; then beat the yolks of ten and whites of four eggs; pound two candied oranges, and a fresh one with the bitterness boiled out, till astender as marmalade, without any lumps; beat the whole together, and putinto pattypans. 1297.--ALMONDCHEESECAKES. Press the whey from as much curd as will fill twodozen small pattypans; then put it on the back of a sieve, and with half anounce of butter, rub it through with the back of a spoon; put to it six yolks and three whites of eggs, and a few almonds of both sorts pounded, with as much sugar as willmake the curd properly sweet; mix with these a wine -glassful of sherry or Madeira, in which boil the rind of a Sevilleorange, if you can get one; or, if not, a large ripe one of the commonkind, with all its juice. Beat all gradually together, and whenthoroughly blended fill the pattypans; the baking will take from a quarter ofan hour to twenty minutes. 1298.--POTATOCHEESECAKE. Four ounces of butter, the same of pounded sugar, six ounces of potatoes boiled and flour ed through asieve, the rind of one lemon, and half the juice, unlessacid is desirable; mix these in gredients well together, with two eggs, and fill the tart -pan and bake it. Potato Cheese is celebrated in various partsof Europe. It is made thus:-- Boil good white potatoes, and when cool, peelthem and rasp or mash them to a light pulp; to five pounds of this,which must be free from lumps, add a pint of sour milk and salt to taste; knead the whole well, cover it, and leave it for three or four days,according to the season; then knead it afresh, and put the cheeses into smallbaskets, when they will part with their superfluous moisture; dry them in theshade, and place them in layers in large pots or kegs, where they may remain afortnight. The older they are, the finer they become. This cheese, it issaid, never engenders worms, and in well closed vessels, in a dry place, willkeep for years. (This receipt is from an old English work). 1299.--CHEESECAKE-STOCK, THATWILL KEEP FOB SEVERAL YEARS. To a quarter of a pound of butter put one pound of loaf-sugar broken into small pieces, six eggs, leaving out two whites, the rind of three lemons grated,and the juice of three; put them all into a pan, and let them simmerover the fire until the sugar is dissolved; and it begins to thickenlike honey. When cold put it into sweetmeat pots for use. Whenmade into cheesecakes, add grated sweet biscuits. Line the small tartlet pans used for these small cakes with good, but nottoo light, puff- paste : make them of a deep yellow color, and put on eacha strip of candied citron. 1300.--ICING FOR FRUIT PIES ANDTARTS. The common mode is to take the white of an egg, whiskedto a froth, mixed thickly with pounded sugar, and laid on with a quillfeather. For larger tarts it should, however, be laid on more thickly, andcomfits or lemon-peel may be stuck into it. 1301 --SOYER'SCHEESECAKES. Take four quarts of milk and turn it with somefresh runnet; when dry crumble it and sift it through a coarse sieve into abowl, beat it well up with a quarter of a pound of butter until it isquite smooth (it may require a little more butter, depending on thequality of the milk ); mix in another bowl the yolks of four eggs and a quarter of a pound of very fine sifted biscuit -powder, the rind of four lemons, the juice of two, a quar ter of apound of powdered sugar (some add a little grated nutmeg or cinnamon ), beat these all well up together until form ing a stiff cream, then put it by degrees into the bowl with curd, and mix them welltogether; line some tartlet pans, previously buttered, with some paste, and place some of the above mixture in, and bake quick. In some places milk is used instead of eggs. Should you not have rennet, procuresome good milk and turn it with the juice of a lemon or ateaspoonful of soda or culinary alkali toa quart of milk; drain the curd, and proceed as before. 1302.--RICHMOND MAIDS OFHONOR. These delicious little cakes, which every inhabitant of Londonwho pays a visit to the most picturesque part of its environs knows so well,derive their name from a period when cookery was not thought to be a degradingoccupation for those honored with that title. It is stated that they originatedwith the maids of honor of Queen Elizabeth, who had a palace at Richmond. Sift half a pound of dry curd, mix it well with six ounces of good butter, break the yolks of four eggs into another basin, and aglass of brandy; add to it six ounces of powdered lump- sugar, andbeat well together one very floury baked potato cold, one ounce of sweet almonds, one ounce of bitter ditto pounded, the grated rind of three lemons, the juice of one, and half a nutmeg grated, mix these well together and add to the curds and butter; stirwell up, and proceed as before, filling the tartlet pans. 1303.--PUDDINGS. Thereare two different sorts of paste for puddings, one for meat and the other for fruit . For Meat Pudding .--To one pound of flour add eight ounces of finely chopped beef-suet cut from the kidney. Mix it with water but do not wet it too much: aftermixing it well together with a wooden spoon, roll out the paste and putin the meat; then close it; boil it in a cloth which has been flour ed, tie it up, but leave sufficient room to permit the swelling ofthe paste. Veal-suet may also be used, but that of beef isbetter; or a mixture of both is not bad. If puddings be boiled in shapes, thecrust is not near so light. For Fruit Puddings the paste should bemade as for a pie--using butter instead of suet ; but unless for the sake of ap pearance,they should never be boiled in shapes. A very little salt added to all paste much improves it. Sweet Pudding .--Very good puddings may be made without eggs ; but they should have verylittle liquid added to them, and must boil longer than puddings with eggs . A spoonful of yeast willserve instead of two eggs, and a pinch of soda will make it stilllighter. Two large spoonfuls of snow will supply the place of one egg, and make a pudding equally good. This is a useful piece of information, as snowgenerally falls in the season when eggs are dear. The sooner it is usedafter it falls the better; but it may be taken up from a clean spot, and keptin a cool place some hours, without losing its good qualities. Bottledmalt-liquors are also a good substitute for eggs; the sooner used afterthe cork is drawn the better. Eggs should always be broken separatelyinto a cup before they are thrown together, as a single bad one might occasionthe loss of a great many without this precaution: the yolks and whites, beaten long and separately, make the article they are put intomuch lighter. They must always be strained after beating. To avoid repetition, let it be observed that, when pudding sauce is ordered, wine, sugar, and very thick melted but ter, boiled up together, is the sauce in tended. If the pudding be partly of bread, the cloth should be tied so as toallow for swelling; if of flour, rather more tight. Basins or forms are much better in ap pearance than cloths for boilingpuddings, but it makes them far less light. The water should boil quickly, when the pudding is put in, and caretaken that it continues to do so, or the pudding will be heavy; and it should be moved about for a minute or two, that the ingredients may not separate. All dishes in which puddings are baked should be lined with paste aninch or two below the edge, as well as on it; the dish must be first rubbedwith butter. If a pudding is to be turned out from a mould, it must beentirely lined with paste. The ingredients of puddings should not be put into the basin or dish tillthe minute they go into the water or oven. Sago, and all sorts of seeds, should lie in water an hour before they are made into puddings, and be well washed;the want of this caution causes an earthy taste. If the butter be strong that is used in puddings, they will not tastewell, whatever good things are added. A small pinch of salt improves the flavor of all mixtures, even whenthe other ingredients are sweet. Well-made raisin or Cape wine will serve in most cases, when wine is order ed for puddings. As the goodness of boiled puddings greatly depends upon keeping theingredients closely but not too compactly together, the cook should take careto have moulds and basins in readiness that will exactly hold the quantitydirected. Puddings of bread or flour are much better if all theingredients be mixed (except the eggs ) three hours before boiling orbaking; and they should be well stirred just before they are put into the ovenor saucepan. Plum -puddings are best boiled in a stout cloth well flour ed;care should be taken that it does not burn to the bottom of the kettle; toprevent this put a plate at the bottom. When the pudding is of a large size itis best to mix all but the liquid ingredients the day before it is boiled. When butter is ordered to be put warm into puddings, the addition ofa little milk or wine will prevent its oiling. Custard Puddings to look well should simmer only, but without stopping. If boiled in aquick or careless manner the surface will not be smooth, but have little holeslike honey-comb all over it. A sheet of writing- paper, thickly buttered,should be put on the top of the mould before the lid or cloth is put on. andthe pudding should stand in the mould five minutes after being lifted from the water. Many persons prefer their puddings steamed, but when this is notdone they should be put into plenty of boiling water, and kept wellcovered. Half an hour should be allowed for boiling a bread -pudding in a half-pint basin, and so onin proportion; but pud dings made up with half a pound of suet and anyother ingredients, will require two hours. 1304.--SUETPUDDINGS. Finely chop one pound of beef suet 5 mix with it onepound and a quarter of flour, two eggs well beaten, a little salt, and as little milk as will mix it. Boil four hours. It eatswell next day cut in slices and fried, and may be eaten either with salt or sugar. Or: --Take eight ounces of grated bread, threeounces of finely chopped suet, and four ounces of pounded loaf-sugar, the juice and grated peel of two lemons, andone egg well beaten; mix all together; put it into a buttered basin, andboil one hour; or make it into dump lings, and boil twenty minutes. Serve with wine sauce. Of veal-suet, cut the crumb of a loaf intoslices; boil and sweeten two quarts of new milk, and pour over it. Whensoaked, pour out a little of the milk, and mix with six eggs well beaten and half a nutmeg. Lay theslices of bread into a dish, with layers of currants and finelychopped veal-suet, one pound of each. Butter the dish well, andbake; or you may boil it in a basin if you prefer it. Balls of suet -pudding, not larger than thesize of an egg, are put into gravy soup. They will take fromtwenty min utes to half an hour boiling; in that time they will be donethrough, and so light as to swim to the top. They may be also servedseparately, and are an excellent accompaniment to corned beef. 1305.--BAKED CHICKENPUDDING. Cut up a pair of young chickens, and season them with pepper and salt, a little nutmeg and allspice. Putthem into a pot with two large spoonfuls of butter, and water enough to cover them. Stew them gently, and when about half cooked, take themout and set them away to cool. Pour off the gravy, and reserve it to beserved up separately. Make batter of a pound of sifted flour, stirredgradually into a quart of milk, six eggs well beaten and added bydegrees to the mixture with a very little salt. Put a layer of chicken into a very deep dish, and pour over it some of the batter; thenanother layer of chicken and another of batter; having a cover of batterat the top. Bake till brown. Break an egg into the reserved sauce, boil up, and serve it in a sauce tureen to eat with thepudding. 1306.--BEEFSTEAKPUDDING. Of all savory puddings perhaps those made with beef are the best. The following is the mode of making them in all theclubs:-- Take from one pound to one pound and a half of the inside of a sirloin ofbeef, or the same quantity of rump-steak, cutting off part of the fat : beat it until tender, cut it thin, and divide it into small slicesalong with two mutton kidneys or one veal kidney; to these add adozen of native oysters, bearded. The whole is then seasoned with pepper and salt and a minced shalot. Boil it from two and a halfto three hours. When done have ready some strong beef gravy, madesavory with a little mushroom ket chup; make a hole in the paste and pour it into the pudding. If for a family pudding, the oysters and the kidneys may be omitted: let the steak be prepared as above,adding, if you choose, some layers of sliced onions. 1307.--PLUMPORRIDGE. Boil eight pounds of shin of beef for five hours in agallon of water, skimming carefully throughout, and finally strainingoff the liquor; add two pounds of meat cut small. Soften the crumb of asmall loaf in some of the liquor, beat it smooth, thicken the soup with it, addhalf a pound of stoned raisins, the same quantity of stoned prunes, a pound of well washed currants, and grated nutmeg, pepper, and mace to taste and boil until the fruit is soft, then serve. 1308.--YORKSHIREPUDDING. Make a batter with a pint of milk, four eggs, and four table-spoonfuls of flour, seasoned with salt. It is tobe well stirred, and put into the pan under roasting beef or baked beef, to be cooked with the drippings. It will bake in about twohours. Serve it in pieces round the meat, on the same dish. 1309.--GAMEPUDDINGS. Game of any description may be made into puddings,and when partly boned, well spiced, with minced truffle or mush room, mace, and a clove of garlic, and boiled within a light paste, they are very rich, and the paste particularly fine, as itabsorbs so much of the gravy; but the boiling deprives the game of much of its high flavor, and a woodcock or a snipe should never be so dressed, as they lose all thesavor of the trail. Or : Make a batter with flour, milk, eggs, pepper, and salt; pour a little into the bottom of apudding-dish; then put seasoned poultry or game of any kind into it, anda little shred onion; pour the remainder of the batter over, and bake ina slow oven. A single chicken, partridge, or pigeon may be thus madeinto a dumpling:-- Stuff it with chopped oysters, lay it on its back inthe paste, and put a bit of butter rolled in flour on the breast; close the paste in the form of a dumpling, put into hot water, and let it boil for two hours. 1310.--MARROWPUDDING. Grate the inside of part of a stale loaf. Make a quart of milk quite hot, and pour over it, letting it remain till it issufficiently swelled and soaked. Shred half a pound of marrow, or good suet, and beat up four eggs. Pick and plump up two ounces of currants, and stone two ounces of the best raisins. Mix them allup together; stir in a few blanched al monds, and a little candiedcitron, and orange and lemon peel. Sweeten the pudding toyour taste, and season it with grated nutmeg and powdered cinnamon. Cover a stoneware, flat dish, round the edge, with a shred ofpuff- paste, and mark it neatly. If baked in a flat dish, twenty-fiveminutes will be sufficient; if in a deep dish it will require half an hour. Alittle finely pounded lump sugar is sometimes strewed over the top, andblanched almonds, sliced, stuck round for ornament. This is a very lightand de licate baked pudding. It is sometimes boiled in a shape.--This makes adelicious dish. 1311.--HERBPUDDING. Pick two handfuls of parsley -leaves from the steins,half the quantity of spinach, two hearts of lettuces, a largehandful of mustard and cress, a few leaves of white beet, and asmall handful of chives : wash, and boil all together three minutes;drain the water from them, and mash very fine; mix well, and add salt and pepper. Have ready a batter, made of one ounce of flour, a pint of thin cream and two eggs; stir it into the herbs, and cover the dish with a good crust. This pudding has muchthe flavor of omelet; and in Lent, when the salads are all coming into season,it may be very aptly brought to table on fast-days. Tansy -Pudding .--Pound a handful of greentansy in a mortar; add the juice to a pint of batter and bakeit. 1312.--GOOSEPUDDING. Half a pound of bread-crumbs soaked in a littleboiling milk, when cold, add two or three eggs, a little salt, pepper, marjoram, and thyme, a spoonful of oat meal, a good handful of suet, and an onion choppedfine. Spread it in a dripping-pan, and bake it under the goose. SWEET PUDDINGS. Under this head the plum-pudding stands foremost as a truly national dish.The following receipt, communicated by a man-cook of much experience, we canvouch for as an excellent way of making a 1313.--RICH PLUMPUDDING. Stone carefully one pound of the best raisins, washand pick one pound of currants, * chop very small one pound of fresh beef suet, blanch and chop small or pound twoounces of sweet almonds and one ounce of bitter ones; mix the whole welltogether, with one pound of sifted flour, and the same weight of crumb of bread soaked in milk, then squeezed dry and stirred witha spoon until reduced to a mash, before it is mixed with the flour. Outin small pieces two ounces each of preserved citron, orange, and lemon-peel, and add a quarter of an ounce of mixed spice : aquarter of a pound of moist sugar should be put into a basin, with eight eggs, and well beaten together with a three-pronged fork; stir this withthe pudding, and make it of a proper consistence with milk. Rememberthat it must not be made too thin, or the fruit will sink to the bottom,but be made to the consistence of good thick batter. Two wine -glassfulsof brandy should be poured over the fruit and spice, mixedtogether in a basin, and allowed to stand three or four hours before thepudding is made, stirring them occasionally. It must be tied in a cloth, andwill take five hours of constant boiling. When done, turn it out on a dish,sift loaf-sugar over the top, and serve it with wine-sauce in aboat, and some poured round the pudding. The pudding will be of considerable size, but half the quantity ofmaterials, used in the same proportion, will be equally good. In addition to the wine-sauce, have a metal sauce -boat filledwith brandy; set it alight on the table, and pour a portion of it in aflame upon each slice of pudding. The bellow note appeared at the bottom of page 439-440 in the originaltext. *The best method of cleansing currants is toput them into a common colander, over a pan with suf ficient water tocover them, rub them well between the hands in the water to separate theknobs, and stir them about. The small sand and gravel will then fall throughthe holes and sink to the bottom of the pan. After being washed clean, and the water drained from them the large stones can then be easily picked outby sorting them over on a large dish. 1314.--ENGLISH PLUM PUDDING.(Original) One pound of fine white flour, sifted; add a little salt; one pound of beef suet chopped as fine as meal, one poundof brown sugar, one pound of stoned rai sins, one pound of Zante currants, three-quarters of a pound of citron, one nutmeg, one teaspoonful of allspice, one ditto of cloves, two ditto of mace, grate in the rind of three large fresh lemons. Weigheach article after it is prepared, allowing for the moisture in the currants as they cannot be dried perfectly. Mix the ingredients togethervery thorough ly; first, the flour and suet --then add the otherarticles and rub the mixture again; this should be done the day be fore thepudding is to be cooked. Immediately before the final mixture, add ten eggs, well beaten, onegill of milk and one of brandy. Tie the mix ture in a wellbuttered cloth, and boil for seven hours. The cloth used should be verystrong. To be served with brandy- sauce, and brought to the table in burning brandy. 1315.--THE BAKED PLUMPUDDING. Ten crackers soaked in milk, five eggs, one pound of raisins, half a pound of suet, half a pound ofchopped apple, two glasses of brandy, dark spice and mace, salt to the taste--half a pound of citron, sugar to the taste. Bake three hours and serve with coldsauce. 1816.--GROUND RICEPUDDING. (Mrs. G.'s Receipt). Boil half apound of rice in five pints of milk 5 add half a pound of butter, three-quarters of sugar, ten eggs, two nutmegs, and mace with a little salt : bake in a dish. 1317.--MARLBOROUGH PUDDING.(Furnished by a Lady of New York.) Stew eighteen apples andstrain them; add a quarter of a pound of melted butter, with rosewater, ten eggs, the juice and rind of two lemons, sugar to taste, and bake in paste. 1318.--BOSTONPUDDING. Make a good common paste with a pound and a half of flour, and three-quarters of a pound of butter. When you roll itout the last time, cut off the edges till you get the sheet of paste ofan even square shape. Have ready some fruit, sweetened to your taste. If cranberries, gooseberries, dried peaches, or damsons; they should be stewed, and made very sweet. If apples, they should be stewed in a very little water, drained, and seasoned with nutmeg, rosewater, and lemon. If currants, raspberries, or blackberries, they should be mashed with sugar, and put into the pudding raw. Spread the fruit very thick,all over the sheet of paste (which must not be rolled out too thin).When it is covered all over with the fruit, roll it up and close thedough at both ends, and down the last side. Tie the pudding in a cloth, andboil it. Eat it with sugar. It must not be taken out of the pot tilljust be fore it is brought to table. 1319.--ALMOND PUDDING ANDSAUCE. A large cupful of finely-minced beef suet, a teacupfulof milk, four ounces of bread-crumbs, four ounces of well cleaned currants, two ounces of almonds, half a pound of stoned raisins, three well beaten eggs, and the whites of othertwo; sugar, nutmeg, and cinnamon, and a small glass of rum. Butter a shape, and place part of the raisins neatlyin rows. Blanch the almonds; reserve the half of them to be placed inrows between the raisins just before serving. Mix all the remainingingredients well together, put into the shape, and boil three hours. The sauce --one teaspoonful of milk, andtwo yolks of eggs well beaten, and some sugar; place on the fireand stir till it just comes to the boil, then let it cool. Whenlukewarm, stir into it a glass of sherry or currant wine, andserve in a sauce tureen. This sauce is a great improvement to raisin pudding. 1320.--POLKAPUDDING. Mix four table-spoonfuls of arrow-root in a pint of cold milk. Beat four eggs well, add them, three ounces of fresh butter, cut into small bits; a dessertspoonful of rosewater; afew drops of essence of lemon, or ratafia, and a tea-cupful of sugar. Boil two pints of milk in a saucepan; when boiling stir inthe other ingredients; without taking the pan off the fire, let it boil tillthick, then pour into a mould to cool. Turn it out and serve it cold. 1321.--JENNY LIND'SPUDDING. Grate the crumb of half a loaf, butter and dish welland lay in a thick layer of the crumbs; pare ten or twelve apples, cutthem down, and put a layer of them and sugar; then crumbs alternately,until the dish is full; put a bit of butter on the top, and bake it inan oven, or American reflector. An excellent and economical pudding. 1322.--NEWCASTLEPUDDING. Butter a basin or mould, stick it all round withsultanas or dried cherries, then put in a slice of bread-crumb soaked in milk, and over that layers of thin bread-crumb buttered, until three parts filled; fill up with custard, and boil for an hourand a half. 1323.--RICHELIEUPUDDING. Steep the crumb of a large slice of bread in milk, warm as from the cow; let it rest, and then strain off the milk; beat up the yolk of an egg, mix it with the bread, also a bit of butter; put it into a saucepan, and boil till it becomesstiff; let it cool, and then add some chopped parsley, thyme, pepper and salt; beat up two eggs; mince about one pound of any cold meat, and add all together. Boil in a basin for three hours, and when dished, pour a good gravy over it. 1824.--PARADISEPUDDING. Take three eggs, three apples pared, cored, andcut small, three ounces each of the crumb of French rolls, sugar, and currants, a little nutmeg and salt, the rind of alemon pared very thin and cut very fine, and awine-glassful of brandy or white wine; stir well, pourinto a buttered mould, and boil for an hour; then serve with melted butter, wine and sugar. 1325.--HASTYPUDDING. Set some milk on the fire, and, when it boils, put ina little salt. Stir in by degrees as much flour as will make itof a proper thickness. Let it boil quickly a few minutes, beating it constantlywhile on the fire. Pour it into a dish, and eat it with cold butter and sugar. Some persons add eggs to this. 1326.--HASTYPUDDING. Boil water, a quart, three pints, or two quarts,according to the size of your family; sift your meal, stir five or sixspoonfuls of it thoroughly into a bowl of water; when the water in the kettle boils, pour into it the contents of the bowl; stir it well andlet it boil up thick; put in salt to suit your own taste, then standover the kettle, and sprinkle in meal, handful after handful, stirring it verythoroughly all the time, and letting it boil between whiles. When it is sothick that you stir it with difficulty it is about right. It takes about halfan hour's cooking. Eat it with milk or molasses. Either Indianmeal or rye meal may be used. If the system is in a restrictedstate, nothing can be better than rye hasty pudding and West India molasses. This diet would savemany a one from the horrors of dyspepsia. 1327.--TO MAKE AN ALMONDPUDDING. Pound in your mortar a quarter of a pound of sweetalmonds, add a table-spoonful of water when you are pound ing, takeit out of the mortar; have ready broken seven eggs, leaving out five ofthe whites, add a quarter of a pound of sifted sugar, mix alllightly together; cut in small dice a little candy, orange, and lemon-peel, butter and paper a plain mould, or one thatwill open; bake it in a moderate oven. 1328.--FARINAPUDDING. One quart of milk, six eggs, eighttable-spoonfuls of flour, three tablespoonfuls of farina, oneteaspoonful of salt. Boil the milk; while boiling, sift into it the farina; beatthe eggs, yolks and whites separately; stir into the yolks the flour and salt, and cold milk enough to make a stiffbatter; then stir in the whites, and, lastly, the boiling milk. Butter a baking dish, and bake for half an hour. Eat with winesauce, or sugar and butter. 1329.--A BAKED APPLEDUMPLING. Pare and quarter four large apples, boil them tenderwith the rind of a lemon in so little water that nothing may re mainwhen done but the juice; add the crumb of a small roll, four ounces butter, melted, the yolks of five and whites of threeeggs, the juice of half a lemon, and sugar to taste;beat all together, and lay it in a dish; then beat the two remain ing whites to a froth, and throw it round the edge of the dish; grate alittle white sugar over when baked. 1330.--LEMONPUDDING. Half a pound of flour, or grated bread, half apound of suet cut very fine, half a pound of crushed sugar, the rind of two lemons, and the juice of one, two eggs; boil it four hours in a shape. Served upwithout sauce it is excellent. 1331.--A PLAIN RICEPUDDING. To make a plain rice pudding, boil a pint of rice until it is quite soft. Mix two ounces of butter and fourtable-spoonfuls of sugar, a quart of rich milk with the rice, boil them up together and let them partially cool. Beat five eggs until they are quite light and stir them into the rice. Itshould bake about an hour. 1332.--RICE MILK Thisdish is an excellent one, and very simply and quickly made. After wash ing apint of rice in two different waters, boil it well with about half apound of raisins from which the stems have been carefully picked. Pouroff the water, and mix a quart of rich milk with the rice. Let it boil for about five minutes, and after mixing with it four table-spoonfuls of brown sugar, beat two eggs until they are light, and pourthem into the milk, stirring it all the time. After the rice and eggs are well mixed together, they should boil from three to five minutes. If they are not well stirred, the eggs will form a custard on thesurface, which is not desirable. 1333.--BIRD'S NESTPUDDING. If you wish to make what is called "bird's nest puddings,"prepare your custard,--take eight or ten pleasant ap ples, pare them, dig outthe core, but leave them whole, set them in a pudding-dish, pour your custardover them, and bake them about thirty minutes. 1334.--ORANGEPUDDING. Wash half a pound of butter until all the salt is extracted, then mix it well with half a pound of powdered whitesugar, and a wine -glass of brandy-- wine may be used but it isnot as good. Grate the rind of three ordinary-sized oranges andsqueeze their juice. Beat together six fresh eggs, and stir theminto the but ter and sugar, after which, add the pre pared orange. Lay a border of puff- paste around the pudding-dish, andthen bake from half to three quarters of an hour. Serve it cold, and grate over white sugar mixed with a little nutmeg. The latter ingredient,however, is not generally preferred. Lemon Pudding may be made in the same manner;substituting lemons for oranges. 1335.--QUINCEPUDDING. Pare six large quinces, cut out the cores andblemishes, chop them as fine as possible, and boil them two hours with aslittle water as possible, stirring them frequently that they may notburn. Drain off the water and mix them, when cold, with a pint of cream and half a pound of powdered sugar. 1886.--APPLEDUMPLINGS. Pare and scoop out the core of six large baking apples, put part of a clove, and a little grated lemon-peel, inside of each, and enclose them in pieces of puffpaste; boil them in nets for the purpose, or bits of linen, for an hour.Before serving, cut off a small bit from the top of each, and put in atea-spoonful of sugar, and a bit of fresh butter; replace the bitof paste, and strew over them pounded loaf sugar. 1337.--BATTERPUDDING. Into a pint and a half of sifted flour stir gradually,so that it may not be lumpy, a quart of milk. Beat seven eggs, and put in, together with a couple oftable-spoonfuls of melted butter, and a couple of teaspoonfuls of salt. Grate in half a nutmeg --add, if you want the pudding veryrich, half a pound of raisins. They should not be put into a bakedpudding till it has been cooking long enough to thicken, so that the raisins will not sink to the bottom of it. A pudding made in this manneris good either baked or boiled. It takes two hours to boil, and an hour and aquarter to bake it. When boiled, the bag should not be more than two-thirdsfull, as flour puddings swell very much. It should be put into boiling water, and kept boiling constantly. If the water boilsaway, so as to leave any part of the bag uncovered, more boiling water should be added. When the pudding has boiled eight or nine minutes, the bagshould be turned over, otherwise the pudding will be heavy. Flour puddings should be eaten as soon as cooked, as they fall directly. Serve themup with rich sauce. 1338.--SAGOPUDDING. Pick, wash, and dry half a pound of currants; and putin such spices as best suit the taste of those who are to eat it. Haveready six table-spoonfuls of sago, picked clean, and soaked for twohours in cold water. Boil the sago in a quart of milk tillquite soft. Then stir alter nately into the milk, a quarter of a poundof butter, and six ounces of powered sugar, and set it away tocool. Beat eight eggs, and when they are quite light, stir themgradually into the milk, sago, &c. Add the spice, andlastly the cur rants; having dredged them well with flour to preventtheir sinking. Stir the whole very hard, put it into a buttered dish,and bake it three-quarters of an hour. It may be eaten cold. 1339.--TAPIOCAPUDDING. To two quarts of warm milk put eight table-spoonfulsof tapioca, four beaten eggs, a table-spoonful of butter, and cinnamon or mace to the taste. Mix four table-spoonfuls of white powdered sugar and a wine -glass of wine, and stir itinto the rest of the ingredients. Turn the whole into a pudding dish that has alining of pastry and bake it immediately. 1340.--INDIANPUDDING. Sift a pint of Indian meal and scald it with boiling water. Place over the fire a quart of milk, cut up aquarter of a pound of butter and melt it in the hot milk --add apint of sugar -house molas ses, and mix them together until the milk boils. Stir it into the meal, mixing it well with a wooden spoon.Beat seven eggs, until they are perfectly light, pour them into the bowlthat holds the meal, with ten drops of the essence of lemon, or a little lemon-juice. Stir the mixture until it seems quite light, and bake it in a moderately hotoven. 1341.--A BAKED BREADPUDDING. This is a very excellent dish when properly mixed. Crumblehalf a loaf of bread, a stale loaf is preferable, and cut up the crustas small as possible. Boil a quart of milk, cut up a quarter of a poundof butter in slices, and melt it in the hot milk --add sixtable-spoonfuls of sugar. Pour the milk over the bread, and mix with it a glass of good brandy. Brandy in which lemon-peel has been soaked for some time, is the best for thispurpose, and gives a fine flavor to the pudding. Beat seven eggs quitelight, and stir them into the mixture. If the pudding is to be placedimmediately in the oven, it is not necessary that the mixture should coolbefore the eggs are added. This pudding in a brisk oven will bake in less than an hour. 1342.--DEMI-PLUMPUDDING. Prepare the mould, then add a layer of plum pudding,broken in pieces, that has been left from the previous day, alternately, tillfull; fill up with custard, and steam or bake for thirty minutes. The remainsof any kind of pudding may be used thus. 1343.--MACARONIPUDDING. Simmer an ounce or two of macaroni in a pint of milk, with a bit of lemon-peel and cinnamon, till soft;put it into a dish with milk the yolk of three eggs and the white of one, some sugar, nut meg:, a spoonful of almond water, and half a glass of raisin wine; put a nice paste round the edge of the dish, and bake it. A layer of orange marmalade or rasp berry jam may be usedinstead of the almond water or ratafia. 1344.--OATMEALPUDDING. Take a pint of the best fine oatmeal, pour a quart ofboiling milk over it and let it soak all night; the next day put it in abasin just large enough to hold it, add two eggs beaten, and a little salt, cover it tight with a flour ed cloth, and boil it an hourand a half. It may be eaten hot, with cold butter and salt; orcold, sliced and toasted. 1345.--GROUND RICEPUDDING. In a pint of new milk boil two dessert spoonfuls ofground rice, adding a small piece of lemon-peel and a little cinnamon. Keep it stirring while boiling, and let it boil ten minutes,then let it cool; when cold add sugar to taste, a couple of well beaten eggs, and some nutmeg. Line your dish with a puff paste, pour in your rice, and bake a light brown. 1346.--PUDDING WITHFRUIT. Fruit puddings are best made in a basin, the basin to bebuttered and lined with the paste, and then filled with the fruit, which cover with the paste; the paste should berolled round to the thickness of half an inch, and when the fruit is in,drawn to the centre, and squeezed, and then tied up in a cloth kept on purpose,and boiled in plenty of water; when done, which will be in timeaccording to the nature of the fruit you put in it; serve it eitherturned out of the basin or not. The cover should be of the same thickness asthe sides. Sugar should be added before being covered. 1347.--COCOA-NUTPUDDING. Remove the shell of the cocoa- nut and cut the brown skin away, cut the nut in pieces and place it in coldwater, remove it and wipe it dry, grate about a quarter of a pound of alarge one, very fine, into a plate. Place in a basin a quarter of a pound ofpowdered white sugar, and three ounces and a half of fresh butter, stir them together till it becomes like cream; add to ita table-spoonful of brandy, and about four drops of either essence ofvanille, or any other essence whose flavor may be preferred. Place the whiteof six eggs into a bowl, and beat them well up; then add gradually the butter and sugar, which keep stirring at the same time; add bydegrees the cocoa- nut. Cover a pie dish with puff paste, placethe mixture in it, and bake in a mode rate oven for about half an hour. Glazeit with powdered sugar and powdered cinnamon mixed. 1348.--AN APPLECHARLOTTE. Pare and slice a quantity of apples; cut off thecrust of a loaf, and cut slices of bread and butter. Butter the inside of a pie dish, and place bread and butter all round; then put in a layer of apples sprinkled with lemon-peel, chopped very fine, and a considerable quantity of good brown sugar. Then put on a layer of bread and butter, and another of apples, lemon-peel, and sugar, until the dish is full, squeezing overthe juice of lemons, so that every part shall be equally fla vored.Cover up the dish with the crusts of the bread and the peels of theapples, to prevent it from browning or burning: bake it one hour and aquarter; then take off the peels and the crust, and turn it out of thedish. 1349.--HEDGEHOG--TOMAKE. Blanch two pounds of sweet almonds, pound them to a paste in a mortar, moisten occasionally with canary and orange-flowerwater; beat the yolks of twelve and the whites of live eggs with a pint of cream and some powdered sugar, put this with the almond paste and half a pound of fresh butter in a saucepan, setit over a stove, and keep it constantly stirring till firm enough to be mouldedinto the shape of a hedgehog; stick it full of blanched almonds cutlengthwise into slips and placed in a dish; beat up the yolks of foureggs, put them to a pint of cream, sweeten to your taste, stir themover a slow fire till hot, then pour it round the hedgehog, and let it standtill cold, serve it. A good calf 's- foot jelly may be poured round it ifpreferred. 1350.--TRIFLES Shouldbe made early in the day on which they are wanted; take a stale sponge cake,cut it in slices of one inch thick, and lay it on the bottom of the dish; layon that a thin layer of any kind of marmalade, jam, or jelly, have some macaroons and ratafia cakes, and lay on and cover thewhole with some sponge cakes. For a dish nine inches in diameter, mix twoglasses of sherry, one of brandy, half a one of rum, andthe same of noyeau, and pour over, and let it remain until it is well soaked,then pour over about one inch thick of rich custard, put a pint of cream into a bowl, with some sifted sugar, a squeeze of a lemon, andabout a table-spoonful of the wine, &c, you have put on the cake,whisk it well up. I use a trifle-churn, which saves some trouble; I also, useit for all whipped cream; and as the froth rises remove it with a spoonupon a clean sieve, where let it drain, then place it on the custard until itis high and handsome. I have occasionally, when being in a hurry, and having no cream byme, proceeded as above, and made the whip with the whites ofeggs, and some very white peach or egg-plum marmalade together, until it makes firm froth or whip, which put on the custard;this may also be colored a nice pink. 1351.--BROWN BREADPUDDING May be made with half a pound of stale brown bread coarsely grated, half a pound of Valencia raisins cut in halves, thesame of chopped suet, sugar and nutmeg. Mix with four eggs, two spoonfuls of brandy, and two of cream; boil itfor three or four hours in a cloth or basin that exactly holds it. Serve with sweet sauce. Prunes, or French plums, instead of raisins, make afine pudding, either with suet or bread. 1352.--BREAD AND BUTTERPUDDING. Make a custard of one egg and half a pint of milk, by boiling the milk with a little lemon-peel and sugar, and beating up the egg in it, putting it on the fire tothicken; butter slices of bread or French roll, and soakthem for an hour or two in this mixture; then lay them in a dish, sprinkling currants between each layer, with a little pounded sugar; and, ifmeant to be very nice, put some sweet meats on the top; but both the fruits and the sweetmeats may be omitted if thought proper. Pour over it another half a pint of milk beaten up with two eggs. 1353.--BOSTON CRACKERPUDDINGS. On three grated Boston crackers pour a pint ofboiling cream; when cold add a teaspoonful of cinnamon in finestpowder, the yolks of four and whites of two eggs, a spoonful of orange-flower water or ratafia, two ounces of loaf-sugar, andhalf a spoonful of flour, or almond flour, rubbed smooth. 1854.--VERMICELLI. Baked .--Simmer four ounces of vermicelli in apint of new milk ten minutes; then put to it half a pint of cream, a tea-spoonful of pounded cinnamon, four ounces of butter warmed, the same of white sugar, and the yolks of foureggs, well beaten; a little oil of almonds or a couple of spoonfuls ofratafia will much improve the flavor. Bake in a dish without a lining. Boiled. --Stir very gently four ounces of vermicelli into a pint of new milk over the stove, until it bescalding hot, but not more; then pour it into a basin, and add to it while hotone ounce of butter and two of sugar. When the above is nearlycold, mix in it, very gently, two well beaten eggs, and immediately putit into a basin that will exactly hold it. Cover carefully with a flour ed cloth; and turning the basin the narrow end up-wards, move itround for ten minutes, and boil an hour. Serve with pudding- sauce. 1355.--MUFFIN AND CRUMPETPUDDING. A very delicate pudding may be made in a short time from acouple of muffins and three crumpets, placed alternately in layers, and eitherboiled or baked in batter. If boiled, they should be placed in an earthen jar,buttered on the inside, filled with the batter, and covered on the top. Themuffins should be split open, and currant jelly, slices of apple, or any sort of fruit may be inserted. Or: --Half a dozen crumpets may be boiled without any fruit, after being dip-ped and covered in batter; seasoned only with sugar and a little nutmeg. 1356.--CHOCOLATEPUDDING. Boil a pint of new milk; dissolve in it one ounce of chocolate; sweeten it with loaf-sugar; add the yolks ofeight and the whites of four eggs well beaten; strain and pour it into aplain mould but-tered and papered; steam it for a half an hour; let it settlefor ten minutes, and serve with the following sauce :--Boil a half astick of vanilla in a pint of milk till it is reduced one-half;strain it, sweeten with loaf-sugar, and thicken with arrowroot. 1357.--SPONGEPUDDING. Butter a mould thickly, and fill it three parts fullwith small sponge-cakes, soaked through with wine; fill up the mouldwith a rich cold custard. Butter a paper, and put on the mould;then tie a flour ed cloth over it quite close, and boil it an hour. Turnout the pudding carefully, and pour some cold custard over it. Or: --Bake it, and serve with wine-sauce instead of custard. 1358.--QUAKINGPUDDING. Scald a quart of cream; when almost cold put to itfour eggs well beaten, one spoonful and a half of flour, some nutmeg and sugar; tie it close in a buttered cloth, boil it anhour, and turn it out with care, lest it should crack. Serve with wine-sauce. 1359.--BRANDYPUDDING. Line a mould with jar raisins stoned, or dried cherries, then with thin slices of Frenchroll, next to which put ratafias, or macaroons; then again fruit, rolls, and cakes in succession until the mould be full,sprinkling in, at times, two wine -glassfuls of brandy. Beat upfour eggs, yolks and whites; put to a pint of milk or cream, lightly sweetened, half a nutmeg, and the rind of ahalf a lemon finely grated. Let the liquid sink into the solid part; then flour a cloth, tie it tight over, and boil one hour. Keep the mould theright side up. Serve with pudding- sauce. 1360.--A BLACK-CAPPUDDING. Rub three table-spoonfuls of flour, smooth, by degreesinto a pint of milk, strain it, and simmer it over the fire until itthickens; stir in two ounces of butter; when cool, add the yolks offour eggs beaten and strained, and a half a pound of currants washedand picked, laid at the bottom of the basin or mould previously well buttered.Put the batter into the mould, cover it tight, and plunge it into boilingwater; the currants down-wards, that they may stick to the bottomand thus form the black-cap. 1361.--A SWEETMEATPUDDING. Cover a dish with thin puff- paste, and lay in itfreshly candied orange, lemon, and citron, one ounce each,sliced thin. Beat the yolks of eight and the whites of two eggs, and mix with eight ounces of butter warmed, but not oiled, and eightounces of white sugar. Pour the mixture over the sweetmeats, andbake one hour in a moderate oven. 1362.--ORANGEPUDDING May be made with six ripe oranges, large, juicy, of thebest kind, and peeled; the rinds to be beaten in a mortar with half apound each of fresh butter and moist sugar, to which add the yolks of six or eight eggs, and make the whole into a batter withthe juice of only three of the oranges : the number of eggs to be regulated by the size of the fruit. Put the materials into a mouldwith a paste around but not over it, and bake it for half an hour. 1363.--ROLY-POLYPUDDING. Make a rich pudding- paste with flour and butter, without suet, but as light as possible. Boll it out thin,and cut it to the breadth of eight or ten inches, making it at the same time aslong as you please; but half of a pound of flour and five ounces of butter, wetted with water, will probably be sufficient whenrolled out quite smooth; then spread upon it a thick layer of raspberry, currant, or any other sort of jam, but leave about an inch of all theedges bare. That done, roll it round; the roll of paste will secure the fruit, and the ends must be twisted together for the same purpose. Wrapit in a nicely flour ed cloth, and boil it for two to three hoursaccording to size. Take it up quite hot, and when served cut it crosswise. It may appearhomely, but it is an excellent and much-admired pudding. 1364.--A VERY FINE GERMANPUDDING. Pour half a pint of boiling milk upon one pound of bread-crumbs; beat up a quarter of a pound of fresh butter to a cream; add to it the yolks of ten eggs well beaten; drain the milk from the bread, and add the bread with a quarter of apound of pounded sugar and the grated peel of a lemon; whip the whites of the ten eggs into a solid froth, andadd them the last thing: butter a cloth, and put the pudding in, tyingit loose, as it will swell out a good deal; plunge it into boilingwater; boil one hour. Some persons add a quarter of a pound of jar raisins slit and stoned. When turned outstick the surface with sliced almonds, and serve with the following sauce :-- Take one pint of cream, one pint of sweet raisinwine, four ounces of sugar rubbed on the peel of a lemon, andlet them boil; add the yolks of six eggs well beaten, and the juiceof the lemon; mix them well; make the sauce quite hot, but do notlet it boil again; pour some over the pudding, serving the remainder in a sauce boat. 1365.--POUDING À LANESSELRODE. (From an eminent Hotel-keeper.) For a two-quart mould boila sufficient quantity of chestnuts to produce a quart of meal afterbeing pounded and rubbed through a tammy. Boil three-quarters of a pound of sugar in one pint of water, with a stick of vanilla, untilit is reduced one-third. Boil one pint of cream, add it to the chestnut-flour, then add the syrup and twelve yolks ofeggs beat up; set it over the fire, stir it until it nearly boils. Whencold, put the composition into a freezing-pot; when it is frozen, add half apint of whipped cream, three whites of eggs whipped up strong, ahandful of raisins stoned, chopped, and soaked for a day in maraschino,as many currants, one cup and a half of chopped candied lemon-peel, and a glass of maraschino; stir these ingredients allwell together, freeze it again, and put it into the mould. 1366.--PAIN PERDU. Beat eggs with salt, sugar and orange-flower water; cutslices of bread, soak in boiling milk, drain, and dip them in the egg; fry them in hot butter. Sift sugar over them, andserve hot with wine sauce. 1367.--A CHARTREUSE OF APPLESAND RICE. Boil six ounces of rice with a stick of cinnamon in milk until it is thick, stirring in a spoonful of rose-water or orange-flower water. Pare ten or twelve apples --golden pippins are the best-scoop out the core, and fillup the orifice with raspberry -jam. Border a deep dish with paste; put in the apples, leaving a space between, and fill it up with the rice. Brush the whole over with the yolk of an egg, and sift sugar thickly over it; form a pattern on the top, with sweetmeats, and bake it for one hour in a quick oven. 1368.--MIROTON OFAPPLES. Scald the apples, reduce them to a pulp, andpile them high upon the dish in which they are to be served; boil oneteaspoonful of grated lemon-peel and six or eight lumps of sugar in a teacupful of water; then add the yolks of threeeggs and the white of one, half an ounce of butter, onespoonful of flour, and one of brandy; mix the whole together overthe fire, and stir it quite smooth. Pour it upon the apples, then whiskthe whites of the other two eggs to a froth; put them over themiroton just as it is going into the oven, and sift some sugar over it.The oven must be slow: it will take ten or fifteen minutes to bake. 1369.--TO MAKE BATTER FOB FRUITPUDDINGS. Put half a pound of flour and a salt -spoonfulof salt into a pan, add very gently half a pint of milk; if mixedcarelessly the flour will remain in lumps; beat up the whites of foureggs, strain them to the batter, and beat it well with a wooden spoon. The whites should be beaten separately to a solid froth, and not added tilljust before the batter is used. For fruit the batter should be ratherthicker than when plain, to prevent the fruit from sinking to the bottomof the dish or basin, as it is equally good baked or boiled. It must be broughtto a proper consistency by adding milk. 1370.--OXFORDDUMPLINGS. Of grated bread two ounces, currants andshred suet four ounces each, two targe spoonfuls of flour, agreat deal of grated lemon-peel, a bit of sugar, and a little pimento in fine powder. Mix with two eggs and a little milk into five dumplings, and fry of a fine yellow brown. Made with flour instead of bread, but half the quantity, they areexcellent. Serve with sweet sauce. 1371.--GLOUCESTERPUDDINGS. Weigh three eggs in the shell; take their weight in flour and butter; take twelve bitter almonds and fiveounces of pounded sugar; beat all together for half an hour, and put themixture in pudding-cups, filling the cups only half full. Bake them half anhour. 1372.--YEASTDUMPLINGS. Take some yeast and make a very light dough, the same as for bread, using milk however instead of water; add salt, put it by the fire covered in a pan for half anhour or more, to rise; after this is done roll up the dough into small ballsand boil them for ten minutes, then take them out and serve directly with wine-sauce over them. To know when they are done stick a fork into one,and if it comes out clean they will do. A good method of eating them is by dividing them from the top with twoforks, as they get heavy by their own steam, and eat them directly with meat, or sugar and butter, or salt. ITALIAN PASTES. Besides macaroni, there are vermicelli, semolina, a smaller sort called macaroncini, and various other pastes of the samenature, all made in Italy from the same kind of grain; nothing, therefore, canbe more simply nutritive, nor, when well boiled, more easy of digestion. Thereare also two sorts of macaroni-- the pipe and the tape --the one hollow, and the other flat, but bothmade of the same material; the vermicelli being that most generally used insoup: each being severally used in various ways, according to the followingreceipts: 1878.--MACARONI. Somecooks are very fond of boiling it in milk, and even of laying it in milk for an hour or two to swell and become ten-der, but boilingwater is as good. A quarter of a pound will be sufficient for half a dozenpeople, and will not require more than twenty to twenty-five minutes to becometender, if boiled in water, but a few minutes longer if boiled in broth. Drain it when tender and lay it in a dish. Half the quantity of cheese should be finely grated and sprinkled over it in layers, with butter, to mix it thoroughly. It should be served quite hot. It issometimes eaten with mustard, and, if to be made very savory, beef gravy may be used with a truffle stewed in it. Nothing but Parmesan cheese will give it the true flavor. To brown Macaroni is the common practice ofcooks; though, in fact, the browning, while giving a pretty appearance to the macaroni, not only hardens the top of the cheese into a crust,but often gives a taste of rancidity. It can be done with crumbs of bread, thus:-- Wash the macaroni, then simmer it in a little broth, with alittle pounded mace and salt. When quite tender, take it out ofthe liquor, lay it in a dish, grate a good deal of cheese over, thencover that with bread grated fine. Warm some butter withoutoiling, and pour it from a boat through a little earthen colander all over thecrumbs, then put the dish in a Dutch oven to brown the bread of a finecolor. G old Macaroni, --If already dressed, may bewarmed in any kind of broth, letting it simmer gently upon a slow fire,with the yolks of two eggs to thicken; after which it should be put intothe oven in a mould covered with crumbs of bread; or, if undressed, itmay be made by leaving it overnight in broth, and then proceeding withit as above. 1374.--TIMBALE BEMACARONI. Soften the macaroni by boiling it fast until it willcut easily without breaking, but do not let it be too soft; then cut it intopieces half an inch long 5 butter a mould, stick the macaroni quite close to-gether all over it, so as to look like a honeycomb; then spreada thin layer of quenelle farce over the macaroni; fill up the mould witha mince of stewed ox palates cut into small pieces, and small buttonmushrooms, either pickled or fresh, moistened well with white sauce :close the mould, and boil it for three-quarters of an hour; turn it out verycarefully, and serve it with thick white sauce and mushrooms. 1375.--PÂTÉ DEMACARONI. Stew some macaroni in butter and water, or broth, strain it, cut it into pieces, and lay it at the bottom of thedish, adding ham balls, made of ham, pounded in a mortar, andblended with butter; then have ready any kind of game, boned andfilleted, cock's-combs or ox -palates, previously blanched and stewed, sweetbread cut into dice, and mushrooms, all stewed in good rich sauce; place a layer upon the macaroni, then another layer of meat, and, until the pie is filled, add to it equal quantities of cream and gravy, cover it with a paste, and bake it, oromit the paste, and stew it before the fire in a Dutch oven. The macaroni may be mixed with grated cheese. 1376.--VERMICELLI Is ofthe same substance as macaroni, but made much smaller, and frequentlyput into meat soups as giving them ad-ditional richness; but it is oftentoo spar-ingly used. To be well made the soup should be thickened with it, andfor that purpose it is preferable to macaroni. Semolina is of the same material, but madeinto small grains, which more easily thicken the soup in which it is mixed; itcan also be made into an excellent pudding with eggs and milk, using it in-stead of flour. It should be observed, as a general rule, that in using any of the Italianpastes--unless they should be sweetened -- Parmesan cheese should alwaysform part of the dish, in the proportion of one-half the quantity to that ofthe paste. 1377.--POLENTA. Is, inItaly, made from the flour of In-dian corn, but in Englandgenerally of semolina, thus:--Put a little salt and four ouncesof semolina into a quart of milk when it is beginning to boil,and let it continue to simmer for about ten minutes, stirring it occasionallyto guard it from burning. When well thickened pour it into a dish to cool, andwhen quite cold it will be very solid: then cut it into slices of less than aninch thick, upon which put a large grating of good Parmesan cheese, forno other kind will answer the purpose; nor should any spices be used,except a little mace; nor even that, unless it be made (as sometimesdone) with veal broth. Clarify a few ounces of fresh butter --though in Italy oil is always used--put a layer of the paste, powdered with the Parmesan, mixed with a little of the butter; bake it for half an hour in a moderately heated oven, and serveit up quite hot, with a separate plate of the grated cheese. RICE. For savory dishes rice should be stewed in good gravy,seasoned with mace, cayenne, and salt, with the addition of fried onions,shalot, garlic, and pot-herbs, strained and used at pleasure. For sweet dishes .--Boil it with lemon-peel, cinnamon, orbay-leaves, and, when done to a proper consistency, add powder-ed sugar andcold butter, stirring it all the time till melted; then pour in a little cream,and use it either as a covering for stewed fruits, or, if made thick enough, itmay be placed round the sides of a dish, leaving the middle hollow for thesweets. The same plan may be adopted for all sorts of meat, poultry, fish,fruit, and sweetmeats. The sugar should not be added until the rice is done, asit has a tendency to harden the grains. Plain rice pudding can be made with brown sugar, and milk baked slowly along time; a richer one by boiling a tea-cupful of rice, and when boiled,adding milk and fine sugar, with four beaten eggs, and baking it. 1378.--RICEFRITTERS. Pare very thin the rind of a lemon, and boil it in milk, with sugar enough to sweeten it, and a cup of rice. When the rice is quite soft take out the lemon peel, beat up the rice with a glass of brandy; shape it into fritters; brush themwith yolks of eggs, cover them with bread-crumbs, fry them in lard, dust them with fine sugar, and glaze with salamander. 1379.--TO BOILRICE. Very few persons know how to boil rice properly. It isusually so boiled as to become a heavy dough, so tenacious and solid as to be almostimpenetrable to the digestive fluids secreted by the mouth and the stomach,which are necessary to dissolve it, and to effect its digestion anddistribution, as innocent nourishing food. It should be so cooked that thegrains shall remain separate and distinct, but not hard, and the wholebe in some degree loose and porous. The Southern method is as follows: Pick over the rice carefully, rinse it well in cold water tillit is faithfully cleansed; drain off the water, then put it in a pot of boiling water, with a little salt. Allow as much as a quart of water to a teacup of rice, as it absorbs the water verymuch while boiling. Boil it seventeen minutes; then turn the water offvery close; set the pot over a few coals, and let it steam fifteenminutes with the lid of the pot off. The beauty of the rice boiled inthis way, is, that each kernel stands out by itself, while it is quitetender. Rice Croquettes. A plateful of rice croquettes arranged in the shaped ofpyramid. 1380.--RICECROQUETTES. Take half a pound of boiled rice, mix with it twotable-spoonfuls of grated cheese, and a little nutmeg and mace; then take a little butter, six table-spoonfuls of coldchicken breast, minced, six bearded oysters, a little parsley and lemon peel, and mixed together with rich milk or cream. Roll out a table-spoon heaping full of the rice, and putinto it as much as it will hold of the mixture, folding the edges and inclosingit; brush the balls over with yolk of raw egg, roll them in crackercrumbs, and fry them light brown in boiling lard. Serve them hotwhen drained. 1881.--CASSEROLE DE RIZ AUXCEUFS. Clean, wash, and stew the rice 5 work it well with stock and an egg beaten as the rice should be firm andwell blended then make it into a wall, lining the inside of a mould of therequisite height: bake the casserole. Take the white portion of coldfowl, cold veal, or sweetbreads; mince them finely, add somethick white sauce and mushrooms, fill the casserole, and coverthe top with poached eggs; cover them with glaze, and serve it up veryhot. 1882.--RICE, GATEAUOF. Boil a quart of cream, and add to it half a pound of powdered sugar, and three-quarters of a pound of rice; when thelatter is quite soft dissolve in it a quarter of a pound of butter, andthen put in the grated rind of a lemon; let it cool. When quite coldstir in four yolks and four whole eggs; more if the rice be very thick; butter a mould lightly, put the rice into it,place the mould in hot ashes so that it may be completely enveloped inand covered with them; in half an hour the gateau will be done enough, thenturn it out and serve. If you wish you can make a souffle by whipping the whites of six eggs like other souffles; in this case it should be servedin a silver dish. In putting the preparation into the mould be careful not tofill it, as the rice would swell and run over. 1883.--MUSH. Stir Indian meal into boiling water, adding a little salt andputting in the meal by degrees, while stirring with a mush stick. Let it boilthick, then simmer slowly till sufficiently cooked; three or four hours'simmering will not be too long. 1884.--HOMINY. Wash the hominy clean, and boil it with sufficient water to cover it. Itshould boil from four to five hours over a very slow fire. Eat it with butter and molasses, or with sugar and milk. It isconsidered extremely wholesome food, especially for children and delicatepersons. 1885.--CROQUETTES OF RICE WITHAPRICOT MARMALADE. Prepare the rice plain for a croquette, takethe handle of a wooden spoon, make a hole in the croquette, which fill with marmalade of apricots. Then close it up with some of the rice, put crumbs of bread as you do in all other croquettes, and fry in thesame manner. You may put in pieces of apple or other fruit. 1886.--SOUFFLE OF APPLES WITH ARICE BOEDER. Prepare your rice as for a croquette. Keep it of astrong solid substance; dress it up all round a dish, the same height as araised crust, that is to say, three inches high. Give a pleasing shape to the rice, and let it be levelled smooth; have some marmalade of apple ready, made very thick; mix with it six yolks of eggs and a small bit of butter; warm it on the stove: then have eight whites of eggs wellwhipped, as for biscuits; mix them lightly with the apples, andput the whole into the middle of the rice; put this into the oven, whichmust not be too hot. When the souffle is raised sufficiently, send it up, as itwould soon lower. If you wish to make a kind of pap, take a spoonful of flour, a pint of milk, a little salt, lemon, and sugar; let the whole boil well and thick, then mix it with the apples and the yolks of six eggs; the whites are to bewell beaten, and poured in afterwards; next bake the souffle in the oven. Thismethod is safer than the former, and is not deficient in delicacy. CHEESE. Cheese takes an important place at the table; not alone, in its simple placeat the close of the dinner, but that it forms the foundation of many excellentdishes. The selection of good cheese requires both judgment and experience; adelicate palate and a keen sense of smell are two essential requisites, whilethe eye is an assistant to point out those defects independent of taste orsmell. A prime cheese is readily told by a connoisseur by the color andtexture, without consulting either nose or palate. 1887.--TO MAKECHEESE. Put rennet into warm fresh milk, soaked in a little warm water, and add salt. Half a pint of rennet water willturn three pails of milk. Cut the curd into squares; afterwards break itup and let it stand a few minutes; pour off the whey, tie up the curd,and hang it up to drain dry. Then chop it up in a cheese tray, put it ina cloth in the cheese mould, and press it in the screw press half anhour. Then cut it up fine, salt it, and press again for twenty-fourhours, wetting the cloth previously. Take it out and turn, and put it in againin a clean wet cloth, and renew this process for three or four days. Then rubthe cheese with butter or lard, and set it away in a dryplace or in a wire safe. Wipe and grease it till the rind isfirm, and turn it every day for several weeks. 1888.--SMEARCASE OR COTTAGECHEESE. Set by the fire some milk beginning to sour, till acurd is formed: then pour off the whey, tie the curd in a cloth, andhang it up to drain, not squeezing it. Drain it twelve hours. Then work it in abowl with cream, salting to taste, and add a little fresh butter, till it is soft and smooth. 1889.--SAGECHEESE. Pound fresh sage leaves in a mortar to obtain the juice, and mix it with the milk while warm, after the rennet isput in. Spinach juice is an improvement. 1890.--CREAMCHEESE. Take a small pan of fresh morning's milk, warm from the cow is best, and mix with the cream skimmed from an equalquantity of the last night's milk. Warm it to blood heat, pour into it acup of water, in which a piece of rennet the size of two fingers hassoaked all night, and put it in a warm place till the curd is formed. Cut thecurd into squares, lay over it a thin straining cloth, press it down, and dipout all the whey that rises through it. Then put the curd in the cloth,squeeze it dry, then crumble and salt it to taste. Wash thestraining-cloth, lay it in the cheese hoop (a bottomless vessel the sizeof a dinner plate, perforated with small holes,) put the crumbled curd into thecloth, and fold the rest of the cloth over it. Put on the cover, and set aweight on it. In six hours turn the cheese, and let stand six hourslonger. Then take it out, rub it with fresh butter, and set it in adark, dry place. Turn it every day for four or five days, when it is fit foruse; and it must be eaten immediately when cut. It will keep but a few days,even in cold weather. 1891--CHEESEPUFFS. Take half a pint of cheese curd strained from the whey, with a spoonful and a half of flour, three eggs, leave out the whites of two, a spoonful of orange flower water, aquarter of a nutmeg, and sugar to make it sweet; beat it in amortar; lay a little of this paste in very small round cakes on a tinplate; if the oven is hot, they will take a quarter of an hour to bake them;serve them with pudding sauce. 1892.--EGGS ANDCHEESE Are mixed together in various ways by French cooks, under thenames of fondus or fondeaux, rumequins, and other titles, for thepurpose of preparing entremets, or side-dishes, for elegant tables. Gruyere and Parmesan are the most proper sorts to be thus used, butany dry cheese, of good flavor, may be employed. For Fondeau .--Slice a stale penny roll; pourover it three gills of boiling milk; when soaked, beat it well, and mixwith it half a pound of cheese, finely grated, with the yolks of foureggs well whisked. All this may be prepared when most convenient;immediately before it is wanted beat the whites of the four eggs into a solid froth, and add them; pour the whole into the paper forms,and bake them to your taste. A l' Italienne .--Mix half a pint of cream with a little flour and a little salt; keep stirring it over thefire until it is as thick as melted butter; then add about half a poundof Parmesan cheese finely grated. Mix it all well together until it ishalf cold; then take four eggs, separate the yolks from the whites, put the former to the cheese, and beat it well together.Then beat the whites to a solid froth, and add them to the rest; pourthe mixture into an ornamented mould or a deep dish lined with paper, cut in a fringe at the top, and only half filled, as it will rise very high.The oven must be very hot, in order to cause the rising, and the dish must beserved immediately, or it will fall; to prevent which, let the cover be ofmetal, strongly heated; twenty minutes ought to bake it. Fondeaux of a small size may be made in either ofthe above modes, and put into little paper moulds of any fancied form,but only half filled. 1893.--RAMÉQUINS. Take two eggs, twospoonfuls of flour, two ounces of melted butter, and two of grated cheese; mix all well together, and bake it in moulds or tartpansfor a quarter of an hour. A la Parisienne .--Boil half a pint of milk, and half the quantity of cream; melt one ounce of butter and alittle salt; mix in a spoonful of flour, and stir it over thefire for five minutes; pour in the milk and cream by degrees, andwork it smooth, taking care that it is thoroughly cooked. Then take it off, andadd half a pound of grated cheese, some coarse ground pepper, andan atom of nutmeg, with a very little powdered sugar, the yolks of eight eggs, and the whites of two, well beaten; whenperfectly mixed, add the whites of six eggs beaten to a froth. Thebatter should be as thick as cream. Make little paper trays, fillthem three parts full, and bake them in a very slow oven eighteen minutes. Fried Ramequins .--Grate half a pound of cheese, and melt two ounces of but-ter; when the latter is getting cool,mix it with the cheese and the whites of three eggs well beaten.Lay buttered papers on a frying-pan, put slices of bread upon it,and lay the cheese on the top; set it on the fire for about fiveminutes, then take it oft, and brown it with a salamander. 1894.--CHEESE SOUFFLE, ORDIABLOTINS. Put a gill of milk in a stewpan, with two ounces of butter; when boiling, stir in two spoonfuls of flour, keepstirring over the fire until the bottom of the stewpan is dry, then add four eggs by degrees, and a pound of grated cheese; mix well in,season with pepper, salt, and cayenne, rather highly,mould the paste into little balls with the forefinger against the side of the stewpan containing it, drop theminto hot lard; fry of a nice light brown, dress in pyramid upon anapkin, and serve very hot; a quarter of the quantity may of course be made.This is an excellent dish. 1895.--STEWEDCHEESE. Grate two ounces of chesse; put it into a basin; mix with it asmall teacupful of cream and an egg beaten and strained. Put intoa small saucepan one ounce or half an ounce of butter, according to therichness of the cheese; let it melt, then stir in the other ingredients,and let it boil until well mixed. Serve it hot either browned or plain. With Ale .--Cut the cheese into slices,pare off the rind, and put it into a dish over a lamp; then pour on asmuch ale as will cover it, and let it stew until the cheese isdissolved. This is a Welsh method, and a very good one. The cheese maybe spread with mustard. A very delicious sort of paste may also be made of any of the richcheeses, stewed with cream and yolk of egg, either seasonedsavorily or sweetened; and eaten hot or cold. 1896.--WELSHRABBIT. Put mellow cheese into a saucepan with about one ounceof butter and a very little ale; stir it over the fire until the cheese is quite dissolved; then take it off, add an egg wellbeaten, dish it, and brown it before the fire. Cheese-Toaster. An illustration of a cheese toaster. Or, Rasp some toasting cheese with a bit of butter, into a cheese-toaster, and, when the cheese dissolves thefire, put it upon thin slices of buttered toast, of which the crust hasbeen cut off. Serve it very hot, or the cheese will become tough; andeat it with pepper, salt, and mustard. 1897.--A CHEESEPUDDING. Grate three ounces of cheese and five of bread; and having warmed one ounce of butter in a quarter of a pint of newmilk, mix it with the above; add two well-beaten eggs and a little salt. Bake it half an hour. This is a nice way of finishing up a cheese when little but the rind is left. When mites have taken possession of a cheese, and this is consideredobjectionable, the following receipt will have the effect of destroying themwithout injury to the cheese. Wipe the cheese, put it into a potin which mutton has been cooked whilst the water is yet hot, makethe water boil a few seconds, take out the cheese, wipe itimmediately, dry it, and then put it away in a dry place until required foruse. 1898.--POTTEDCHEESE. Scrape and pound the cheese, with a piece of butter, cayenne pepper, a few grains of pounded mace, ateaspoonful of sifted sugar, a glass of white wine, and a little salt; press it into your potting-jar for shape. It may be potted with brandy. 1899.--CHEESE CREAM, A PLAINFAMILY WAY. Put three half pints of milk to one-half pint of cream, warm, or according to the same proportions, and put in a littlerennet; keep it covered in a warm place till it is curdled; have a mould withholes, either of china or any other, put the curds into it to drain about anhour, serve with good plain cream and pounded sugar over it. 1400.--PANCAKES. The common sort are composed of a light batter, made of eggs, flour, and milk, fried in hot dripping or lard, only-half of the whites of the eggs being generally used;but salt, or nutmeg, and ginger, may be added, and sugar and lemon should be served to eat with them. Or, when eggs are scarce, make the batter with flour and small beer, ginger, &c.; or clean snow, with flour, and avery little milk, will serve as well as eggs. If the family belarge, beat eight yolks and four whites of eggs, strain them intoa pint of milk, put a grated nutmeg, and sugar to yourtaste: set three ounces of fresh butter on the fire, stir it, and as itwarms pour it to the milk, which should be warm when the eggs areput to it; then mix smooth almost a half a pound of flour. Fry thepancakes very thin; the first with a bit of butter, but not the others.Serve several on one another, but at two or three different times, "hot andhot." A finer kind are fried without butter or lard, as thus:--Beat six fresh eggs extremely well; mix, whenstrained, with a pint of cream, four ounces of sugar, a glass ofgood French brandy, a half a nutmeg grated, the grated rind of a whole lemon, and as much flour as will make italmost as thick as ordinary pancake-batter, but not quite. Heat the frying-pantolerably hot, wipe it with a clean cloth; then pour in the batter to make thinpancakes. 1401.--APPLEPANCAKES. Mix two large spoonfuls of flour in a cup of milk or wine; when smooth add eight eggs, some pounded cinnamon, grated lemon-peel, a handful of currants, andsix or eight apples peeled and chopped: mix it all well together; meltsome butter in a frying-pan; when hot pour the whole mass in, and fry iton both sides: serve it stewed with pounded cinnamon and sugar very hot. 1402.--NEW ENGLANDPANCAKES. Mix a pint of cream, five spoonfuls of fineflour, seven yolks and four whites of eggs, and a very little salt; fry them very thin in fresh butter, and between each strew sugar and cinnamon. Send up six or eight at once. Waffle Furnace. An illustration of an opening waffle furnace. 1403.--DUTCHPANCAKES. Mix one pound of flour with a half a pound of sugar and a table-spoonful of cinnamon in powder; make it into a paste with ten eggs and two glasses of white wine, or oneeach of wine and brandy; when well mixed, roll it out and frylike other pancakes. 1401.--CREPES. Make abatter with flour, milk and eggs, adding brandy and orange-flower water. In two or three hours afterwards, melt a piece of butter or lard, the size of a walnut, in a frying-pan,pour in some batter, and shake it over the pan. "When done on one side, turn itover; when the other side is done, dish it and keep hot till the others aredone, sifting sugar over each. 1405.--RICEPANCAKES. To half a pound of rice put two-thirds of a pint of water, boil it to a jelly; when cold, add to it eight eggs, a pint of cream, a little salt and nutmeg, and half a pound of butter melted; mix well, adding the butter last, and working it only so much as will makethe batter sufficiently thick. Fry them in lard, but employ as little asit is possible to fry them with. 1406.--FRITTERS, Although a species of pancakes,are yet not so wholly composed of eggs, and may be made of almost anysubstance fried in butter. Make them of any of the batters directed forpancakes, dropping a small quantity into the pan, or beat six eggs verylightly and quickly in a quart of milk, adding gradually three quartersof a pound of potato-flour. Have ready a large quantity of lard, and when boiling hot put in the batter, allowing for each fritter half ateacupful. They do not require turning, and will be done in a few minutes, butmust be sent to table immediately, or they will become heavy; one pound and ahalf of lard will be required for the above quantity of fritters; theymay be eaten plainly pow-dered with loaf sugar or sugar andcinna-mon, and should be served on a folded napkin in the dish. Any sort ofsweet- meat or ripe fruit may be made into fritters. For plain Fritters .--Grate the crumb of a pennyloaf, put it into a pint of milk over the fire, and beat it very smooth;when cold, add the yolks of five eggs three ounces of sifted sugar, and half a nutmeg. Fry them in hog's lard, andserve pudding- sauce in a boat. Apple -Fritters .--Take the yolks of sixeggs, and the whites of three; beat them well, and strain them; thenadd a pint of milk, a little salt, half a nutmeg grat-ed,and a glass of brandy. Make it into thick batter with fine flour; slice the apples in rounds, cut out the core, dust them with fine sugar, and let them so re-main for two hours; then dip each slice inbatter, and fry them in plenty of boil-ing lard over a quick fire. Theyrequire lard sufficient to swim in. Glaze with sugar. Creme Frite aux Amandes .--Boil one pint of milk with two bay-leaves, a little lemon-peel, and a smallpiece of cinnamon. When the flavor is extracted, strain it; add twotable-spoonfuls of arrowroot, and sugar to palate; stir it wellover the fire, and add the yolks of four eggs, two ounces of chopped almonds, and a wine -glass of cream. Cook the whole overthe fire for about four minutes, stirring it all the time; then pour it on atin which has been well buttered, spread it about half an inch thick, put itinto the oven for ten minutes, let it get thoroughly cool, cut out with a roundcutter, dip into fine bread-crumbs, then into egg beat up verythin, and again into crumbs; fry in hot lard : dust over with sugar, and send to table. French Fritters .--Mix two eggs, well beatenand strained, with as much new milk and flour as shall make onethick pancake, which fry as pale as you can. Pound it in a mortar quite smooth,and add the yolks of four and whites of two eggs, one largespoonful of orange-flower water or cinnamon-water, one ounce ofblanched almonds beaten to a paste, two ounces of white sugar, and one-quarter of a small nutmeg. Pound it all till it becomes smoothbatter. Have ready a large stewpan half full of fine lard quite hot, anddrop the batter into it, the size of large nuts, until the surface befilled: as they brown, turn them: they will be very large: when done, removethem on clean paper, in a dish before the fire, and do the remainder.Serve as quickly as possible. They are excellent. Potato Fritters .--Boil two large potatoes, scrape them fine, beat four yolks and three whites of eggs, andadd one large spoonful of cream, another of sweet wine, a squeezeof lemon, and a little nut -meg. Beat this batter half an hourat least. It will be extremely light. Put a goodquantity of fine lard in a stewpan, and drop a spoonful of the batter ata time into it. Fry them, and serve in a sauce boat, a glass of whitewine, the juice of a lemon, one dessert-spoonful of peachleaf or almond water, and some white sugar, warmedtogether. Curd Fritters .--Rub down in a mortar a quart ofdried curd, with the yolks of eight and whites of four wellbeaten eggs, two ounces of sifted sugar, half a nutmeg, and half a spoonful of flour. Drop the batter into a frying pan, with alittle butter or fine lard. Orange and Sweetmeat Fritters .--Peeltwo oranges, then cut them in slices across, and take out all the seeds, dip the slices of orange in batter, as for apple -fritters, and fry them. Serve with powdered sugar upon eachfritter. 1407.--BEIGNETS. Mixand work well together half a pound of flour, and two ounces of butter, or three table-spoonfuls of sweet oil, and make it into abatter with some warm water; then mix into the batter a couple of raweggs, keeping the yolk of one for browning. The materials may thusbe made of any degree of consistence, so as to act as thick batter, or as thin paste by the addition of a little flour; and being made intosmall balls, are spread with the remaining yolk of egg, powdered usuallywith sugar, and fried in hot lard; and, when ready to be served,put them for a moment on a hair sieve to drain off the fat. If made solely with paste, without mince of any kind, they shouldhave an-other egg, and the batter be more con-tinually beaten, so as torender the beignets light; then, when prepared for dressing, take a spoonful ofthe batter formed into a ball, and drop it into the boiling lard. Alarge dishful will be fried in six or seven minutes. VARIOUS MODES OF COOKING EGGS. Unless an egg is perfectly fresh it is unfit for any purpose. You may trythe freshness of eggs by putting them in a pan of cold water. Those that sinkthe soonest are the freshest. Eggs may be preserved a short time by puttingthem in a jar of salt or lime-water with the small ends downwards. The saltshould not afterwards be used. They may be preserved several months by greasingthem all over with melted mutton suet, and wedging them close together in a boxof bran. The small ends always downwards. There are, of course, several sorts of eggs, according to the species ofpoultry which produce them. The turkey egg is the largest and the mostdelicate, after which, in point of flavor, is the guinea-hen's, and, in that ofsize, those of the goose and duck. Although all these are employed in cookery,yet the eggs of the "common barn-door fowl" are those most generally used whenserved up separately and boiled in the shell, in which case the main point istheir entire freshness. This can partly be judged of by putting them betweenyou and the light, and seeing that the white is clear and the yolk unclouded;for although nothing can be more delicately nutritive when newly laid, fewthings are more nause-ous when they are stale. 1408.--TO KEEP EGGS FOR WINTERUSE. Pour a full gallon of boiling water on two quarts ofquicklime and half a pound of salt; when cold, mix into it an ounce of cream of tartar. The day fol-lowing put in the eggs. After the lime has been stirred well into the boiling water, a large partof it will settle at the bottom of the vessel, onwhich the eggs will remain. Keep them covered with the liquor, and theywill keep for two years. 1409.--TO BOIL EGGS. Toeffect the simple process of boiling demands constant attention, as half aminute more or less may spoil the egg for a fastidious palate. Some putthem into cold water, and, when it boils, allow the eggs toremain in it for a minute longer; while others prefer putting them into boiling water, and there leaving them until done. That time is mostcommonly three minutes, and seldom less; but many persons object to their beingleft so soft, and four or five minutes are not unusual if the eggs arenot "new-laid" Ten minutes are required for making the yolks hard enoughfor salad, after which the eggs should be put for some time into coldwater to harden, or the yolks will not readily incorporate with thecondiments. It should, however, be understood that, in whatever way the egg is tobe boiled, it should be completely covered with water; that if put intothe water while boiling, the shell is subject to being cracked; and ifboiled too suddenly, the white becomes hard, while the yolk remains comparatively soft. The cook should therefore be providedwith min-ute glasses of various sizes--from one minute to five--to mark thetime; for they are more accurate than the hand of a kitchen clock, and do notrequire so much watching. 1410.--TO POACH EGGS Isto boil them without their shells, and requires still greatercare. The water must be perfectly pure, and the yolk must be onlyjust so much done as to fix itself firmly in the centre of the white. Egg Poacher An illustration of a three layers egg poacher. Put a moderate quantity of water into a broad flat stewpan. Frenchcooks add to it, when boiling, a spoonful of vinegar and a little salt. Take the pan off the fire whilst putting in the eggs; breakthe egg into a teacup or small ladle, and turn it gently into the water, so as to prevent the yolk from being mixed with the white; let them stand till beginning to set; then let the eggs boil gently until you perceive that they are done, by the white beingset, and the yolk appearing through it in a comparatively soft state;then take each from the water with an egg -slice, and pare off anyragged edges, which may appear around it, before sending to table. This latteroperation, however, if not quickly done, cools the egg, which ought tobe served quite hot, to avoid which inconvenience, a little machine forpoaching has been invented. Poached eggs are commonly placed upon buttered toast, broiled ham, or boiled spinach. 1411.--OMELETTE. Thisis the most usual mode of dressing eggs, after that of boiling them inthe shell. Four eggs will make a very pretty sized omelet, but the number mustof course depend on the size required. If sweet herbs be put in, a gooddeal of parsley should form part; tarragon gives a high flavor,and chives or shalots are not unfrequently used, but care should be taken that the flavor should not overpower that of theother ingredients. Omelets are judiciously varied by mixing grated ham or tongue with minced anchovies, when served at supper or as a side-dish atdinner; but when intended for the breakfast-table, it is more delicate to makethem of eggs alone. Although a common frying-pan may be used, yet one made on purpose, notlarger than the size of a dessert-plate, should be employed, so as not to allowthe omelet too much spreading, for it should always be kept of a certain degreeof thickness to secure the softness of the inside. It is therefore only to befried on one side, and when the under is browned and the upper brought to amoderate state of consistence, the fried side is to be folded over the other inthree. Butter is better than either lard or dripping for the fryingof an omelet. Any sort of pot- herbs is admissible; and many sorts ofminced fowl and fish are prepared in that manner. There arehundreds of receipts for omelets, but the principle is the same in all, thedifference being only in the flavoring. 1412.--OMELETTE AUNATUREL. Take four eggs, beat the yolks and whites together with a table-spoonful of milk, a little salt and pepper; put two ounces of butter into afrying-pan to boil, and let it remain until it begins to brown; pour the batterinto it, and let it remain quiet for a minute; turn up the edges of the omeletgently from the bottom of the pan with a fork; shake it, to keep it fromburning at the bottom, and fry it till of a bright brown. It will not take morethan five minutes frying. Aux fines Herbes .--Beat up four eggs with alittle cream, salt, pepper, chives, and parsley, minced very small. Put a piece of butter half the sizeof an egg into the frying-pan; let it begin to brown; pour in the omeletand allow it to set a little; then raise it round the edge, to allow more ofthe mixture to become brown. When that is done, turn it over to double it; butas in browning the lower side the upper will sometimes appear too soft; in thatcase make a slight use of the salamander, to give it firmness; put the dish onthe frying-pan, and turn it over. Let the fire be clear, but not too hot. Aux Confitures .--Beat up eight eggs with atable-spoonful of powdered sugar, a little nutmeg, a pinch of salt, some finely-chopped lemon-peel, and a wine -glassof cream, or about a quarter of an ounce of butter. Make anomelet-pan hot, put in a small piece of butter, and, when the eggs are thoroughly mixed, pour them into the pan; stir it about, and,when set, arrange the omelet neatly in the pan; lay on two spoonfuls of jam,roll it up, and glaze it with sugar and the salamander. Any of the preserved fruits, when prepared as jam, will answer the purpose. Une Omelette aux Amandes is also looked upon as adelicacy, and made by substituting almond-flour, or pounded sweetalmonds, for jam. Une Omelette d' Huîtres may be made with four raw eggs, a little cream, beaten up either with or without sweet herbs and grated ham, but seasoned with a little salt, pepper, and nutmeg, together with a dozen oysters bearded, dried, minced very small, and fried in butter. 1413.--OMELETTESOUFFLÉE. Take six eggs, separate the whites fromthe yolks, add to the yolks a table-spoonful of arrowroot or potato-flour, six ounces of pounded loaf-sugar, some grated lemon-peel, and a small quantity of lemon-zest, or chopped peel, or orange-flower water. Beat the wholetogether for several minutes, until they are made into a batter, and then whip the whites until they become a froth; stir in lightly thebatter. Have ready an omelet-pan of the proper size heated upon the stove; putinto it a quarter of a pound of butter, and when it begins to boil putthe whole into the pan, and stir it with a spoon carefully until it becomespartially firm. That done, turn it out upon a small circular dish, of silver ormetal, as the omelet ought to acquire the form of a dome, and the dish beplaced in a very moderately heated oven for at least ten mintues or a quarterof an hour, according to the care and nicety with which it has been made; afterwhich it will have risen into a puff of considerable height, similar to thefashionable supper dish, "trifle." It should then be sprinkled with a little powdered sugar, the salamander held over it, and be servedimmediately. An Omelette Souffle should not be cooked till the moment it is wanted. Itswhole delicacy, indeed, depends upon its being quickly baked, being very light,and, as Dr. Kitchiner observes, its making but one movement--viz.: from thefire to the throat of the guest. The great art is to make it light, foamy, and,as it were, effervescent. 1414.--ŒUFS FRITS, ORFRIED EGGS. Break some fresh eggs into a dish, without damagingthe yolks, and powder over them a little pepper and salt. Then fry some butter; a quarter of a pound will do for a dozen eggs. When the butter is completely fried, pour it over the eggs, and then put them into the frying-pan, which keep at a littledistance from the fire, for fear the eggs should stick. When they aredone at the bottom, use the salamander for the top, till they turn white. Then dish without breaking them, and pour over them a little vinegar. 1415.--PLAIN BAKEDEGGS. Butter with one ounce a plated or common tart -dish, that will bear the heat of the oven; break carefullysix eggs in it, season with one pinch of pepper, half a spoonfulof salt, the juice of half a lemon, and add half an ounceof butter in small pieces over; put in a slack oven until set, andserve. 1416.--RANDALLEDEGGS. Twelve eggs boiled hard and halved; cut a piecefrom the ends of half of them to allow them to stand, take out the yolks, chop them, and mix chopped boiled ham or tongue, season with nutmeg and mace, moisten with butter, and putit in the space within the egg. Put the halves together, and stand thejoined eggs on end in the dish. 1417.--ŒUFSFARCIS. Boil six eggs hard, remove the shells, but leave the eggs whole; cover them with a rich forcemeat made with scraped ham, pounded anchovy, pounded veal, and bacon fat, well pounded together and highly seasoned; brush them with the yolk ofegg, and dredge them with bread-crumbs or vermicelli; frythem a pale gold color, or put them for a quarter of an hour in an oven, andserve them up with gravy in the dish. Œufs sur le plat is a German mode of frying an egg by means of a small cheese plate, which, being thoroughlywarmed, is greased in the indented part with a bit of butter or a verylittle sweet- oil, and into this part the egg is broken from theshell, thus retaining the exact rotundity of the plate, which is then placedupon the gridiron over a good fire. It may beslightly browned, if thought fit, with a salamander, but does not need it; andthough quite as delicate, yet renders the egg rather more savory than by poaching. 1418.--EGGS ANDVEGETABLES. Eggs and Spinach .--Poach half a dozen eggs, trim them nicely, and serve them upon stewed spinach. Eggs and Onions, or à la Tripe .-- Skin six or eight onions, mince them, put some butter into a stewpan and melt it,add about two spoonfuls of flour, mix both well together, then add the onions, and wet them with milk, cream or water; letthem stew, taking care that the onions and butter do not becomebrown; season with a little salt and white pepper; cut some hard eggs into slices, and when the sauce is ready put them in;make the whole very hot, and serve it up. 1419.--ŒUFSBROUILLÉS. Break four or six eggs; beat them and putthem into a saucepan with a piece of butter, a little salt, and aspoonful of sauce or gravy, which makes the eggs softer;stir them over the fire until sufficiently thick; serve on a plate garnishedwith toasted bread. To eggs dressed this way, truffles, ham, mushrooms, &c., minced, may be added. The differencebetween this and an omelet is, that an omelet is compact and turns out smooth,whereas aufs brouillés are less done, and aretherefore broken. In Ireland, where it is in general use, it is usually served upon hot buttered toast, and is there called " buttered eggs ." It is also very common inFrance, where it is usually served for breakfast. A very pretty dish of eggs is madethus :--Break some eggs into a small tart -dish, withoutinjuring the yolks, or lay-ing one over the other. Drop on them somewarm butter, and lightly strew crumbs of bread. Put it in theoven until the whites be set, and serve with a wreath of parsley round the edge. 1420.--EGGS WITH BURNTBUTTER. Put into a frying pan two ounces of butter, which melt;as soon as it is on the point of browning, put in the eggs, which havebeen previously broken in a basin, and seasoned with pepper and salt; when well set, serve, with a teaspoonful of vinegar overthe eggs. 1421.--SNOW EGGS. Takehalf a pint of milk and a little sugar, and flavor it with orange-flower water, or any other essence, and put it in a stewpan onthe fire, having previously beaten up the whites of six eggs to a stifffroth; if very hot weather, you must place the basin they are in on ice, or in cold water; whilst beating add some powdered sugar lightly; whenthe milk is boiling, take the white up with a table-spoon, anddrop it, one table-spoonful at a time, into the stewpan to poach, keeping theshape of an egg, which turn over when set; when done, remove with acolander on to a sieve, and dress them in a crown on the dish you intend toserve them on; when all done, beat up the yolks of four of the eggs in a stew-pan, with a little sugar, and a few drops of orange-flower water, pour part of the boiling milk out of thestewpan into it, sufficient to make a good stiff custard, put it on the fireuntil rather thick, and pour over the white, and serve either hot orcold: the last is preferable. 1422.--EGGS INCASES. Cut up a sheet of paper into pieces of three inchessquare, turn up half an inch all round so as to form a kind of square case;there will then remain but two inches square in the inside. Take a small pieceof butter, a pinch of fine bread crumbs, a little fine chopped parsley, spring onions, salt, and pepper, and mix them together, put a little into each case, thenbreak one egg into each, put them on a gridiron over a slow fire, and dothem gently, or place them in a dish in an oven; when well set, serve. Smallround paper cases may be procured very cheap. 1423.--GARNITURE FOROMELETTES. Asparagus, Peas, and GreenPeas .-- Put in a stewpan three spoonfuls of plain boiled asparagus, that has previously been cut up, add to it half an ounce of butter, a little salt, pepper, and sugar, warm iton the fire, moving it continually, when warm, put it with a spoon in thecentre of the omelette, turn over, and serve; the same with peas; ratherthin melted butter or white sauce may be served round it. Oysters .--Open and blanch delicately twelvemiddle-sized oysters, and put them in a stewpan with their own gravy, after having bearded them, add a tablespoonful of milk or cream, and give it a boil, then add half an ounce of butter, inwhich you have mixed a saltspoonful of flour, stir it in withoutbreaking the oysters, put over the centre of your omelette, and proceedas before. Lobster .--Cut half or a small one in thinslices, put four table-spoonfuls of melted butter in a stewpan, a fewdrops of essence of anchovies, and a little cayenne; put in your lobster, warm it well, and put it in the middle of the omelette, asabove. Mushroom .--Wash about ten small fresh mushrooms, cut in slices, put in a stewpan, with half an ounce of butter, a little salt, pepper, and the juice of aquarter of a lemon, simmer for a few minutes on the fire till tender; iftoo liquid, add a little flour, place in centre of omelette, and proceedas above. Bacon. --Cut two ounces of good leanbacon in small dice, put in a pan to fry with a pat of butter forone minute, then mix with the eggs prepared as for omelette of herbs, omitting the salt, and cook the same way. This omelette isin great repute in France, especially among the epicures of the Barrieres,outside of Paris. It prepares the palate to receive with pleasure the cheap andacid wines sold there, which must have been in vented by Bacchus when in a sourhumor. TO MAKE BREAD. 1424. For a good baking, take two and a half pecks of wheatflour; put it into a kneading trough or earthen pan well glazed; make ahole in the centre of the flour and pour in a pint or more of good brewer's yeast, or still more of homemade, well mixed with a pint of milk-warm water. Stir in, with a spoon, flour enough to make abatter; sprinkle this with dry flour, and cover it entirely. Cover thewhole lightly with a cloth, and set it by the fire. This is setting the sponge . When the batter has swelled andrisen so as to form cracks in the flour covering it, scatter through ittwo table-spoonfuls of fine salt, and mix the flour with softwarm water, added by degrees. Work and mould the dough thoroughly, kneadingit till smooth and light, and till not a particle will stick to the hands. Thensprinkle a mass of dough with flour, cover it with a warm cloth, and letit stand near the fire for an hour, or less in warm weather. It has now risento its height. Divide it into seven loaves; mould and form them lightly on the paste -board, put them on flour ed tin or earthen plates, and placethem in the oven. With good, dry, hard wood, the oven will be heated in an hour. Whenthe coals are spread over the bottom, the oven will be clear of smoke.Clean and sweep it, and throw in a little flour to see if it is too hot; if it burns black at once, let the ovencool a little. When the loaves are in, close the oven and keep it tight. Theloaves should be done in from an hour to an hour and a half. When the loaves are baked, take them from the oven, and put them on a cleanshelf, in a cool pantry, with a light cloth over them. If the crust isscorched, or the bread too much baked, wrap the loaves in a clean coarsetowel, slightly damped. 1425.--BROWN, OR DYSPEPSIABREAD. Take six quarts of wheat meal, rather coarsely ground,one teacup of good yeast, and half a teacup of molasses, mixthese with a pint of milk-warm water and a teaspoonful of saleratus. Make a hole in the meal and stir this mix ture in the middletill it is like batter. Then proceed as with fine flour bread. Make thedough, when sufficiently light, into four loaves, which will weigh two poundsper loaf when baked. It requires a hotter oven than fine flour bread, and must bake about an hour and a half. 1426.--RYE AND INDIANBREAD. There are many different proportions in the mixing of this bread. Some put one-third Indian with two of rye; otherslike one-third rye and two of Indian; others prefer it half andhalf. If you use the largest proportion of rye meal, make your dough stiff,so that it will mould into loaves; when it is two-thirds Indian, itshould be softer and baked in deep earthen or tin pans after the followingrules: Take four quarts of sifted Indian meal : put itinto a glazed earthen pan, sprinkle over it a table-spoonful of finesalt; pour over it about two quarts of boiling water, stir and workit till every part of the meal is thoroughly wet; Indian meal absorbs agreater quantity of water. When it is about milk -warm, work in two quarts of rye meal, half a pint of lively yeast, mixed with a pint of warm water; add more warmwater if needed. Work the mixture well with your hands: it should be stiff,but not firm as flour dough. Have ready a large, deep, well butteredpan; put in the dough, and smooth the top by putting your hand in warmwater, and then patting down the loaf. Set this to rise in a warm place inthe winter; in the summer it should not be put by the fire. When it begins tocrack, on the top, which will usually be in about an hour or an hour and ahalf, put it into a well heated oven, and bake it three or four hours. It isbetter to let it stand in the oven all night, unless the weather is warm. Indian meal re quires to be well cooked. The loaf will weigh betweenseven and eight pounds. There is another mode which many persons think preferable. Scald a quart of rye and another of Indian meal with a small quantity of boiling water. Boil a teaspoonful of salt in a pint and a half of milk, mix the rye and Indian to gether, and pour the milk over them--add half a pint of fresh yeast; but not beforethe meal is cooling. The mixture must be well kneaded and placed in a deep panby the fire to rise. When it has risen sufficiently, take it out of the pan,make it into any shape you like, and put it into an oven well heated. If thefire is too brisk the crust will brown and the inside remain heavy. Bake from two to three hours. 1427.--TO MAKE EXCELLENT BREADWITHOUT YEAST. Scald about two handfuls of Indian meal; intowhich put a little salt, and as much cold water as will make itrather warmer than new milk; then stir in wheat flour, till it isas thick as a family pudding, and set it down bythe fire to rise. In about half an hour it generally grows thin; you maysprinkle a little fresh flour on the top, and mind to turn the potround, that it may not bake at the side of it. In three or four hours, if youmind the above directions, it will rise and ferment as if you had set it with hop yeast; when it does, make it up in soft dough, flour a pan,put in your bread, set it before the fire, covered up, turn it round tomake it equally warm, and in about half an hour it will be light enough tobake. It suits best to bake it in a Dutch oven, as it should be put into theoven as soon as it is light. 1428.--TO MAKEYEAST. The settlings of home-brewed beer in a clean cask, makegood yeast. Common yeast is made thus: Take two quarts of water, one handful of hops, two of wheatbran; boil these twenty minutes; strain off the water, and while itis boiling hot, stir in wheat or rye flour, to a thick batter:when this is milk -warm, add half a pint of good lively yeast anda large spoonful of molasses; stir well and set it away, in a cool placein summer and a warm one in winter. When light it is fit for use. When cold, itmay be put in a clean jug or bottle; do not fill the vessel containing it, andleave the cork loose till next morning. Corked tightly, it will keep ten ortwelve days in a cool place. 1429.--MILK YEAST. To apint of new milk put a teaspoon ful of salt or a large spoonfulof flour; stir well, and keep it lukewarm by the fire; in an hour itwill be fit for use. Twice as much must be used as of com mon yeast; andthe bread dries soon; and in summer this method is convenient. Never keep yeast in a tin vessel. If sour, put in saleratus --ateaspoonful to a pint of yeast, when ready for use. If it foams uplively, it will raise the bread; if not, throw it away. 1430.--RICE BREAD. Boilsoft a pint of rice; when cold, add a pint of leaven, and work in threequarts of flour. It will be light in an hour in warm weather. Divide thedough into three loaves, and bake in buttered tin pans. It grows dry soon. 1431.--YEASTCAKES. Boil three ounces hops in six quarts water, downto two quarts. Strain it, and while boiling hot, stir in wheat or ryemeal to a batter. When milk -warm, add half a pint of good yeast, and let it stand till very light--about three hours. Then work insifted Indian meal till it is stiff dough. Roll out and cut it in cakesthree inches by two, half an inch thick. Lay these cakes on a smooth board, flour ed; prick them with a fork, and place them in a dry store room,exposed to sun and air. Turn them every day. They will be dry in a fortnight.When dry, put them into a coarse, cotton bag, and hang them in a cool, dryplace. They will keep a year. Two will raise a peck of flour. Break theminto a pint of milk -warm, water, and stir in a spoonful of flour the evening before you bake; then set it in a moderately warmplace till morning. Bread made at home is not only more palatable, but far moreeconomical. A stove will bake with little expense of fuel, and the flour used for a family will cost one-third less than bread bought. You aresure too, that good flour is used, and that your bread containsno alum, ammonia, or sulphate of zinc, which it is said bakersput in to make their bread light and white. Baker's bread is nearly tasteless, dries directly, and can not be as nutritious as bread baked at home. Ladies keeping house in the city ought to maketheir own bread as well as cake, or at least superintend the process. Itrequires no sacrifice of time, and is a neat, delicate, and ladylikeemployment. Three things, however, are requisite-- yeast just livelyenough, dough just light enough, and an oven just hot enough. Practice willshow how to at tain perfection in these respects. 1432.--POTATOBARM. Boil half an ounce of hops in four quarts of water, and leave it till the hops sink; then strain it into anearthen pot, and, when milk -warm, add three table-spoonfuls of sugar and half a pint of flour, leave it near the fire,frequently stirring it, for twenty-four hours. Then add four pounds potatoes pounded and pulped through a colander; they are best un boiled. When themixture is well risen, half a pint will do for four quarts of flour. The bread requires much kneading, and should be left eight or ten hours torise. A few spoonfuls of beer barm are an improvement to the stock, which should not be allowed to run out, as a little of the oldwill improve a new supply. Brick ovens are the best for baking all kinds of bread, large cakes and pies; the reason of which is chiefly owing totheir being generally capable of retaining the heat a much longer time than onebuilt of iron. For the baking of pastry, light bread, rolls, and breakfast-cakes,the iron ovens, fixed in the usual kitchen ranges, have the advantage ofrequiring but little fire, and enabling the cook to regulate itstemperature. 1433.--ALMONDBREAD. Blanch, and pound in a mortar, half a pound of shelled sweetalmonds till they are a smooth paste, adding rose-water asyou pound them. They should be done the day before they are wanted. Prepare apound of loaf-sugar finely powdered, a teaspoonful of mixedspice, mace, nutmeg and cinnamon, and three-quartersof a pound of sifted flour. Take fourteen eggs, and separate the whites from the yolks. Leave out seven of the whites, andbeat the other seven to a stiff froth. Beat the yolks till very thickand smooth, and then beat the sugar gradually into them, adding the spice. Next stir in the white of egg, then the flour, andlastly the almonds. You may add twelve drops of essence oflemon. Put the mixture into a square tin pan, well buttered, or into a copper ortin-turban mould, and set it immediately in a brisk oven. Ice it when cool. Itis best when eaten fresh. You may add a few bitter almonds to the sweet ones. 1434.--DAMASCUSBISCUITS. Take the whites of three eggs beaten to a froth, aquarter of a pound of good beef suet chopped very fine, and half anounce of bitter almonds blanched, chopped fine, and beaten well with thefroth of the eggs. Then take the yolks of the eggs, and mix withsix ounces of sifted loaf sugar, beat well, pour into the mixture of almonds and whites of egg; mix well, and shake in two ounces of flour, with sufficient lemon to flavor them. Pour into small tins, ormoulded papers, and bake in a quick oven. 1435.--MILK BISCUITS. Aquarter of a pound of butter, one-quart of milk, one gill of yeast, as much flour as will form the dough, and a little salt. Stir flour into the milk, so as to form a very thickbatter, and add the yeast; this is called a sponge. This should be donein the evening; in the morning cut up the butter, and set it near thefire, where it will dissolve, but not get hot; pour the melted butter into the sponge, then stir in enough flour to form a dough, knead it well and stand it away to rise. Assoon as it is perfectly light, butter your tins, make out the dough insmall cakes, and let them rise. When they are light, hake them in a very quickoven, and send them to the table hot. 1436.--ROLLS. French Rolls are usually made by the bakers,but in country houses, where families bake their own bread, they may bedone as follows:-- Sift one pound of flour, and rub into it two ounces of butter; mix in the whites only of three eggs beaten to a froth, and atable-spoonful of strong yeast; to which add enough of milk, witha little salt, to make a stiff dough, and set it covered be fore thefire to rise--which will take about an hour; and, if cut into small rolls, andput into a quick oven, will be done in little more than ten minutes. 1437.--ROCKS. Take aloaf that is half baked, pull it apart, and with two forks tear the crumb intobits about the size of a walnut; lay them on a tin, and return them tothe oven, and bake of a light brown. A loaf made for the purpose with milk and a little butter makes them nicer. A sweet cake pulled inthis way is very good. 1438.--MUFFINS. Taketwo eggs, two spoonfuls of new yeast, and a little salt. Mix a little warm new milk and water into a quart of flour. Beat all well together, and let it stand to rise. Bake them forabout twenty minutes, until of a light brown, either on a hot iron, or inshallow tin rings in a Dutch oven. When to be brought to table, toast them slightly on both sides, but not in the middle: then notch them round thecentre, and pull them open with your fingers, without using a knife, and butter them. 1439.--CRUMPETS. Beattwo eggs very well, put to them a quart of warm milk and water, and a large spoonful of yeast; beat in as much fineflour as will make them rather thicker than a common batter pudding; thenmake the stove hot, and rub it with a little butter wrapped in a cleanlinen cloth; pour a large spoonful of the batter upon the iron, and let it runwithin a ring to the size of a teasaucer; turn them with the elastic blade ofan old table-knife, and when you want to use them, toast them veryquickly, but not too crisply, and butter them. 1440.--SALLY-LUNN. Intoone pint of flour rub a piece of butter the size of a walnut, a little salt, and a little yeast. Let it risehalf an hour before the fire. Then mix it with two eggs, and if notenough add a little milk; knead the dough well and let it stand someminutes before the fire; after which make this quantity into five cakes andhave them slack-baked, as they must be well warmed in a Dutch oven before beingtoasted for table. 1441.--BUCKWHEATCAKES. Mix a quart of buckwheat flour with a pint of lukewarm milk, ( water will do, but is not as good,) and a teacup of yeast --set it in a warm place to rise. When light, (which will be in thecourse of eight or ten hours if family yeast is used, if brewer'syeast is used they will rise much quicker,) add a teaspoonful of salt --if sour, the same quantity of saleratus dissolved in alittle milk, and strained. If they are too thick, thin them with coldmilk or water. Bake them with just fat enough to preventtheir sticking to the griddle. 1442.--RICE CAKES. Boila cupful of rice until it becomes soft;while it is warm mix a large lump of butter with it and a little salt. Add as much milk to a small teacupful of flour and alittle corn meal, scalded, as will make a tolerably stiff batter--stirit until it is quite smooth and then mix it with the rice. Beat five eggs as light as possible and add them to the rice. These cakes are fried on a griddle as all other pancakes--they must becarefully turned. Serve them with powdered sugar and nutmeg. They should beserved as hot as possible. 1443.--FLANNEL CAKES ANDWAFFLES. Stir into two pints of flour as much milk aswill make a light batter. Melt a large lump of butter and add with it alittle salt. Beat together five eggs and stir them into thebatter. These cakes are to be baked on a griddle. Serve them with powderedsugar. It is customary to mix with the butter a table-spoonful of yeast and leave it to rise for several hours; but this is un necessaryunless you wish to bake the cakes in waffle or wafer irons. 1444.--EGG BISCUIT. Onepound of flour; wet nearly all of it to a paste with the whites of two eggs, beat and roll out thin, work in three-quarters of apound of butter, placing bits on the paste, flour ing,folding, and rolling it out again till all is used. Move the rolling pin fromyou always. Out out in small squares or with a tumbler, and bake in a quickoven. 1445.--APPLE BREAD. Avery light pleasant bread is made in France by a mixture of apples and flour, in the proportion of one of the former to twoof the latter. The usual quantity of yeast is employed as in makingcommon bread, and is beat with flour and warm pulp of the apples after they have boiled, and the dough is then considered as set:it is then put in a proper vessel, and allowed to rise for eight or twelvehours, and then baked in long loaves. Very little water is requisite;none, ge nerally, if the apples are very fresh. 1446.--JOHNNYCAKES. Sift a quart of corn meal into a pan, make a hole in themiddle, and pour in a pint of warm water. Mix the meal and water gradually into a batter, adding a teaspoonful of salt; beat it veryquickly, and for a long time, till it becomes quite light; then spread it thickand even on a stout piece of smooth board; place it upright on the hearthbefore a clear fire, with something to support the board be hind, and bake itwell; cut it into squares, and split and butter them hot. Cakes may also be made with a quart of milk, three eggs, oneteaspoonful of carbonate of soda, and one teacupful of wheat-flour; add Indian meal sufficient to make a batter likethat of pancakes, and either bake it in buttered pans, or upon a griddle, andeat them with butter. 1447.--INDIAN GRIDDLECAKES Are made with one pint of Indian meal, fourtable-spoonfuls of flour, one quart of milk, four eggs, and salt to taste. 1448.--TO MAKERUSK. Take a piece of bread -dough large enough to fill a quartbowl, one teacup of melted butter, one egg, one teaspoon ful of saleratus; knead quite hard, roll out thin, lap it together, rollto the thick ness of a thin biscuit, cut out with a bis cuit mould, andset it to rise in a warm place. From twenty to thirty minutes will generally besufficient. Bake them and dry thoroughly through, and you will have an excellent rusk to eat with your coffee. You can make them with hop yeast, and sweeten them, too, if you please;use milk with yeast. 1449.--BANNOCK OR INDIAN MEALCAKES. Stir to a cream a pound and a quarter of brownsugar, a pound of butter --beat six eggs, and mix them withthe sugar and butter --add a teaspoonful of cinna mon or ginger --stir in a pound and three-quarters of white Indian meal, and a quarter of a pound of wheat flour, (the meal should be sifted,)Bake it in small cups, and let it remain in them till cold. Corn Cake Pan. An illustration of a corn cake pan. 1450.--RUSK. Melt fourounces of butter in half a pint of new milk; then add to thisseven eggs, well beaten, a quarter of a pint of yeast, and threeounces of sugar; put this mixture, by degrees, into as much flour as will make an extremely light paste, more like batter, and set it torise before the fire for half an hour; then add more flour to make itrather stiffer, but not stiff. Work it well, and divide it into small loaves orcakes, about five or six inches wide, and flatten them. When baked and cold,slice them the thickness of rusks, and brown them a little in the oven. 1461.--MUFFINS. Mix aquart of wheat flour smoothly with a pint and a half of lukewarm milk, half a teacup of yeast, a couple of beaten eggs, aheaping teaspoonful of salt, and a couple of table-spoonfuls of lukewarmmelted butter. Set the batter in a warm place to rise. When light, butter your muffin-cups, turn in the mixture, and bake the muffins tilla light brown. 1452.--SOFTWAFFLES. Stir into a quart of flour sufficient lukewarm milk to make a thick batter. The milk should be stirred ingradually, so as to have it free from lumps. Put in a table-spoonful of melted butter, a couple of beaten eggs, a teaspoonful of salt, and half a teacup of yeast. When risen, fill your waffle-irons with thebatter--bake them on a bed of coals. When they have been on the firebetween two and three minutes, turn the waffle-irons over--when brown on bothsides, they are sufficiently baked. The waffle-irons should be well greasedwith lard, and very hot, before each one is put in. The waffles shouldbe buttered as soon as cooked. Serve them up with powder ed white sugar and cinnamon. For Rice Waffles. --Take a teacup and a halfof boiled rice --warm it with a pint of milk, mix it smooth, thentake it from the fire, stir in a pint of cold milk, and a teaspoonful of salt. Beat four eggs, and stir them in, together with sufficient flour to make a thick batter. 1453.--SHORTCAKES. Dissolve half a pound of fresh butter in as much milk as will make a pound and a half of flour into a paste, roll it out about a quarter of an inch thick, and cut it intolarge round cakes. Do them in a frying-pan, and serve them hot. They are eatenwith butter. 1454.--WAFERCAKES. Wafer cakes are an excellent tea cake, and they do nottake long to make, although a little practice is necessary be fore they can besuccessfully made. Beat three eggs quite light. Wash a little less than a quarter of apound of butter, to extract the salt from it, and mix itwith a quarter of a pound of sifted sugar --add the beaten eggs, a tea-spoonful of rose-water, and as much sifted flour as will make a thin batter. Stir the batterwith a wooden spoon until it is perfectly smooth and so light as to break whenit falls against the sides of the vessel. Your wafer-iron should be heated, butnot too hot, or the butter will burn. Grease the iron with butter tied up in a linen rag, twice doubled. Fill the iron withthe batter and close it. Place it in the fire in such a manner that both sideswill heat at once; if this cannot be done turn the iron frequently. The batterwill be cooked in about two minutes if properly managed. You may sprinkle the wafer with pounded sugar and roll it over asmooth stick made for the purpose. Southern biscuit is made with a large spoonful of lard to apint of flour; add salt, knead the dough, and beat it well. 1455.--MILK TOAST. Boila pint of rich milk, and then take it off and stir into it a quarter ofa pound of fresh butter, mixed with a small table-spoonful of flour. Then let it again come to a boil. Have ready two deep plates withhalf a dozen slices of toast in each. Pour the milk over themhot, and keep them covered till they go to table. Milk toast isgenerally eaten at breakfast. The warming of the bread gradually through, on both sides, is a verygreat improvement upon the quality of the toast. All kinds of toast must be done the same way; but if to be servedunder a bird, eggs, or kidneys, it requires to be toasteddrier. Dry toast should not be made until quite ready to serve; when done,place it in a toast -rack, or upon its edges, one piece resting againstanother. Any kind of toast that has been made half an hour is not wortheating. 1456.--MILK ROLLS. Havea convenient-sized basin, into which put half a pound of the best flour, making a hole in the middle; add half an ounce of yeast, one ounce of butter, a teaspoonful of powdered sugar, and half ditto of salt, over which pour three large wineglassfuls of lukewarm milk; mix the whole, by degrees, with your hand, (using a little more flour, )until forming a stiffish paste; rub off the paste which adheresto your fingers, and form the whole into a ball, which leave at the bottom ofthe basin, covered over with a clean cloth, and set it half an hour to rise, ina warmish place, after which throw a little flour upon a dresser, cutthe paste into pieces the size of eggs, mould them of a round,oval, or any other shape you may fancy, egg over with a paste -brush, and place them upon a baking-sheet, or upon the bottom ofthe oven if clean and not too hot; bake quickly. Rolls are made with soda and cream of tartar; a teaspoonful ofthe first to two of the latter. Or, with sour cream and soda, instead of yeast. 1457.--TOPS ANDBOTTOMS. Make a dough as for rusks, but using only half the butter; have a deep-edged baking-sheet well buttered, and when the doughis ready, turn it on to a dress er, well flour ed; divide into smallpieces the size of walnuts, which mould into round balls, and placeclose together upon the baking-sheet; put them in a warm place to rise, andbake well in a moderate oven. When cold, divide and cut each one in halves(making a top and bottom) which brown in the oven. 1458.--BUNS. Put threepounds of flour in an earthen pan, make a hole in the middle, in whichput some yeast, dissolved in three partsof a pint of warm water, and stir in a little of the flour, forming a thinnish batter; let it remain in a warm place nearly an hour, untilwell fermented; then add half a pound of sugar, a few currants, and half a pound of butter, dissolved in nearly a pint of warm milk; mix the whole well together, making a soft but dry dough; let itremain in a warm place until it rises very light, then turn it out of the panon to a board; work it well with the hands, shaking flour over lightly;then mould it into small round balls, double the size of walnuts , whichplace upon a buttered baking-sheet four inches apart; moisten the tops with milk; put them in a warm place to rise; not, however, permitting them tocrack, and bake them in a hot oven. 1459.--SOYER'S BRIOCHEROLLS. Put four pounds of flour upon a dress er, one pound ofwhich put on one side, make a hole in the middle, into which pour nearly threeparts of a pint of warm water, in which you have dissolved yeast; mix it into a stiff but delicate paste, which roll up into a ball: cutan incision across it, and lay it in a basin well flour ed, in a warmplace, until becoming very light; then make a large hole in the centre of thethree pounds of flour, into which put half an ounce of salt, twopounds of fresh butter, half a gill of water, and sixteen eggs; mix it into a softish flexible paste, which press out flat,lay the leaven upon it, folding it over and working with the hands until wellamalgamated; flour a clean cloth, fold the paste in it and let itremain all night. In the morning mould them into small rolls; put them upon abaking-sheet, and bake in a moderate oven. Unless your breakfast party be verylarge, half the above quantity will be sufficient. These rolls being a luxury,I make them only upon very especial occasions. BUTTER. Mrs. Hale says: "Always to make good butter or cheese shows great care and excellent judgment in the farmer's wife. When every department of the dairyis kept perfectly neat, there is hardly any exhibition of woman's indus trymore likely to make her husband proud, or gratify a beholder of good sense andbenevolence, than the sight of a neat dairy-room filled with the rich, valuableproductions which her skill has fashioned from the milk of the cow. "The secret of success in the dairy is strict attention and scrupulousneatness in all its operations. The best time to make butter is in June, whenthe pastures are rich with clover and September, when the fall feed is in its perfection. July and August arethe months for cheese; then the rich new milk and cream cheeses are made. "To insure good butter, you must always scald your pails, &c, in hotwater, and then heat them by the fire, or in the hot sun, so that they may beperfectly sweet. "Keep your cream in a cool place in summer, and churn twice a week. "Work out all the buttermilk. --This must be done, orthe butter will not keep well; and do not make the butter too salt. "Neverput butter in a pine tub. "Pickle for Butter. --Allow half a pound of salt, anounce of saltpetre, and half a pound of sugar to three quarts of water;dissolve them together; scald and skim the pickle; let it be entirely cold, andthen pour it over the butter "Keep your cheese in a dark, cool room, and turn and rub them every day. Thefat fried out of salt pork, is the best preservative to rub on cheese, andgives a rich color and smoothness to the rind. "Never wash your cheese shelves; but always wipe them clean with a drycloth, when you turn your cheese. "Do not heat the milk too hot; it should never, for new milk cheese, be morethan blood-warm; be sure that your rennet is good, and do not use more than itrequires' to bring the curd. "Cover the pan or tub in which milk is set to coagulate, and do not disturbit for half an hour or more. "Cut the curd, when fully formed, carefully with a knife; never break itwith your hand; and be very particular, when draining it from the whey, not tosqueeze or handle the curd; if you make the white whey run from the curd, youlose much of the richness of the cheese." 1460.--TO CUBE BUTTER IN THEBEST MANNER. The following receipt is from "The Housewife's Manual," awork said to have been prepared by Sir Walter Scott . Having washed and beaten the butter free of buttermilk, workit quickly up, allowing a scanty half ounce of fine salt to the pound.Let the butter lie for twenty-four hours, or more; then, for everypound, allow a half ounce of the following mixture:--Take four ounces of salt, two of loaf sugar, and a quarter of an ounce of saltpetre. Beat them all well together, and work the mixture thoroughlyinto the butter; then pack it down in jars or tubs. Instead of strewinga layer of salt on the top of the butter, which makes the firstslice unfit for use, place a layer of the above mixture in folds of thinmuslin, stitch it loosely, and lay this neatly over the top, which willeffectually preserve it. To freshen salt butter .--Churn it anew in sweet milk, a quart to the pound. The butter will gain inweight. To improve rancid butter .--Wash it, melt itgradually, skim it, and put to it a slice of charred or hard toastedbread, or some bits of charcoal. 1461.--TO MAKEBUTTER. The milk pans should be scalded every day. After the milk has stood twenty-four hours skim off the cream, and depositit in a large earthen jar kept closely covered. Stir up the cream with astick every day to prevent the skin from gathering. Butter ofonly two or three days is best. Strain the cream from the jar into thechurn and put on the lid. In warm weather move the handle slowly, or the butter will be too soft. When the handle moves with great difficulty the butter has come. Take it out with a wooden ladle and squeeze out theremains of milk. Add a little salt and work it well. Set it in acool place for three hours, then work it again. Wash it in cold water, and put it away for use. 1462.--BUTTER--TOCLARIFY. Scrape off the outsides of the butter you may require,and then put it into a stewpan by the side of a slow fire, where it must remaintill the scum rises to the top and the milk settles at the bottom;carefully with a spoon take off the scum; when clear, it is fit for use. To preserve it for winter, take two parts ofthe best common salt, one part of good loaf sugar, and one part salt petre, beat them well together; to sixteen ounces of butter thoroughly cleansed from the milk put one ounce of the abovecomposition, work it well, and put it into pots when quite firm and cold. CAKES, &c. In making cakes it is indispensably necessary that all the ingredientsshould be heated before they are mixed together, for which purpose every thing should be prepared for an hour or two previouslyto their being wanted, and placed near the fire or upon a stove--the flourthoroughly dried and warmed the currants, sugar, carraway-seed, and any thingelse required, heated in the same way; butter and eggs should be beaten inbasins fitted into kettles or pans of warm water, which will give them therequisite degree of temperature. Without these precautions cakes will be heavy,and the best materials, with the greatest pains, will fail to produce thedesired results. Currants should be very nicely washed, dried in a cloth, and then set beforethe fire. If damp, they will make cakes or puddings heavy. Before they are tobe used, a dust of dry flour should be thrown among them, and a shake given tothem, which causes the cakes to be lighter. Eggs should be very long beaten, whites and yolks apart, and alwaysstrained. Sugar should be pounded in a mortar, or rubbed to a powder on a clean board,and sifted through a very fine hair or lawn sieve. Lemon-peel should be grated or pared very thin, and, with a little sugar,beaten in a marble mortar to a paste; and then mixed with a little wine orcream, so as to divide easily among the other ingre dients. The pans should beof earthen ware; nor should eggs or batter and sugar be beaten in tins, as thecoldness of the metal will prevent them from be coming light. Use no flour but the best superfine; for if the flour be of inferior qualitythe cakes will be heavy, ill-colored, and unfit to eat; but if a littlepotato-flour be added, it will improve their lightness. Cakes are frequentlyrendered hard, heavy, and uneatable, by misplaced economy in eggs and butter,or for want of a due seasoning in spice and sugar. An illustration of an iron oven with the label "cake". After all the articles are put into the pan, they should be thoroughly andlong beaten, as the lightness of the cake de pends much on their being well incorporated. Accuracy in proportioning the ingre dients is also indispensable; and therefore scales, weights, and measures, down to the smallest quantity, are of theut most importance. An illustration of an iron oven with the label"crackers". Iron ovens are desirable, as well for their economyof fuel as for the short time in which they can be heated, and on account ofthe celerity and convenience with which one person may prepare large quantitiesof small pastry, and bake it also. The most vigilant care and attention are necessary in order to securesuccess in the baking of delicate pastry or cakes; for however well they mayhave been prepared, if not equally well baked, the result will beunsatisfactory. If the oven be not lighted long enough to have a body of heat, or if it isbecome slack, the cake will be heavy. If not pretty quick, the batter will notrise. Should you fear its being too quick, putsome paper over the cake to prevent its being burnt. To know when it issoaked, take a broad-bladed knife that is very bright, and plunge it into thevery centre, draw it instantly out, and if the least stickiness adheres, putthe cake imme diately in again, and shut up the oven. If the heat should be sufficient to raise, but not to soak it, let freshfuel be quickly put in, and the cakes kept hot until the oven is fit to finishthe soaking. Bread and cakes mixed with milk eat best when new, but becomestale sooner than others. Cakes kept in drawers or wooden boxes have a disagreeable taste. Earthenpans and covers, or tin boxes, preserve them best; but in making largecakes of any kind, which are to be baked in hoops, use those of wood. Cakesmade with yeast should always be eaten fresh. 1463.--PLUM CAKE(English). Mix thoroughly two quarts of fine flour, well dried,with one pound of dry and sifted loaf-sugar, three pounds ofcurrants washed and very dry, half a pound of raisins stoned andchopped, one-quarter of an ounce each of mace, cloves, andcinnamon, a grated nutmeg, the peel of a lemon cut as fineas possible, and half a pound of almonds, blanched and beaten withorange-flower water. Melt two pounds of butter in one and aquarter pint of cream, but not hot; put to it one pint of sweetwine, a glass of brandy and another of rose-water, with thewhites and yolks of twelve eggs beaten apart, and half a pint ofgood yeast. Strain this liquor by degrees into the dry ingredients,beating them to gether a full hour; then butter the hoop or pan, andbake it in a moderate oven for at least four hours. As you put in the batter,throw in plenty of citron, lemon, and orange candy. If you ice the cake, when it is nearly cold pour the icing over, and returnit to the oven, where it should be left all night, or until it becomes cold;but if the oven be warm, keep it near the mouth, and the door open, lest thecolor be spoiled; or the icing may be left until the next morning. 1464.--PLUM NEW ENGLAND WEDDING CAKE. One pound of dry flour, one pound of sweet butter, one poundof sugar, twelve eggs, two pounds of raisins, (thesultana raisins are the best,) two pounds of cur rants, as muchspice as you please. A glass of wine, one of brandy, and apound of citron. Mix the butter and sugar as for poundcake. Sift the spice, and beat the eggs very light. Put inthe fruit last, stirring it in gradually. It should be wellfloured. If necessary add more flour after the fruit isin. Butter sheets of paper, and line the inside of one large pan,or two smaller ones. Lay in some slices of citron, then a layer of themix ture, then of the citron, and so on till the pan is full. This cakerequires a toler ably hot and steady oven, and will need baking four or fivehours, according to its thickness. It will be better to let it cool graduallyin the oven. Ice it when thoroughly cold. 1465.--FROSTING CAKES. Allow for the white of one egg nine heaping teaspoonfuls ofdouble-refined sugar, and one of nice starch. The sugarand starch should be pounded and sifted through a very fine sieve. Beatthe whites of eggs to a stiff froth, so that you can turn the plateupside down, without the eggs falling from it--then stir in thesugar gradually with a wooden spoon--stir it ten or fifteen minuteswithout any cessation--then add a teaspoonful of lemon juice,(vinegar will answer, but is not as nice,)--put in sufficient rose-water to flavor it. If you wish tocolor it pink, stir in a few grains of cochineal powder, or rose pink;if you wish to have it of a blue tinge, add a little of what is called powderblue. Lay the frosting on the cake with a knife, soon after it is taken fromthe oven--smooth it over, and let it remain in a cool place till hard.To frost a common-sized loaf of cake, allow the white of one egg, andhalf of another. 1466.--SMALL PLUM CAKE. One pound and a half of raisins, one pound and a half ofcurrants, half a pound of butter, half a pound of flour,five eggs, half a teacup of molasses, half a pound ofsugar, half a pound of citron, one gill of brandy,spice to taste, three nutmegs. Cake Mould,with Cylinder. An illustration of a cake mould on the left and the cylinder on the right. 1467.--GERMAN SUGAR CAKES. Blend well with the fingers sis ounces of good butter, with a poundof fine flour, working it quite into crumbs; add a few grains ofsalt, one pound of dry sifted sugar, a table-spoonful of the bestcinnamon in very fine powder, and a large teaspoonful of spices:to these the grated rinds of three sound fresh lemons can beadded, or not, at pleasure. Make these ingredients into a paste, withthe yolks of five eggs, and about four table-spoonfuls of whitewine, or with one or two more in addition, if required, as this must beregulated by the size of the eggs: half of very thick cream andhalf of wine are sometimes used for them. Roll the mixture into balls,flatten them to something less than three-quarters of an inch thick, and bakethem in a moderate oven from fifteen to twenty min utes. Loosen them from thebaking-sheets--which should be lightly floured before they are laidon--by passing a knife under them, turn them over, and when they are quitecold, stow them in a dry, close-shutting canister. The Germans make threeincisions on the top of each cake with the point of a knife, and lay spikes ofsplit almonds in them. 1468.--BRIDE CAKE. Wash two pounds and a half of fresh butter in plain waterfirst, and then in rose-water; beat the butter to a cream;beat twenty eggs, yolks and whites separately, half an hour each.Have ready two pounds and a half of the finest flour, well dried andkept hot, likewise one pound and a half of sugar pounded and sifted, oneounce of spice in fine powder, three pounds of currants nicelycleaned and dry, half a pound of almonds blanched, and three-quarters of apound of sweetmeats cut, not too thin. Let all be kept by the fire, mixall the dry ingredients, pour the eggs strained to the butter,but beat the whites of the eggs to a strong froth; mix half a pint ofsweet wine with the same quantity of brandy, pour it to thebutter and eggs, mix well, then have all the dry things put in bydegrees; beat them very thoroughly--you can hardly do it too much. Having halfa pound of stoned jar-raisins chopped as fine as possible, mix themcarefully, so that there should be no lump, and add a teacupful oforange-flower water; beat the ingredients together a full hour at least.Have a hoop well buttered; take a white paper, doubled and buttered, andput in the pan round the edge; do not fill it more than three parts withbatter, as space should be allowed for rising. Bake in a quick oven. It willrequire full three hours. In making cakes of a larger size, put at the rate ofeight eggs to every pound of flour,and other ingredients in the same proportion. The cake must be covered with an icing. 1469.--QUEEN CAKE. Mix one pound of dried flour, the same of sifted sugar and ofwashed currants. Wash one pound of butter in rose-water,beat it well, then mix with it eight eggs, yolks and whitesbeaten separately, and put in the dry ingredients by degrees; beat the whole anhour; butter little tins, teacups, or saucers, filling them only halffull. Sift a little fine sugar over just as you put them into theoven. 1470.--PLAIN FRUIT CAKE. One loaf of bread, half a cup of butter, and half a cupful ofsugar, half do. of molasses, half do. of buttermilk, halfdo. of currants, one do. of raisins, half do. citron,three eggs, one teaspoonful salera tus. Season to taste; brandyif you choose. 1471.--ALMOND CAKE. Blanch half a pound of sweet, and three ounces of bitteralmonds--pound them to a paste in a mortar with orange-flowerwater--add half a pound of sifted loaf sugar, and a littlebrandy--whisk separately, for half an hour, the whites and yolks oftwenty eggs, and the yolks to the almonds and sugar, and thenstir in the whites, and beat them all well to gether. Butter atin pan, sift bread-raspings over it, put the cake into it, over the topof which strew sifted loaf-sugar. Bake it in a quick oven for half orthree-quarters of an hour. 1472.--HONEY CAKE. One pound and a half of dried and sifted flour, three-quarters of apound of honey, half a pound of finely pounded loaf sugar, aquarter of a pound of citron, and half an ounce of orange-peelcut small; of pounded ginger and cinnamon three-quarters of anounce. Melt the sugar with the honey, and mix in the otheringredients; roll out the paste, and cut it into small cakes of anyform. 1473.--COCOA-NUT CAKES. Take equal weights of grated cocoa-nut and powdered whitesugar, (the brown part of the cocoa-nut should be cut off beforegrating it,)--add the whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth in theproportion of half a dozen to a pound each of cocoa-nut andsugar. There should be just eggs enough to wet up the wholestiff. Drop the mixture on buttered plates, in parcels of the size of a cent,several inches apart. Bake them immediately in a moderately warm oven. 1474.--SAVOY CAKES. Beat eight eggs to a froth--the whites and yolks shouldbe beaten separately, then mixed together, and a pound of powdered whitesugar stirred in gradu ally. Beat the whole well together, for eight or tenminutes, then add the grated rind of a fresh lemon, and half thejuice, a pound of sifted flour, a couple of table-spoonfuls ofcoriander seed. Drop this mixture by the large spoonful on but teredbaking plates, several inches apart, sift white sugar over them, andbake them immediately in a quick oven. 1475.--SPONGE CAKE. Take the weight of ten eggs in pow dered loaf sugar, beat itto a froth with the yolks of twelve eggs, put in the grated rindof a fresh lemon, leaving out the white part--add half thejuice. Beat the whites of twelve eggs to a stiff froth, and mixthem with the sugar and butter. Stir the whole without anycessation for fifteen minutes, then stir in gradually the weight of six eggs in sifted flour. Assoon as the flour is well mixed in, turn the cake into pans lined withbut tered paper--bake it immediately in a quick, but not a furiously hotoven. It will bake in the course of twenty minutes. If it bakes too fast, coverit with thick paper. 1476.--POUND CAKE. Mix a pound of sugar with a pound of butter. When workedwhite, stir in the yolk of eight eggs, beaten to a froth, thenthe whites. Add a pound of sifted flour, and mace ornutmeg to the taste. If you wish to have your cake particularly nice,stir in, just before you put it into the pans, a quarter of a pound ofcitron, or almonds blanched and powdered fine in rose-water,and a glass of brandy. 1477.--JUMBLES. Stir together, till of a light color, a pound of sugar and half theweight of butter---then add eight eggs, beaten to a froth,essence of lemon, or rose-water, to the taste, and flourto make them sufficiently stiff to roll out. Roll them out in powderedsugar, about half an inch thick, cut it into strips about half an inchwide, and four inches long, join the ends together, so as to form rings, laythem on flat tins that have been buttered and bake them in a quick oven. 1478.--NEW-YEAR'S COOKIES. Weigh out a pound of sugar, three-quarters of a pound ofbutter--stir them to a cream, then add three beaten eggs,a grated nutmeg, two table-spoonfuls of caraway seed, and a pintof flour. Dissolve a teaspoonful of saleratus in a tea cup ofmilk, strain and mix it with half a teacup of cider, and stir itinto the cookies--then add flour to make them sufficiently stiff to rollout. Bake them as soon as cut into cakes, in a quick oven, till a lightbrown. 1479.--NEW YORK CUP CAKE. One cup butter, two of sugar, three of flour, one ofmilk or cream; four eggs, a wine-glass of brandy--anutmeg grated, a teaspoonful of soda, two of cream oftartar. Dissolve the soda in the milk rub the cream oftartar dry in the flour. 1480.--WASHINGTON CAKE. One and three-quarter pounds flour, one and a quarter sugar,three-quarters of a pound of butter, four eggs, two tea-spoonfulsof cream of tartar, one of soda, half a pint of milk, twopounds raisins, two glasses of brandy, one nutmeg,spice to taste. 1481.--GINGER WAFERS. Three cups sugar, two of butter, one of milk, threetable-spoonfuls of ginger, two teaspoonfuls of soda in themilk; flour enough to make it a dough. Roll it very thin, andbake in cakes. 1482.--INDIAN CORN CAKE. One pint of milk, half a pound In dian-meal, two eggs; twoounces butter, half a teaspoonful of soda, a whole one ofsalt. Bake three-quarters of an hour. 1483.--SOYER'S ST. JAMES'SCAKE. Put one pound of very fresh butter in a good-sized kitchen basin, andwith the right hand work it up well till it forms quite a white cream;then add one pound powdered sugar, mix well, add ten eggs bydegrees; put to dry a pound and a quarter of flour, which mix as lightlyas possible with it; blanch and cut in slices two ounces of pistachios, twoditto of green preserved angelica, add two liquor glasses of noyeau, twodrops of essence of vanilla; whip a gill and a half ofcream till very thick, mix lightly with a wooden spoon, have a mould,put it in, and send to the baker; it will takeabout one hour and a quarter to bake. 1484.--SOYER'S TURBAN OF ALMONDCAKE ICED. This is a very good and useful second course remove. Make half a pound ofpuff paste, give it nine rolls, rolling it the last time to thethickness of a penny-piece have ready blanched and chopped a pound of sweetalmonds, which put in a basin with half a pound of powdered sugarand the whites of two eggs, or little more if required; spread it overthe paste the thickness of a shilling, and with a knife cut thepaste into pieces two inches and a half in length and nearly one inbreadth, place them upon a baking-sheet, and bake nicely a very light browncolor, in a moderate oven; dress them on a stiff border of any kind of stiffjam or marmalade, so as to form a large crown, according to the size yourequire it; then fill the interior with vanilla cream, or any other,iced, but not too hard, and bring it up to a point; the cake may be cutinto any shape you fancy, but never make them too large. 1485.--CIDER CAKE. Cider cake is very good, to be baked in small loaves. One pound and ahalf of flour, half a pound of sugar, quarter of a pound ofbutter, half a pint of cider, one teaspoonful of pearlash;spice to your taste. Bake till it turns easily in the pans. I shouldthink about half an hour. 1486.--THE HOUSEWIFE'S CHRISTMAS CAKE. Take two pounds of pounded sugar-candy, two pounds of flour,two pounds of butter, thirty-six eggs, four pounds ofcurrants, a pound of raisins stoned and chopped, half a pound ofalmonds blanch ed and chopped, half a pound of citron, a pound ofcandied orange-peel, the same of candied lemon-peel, a largenutmeg pounded, half an ounce of powdered all spice, half anounce of powdered mace, ginger, cinnamon, andcoriander, and half a pint of brandy. All the ingredients should be well dried, the white of the eggs wellbeaten up separately from the yolks, the butter stirred andbeaten almost to a cream; then add the rest gradually, taking care theyare well beaten and mixed. Have ready a large tin, well lined withbutter ed paper, pour in the cake, and bake in a slow oven for atleast four hours. Smaller proportions may be adopted. 1487.--CORNSTARCH CAKE. Half a pound of sugar, four ounces of butter, fiveeggs, one teaspoonful cream of tartar, half a teaspoonful ofsoda, half a pound of cornstarch. half a gill of sweetmilk. 1488.--SHORT CAKE. Three pounds of flour, half a pound of butter, half a pound oflard, a teaspoon ful of soda, two of cream of tartar; mixwith cold milk. For Strawberry Cake, open these when first baked, take out some ofthe crumb, and fill the inside with ripe strawberries, sugared; closeand bake the cakes five minutes longer. 1489.--SUGAR CAKE. Three pints of flour, a table-spoonful of butter, half a poundof sugar, one egg, half a teaspoonful of soda a teaspoonful of cream of tartar, milk enough to make a dough, roll itthin and cut in squares. 1490.--RAILROAD CAKE. A pint of flour, three eggs, a teaspoon ful of cream oftartar, half a teaspoon ful of soda, a table-spoonful ofbutter, a teaspoonful of sugar; bake the batter in a square pantwenty minutes. 1491.--JELLY CAKE. Bake sponge cake or cup cake in cir cular pans, half an inch thick; whencold, put pulp of fruit or marmalade be tween them; six or eightlayers of each. 1492.--LADY CAKE. One pound of flour, one of loaf sugar, half one ofbutter, the whites of twelve eggs, almonds pounded,rose-water. 1493.--CHOCOLATE CAKE. Grate chocolate; add whites of six eggs and loaf sugar;drop it on buttered paper, and bake as macaroons. 1494.--NOURMAHAL CAKE. Cut four slices of sponge cake about an inch thick and of an oval shape, buteach slice smaller than the others. Spread a thick layer of apricot jamupon the first and largest slice, and then lay the next sized slice upon it;spread the second slice with apple marmalade, and cover with the thirdsize, which is to be spread in like manner with strawberry jam, andcovered with the smallest size. Press the top lightly with the hand, and with asharp knife cut away the central part, so as to leave a wall about two inchesand a half thick, which is to be trimmed outside. Mash up the part re movedfrom the centre, with equal parts of white wine and brandy,sufficient to flavor, and stir in some thick custard, then pour into the centerof the cake. Whip the whites of two eggs into a stiff froth, pourover the whole, heaping it well up in the centre, and shake sifted sugarthickly on, then place in a quick oven until the frosting is set. A few piecesof strawberry jam or any other preserve placed round the bottomof the dish, gives a finish to the whole. 1495.--ICING FOR CAKES. Beat the whites of four eggs to a solid froth, add graduallythree-quarters of a pound of refined sugar pounded and sift ed; mix inthe juice of half a lemon; beat it till very light andwhite. The cake should be cold. Place it before the fire, pour over itthe icing, and smooth over the top and sides with a knife. It might be set todry at the mouth of a cool oven. 1496.--LEMON CAKES. Rub half a pound of butter into one pound of flour and a poundof powdered lump sugar, the rind and juice of onelemon, three eggs, leaving out the whites unless thebutter be very hard. Mix all together, and drop on tins in smallcakes. 1497.--CINNAMON BISCUITS. Half a pound of dry flour, one pound of lump sugar, finelysifted; one pound of butter, powdered cinnamon to judg ment. Thewhole to be mixed with a glass of brandy, or rum, then rolledvery thin, and baked in a quick oven. 1498.--DIET BREAD. To half a pound of sifted sugar put four eggs; beat themtogether for an hour; then add a quarter of a pound of flour dried andsifted, with the juice of half a lemon and the grated rind ofa whole one. Bake it in a slow oven. 1499.--CURRANT CAKE. Beat a pound of fresh butter to a cream; take one pound and aquarter of sugar, and one and a quarter pounds of currants washedand picked, and beat up the whites and yolks of eight eggs; putin the sugar by degrees, then a pound of flour andcurrants; add a gill of brandy, some candied orange andcitron; beat the mixture till very light, and bake it in a pan. 1500.--SEED CAKES. Beat one pound of butter to a cream, adding, gradually, a quarter of a pound of siftedsugar, beating both together. Have ready the yolks of eighteeneggs, and the whites of ten, beaten separately; mix in thewhites first and then the yolks, and beat the whole for ten minutes; add two grated nutmegs, one pound and a half of flour, andmix them very gradually with the other ingredients. When the oven is ready,beat in three ounces of picked carraway-seed. To two pounds offlour add two ounces of butter rubbed in, half a pound ofsugar, one ounce of carraway-seed, half an ounce of groundcoriander-seed, half a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda, and atable-spoonful of arrowroot; mix the whole well together, and make astiff paste with warm milk; cut into thin cakes, and prick overwith a fork; bake slowly. 1501.--PITCAITHLY BANNOCK. Dry before the fire one pound fine flour; then melt half a pound ofbutter; then mix with the flour two ounces of almonds thinly sliced ; two ounces of orange peel, twoounces of sugared carra ways, two ounces pounded sugar,then pour on these ingredients the melted butter; knead all togetherwell; put the bannock in a slow oven, and bake it an hour. 1502.--TO MAKEBANBURY CAKES. Roll out the paste about half an inch thick, and cut it into pieces,then roll again till each piece becomes twice the size; put some Banburymeat in the middle of one side, fold the other over it, and pinch it upinto a somewhat oval shape, flatten it with your hand at the top, letting theseam be quite at the bot tom, rub the tops over with the white of an egglaid on with a brush, and dust loaf-sugar over them. Bake in a moderateoven. The meat for this cake is made thus:--beat up a quarter of a poundof butter until it becomes in the state of cream, then mix withit half a pound of candied orange and lemon-peel cut fine, onepound of currants, a quarter of an ounce of ground cinnamon, anda quarter of an ounce of allspice; mix all well together, and keep in ajar, till wanted for use. 1503.--PETS DE NONNE. Put water or cream in a stewpan with sugar, a littlesalt, and flavoring of orange-flower water; when near boilingshake flour in with one hand, and stir with the other, till thepaste is thin and well done; take it off the fire, and break anegg in; turn and mix, adding a second egg; add eggs tillthe paste is thick and soft, stirring and beating it. Have butterboiling hot in a frying pan, drop in the paste by spoonfuls, let each bethe size of a walnut, take them out, and keep them hot till all aredone; sift sugar over them, or serve sweet sauce of wine,butter, sugar, and grated nutmeg. 1504.--BISCUITS. Those of the common sort are made in various ways. For a large quantity beatup eight eggs during nearly half an hour, then put in one pound ofwhite powdered sugar, with the grated peel of a lemon, and whiskthat again for the same time, or until it appears well mixed; afterwhich makeit into a batter with one pound of flour, and a littlerose-water. Bake the dough in tins, half a pound of loaf-sugar, and a quarter ofa pound of butter; rub all together; wet it with one egg beatenup in half a teacupful of milk, and roll it out thin. Or :--One pound of flour, half a pound ofloaf-sugar, and a quarter of a pound of butter; rub all together;wet it with one egg beaten up in half a teacupful of milk, androll it out thin. 1505.--GOLD AND SILVER CAKE. Is made by using the whites of the eggs for the latter, and the yolks for the first. The other proportions likepound cake. 1506.--FRANGIPANE Is a French paste, made with two or three eggs put into asaucepan with one table-spoonful of flour, moistened with a littlemilk, and placed on the fire for about ten minutes; taking care to stirthe materials continually, to prevent them from sticking to the pan. Thesubstance may either be used as a paste for tartlets, or eaten as cakes,if made with sugar and macaroons. 1507.--LA GALETTE Is in great favor among the Parisians, who usually eat it withsweetmeats, but vary it in point of richness by the greater or lessquantity of cream and butter employed in making it up. It is thusmade:-- Take one pound each of butter and flour, a little salt,and two eggs; knead the whole together into a paste, roll it tonot more than an inch in thickness, and make it the size of a dessert-plate.Then put it into the oven for a quarter of an hour; take it out; beat up twoeggs with a little cream and some salt; pour it over thecake, and return it to the oven to bake for another quarter of an hour 5 or, ifyou please, ornament the back with candied citron. 1508.--ISLE OFWIGHT CRACKNELS. Mix with a quart of flour half a nut meg grated, the yolksof four eggs beaten, with four spoonfuls of rose-water, into a stiffpaste, with cold water; then roll in one pound of butter,and make them into a cracknel shape; put them into a kettle of boilingwater, and boil them till they swim; then take them out and put them intocold water; when hardened, lay them out to dry, and bake them on tinplates. 1509.--CRACKNELS. Half a pound of flour, half a pound of sugar, a quarter of apound of butter, two table-spoonfuls of rose-water, a littlesalt and rice, and eggs well beaten. Mix together twentyminutes; roll and cut into shapes. Rub a baking sheet with butter, andwhen baked, wash them with white of egg. 1510.--FRENCH BREAD. Commence as for common bread, but use milk instead ofwater. When it is light, add two quarts warm milk, salt,half a pound of butter, and one ounce sifted loaf sugar; kneadwell and let it rise again. Make it into rolls; put them in a warm place halfan hour, then bake in a quick oven. 1611.--KRINGLES. Beat well the yolks of eight and whites of two eggs, and mixwith four ounces of butter just warmed, and with this knead one pound offlour and four ounces of sugar to a paste. Roll into thickbiscuits; prick them, and bake on tin plates. GINGERBREAD. This is amongst the most ancient species of cake known throughout Englandand the north of Europe. It is the delight of children; in Holland it is thecommon accompaniment of the "schnaps," and in Ghent there are shops famous forit. The following are selected from amongst the numerous ways of making it inthis country. 1512.--SOFT GINGERBREAD (from a Lady of New York). Three cups molasses, one of butter, one of milk, ginger, a table-spoonful ofsaleratus, and flour enough to make it the stiffness of pound cake. Another :--Half a pound of butter, a quart of molasses, eight eggs, four table-spoonfuls siftedginger, two teaspoonfuls saleratus, allspice, and flour enough to make it stiffas pound cake. 1513.--HARD GINGERBREAD. Rub half a pound of butter into one pound of flour; then rub in half a poundof sugar, two table-spoonfuls of ginger, and a spoonful of rose-water; work itwell; roll out, and bake in flat pans in a moderate oven. It will take abouthalf an hour to bake. This gingerbread will keep good some time. 1514.--GINGERBREAD-NUTS. Mix half a pound of flour, the same quantity of butter and of brown sugar,with three ounces of ginger, a teaspoon ful of carbonate of soda rubbed in theflour, with as much molasses as will make it into a paste. Roll it out thin,and bake it for about twenty minutes in a slow oven. 1515.--PASSOVER CAKES. Make a stiff paste with biscuit-powder, milk, and water; add a littlebutter, the yolk of an egg, and a little white sugar. Cut into pieces, mouldwith the hand, and bake in a brisk oven: they should not be too thin. 1516.--SCOTCH SHORT-BREAD. To four pounds of flour take two of butter, half a pound of moist sugar,quarter of a pound of citron, and the same of almonds, the latter blanched, andall cut small. Mix the sugar and fruit well with the flour, then work it upwith the butter, cold, till it is smooth and compact, but it will take a longtime; divide into four or more pieces, and roll out each piece into an oblongcake, having previously floured the table well. Prick the top with a steelfork, strew some orange and citron cut thin, and some large caraway-comfits,press them in with the roller, then pinch round the edges, put the cakes infloured tins; bake for twenty minutes. If the cake rise after the pressing ofthe finger, it is sufficiently done. Or: --One pound each of butter and sifted sugar, twopounds of flour, eight ounces of sweet and four ounces of bitter almonds, asmall piece of cinnamon, all pounded, and a glass of brandy. Soften the butterbefore the fire, then rub in the flour, and make it into a paste; roll it outhalf an inch thick, and bake it on a tin in a slow oven, as it should be of apale color. 1517.--POTATO CHEESECAKES. Boil six ounces of potatoes, and four of lemon-peel, beat the latter in amarble mortar with a quarter of a pound of sugar, then add the same quantity ofbutter, melted in a little cream, and the potatoes beaten: mix well, and let itstand to cool; put crust in patty-pans, rather more than half fill them, siftsome sugar over, and bake half an hour in a quick oven. Tipsy Cake .--Put a sponge-cake into a deep glassdish, pour round it a glass of brandy and some raisin-wine, and let it soak itup; then strew sifted sugar over it, pour a thick custard into the dish, andornament the top with blanch ed almonds split and put thick. 1518.--DOUGHNUTS. Set a sponge with a pound of flour, milk and good yeast; rub nearly half apound of butter into another pound of flour, and add half a pound of sugar,with grated nutmeg and spice, and mix with it three beaten eggs; mix it withthe light sponge, and more milk if neces sary, and set it to rise. When it isper fectly light, roll out the dough on a pasteboard, cut it into slips, doubleand twist them up, and fry them in boilinglard. For Crullers --Allow to the flour more butter andsugar, and six eggs, without yeast, and fry as before, making smallercakes. 1519.--BOSTON CREAM CAKES. Take half a pint of cream from a quart of milk, and boil it with vanilla andcinnamon; strain and mix it with the rest of the milk; when cold, add the yolksof twelve eggs and a quarter of a pound of loaf-sugar, and bake the custard ina bain-marie; have ready a batter made of half a pound of flour and the same ofbutter, in a pint of milk, with eight eggs, and bake it in buttered deeppatty-pans, not scolloped; when browned, open a slit in the side of each whilehot, and put in with a spoon as much of the custard as it will hold; close theslit smoothly, and set the cakes away. 1520.--SPANISH PUFFS. Boil three-quarters of a pint of milk with one ounce of butter, six ouncesof flour, mixed well in the hot milk--flavor with vanilla. Drop about the sizeof a walnut, and lightly bake. When done, open gently at the side and fill withpreserve. 1521--ALMACK. Plums, pears, and apples, each two pounds; pare, core, and stewtogether--rub through a sieve. Add half a pound of moist sugar; boil until itis quite stiff; spread on dishes to dry. When set, cut in squares and put byfor use. 1522.--KISSES. Beat the whites of four eggs till they stand alone. Then beat in, gradually,a pound of finely-powdered sugar, a tea-spoonful at a time. Add eight drops ofthe essence of lemon, and beat the whole very hard. Lay a wet sheet of paper on the bot tom of a square tin pan. Drop on it, atequal distance, small teaspoonfuls of stiff currant jelly. Put a little of thebeaten egg and sugar at first, under the currant jelly. With a large spoon,pile some of the beaten white of egg and sugar, on each lump of jelly, so as tocover it en tirely. Drop on the mixture as evenly as possible, so as to makethe kisses of a round, smooth shape. Set them in a cool oven, and as soon as they are colored, they are done.Then take them out, and place the two bot toms together. Lay them lightly on asieve, and dry them in a cool oven, till the two bottoms stick fast together soas to form one ball or oval. 1523.--MACAROONS. Blanch and skin half a pound of sweet almonds, dry them well in your screen,then put them into a mortar with a pound and a half of lump sugar, pound welltogether, and pass the whole through a wire sieve; put it again into a mortar,with the whites of two eggs, mix well together with the pestle, then add thewhite of another egg, proceeding thus until you have used the whites of abouteight eggs and made a softish paste, when lay them out at equal distancesapart, upon wafer-paper, in pieces nearly the size of walnuts, place somestrips of almonds upon the top, sift sugar over, and bake in a slow oven of ayellowish brown color; they are done when set quite firm through. 1524.--RATAFIAS. Ratafias are made similar to the above, but deducting two ounces of sweet,and adding two ounces of bitter almonds; they are laid out in much smallercakes upon common paper, and baked in a much warmer oven; when cold, they maybe taken off the paper with the greatest ease. These cakes are very serviceable in making a great many second-coursedishes. 1525.--RICE CAKES. Take eight yolks and four whites of eggs, and beat to a foam; add six ouncesof powdered sugar, and the peel of one lemon grated; then stir in half a poundof ground rice, and beat all together for half an hour. Put it into a butteredtin, and bake twenty minutes. This cake is recommended as very easy of digestion. The foregoing cakes are made without butter, and therefore are not aptto prove injurious. 1526.--BOLA D' AMOUR-LOVE CAKES. Take the yolks of eggs, as many as are required for the dish (about twelve),and beat them up in a pan with an equal weight of sugar, the same as spongecake, using any kind of liquor or essence for flavoring. "When the mixture isbeaten up light and thick, have ready some clarified butter in a stewpan, madehot enough for frying. Pour the mix ture into a funnel having a small bore orpipe, and let it run into the hot butter, turning the hand while it is running,so that it may be formed into threads all over the surface of the pan. In abouttwo minutes it will be done, when it should be taken out with a skimmer, and beplaced on a dish for serving, garnish ing it with any kind of preserve, andserve cold. Another way is, to beat up the eggs with some liquor, and run it into someboiling syrup at the blow . 1527.--EXCELLENT CHEESECAKES, KNOWN ATRICHMOND AS "MAIDS OF HONOR." Make some milk lukewarm then put a spoonful ofrennet, stir it well through a cheese-cloth to get rid of the whey; then tohalf a pound of curd put six ounces of butter, four yolks of eggs, and sugarand nutmeg to the taste. Mix all the ingredients well, line pattypans with apuff paste, fill them with the mixture, and bake in a quick oven. Thecheesecakes may be flavored with lemon for a variety. 1528.--CHEESECAKES. Take the curd of three quarts of milk, a pound of currants, twelve ounces ofsugar, a quarter of an ounce of cinna mon, the same quantity of nutmeg, and thepeel of a lemon chopped to a paste; the yolks of eight and the whites of sixeggs, a pint of scalded cream and a pint of brandy; mix them all together, puta light thin puff-paste into your pattypans and half fill them. 1529.--SOYER'S QUEEN VICTORIA'S CAKE. To three-quarters of a pound of flour, add half an ounce of yeast, mixedwith warm water until forming a stiff paste, and place it in a stewpan, and letit stand by the fire or oven until well risen, during which time the buttermust be well worked until soft, adding a quarter of a pound of flour more andfive eggs gradually, and beat them well together; when done, if the leaven iswell risen, add to it one and a half pounds of raisins, with a little salt andsugar; let it stand in the mould for a short time, and bake it in a slowoven. 1530.--ELETHERIAN PINE APPLE CAKE. Take three-quarters of a pound of pine apple, not over ripe, peel it; placehalf a pound of white sugar in a pan, with half pint of water, boil till athick syrup; cut the pine in small dice of a quarter of an inch, and pour thesyrup over; and, when nearly cold, add to it the dough, which has previouslybeen mixed with three-quarters of a pound of butter and two eggs; let it risein a hoop as above, and bake in the same way: a glass of rum may beadded. 1531.--BABA. Take three pounds of flour, one-quarter of which set apart and mix intodough with a gill of good yeast and a little warm water; cover it close in astew-pan and set it by the fire to rise; when you see the dough rise and nearlyready, form the other parts of the flour in a circle on the table, in which puthalf an ounce of salt, one ounce of sugar, a half pound of butter and twelveeggs and a table-spoon of saffron; mix the butter and eggs well together beforeyou put it to the flour; when it is all mixed spread it out and put the doughto it and knead it well. "When the yeast is nearly mixed in, add two pounds ofraisins stoned, a few at a time, have ready two moulds buttered, and put threeparts full of dough and set in a warm place to rise very gently; when raised tothe top of the mould bake in a hot oven; a brick oven is best. 1532.--CHEESECAKES, APPLE. Take twelve apples, pare, core, and boil in sufficient water to washthem; beat them very smooth; add six yolks of eggs, the juice of twolemons, some grated lemon peel, half a pound of freshbutter, beaten to a cream, and sweetened with powderedsugar; beat in with the apples, bake in a puff crust, and serveopen. 1533.--CHEESECAKES, ALMOND. Take four ounces of blanched almonds, mixed with a few bitter, beatthem with a spoonful of water, add four ounces of powdered sugar,a spoonful of cream, and the whites of two eggs well beaten; mixthem quickly, put into small pattypans, and bake for twenty minutes in a moderately warm oven. 1534.--CHEESECAKES, BREAD Take a French roll, slice it very thin, pour over it some boilingcream, allow it to cool and then add six or eight eggs, half apound of butter melted, a spoonful of brandy, half a pound ofcurrants, some nutmeg, and a little sugar; put them inpuff-paste, the same as other cheesecakes. 1535.--CHEESECAKES,CITRON. Take a pint of cream, boil it, and when cold mix it with twoeggs well beaten; then boil them together, until they be come a curd.Put in a few blanched almonds beaten in a mortar with a littleorange-flower water, and some Naples biscuits and greencitron chopped very small. Sweeten, and bake in tins. 1536.--CHEESECAKES, LEMON. Take four ounces of sifted lump sugar, and the same quantity ofbutter; melt them slowly, add the yolks of two and the whiteof one egg, a sponge cake, some blanched almonds, the rind ofthree lemons shred fine, and the juice of one lemon and ahalf, and three spoonfuls of brandy; mix all well together, then make apaste with eight ounces of flour, and six ounces ofbutter, mixing four ounces of it with the flour first, then wetit with six spoonfuls of water, and roll in the remainder of thebutter; put the ingre dients to this paste, and bake it. CUSTARDS, CREAMS,JELLIES, &c. Custard is always eaten cold, and either poured over fruit tarts, or servedup separately in custard-cups, in each of which a macaroon steeped in wine, andlaid at the bottom, will be found a good addition. The flavoring may likewise be altered, according to taste, by using adifferent kind of essence, the name of which it then acquires; as of lemon, orange, marashino vanilla, &c. It is almostneedless to say that cream or a portion of it will make it richer than meremilk. The French mode of making it is, to measure the numberof cups which are to be filled, and use nearly that quantity of milk or cream,simmering it upon the fire, until beginning to boil, with lemon-peel,bay-leaves, or almonds, then adding about half an ounce of powdered sugar toeach cup; then take the yolk of an egg to each small cup, beat them up with themilk, fill the cups, place in a bain-marie or vase of boiling water until thecustard become firm. For boiled custard :--Boil the milk with theflavoring till thick enough; pour it boiling hot over beaten yolks of eggs,eight to a quart; sweeten to taste, stir till cold and smooth. 1537.--ARROWROOT CUSTARD. One pint of milk, one table-spoonful of arrowroot, one of sugar, boil themilk with a stick of cinnamon in it, wet the arrowroot with a little cold milk,add to it one egg well beaten, add the sugar, stir the whole into the boilingmilk, flavor it with vanilla, wine, or rose when nearly cold. You may flavor custards with lemon-peel, vanilla, or any thing you choose,and make them as rich as you like. 1538.--BLANC MANGE. Wet one ounce or four sheets of Cooper's Isinglass in cold water, boil onequart of milk with a stick of cinna mon in it, drain the isinglass out of thewater and stir it into the milk; when dis solved, strain it through a flannelbag, sweeten it, and when cold pour it into the moulds. 1539.--CUSTARDCREAM OF CHOCOLATE. Scrape one-quarter of a pound of the best chocolate; pour on it a teacupfulof boiling water, and let it stand by the fire till it has dissolved. Beateight eggs very light, omitting the whites of two. Stir them by degrees into aquart of cream or rich milk, alternately with the melted chocolate and threetable-spoon fuls of powdered white sugar. Put the mixture into cups and bake itten min utes. Send them to table cold, with whipped white of egg heaped on thetop of each custard. 1540.--COFFEE CUSTARD. This is made by putting a quart of milk on the fire, with about six ouncesof white sugar. In another vessel beat up the yolks of ten eggs, and pour themilk gradually upon them. Roast your coffee (three or four ounces) till it isof a very light brown color, and gives out all its flavor; break it in amortar, slight ly, and add it, while hot, to your hot custard. Strain through ajelly-bag, pour the cream into cups, and put them to cool. Every thing dependson the coffee being used whilst hot, so as to catch the aroma which goes off asit cools. Or: --Pour half a pint of cold water on the samequantity of fresh ground coffee in a French coffee-pot, press it down and puton the lid. Stop the mouth of the spout, and when the water has filtered down,pour it off, and return it to the top to filter a second, time. Have a custardmade with eight eggs to a pint of milk, sweetened to taste. Stir in the coffee,put it in custard cups, and bake in a pan with water half to their tops. Sendcold to table. 1541.--CHAMPAGNE CREAM Is made by beating up the yolks of six eggs with as much powdered sugar aswill make it quite stiff--so much so as nearly to make the spoon stand in it Then pour on it very gradually--stirring it all thetime--a bottle of sparkling champagne: grate on it a little nutmeg, and serveit to the ladies, who seldom refuse a second glass. A bottle of good cider or perry will be a tolerable substitute. 1542.--LECHE CREMA. Beat up three eggs, leaving out two of the whites, and add to to themgradually one pint and a half of milk; then mix very carefully fourtable-spoonfuls of fine wheat-flour, and two ounces of finely powderedloaf-sugar, with grated lemon-peel to give a flavor. Boil these ingredientsover a slow fire, stirring constant ly to prevent burning, until the flour isquite dissolved. Prepare a shallow dish with some ratafia cakes at the bottom,and when the "crema" is sufficiently boiled, pour it through a sieve upon thecakes. * 1543.--ITALIAN CREAM. Whip together for nearly an hour a quart of very thick scalded cream, aquart of raw cream, the grated rind of four lemons and the strained juice, withten ounces of white powdered sugar: then add half a pint of sweet wine, andcontinue to whisk it until it becomes quite solid. Lay a piece of muslin in asieve, and lay the cream upon it with a spoon. In twenty hours turn itcarefully out, but mind that it does not break Garnish it with fruit-jelly orwith flowers. Another. --Whip up three-quarters of a pint of veryrich cream to a strong froth, with some finely scraped lemon-peel, a squeze ofthe juice, half a glass *Some finely powdered cinnamon should bedusted pretty thickly over it. This delicious dish is always served up cold.The receipt was obtained from the nuns of Santa Clara convent at Palmas in theisland of Grand Canary. of sweet wine, and sugar to make it pleasant, but nottoo sweet; lay it on a sieve or in a form, and next day put it on a dish, andornament it with very light puff-paste biscuits, made in tin shapes the lengthof a finger, and about two thick, over which sugar may be strewed, or a littleglazed with isinglass. Or you may use macaroons to line the edges of thedish. 1544.--CLOUTED CREAM. Strain the milk as soon as it comes from the cow into wide pans, holdingabout six quarts each, so as to be about three inches deep, and let it remainfor twenty-four hours; then gently place the pan upon a hot plate or slowcharcoal fire, which must heat it very gently, for if it boils it is spoilt; assoon as the cream forms a ring in the middle, re move a little with the finger,and if a few bubbles rise in the place where you do so, it is done, which willbe in half to three quarters of an hour; re move it from the fire, and let itremain twenty-four hours; then skim it, and throw a little sugar on thetop. 1545.--CHARLOTTE RUSSE. (Furnished for this work by Mr. Taylor,Proprietor of Taylor's splendid Establishment, Broadway, New York.) Dissolve one ounce of isinglass in half a pint of milk, and add to it whendis solved the yolks of six eggs, and half a pound of white powdered sugar. Whip up a quart of sweet cream in one vessel, and the whites of six eggs inan other. When the isinglass, &c., is nearly cold, stir it gradually into thecream. Then add the whites and stir up the whole together. Pour it in a mould,and set it on the ice for an hour. 1546.--CHARLOTTE RUSSE. (Furnished by aLady of New York.) Make a custard of four eggs, one pint of milk,and five table-spoonfuls of sugar; boil a vanilla bean with the milk. Dis solvehalf an ounce of isinglass in a tea-cupful of water, put a pint of cream in atin pan, stand it over ice, and when the isinglass is cold, mix it with thecream and beat it to a thick froth; pour the cooled custard in and beat it allwell. Place lady-fingers or spongecake inside the form, pour in the mixture,and leave it on the ice to thicken. 1547.--STRAWBERRY CHARLOTTE. Line a plain round mould with ripe strawberries by burying the mould in iceto the rim, and dipping the straw berries in calf's-foot jelly, first coveringthe bottom with them cut in halves, the cutside downwards, afterwards buildingthem up the sides, the jelly (which must be cold, but not set) causing them toad here; when finished fill it with the cream as directed for the charlotterusse, and when ready to serve clip the mould in warm water, and turn it outupon your dish. The cream must be very nearly set when you pour it in, or itwould run between the strawberries, and produce a bad effect. Slip. --Warm two quarts or more of new milk, then putin it a piece of ren net that has been kept in wine, or suffi cient of theliquor to curdle it. When a firm curd is formed, set it in a cool place. Servewith grated nutmeg over it, and with cream. 1548.--EASY AND EXCELLENTRECEIPT FOR JELLY. (By a Lady of New York.) Seven bars isinglass dissolved in two quarts water. When cold, add the juiceand rind of six lemons--the whites and shells of six eggs, a pint and a half ofwine, one and a quarter pounds sugar; stir all well, boil it five minutes, andstrain through a jelly-cloth. 1549.--A GERMAN TRIFLE. Put a pint of strawberries or any other fresh fruit in the bottom of a glassdish. Sugar the fruit, put over it a layer of macaroons; and pour over it a custard, made with a quart of fresh milk and the yolks of eight eggs beaten,sweetened to taste, and scalding hot When cold place on the top the whites ofthe eggs beaten to a froth with a little sugar, or cream whipped to a froth.The egg may be made ornamental by beating currant jelly with part of it, andputting it in alternate hills of white and pink. 1550.--GOOSEBERRY OR APPLETRIFLE. Scald a sufficient quantity of fruit, and pulp it through a sieve, add sugaragree able to your taste, make a thick layer of this at the bottom of yourdish; mix a pint of milk, a pint of cream, and the yolks of two eggs, scald itover the fire, observing to stir it; add a small quantity of sugar, and let itget cold. Then lay it over the apples or gooseberries with a spoon, and put onthe whole a whip made the day before. If you use apples, add the rind of a lemon grated. 1551.--SYLLABUB. Mix a quart of cream with half a pint of sherry wine, and sweeten it totaste, adding essence or grated rind of lemon, and, if desired, thejuice of the fruit. Churn or beat the mixture to a thick froth,which skim off and put in a glass bowl, over slices of sponge cake. 1552.--A FLOATING ISLAND. Take a pint of thick cream, sweeten with fine sugar, grate inthe peel of one lemon, and add a gill of sweet white wine;whisk it well till you have raised a good froth; then pour a pint of thickcream into a china dish, take a sponge cake, slice it thin, and lay itover the cream as lightly as possible;then a layer of clear calves' feet jelly, or currantjelly; then whip up your cream, and lay on the froth as highas you can, and what remains pour into the bottom of the dish. Garnish the rimwith sweetmeats. Or: --Beat the whites of twelve eggs with alittle sugar and currant jelly--a teaspoonful to each egg;whisk it light and lay it on a custard made with the yolks of the eggsand three pints milk. 1553.--WAGNER'S ICE CREAMS. (These re ceiptsare furnished by Mr. Wagner of New York, expressly for this work.) Vanilla Ice Cream. --One quartcream, eight ounces sugar, crushed, half a va nilla bean.Boil half the cream with the sugar and bean, then add therest of the cream, and cool and strain it. Lemon Ice Cream. --One quart cream,eight ounces sugar, one lemon. Grate the lemon-rind in thesugar; this ex tracts the oil 5 then add the raw cream andstrain and freeze very soon. Lemon cream sours and becomes rancid morequickly than any other. Strawberry Ice Cream. --One quartcream, nine ounces sugar, quarter of a pound fresh berriesor more if desired. Wash the berries in the sugar, add thecream, and strain and freeze as soon as possible to preventcurdling. Johnston's Freezer. An illustration of a wooden keg with a churn on top with two undetermined devices on either side of it. The freezing with the ordinary freezer and a strong arm is preferable to allthe machines ever invented. Mr. Wagner has at some expense tried the labor-saving machines, but could not bring up the cream to his standard, and hasnow aban doned them for his original mode of manufacture. A great variety of ice creams may be made with different kinds offruit in the same manner. Mock Cream may be made by mixing half atable-spoonful of flour with a pint of new milk, letting itsimmer five minutes to take off the rawness of the flour; beat up theyolk of an egg, stir it into the milk while boiling and run itthrough a fine sieve. Patent Ice Breaker. An illustration of a boy standing in front of machine. Rennet, to turn milk, may be pre pared thus: Take out the stomach ofa newly killed calf, cover it inside and out side with salt,after it is cleared of the curd. Drain it a few hours, then sew it up with twohandfuls of salt in it, or stretch it on a stick well salted; or keep itin the salt and soak a bit of it when wanted, in fresh water. 1554.--BISCUIT GLACE. Rub some pieces of loaf-sugar on the rind of fourlemons, powder it, and add half a pound more, moistened with thelemon-juice; mix it with a quart of cream, and add six beateneggs. Grate some stale Naples biscuit or sponge cakes, and stirthem in till a thick smooth batter is formed. Scald it in a porcelain stewpan; put it in a freezer and freeze it. 1555.--ALMOND CREAM ICE. Take six ounces of bitter almonds, (sweet ones will not do,) blanchthem, and pound them in a mortar, adding by degrees, a littlerose-water. Boil them gently in a pint of cream till you findthat it is highly flavored with them. Then pour the cream into a bowl,stir in half a pound of powdered loaf-sugar, cover it, and set it awayto cool gradu ally. "When it is cold, strain it, and then stir it gradually andhard into three pints of cream. Put it into the freezer, andproceed as directed. Freeze it twice. It will be found very fine. Send round always with ice cream, sponge cake: afterwards wineand cor dials, or liquors, as they are now gene rally called. 1556.--WATER ICES. Are made with the juice of lemon, currant, orraspberry, or any other sort of fruit, being gained by squeezing,sweetened, and mixed with water. Rub some fine sugar on lemonor orange, to give the color and flavor, then squeeze the juice ofeither on its peel; add water and sugar to make a fine sherbet,and strain it before it be put into the icepot. If orange, the greaterproportion should be of the juice. 1557.--DEVONSHIRE JUNKET. Turn warm milk with rennet; add scalded cream, sugar,and cinnamon, hang to drain in a net. Country Syllabub is made by milking from thecow into a bowl, with wine, sugar, and flavoring. 1558.--RICE FLUMMERY. Boil with a pint of new milk a bit of lemon-peel andcinnamon; mix with a little cold milk as much rice-flouras will make the whole of a good consist ence; sweeten, and add a spoonful ofpeach-water or a bitter almond beaten; boil it, taking care itdoes not burn; pour it into a shape or pint basin, taking out the spice.When cold, turn the flum mery into a dish, and serve with cream,milk, or custard, round. As to the chemical compounds, adver tised for the making ofjellies, custards, and blanc mange, they are worthless in comparisonwith the animal substance of meat, eggs, and milk, ofwhich such deli cacies ought to be formed; they are not cheaper nor sonutritive, neither do we know of what they are composed. 1559.--CALF'S-FOOT JELLY. It is a complaint amongst even experi enced housekeepers that they cannotfeel a certainty of having jelly clear; but by strictly attending to the following method formaking calf's-foot jelly, they can scarcely fail to have itbeautifully bright. Feet for all jellies are boiled so long by the people who sellthem that they are less nutritious: they should be procured from the butcherand only scalded to take off the hair. The liquor will require greater care inremoving the fat; but the jelly will be far stronger. A littleisinglass, half an ounce to a quart of stock, may be used tosecure the firmness, particularly in summer. In peeling lemons, careshould be taken not to cut below the color, as by so doing a great deal of theflavor of the essential oil is lost, and the white part gives a Felt Jelly Bag. An illustration of a cylinderical cloth bag one open end and the other with a narrow opening. disagreeable flavor. The stock should he measured when set to get cold,as the exact quantity cannot be measured when it is set. Jelly is equally good made of cow-heels nicely cleaned; theybear a less price than those of calves, and make a strongerjelly. To make Jelly. --Boil two feet in twoquarts and a pint of water till the feet are broken and thewater half wasted 5 strain it, and the following day take off thefat, and remove the jelly from the sediment; then put it into asaucepan, with a laurel-leaf, twenty cori ander-seeds, the peel oftwo lemons, sugar to palate, half a pint of sherry, and awine-glass of brandy. When the flavor is rich, put to it thewhites of five eggs well beaten, and their shells broken. Theingredients should be cold when mixed together, to ensure the jellybeing clear. Set the saucepan on the fire, but do not stir the jellyafter it gets hot. Let it boil twenty minutes after it rises to a head;then pour it through a flannel jelly-bag, first (lipping the bag in hotwater to prevent waste, and squeezing it quite dry. Run the jellythrough and through until clear; then put it into glasses or moulds. The following mode will greatly facili tate the clearing of jelly: When the mixture has boiled twenty minutes, throw in a teacupful of coldwater; let it boil five minutes longer; then take the saucepan off thefire, cov ered close, and let it stand half an hour; after which it will be soclear as to need only once running through the bag, and much waste will besaved. Or: --Boil four quarts of water, with threecalf s-feet, or two cow-heels, that have been onlyscalded, till half wasted: take the jelly from the fat andsediment; mix with it the juice of a large orange and twelvelemons, the peels of three lemons, the whites and shellsof twelve eggs, white sugar to taste, a pint of wine, oneounce of coriander-seeds, two bay-leaves, a bit of cinnamon, andsix cloves, all bruised, after having previously mixed them cold. Thejelly should boil fif teen minutes without stirring; then clear itthrough a flannel bag. While running take a little jelly, and mix with ateacup ful of water in which a bit of beet-root has been boiled,and run it through the bag when all the rest is run out; this is to garnish theother jelly, being cooled on a plate: but this is a matter of choice,This jelly has a very fine high color and flavor. Cheap Calf's-foot Jelly. --Take one boxof Cox's sparkling gelatine and pour on a pint of cold water--letit stand ten minutes, then add a pint of boiling water--one pint ofwine--half a pound of sugar--the juice and rind oftwo lemons--strain it through a napkin into a pitcher, then turn it intothe moulds Boil in the water a stick of cinnamon, and thelemon-peels. 1560.--GOOSEBERRY-FOOL. Put the fruit into a stone jar, with. white sugar; set the jaron a stove, or in a saucepan of water over the fire; if the former, alarge spoonful of water should be added to the fruit. When it isdone enough to pulp, press it through a colander; have ready a teacupfulof new milk and the same quantity of raw cream boiled together,and left to be cold; then sweeten pretty well with fine sugar and mixthe pulp by degrees with it. For Orange-fool. --Mix the juice ofthree oranges, three eggs well beaten a pint of cream, alittle nutmeg and cinna mon, and sweeten to your taste. Set the wholeover a slow fire, and stir it till it becomes as thick as good meltedbutter, but it must not be boiled; then pour it into a dish for eatingcold. For Apple-fool. --Stew apples as directed for gooseberries, and then peel and pulp them. Prepare themilk, &c., and mix as before. 1561.--TO MAKE AN ALMONDPOSSET. Grate the crumb of a loaf very fine, pour a pint of boiling milk uponit; let it stand two or three hours; then beat it exceedingly well; add to it aquart of good cream, and four ounces of almonds, blanched andbeaten as fine as possible, with rosewater. Mix them all well to gether,set them over a very slow fire, and boil them a quarter of an hour: then set itto cool, and beat the yolks of four eggs, and mix them with yourcream. When it is cold, sweeten it to your taste; then stir it over aslow fire, till it grows pretty thick, but do not let it boil, or it willcurdle} then pour it into a china bowl. When you send it to table, put in threemacaroons to swim on the top. 1562.--TAYLOR'S PLUM PUDDINGGLACE. (Furnished for this work by Mr. Taylor of New York.) One quarter of a pound each of raisins, currants andcitron, one quarter of a pound of chocolate, all boiled togetherin a pint of Madeira wine; mix it when cold with ice cream, so asto make sufficient for an ordinary sized pudding. 1563.--TO CLARIFYISINGLASS. Take two ounces of isinglass, pour on it a pint of springwater which has been mixed with a teaspoonful of beaten white ofegg, and a table-spoonful of lemon-juice. Stir them thoroughlytogether, and let them heat slowly, taking care the isinglass does notstick to the bottom of the pan; simmer a few minutes, clear off the scum tillno more appears; strain it through muslin, and set it by for use: it will betransparent, and .may be warm ed and mixed with the clear juice of anykind of fruit already sweetened, or with syrup in jellies,flavored with liqueur. As a portion of the isinglass is taken up by thewhite of egg, one quarter to each ounce should be allowed for this. Thefinest sort of isinglass, which should be white and without anysmell, does not require to be clarified, excepting for clear jellies;for all other purposes it is enough to dissolve and skim it, and to pass itthrough a strainer. A great variety of excellent jellies may be madewith clarified isinglass and the juice or syrup of almostany kind of fresh fruit, the color of which is best preserved by mashing it lightly and strewing pounded sugar over it, letting it standthree or four hours for the juice to drain off; pour a littlewater over, and use the juice with out boiling. 1564.--FROZENPUDDING. (Furnished for this work by Mr. Sneekner, whose splendid Confectionery Establishment is in Union Square, New York.) Cut up about half a pound of preserved fruits--such aspeaches, plums, citron, raisins, andcurrants--add half a pound of Baker's chocolate, and a pint ofbest Madeira wine; simmer on the fire about fifteen minutes, and whenperfectly cold add about one quart of vanilla ice cream. Freezeit in a two-quart mould, and for the sauce whip half a pint of sweetcream flavored with vanilla. 1565.--MERINGUES. Pound and sift one pound of lump sugar, whisk the whites of twelveeggs very stiff, throw the sugar lightly over, and with a woodenspoon stir gently, perfectly mixing the sugar, then with a table ordessert-spoon lay them out upon white paper in the shape of eggs,sift powdered sugar-thickly over, let them remain ten minutes, thenshake off the superfluous sugar, place upon boards which you havewetted, and put them in a slow oven, just hot enough to cause them to be lightand slightly tinged; when the outside becomes quite crisp, take off the papers, by turning them topsy-turvy andlifting the papers from them 5 dip your spoon into hot water, andwith it clear out the best part of the interior, dust them with powderedsugar, lay them upon a baking-sheet, and pat into the screen to dry; theymay be made several days before they are re quired, if put away in a dry place;to serve, fill them with whipped cream, flavored either withvanilla or orange-flower (but do not make it too sweet), sticktwo together, dress in pyramid upon a napkin, and serve. Should they happen tostick to the papers, moisten the papers with a paste-brushand water underneath; they will come away easier. 1566.--MERINGUES ALA CREME. (Furnished by Mr. Delmonico for this work.) Beat to a froth the whites of six eggs, to this add three ounces offinely powdered sugar, and mix up well. Then lay sheets of paperupon tin or other plates, place some spoonfuls of the mixture at intervals ofhalf an inch, and powder them with fine sugar. Cook them at a verygentle heat, and, when done, place them in a warm place, in order to keep themdry. You may dress them with whipped cream or jelly, according toyour taste. 1567.--NOUGAT. Out in dice or in fillets a pound of blanched sweet almonds, and mixwith them eight or six bitter almonds. When they are cut equally, drythem in the oven, but keep them white; take three or four spoonfuls ofsuperfine pounded sugar, put it over a slow fire in a pre serving pan;when the sugar is melted without having used any water, throw thealmonds in, but take care that they are quite dry. Stir the sugarwith a clean wooden skewer. If you hear a noise when you throw them into thesugar it is a sign that they are dry enough. Rub a mould slightly overinside with oil or butter, and lay some al monds in beds asthinly as possible; take an oiled lemon to press the almonds with: but bequick, otherwise the almonds will get cool, and then they cannot be workedso thin. The nougat requires to be light, to be made to perfection. Some timesyou may make the nougat in a mould the form of a vase, sometimes in smallcustard-moulds, according to your choice; it is always the same thing, but youmay cut the almonds of different shapes. Sometimes make a pound of almonds into nougat, oil a baking-dish,and spread it over it, oil the rolling-pin, and flatten the nougat withit; if it will spread easy, put it in the oven again to make it soft; then cutit into small long squares, and keep it in a very dry place, to pre vent itsticking to the fingers. The nougat is in general made too sweet, and it is anarticle that belongs to the con fectionery department. COFFEE,TEA, AND CHOCOLATE. 1568.--COFFEE. There are several ways of making coffee; and every housewifegenerally has her favorite mode. The French make excellent coffeewithout the aid of eggs, isinglass, or any foreign article tosettle it. It consists of a sort of tin coffee-pot, with two strainers. Youremove the first strainer, and pour some boiling water into thecoffee-pot through the second strainer. Empty out the water, and put ina sufficient quantity of coffee for the family over the under strainerand press it flat with a little tin machine (which comes with the apparatus).Put in the other strainer, and pour in the hot water. The coffeewill drain through in a few moments. Coffee Canister. An illustration of a canister with coffee written across the front. Another mode of making Coffee.--Take fresh roasted coffee, allow twotable-spoonfuls for each person, grind it just before making, put it in a basinand break into it an egg, yolk, white, shell, and all. Mix it upwith the spoon to the consist ence of mortar, put warm, not boilingwater, in the coffee pot; let it boil up and break three times; thenstand a few minutes and it will be as clear as amber, and the eggwill give it a rich taste. Codfish skin, scraped, washed, and dried, and cut in pieces, an inchsquare, may be used to settle off, or isinglass. You may add to a pintof coffee a pint of boiling milk, and heat both together beforeserving. Sugar Box. An illustration of a canister with a lid. 1569.--COFFEE, TO ROAST. Coffee should never be roasted but when you are going to use it, andthen it should be watched with the greatest care, and made of a gold color;mind and do not burn it, for a few grains burnt would communicate a bittertaste to the whole; it is the best way to roast it in a roaster over acharcoal fire, which turns with the hand, as by that means it will notbe forgotten. PARKER'S PATENT COFFEE-MAKER. Figure 1. An illustration of an old fashioned coffee maker. By this machine, the extract of coffee is prepared in a very easy andexpeditious manner. When the extract is made, it may be diluted withboiling water to suit the palate; or hot milk may be used insteadof water, making café au lait . Figure 1 represents the external appearance of the apparatus, and figure 2is section to show its construction and mode of action. a a is a box of metal to hold the coffee,having its bottom and top lid perforated with numerous small holes. From thelower part of the box proceeds a funnel, that reaches nearly to the bottom ofan outside vessel or cylinder of metal, e e, which is divided into two parts interiorly by apartition, b b, and on the middle of this partition is fixed a tube, into whichthe neck of the funnel is put, and on which the box with thecoffee rests. The exterior vessel is covered with a convex lid, d . The whole is placed on a stand, in which is aspirit-lamp, f, having a sliding tube, g, so arranged that the heat can be increased ordiminished at pleasure. Having taken out the box, with its funnels, it is tilled with coffee,and boil ing water is poured down the tube in the interior; this willpass into the di vision at the lower part, ee; then the box with thecoffee is to be replaced, and the lamp lighted. The steam which isformed forces the water into e e to rise through the tube, and passesupward through the perforated bottom of the box into the coffee, whichis seen rising as a dark fluid through the perforated lid of a a, and flowing over into the up per division, b b. The passage of the water should be permitted to continue till it becomes pale-colored, and has con sequently extracted all the goodness of the coffee, when thelamp should be ex tinguished, and the lid put on. The ex tract is then drawnoff by means of the faucet. Figure 2. An illustration of the internal mechanics of a coffee maker. After making the extract, it is best not to drain off the liquidremaining within the rim of the cover, but to let it return into the boiler,which it will do as soon as the lamp is extinguished.--Thus, any sediment willreturn with it. The filling of the box is best done by piling up the ground coffee inthe centre, and then striking it off with a knife, as is done with corn in abushel-measure. The time for making the extract of coffee, where hotwater is used, should never exceed five minutes. If it takes longer, it canarise only from the coffee being ground too finely; and this not only increases the expenditure of spirits of wine and of time, but likewiseinjures the quality of the extract. The remedy is, to grind thecoffee coarser and coarser, until the operation, after the waterin the boiler boils, lasts only three minutes. The extract of coffeeprepared by this apparatus contains all the aroma and other fine qualities ofthe coffee. An illustration of a decorative tea pot and its holder. TEA. Tastes differ regarding the flavor of various sorts of tea: somepreferring all black; others, all green; and many, a mixture of both indifferent quantities; though most persons--when not fearful of their nerves--agree that fine Hyson is the best. A good mixture, in point of Tea Canister. An illustration of a canister with a narrow opening and the words tea canister written on the front. flavor, we know tobe--two-fifths black, two-fifths green, and one-fifth gunpowder: all being, ofcourse, of superior quality. Presuming all ladies to be intimately acquainted with the mode of makingtea, yet to some, a few hints on the subject may not perhaps be foundobjectionable. Boiling water should alone be used. Metal tea-pots in preference to earthenware. They retain heatbetter. Silver is better than either. Water Urn. An illustration of a ceramic urn with a spigot. A spoonful of tea for each person. Heat the tea-pot first withsome boiling water, then pour that into the tea-cups to warm them; putin your tea, and pour enough water upon the tea to coverit; let it stand three or four minutes, then nearly fill the tea-potwith water; let it stand a few minutes, and pour out. CHOCOLATE, If made thin, is not worth drinking; and that which is commonly sold is acompound of flour, or some farinaceous substance, and coarsesugar, with a very moderate quantity of real cocoa, and that ofthe most inferior quality, colored with Venetian red and brown ochre. Chocolate forms the common breakfast throughout Spain, and is theremade by merely chipping a portion of the cake into which it is formed from thecocoa, leaving the chips in water for a whole night to soften. Itmay then be slowly warmed, along with either water or milk,working it all the time with the mill, which is a small movable pole passedthrough the lid of a chocolate-pot, and furnished with a headpiece, inorder to mix the chocolate equally, by turning the mill rapidly betweenthe hands and without intermission, thus to prevent it from becoming clotty;care, however, should be taken not to let it boil; for, in that case, thevegetable oil which is contained in the nut will be extractedfrom it and appear on the surface. The flavor is better retained by making itin water than milk. It is always made very thick, so that a small spoon will nearly standupright in it, and nothing eaten with it but a rusk, or dry toast: afterwhich there is usually taken a draught of cold spring water. The usual mode of making it here is, to boil a pint of water and apint of milk in the pot, put to it a part of a cake of chocolatecut into very small slices, mill it off the fire till quite melted, then put iton a gentle fire till it nearly boils, milling it all the time. Sweeten totaste. 1570.--COCOA. An excellent breakfast beverage may be made by simply pounding thenut--which is the substance of chocolate--and boiling it in thesame manner in either water or milk. Cocoa Shells or Nibs, are the thin coveringsof the cocoa kernel, and can only be had at some chocolatemanufac tory, where they can be bought at a very low price, and form a lightfood for an invalid, when taken warm. Soak them in water during the whole night, and then boil them in thesame water until it is reduced to half the quantity: they should boil two hours, and should then be mixed up withmilk. 1571.--CHOCOLATE DROPS. Take one pound and a half of choco late, put it on a pewter plate and put itin the oven just to warm the chocolate, then put it into a copperstewpan with three-quarters of a pound of powdered sugar; mix it wellover the fire, take it off, and roll it in pieces the size of small marbles,put them on white paper, and when they are all on, take the sheets ofpaper by each corner and lift it up and down, so that thepaper may touch the table each time, and by that means you will see thedrops come quite fat, about the size of a sixpence; put somesugar nonpareils over them, and cover all that are on the paper,then shake them off, and you will see all the chocolate drops arecovered with the sugar nonpareils; let them stand till cold and theywill come off well, and then put them in a box prepared. 1572.--TEACREAM. Infuse an ounce of the best green tea in half a pint of boilingmilk, simmer it five minutes, then strain it through a tammy, pressingthe leaves well; boil a pint of rich cream, add to it the yolks offour eggs beaten, and sufficient quan tity of clarified sugar; pourthis whilst hot to the milk, stir them together well, put in as muchclarified isinglass as will set it, and pour the cream into themould or glasses; place them on ice; when per fectly cold, turn it out of themould or serve in the glasses. PRESERVES, &c. Preserves should be kept carefully from the air, and in a very dryplace. Unless they have a very small proportion of sugar, a warm onedoes not hurt; but when not properly boiled, heat makes them ferment, and dampcauses them to grow mouldy. They should be looked at two or three times in thefirst two months, that they may be gently boiled again if not likely to keep.Paste the edge of the outer paper, as it keeps out the air betterthan a string; put writing-paper over the fruit. Dried sweetmeats, cakes, &c., should be kept in tin boxes,between layers of white paper, in a very dry but not hot room. All fruits for preserving should be gathered in dry weather; but asthis is not always practicable, much incon venience may be obviated by boilingthe fruit for jellies and jams long before the sugar isadded. By so doing, the watery particles will evaporate, and thepreserve will be better flavored, by the sugar not being too longon the fire. Pans of copper or bell-metal are the proper utensils for preservingfruit: when used, they must be scoured bright with sand. Tinned pansturn and destroy the color of the fruit that is put into them. 1573.--TO PRESERVE WATERMELON RIND. Pare off the outer skin and cut the rind into shapes: greenthem by simmer ing with vine leaves and a little alum, and allowa pound and a quarter of sugar to each pound. Make the syrup andclarify it with white of egg, and simmer the melon rind till donethrough and trans parent. Boil down the syrup afterwards, and pour itover the preserves. Chips of pumpkin or muskmelon rind, cut thin, are often madeinto preserves,--adding the juice and grated rind oflemons, which much improves the syrup. Citrons may be preserved in the same manner,first paring off the outer skin, and cutting them into quarters. Alsogreen limes. 1574.--APPLES. Weigh equal quantities of good brown sugar and of apples; peeland core them. Boil the sugar, allowing to every three pounds a pint ofwater; skim it well, and boil it pretty thick; then add theapples, the peel of one or two lemons, and two or three pieces ofwhite ginger; boil till the apples look clear and yellow. Thispreserve will keep for years. 1575.--PINE-APPLES, Take those that are ripe, and perfectly fresh--pare off the rind, andcut the apples in slices an inch thick. Powder the same weight ofwhite sugar as you have pine-apples--lay the pine-applesin a deep dish, and sprinkle part of the powdered sugar between eachlayer of apples. Reserve about half of the sugar. Let theapples remain till the succeeding day---then turn the syrup fromthem, and mix it with the reserved sugar, and half a pint ofwater, for three or four pounds of pine apple. Boil thesyrup, take it from the fire, and when cool, put in the apples,simmer them gently till tender, let them remain in a deep dish for severaldays; they should be covered up tight, and kept in a cool place. When everthere is any appearance of fermen tation, turn the syrup from them,scald it, and turn it back hot upon the pine apples. Keep them in glassor china jars, covered tight, and in a cool place. 1576.--TAITPINE-APPLE. To fourteen pounds of grated pine apple add half an ounce of gratedalum, and mix thoroughly. Boil seven pounds white sugar in aslittle water as possible, skimming it until perfectly clear. Pour theboiling sugar over the fruit, and put it into emptychampagne bottles; stand the bottles in boiling water till thewater begins to cool; then cork and seal them closely. 1577.--CRAB-APPLES Make a syrup, allowing the same weight of sugar asapples. Let it cool, then put in the apples, a few at once, sothat they will not crowd, and break to pieces. Boil them till they begin tobreak, then take them out of the kettle. Boil the syrup in the course ofthree or four days, and turn it while hot upon the apples. This continueto do at in tervals of two or three days, till the apples appear to bethoroughly preserved. 1578.--GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR MAKINGSWEETMEATS AND JELLIES. In preparing sugar for sweetmeats, let it be entirelydissolved before you put it on the fire. If you dissolve it in water,allow about half a pint of water to a pound of sugar. If you boilthe sugar before you add the fruit to it, it will be improved inclearness by passing it through a flannel bag. Skim off the brown scum all thetime it is boiling. If sweetmeats are boiled too long, they lose theirflavor and become of a dark color. If boiled too short a time they will notkeep well. You may ascertain when jelly is done, by dropping a smallspoon ful into a glass of water. If it spreads and mixes with thewater, it requires more boiling. If it sinks in a lump to the bottom, itis sufficiently done. This trial must be made after the jelly is cold.Raspberry jelly requires more boiling than any other sort. Blackcurrant jelly less. Keep your sweetmeats in glass jars. 1579.--TO PRESERVE QUINCES. Ripe quinces pare and cut in slices an inch thick--take out the corescarefully, so as to have the slices in the form of a ring. Allow a pound.ofwhite sugar for each pound--dissolve it in cold water, having aquart of the latter to a pound of sugar, then put in the slicedquinces, and let them soak in it ten ortwelve hours. Put them in a preserving kettle, and put it on a moderatefire-cover them over, and let the quinces boil gently-- there should bemore than enough syrup to cover the quinces. When a broomsplinter will go through them easily, take them from the fire, and turn themout. In the course of a week turn the syrup from them, and boil it down,so that there will be just enough to cover the fruit. When not veryripe, pare and cut the quinces either in rings or quar ters, take outthe cores, and boil the quinces in fair water, till they begin togrow tender--take them up, and strain the water in which they areboiled--put in either brown or white sugar--add a little coldwater. When lukewarm, put in the whites of eggs and clarify it--letit cool, then put in the quinces, and boil them slowly for half an hour.Keep them covered over while boiling, if you wish to have them of a lightcolor. Turn them out into pots as soon as preserved, and set them away in acool place. Look at them in the course of a week to see if they havefermented--if so, turn the syrup from them, boil it. and turn it backwhile hot. The parings and cores of the quinces can be used for marmalade, with a few whole ones. Some people prefer to preserve thequinces with the cores in, but the syrup will not look clear. Thefollowing is a cheap method of preserving quinces, and answers very wellfor common use: Pare, halve, and take out the cores of the quinces, andboil the parings in new cider till soft. Strain the cider, andfor five pounds of quinces put in a pound of brown sugar, a quartof molasses, the beaten white of an egg--clarify it, then put inthe quinces. There should be rather more than enough rider to cover thequinces, as it wastes a good deal while the quinces are boiling.The peel of an orange cut in small pieces, and boiled with them, givesthe quinces a fine flavor. Quince Marmalade. --Gather the fruitwhen fully ripe, and of a fine yellow; pare, quarter, and core it. Put thequinces into a saucepan with a little water, set them on the fireuntil they are quite soft; then take them out, and lay them on a sieve todrain; rub them through, and put to each pound of the strained quinces apound of brown sugar. Set it on a few coals, and let it stewslowly, stirring it constantly. When it has stewed an hour, take a little of itout, let it get cold--if it then cuts smooth, it is sufficiently stewed. Quince Jelly. --Halve the quinces, andtake out the cores. Boil the quinces till very soft in clearwater, mash them, and let them drain through a flannel bag, withoutsqueezing them. Put to the quince liquor, when drained through the bag,white sugar in the proportion of a pound to a pint of liquor. Add thewhites of eggs, and clarify it. When clear, boil it on a moderate firetill it becomes a thick jelly. Fill glasses with the jelly, andcover them tight. The quince pulp that remains in the jelly-bag can bemade into marmalade. 1580.--TO PRESERVE PEACHES,APRICOTS, NECTARINES, AND PLUMS. September is the best month for peaches, as they are then harder andlarger. Weigh the peaches, put them into a preserving-pan full ofcold water, with a slice or two of lemon; set them on a slowfire, have ready a sieve and a napkin, and be careful not to do them toomuch. Some of the peaches will be ready sooner than others; when they beginto be soft they are done enough; take them out as they become soft, and drainthem on a sieve, and let them stand until cold; then make a syrup, toevery pound of peaches allowing a pound ofloaf-sugar-- use some of the water in which the peacheswere boiled for the syrup. Take the kernels of half a dozenpeaches, throw them into hot water and remove their skins,then boil them with the syrup you are making. Put the peachesinto jars and glasses, and pour the syrup over them. Gut several round pieces of paper, dip them in brandy,lay them over the pre serves, and tie up the jars. Apricots, nectarines, and plums, may be preserved inthe same manner. This way of preserving peaches is much preferable to cutting them upand then preserving them. The fruit should not be permitted to boiluntil it becomes shrivelled. 1581.--BRANDY PEACHES. To each pound of peaches take three-quarters of a pound of whitesugar. Make a syrup, in half of which boil the fruit, havingfirst taken off the skin by scalding them in hot lye, which is made bydissolving as much salsoda in boiling water as will make it strongenough to bear an egg. The peaches are to be taken out of the lye as soon as the skinbegins to crack, and thrown into cold water, when they can be rubbedquite clean with a coarse cloth. Rinse them in fresh water, wrap them ina cloth to drain, and keep them covered, as on this depends their color. When the boiled peaches are cold, add to the remainder of thesyrup the same quantity of brandy. Put away the peaches init, and cover tightly. 1582.--GREEN GAGES. Allow equal weights of sugar and gages. Make a syrup ofwhite sugar, and just water enough to cover the plums.Boil the plums slowly in the syrup ten minutes--turn them into adish, and let them remain four or five days, then boil them again, till thesyrup appears to have entered the plums. Put them into a chinajar, and in the course of a week turn the syrup from them, scald it, andturn it over them hot. 1583.--TO PRESERVE PEARS. Pare them very thin, and simmer them in a thin syrup, allowing onlyone-quar ter of a pound of sugar to a pound of pears. Let themlie for two days, add another quarter of a pound of sugar to each poundof pears, and simmer them again. Let them lie all night, or longer ifyou please, then simmer them once more, this time adding half a pound ofsugar to each pound of pears, with the juice of half alemon to every two pounds of fruit. A small portion of thelemon-peel may also be used. The fruit may then be drained anddried in the sun, so that they may be used dry; or they may be poured into thejars with the syrup over them. Another mode of preserving pears, and a less troublesome one, is topare, quarter and core the pears, boil them for an hour in as muchwater as will cover them, then add to every pound of pears apound of white sugar and the juice of half a lemon, boilthe whole and skim it. When the pears are soft, pour them into jars andthe syrup over them; tie up the jars. This is a much more expeditious way of preserving the pears, andperhaps the best for large families, where sweetmeats are in daily use;but the fruit itself does not look as clear and beautiful; as whenpreserved by the former method. Pear Marmalade --Boil the pears withthe skins on. When soft, rub them through a sieve, and put to each poundof pulp three-quarters of a pound of brown sugar. Stew it over aslow fire till it becomes a thick jelly. It should be stirredconstantly. Baked Pears .--Take half a dozen finepears; peel, cut them in halves, and take out the cores; put them into apan with half a pound of sugar, and some water. Set them in amoderate oven till tender, then put them on a slow fire to stew gently; addgrated lemon-peel, and more sugar, if necessary. They will besuffi ciently red. 1584.--GOOSEBERRIES. The tops and tails being removed from the gooseberries, allow anequal quantity of finely pounded loaf-sugar, and put a layer of eachalternately into a large deep jar; pour into it as much drippedcurrant-juice, either red or white, as will dissolve thesugar, adding its weight in sugar; the following day put all intoa preserving-pan and boil it. Gooseberry Jam. --Take what quantity youplease of red, rough, ripe gooseberries; take half their quantity oflump sugar; break them well, and boil them together for half an hour ormore, if necessary. Put it into pots and cover with paper. 1585.--CURRANT JELLY, (RED), Strip off the currants, put them in a jar, set the jar in a kettle ofhot water, let it boil an hour, then throw the cur rants andjuice into a fine lawn sieve, press out all the juice, and toevery pint of juice put a pound of fine sugar; put them in apreserving-pan, set it over a charcoal fire and keep it stirring till itis in a jelly, which you will know by tak ing a little out to cool; becareful to take off the scum as it rises, and when it is jellied and very clearpour it into glasses; when cold, cut round pieces of paper that willjust cover the jelly, dip ped in brandy, put white paperover the glasses, twisting round the top. Make black currant jelly thesame way, using coarse sugar. 1586.--CLEAR APPLE JELLY. Pare and cut up five dozen large juicy, acid apples; put them in apan with as much water as will cover them, let them boil gently untilsoft, let them get cold, then strain them through a jelly bag, put thejuice in your preserving-pan, and to each pint of juice put onepound of fine sugar and the peel of two lemons, then boil ituntil it is reduced to the stiffness of calves'-foot jelly, skimit well, add the juice of a lemon; it should be made in September, theflavor of the apple is better. Jelly may be made from apricots, raspberries,grapes, and other fruits, using a pound of sugar for eachpint of juice, and following the above directions. 1587.--COLORINGFOR JELLIES, ETC. For a beautiful red, boil fifteen grains of cochineal in the finestpowder, with a dracham and a half of cream tartar in half a pint ofwater, very slowly, half an hour; add in boiling a bit of alum,the size of a pea, or use beet-root sliced, and some liquorpoured over. For white, use almonds finely powdered, with a little drop ofwater, or use cream. For yellow, yolks of eggs, or a bit of saffron steeped in theliquor and squeezed. For green, pound spinach leaves or beet leaves, express thejuice, and boil a teacupful in a saucepan of water to take of therawness. 1588.--FROSTED FRUIT. Pick out the finest cherries, plums, apricots,grapes, or small pears--leave on their stalks. Beat the whitesof three eggs to a stiff froth--drain them, and beat the part that dripsoff again. Lay the fruit in the beaten egg witht he stalksupward--select them out one by one, and dip them into a cup of finelypowdered sugar. Cover a pan with a sheet of fine paper, place the fruit inside of it, andset it in an oven that is cooling. When the icing on the fruit becomesfirm pile them on a dish and set them in a cool place. 1589.--GRAPESIN BRANDY. Take some close bunches, black or white, not over-ripe, and lay themin a jar. Put a good quantity of pounded white sugar upon them, and fillup the jar with brandy 5 tie them close down with a bladder, and keep ina dry place. Each grape should be pricked thrice. They make a beautiful middle dish in a winter dessert. 1590.--CRANBERRY JELLY. Make a very strong isinglass jelly. When cold, mix it with a doublequan-tity of cranberry juice pressed, sweeten it with loaf sugar,and boil it up; then strain it into a shape. 1591.--TO PRESERVESTRAWBERRIES, RASPBERRIES, AND BLACKBERRIES, WHOLE. The strawberries should be gathered fresh from the vines. Select thelargest, and those perfectly unbroken. Mash up the others and boil them for aquarter of an hour without any water--strain them through a finejelly-bag. Measure the juice, and allow a pound of loaf sugar, to everyquart of strawberry juice. When you make the syrup allow a pint of spring water to everytwo pounds of sugar--skim the syrup thoroughly. When the scumceases to rise pour in the juice of the berries and boil it fromfive to fifteen minutes, or until the syrup will hang in drops from aspoon. Pour the syrup into glass jars or tum-blers, and lifting the wholestrawberries with a spoon, put as many of them in each jar as it willhold, without being at all crowded. The syrup should cover all well, andit is better to have too few than too many in every jar. Let the jars standuntil the syrup is quite cold, and then tie them up with paperdipped in brandy. 1592.--TO DRY CHERRIES. Weigh the cherries before they are stoned, and allow to every poundof fruit a quarter of a pound of lump-sugar; when they are stonedset them over a slow fire to heat, then take them out of the liquor and put thesugar to them, and let them stand till it is dissolved. Then set themover the fire and let them just boil. Allow them to stand until they are quitecold, or, if convenient, for two or three days, in the syrup;after-wards strain them, and spread them on sieves to dry, either on a stove orin the sun, or in an oven after the bread is drawn. The same syrup will do again for more fruit. To Dry without Sugar. --Stone, and set themover the fire in the preserving-pan; let them simmer in their own liquor, andshake them in the pan. Put them in china common dishes; next day give themanother scald, and put them when cold on sieves to dry in an oven of temperateheat. Twice heating, an hour each time, will do them. Put them in a box, with apaper be-tween each layer. 1593.--CURRANT JAM. Strip your currants, and put them into your pan, with three-quartersof a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit, add your sugarafter your fruit has boiled a few minutes, boil all together, mashingyour fruit with a wooden spoon; boil all gently for half an hour, thenfill your jars. Currants Preserved. --Take the seedsand stalks from whatever quantity of currants you intend to use, ofwhich a fourth part must be white currants; put them into a preserving pan with a glass of water, letthem boil up until the fruit bursts, then strain the juice twice,clarify and boil to casse some sugar, an equal weight to thefruit, pour the juice on it, boil them together a quarter of anhour, and having skimmed it well, pour it into pots. To preserve them dry. --Tie up in bunches; toevery pound of currants boil two pounds of sugar, till it boilsvery strong, dip in the currants, let them boil very fast till thesugar flies all over them; when settled a quarter of an hour boil themtill the sugar rises almost to the top of the pan, let them settle, skimthem and set them by till next day, then drain them and lay them out, takingcare to spread the sprigs that they may not dry clogged together; dust themvery much, and dry them in a hot stove. 1594.--FIGS GREEN, TOPRESERVE. Slit some small green figs on the top, and put them into waterfor ten days, and proceed thus:--Put as much salt into the wateras will make it bear an egg, then let it settle, take off thescum and put the clear brine to the figs, keep them for ten days;then put them into fresh water, shifting them every day for four days;again drain, then put them into clarified sugar, warm them a little andlet them stand till the next day; warm them again, and when they are becomegreen give them a good boil, then boil some sugar down, put it to themand give them another boil, and next day drain and dry them. 1595.--FIGS RIPE, TO PRESERVE. Take the figs when ripe, slit them in the tops, put them intoclarified sugar, and give them a good boil, skim them, and leave them tostand till the next day. then boil some more sugar, put it to thefigs and give them another boil, the next day drain and dry them. Ripe or Green Tomatoes --Make a nicepreserve. They require a more than usual quantity of sugar. 1596.--GINGER, PRESERVED. Take some green ginger, and with a sharp knife pare it neatly, and asit is pared throw into a pan of cold water to keep it white 5when you have a sufficient quantity boil it till tender, changing thewater three times each time; put it into cold water to take outthe heat or spirit of the ginger, when tender throw it intocold water. For seven pounds of ginger clarify eight pounds ofrefined sugar; when cold drain the ginger and put it into anearthen pan, with a sufficient quantity of the sugar cold to cover it,and let it stand for a couple of days; then pour the syrup from theginger to the remainder of the sugar, boil it for some time, andwhen cold pour it on the ginger again, and set by for three days atleast. Then take the syrup from the ginger, boil it, and then putit hot over the ginger; pro-ceed in this manner until you find thesugar has entered the ginger; boiling the syrup andskimming off the scum that rises each time until the syrup becomes richas well as the ginger; if the syrup is put on hot at first, or iftoo rich the ginger will shrink and not take the sugar. 1597.--MARMALADE. Marmalade may be composed almost of any fruit; the besthowever for this purpose are apricots, peaches, oranges,quinces, eggs, plums, apples, &c.; they areusually made by boiling the fruit and sugar together to a kind ofpulp, stirring them constantly while on the fire. It is kept in potswhich must not be covered, till the marmalade is quite cold 5 theproportion of sugar is half a pound to each pound of fruit. 1598.--APPLE MARMALADE. Boil some pippins until they begin to get tender, then put them into cold water, pare and core them, squeezethe pulp through a sieve, and put it over the fire, letting it remaintill it becomes very thick, then weigh an equal quantity of fine sugar,boil till the sugar rises in sparkles which cluster together, put themarmalade to it, and stir them well with a wooden spoon till theapples begin to boil, then take it off, and when a little cool put itinto pots, but do not cover them until quite cold. 1599.--ORANGEMARMALADE. Blanch the rinds of fifteen oranges without any of thewhite till soft, then soak them in cold water for a few min-utes,drain and pound them to a paste, which rub through a sieve; ascertainits weight, and for each pound allow a pound and a half of sugar;clarify and boil the sugar till the bubbles rise strong-ly to thesurface; put in the paste and boil them together, stirring continuallytill the marmalade is done. To know when the marmalade is fit toturn out and be potted, take some up between your thumb and finger, and if onopening them it draws out like a thread it is done. The Southerners use bitteroranges. Marmalades of raspberries, blackberries, plums,grapes, &c., are most in favor. JAMS. 1600.--RASPBERRRY. Take equal weights of fruit and moist sugar 5 put them on thefire together; keep stirring and breaking the fruit till thesugar melts, then boil it till it will jelly on a plate. 1601.--CHERRY. Stone four pounds of cherries, and put them in a preserving-pan withtwo pounds of fine white sugar and a pint of red-currant juice.Boil the whole together rather fast, until it stiffens, and then put it intopots for use. 1602.--BLACKBERRY. In families where there are many children, there is no preparation offruit so wholesome, so cheap, and so much ad-mired, as this homelyconserve. The fruit should be clean picked in dry weather, and to everypound of berries put half a pound of coarse brown sugar; boil thewhole together for three-quarters of an hour or one hour, stirring it well thewhole time. Put it in pots like any other preserve, and it will be foundmost useful in families, as it may be given to children instead ofmedicine. Compotes of fruit are made by prepar-ing asyrup, and simmering the fruit in it two or three minutes, thenpouring the syrup over, after it is boiled down a little; a delicatelight jelly is thus formed round the fruit. Not more than halfthe weight of the fruit in sugar, or even a less proportion, isused. The dish is a nice one for desserts, but will not keep. All kinds offresh fruit may be thus prepared. 1603.--TO PRESERVE ORANGESOR LEMONS IN JELLY. Out a hole at the stalk the size of a shilling, and with a small blunt knifescrape out the pulp quite clear, without cutting the rind, andlay them in spring water two days, changing it twice a day; in the last,boil them tender on a slow fire, keeping them covered to the last. To everypound of fruit take two pounds of double-refined sugar and onepint of water; boil the two latter together with the juice of theorange to a syrup, and clarify it; skim well, and let it stand tobe cold; then boil the fruit in the syrup half an hour; if notclear, do this daily bill they are, done. 1604.--TO PRESERVE LEMON PEEL. Squeeze the juice out of the lemons, put the rinds,with the pulps, into water, and let them remain a fortnight,taking care always to have them covered with the same water; then takeout the pulp, and boil the rinds in the water till theycan be pierced with a knitting needle 5 make a rich syrup of brownsugar--pound for pound of rinds--and pour it boiling over them;cover close for three weeks, then give them a second boil in the syrup,and cover for use. 1605.--BARBERRY CAKES. Pick the barberries and weigh them; to every pound of fruit add onepound of sugar pounded and sifted. Bruise the barberries in a mortar,boil them gently till nearly all the juice is consumed, then take themoff the fire and stir in the sugar by degrees; drop the fruit onear-then dishes to dry: it must not go over the fire after thesugar is put in, nor must there be any water used. Do not poundthe barberries too small, as the cakes will not look so well. Currant cakes may be made in the same way. 1606.--RASPBERRYCAKES. Take any quantity of fruit you please, weigh and boil it, and whenmashed, and the liquor is washed, add as much sugar as was equal inweight to the raw fruit. Mix it very well off the fire till the whole isdissolved, then lay it on plates, and dry it in the sun. When the top partdries cut it off into small cakes, and turn them on a fresh plate. When dry,put the whole in boxes with layers of paper. 1607.--BRANDYCHERRIES. Get the largest morel cherries you can, cut off half of the stalk,pricking each cherry with a needle, putting them as you do them into ahigh glass; add three quarters of the weight in white candy sugarbruised between until full, a gill of Noyeau, and then fill up with Frenchbrandy; tie a bladder over the bottle. 1608.--CHERRIES INBRANDY. Choose the finest and ripest cherries, leave on half the stalks, washand weigh them; to every pound of fruit allow a quarter of a pound ofsugar; when you have clarified and boiled it, put in the fruit,boil them up two or three times, then put the cherries into bottles, orglass jars; when filled, add to each twelve cloves and half an ounce ofcinnamon tied in a linen bag, put to the sugar when nearly cold,brandy in proportion of a pint and a half to a pound of fruit,mix them together well, and pour them on the cherries. In two months'time taste them, and if sufficiently flavored, take out the cloves andcinnamon; cover the jars close. Plums, apricots, &c., can be done the same way. 1609.--MOCKPRESERVED GINGER. Boil, as if for the table, small, tender, white carrots; scrape themuntil free from all spots, and take out the hearts. Steep them inspring water, changing it every day, until all vegetable flavor has leftthem. To every pound of carrot so prepared, add one quart ofwater, two pounds of loaf-sugar, two ounces of wholeginger, and the shred rind of a lemon. Boil for a quarter of anhour every day, until the carrots are clear; and, when nearly done, addred pepper to taste. This will be found equal to West India preservedginger. 1610.--YANKEE APPLE BUTTER. Boil cider down one half; put in as many apples as the liquorwill contain, stew them soft; then take them out and put in fresh apples. When they are cold boil themagain in the cider til they are pulpy and thick. Add different kinds ofspice, a little before it is done Keep in covered jars. 1611.--CRANBERRY SAUCE. Simmer the berries in a very little water, till very thick andpulpy; sweeten to taste; they will require as much as preserves; strainthe marmalade into a mould. 1612.--TO KEEP PEACHES FRESH. Pare and halve your peaches, have your cans perfectly dry, set one ata time in a bain marie in boiling water, to drive out the air. Fill thecan as full as you can without bruising the fruit; if you have plenty offruit, boil some in a very little water, fill the can withit--and seal it immediately. Do not put any sugar in the peachesor juice. If you have not much fruit, a little boilingwater will do, as each can will hold but a few spoonfuls. Do not let itboil until it becomes colored. Any fruit or vegetables may be pre-servedin the same manner. Inspect the cans daily, and if the tops bulge out, be surethe sealing has not been perfect, and fermentation has begun. Then open thecan, use the article, and put up a fresh quantity. To open the can, set it inthe oven, till the cement is soft; then lift out the cover, and let the cancool. To open glass jars, hold a flat-iron, heated, on the cover till thecement softens. Butter may be kept unchanged for years in air-tight vessels, as sweetas if fresh from the dairy. To insure means in excluding the air, it is best tofill the vessel nearly full of well worked fresh butter, allowing roomfor a thin layer of salt; over this lay a piece of white paper;pour on the paper half a teaspoonful of spirits of wine; set iton fire; hold the cover over the flame for an instant, and if you havespirits enough, it will furnish heat for the cover, then put it intoplace while the spirits are burning. Or, powder two pounds fine salt, one pound loaf-sugar, andhalf a pound of saltpetre. Sift these ingredients over a large sheet ofpaper, and mix them well; then keep them covered close in a jar in a dryplace. When the butter is well worked and salted, and ready to go intojars, use one ounce of this composition to every pound of butter. Workit well into the mass. In a month place the butter thus prepared intojars or else lay a cloth over the butler; on this put a layer of salt,with a piece of white paper on the salt; pour a littlespirits on the paper, set fire to it, and seal as abovedirected. 1613.--TO KEEP TOMATOES. Peel the tomatoes, and put them in a kettle over the fire till theyboil for ten or fifteen minutes. They are then ready for sealing. Thehalf-gallon or gallon sized cans are the best for the purpose. Fill one withthe hot tomatoes, wipe off from the cement any juice, and put onthe cover. The contents of the can will so heat the cover, that it is onlyneces-sary to press it firmly into place. When first closed, as the confinedsteam is elastic, it will rise up, and a weight, say of five or six pounds,must be used to keep it down; or a piece of ice may be aid on it, which willcondense the steam within. If the can is larger than the weight, put a board onfirst. When the cans are cold, if the sealing is perfect, the tops and bottomswill be concave. If the cement of the cover should not be sufficiently melted,hold on the top a heated flat-iron, till the cover goes down into itsplace. 1614.--TO PRESERVE GREEN CORN. Fill a strong tin canister with the corn, solder it tightly, place itin boiling water, and allow it to remainseveral hours. The top and bottom will swell, and the can may burst (if notstrongly made) with the confined steam. Some puncture the vessel, and when thesteam escapes, solder up the opening. Others do not consider this necessary; orif the vessel tightly covered, is cooked a long time in a bath of brine,in which a higher temperature may be obtained than in water, and thensealed hermetically, the vegetable will keep. 1615.--TO CLARIFYSUGAR. Take the quantity of fine white loaf sugar you intend to clarify, addto it of very clean warm water, half a pint for every pound; whendissolved add to it the white of one or two eggs--as the quantitymay require--well whipped; put it on the fire, and when it conies to a boilpour into it an ordinary teacupful of cold water; on its rising again toa boil, remove it, and let it settle for twenty minutes, skim the scum from thetop, pour off the syrup into a clean vessel with sufficient quickness toleave all the sediment at the bottom, and such steadiness as to prevent any ofthe latter rising and mixing with it. 1617.--TO BOIL SUGAR FORBASKETS OR SPINNING. Fill quite full a pint and a half stew-pan with pieces of lump sugar,fill the stewpan with clear spring water, let the water barelycover the sugar, put it on to boil, skim it all the time that any scumarises; let it boil fast with the stewpan flat upon the fire, not halfway; itwill not boil over if your fire is regular. Then get ready a large basin ofcold water, and when it has boiled some time and begins to appear allfroth or bladders do not go away and leave it; after having boiled so for somefew minutes, have a silver spoon and dip it into it, and then into thewater; if it is getting to a sub-stance pour in the juice of halfa lemon, free from pips, still keeping it boiling on the fire; keepfrequently trying it by dropping and spinning a little in the coldwater, and when it makes a crackling noise, and is very brittle, take offyour stewpan and pour it into a cold stewpan; work it well with your spoon,give it one more boil, then take it off and hold the stewpan in coldwater, stirring it all the time, for a minute or two; it is then ready fora basket, or spinning, or what you may require it for. It is but very littleused now for second courses; at breakfasts and ball suppers it is generallyintroduced and liked, but it too frequently answers the purpose of lock andkey, saying as much, as "this must not be touched;" many think it will doagain, and do not like to break through it. The various purposes to which sugar is applied require it to be indifferent states; these are called degrees. They extend to the number ofthirteen, and are named in the following order: Petit Lisse, or First degree. --Replace the clarified sugar inthe preserving-pan to boil gently, take a drop of it on the thumb, touch itwith the forefinger; if on opening them it draws to a fine thread, and inbreaking forms two drops on each finger, it is at the right point. Lisse, Second degree. --A little more boiling bringsit to this point, when the thread will draw further before it breaks. Petit Perle, Third degree. --At this point the threadmay be drawn as far as the span will open without breaking. Grand Perle, Fourth degree. --On still increasing theboiling, little raised balls are formed on the surface of the sugar. Petit Queue de Cochon, Fifth degree. --Take up someof the sugar on a skim-mer, and drop it on the rest, when it should forma slanting streak on the sur-face. Grande Queue de Cochon, Sixth de- gree. --Boil it yet a little longer; the streak ortail is now larger, and it has reached this point. Souffle, Seventh degree. --Take out a skimmerful ofthe sugar, blow through it and small sparks of sugar will flyfrom it. Petit Plume, Eighth degree. --The same proof asabove; the sparks should be larger and stronger. Grande Plume, Ninth degree. --Take the sugarin the skimmer as before; give it a shake, and if the sparks are large, andadhere together on rising, it is at the right point. Petit Boulet, Tenth degree. --Dip your fingers incold water, and then into the sugar instantly, and again into thewater, when the sugar will roll into a ball which will be supplewhen cold. Gros Boulet, Eleventh degree. --At this point theball or bullet will be harder when cold than the last. Casse, Twelfth degree. --Prove as above; the bulletshould crumble between the fingers, and on biting will stick to the teeth. Caramel, Thirteenth degree. --At this point itshould snap clean when bitten. This point is very difficult to attain, for inincreasing the height, the sugar is apt to burn; it is better,therefore, to try the proof very frequently. Another caramel is much used by the confectioner, andis of a deep color; it is made by putting a little water to thesugar, and boiling it without skimming or otherwise touching thesugar till of the right color, then take it off, and useimmediately. If on preparing the sugar, you happen to miss the right point, add alittle cold water, and boil once more. The skimmer should never be left in the preserving-pan after thesugar is clarified, nor after the scum is removed. Be very careful not to stir or disturb the sugar, as that would causeits diminution. In boiling the sugar, particularly the two last degrees, thesugar is continu-ously rising and falling, and on falling leaves markson the side of the pan, which the heat of the fire would soon burn and therebyspoil the whole of the sugar. To avoid this have a sponge with coldwater, and wipe the sides of the pan the instant the sugar hasfallen. 1617.--TO CANDY FRUIT. Having prepared your fruit, steep it in the syrup, and lay itas done in an open sieve, until the bottom is covered with one layer; steepthis suddenly in scald-ing water. This will remove any syrupwhich may cling to the fruit. Lay them aside on a napkin to drain, andgo on with the others. You will have ready, finely-powdered, some of the bestloaf sugar; sift this over the fruit until they are whiteall over, without being toe thickly encrusted; lay them so as not to touch eachother, on strainers or the reverse end of small sieves; place them in agently-warmed oven, watch them carefully, turning them until dry. The warmth ofthe oven must not be in-creased, but must not abate until the fruit isquite dry. Almonds. --Blanch any quantity ofalmonds, then fry them in butter till they are of a light browncolor; wipe them nicely with a napkin, and put them into a pan. Make a syrupof white sugar, and boil it to a thread--that is, until on your taking adrop of the sugar between the finger and thumb it will produce a thread;care must be taken to boil it to the exact candying-point; pour it boil-ing-hotupon the almonds, and stir them till they are quite cold. This is anex-cellent method of preparing almonds for dessert. Bon-bons. --Clear off the sugar from freshcandied citron or orange-rind, cut it into squares one inchthick, stick them singly on a bit of thin wire, and dip them into liquidbarley-sugar; rub a dish with a few drops of pure salad oil, andlay the fruit upon this to cool. They should be kept in tin canisters ina very dry place. Toffie. --Melt in a stewpan three ounces of freshbutter, add one pound of good moist sugar, stir it well over agentle fire, and let it boil about a quarter of an hour, or till it cracksshort between the teeth like barley-sugar 5 then pour it upon buttereddishes, and when nearly cold mark it across in squares that it may easilydivide, or roll it into sticks. When half-boiled, the grated rind of a lemonor a teaspoonful of ground ginger may be added. A few sliced almondsmay be added after it is poured upon the dishes. BEVERAGES. Louis XII., of France, first gave permission to distil spirits on alarge scale. So terrific were the effects twenty years afterwards, thatFrancis, his successor, was obliged, for the safety of his subjects, to enact alaw, that the drunkard who remained incorrigible, after severe monitorypunishments, should suffer amputation of the ears, and be banished fromthe kingdom. How much more wisely would Francis have acted, if, instead ofbanishing the drunkard, he had banished the pernicious material of drunkenness!Take another example: Sweden was a temperate country, ardent spiritsbeing, to a great extent, prevented from coming into ordinary use. In 1783,however, Gustavus, king of Sweden, gave permission for opening spiritshops in all the villages of his kingdom. His object was to increase hisrevenue, and that object he apparently for a time accomplished; for immediatelyardent spirits were loaded with fictitious excellences, by those wholoved them, and those who were interested in their sale: the drinking of them,which had formerly been carried on in secret, now became respectable; and theconsumption of them was greatly increased. But mark the consequence;--such wasthe increase of drunkenness and crime, of fatal accidents and prematuremortality, that the very same king who gave the permission, was obliged, forthe preservation of his people, to withdraw it. Spruce Beer. --Allow an ounce of hopsand a spoonful of ginger to a gallon of water. When well boiled,strain it, and put in a pint of molasses and half an ounce or less ofthe essence of spruce; when cool, add a teacup of yeast, andput into a clean tight cask, and let it ferment for a day or two, then bottleit for use. You can boil the sprigs of spruce-fir in room of theessence. Ginger Beer. --Fourteen gallons water,fourteen pounds loaf sugar, four ounces ginger, well pounded 5boil one hour, add the whites of eight eggs beat up, and take off thescum; strain the liquor into an earthen pan, let it stand till cold, then putit into your cask with the peel of fourteen lemons cut thin, and theirjuice strained. Add half a spoonful of ale-yeast on the top. Stopthe vessel closely for a fortnight. Then it may be bottled, and in anotherfortnight will be fit for use. Another for Ginger Beer. --One poundsugar, one ounce ginger, one-half ounce of cream oftartar, one lemon sliced. Put all into a pan, pour over one and a halfgallons boiling water, and when milk-warm put in a littleyeast; let it stand all night to work; bottle it; and in three days itis fit for use. Lemonade. --Three lemons to a pint ofwater, makes strong lemonade; sweeten to your taste. This is the best beverage for parties; cool, refreshing, pleasant, andsalubrious. Orangeade. --Roll and press the juice from theoranges, in the same way as from lemons. It requires lesssugar than lemonade. The water must be pure and cold, and thenthere can be nothing more delicious than these two kinds of drink. Currant Wine. --Gather the currantswhen dry, extract the juice, either by mashing and pressing thefruit, or putting it in a jar, placed in boiling water; strainthe juice, and for every gallon allow one gallon of water andthree pounds of sugar. Dissolve the sugar in the water,and take off the scum; let it cool, add it to the currant juice, and putthe mixture in a keg, but do not close it tightly till it has ceasedfermenting, which will not be under a week. In three or four weeks it may bebottled. The white of an egg beaten, mixed with a teaspoonful ofcream of tartar, and stirred into the liquid, makes the wine lookclear and bright. Some add a portion of spirits. Raspberry Vinegar. --To two and a half quartsof ripe raspberries put one pint of the best vinegar. Bruise themwell, and let it stand three days. Strain the juice through a bag, andadd its weight of sugar. Boil it, skim well, and bottle it closely. Syrup of Almonds. --Blanch and pound in amarble mortar one pound of sweet and one ounce of bitter almonds; addinga spoonful or two of orange-flower water. Mix a pint of rosewaterwith one of pure water, add it to the almonds, and pass the wholethrough a lawn sieve. Then boil three pints clarified syrup, and when itboils put in the almonds, and let them boil one minute. When cold put itinto bottles, and cork it for use. To make it for immediate use, after pounding the almonds, mix themwith a quart of water, one of milk, and one of clarifiedsyrup or capillaire, and pass through a sieve. Valencia Wine. --To each gallon of goodspirits take the peel of eighteen lemons; let them remainforty-eight hours in the spirits; then add the juice with fivequarts of cold spring water, three pounds of loaf sugar, aquarter of a pound of bitter almonds well blanched, half a drachm ofsaffron, and two ounces of ground ginger; mix all together, andpour over all three quarts new milk, scalding hot, but not boiled let itstand till next day, then run it through flannel, like jelly. Mead without fruit. --Boil honey--threeor four pounds to a gallon of water--for an hour, skimming carefully,draining the skimmings, and returning what runs through. When nearly cool, stirin a teacupful of yeast for nine gallons, and let it ferment. Put it ina cool cellar, and bottle in a year. Currants and raspberry juice, orange and lemonpeel, spices and aromatic herbs are often added tomead; the last towards the end of the fermentation, in a muslin bag,weighed down with a piece of flint. Six quarts of red currants and twoof black will do for twenty-five pounds of honey. Ratafias. --Ratafias are liquors prepared by infusingthe juices and kernels of fruit in strong spirit withsugar. For the ratafia of cherries take two quarts of rectifiedspirits of wine, add two drachms beaten cinnamon, one of bruisedcloves, and one ounce bruised coriander seeds. Cover and let themstand a week; then from morella and black heart cherries press twelvepints of juice, add three pounds powdered loaf sugar, and mixwith the spirit and spices; add half the cherry stones,mashed in a mortar. Closely cover the stone jar, containing all these, and stiror shake it frequently. In two months pour itoff; press and filter the residuum. Then put it into bottles and cork it. Ratafia. --Blanch two ounces of peach andapricot kernels, bruise and put them into a bottle, and fill nearly upwith brandy. Dissolve half a pound of white sugar-candy in a cupof cold water, and add to the brandy after it has stood a monthon the kernels, and they are strained off; then filter through paper andbottle for use. The distilled leaves of peaches and nectarines,when the trees are cut in the spring, are an excellent substitute for ratafiain puddings. Capillaire, is so called from being prepared from akind of fern called capillus veneris, or maiden-hair; but almost anyother fern may be substituted for it. A syrup made from the Canadacapillaire, with maple sugar, is sold. BEVERAGES COMPOSED PARTLY OFFERMENTED LIQUORS. Hot spiced wines were much in use till the beginningof the sixteenth century; and some of these favorite compounds were known bythe names of ypocras, sack, and clary. The first of these, which took itsname from the bag through which it was strained, called by apothecaries"Hippocrates's sleeve," was made either of white or red wine witharomatics, such as ginger, cinnamon, aromatic seeds, andsugar. Clary was made from claret, with honey andaromatics; and sack from the wine of that name, a kind of sherry.These were drunk as a "night cap," and at the conclusion of a banquet. LeGrand, in his "Vie privée des Francois," observes that the poets of thethirteenth century speak with rapture of these delicious beverages; and it issaid that they were highly esteemed in convents and universities. A scale ofperfection was even observed: when the compound was made of Bordeauxwine, it was simply called Bishop; but received the name of Cardinal when old Rhine wine was used; androse to the dignity of Pope when imperial Tokay was employed. The vestigesof these ancient mixtures may still be seen in our mulled wine andbishop. To mull Wine. --Boil the spices(cinnamon, nutmeg grated, cloves, and mace) in anyquantity approved, in half a gill of water; put to this a full pint ofport, with sugar to taste. Mix it well, and serve hot with thin slips oftoast or rusks. Lemon or orange juice may be added, and thewater may be strained off from the spices. Ale or Porter may be mulled as above, andhave toast or biscuits put to them. Formerly the yolks ofeggs were mixed with mulled wine, as in making custard oregg-caudle, and many flavoring ingredients were employed which are nowdisused. Bishop. --The day before it is wanted, grill over aclear, slow fire, of a pale brown, three large, bitter oranges. Placethem in a small punch-bowl that will about hold them, and pour over them a fullhalf pint from a bottle of old Bordeaux wine, in which a pound and aquarter of loaf sugar is dissolved. Cover with a plate. When it is to beserved next day, cut and squeeze the oranges into a small sieve placedabove a jug, containing the remainder of the bottle of wine, previouslymade very hot; add more syrup if it is wanted. Serve hot in largeglasses, or in summer it may be iced. Bishop is often made of Madeira inEngland, and is perfumed with nutmegs, bruised cloves, andmace. It ought, however, to be made of old generous Bordeauxwine, or it fails of its purpose as a tonic liqueur. It is reckonedhighly stomachic, and is served at French dinners, savans and recherchés, either as the coup d'après or after the dessert. The wassail bowl of ancient times was made of mild ale, well spiced and sweetened; andsometimes with eggs beat up in it. The ancient Ypocras was made of a quart of red wine, an ounce ofcinnamon, half an ounce of ginger, a quarter of an ounce ofpepper, and half a pound of sugar, all put into a bag and infusedin the wine. Cool Tankard. --The composition of this ancientbeverage is of great variety. The basis is home-brewed ale,spices, and seasoning herbs. Some use cider instead ofale. Covered Pitcher. An illustratio of a ceramic pitcher with a lid. Egg Flip. --Heat a quart of good ale,and pour it into a pitcher; in a similar pitcher beat up three or foureggs with a quarter of a pound of moist sugar, and one or twoglasses of rum or brandy, flavoring it with nutmeg,ginger, and grated lemon peel. When the ale is quite hot,but not boiling, pour it quickly into the jug with the eggs, return thisback into the other jug, and thus keep pouring the mixture backward and forwardfrom one jug to another, till the whole is thoroughly incorporated, and assmooth as cream. Egg hot. --This is made in the same manner asthe last, only there is no spirits nor spices; simply theegg, and ale or beer, with sugar. Ale Posset. --Boil a pint of new milkwith a slice of toasted bread; pour a bottle of mild ale into apunch-bowl, sweeten, and add spices, and then pour the boilingmilk over it. Sack Posset. --Boil some cream and gratedsweet biscuits; add sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg.Warm some sherry, and stir it into the cream; then pour the wholequickly from one vessel to another until it be perfectly smooth; or it may bemade with eggs beat up in milk instead of the cream. Punch is a beverage made of various spirituousliquors or wine, hot water, the acid juices of fruits, andsugar. It is considered to be very intoxicating; but this is probablybecause the spirit being partly sheathed by the mucilaginousjuice and the sugar, its strength does not appear to the taste sogreat as it really is. Punch was almost universally drunk among the middleclasses about fifty or sixty years ago. English Punch. --Rub the yellow rind of a lemonwith lump sugar; put this sugar into the punch-bowl, and squeezethe lemon juice to it, add the spirits, rum andbrandy, in such proportions as are preferred, incorporate thespirits thoroughly with the sugar and lemon before pouring inthe boiling water, and keep stirring the whole while this is pouring:some add Madeira or sherry. Punch is kept also cold in bottles,and in summer is liked. It is frequently made with whiskey. Regent's Punch. --A bottle of Champagne, aquarter of a pint of brandy, a glassful of veritable Martinique: with this mix a pint or moreof a strong infusion of the best green tea, strained, and capillaire orsimple syrup to taste. Norfolk Punch. --Pare thirty-two oranges, andthe same number of lemons; infuse the peel for two days in a largebottle or jar with a gallon of brandy (or whiskey), a littlereduced in strength; clarify in a gallon of water four pounds of sugar; when cold, strain the brandy(which will now be a tincture) to this; add the juices of theoranges and lemons, previously strained and bottled, when thepeel is taken off; cask the liquor, or put it in a jar, and stop it well; insix weeks it may be gently poured, or drawn off, and bottled. A tinctureof bruised nutmegs and cloves may be added to this compound; thiswill keep any length of time, and in any climate. Victoria or 32d Regiment Punch. -- Take the peel oftwo dozen lemons, and steep it for thirty-six hours in two quarts ofrum. Pour the juice of the lemons on three pounds and a halfof loaf sugar. Add two quarts of brandy, and seven quarts ofcold water. Mix these together, and add by degrees two quarts of boiling milk,stirring it well. Let it stand four hours. Strain it two or three times through a flannel jelly bag, tillperfectly clear; bottle and cork it tight. Age improves it very much. Milk Punch. --Mix wine or brandywith milk; sweeten to taste; grate nutmeg on it. Wine Punch. --Port wine, two pints;arrack, two pints; the juice of twelve lemons; sugar, onepound; hot water, six pints. Tea Punch. --Hot tea, two pints;arrack, thirteen ounces; sugar, four ounces; flavored by rubbing off theyellow peel of the lemons. French Punch. --Cut a lemon into thin slices,taking out the seeds; boil them in water, and add a pinch ofgreen tea, and let it infuse five minutes; strain the whole, and addbrandy and sugar sufficient. Auld Man's Milk of Scotland, or Egg-nog ofAmerica. --Beat the yolks and whites of six eggsseparately; put to the beat yolks sugar and a quart of new milk,or thin sweet cream; add to this rum, whiskey, orbrandy, about half a pint; put in the whites of the eggs whippedup, and stir the whole gently. It may be flavored with nutmeg or rindof lemon. Sanguree is a kind of punch frequently drunk in theWest Indies, and is composed of one-third Madeira or porter, andtwo-thirds water, acidulated with lime juice and sweetened withsugar. Mulled Cider. --Boil a quart of cider,watered, if too strong, with cloves and allspice. Beat sixeggs, sweeten, and add them to the boiling cider, with a pint ormore of cream. Pour the liquor from one pitcher to another till it has afine froth, and serve it warm. Cherry Bounce. --Take twelve poundscherries, mashed, and mixed with three pounds sugar: add twogallons whiskey. Put it into a closed vessel, shake it often, and let itstand four months before bottling. WINES AND LIQUEURS. Ginger Wine. --Take fourteen gallons ofwater, six pounds of sugar, four ounces of bruised ginger,and the whites of two eggs, well beaten; mix them, set on a fire, boilit fifteen minutes, skim it well, and when cold, pour it into an earthenvessel, squeeze in the juice of four lemons, and the rindspared exceedingly thin, put to it a teacupful of ale-yeast, let it workfor a day and a night, then turn it into a cask, bung it up, and in a fortnightyou may bottle it off. Blackberry Wine. --Put some ripeblackberries into a large vessel with a cock in it; pour on as muchboiling water as will cover them, and as soon as the heat will permit,bruise them well with the hand till all the berries are broken, coverthem, and in about three or four days, when the berries rise to the top, draw off the clear part into another vessel; add toevery ten quarts of the liquor one pound of sugar, stir it well in, andlet it stand a week or ten days to work. Draw it off through a jellybag. Steep four ounces of isinglass in a pint of sweet wine fortwelve hours, then boil it slowly till dissolved, put it in a gallon of thejuice; boil them together, then put all together, let it stand a fewdays, and bottle. Water Cooler. To preserve Ice twelvehours. An illustration of a container with a spigot. Cherry Wine. --For every five pints of thiswine, take fifteen pounds of cherries, and two ofcurrants; bruise them together, mix with them two-thirds of the kernels,and put the whole of the cherries, currants, and kernels into abarrel with a quarter of a pound of sugar to every pint of juice.The barrel must be quite full; cover the barrel with vine leaves andsand above them, and let it stand until it has done working, which will be inabout three weeks; then stop it with a bung, and in two months' time it may bebottled. Rhubarb Wine. --The leaf stalks ofrhubarb cut in pieces as for tarts, and bruised with a wooden mallet toexpress the juice, will make a wine equal to greengooseberry, and resembling champagne. Wine made from mixed fruits. --Takecherries, raspberries, and black and white currants--ofeach an equal quantity. To four pounds well bruised put one gallon ofwater. Steep the mass three days and nights, frequently stirring it inan open vessel, then run it through a hair sieve, and to each gallon of liquorput three pounds sugar. Let it stand again three days and nights,stirred often and skimming the top; then turn it into a cask, and let itferment at the bunghole two weeks. To every nine gallons put one quart bestbrandy, and fasten down the bung. If not soon clear stir in a solutionof isinglass. Black Currant Wine (very fine). --To everythree quarts of juice put the same of water unboiled, and toevery three quarts of the liquor add three pounds of very pure moistsugar; put it into a cask, reserving for a little filling up; put the caskin a warm dry room, and the liquor will ferment of itself; skim off the refusewhen the fermentation shall be over, and fill up with the reserved liquor; whenit has ceased working pour three quarts of brandy to forty quarts ofwine; bung it close for nine months, then bottle it, and drain the thickpart through a jelly-bag until it be clear, and bottle that; keep it ten ortwelve months. This recipe is most excellent. The wine will keep for sixyears. Gooseberry Wine. --To every three pounds ofgooseberries put a pint of spring water unboiled, having firstbruised the fruit with the hands in a tub; stir them very well; let themstand a whole day, then strain them off, and to every three pounds ofgooseberries add a pint of water, and one pound of sugardissolved; let it stand twenty-four hours longer, then skim the headclean off, and put the liquor into a vessel, and the scum into a flannel bag,adding the liquor that drains from it to that in the vessel; let it work two orthree days before stopping it up close, and allow it to stand four months before it is bottled. When it is drawn out ofthe cask it should not be tapped too low. Green Gooseberry Wine. --Take thirty-twoquarts of unripe gooseberries of the green kind, bruise them well, addthirty-two quarts of cold water; let them stand for twenty-four hours;drain the goose-berries well from the liquor through a sieve; put threepounds and a half of lump-sugar to every gallon of liquor put it into acask with a bottle of the best gin; let it stand six months, and thenbottle it. Frontiniac. --Boil eighteen pounds of whitesugar in six gallons of water with two whites of eggs wellbeaten. Skim it, and put in a quarter peck of elder-flowers; do not keepthem on the fire; when nearly cold, stir it, and add six spoonfuls oflemon-juice and four or five of yeast; beat the whole wellinto the liquor. Stir it every day, put six pounds of the best raisins,stoned, into the cask, and tun the wine. Stop it close, and bottle it atthe end of six months. This wine requires keeping. Elder Wine. --Pour four quarts of waterupon eight quarts of berries, and let it stand a day or two; then boilit for about an hour, strain it, and put three pounds of moist sugar toevery gallon of wine; then add one ounce of cloves andcinnamon, with two ounces of ginger; boil it again, and work itwith a toast, dipped in yeast. Elder-flower Wine. --Take twelve poundsof loaf-sugar and six pounds of the best raisins, cut small, andboil them in six gallons of water for one hour. Then take half a peck ofelder-flowers, when ready to shake; put them into the liquor, when it isnearly cold, with four table-spoonfuls of fresh yeast, and six oflemon-juice. Let it work two days in the tub, then strain it, put itinto the barrel, bung it up closely for two months, and then bottle it. These are excellent domestic wines, generally taken mulled, with drytoast; and the flavor will be improved if, while warming, a grating ofnutmeg be added. Negus. --One bottle of wine, half a pound ofsugar, and a lemon sliced. Pour three pints of boiling waterupon this mixture, and grate nutmeg to the taste. Such is the common mode of making negus; for making a single tumblerful, however, as many people prefer todo it in their own way, perhaps a better plan is to use only half the quantityof water, poured boiling hot upon the wine already sweetenedand flavored with nutmeg; but having in it also a large and very thincut rind of orange, which gives it a very superior flavor, without anyportion of the acid. The negus may be made of either white or red wine; and, ifdrunk cold, is called "sangaree." The following is a French receipt: -- One pound of cherries, fourpounds of currants, two pounds of black cherries; squeeze alltogether, then let it stand in a cool cellar for three days; put thejuice on the fire in a preserving-pan, and allow it to bubble; addsugar as for raspberry vinegar, and bottle it. This makes adelicious summer beverage. Noyau. --To three quarts of best brandyor spirits put three pounds of white sugar broken small, aquarter of an ounce of cinnamon, the peel of two lemons andjuice of one, and eight ounces bitter almonds; mix, and when thesugar is dissolved, pour in a pint of boiling milk. Cover close,stir it every day for three weeks, and filter it through a filteringpaper. It may be necessary to add a little more spirits. Elder Wine--another way. --To three pounds ofelderberries put one pound of damsons, and to a nine-gallon cask put a pint of sloes. Boil two gallonsof water with an ounce of hops for an hour and a half; then putin sugar, such as four pounds to five quarts of water; keepskimming as it rises, and then set it to cool; boil the fruit for halfan hour, strain the juice, and put a quart of it to every gallon ofwater; then let it work with yeast for three days; put it in thebarrel and stop it close. The spice and sugar to be put accordingto taste. When the wine has stood six weeks put in four pounds of stonedraisins. Pink Champagne. --Boil nine pounds oflump-sugar in three gallons of water for half an hour, skim itwell, and pour the liquor boiling hot over a gallon of red and whitecurrants picked, but not bruised. When nearly cold, put in a smallteacupful of yeast. Keep it working for two days, then strain it througha horse-hair sieve, put it into a small cask with half an ounce ofisinglass. Have rather more liquor than will fill the cask to fill it upas it works over. In about a fortnight bung it up. Let it stand till April; putinto each bottle a lump of double-refined sugar. Let the bottles remainone day uncorked. Cork and wire them. They must stand upright in the cellar;when wanted, put a few on their sides for about a week. Grape Champagne to equal foreign. -- Gatherthe grapes when they are just turning, or about half ripe. Pound them ina tub, and to every quart of fruit put two quarts of water. Letit stand in a mash-tub for fourteen days, then draw it off, and to every gallonof liquor add three pounds of lump-sugar. When the sugar isdissolved, cask it, and, after it has done working, bung it down. In about sixmonths it will be fit to drink, when it should be bottled, and the corks tieddown, or wired if it is to be kept more than a year. COOKERY FOR THE SICK. Invalid's Breakfast Set. An illustration of a tray with four pitchers sitting on it. IT may be necessary to premise that a choice should be made of those thingsmost likely to agree with the patient, and, as invalids require variety toindulge their appetite, frequent changes should be provided, but greatsimplicity observed in the preparation. Perhaps jellies and meatbroths, together with various kinds of farinaceous food, are thelightest on the stomach, as well as, generally speaking, the mostnutritious. A Good Jelly. --Soak twelve shanks ofmutton four hours, then brush and scour them very clean. Lay them in asaucepan with three blades of mace, an onion, twentyJamaica and thirty or forty black peppers, a bunch of sweetherbs, and a crust of bread made very brown by toasting. Pour threequarts of water to them, and set them on a hot hearth close covered; letthem simmer as gently as possible for five hours, then strain it off, and putit in a cold place. This may have the addition of a pound of beef, if approved, forflavor. It is a remarkably good thing for people who are weak. Sheep's heads and trotters are also good restoratives; savoryjelly may also be made in the same manner, without lemon,wine, or sugar, but flavored with ham andspice. Dr. Ratcliff's Pork Jelly. --Take a legof well-fed pork, just as cut up; beat it, and break the bone.Set it over a gentle fire with three gallons of water, and simmer toone. Let half an ounce of mace and the same of nutmegs stew init. Strain through a fine sieve. When cold, take off the fat. Give acoffee-cupful the first and last thing, and at noon, putting salt totaste. Lambs' feet are very nutritious; purchase them ready cleaned;lay them ten minutes in boiling water, by doing which you will be ableto draw out the leg-bone with facility; then put them in a stewpan (twowould be sufficient), and pour over a pint of water with which you havemixed smoothly a table-spoonful of flour, and half a teaspoonful ofsalt; place them upon the fire, stirring frequently until boiling, thenadd a small onion, with celery, parsley, andparsnip; boil gently for two hours, and when done, serve plain upon aplate, or with a little melted butter and parsley poured over. Byusing a little white broth from any meat, instead ofwater, you make a delicious soft soup, which may be partaken offreely. Calves' feet are dressed in the same manner, but using adouble proportion of every thing, and stewing them double the time; they areserved precisely the same. Real Essence of Beef. --Take one pound ofbeefsteak, cut it into thin slices, which scrape fine; put it into astewpan, and stir over the fire five or ten minutes, until thoroughly warmedthrough, then add half a pint of water, cover the stewpan as tightly aspossible, and let it remain close to the fire or in a warm oven for twentyminutes; then pass it through a sieve, pressing the meat with a spoon toextract all the essence. Strengthening Jelly. --Take two pounds ofgravy-beef, cut into small pieces; put the pieces into a jar, coverclose, and stand the jar in a saucepan of water; let it simmer from fourto six hours. This I have made from either beef or veal. I havefound it invaluable in cases of sickness, and it will be found that the realessence of the meat is extracted. A Clear Broth that will keep long. -- Put themouse-round of beef, a knuckle-bone of veal, and a few shanks ofmutton, into a deep pan, and cover close with a dish or coarse crust;bake till the beef is done enough for eating with only as muchwater as will cover it. When the broth is cold, cover it close,and keep it in a cool place. When it is to be used, give what flavor may bebest liked. Cowheels make good broth. For a quick-made Broth, take a bone ortwo of a neck or loin of mutton, take off the fat andskin, set it on the fire in a small tin saucepan that has a cover, withthree-quarters of a pint of water, the meat being first beatenand cut in thin bits; put a bit of thyme and parsley, and, ifapproved, a slice of onion. Let it boil very quickly; skim it; take offthe cover if likely to be too weak, else cover it. Half an hour is sufficientfor the whole process. Liebig's Beef Tea. --Chop a pound of leanbeef as fine as for sausage-meat-- mix with a pint of coldwater--put it over a slow fire--when it has boiled five minutes, strainthrough a coarse cloth. Salt to taste. Chicken Broth. --Boil a chicken in aquart of water till about three parts cooked, or about a quarter of anhour; remove the skin and the rump, and put it into thewater it was boiled in, with a slice of onion, ten whitepeppercorns, and a blade of mace; then simmer until it has a goodflavor. Beat a quarter of an ounce of blanched sweet almonds with ateaspoonful of water, till of a goodconsistence and fine, add this paste to the broth, simmer for aminute, then remove, strain, and set aside to get cold. When quite cold, removethe fat, and warm the broth again; season with salt, andserve in a broth basin, with toast dice on a plate. Panada is merely a preparation of bread madeup in various ways. To make it in fire minutes. --Set a littlewater on the fire with a glass of white wine, some sugar,and a scrape of nut-meg and lemon-peel: meanwhile grate somecrumbs of bread. The moment the mixture boils up, keeping it still onthe fire, put the crumbs in, and let it boil as fast as it can. When of aproper thickness just to drink, take it off. Or: --Put to the water a bit oflemon-peel, mix the crumbs in, and, when nearly boiled enough, putsome lemon or orange syrup. Observe to boil all the ingredients, for, ifany be added after, the panada will break and not jelly. Chicken Panada. --Boil a chicken tillabout three parts ready in a quart of water; take off the skin,cut the white meat off when cold, and put into a marble mortar: pound itto a paste with a little of the water it was boiled in, seasonwith salt, a grate of nutmeg, and the least bit oflemon-peel. Boil gently for a few minutes to the consistency youlike; it should be such as you can drink, though tolerably thick. This conveys great nourishment in a small compass. Sippets. --On an extremely hot plate put two or threesippets of bread, and pour over them some gravy from beef,mutton, or veal, with which no butter has been mixed.Sprinkle a little salt over. Port Wine Jelly. --Melt in a little warmwater an ounce of isinglass; stir it into a pint of portwine, adding two ounces of sugar-candy, an ounce of gumarabic, and a nutmeg grated. Mix it all well, and boil it tenminutes; or till every thing is thoroughly dissolved. Then strain it throughmuslin, and set it away to get cold. For rice jelly, having picked andwashed a quarter of a pound of rice, mix it with half a pound of loafsugar, and just sufficient water to cover it. Boil it till itbecomes a glutinous mass; then strain it; season it with whatever may bethought proper, and then let it stand to cool. Caudle is made in various ways. Make a fine smoothgruel of half-grits; strain it when boiled well; stir it at differenttimes till cold. When to be used, add sugar, wine, and lemonpeel,with nutmeg. Some like a spoonful of brandy besides thewine; others like lemon-juice. Another. --Into a pint of fine gruel, not thick, put,while it is boiling-hot, the yolk of an egg beaten with sugar,and mixed with a large spoonful of cold water, a glass of wine,and nutmeg. Mix by degrees. It is very agreeable and nourishing. Somelike gruel with a glass of table-beer, sugar, &c., with orwithout a teaspoonful of brandy. Dr. Boerhaave's Sweet Buttermilk. --Take the milk from the cow into a small churn; in ten minutesbegin, and churn till flakes of butter swim about thick, and themilk appears thin and blue; strain it through a sieve. It should formthe patient's drink, with biscuits, rusk, ripe and dried fruits,&c. Flour Caudle. --Into five large spoonfuls ofwater rub smooth one dessert-spoonful of fine flour. Set over thefire five spoonfuls of new milk, and put two bits of sugar intoit; the moment it boils pour into it the flour and water, andstir it over a slow fire twenty minutes. It is a nourishing and gentlyastringent food. This is an excellent food for babies who have weakbowels. Apple Paste. --Pare your apples and cutthem down. Weigh them, and allow an equal quantity of white sugar; putthem into a jar, and boil till quite soft. Boil your sugar to asyrup, then drop in the apples with a teacupful ofmarmalade and a little grated ginger; let them simmer tenminutes. Wet your shapes with spirits, and dish them. They will turn outfirm, and keep for years. The apples must be put into cold water asthey are pared. The proportion of water is a breakfast cupful totwo pounds of sugar. To Bake Apples. --Sweet apples properlybaked and eaten with milk are excellent. The best method of bakingtart apples is, to take the fairest and largest in size, wipe them cleanif thin skinned, and pare them if the skin is thick and tough. Cut outthe largest portion of the core from one end, and place the fruit onwell glazed earthen dishes or pans, with the end which has been cored upwards,and fill the cavity with refined powdered sugar. Then place them in theoven or other apparatus for baking until sufficiently cooked. Take them out andwhen cold they are perfectly delicious. Apple Tapioca (a new receipt forinvalids). --Pare, core, and quarter eight apples; take half aspoonful of tapioca; put it to soak and swell all night in thewater; put in half a teacupful of white sugar, and a littlelemon-peel; put this into a stewpan and let the tapioca simmerten minutes, then put in the apples and stew ten minutes more. When thetapioca is clear, it will form a jelly around theapples. Chicken Jelly. --For chicken jelly takea large chicken, cut it up into very small pieces, bruise thebones, and put the whole into a stone jar with a cover that will make itwater-tight. Set the jar in a large kettle of boiling water, andkeep it boiling for four hours. Then strain off the liquid, and season itslightly with salt, pepper, and mace; or withloaf-sugar and lemon-juice, according to the taste of theperson for whom it is intended. Return the fragments of the chicken tothe jar, and set it again in a kettle of boiling water. You will findthat you can collect nearly as much jelly by the second boiling. Thisjelly may be made of an old fowl. Baked Milk. --Mix new milk withbuttermilk, in the proportion of a pint of the former to a wineglassfulof the latter. Let it stand in a covered jar, before the fire, all night; inthe morning it will be as thick as clotted cream. Pour from one jar toanother till it is again of the consistency of new milk; put it into astone bottle, tightly corked; add a few lumps of white sugar; let itagain stand before the fire, (not too near,) for five or six hours, it willthen be ready to drink. Care must be taken in opening the bottle, as itsometimes effervesces. Besides forming a very wholesome and strengtheningdrink, it is a most delicious and refreshing beverage in summer. Invalidsshould take about a pint a day. If it is at all acid, it has not been properlymade, and should not be taken. Asses' Milk far surpasses any imitatation ofit that can be made. It should be milked into a glass that is kept warm bybeing in a basin of hot water. The fixed air that it contains gives some people a pain in the stomach. Atfirst a teaspoonful of rum may be taken with it, but should only be putin the moment it is to be swallowed. The animal should always be milked at thedoor. Artificial Asses' Milk. --Mix two spoonfuls ofboiling water, two of milk, and an egg well beaten;sweeten with pound-ed white sugarcandy. This may be taken twice orthrice a day. Wine Whey. --Stir into a pint of boiling milk a couple of glasses of wine. Letit boil a minute, then take it from the fire, and let it remain till the curdhas settled; then turn off the whey, and sweeten it with whitesugar. Toast Water. --Pare the crust off a thin sliceof stale bread, toast it brown upon both sides, doing it equallyand slowly, that it may harden without being burnt; put it into a jug, and pourupon it boiling water; cover the jug with a saucer, and set it in a coolplace. An illustration of a pitcher and two bowls with handles and a decorative motif. Rice Gruel. --Put a large spoonful of ungroundrice into six gills of boiling water, with a stick ofcinnamon or mace. Strain it when boiled soft, and add half a pintof new milk; put in a tea-spoonful of salt, and boil it a fewminutes longer. If you wish to make the gruel of rice flour, mix atable-spoonful of it smoothly, with three of cold water, and stir itinto a quart of boiling water. Let it boil five or six minutes, stirringit constantly. Season it with salt, a little butter, and add, ifyou like, nutmeg and white sugar. Water Gruel. --Mix a couple of table-spoonfulsof Indian meal with one of wheat flour, and sufficient coldwater to make a thick batter. If the gruel is liked thick, stir it into apint of boiling water--if liked thin, more water will benecessary. Season the gruel with salt, and let it boil six or eightminutes, stirring it frequently--then take it from the fire, put in a piece ofbutter, of the size of a walnut, and pepper to the taste.Turn it on toasted bread, cut in small pieces. Molasses Posset. --Put into a saucepan a pintof the Lest West India molasses, a teaspoonful of powdered whiteginger, and a quarter of a pound of fresh butter. Set it on hotcoals, and simmer it slowly for half an hour, stirring it frequently. Donot let it come to a boil. Then stir in the juice of two lemons, ortwo table-spoonfuls of vinegar; cover the pan, and let it stand by thefire five minutes longer. This is good for a cold. Some of it may be taken warmat once, and the remainder kept at hand for occasional use. Wine Posset. --Boil some slices of whitebread in a pint of milk; when soft take it off the fire, and gratein some nutmeg and a little sugar; pour it out, put half a pintof sweet wine into it by degrees, and serve it with toastedbread. Balm Mint, and other Teas. --These aresimple infusions, the strength of which can only be regulated by the taste.They are made by putting either the fresh or the dried plants into boilingwater in a covered vessel, which should be placed near the fire for anhour. The young shoots both of balm and of mint are to bepreferred, on account of their strong aromatic qualities. These infusions maybe drunk freely in feverish and in various other complaints, in which diluentsare recommended. Mint tea made with the fresh leaves, is useful inallaying nausea and vomiting. Tapioca Jelly. --Take four table-spoonfuls oftapioca--rinse it thoroughly, then soak it five hours, in coldwater enough to cover it. Seta pint of cold water on the fire--whenit boils, mash and stir up the tapioca that is in water, and mixit with the boiling water. Let the whole simmer gently, with a stick ofcinnamon or mace. When thick and clear, mix a couple oftable-spoonfuls of white sugar, with half a table-spoonful oflemon-juice, and half a glass of white wine--stir it into thejelly; if not sweet enough, add moresugar, and turn the jelly into cups. Mulled Wine. --Boil a pint of wine withnutmeg, cloves, and sugar, serve it with slices oftoasted bread; or, beat up the yolks of four eggs with a littlecold wine, and mix them carefully with the hot wine, pour itbackwards and forwards till it looks fine, heat it again over the fire till itis tolerably thick, pour it backwards and forwards, and serve with toastedbread as above. Or, --Boil some spice in a little watertill the flavor is extracted, then add a pint of port wine, with somesugar and nutmeg. Brandy Mixture. --Mix a gill of brandy,and the same quantity of cinnamon water, with the yolks of twoeggs, half an ounce of powdered white sugar, and two drops of oilof cinnamon. This is a valuable restorative in cases of extreme exhaustion,given at intervals of ten to fifteen minutes, in doses of from one to threetable-spoonfuls. Sago Gruel. --Macerate an ounce (or atable-spoonful) of sago in a pint of water for two hours, thenboil for a quarter of an hour, taking care to stir it well; sweeten withsugar, and add lemon-juice, nutmeg, or ginger,and white wine if allowed. Caudle, York. --Take a pint of new milk, turnit with wine, then strain, and put it into a saucepan with two blades ofmace, three slices of white bread, and a little gratednutmeg. Boil over a slow fire, then beat the yolks of four eggs,and the whites of two; stir into the caudle to thicken, taking care tostir one way for fear of curdling it; sweeten to taste, and serve warm. Flax-seed Lemonade. --Boil someflax-seed in water until it becomes a thick syrup. To atable-spoonful of flax-seed allow about two tumblers full ofwater. Strain it through a cloth and mix with a quarter of a pound ofwhite sugar. Then stir in a little lemon juice. This miture hasfrequently been very serviceable in relieving a cold. A little of it may betaken whenever the cough is troublesome. A little gum arabic added tothe syrup will be an improvement. Cocoa. --To two ounces of cocoa allow aquart of water. Put it in a saucepan and let it boil slowly for about anhour. The cocoa shells boiled in this manner will make a very pleasantbeverage, and will not be so rich as the ground cocoa. Barley Water. --Wash carefully two ounces ofbarley and put it into a saucepan with a quart of water and a fewraisins. Let it boil until the liquid is about half diminished. Sweetenit and drink it hot. A little lemon-peel or some liquor-ice root putin with the barley instead of or with the raisins, and somesliced figs, may please some tastes. When only a drink is required, itis better to strain the liquid; but the boiled barley with a littlesugar will make a very pleasing variety for an invalid to eat instead ofrice. Ground Rice Milk. --Boil together twotable-spoonfuls of ground rice with a pint of milk. Sweeten itaccording to your taste, adding the juice of half a lemon. Letthe whole boil half an hour over a moderate fire. Eat it warm. Compound Camomile Tea. --Twenty camomileflowers, half the thin peel of a lemon, four cloves: pour onthem a coffee cup of boiling water, cover and let them stand allnight. Strain the liquor in the morning. A wine glass full may be takena little before breakfast. Dr. Maton always recommended this, with ateaspoonful of salvolatile for indigestion. Elder Flower Tea. --Infuse the dried flowersas common tea is made. A little acid with sugar will make thetaste pleasant. (To promote perspiration.) Dandelion and Parsley Tea. --Wash andscrape six dandelion roots and six of parsley; pour on them apint of boiling water; let it infuse three hours before the fire. Alittle salt or saltpetre may be added. (Lady Cush prescribes thisin dropsy; it acts on the kidneys.) The flowers of any plant should be dried in every case. Rice Water. --Boil a quarter of a pound ofrice in three pints of water till soft as a paste,skimming it well. Strain the liquor, and sweeten it with sugar orhoney. Apples or lemon peel may be boiled with therice, or lemon juice added. It is an excellent drink in cases ofdiarrhoea. Cream of Tartar Water. --Put a large spoonfulof cream of tartar into a quart pitcher, with an ounce of gumarabic and thin lemon peel. Pour boiling water on it, and letit stand some hours; sweeten to taste. Imperial may be made with two ounces cream oftartar and the juice and peel of two lemons; put in a jarwith seven quarts of boiling water. When cold, half a pint ofspirits may be added to keep it. Sweeten to taste and bottle it. Marsh Mallow Emulsion. --Slice the dried rootsof marsh mallows, and boil four ounces with one and a half ounce choppedraisins in a quart of water. When it is boiled till there is agood sediment, strain it, and sweeten with water. Add water totaste. Linseed Emulsion. --One ounce linseed, two drachmsliquorice root sliced and bruised; a pint of boiling water. Letit stand four hours by the fire; then strain it. Rennet Whey. --Infuse a piece of theskin in a little boiling water, as for mak-ing cheese; letit stand an hour or two; then put a table-spoonful to three pints of newmilk, warmed; cover with a cloth, and leave it until the curd is thick.Press out and use the whey. Iceland Moss Jelly. --Wash and bruise Icelandmoss, and soak it all night; dry and boil it--putting an ounce to a quart--tillreduced to one-half the quantity of water; strain it through a sieve.Take it with milk or wine, or flavored to taste. Carageen, orIrish moss jelly can be made the same way. Blancmange. --Take gelatine, or isin-glass,two ounces to one and a half pints water; dissolve it, add a pint ofmilk, and strain it; flavor and sweeten it, and let it boil up; thenturn it into a mould. Rice Blancmange. --Boil as much groundrice in a pint of milk as will make it thick enough to turn outof a mould, sweetening and flavoring it. A sauce can be added ofmilk, cream, or custard. Somersetshire Fromity. --Wash a quart ofwheat, and boil it soft; add by degrees two quarts new milk; boilit till soft and mixed; then add the yolks of a few eggs, wellbeaten, nutmeg, sugar, and a little ginger, withcurrants or chopped raisins, if approved for the invalid. Baked Pears. --Put into a pint of watersome mace, cinnamon, and a few cloves; boil them; add apint of white wine, and the juice of two oranges, andsweeten with loaf sugar. Cut some baking pears into halves orquarters; put them into the syrup, and then into a moderately heatedoven, or a stewpan over the fire. Cover and cook them till soft. Serve themwith the liquor. They will keep in jars. Pears are excellent baked inmolasses with a little water added. Millet Pudding. --Wash themillet;simmer two table-spoonfuls with a little butter in a pintand a half of milk. Two, or three beaten eggs may be added.The sugar and flavoring must be put inwhile the milk is boiling. Bake or boil it. Ground Rice Pudding. --One and a half pintsnew milk, with flavoring of coriander seeds, cinnamon,lemon-peel, and sugar. Boil a few minutes, strain it upon twoounces ground rice and boil twelve minutes. Add not quite an ounce offresh butter, a little salt, and three beaten eggs. Bakein a dish or boil it. Barley flour may be substituted for the rice. Calf's Feet Pudding. --Calf'sfeet minced, taking off the brown and fat, one and a halfsuet minced, yolks of six and whites of four eggs, thecrumb of a roll, a little sugar, and a few chopped raisins. Addmilk enough to moisten it, and boil it eight or nine hours. Serve withany sauce. Marrow Pudding. --One pint milk boiledwith cinnamon and lemon-peel, with a pinch of salt,quarter of a pound beef's marrow minced fine, slices ofcitron and orange peel, grated nutmeg, half a pound spongecake, a little sugar, a glass of wine or brandy, and twoeggs. Bake it. Dr. Jophson's Soup. --Cut into pieces a pound oflean veal, the same of beef, with water to cover them, inan earthen jar. Tie it down, add salt, and simmer in a water bathtwenty-four hours. Essence of Meat, or Glaize. --Put two poundsmeat, of bird or animal, into a bottle, and that into a pan ofwater. Let it boil fifteen minutes. Strain the liquor that comes out. Itwill keep in a skin, and can be diluted for broths or gravies orsoups. Marrow Toast. --Boiled marrow spread ontoast with a little salt, is said to be good in allaying vomitingfrom irritation, after the operation of an emetic, or any other cause. Kedgeree. --Boil soft a tea-cupful of rice;chop a boiled whitefish to pieces, take out the bones; add therice, with three ounces of butter. Stir it on the fire, and addsalt and cayenne pepper, with chopped hard boiled eggs.Serve it dry and hot. Ground Rice Paste. --Boil a quarter of a poundin a little water, strain and beat it in a mortar with one egg, asmall lump of butter and a pinch of salt; mould the pasteas for tarts, and bake sweetmeats in it. Arrow-Root Transparent Jelly. --Put agood teaspoonful of arrow-root into a basin, which mix smoothly with twospoonfuls of water, then add enough boiling water to make itabout the consistency of starch, stirring all the time; pour it into astewpan, and stir over the fire until it has boiled two minutes; add a littlecream, a small glass of wine, and a little sugar, andserve. Lemonade. --Pour one quart of boiling water onthe rinds of six lemons, and let it stand for three or fourhours; add the juice of the lemons with three-quarters of a pound ofsugar; simmer it well and skim it; then add another quart of boilingwater. Either run it through a jellybag, or mix a glass ofcalf's-foot jelly, which will make it rich. Tamarinds, or Cranberry Juice, withdouble the quantity of water, also form a pleasant drink for an invalid,when approaching to convalescence. Almond Water. --Blanch five ounces of sweetand two of bitter almonds, pound them in a mortar, adding a few drops ofwater occasionally, to prevent their becoming oily, set a pint ofsyrup to boil, and throw in the mashed almonds; boil all togethera minute, then set it at the corner to simmer for a quarter of an hour; itis then ready to pass through a fine sieve for use. When required, add anyquantity of cold water, according to taste or direction, to make itpalatable. Lait de Poule, (French remedy for colds.)--This may be made from any broth. Break afresh egg, separate the white from the yolk, put theyolk in a basin, with a wine-glassful of good cream ormilk, which mix well with a spoon; have half a pint of brothboiling, which pour gradually over the egg and cream, mixing it(as you pour the broth) with a wooden spoon; it is then ready, and oughtto be taken when going to bed. Sweet Lait de Poule. --This is also reckoned verygood for a cold. Put two yolks of eggs into a cup, with twotea-spoonfuls of pounded sugar, part of the rind of a freshlemon grated; beat them well together for ten minutes, then pour boilingwater gradually over, keeping it stirred until the cup is nearly full.Drink this very hot when in bed. Sago Fruit Pudding. --A correspondent of theCottage Gardener says: "Being forbidden the use of pastry, I use rice and sago assubstitutes, in the following manner:--Boil a teacupful of sago as thickas it can be made to boil without burning: put about five table-spoonfuls inthe bottom of a quart basin; then a layer of baked fruit of any sort(sweetened), and fill the basin to the brim with alternate layers offruit and sago. Put it in a cool place for some little time, andit will become solid. It is best when made shortly after breakfast, and allowedto stand till wanted, to warm either in an oven, over boiling water, orbefore the fire with a plate turned over it, for dinner. The sago boilsbest when soaked in cold water for a few hours before using; riceis used in exactly the same way. By way of change, I sometimes line a basinwith the rice or sago, when very thick, and spread a thick layerof the same over a large dinner plate. When cold and stiff, I turn the basinover it, and with a knife cut the sago round the edge of the basin; theparings I put in the bottom of the basin, and then fill with bakedfruit, after which I put the sago in the plate on the top of thebasin, to act as a cover. The smooth side must be upwards. Eaten with mockcream, made as follows, it is delicious:--Pour half a pint of boilingmilk on a teaspoonful of arrowroot, well mixed with a smallquantity of milk; stir the mixture well, and have the white of anegg well beaten, and when about half cold add it, and placing the wholeover the fire, stir till it nearly boils, then strain for use." Tapioca Milk. --Soak an ounce oftapioca in a pint of cold water for half an hour, pour off thewater, and add a pint and a half of good milk; boil slowly untilthe tapioca is dissolved, then add sugar, nutmeg, and alittle white wine, if not prohibited by the medical attendant. Italian Cheese. --To a pint of scaldedcream, whipped very smooth, add the juice of three lemons, andthe rind of two--sugar to taste; let it stand for half an hour,then whip till it is very thick, tie it in a thin cloth, or a tin withholes in it; let it drain till next day, then turn out. Soyer's Curry Custard. --Break three wholeeggs in a basin, and beat them up, add a quart of milk, a littlesalt, a very little sugar, and two teaspoonfuls of currypaste; bake in a dish or basin. This is very light and nutritious. For those who can afford it, roast a leg of mutton, and when nearlydone put a hot dish under it, and with a sharp knife make several deepincisions in every part of it; let it remain two minutes longer, that all thegravy may fall into the dish; pour into a cup, take off the fat,and give to the patient as may be required; the mutton will do forcurry or hash for the family. This may be called gigot de mouton sacrifié; but when life mayalmost depend upon this extravagance as you may call it, the expense must notbe thought of. Decoction of Iceland Liverwort. --An ounce ofliverwort must be carefully freed from the moss, fragments of stalks, andparticles of dirt, with which it is frequently mixed, by rubbing it between thehands in cold water. Then steep it for two hours, in such quantity ofcold water as will completely cover it; after which it must be bruised,pounded, or cut, and the steeping continued for three or four days longer, in afresh quantity of boiling water, which when the steeping is finished,must be strained off by pressure. The liverwort is then to be put into a quartof fresh water, and kept boiling until the fluid be reduced two-thirds,or to a pint and a quarter. When strained and allowed to cool, it forms a thickmucilage, free from any bitter taste, and may be rendered very palatable by theaddition of sugar and lemon-juice; or by white wine, inthose cases which permit the use of wine. This decoction of liverwort is an excellent demulcent nutriment, inconsumption, dysentery, and in convalescence from acute diseases, andparticularly after the whooping cough, in which case the bitter need not becompletely removed, as it tends to invigorate the digestive organs. Vermicelli au Lait. --Boil a pint ofmilk, and when boiling, add sufficient vermicelli to make itabout the proper thickness; it may be served quite plain if required, orseasoned with sugar. FOOD AND COOKERY FOR CHILDREN. The kinds of food to be given to very young childrenshould be of the simplest description: besides cow's milk, diluted withone-third part of water, arrow-root and milk; pearl sago boiled in water tillperfectly soft, and thinned with new milk; rusks; biscuit powder; flour previously boiled like a pudding in a basin till it is formed into ahard ball, from which portions can be grated into milk, andboiled in it till it thickens the milk, are the chief ingredients usedas food for infants. Rice, barley, and farinagruels, are also used with advantage; and as a change in the diet ofchildren is advisable when they are occasionally indisposed, these kinds ofgruel may be found useful varieties in the food of children. Food which contains milk should never be warmed over and over again,as is sometimes done; nor should it be suffered to remain, when cold, in metalutensils; if intended for future use, it should be put into earthen-warebasins, and set in a cold place; but no food thus set by for another day shouldhave milk put into it. Nurse Lamp, with Tea Kettle to keep children's food warm. An illustration of a tea kettle and a nurse's lamp. The nutriment of children, after the completion oftheir first year and a half, it will be necessary to increase in solidity, and,if their appetite seems to demand it, in quantity also. Their teeth begin nowto aid them in masticating food, their limbs become firmer, and carry theirbodily exertions often to a great extent; the degree of exercise which healthychildren voluntarily give themselves, stimulates the digestive organs, enablingthem to receive and act upon more solid nutriment. Having previously had animalfood three or four times a week, children may, in the second year of theirlives, safely eat it once every day--meatsbeing chosen for them that are tender and nutritious. Roast beef; mutton, either boiled,roasted, or broiled; chickens, some kinds of fish, well-boiled vegetables, such as brocoli, turnips, potatoes (the latter arebest for them when mashed with hot milk and a little salt);simple compounds of egg and milk; fruits, baked or boiled; bread well made and baked, with smallportions of butter; these, with milk for breakfast and supper,with water as beverage, are the chief articles of wholesome food forchildren as long as they continue under nursery management. The species of food we would not give them consists of salted meats (beef, pork, or bacon); of richstews, ragouts, and soups; of fried fish, of pastry and confectionerygenerally; of cheese; and of beverages, tea, coffee,beer, and wine. Of the two last mentioned, beer andwine, we may remark that, in cases of delicate health, they may beadvantageously allowed; but they should always be given under medicaldirection, for the stimulus of fermented or spirituous liquors is not in everycase of debility beneficial; sometimes the reverse; neither ought children tobe allowed to drink much at a time of any liquid, however mild and innocent itmay be. Too much liquid has a tendency to create flatulency, and to distend thebowels. It has been said that parents accustoming their children to drinkwater only, bestow a fortune upon them of the value of which they willbe sensible all the days of their life. Children's meat should be minced as small as possible. If too muchtrouble is left to their feeble power of masticating, they will shun it byswallowing their food unmasticated. For children whose digestion is weak, itmay even be desirable to have their meat pounded. French Pap. --Put a table-spoonful of flourinto a pap saucepan, to which add by degrees two gills of milk, mixingit into a very smooth batter with a wooden spoon; place the saucepan upon thefire, let it boil ten minutes, keeping it stirred the whole time, or it isliable to burn or become brown; then add about half an ounce of sugarand a little salt, put it into a basin, and it is ready for use. Alittle butter is also very good in it. It may be made with dry rusk orcracker, scalded merely in water, and beaten to a pulpwith a little sugar. Infant's Food. --Take a pound of the bestflour, tie it very tightly in a strong cloth, and put it into a pan ofboiling water (in which put a plate to prevent the cloth sticking to thebottom of the pan). Boil it for three hours without allowing it to go off theboil--when coldish untie the cloth, and scrape off the outsideof the ball: when to be used, grate down the quantity required and break itwith cold water; boil four or five minutes only, and sweeten to the taste. Flourprepared in this way is confidently recommended by an experienced sick nurse asa soft and nutritious food for the youngest infant, and will keep for a monthor more in its hard compact state. Milk may be added when aboutto be eaten, if wished. Semoulina. --Semoulina is very delicate andglutinous; it is good in any kind of broth or milk for invalidsor children, of easy digestion, and having also the advantage of beingtolerably cheap and quickly cooked. Arrowroot. --When broth is boiling, puttwo teaspoonfuls of arrowroot into a cup, which mix smoothly with a gillof cold broth, or half ditto of water; then pour it into yourboiling broth, which keep stirring with a spoon; let it simmer tenminutes, and it is ready for use. Cakes for Children. --Sugar and egg,browned before the fire, or dropped as fritters into a hot frying-pan, withoutfat, will make them a nourishing delicacy. Rice Pudding with Fruit. --In a pint ofnew milk put two large spoonfuls of rice well washed; then addtwo apples, pared and quartered, or a few currants orraisins. Simmer slowly till the rice is very soft, then add oneegg, beaten, to bind it. Serve with cream and sugar. To prepare Fruit for Children. --A far morewholesome way than in pies or pud-dings, is to put apples sliced, orplums, currants, gooseberries, &c., into a stone jar,and sprinkle among them as much sugar as necessary. Set the jar in anoven or on a hearth, with a teacupful of water to prevent thefruit from burning; or put the jar into a saucepan of water tillits contents be perfectly done. Slices of bread or some rice maybe put into the jar, to eat with the fruit. Rice and Apples. --Core as many niceapples as will fill the dish; boil them in light syrup; prepare aquarter of a pound of rice in milk, with sugar andsalt; put some of the rice in the dish, and put in theapples, and fill up the intervals with rice, and bake it in theoven till it is a fine color. A nice Apple Cake for Children. --Grate somestale bread, and slice about double the quantity of apples;butter a mould, and line it with sugar paste, and strew in somecrumbs, mixed with a little sugar; then lay in apples with a fewbits of butter over them, and so continue till the dish is full; coverit with crumbs, or prepared rice; season with cinnamon andsugar. Bake it well. Fruits that have seeds are muchhealthier than stone fruits. But all fruits are better, for veryyoung children, if baked or cooked in some manner, und eaten with bread.The French always eat bread with raw fruit. Apples andwinter pears are very excellent food for children, indeed, for almostany person in health; but best when eaten at breakfast or dinner. If taken latein the evening fruit often proves injurious. The old saying--apples are gold in the morning, silver at noon, and lead atnight, is pretty near the truth. Both apples and pears areoften good and nutritious when baked or stewed, for those delicateconstitutions that cannot bear raw fruit. Much of thefruit gathered when unripe, might be rendered fit for food by preservingit in sugar. Ripe Currants are excellent food forchildren. Mash the fruit, sprinkle with sugar, and with goodbread let them eat of this fruit freely. Blackberry Jam. --Gather the fruit indry weather; allow half a pound of good brown sugar to every pound offruit; boil the whole together gently for an hour, or till theblackberries are soft, stirring and mashing them well. Preserveit like any other jam, and it will be found very useful in families,particularly for children--regulating their bowels, and enabling you todispense with cathartics. It may be spread on bread, or on puddings,instead of butter: and even when the blackberries are bought itis cheaper than butter. In the country every family shouldpreserve, at least, half a peck of blackberries. Bread and Milk. --Cut about two ouncesof any white bread into small thin slices, and put them into a smallbasin or a large breakfast cup. In a little saucepan (only used for thatpurpose) have half a pint of milk; when upon the point of boiling, pourover the bread; cover over the cup five minutes, and it is ready foruse. Porridge. --When children are delicate, porridge isoften preferable to bread and milk. Put two table-spoonfuls ofgrits or oatmeal in the milk saucepan, which moisten withhalf a pint of milk; let it boil ten minutes, keeping well stirred, adda small piece of butter and a little sugar, and it is ready foruse. Meats for Children. --Mutton,lamb, and poultry, are the best. Birds and the white meat offowls, are the most delicate food of this kind that can be given. Thesemeats should be slowly cooked, and no gravy, if made rich withbutter, should be eaten by a young child. Never give childrenhard, tough, half cooked meats, of any kind. Vegetables for Children, Eggs, &c. --Their rice ought to be cooked in no more water than is necessaryto swell it; their apples roasted, or stewed with no more waterthan is necessary to steam them; their vegetables so well cooked as to makethem require little butter, and less digestion; their eggs boiledslow and soft. The boiling of their milk ought to be directed by thestate of their bowels: if flatulent or bilious, a very littlecurry-powder may be given in their vegetables with good effect--such asturmeric and the warm seeds (not hot peppers), areparticularly useful in such cases. Potatoes and Peas. --Potatoes, particularlysome kinds, are not easily digested by children; but this is easily remedied bymashing them very fine, and seasoning them with sugar and alittle milk. When peas are dressed for children, let them beseasoned with mint and sugar, which will take off the flatulency.If they are old, let them be pulped, as the skins are perfectlyindigestible by children's or weak stomachs. Never give them vegetables lessstewed than would pulp through a colander. Children's Diet for the day (Soyer). -- Bread and milk for breakfast at eight; the dinner at one, asfollows throughout the week: roast mutton and apple pudding;roast beef and currant pudding, baked apples; boiledmutton with turnips, after which rice or vermicellipudding 5 occasionally with beef, suet dumplings, plain and withcurrants in them, or pease pudding; or if unwell, a littleveal or chicken-broth, or beef-tea. When in business, thefirst three years the children used to dine with us at one, at a side-tablewith their nurse. They then had a little plain meat, cut small in theirplates, with potatoes, pieces of bread, and gravy, afterwhich, three times a week, plain rice, bread, or other plainpudding, or rhubarb or apple tart; and, at five o'clock, theirbread and milk again, previous to going to bed. But I should recommend for nurserymaid and all: First, about two pounds of mutton, well cooked, but with the realgravy of the meat in it, which will require about one hour beforea moderate fire; dredge it ten minutes before being clone; when taken up and inthe dish, sprinkle a little salt over the meat, and pour overthree or four spoonfuls of hot water to make a little lightgravy. Or, a few slices of roast beef, or a small piece roasted on purpose;after which a very plain currant pudding; or, occasionally, a littlepickled pork, with pease pudding; or roast pork, withbaked apples; and now and then a little salt beef, but very wellboiled, with suet dumplings; and occasionally, for change, eitherbread, vermicelli, or tapioca puddings; in case ofillness, and with the approbation of the doctor, veal, mutton, orchicken-broth, sago, gruel, panada, &c. SAVORYDISHES FOR BREAKFAST. Grillades. --Perhaps there is no better grill forbreakfast than a cold blade-bone of mutton, off which the greater partof the meat has been already cut. The remaining parts should then bescored, and the gashes filled with a mixture of mustard, cayenne,common pepper, and salt, as for a devil; it should then be putupon the gridiron, and well browned, but notburnt. It may be sent to table dry, without any sauce, or served withgravy mixed with capers. The bones of cold fowl of all kinds are also frequentlybrought thus to breakfast. Broiled Chicken. --Split it open,pepper it only on the inside, broil and serve it with a very littlebutter, and accompanied with broiled mushrooms. Kabobs. --Put thin slices of well-seasonedkidney and bacon, with beef or mutton also if youplease, upon skewers. Have ready fine bread-crumbs, with a slightgrating of lemon, brush them over with egg, and roll them intothe crumbs. Hang up the skewers to roast, and put a slice of toast underto secure the gravy: when served, carefully remove the skewers, andplace the "kabobs" on the toast; but, if only a quantity sufficient tohelp one person be put on each skewer, then do not remove them. If, instead of meat, an oyster be put between each slice ofbacon and kidney, it will be found very superior. Dried Salmon is likewise a good relish; andfresh mackerel, split open and broiled. German Toast. --Take the remainder of anyfricassee or ragout; any quantity will do; chop it fine, add a little chop- pedparsley, and a little bit of shalot or chive: mix it up with oneor two eggs beaten, according to the quantity. Put the whole with itsgravy into a stewpan, and let it reduce and thicken on the fire. Let itremain until it be cold, then cut pieces of bread, toast them:lay the mixture thickly upon them. Boil an egg hard, cut it into smallpieces, and stick them on the top; brush the whole with egg beaten up,sift bread-crumbs over, and bake them in the oven; squeeze a littlelemon-juice on the top. This makes also a good corner dish fordinner. Vegetable Toast. --Take any stewed vegetable,and make it into a purée. Add a little more seasoning, mix it upwith the yolk of an egg, and, if too thin, reduce and thicken it overthe fire, then spread it upon toast, brush it over with beateneggs, and bread-crumbs or vermicelli, and fry or bakethem. Anchovy Toast. --Make a well-buttered toastof brown bread, if you can get it; scale and bone a proper number ofanchovies, with little or no washing; cut them into broad slices, andplace them upon the toast, seasoning it with mustard,without pepper. Sausage Toast. --Fry two or threesausages; when quite hot, strip off the skins, and spread themeat upon the toast buttered with salt butter; season itwith a little pepper and mustard. It will be improved by agrating of old cheese. Kidney Toast. --Take a cold vealkidney, with a part of the fat, cut it into very small pieces; poundthe fat in a mortar with a little salt, white pepper andan onion previously boiled. Bind al together with the beaten whitesof eggs. Heap it upon toast; cover the whole with the yolksbeaten; dredge with bread-crumbs, and bake in the oven. Ham Toast. --Grate or pound the coldham; toast and butter a slice of bread; mix theham with the yolk of an egg and a little cream, until itis thick and rich; warm it over the fire, and serve it very hot upon thetoast. Tongue may be employed in the same way. Scotch Woodcock. --Toast andbutter three or four slices of bread on both sides; take nine orten anchovies washed, scraped, and chopped fine, and put them betweenthe slices of bread. Beat the yolks of four eggs in half a pintof cream, and set it on the fire to thicken, but not to boil. Then pour it over the toast,and send it to table as hot as possible. Sheep's Rumps and Kidneys. --Boil therumps in gravy, and lard the kidneys withbacon; set them, along with the rumps, before the fire in a smalltin oven, rubbing them at the same time with yolk of egg and a littlecayenne and nutmeg. When of a light brown, dish them up, eitherdry or with any pungent sauce, and garnish them with parsley. Baron Broiled. --The streaked part of a thickflank of bacon is to be preferred; cut nice slices, not above a quarterof an inch thick, take off the rind, put to broil on the gridiron over aclear fire; turn it three or four times in the space of five minutes. Serve itvery hot. If any remain after dinner of boiled bacon, it is very goodbroiled or fried for next day's breakfast. Broiled and boiled bacon hasbeen highly recommended to the dyspeptic. Devils of Biscuits. --Butter them onboth sides; sprinkle cayenne pepper on the top, and send them to begrilled This may be varied by the addition of chopped anchovies, or theessence, or diavolo paste. Or: --Make a slice of cheese into apaste with made mustard, and lay it upon one side. A Dry Devil. --Take the liver, gizzard,drumstick, and sidebones of a fowl or turkey; score them; lay onmade mustard very thickly, and add a quantity of cayenne pepperand salt, and broil them. A Wet Devil. --Take any part of a turkey,goose, or fowl, cover it with mustard, Chetney, diavolopaste, or any other piquant condiment; put a dessert spoonful ofcayenne pepper, one of pounded white sugar, the juice of alemon, a glass of wine, and a glass of ketchup, to atea-cupful of gravy; heat them together, pour over the devilledfowl, and send up very hot. A little cold fresh butter will cool the mouth, should the grillprove too powerful. Devilled Game. --Split a woodcock, asnipe, a wild duck, or any other game that is undone. To ateaspoonful of salt add a dessert spoonful of cayenne pepper witha tablespoonful of curry-powder, and wet the whole with Frenchmustard. Cover the birds both inside and out with this mixture. Take outthe brains when the head is split, and, if a woodcock, addthe trail; make them into a paste with the yolk of a hard-boiledegg, half a blade of pounded mace, a saltspoonful of gratedlemon-peel, and season it with essence of anchovies,ketchup, or other sauce; then add a glass of wine, atea-spoonful of cayenne pepper, a dessertspoonful of pounded whitesugar, and the juice of a lemon or orange. Roll a bit ofbutter, the size of a walnut, in flour; put the birds andthe sauce into a metal dish over a lamp, cover it close, shake it aboutoccasionally, and when it has stewed until the greater part of the saucehas been imbibed, serve it round. The legs of fowls, geese, andturkeys, may be devilled the same way. Mustard. --No savory things are everbrought to table without this indispensable accompaniment. In making it, pure water is most generally used, with a pinch ofsalt and sugar, though both are frequently omitted: but a muchbetter mode for preserving it, as well as adding to it a good flavor, is tomake it of water in which horseradish has been boiled. This costsno trouble; for if the horseradish be scraped and put in a teacup withboiling water poured upon it, and covered, the infusion will be strongenough in little more than half an hour. The Parisian mustard, known as moutarde de maille, is however much in vogue amonggastronomists, as possessing a finer pungency of flavor, and may be imitated by mixing up the flour and a littlefine salt with salad oil, so as to form a thick paste,then diluting it to a certain degree with equal quantities of the vinegars ofhorseradish, tarragon, chili, and garlic; orsufficient of each to please the palate. Cayenne should never be used,and even chili vinegar but sparingly. Sandwiches require more care than is usuallybestowed on them, for this reason, that every one believes he can cutsandwiches. Where any quantity is required the bread should be made onpurpose, and the baker should be desired to bake it in tins, and either add alittle butter to it or raise it well before it is put into the tins, sothat it should not be full of holes, as in that case too much butter isused, and the sandwich becomes disagreeable from being greasy. Out thebread moderately thin, butter it very slightly indeed, lay themeat cut thin, season it with salt, pepper, andmustard, as may be required: cover with a second slice of bread,trim the edges, put them one on the other, and cover with a damp cloth untilwanted. Where tongue is used it should be boiled the day before, and, whenthoroughly done, pressed in the mould in which the bread is to bebaked. Chickens boned, and farced with a small quantity of farce ofveal and ham, and treated in the same way, will make excellentsandwiches. Soyer recommends for breakfast also-- Scrambled Eggs. --Break three eggs intoa small stewpan, add a saltspoonful of salt, a quarter of that quantityof pepper, and two ounces of fresh butter, (the fresher thebetter;) set the stewpan over a moderate fire, and stir the eggs roundwith a wooden spoon, being careful to keep every particle in motion, until thewhole has become a smooth and delicate thickish substance; have ready aconvenient-sized crisp piece of toast, pour the eggs upon it, andserve immediately. Herring may be laid between the eggs andtoast. Eggs au Beurre (a new Method.) -- Let theeggs boil six minutes, then take them out, dip them for two seconds incold water, crack and peel off the shells, and lay them in a hot plate;cut each egg in halves lengthwise, spread a little fresh butter,and sprinkle a little salt over the interior, and eat them very hot. The following articles for Breakfasts are popular in Springand Summer: -- Veal Cutlets--Stewed or Fried Clams-- ColdBoiled Ham or Tongue--Clam Fritters--BroiledShad--Broiled and Fried Fish--Stewed or BroiledChickens--Minced Veal--Pickled Salmon--Fried SweetPotatoes--Fried Egg Plant-- Green Corn Fritters--StewedPigeons-- Broiled or Sliced RawTomatoes--Hash-balls--Cucumbers--PepperGrass--Cresses--Game Birds--Eggs--Omelets of allkinds--Tongue or Ham Toast-- Rice Cakes--BatterCakes--Ripe Fruits. Jam, marmalade and honey areappropriate. In Winter--Additional. --Stewed Pigeons withMushrooms--Stewed or Fried Oysters--Broiled and StewedFowl-- Fried Egg Plant--Pork Cheese--HashedPoultry--Deviled Gizzards--Steaks-- Chops--LiverPudding--Fried Pigs' Feet--Venison Steaks--VenisonPasty-- Fried Smelts--Minced Codfish---FishCakes--Sausages--Hot Cakes of all kinds, Buckwheat and FlannelCakes especially; also Hominy and Mush. A celebrated cook says:--When I was first married and commencing business,our means were limited: the following was our system of living:-- Sunday's Dinner. --Roast Beef, Potatoes,Greens, and Yorkshire Pudding. Monday. --Hashed Beef, Potatoes, andBread Pudding. Tuesday. --Broiled Beef and Bones,Vegetables and Apple Pudding. Wednesday. --Fish, if cheap, Chops,Vegetables, Pancakes. Thursday. --Boiled Pork, Pea Pudding,Greens, and Rice Pudding. Friday. --Pea Soup, remains of Pork,and Baked Batter Pudding. Saturday. --Stewed Steak with SuetDumpling, and Rice in a mould with sauce. Dinner for Dinner Party.--Soup-- Fish--Saddle ofMutton--Cutlets Main-tenon--Greens--Potatoes--Sweet Breads--WhiteSauce--Cranberry Jelly-- Pickles--TurkeyRoast--Celery Sauce-- Game Course--Partridges--WildDucks French Salad--Jelly of Fruit--Cheese Cakes--Meringues a laCreme--Frozen Plum Pudding--Dessert. 2d. For a Party of Twenty Persons. -- Soups--Two Dishesof Fish--Haunch of Mutton--Boiled Capons--Fricandeau ofVeal--Curry of Fowl--Fillets of Beef with TomatoSauce--Oyster Patties-- Croquettes of Veal orFowl--Cutlets Sou-bise--Wild Ducks--Guinea FowlLarded--Scolloped Oysters--Charlotte Russe--Apple withRice--Meringues--Punch Jelly--Turban--Cheese Souffle--Dessert. For Supper Parties. --Cold RoastFowls--Lobster Salad--Chicken Salad--Mayonnaises ofFowls--Ham--Tongue cut in slices, garnished withParsley and Aspic Jelly-Grouse Pie--BonedTurkey--Terrapins----Game Birds----Oysters Stewed,Fried--Raised Pastry--Jellies-Ice Creams--Pyramids of CandiedFruits--Cakes--Compotes of Fruits--Confectionery, &c. Children's Party.----S andwiches---- Dishes ofLamb--Ham--Beef--Tongue---Fowls--Pastry--Custard--Jellies-Bonbons. Another (Soyer.)--A Roast Turkey-- Two Dishes of Fowls--OneHam--Two Pigeon Pies--One Piece of Boiled Beef--FourLobsters---Four Salads--Four Jellies--Four Tarts--Four of PreservedFruit, &c.--Four of Pastry, with about twelve of various kinds ofFruit, &c. SPRING. Breakfast. ----Tea----Cocoa----FlannelCakes--Meat Cakes--Twist Bread--LiverPuddings--Sausages. Dinner. --Pepperpot--White Potatoes--LimaBeans--Sweet Potatoes-- Stewed Oysters--StewedChickens. Breakfast. --Tea--Coffee--Rye BatterCakes--Boiled Eggs--Cold Bread-- SlicedHam--Beefsteak. Dinner. --Vermicelli Soup--WhitePotatoes--Tongue--Hominy--Fried Oysters--BoiledFowls. Dinner. --Soup--Potatoes--Ruta BagaTurnips--Asparagus--Mint Sauce--Roast Lamb. Dinner. --Fish--Potatoes--Salad-- RoastVeal--Egg Sauce--Greens. SUMMER. Dinner. --Ochra Soup--Squashes-- FriedChickens--Green Corn--Potatoes--Salad--ButteredBeets--Beef Steak. Breakfast. --Cold Bread--Dry Toast--Clam Fritters--Minced Veal--Cream Cheese. Dinner. --Soup--Egg Sauce--CelerySauce--Potatoes--String Beans--Tongue--Squashes--BoiledFowls. Dinner. --Lamb Soup--GreenPeas--Potatoes----Asparagus----Spinach andEggs--Veal--Cutlets. Dinner. --Green PeaPorridge--Potatoes--French Beans--Cucumbers--CurrantJelly--Pickles--Roast Lamb. Dinner. --Soup--Squashes--ButteredBeets--Green Corn--Roast Veal. Dinner. --Soup--Fish--Potatoes--StringBeans--Fried Squashes--Corn Fritters--FriedChickens. WINTER. Dinner. ---Beef Soup--SweetPotatoes--Turnips---Cranberry Sauce--- WhitePotatoes--Leg of Pork Stuffed and Roasted. Breakfast. --Tea--Coffee--Indian BatterCakes--Rolls--Beef Hash--Fried Liver--Pork Steaks. Dinner. --Veal Soup--Turnips--BakedSweet Potatoes--Mashed Potatoes-- Horse Radish--RoastBeef. Dinner. --Soup--Fish--PickledBeets--Sweet Potatoes---White Potatoes-- BakedBeans--Roast Ducks. Dinner. --Calves' Head Soup--WhitePotatoes--Hominy--Turnips--Pickles-- Fillet of VealStuffed and Roasted. Dinner. --Soup--CranberrySauce----Ham--Fried Oysters--White Potatoes--SweetPotatoes--Roast Turkey. Dinner. --Soup--Roast Goose--AppleSauce--Onion Sauce--Potatoes--SweetPotatoes--Tongue--Celery--Stewed Oysters. Dinner. --Calves' HeadSoup----Potatoes--Beets--StewedOysters--Turnips--Sweet Potatoes--Onion Sauce--Boiled Turkey. Dinner. --Soup--Pish--CurrantJelly--Potatoes--Turnips--Roast Mutton. Dinner. --Beef Soup--Smoked Pig's HeadwithCabbage--Potatoes--Turnips--Macaroni--Beets--Celery--SweetPotatoes--Roast Mutton--Batter Pudding Baked--BrandyPeaches--Pain Perdu-- Floating Island. Dinner. --Vegetable Soup--RoastPig--Potatoes--Onions--OysterPie--Turnips--Rice--Boiled Turkey--VermicelliPudding--Cocoanut Custard--Tipsy Cake--Indian Pudding. Dinner. --Clam Soup--Chowder-- RoastFowls--Beets--Mangoes--Tomatoes--Turnips--Maccaroni--Potatoes--Lamb Pot Pie--Plum Pudding--Rice in a mould withcustard--Wine Sauce-- Cracker Pie. Dinner. --Soup-Roast Beef--Celery--Macaroni--Turnips--Sweet Potatoes--Potatoes--Fricasseed Chickens--Boiled Tongue --BoiledFlour Pudding--Tartlets--Compote of Peaches. Dinner. --Soup a la Julienne--RoastBeef--GreenCorn--Mangoes--Tomatoes--Potatoes--Beets--Squashes--Pilauof Chickens--Custard Pie--Rice Flummery--BakedPears--Green Corn Pudding. Dinner. --Mullagatawny Soup--RoastLamb--Mint Sauce--Macaroni--Potatoes--BoiledTongue--Tomatoes--Rice--Roast Ducks--BreadPudding--Jellies--Slip--Cherry Tartlets. Dinner. ---Oyster Soup---A la modeBeef--Turnips--SweetPotatoes--Beets--Potatoes--Rice--Baked Pork andBeans--Custards--Suet Pudding--Sauce--AppleFritters--Mince Pie. Dinner. ----Vermicelli Soup---BoiledCalf's Head--Turnips--SpareRib--Potatoes--Beets--Rice--RoastTurkey--Apple Dumpling--Flapjacks----Spanish Cream--PumpkinPie. Dinner. --Soup--Chickens--EggSauce--Potatoes--Beans--Tomatoes--Ham-- GreenCorn----Cocoanut Pie----Boiled Custards----SpongeCake--Tapioca Pudding. Dinner. --Soup--Boiled Salmon--Leg ofMutton--Caper Sauce--Tomatoes-- Squashes----GreenCorn----Fried Egg Plant--Beans--Tongue--RicePudding--Slip--Farina Mould--Peach Pie. NOTE.--The Cuts of Cooking Utensils in the Second Part were furnished to thePublishers by Mr. STEPHEN WM. SMITH, whose Housekeeping Furniture Ware Roomsare at 534 Broadway, near Spring Street, New York. PART THIRD. PERFUMERY AND THE TOILET, THE FAMILY MEDICALGUIDE, MISCELLANEOUS RECEIPTS. PERFUMERY AND THE TOILET. THE perfumes for the handkerchief, as found in the shops of Paris andLondon, are either simple or compound; the former are called extracts,extraits, esprits, or essences, and the latter bouquets and nosegays, which aremixtures of the extracts so compounded in quantity that no one flower or odorcan be discovered as predominating over another. Perfumes are procured by theprocesses of maceration, absorption, and distillation. In making pomade, a certain quantity of purified mutton or deersuet is put into a clean metal or porcelain pan, this being melted by asteam heat; the kind of flowers required for the odor wanted are carefullypicked and put into the liquid fat, and allowed to remain from twelve toforty-eight hours; the fat has a particular affinity or attraction forthe oil of flowers, and thus, as it were, draws it out of them, andbecomes itself, by their aid, highly perfumed; the fat is strained fromthe spent flowers, and fresh are added four or five times over, till the pomadeis of the required strength. For perfumed oils the same operation is followed;but, in lieu of suet, fine olive oil or oil of ben,derived from the ben nuts of the Levant, is used, and the same resultsare obtained. The odors of some flowers are so delicate and volatile, that heatwould spoil them; the process of absorption or enfleurage is, therefore,conducted cold, thus:--Square frames, about three inches deep, with a glassbottom, say two feet wide and three feet long, are procured; overthe glass a layer of fat is spread, about half an inch thick, with akind of plaster knife; into this the flower buds are stuck, cup downwards, andranged completely over it, and there left from twelve to seventy-two hours. Almond perfume is obtained from the bitteralmonds, and exists in the skin or pellicle that covers theseed after it is shelled. The essential oil of almonds enters intocombination with soap, cold cream, and many other materialsprepared by the perfumer. Almond. An illustration of almonds still on the tree. A beautiful imitation of Essence of white Lilac may be compoundedthus: One pint spirituous extract from tubereuse pomade; one quarter of a pint spirituous extract oforange-flower pomade; three drops of otto of almonds; half an ounceextract of civet. The civet is only used to give permanence to the perfume of thehandkerchief. Benzoin, also called Benjamin.--This is a veryuseful substance to perfumers. It exudes from the Styrax benzoin by woundingthe tree, and drying, becomes a hard gum-resin. It is principallyimported from Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and Siam. StyraxBenzoin. An illustration of a Benzoin sprig with leaves and flowers. Bay. --Oil of sweet Bay, also termed essentialoil of laurel-berries, is a very fragrant substance, procured bydistillation from the berries of the bay laurel. Bergamot. --This most useful perfume isprocured from the Citrus Bergamia, by expression from the peel ofthe fruit. Mixed with rectified spirit in the proportions of aboutfour ounces of bergamot to a gallon, it forms what is called "extract of bergamot," and in this state is used for thehandkerchief. Geranium ( Pelargonium odoratis-simum, rose-leafgeranium).--The leaves of this plant yield by distillation a very agreeablerosy-smelling oil, so much resembling real otto of rose, that it is usedvery extensively for the adulteration of that valuable oil, and is grownvery largely for that express purpose. When dissolved in rectifiedspirit, in the proportion of about six ounces to the gallon, it formsthe " extract of rose leaf geranium" of the shops. Heliotrope. --Either by maceration or enfleurage withclarified fat, we may obtain this fine odor from the flowers of the Heliotrope Peruvianum or II grandi florum . For a small trial, which can bemanaged by any person having the run of a garden, we will say, procure anordinary glue-pot now in common use, which melts the material by theboiling of water. At the season when the flowers are in bloom, obtainhalf a pound of fine mutton suet, melt the suet and strain itthrough a close hair-sieve, allow the liquefied fat, as it falls fromthe sieve, to drop into cold spring water; this operation granulates andwashes the blood and membrane from it. In order to start with a perfectlyinodorous grease, the melting and granulation process may be repeatedthree or four times; finally, re-melt the fat and cast it into a pan tofree it from adhering water. Now put the clarified suet into the macerating pot, and place it insuch a position near the fire of the greenhouse or elsewhere, that will keep itwarm enough to be liquid; into the fat throw as many flowers as you can,and there let them remain for twenty-four hours; at this time strain thefat from the spent flowers, and add fresh ones; repeat this operationfor a week: we suppose at the last straining the fat will have becomevery highly perfumed, and when cold may be justly termed Pomade a la Heliotrope . The cold pomade being chopped up like suet for a pudding, is now tobe put into a wide-mouthed bottle, covered with spirits as highlyrectified as can be ob- tained, and left todigest for a week or more; the spirit then strained off will be highlyperfumed: in reality it will be extract of Heliotrope, a delightful perfumefor the handkerchief. The rationale of the operation is simple enough: thefat body has a strong affinity or attraction for the odorous body, oressential oil of the flowers, and it therefore absorbs it by contact,and becomes itself perfumed. In the second operation, the spirit has amuch greater attraction for the fragrant principle than the fatty matter; theformer, therefore, becomes perfumed at the expense of the latter. The sameexperiment may be repeated with almond oil substituted for thefat. The experiment here hinted at may be varied with any flowers whatever;indeed, by having the macerating bath larger than was mentioned above, anexcellent millefleur pomade and essence might be produced fromevery conservatory. The odor of heliotrope resembles a mixture of almonds and vanilla,and is well imitated thus:-- Extract of Heliotrope. --Half a pint ofspirituous extract of vanilla; one gill of spirituous extract ofFrench rose pomatum; two ounces spirituous extract of orange-flowerpomatum; one ounce spirituous extract of ambergris; five drops ofessential oil of almonds. A good Imitation of Honeysuckle is made thus:--Spirituous extract ofrose pomatum, one pint; spirituous extract of violet pomatum, one pint;spirituous extract of tubereuse pomatum, one pint; extract ofvanilla, one gill; extract of Tolu, one gill; otto neroli, tendrops; otto almonds, five drops. Imitation Essence of Myrtle. --Extract ofvanilla, half a pint; extract of roses, one pint. Orange Flower. --Extract of fleurd'or-ange, half a pint; extract of tubereuse, half a pint;extract of jasmine, two ounces. Mix and allow to stand for a fortnight:it is then fit for bottling, and is a perfume that gives a great deal ofsatisfaction. Imitation Essence of Violets.--Spirituous extract of cassie pomade,one pint; esprit de rose, from pomade, half a pint; tincture of orris,half a pint; spirituous extract of tuberose pomade, half a pint; otto ofalmonds, three drops. Imitation " Lily of the Valley." --Extract oftubereuse, half a pint; extract of jasmine, one ounce; extract offleur d'or-ange, two ounces; extract of vanilla, three ounces;extract of cassie. one gill; extract of rose, one gill; otto ofalmonds, three drops. Keep this mixture together for a month, and thenbottle it for sale. It is a perfume that is very much admired. Imitation " Essence of Magnolia" -- Spirituousextract of orange-flower pomatum, one pint; spirituous extract ofrose pomatum, two pints; spirituous extract of tubereuse pomatum, half apint; spirituous extract of violet pomatum, half a pint; essentialoil of citron, three drachms; essential oil of almonds, tendrops. Extract d'Ambre. --Esprit de rose triple, halfa pint; extract of ambergris, one pint; essence of musk, onegill; extract of vanilla, two ounces. This perfume has such a lasting odor, that a handkerchief being wellperfumed with it, will still retain an odor even after it has been washed. Patchouly. -- Pogostemon patchouly (Lindley), Plectranthus crassifolius (Burnett), is anherb that grows extensively in India and China. It somewhat resemblesour garden sage in its growth and form. The odor is due to an ottocontained in the leaves and stems, and is readily procured by distillation. It is the most powerful of any derived from the botanic kingdom; hence, ifmixed in the proportion of measure for measure,it completely covers the smell of all other bodies. Patchouly. An illustration of a patcholy plant. Extract of Patchouly. --Rectifed.spirits, one gallon; otto of patchouly, one ounce and a quarter; ottoof rose quarter of an ounce. The characteristic smell of Chinese or Indian ink is due to someadmixture of this herb. The origin of the use of patchouly as a perfume in Europe is curious. A fewyears ago real Indian shawls bore an extravagant price, and purchaserscould always distinguish them by their odor; in fact, they were perfumed withpatchouly. The French manufacturers had for some time successfully imitated theIndian fabric, but could not impart the odor. At length they discovered the secret, and began to import the plant toperfume articles of their make, and thus palm off homespun shawls as realIndian ! From this origin the perfumers have brought it into use. Imitation of the Essence of Sweet Pea can beprepared thus :--Extract of tuberose, half a pint; extract offleur d'orange, half a pint; extract of rose from pomatum, halfa pint, extract of vanilla, one ounce. Musk. --This extraordinary substance, likecivet, is an animal secretion. Musk is remarkable for the diffusivenessand subtlety of its scent; every thing in its vicinity soon becomes affectedby it, and long retains its odor, although not in actual contact with it.Extract of musk, one pint; extract of ambergris, half a pint ;extract of rose triple, one gill. Mix and filter it; it is then fit forbottling. Rose. --Pure otto of roses, from its cloyingsweetness, has not many admirers; when diluted, however, there is nothing toequal it in odor, especially if mixed in soap, to form rose soap,or in pure spirit, to form the esprit de rose. There are four modifications of essence of rose for the hankerchief, whichare the ne plus ultra of the perfumer's art. Theyare,--esprit de rose triple, essence of white roses, essence oftea rose, and essence of moss rose. The following are the recipes:-- Esprit de Rose Triple. --Rectified alcohol,one gallon; otto of rose, three ounces. Mix at a summer heat; in the courseof a quarter of an hour the whole of the otto is dissolved, and is then readyfor bottling. In the winter season beautiful crystals of the otto--if it isgood--appear disseminated through the esprit. Essence of Moss Rose. --Spirituous extractfrom French rose pomatum, one quart; esprit de rose triple, one pint ;extracts fleur d'orange pomatum, one pint; extract of ambergris,half a pint; extracts of musk, four ounces. Allow the ingredients toremain together for a fortnight; then filter, if requisite, and it is readyfor sale. Essence of White Rose. --Esprit de rose frompomatum, one quart; esprit de rose triple, one quart; esprit de roseviolette one quart; extracts of jasmine, onepint; extracts of patchouly, half a pint. Essence of Tea Rose. --Esprit de rose pomade,one pint; esprit de rose triple, one pint; extract of rose-leafgeranium, one pint; extract of sandal-wood, half a pint ;extract of neroli, quarter of a pint; extract of orris, quarterof a pint. Otto of Rosemary is very extensively used inperfumery, especially in combination with other ottos for scenting soap.Eau de Cologne cannot be made without it, and in the once famous "Hungarywater" it is the leading ingredient. The following is thecomposition of Hungary Water. --Rectified alcohol, onegallon; otto of English rosemary, two ounces; otto oflemon-peel, one ounce; otto of balm ( Melissa ), one ounce; otto of mint, halfdrachm; esprit de rose, one pint; extract of fieur d'orange,one pint. Vanilla. --The pod or bean of the Vanilla planifolia yields a perfume of rareexcellence. Extract of Vanilla. --Half a pound ofVanilla pods, and one gallon of rectified spirit. Slit the pods from end to end, so as to lay open the interior, then cut themup in lengths of about a quarter of an inch, macerate with occasional agitationfor about a month; the tincture thus formed will only require strainingthrough cotton to be ready for any use that is required. In this state it israrely sold for a perfume, but is consumed in the manufacture of compoundodors, bouquets, or nosegays, as they are called. Verbena, or Vervaine.--The scented species of thisplant, the lemon verbena, Aloysia citriodora (Hooker), gives one of the finestperfumes with which we are acquainted; it is well known as yielding adelightful fragrance by merely drawing the hand over the plant; some of thelittle vessels or sacks containing the otto must be crushed in this act, asthere is little or no odor by merely smelling at the plant. The otto, which can be extracted from the leaves by distillation withwater, on account of its high price, is scarcely, if ever, used by themanufacturing perfumer, but it is most successfully imitated by mixing the ottoof lemon grass, Andropogon schcenanthus, with rectifiedspirit, the odor of which resembles the former to a nicety. Thefollowing is a good form for making the Extract of Verbena. --One pint of rectifiedspirit; three drachms otto of lemon grass; two ounces otto oflemon peel; half an ounce otto of orange peel. After standing together for a few hours, and then filtering, it is fit foruse. Another mixture of this kind, presumed by the public to be made from thesame plant, but of a finer quality, is composed thus : Extrait de Verveine. --One pint of rectifiedspirit; one ounce of otto of orange-peel; two ounces of otto oflemon peel; one drachm of otto of citron; two drachms and ahalf of otto of lemon grass; seven ounces of extrait de fleurd'orange; seven ounces of extrait de fleur tubereuse; half a pintesprit de rose. This mixture is exceedingly refreshing, and is one of the most elegantperfumes that is made. Winter Green (Trientalis Europcea). --A perfumingotto can be procured by distilling the leaves of this plant; it is principallyconsumed in the perfuming of soaps. Upon the strength of the name ofthis odorous plant a very nice handkerchief perfume is made. Iceland Winter Green. --One pint esprit de rose; aquarter of a pint of essence of lavender; half a pint of extractof neroli; a quarter of a pint of extract of vanilla; a quarter of apint of extract of vitivert; half a pintof extract of cassie; a quarter of a pint of extract ofambergris. Citron. --On distilling the flowers of the Citrus medica, a very fragrant oil isprocured, which is a species of neroli, and is principally consumed by themanufacturers of eau de Cologne. Gitronella. --Under this name there is an oilin the market, chiefly derived from Ceylon and the East Indies. Being cheap, itis extensively used for perfuming soap. What is now extensively sold as"honey" soap, is a fine yellow soap, slightly perfumedwith this oil. Cloves. --Every part of the clove plant (Caryophyllus aromaticus) abounds with aromaticoil, but it is most fragrant and plentiful in the unexpanded flower-bud,which are the cloves of commerce. The plant is a native of the Moluccasand other islands in the China seas. The oil may be obtained byexpression from the fresh flower-buds, but the usual method of procuring it isby distillation. Few essential oils have a more extensive use in perfumery; itcombines well with grease, soap, and spirit, and forms aleading feature in some of the most popular handkerchief essences. Foressence of cloves, dissolve oil of cloves in the proportion oftwo ounces of oil to one gallon of spirit. Cloves. An illustration of a clove plant. Ess. Bouquet. --The reputation of this perfume hasgiven rise to numerous imitations of the original article, more particularly onthe continent. In many of the shops in Germany and in France will be seenbottles labelled in close imitation of those sent out by Bayley and Co.,Cockspur Street, London, who are, in truth, the original makers. Esprit de rose triple, one pint; extract of ambergris, two ounces ;extract ot orris, eight ounces; otto of lemons, one-quarter ofan ounce; otto of bergamot, one ounce. COMPOUND ODORS, or bouquets, are used for the purpose of fixing the morevolatile odors to the handkerchief. Essence of Rondeletia. --Spirit (brandy) onegallon; otto of lavender, two ounces; otto of cloves, one ounce; otto of roses, three drachms; otto of bergamot, one ounce; one gill ofextract of musk; one gill of extract of vanilla, and one gill ofextract of ambergris. The mixture must be made at least a month before it is fit for use. Bouquet de Caroline ; also called Bouquet des Delices. --Extrait de rose, from pomade,one pint; extrait de vio-lette, from pomade, one pint; extrait de tuberose,from pomade, one pint; extract of orris, half a pint; extract ofambergris, half a pint; otto of bergamot, a quarter of an ounce ;otto of limette, a quarter of an ounce; otto of cedret, a quarter of anounce. The Court Nosegay. --Extrait de rose, one pint ;extrait de violette, one pint; extrait de jasmine, one pint; esprit de rosetriple, one pint; extract of musk, one ounce; extract ofambergris, one ounce; otto of lemon, half an ounce; otto ofbergamot, half an ounce; otto of neroli, one drachm. Bouquet de Flora ; otherwise, Extract of Flowers. --Esprit de rose, frompomade, one pint; esprit de tubereuse, from pomade, one pint; esprit de violette, from pomade, one pint; extractof benzoin, an ounce and a half; otto of ber-gamot, two ounces; otto oflemon, half an ounce; otto of orange, half an ounce. Essentia Odorifera. --Take of musk grain, tengrains; civet, five grains; Peruvian balsam, twelve grains; oil ofcloves, four drops; oil of rhodium, two drops; sub-carbonate ofpotash, half a drachm; rectified spirits of wine, two ounces.Digest them together in a close vessel, with a heat equal to that of the sun insummer (78 deg. Fahr.) for several days, and afterwards pour off the essencefor use.--This is an exquisite perfume, and a single drop gives a fine flavorto many ounces of other liquors. Eau de Chypre. --This is an old-fashioned Frenchperfume, presumed to be derived from the Cyperus esculentus by some, and by others to be sonamed after the island of Cyprus; the article sold, however, is made thus: Extract of musk, one pint; extract of ambergris, half a pint; extract of vanilla, half a pint; extract of tonquinbean, half a pint; extract of orris, half a pint; esprit derose triple, two pints. The mixture thus formed is one of the most lasting odors that can bemade. Empress Eugenie's Nosegay. --Extract of musk,one gill; extract of vanilla, one gill; extract of tonquin, onegill; extract of neroli, one gill; extract of geranium, half apint; extract of rose triple, half a pint; extract of santal,half a pint. The Guards' Bouquet. --Esprit de rose, two pints ;esprit de neroli, half a pint; extract of vanilla, two ounces ;extract of orris, two ounces; extract of musk, a quarter of apint; otto of cloves, half a drachm. Fleur d'Italie, or Italian Nosegay. -- Esprit derose, from pomade, two pints; Esprit de rose triple, one pint; esprit dejasmine, from pomade, one pint; esprit de violette. from pomade, one pint ;extract of cassie, half a pint; extract of musk, two ounces ;extract of ambergris, two ounces. Jockey Club Bouquet (Englishformula).--Extract of orris root, two pints; esprit de rose triple, onepint; esprit de rose de pomade, one pint; extrait de cassie de pomade, half apint; extrait de tubereuse de pomade, half a pint; extrait ofambergris, half a pint; otto of bergamot, half an ounce. Jockey Club Bouquet (French formula). --Esprit derose de pomade, one pint; esprit de tubereuse, one pint; esprit de cassie,half a pint; esprit de jasmine, a quarter of a pint; extract of civet,three ounces. SPIRITUOUS INFUSIONS. Leaves, flowers, roots, wood, resins, powders, and perfumes of animalorigin, all serve to furnish these tinctures. The substances are either cut,rasped, or bruised, according to their nature, and infused for some days or amonth, taking care not to fill the vessel so full as to prevent its contentsbeing stirred up occasionally. These infusions are made either withalcohol or brandy. Eau de Vie de Lavande. --Take one pound of flowers,and three pints of brandy. Infuse in a closed vessel for six weeks. andafter that strain and bottle up for use or sale. Infusion de Lavande Rouge composée (English).--Take of spirit lavender, one pound and a half; spiritrosemary, one pound; pulverized cinnamon, one ounce; pulverizednutmegs, one ounce; red sanders, one drachm. After two weeks infusion,filter. Infusion de Camomille Romaine. --One pound of flowers suffices for three quarts ofbrandy. Infusion of Absinthe : de Sauge, &c. -- Take onlyfour leaves to the quart of brandy. These infusions serve in thecomposition of sundry aromatic waters. Infusion or Esprit de Safran. --To a quart ofalcohol, take two ounces saffron and infuse for two months. Thisspirit is used for coloring waters, pastes, &c., but in very smallproportions. Infusion or Esprit de Rhodia. --Infuse as before onepound of rhodium wood in two quarts of spirit. If the wood is resinous,only half a pound is required. Infusion or Teinture de Canelle. -- Take four ouncesbest bruised cinnamon to the quart of spirit. Tincture of Sassafras. --Infuse eight ouncesof bruised sassafras in one quart of alcohol. Tincture of Santal-citrin (yellowsan-ders).--Operate as for the preceding infusion. Tincture of Benzoin. --Take Benzoin in tearsand pulverized, two ounces; alcohol one pound. After seven days'infusion, filter. This tincture is used, principally, for making the Lait Virginal, either with pure rose, orangeflower or lavender water. To make Eau-de-Cologne. --Rectified spirits ofwine, four pints; oil of berga-mot, one ounce; oil oflemon, half an ounce; oil of rosemary, half a drachm; oilof Neroli, three quarters of a drachm; oil of English lavender,one drachm; oil of oranges, one drachm. Mix well, and then filter. Ifthese proportions are too large, smaller ones may be used. Eau Jaune à l'Amaryllis. --In two quarts ofalcohol, dissolve two ounces essence of bergamot, four ouncesessence oi lemon, four drachms essence of Portugal, four drachms essenceof neroli, one drachm essence of thyme, one drachm essence ofrosemary, two ounces of tincture of cloves, eight ounces of lait virginal, as much of vanilla water, fourdrachms of essence of amber, and two drachms essence of musk.Dilute the spirit with good rose water, and add a little of redor yellow tincture, according to choice. Eau d'Ambre Royale. --To a quart of alcoholadd half a pint of spirit of ambrette, an ounce of essence ofamber, an ounce of musk mixed with a proportional quantity oforange-flower water. Eau de Chypre. --Mix together ( eau de ) jasmine, one quart; (eau de)bergamot, one quart; ( eau de ) violet, one quart; ( eau de ) tuberose, one quart; ( esprit ) spirit of ambrette, one pint ;essence of musk, one ounce; mecca balsam, one ounce; storax, half anounce. Add to the mixture two ounces of water, and mix thoroughly together,so that no one odor predominates over the rest. Lavender Water. --Oil of lavender, twodrachms; oil of bergamot, half drachm; essence of musk, onedrachm; spirit of wine, thirteen ounces; water, five ounces.Let it stand a week. Eau de Bouquet de Flore. -- Eau de miel, two ounces; tincture of cloves,one ounce; tincture of calamus, half an ounce; tincture oflavender, half an ounce; tincture of souchet, half an ounce; eau sans pareille, four ounces; tincture ofjasmine nine drachms; tincture of orris root, one ounce ;tincture of neroli, twenty drops. These waters and tinctures mixed together, give a product of exquisitefragrance. Eau d'Elegance. --Spirit of jasmine, twoquarts; spirit of storax, one pint; spirit of hyacinth, onepint; spirit of badiane, four ounces; tincture of balsam ofTolu, four ounces; tincture of vanilla, two ounces. Eau de Miel. --This receipt is from one of the mostcelebrated English perfumers; coriander, seven pounds; cloves,twelve ounces; storax, eight ounces; bruisednutmegs, eight ounces; lemon-peel, ten ounces; calamus, sixounces; alcohol, fifteen quarts. Macerate for a month in a well-stoppered demijohn. Distil then, and to theliquor add : orange-flower water, five quarts; essence of roses,twenty-four drops; pulverized ambergris, one drm.; vanilla inpieces, two ounces. Macerate for a week, and filter. This is one of the most agreeable watersused. OILS FOR THE HAIR. For Thickening and Strengthening the Hair. --Skim thefat from the top of calves' feet while boiling; mix witha teaspoonful of rum; shake together. Apply night and morning. Pomatum. --Take white mutton suet, fourpounds, well boiled in hot water, (three quarts,) and washed to free itfrom salt. Melt the suet when dried with one pound and a half offresh lard, and two pounds of yellow wax. Pour into an earthen vessel,and stir till it is cold; then beat into it thirty drops of oil ofcloves, or any other essential oil whose scent you prefer. If thisis too hard, use less wax. Or: --Soak half a pound of clear beef-marrow,and a pound of unsalted fresh lard, in water, two or three days,changing and beating it every day. Put it into a sieve, and when dry, into ajar, and the jar into a saucepan of water. When melted, pour it into abasin, and beat it with two spoonfuls of brandy; drain off thebrandy, and then add essence of lemon, bergamot, or anyother scent that is liked. Pomade Victoria. --This highly praised and excellentpomade is made in the following way--and if so made, will be found to give abeautiful gloss and softness to the hair :--Quarter of a pound of honeyand half an ounce of beeswax simmered together for a few minutes, andthen strain; and of oil of almonds, lavender, and thyme,half a drachm each. Be sure to continue stirring till quite cold, or thehoney and wax will separate. Imitation Bear's Grease. --Hog's lard,sixteen ounces; flowers of benzoin and palm oil, of each quarter of anounce. Melt together until combined, and stir until cold. Scent at pleasure.This will keep a long time. Sweet Pot-pourri. --Take three handfuls oforange-flowers, three of clove-gillyflowers, three ofdamask-roses, one of knotted marjoram, one of lemon-thyme, sixbay-leaves, a handful of rosemary, one of myrtle, half of mint,one of lavender, the rind of a lemon, and quarter of an ounce ofcloves. Chop all, and put them in layers, with pounded bay-saltbetween, up to the top of a china jar. If all the ingredients cannot be got at once, put them in as you get them;always throwing in salt with every new article. To make Wash-balls. --Shave thin two pounds of newwhite soap into about a teacupful of rose-water, then pour asmuch boiling water on as will soften it. Put into a brass pan a pint ofsweet oil, four pennyworth of oil of almonds, half a pound ofspermaceti, and set all over the fire till dissolved; then add the soapand half an ounce of camphor that has first, been reduced to powder byrubbing it in a mortar, with a few drops of spirits of wine, orlavender-water, or any other scent. Boil ten minutes, then pour it intoa basin, and stir it till it is quite thick enough to roll up into hardballs, which must then be done as soon as possible. If essence is used, stir itin quickly after it is taken off the fire, that the flavor may not fly off. Paste for Chapped Hands. -Mix a quarter of apound of unsalted hog's lard, which has been washed in softwater, and then rose-water, with the yolks of two new-laid eggs, and a large spoonful of honey.Add as much fine oatmeal or almond-paste as will work into apaste. Or: --Blanch one pound of bitter almonds,pound them smooth in a marble mortar; add half an ounce of camphor, oneounce of honey, quarter of a pound of spermaceti, all pounded, and mixedwith the almonds, till it becomes a smooth paste. Put it intojars or china boxes, and tie it down till wanted. For Chapped Lips. --Put quarter of an ounce ofbenjamin, storax, and spermaceti, pennyworth of alkanet-root, a large juicyapple chopped, a bunch of black grapes bruised, quarter of apound of unsalted butter, and two ounces of beeswax, into a newtin saucepan. Simmer gently till the wax, &c., are dissolved, and thenstrain it through linen. When cold, melt it again, and pour it into small potsof boxes; or, if to make cakes, use the bottoms of teacups. Cosmetic Gloves. --Though not altogether fashionablenow, these gloves are still worn by those who are subject to chaps andchilblains : the ladies especially use them; hence the necessity of alwaysbeing provided with a small stock. Gants cosmétiques au bouquet. --Wax, fourdrachms; spermaceti, four drachms; white soap, four drachms ;mutton suet, seven drachms. Mince up each of these substances separately, melt them over awater-bath, and add : Olive oil, an ounce and a half; pomaderosat, one ounce and a half; benzoin, one drachm; Peru balsam, one drachm ;essence of roses, some drops; honey water, au bouquet, half an ounce.Stir together until the mixture is complete, and, whilst the mass is still hot,apply it with a brush to the wrong sides of the gloves. The gloves beingreturned, are blown up, and put by in a warm place to dry. Or: --Beat two yolks of eggs with twospoonfuls of oil of sweet almonds, and add half an ounce rosewater and two drachms tincture of benzoin. The gloves are worn during the night, and each pair should serve two weeks.The rest of the pomade answers for rubbing the hands. Lait de rose (milk of rose).--To one ounce offine olive oil, and six drops of oil of tartar, add a quart ofrose water. Melt together, in a stoneware vessel, over awater-bath : Spermaceti, one ounce; white wax, one ounce;white soap, one ounce. Rub up in a marble mortar bitter almonds(best quality), two ounces; sweet almonds, best quality, one pound.Take out three-fourths, and upon the remaining fourth pour the above mixture,and continue rubbing actively, and afterwards add, by degrees, the otherthree-fourths of the almonds, always pestling rapidly so as tothoroughly incorporate the mixture. Again prepare in a white-glass bottle the following mixture:--Distilled water, two pounds; rose water, half a pound ;spirit of rose, half a pound. Reserve a pint, and pour gradually intothe rest the first, and rub well all the while; then strain through a closecloth, and return the marc to the mortar, where, being triturated with the pintabove reserved, it is again strained, and the liquid united with the first. If there is any tendency to decomposition, shake up the milk freely.To augment the fragrance of this composition, perfume with four drops essenceof rose. Violet Powder. --Wheat starch, twelve pounds ;orris-root powder, two pounds; otto of lemon, half an ounce; otto ofbergamot, a quarter of an ounce; otto of cloves, two drachms. Rose Face Powder. --Wheat starch, seven pounds; rose pink, half a drachm ; otto of rose, twodrachms; otto of santal, two drachms. Perle Powder. --French chalk, one pound ;oxide of bismuth, one ounce; oxide of zinc, one ounce. Poudre de la mer rouge, by Cambou, Paris.--Takealum, one pound; white sugar, one ounce; gum arabic(best), one ounce; carmine, one ounce. Mix and reduce the whole to animpalpable powder, and sieve through a fine cloth. This powder, its author says, is curative of the ringworm, red blotches, andpimples. It is tied up loosely in a bag, and this bag, moistened with freshwater, is rubbed gently over the skin. SOAPS. Sawn au miel. --Take four ounces white soap,four ounces white honey, one ounce benzoin, half an ounce storax; mixthe whole together in a marble mortar, and when well incorporated, melt thepaste over a water-bath, strain, pour into frames, and divideinto small tablets. Lady Derby's Soap. --Take two ounces blanchedbitter almonds, ten drachms tincture benzoin, a pound of whitesoap, and a piece of camphor, size of a filbert; powder thealmonds and camphor in a separate mortar, and, when they are completelymixed, add the benzoin. If there should be too much odor of benzoin andcamphor, weaken the perfume by remelting the soap. Saponaceous Cream of Almonds. --Thepreparation sold under this title is a potash soft soap of lard. It hasa beautiful pearly appearance, and has met with extensive demand as a shavingsoap. It is made thus :--Clarified lard, seven pounds ;potash of lye (containing twenty-six per cent. of causticpotash), three and three-quarter pounds; rectified spirit, threeounces; otto of almonds, two drachms. Manipulation: --Melt the lard in a porcelainvessel by a salt-water bath; then run in the lye, very slowly,agitating the whole time; when about half the lye is in, the mixture begins tocurdle; it will, however, become so firm that it cannot be stirred. The cremeis then finished, but is not pearly; it will, however, assume that appearanceby long trituration in a mortar, gradually adding the alcohol, in whichhas been dissolved the perfume. Transparent Soap. --Take of perfectly dry,pulverulent white soap, two pounds; alcohol, three quarts; heatgently together over a water-bath, and when the solution is complete,perfume, and turn out into forms. When cooled, divide it into cakes, one-third thicker than their designedsize, so as to allow for contraction by evaporation. Frangipanne Soap. --Curd soap,previously colored light brown, seven pounds; civet, a quarter of an ounce ;otto of neroli, half an ounce; otto of santal, an ounce and a half; otto ofrose, a quarter of an ounce; otto of vitivert, half an ounce. Rose Cold Cream -- Almond oil, onepound; rose-water, one pound; white wax, one ounce; spermaceti,one ounce; otto of roses, half a drachm. Heat the wax and sperm in awater-bath; add the otto last. Cold Cream of Almonds is prepared precisely asthe above; but in place of otto of roses otto of almonds is used. Violet Cold Cream .--Huile violette, one pound; rose-water, one pound; wax and spermaceti, each one ounce; otto ofalmonds, five drops. Violet Cold Cream. Imitation: --Almond oil, three-quarters of apound; huile cassie, a quarter of a pound;rose-water, one pound; sperm and wax, one ounce; otto of almonds,a quarter of a drachm. This is an elegant and economical preparation, generally admired. Camphor Cold Cream (otherwiseCamphor Ice).--Almond oil, one pound; rose water, onepound; wax and spermaceti, one ounce; camphor, two ounces; otto ofrosemary, one drachm. Pommades des Sultanes. --Melt over awater-bath one ounce white wax and two ounces spermaceti;withdraw from the fire, and then add eight ounces oil of sweetalmonds, eight ounces oil of white poppy, and continue beatingtogether without interval until the mixture begins to get white, thenput in half an ounce of Mecca balsam and a gill of rose-water, andprolong the rubbing until the mixture will take up no more of rosewater, and detaches itself in large flakes or lumps. In filling the pots, take care to cover the contents with a littlerose-water. This is among the best preparations for softening theskin and preserving its freshness. Pommade de Ninon de L'Enclos, by Boyer.--Take oilof sweet almonds, four ounces; washed lard, three ounces,rose-water, three, ounces. This pomade is extremely mild andrefreshing. Pate divine de Venus, by Bourdel.-- Mix togetherequal parts of purified lard, fresh butter, and honey, andadd a half portion of Mecca balsam, and essence of roses. Almond Balls. --Purified suet, one pound;white wax, half a pound; otto of almonds, one drachm; otto ofcloves, quarter of a drachm. Camphor Balls. --Purified suet, onepound; white wax, half a pound; camphor, quarter of a pound; ottoof French lavender or rosemary, half an ounce. Camphor Paste --Sweet almond oil, halfa pound; purified lard, quarter of a pound; wax, spermaceti andcamphor, each, one ounce. Pate d'Amandes Aux Jaunes d'æufs. --To fourounces sweet almonds, powdered finely in a marble mortar, add theyolks of three fresh eggs, mix well, thin out with eight ouncesof milk, and boil until it assumes the consistence of paste,stirring constantly during the ebullition. Perfume with one drachm essenceof vanilla. Composition par Blaque, Paris, for Softening theSkin. --Butter, four pounds; oil of sweetalmonds, four pounds; common white soap, six pounds; decoction ofmarshmallow, eight pounds; alcohol, one pint. Melt and heat together, in a stoneware vessel, over a water-bath,stirring well all the time; and when the whole is thoroughly incorporated, pourout to cool. Perfume according to taste. A quantity of the size of afilbert, well rubbed on, suffices for washing the hands. Camphor Cerate for Chapped Hands. -- Take halfan ounce of spermaceti, half an ounce of white wax, scrape them into anearthen vessel or pipkin (an earthen jam-pot will do,) add six drachms ofpounded camphor, and pour on the whole four table-spoonfuls of bestolive oil let it stand before the fire till it dissolves, stirring itwell when liquid. Before you wash your hands, take a small piece of the cerate,and rub it into your hands, then wash them as usual. Putting the cerate onbefore going to bed is very good. The ingredients cost two shillings, and thisquantity will last for three winters. The vessel should be covered, to preventevaporation. To eradicate Warts. --Dissolve as much commonwashing soda as the water will take up; repeatedly wash with thisfor a minute or two, and let them dry withoutwiping. Another Method. ---Get a little bullock'sgall, keep it in a bottle, and rub a little on the warts two or threetimes a day. Cold Cream. --Lard, six ounces;spermaceti, one ounce and a drachm and a half; white wax, three drachms;rose-water, three ounces; carbonate of potass, fifteen grains;spirits of wine, three quarters of an ounce; essential oil ofbergamot, three drachms. Melt the three first, then add therose-water, carbonate of potass, and spirits of wine, stirringwell, and when nearly cold add the perfume. I can safely say that this isfirst-rate, having made many pounds of it. To Whiten the Nails. --Diluted sulphuric acid,two drachms; tincture of myrrh, one drachm; spring water, fourounces. Mix. First cleanse with white soap, and then dip the fingersinto the mixture. To Whiten the Hands. --Take a wine-glassful ofEau de Cologne, and another of lemon-juice: then scrape two cakes ofbrown Windsor soap to a powder, and mix well in a mould. Whenhard, it will be an excellent soap for whitening the hands. Rose Lip Salve. --Eight ounces sweet almondoil, four ounces prepared mutton suet, one and a half ounceswhite wax, two ounces spermaceti, twenty drops otto 5 steep a smallquantity of alkanet root in the oil, and strain before using. Melt thesuet, wax, and spermaceti together, then add the coloric oil andotto. Pommade de Beauté, for improving thecomplexion, and healing chaps. Melt together over a water-bathwhite wax, one and a half drachms; spermaceti, two drachms; oil ofsweet almonds, half an ounce; oil of olives, pure, half an ounce;oil of poppy, half an ounce balsam Peru, liquid, four drops. Add thebalsam after having well beaten the mixture. This is an excellent cosmetic. Glycerine Balsam. --White wax, spermaceti,each one ounce; almond oil, half a pound; glycerine, two ounces; otto ofroses, quarter of a drachm. White Lip Salve. --Almond oil, quarterof a pound; wax and spermaceti, each one ounce; otto of almonds, half adrm.; otto of geranium, quarter of a drachm. Common Lip Salve is made simply of equal parts oflard and suet, colored with alkanet root, and perfumed with anounce of bergamot to every pound of salve. Pommade, by Dr. Pittschaft, Baden, for ChappedLips. --Take sublimed oxide of zinc, one drachm; lycopodium powder, onedrachm; pommade rosat, four ounces. Mix, and make into a perfectly homogeneous pomade. This is an excellent remedy for chapped lips, and is beneficial in cases ofulceration of the nails of the feet. Its application in such instancesmust be immediately after bathing the affected parts. A toilet can be arranged and furnished according to taste, where there ismore regard to convenience and comfort than expense of outlay. The necessaries, however, for a dressing-table andwashstand, are two cakes of fine soap, a box of dentifrice, a pot ofpomade for the hair, and a box of lip salve. Acetic Acid and its Use in Perfumery. --The pungencyof the odor of vinegar naturally brought it into the earliest use in theart of perfumery. The modern aromatic vinegar is the concentrated acetic acidaromatized with various ottos, camphor, &c., thus:-- Aromatic Vinegar. --Concentrated acetic acid,eight ounces; otto of English lavender, two drachms; otto of English rosemary, one drachm; otto of cloves,one drachm; camphor, one ounce. First dissolve the bruised camphor in the acetic acid, then add theperfumes; after remaining together for a few days, with occasional agitation,it is to be strained, and is then ready for use. The most popular article of this kind is-- Henry's Vinegar. --Dried leaves ofrosemary, rue, wormwood, sage, mint, andlavender flowers, each half an ounce; bruised nutmeg,cloves, angelica root, and camphor, each quarter of anounce; alcohol (rectified), four ounces; concentrated acetic acid,sixteen ounces. Macerate the materials for a day in the spirit; then add the acid,digest for a week, and filter it. Vinaigre à la Rose. --Concentrated aceticacid, one ounce; otto of roses, half a drachm. Well shaken together. It is obvious that vinegars differently perfumed may be made in a similarmanner to the above, by using other ottos in place of the otto of roses. Allthese concentrated vinegars are used in the same way as perfumedammonia, that is, by pouring three or four drachms into an ornamental"smelling" bottle, previously filled with crystals of sulphate ofpotash, which forms the "sel de vinaigre" of the shops; or upon spongeinto little silver boxes, called vinaigrettes, from their French origin. Theuse of these vinegars had their origin in the notion that they kept those whocarried them from the effects of infectious disease. Mint Vinegar. --This is made by putting into awide-mouthed bottle, fresh nice clean mint leaves enough to fill itloosely; then fill up the bottle with good vinegar; and after it hasbeen stopped close for two or three weeks, it is to be poured off clear intoanother bottle, and kept well corked for use. Serve with lamb whenmint cannot be obtained. Thieves' Vinegar. --Take of rue,sage, mint, rosemary, wormwood, andlavender, a large handful of each; infuse in one gallon ofvinegar, in a stone jar closely covered, and keep warm by the fire forfour days, then strain, and add one ounce of camphor, pounded; bottle,and keep well corked. There is a legend connected with this preparation (calledin French Vinaigre à quatre Voleurs), that during theplague at Marseilles certain robbers plundered the infected houses withimpunity, and being apprehended and condemned to death, were pardoned oncondition of disclosing the secret of their preventive--as above. The mode ofusing is to wash the face and hands with it previous to exposure to anyinfection. Vinaigre Virginal. --This mild and refreshing liquoris excellent to remove prickly heat, but, before being used for such purpose,must be diluted with water. Take benzoin pulverized, two ounces; alcohol, eight ounces;vinegar, two pounds. Digest the benzoin in the alcohol for a week, decant the liquor, andto the residue add the vinegar; after six days' infusion, this too isdecanted, and it and the alcoholic tincture are mixed together, andfiltered the next day. This vinegar weakened with water is a mostexcellent cosmetic, and is in fact a remedy for the ill effects of perniciousrouges and paints upon the skin. Of Vinegars by Infusion. --These are either vinegars of flowers or aromatic vinegars. Vinaigre de Toilette, by Sinfar,Paris. --Alcohol eight quarts; white vinegar, two quarts;cologne water, one pint; extract of benzoin, two ounces;extract of storax, two ounces; acetic acid, four ounces; essence oflavender, one ounce and a half; essence of cinnamon, one drachm; essence of cloves, one drachm;ammonia, one drachm. Mix together the alcohol, lavender, cinnamon andcloves, and macerate for eight days; then add the vinegars, cologne,extracts, and ammonia; color, and filter through paper. Vinaigre Roast. --Dry rose leaves, red, half a pint;good vinegar, eight quarts. Macerate for two weeks in a closed vessel,and after that filter. Vinaigre à la Fleur d'Oranger.--Fresh orange flowers, one anda half pounds; vinegar, eight quarts; brandy à la fleur d'oranger, one quart. Macerate fortwelve days, and filter. Vinaigres Infusées à la Lavande, de Sauge,Thyme, &e. --One pound of fresh flowers to twelve quarts ofvinegar. Vinaigre Scillitique, for clearing the Voice. --Amongspeakers and vocalists, it is desirable, before commencing the exercises oftheir vocation, that the throat be freed from all pituitous hoarseness. Thisvinegar accomplishes that object, and besides imparting a tone to theglottis and all the organs, it serves to develop and perfect the voice. Putfive or six drops of the preparation in a glass of warm water, andgargle therewith morning, noon, and night of the days on which the voice is tobe exerted. Take of dried squills, one part; good vinegar, twelve parts;alcohol, half a part. After two weeks' maceration in a close vessel,press out and filter. Vinaigre Alcoholique, for Fits and Swoons. --Mixtogether equal parts of strong concentrated vinegar and alcohol;and, to increase its force, add two drops of ether to the quart. Thiscomposition is most excellent in cases of fainting and swooning. The best preparation for smelling-bottles is what is termed Inexhaustible Salts, which is prepared thus: Liquidammonia, one pint; otto of rosemary, one drachm; otto of Englishlavender, one drachm; otto of bergamot, half a drachm; otto ofcloves, half a drachm. Mix the whole together with agitation in a verystrong and well stoppered bottle. This mixture is used by filling the smelling-bottles with any porousabsorbent material, such as asbestos, or, what is better, sponge cuttings, thathave been well beaten, washed and dried. These will retain the ammoniacal odorlonger than any other material; hence, we presume, bottles filled in this wayare called "inexhaustible," which name, however, they do not sustain more thantwo or three months with any credit; the warm hand soon dissipates theammonia under any circumstances, and they require to be refilled. Preston Salts, which is the cheapest of all theammoniacal compounds, is composed of some easily decomposable salt ofammonia and lime, such as equal parts of muriate of ammonia,or of sesqui-car-bonate of ammonia, and of fresh-slaked lime.When the bottles are filled with this compound, rammed in very hard, adrop or two of some cheap otto is poured on the top prior to corking. For thispurpose otto of French lavender, or otto of bergamot, answersvery well. We need scarcely mention that the corks are dipped into meltedsealing-wax. Cassolettes and Printaniers. --Cassolettes andprintaniers are little ivory boxes of various designs, perforated in order toallow the escape of the odors contained therein. The paste used forfilling these "ivory palaces whereby we are made glad," is composed of equalparts of grain musk, ambergris, seeds of thevanilla-pod, otto of roses, and orris powder, with enough gum acacia, orgum tragacanth, to work the whole together into a paste. These thingsare now principally used for perfuming the pocket or reticule, much in the same way that ornamental silver and gold vinaigrettesare used. Sachet a la Frangipanne. --Orris-root powder, threepounds; vitivert powder, a quarter of a pound; santal-wood powder, a quarter ofa pound; otto of neroli, one drachm; otto of rose, one drachm; otto of santal,one drachm; musk-pods, ground, one ounce. The name of this sachet has been handed down to us as being derived from aRoman alchemist of the noble family of Frangipani. Heliotrope Sachet. --Powdered orris, two pounds; roseleaves, ground, one pound; tonquin beans, ground, half a pound; vanillabeans, a quarter of a pound; grain musk, a quarter of an ounce; otto ofalmonds, five drops. Well mixed by sifting in a coarse sieve, it is fitfor sale. It is one of the best sachets made, and is so like in its odor to the flowerfrom which it derives its name, that no person unacquainted with itscomposition would, for an instant, believe it to be any other than the "realthing." Lavender Sachet. --Lavender flowers,ground, one pound; gum benzoin, in powder, a quarter of a pound; otto oflavender, a quarter of an ounce. Sachet à la Mousselaine.--Vitivert, in powder, one pound;santal-wood, half a pound; orris, half a pound; black currant leaves,half a pound; benzoin, in powder, a quarter of a pound; otto of thyme,five drops; otto of roses, half a drachm. Millefleur Sachet. --Lavender flowers, ground,one pound; orris, one pound; rose leaves, one pound; benzoin, one pound;tonquin, a quarter of a pound; vanilla, a quarter of a pound; santal, aquarter of a pound; musk and civet, two drachms; cloves, ground,a quarter of a pound; cinnamon, two ounces; allspice twoounces. Portugal Sachet. --Dried orange-peel, onepound; dried lemon-peel, half a pound; dried orris root, half apound; otto of orange-peel, one ounce; otto of neroli, a quarter of adrachm; otto of lemon grass , a quarter of a drachm. Patchouly Sachet. --Patchouly herb, ground,one pound; otto of patchouly, a quarter of a drachm. Patchouly herb isoften sold in its natural state, as imported, tied up in bundles of half apound each. Pot Pourri. --This is a mixture of dried flowers andspices not ground. Dried lavender, one pound; whole rose-leaves,one pound; crushed orris, coarse, half a pound; broken cloves, twoounces; broken cinnamon, two ounces; broken allspice, twoounces. Rose Sachet. --Rose heels or leaves, one pound;santal wood, ground, half a pound; otto of roses, a quarter of an ounce. An excellent Water to prevent Hair from falling off,and to thicken it. --Put four pounds of unadulterated honey into astill, with twelve handfuls of the tendrils or vines, and the same quantity ofrosemary-tops. Distil as cool and as slowly as possible. The liquor maybe allowed to drop till it begins to taste sour. Tooth Powder. --Powdered orris root,half an ounce;powdered charcoal, two ounces; powdered Peruvian bark, one ounce;prepared chalk, half an ounce; oil of bergamot orlavender, twenty drops. These ingredients must be well worked up in amortar, until thoroughly incorporated. This celebrated tooth-powder possessesthree essential virtues, giving an odorous breath, cleansing and purify- ingthe gums, and preserving the enamel; the last rarely found in populartooth-powders. Bandoline for the Hair (a French receipt). --To one quart of water put half anounce of quince pips, boil it nearly an hour, stirring it well, strainit through a fine muslin, let it stand twenty-four hours, and then add fourteendrops of the essential oil of almonds. A dessert spoonful ofbrandy may be added, if required to keep a long time. Economical Hair Wash. ---Take one ounce of borax,half an ounce of camphor, powder these ingredients fine, and dissolvethem in one quart of boiling water; when cool, the solution will beready for use; damp the hair frequently. This wash not only effectuallycleanses and beautifies, but strengthens the hair, preserves the color,and prevents early baldness. The camphor will form into lumps, but thewater will be sufficiently impregnated. To make a Curling Fluid for the Hair. Melt a bit ofwhite bees'-wax, about the size of a filbert kernel, in one ounceof olive oil, to this add one or two drops of otto of roses. Rose Bandoline. --Gum tragacanth, six ounces; rosewater, one gallon; otto of roses, half an ounce. Steep the gum inwater well, strain and mix thoroughly. Simple Pastilles. --Benzoin, half an ounce;cassia, one drachm; charcoal, two ounces; salpetre, one drachm.Reduce all to powder, and mix into a paste with a solution of one ounceof gum tragacanth to the pint. Pastilles au benzoin. --Take half a pound of benzoin,four or five grains of storax, five grains of cassia, two drachms of dryPeru balsam, half a drachm of cloves; half an ounce of charcoal;one drachm of nitre, half a drachm essential oil of orange flowers, andhalf a drachm tincture of ambergris. All these materials must be in finepowder. Pastilles à la rose. --Gum, in impalpablepowder, six ounces; olibanum, in impalpable powder, six ounces; storax, inimpalpable powder, six ounces; saltpetre, in impalpable powder, fourounces; Powder à la rose, impalpable powder, eight ounces;charcoal, impalpable powder, two pounds; essence of roses, half anounce. Mix together the powders, and add to them a quart of rose waterin which has been dissolved an ounce of gum tragacanth. Rub up well in amortar, and of this paste form the pastilles. They are burned upon ahandsome chafing-dish or perfume-pan made for the purpose. Fumigating Paper. --There are two modes ofpreparing this article:--1.Take sheets of light cartridge paper, and dipthem into a solution of alum--say, alum, one ounce; water,one pint. After they are thoroughly moistened, let them be well dried; upon oneside of this paper spread a mixture of equal parts of gum benzoin,olibanum, and either balm of Tolu or Peruvian balsam; or the benzoin maybe used alone. To spread the gum, &c., it is necessary that they be meltedin an earthenware vessel, and poured thinly over the paper, finallysmoothing the surface with a hot spatula. When required for use, slips of thispaper are held over a candle or lamp, in order to evaporate the odorousmatter, but not to ignite it. The alum in the paper prevents itto a certain extent from burning. 2. Sheets of good light paper are to be steeped in a solution ofsaltpetre, in the proportions of two ounces of the salt to onepint of water, to be afterwards thoroughly dried. Any of the odoriferous gums, as myrrh, olibanum, benzoin, &c.,are to be dissolved to saturation in rectified spirit, and with a brushspread upon one side of the paper, which, being hung up, rapidlydries. Slips of this paper are to be rolled up as spills, to be ignited, and then to be blown out. The nitre in the paper causes a continuance of slow combustion,diffusing during that time the agreeable perfume of the odoriferous gums. Iftwo of these sheets of paper be pressed together before the surface isdry, they will join and become as one. When cut into slips, they form what arecalled Odoriferous Lighters, or Perfumed Spills. FRAGRANT PASTILLES FORNECKLACES OR BRACELETS. Pâte de Roses. --Rose leaves, two ounces;lampblack, one and a half drachms; isinglass, one ounce; gum tragacanth,half ounce. Dissolve the gum and isinglass in boiling water, thicken thesolution by evaporation, and add thereto the other articles previously mixedtogether. When the paste is homogeneous, knead it well in mass, anddivide into small beads. It can also be moulded into a variety of forms anddesigns, in relief, resembling cameos and similar ornaments. Pâte de Menthe ou de Jasmin. --Flowers ofmint or jasmine, one ounce; gum tragacanth, half ounce; vermillion,two ounces. In this way red-colored pastilles are made. Pastilles for Bad Breath. --Chocolate, threeounces; charcoal, one ounce; sugar, one ounce; vanilla,one ounce; mucilage, quantum sufficit. Make into lozenges of five grains,and take four or five daily. Preparation for Bad Breath. --Dry chloride oflime, three drachms; distilled water, two ounces. Powder the chloride of lime in a glass mortar, and then add a part ofthe distilled water; stir up and let it repose for some minutes; whensettled, decant the clear liquor. Add a new quantity of water to theresidue, triturate, and after sufficient rest, again draw off the clear liquor.Repeat this washing and decanting a third time; add all the clear solutionstogether, and filter. To the liquid running through, add two ouncesalcohol, in which four drops oil of rose and four drops of anyother desired oil are dissolved. The solution, thus prepared, removes the fetid odor of diseased gums. Thedose is half a table-spoonful in a tumbler of water, with which the gumsare moistened daily by means of a sponge or brush. Keep the bottle always closely stoppered to retard decomposition. Instantaneous Hair-dye. --This consists of twomixtures in separate bottles; one is a solution of one part of nitrate ofsilver in eight parts of water, and the other a weak solution ofhydrosulphuret of ammonia. Its influence is effected by moistening thehair, first with the silver solution, and immediately afterwards with theother. The color of the hair changes immediately into a black. Delacroix's Hair-dye.--Acetate of lead, two ounces; preparedchalk, three ounces; quicklime, four ounces. Use as above. Litharge Hair Dye. --Powdered litharge, two pounds;quicklime, half a pound; calcined magnesia, half a pound. Slake thelime, using as little water as possible to make it disintegrate,then mix the whole by a sieve. Another Way. --Slaked lime, three pounds;white lead in powder, two pounds; litharge, one pound. Mix by sifting,bottle, and well cork. Directions. --Mix the powder with enough waterto form a thick creamy fluid; with the aid of a small brush, completely coverthe hair to be dyed with this mixture; to dye a light brown, allow it to remainon the hair four hours; dark brown, eight hours; black, twelve hours. As thedye does not act unless it is moist; it is necessary to keep it so by wearing an oiled silk, india-rubber, or otherwaterproof cap. After the hair is dyed, the refuse must be thoroughly washed from thehead with plain water; when dry the hair must be oiled. Lead Dye. --Liquid hair dye, not to blackenthe skin, may be thus prepared:--Dissolve in one ounce of liquor potassaas much freshly precipitated oxide of lead as it will take up, anddilute the resulting clear solution with three ounces of distilledwater. Care must be taken not to wet the skin unnecessarily withit. Quick Depilatory or Rusma, (for removing hair.) --As.the ladies of this country consider the growth of hair upon the upper lips,upon the arms, and on the back of the neck, to be detrimental to beauty,those who are troubled with such physical indications of good health and vitalstamina have long had recourse to rusma or depilatory for removing it. This or analogous preparations were introduced into this country from theEast, rusma having been in use in the harems of Asia for many ages. Threepounds best lime, slaked; half a pound of orpiment in powder. Chinese Depilatory. --Quicklime, one pound;pearlash and sulphuret of potassium, each, two ounces. Trituratetogether, sieve, and preserve the fine powder in a well-stoppedbottle. Crême Parisienne Depilatoire. --Take quicklime,two ounces; orpiment (sulphuret of arsenic), half an ounce; alka-net in powder,two drachms. Mix together and pack up in bottles or boxes, bearing directions as follows,and to be strictly conformed to in the application of the powder: Put some pinches into a saucer or egg-glass, and pour upon it enoughwarm water to thin it into a pasty or pap consistence, and apply it inthis form to the places to be depilated. Let it remain five to eight minutes,then moisten with a little warm water, and gently remove the dampenedstuff with the point of a knife. Afterwards sponge the part with warmwater and dry without rubbing. It is necessary that there should always be an interval of twenty-four hoursbetween any two applications of this powder. Eau de Javelle (rectified.) --This water isused both as a disinfectant, and for the removal of fruit, rust, and inkstains. It is prepared by saturating an aqueous solution of potash withchlorine gas. A few drops, washing the linen afterwards with soap, willbleach it perfectly. Ink for Marking Linen. --Sulphate of manganese, onedrachm; distilled water, one drachm; powdered sugar, two drachms;lampblack, half a drachm. Make into a semi-liquid paste. This paste is used with astamp. The mark is dried, then washed in solution of caustic potash anddried anew; then again washed in water. The name now stands outboldly. Shaving Pastes. --White wax, spermaceti, andalmond oil, of each, quarter of an ounce; melt, and while warm, beat intwo squares of Windsor soap, previously reduced to a paste, withrose water. Another. --Melt together half an ounce each ofspermaceti, white wax, and oil of almonds; beat it up with threeounces of the best soap, and a sufficient quantity of eau deCologne. Preparation of Good Hair Dye. --Ten grains gallic acid in one ounceweak alcohol. For the Dye. --Four grains nitrate of silver in oneounce of water with half a drachm of aqua ammonia. Add the ammonia cautiously till the precipitate dissolves. THE FAMILY MEDICAL GUIDE. No directions here given are intended to supply the place of medicalattendance. A little medical knowledge is a dangerous thing, and thistemporizing with the constitution is often attended with the worst results. Itwould, therefore, be an act of folly and danger for the non-professional topresume to decide on the ailment, and equally so to prescribe for it. At thesame time, it is well to gain all the information possible. The following recipes have been submitted to a physician:-- For Hooping Cough.-- -Dissolve one scruple ofsalt of tartar in a gill of soft water; add to it ten grains ofcochineal, finely powdered, and sweeten it with lump sugar. Thedose for an infant is a teaspoonful four times a day; from five years oldupwards, a table-spoonful may be taken. The following embrocation for spasmodiccoughs of all kinds, as well as for inflammatory croup, is valuable: Twodrachms of tincture of opium, two ounces of camphor liniment. Ateaspoonful to be rubbed in over the throat and chest every night and morning,and cover the parts immediately with flannel. If the chest is loaded withphlegm, a gentle emetic must be given once, twice, or three times a week, asrequired. Ipecacuanha wine is most suitable, and the dose for a child offour or five years is two and a half or three drachms. During the first stages of this disorder the patient should breathe an equaltemperature, as nearly as it can be managed, not too warm and close, but equal;and when the virulence of the disorder has passed away, the open air (if the weather bemild) may be frequently resorted to: and a change of air, where it ispracticable, will often remove at once all remains of the complaint. The diet is of paramount importance, and for children of even six and sevenyears of age, ought to be little more than milk and broth. Shouldthe milk be found to curdle on the stomach, a little common saltmust be added. If thirst prevails, a little toast and water maybe given. If the attack, from its length and severity, should cause a loss ofstrength, it will soon be recruited by a cold infusion of bark, gentleexercise, pure air, and diet of nourishing broth. Mixture for Hooping Cough. --Ipecacuanha wine,two drachms; carbonate of soda, half a drachm; paregoric elixir,two drachms; water, one ounce. A teaspoonful or two (according to theage of the patient) may be given three times a day. Scarlet Fever, or Scarlatina. --This disease beginswith the common symptoms of fever, often with languor and disposition tofainting, shiverings, sickness, a quick pulse, and pain in the head;there is frequently, very early in the disorder, a stiffness of the muscles ofthe neck, which is soon followed by somedifficulty in swallowing. To determine the eruption to the surface of the body, it will be right togive the simple saline, made as follows: Take of citric acid one drachmand a half; bi carbonate of potash, two drachms; water, sevenounces and a half; simple syrup, half an ounce; spirits of nitre,two drachms. Mix, and take a sixth part every four hours. If the child is veryyoung, give half the dose. Throughout the whole of this disease it will be advisable to make frequentuse of some detergent (cleansing) gargle, which in young children must bethrown into the throat with a syringe. Detergent Gargle. --Take of purified alum onedrachm; barley water, half a pint; honey of roses, one ounce. Draught for Palpitation of the Heart, with greatnervous Irritability. --Tincture of foxglove, ten drops;camphor mixture, one ounce; tincture of columba, one drachm. Thisdraught may be taken twice a day. Mixture for Children Teething, when the Bowels aredisordered. --Chalk mix-ture, fifteen drachms; tincture ofcinnamon, one drachm. Mix together. Two teaspoonfuls to be given three orfour times a day as required. Primrose Ointment, for Burns and Ulcers. --Bruise onepound of the leaves of this well known plant, in a mortar, along with half apound of the flowers; simmer these in an equal quantity of hog's-lard,without salt, until the prim-roses become crisp; after which theoint-ment, whilst fluid, must be strained through a coarse sieve. This is anexcellent application for obstinate ulcers or burns. Excellent Medicine for Indigestion. --Carbonate ofmagnesia, one ounce; carbonate of soda, one ounce; powderedginger, one drachm; best Turkey rhubarb, half a drachm. Wellmixed in a mortar, to be kept in a bottle with a glass stopper. The dose for anadult is half a teaspoonful. For Inflammation of the Eyes. --Brandy, oneteaspoonful; white wine vinegar, one teaspoonful; soft water,nine tea-spoonfuls. Mix--and to be used frequently. Cure for Ringworm. --The head to be washedtwice a day with soft soap and warm soft water; when dried, theplaces to be rubbed with a piece of linen rag dipped in ammoniafrom gas tar; the patient should take a little sulphur andmolasses, or some other gentle aperient, every morning; brushes andcombs should be washed every day, and the ammonia kept tightlycorked. Or: --Mix pyroligneous acid with one-third ofwater; rub the spots carefully for three mornings: if cured, a scurfwill appear, which must be softened with cold cream, or lardwithout salt, but no soap or water must be used. It is desirable to cut off the hair from the immediate neighborhood of thering; and after the cure is effected, weaken the lotion still farther, by theaddition of more water, and well wash the head all over with it.It seldom happens that an internal use of medicine is requisite; but where thedisease is very inveterate, I would recommend a powder to be given at bed-time,once or twice. The following will answer very well for a child of seven yearsof age: calomel, one grain; jalap, powder, eight grains. The great Abernethy used to say poultices were blessings or curses, as theyI were made; I cannot, therefore, insert a more useful recipe than that of thiscelebrated surgeon's for a well made Bread and Water Poultice. --Scaldout a basin, for you can never make a goodpoultice unless you have perfectly boiling water; then having put someinto the basin, throw in coarsely-crumbled bread, and cover it with aplate. When the bread has soaked up as much of the water as itwill imbibe, drain off the remaining water, and there will be left alight pulp. Spread it a third of an inch thick on folded linen, andapply it when of the temperature of a warm bath. It may be said that thispoultice will be very inconvenient, if there be no lard in it, for itwill soon get dry; but this is the very thing you want, and it can easily bemoistened by dropping warm water on it, whilst a greasy poultice will bemoist, but not wet. A poultice thus made is, to the surgeon, what well made stock is tothe cooks, a foundation to be seasoned or medicined with laudanum, orpoppy-water, with carrot or horse-radish juice, or withdecoctions of herbs, with which the patient or the doctor may beinclined to medicate it. When vegetables are used to medicate poultices, they should be bruised, putinto a pot, covered with water, and simmered for about half an hour. Theliquid is then to be strained off, and mixed with bread-and-wateror linseed to the consistence of a poultice. Spirit Wash. --Half a gill of spirits ofwine, or a gill of brandy, added to a pint of water, makesthis wash useful in allaying the pain of extensive bruises. Intermittent Fever or Ague. --The title ofIntermittent is applied to that kind of fever which consists of a succession ofparoxysms, between each of which there is a distinct and perfect intermissionfrom fever symptoms. When it comes on within the space of twenty-four hours, itis called a quotidian; when it returns every other day, it is called a tertian;and when it attends on the first and fourth day, it is named a quartan ague. Itis very generally acknowledged, that marsh exhalations, or the effluvia arisingfrom stagnant water, when acted upon by heat, are the most frequentexciting causes of ague. Quinine, or a preparation of arsenic, administeredunder the prescription of a physician, will usually break the succession ofchills or of paroxysms. Erysipelas. --This disease is an inflammatoryaffection principally of the skin, when it makes its appearanceexternally. If there is fever and inflammation, it will be proper to administeraperient medicines, and nothing, perhaps, suits your purpose better than theold-fashioned black-draught--senna and salts. The external applicationof Goulard's Lotion will allay heat and irritation. The patient must drinkfreely of tea, bran tea, or warm barley water, and this isa necessary part of the treatment, which must never be neglected. The vesiclesmust be kept lightly covered with pure, unadulterated wheat flour; whenthe inflammatory symptoms run high, the diet must consist of light nourishingfood, such as sago, arrowroot, bread pudding, and suchlike things; but in those cases where symptoms of irritation prevail, a moregenerous diet, such as animal broths, ought to be allowed. There is another species of erysipelatous inflammation, which usuallyattacks the trunk of the body, and is vulgarly known as "Shingles." It consistsof a number of blisters extending round the waist. Little or no danger everattends this species of erysipelas; but much pain is felt darting through thebody, and these pains will continue to annoy the patient at times for someweeks after the eruption has disappeared. Draught to be taken on the approach of the warm stage in ague andintermittent fevers, for an adult:--Tincture of opium, fifteen drops; syrup of poppies, twodrachms; spirit of cinnamon, one drachm; water, one ounce. Plummer's Pill, for Eruptions on theSkin. --Calomel and antimony, of each, one drachm; guaiacumpowder, two drachms. Useful Mixture for Diarrhoea in Infants. --Carbonateof magnesia, half a drachm; rhubarb, in powder, twenty grains;dill water, three ounces; aromatic spirit of ammonia, thirtydrops; sugar, teaspoonful. Mix: Two teaspoonfuls may be given two orthree times a day. Goulard Lotion, or Lead Wash, may be made bydissolving one drachm of sugar of lead in a pint of soft water.Some persons are very fond of using this wash, with the addition of spiritsof wine, as an evaporate, but I do not like it, for it renders theskin very dry and harsh, and its sedative virtue acting through unbrokenskin, is not of much value. Under other circumstance it is very oftenuseful. When used as a wash for the eyes, two grains of the sugar of lead areto be dissolved in two table-spoonfuls of water. Bran Tea. --A very cheap and useful drink incolds, fevers, and restlessness from pain. Put a handful of bran in a pint anda half of cold water, let it boil rather more than half an hour, thenstrain it, and, if desired, flavor with sugar and lemon-juice;but it is a pleasant drink without any addition. Electuary for Scorbutic Eruptions. --Peruvianbark, powdered, half an ounce; aromatic confection, half an ounce; syrupof oranges, sufficient quantity to mix the bark and confection; and takethe size of a nutmeg, three times a day, in a glass of seidlitz orsoda water. Draught for Hysteric Patients. --Camphormixture, one ounce; foetid spirit oi ammonia, two drachms. Fever Draught. --Almond mixture, one ounce;carbonate of potass, twenty grains; syrup of poppies, one drachm. Pourinto this a table-spoonful of lemon juice, and drink whileeffervescing. Ointments. --The base of all ointments isgrease, and they are used for dressing wounds and sores, to prevent thesticking of the lint or linen with which they are covered, and protect themfrom the air; the most simple kinds serve this purpose best; but sometimesmedicine of various kinds is mixed up with grease, to form ointments,through the means of which the medicine acts on the surface of the sore. Simple Ointment is made by melting in a pipkin bythe side of the fire, without boiling, one part of yellow or white wax,and two parts of hog's lard, without salt or oliveoil. Resin Ointment or Yellow Basilicon iscomposed of two ounces of yellow wax, five ounces of white resin, andseven ounces of hog's-lard; these must be slowly melted together, andstirred constantly with a stick, till completely mixed. This ointment is sometimes used in treating scalds and burns; also fordressing blisters, when it is wished to keep up a discharge from them for a fewdays. This is a stimulating ointment. Galamine Ointment, or Turners Cerate, consists ofhalf a pound of yellow wax, aand a pint of olive oil, which are to bemelted together; this being done, half a pound of calamine powder is to besifted in, and stirred till the whole be completely mixed. This is an excellent ointment for stimulating sluggish wounds or sores. Development of the Lungs. --Multitudes, andespecially ladies in easy circumstances, contract a vicious and destructivemode of breathing, not carrying the breath half way down the chest, and scarcely expanding the lower portions of the chestat all. Children that move about a great deal in the open air, and are in noway laced, breathe deep and full in the bottom of the chest, and every part ofit. The lungs give us the power of action, and the more exercise wetake, especially out of doors, the larger the lungs become, and the lessliable to disease. In all occupations that require standing, keep the personstraight. If at table, let it be high, raised up nearly to the armpits, so asnot to require you to stoop; you will find the employment much easier; whilethe form of the chest and symmetry of the figure will remain perfect. The Nettle Rash. --This disease takes its name fromits being attended by an eruption similar to what is produced by the stingingof nettles. In some cases it is accompanied with large wheals or bumps, whichappear of a solid nature, without any cavity or head, containing eitherwater or other fluid. Nothing is so efficacious in this disorder as halfa teaspoonful of magnesia, and the same quantity of cream oftartar, mixed in half a teacupful of milk, an hour before breakfast,and repeated as required. Sprain. --To treat a sprain properly, it should bekept perfectly at rest; and, if it be of the ankle or knee, the patient mustlie in bed, or on a sofa. Warm, moist flannels should be repeatedly applied forsome hours, and a bread-and-water poultice on going to bed. Theseshould be continued for some days, and no attempt made to use the joint. If thepain be very severe, and it continues so for the first or following days,leeches may be applied, and repeated if necessary. Some persons are fond ofputting on a vinegar poultice at once; but this is better left alonetill the tenderness has subsided, and there remains only a little pain andstiffness in the joint. Then a vinegar poultice is a very goodapplication, as it produces a diversion of the inflammation going on in theligaments, by bringing out a crop of pimples on the skin, at a time whenthe pressure of rubbing in any stimulating lotion cannot be borne. When the pain has entirely ceased, the joint must not be carelessly used;and, if it be the knee or ankle sprained, walking till the joints become weakand ache must be most carefully avoided, as irreparable mischief is therebyvery often caused. A joint often swells a long time after a sprain; under which circumstancesit is best to bind it up with straps of soap-plaster or a roller. Excellent Medicine for Rheumatism. --Powdered gumguaiacum, eight grains; flour of sulphur, two drachms; powderedrhubarb, fifteen grains; cream of tartar, one drachm; powderedginger, thirty grains; powdered nutmeg, eight grains. To be made into an electuary, with two ounces of clarified honey; ateaspoonful to be taken night and morning. For Sprains and Bruises, especially where the partsare discolored with blood underneath the skin, and for rheumaticswelling of the joints:--Vinegar, one pint; distilled water, halfa pint, rectified spirits, one and a half pints; camphor, twoounces. Mix the vinegar and water, dissolve the camphor in thespirit of wine, and then put them all together. For sprains, bruises, and other injuries, when the skin is notbroken, carbonate of ammonia, two ounces; vinegar, two pints;proof spirit, three pints. Mix the ammonia with the vinegar; when the effervescenceceases, add the spirit. In inflammation of the joints of some standing,this is mixed with linseed meal, and applied as a poultice, twice a-day. Aperient Electuary. --A. very useful family medicine, particularly good for those who aretroubled with asthma or rheumatism. One ounce of senna powder, half anounce of flour of sulphur, two drachms of powdered ginger, half adrachm of saffron powder, four ounces of honey. The size of anutmeg to be taken night and morning. For Heartburn. --Carbonate of magnesia, tengrains; carbonate of soda, five grains; ginger in powder, fivegrains; liquorice in powder, fifteen grains. Take as a powder two orthree times during the day. Zinc Ointment is made by rubbing well together oneounce of oxide of zinc, and six ounces of hog's lard. This ointment isuseful for chilblains; it is also commonly used for dressing the soresremaining after scalds and burns, to absorb the great discharge which generallyfollows; and it is a very good application to cracked skin, from which awatery fluid oozes and irritates the neighboring skin. Leeches. --Leeches should be kept in a cool place, ina stone or glass jar, filled with soft water, and tied over with coarsemuslin to prevent their escape, though it allows them air. The watershould be changed only when it begins to get foul, as too frequent disturbingdestroys them. The part on which they are to be applied should be carefullywiped with a cool moist cloth, so as to leave it damp. If they do not takereadily, the part may be moistened with a little sugar and water,or milk. But if this does not answer, the skin may be gentlyscratched with a needle-point, till the blood comes, and then they will take.If it be wished to put the leeches as near as possible on one spot, the bestplan is to put them all in the deep part of a pill-box, or in a smallwine-glass, which is to be turned down on the part. If you wish them tospread over a large surface, as upon one of the limbs or the stomach, they mustbe put on singly and by hand, which is often very tedious and tiresome work.They should then be held tightly by the tail, wrapped in a piece of wet rag, sothat they may be less inconvenienced by the heat of the hand; and if the leechdo not soon fix, it is best to put it again into the water to coolitself, and after applying others, to try it again. It is always best to havemore leeches than the number directed, in case some will not bite. When the proper number have been applied, they should be left quite alone,or they are apt to unfix, and, wandering about, arc of no further use. Whenthey have sucked their fill, they generally drop off, and should then be put ina plate with a little salt, which quickly makes them throwup the blood; and, as soon as they have emptied themselves, they should be putinto plenty of fresh cold water, so that they may get free from thesalt, for if left in it, or if too much be put on them, they contract violently,and die almost immediately. After the leeches have come off, the bleeding from the wounds is to beencouraged, by first quickly sponging off whatever clotted blood there may be,and then covering the part with a warm bread-and-water poultice,which must be changed every half hour, so long as it may be thought necessaryto keep up the bleeding. This is much better than leaving the surface exposed,and mopping with a warm sponge, which is very fatiguing to the patient, besidesexposing him to the danger of taking cold. If a leech-bite continue bleeding for some hours, and the person, moreespecially if an infant, begins to be very faint, and the countenance and lipspallid and cold, like marble, no time must be lost in stopping thebleeding. This is done by pressure with the finger; but, if that fail, by applyingcaustic, or by running a moderate-sized darning needle into theskin on one side of the bite, and bringingits point well out on the other side. The whole wound is thus lifted up, and apiece of silk or strong thread, is then to be wound round and round the bite,under the two ends of the needle. This will raise it up like a small spot, andgenerally stops the bleeding very effectually. In four days cut the silk anddraw out the needle carefully, and there the matter usually ends. But in apeculiar state of constitution, sometimes even after the removal of the needleand thread, the bleeding will continue. Nothing then remains, but to touch thebottom of the wound with a bit of thin iron wire heated white-hot, whichnever fails to stop the bleeding. Though this may seem a very horribleproceeding, it is not very painful if the iron be white-hot, as itdestroys sensation in an instant; but whether it give pain or not is a matterof no consequence, as it is the only sure mode of saving the patient. Pimples. --A weak solution of sugar of lead orsulphate of zinc may be used as a wash; if not effective, try--camphoratedspirit, two drachms, corrosive sublimate of mercury, one grain, rosewater or almond water half a pint, to be applied night and morning.When there is great irritability of the skin, a decoction of the woodynightshade may be used instead of the rose or almond-water. If pimplesarise from the condition of the blood, then cooling purgatives must be taken. APlummer's pill at night, and a teaspoonful of decoction of Sarsaparillatwice a day with salts and senna once a week, are excellentmedicines. For Chicken-Pox. --Let the patient partakefreely of water or cooling drinks, as thirst is always an attendant onthe disease, and gentle laxatives should be occasionally given,--a teaspoonfulof lenitive electuary with a little milk of sulphur in it, is all thatis generally required; but should febrile symptoms run high, it may beadvisable to take two or three saline draughts during the day. The following isa recipe for an excellent saline, to be drunk while effervescing. Twenty grainsof carbonate of soda dissolved in a tumbler containing twotable-spoonfuls of water; add two teaspoonfuls of lump-sugarrolled; then put a dessert-spoonful of lemon-juice into awine-glass (or fifteen grains of citric acid dissolved in onetable-spoonful of water.) Pour it into the tumbler and drink it whilethe effervescence is taking place. Group. --The cause of this disease is a morbidsecretion of thick mucus in the trachea (windpipe), adhering so firmly to itssides as to impede respiration. A warm bath should immediately be administered, and an emetic given as soonas possible; say, ten drops of antimonial wine for a child of threeyears of age, and repeated every quarter of an hour, until effectual, andaccording to the age and strength of the patient: a blister should be appliedacross the throat, the sufferer being made to inhale the vapor of warmwater with vinegar in it, and kept nearly upright in bed. A doctorshould be procured as soon as possible. Children liable to this disease should be warmly clad, wearing flannel nextthe skin, and an emetic given upon the earliest appearance of theattack. Elder-flower Ointment is the mildest,blandest, and most cooling ointment, as the old women term it, which can beused, and is very suitable for anointing the face or neck, whensun-burnt. It is made of fresh Elder-flowers stripped from the stalks,two pounds of which are simmered in an equal quantity of hog's lard tillthey become crisp, after which the ointment, whilst fluid, is strained througha coarse sieve. Chilblains. --The mode of prevention of chilblainswill be at once perceived, viz.:--To protect the parts most liable to theattack (hands and feet) from sudden alternations, either from cold toheat, or from heat to cold. To keep the constitution in such a healthy state,as to make all parts possess such vitality as to be able to resist slightalternations in temperature. Woollen stockings or socks, and warm boots and shoes, should be worn in thestreet. Warm leather gloves are better for the hands than woollen ones, throughwhich the dry frosty air is apt to pierce and chap the hands. Tight wristbands,tight garters, and boots that lace or button tightly about the ankles, must beavoided. The most frequent cause of chilblain is the warming ofnumbed hands or feet at the fire. A good constitutional remedy issmall doses of tartrate of antimony wine, which constringe the enlargedvessels. A drachm of the wine may be added to half a pint ofwater, in which a drachm of saltpetre has been dissolved. Dose:for an adult one or two table-spoonfuls every four hours; for a child, one ortwo teaspoonfuls three times a day. It should not be given in such doses as toproduce vomiting. The head, neck, and chest, should be washed in cold water every morning, and brisk exercisetaken at regular hours. Wash the hands in cold water every three hours, and lather well withWindsor soap. When the hands are nearly dried with the towel, pour alittle eau-de-Cologne, or milk of roses, into the palm of one hand, andrub it over the whole of both. A leech is a useful remedy to unload the overcharged blood-vessels; or thepart may be pricked with a needle, or punctured with a lancet; in such cases asoft bread-and-water poultice should be kept on during the night,applied warm, so as to encourage the flow of blood. Household Remedies for Chilblains. -- The followingare among the most approved of the domestic remedies, or palliatives:-- Take half an ounce of white wax, ox marrow one ounce, hog'slard two ounces; melt these ingredients slowly over a fire in a pipkin, andmix them well together; then strain through a linen cloth. Before going to bed,spread the ointment upon the parts affected, feet or hands, taking careto wrap them well up. The application should be made as soon as the firstattacks are felt. Lemon juice rubbed on the inflamed parts is said to stop the itching.A sliced onion dipped in salt has the same effect, but makes thefeet tender. Strong white mustard, pounded and mixed with water to theconsistence of thick cream, rubbed on every night, letting it dry on thechilblain, and washing it off in the morning with rain water. Encourage children to use the skipping rope regularly during cold weather. This isa capital prevention, together with regularly washing and rubbing thefeet. Aperient for Children. --Gingerbread made withoatmeal instead of flour is a very useful aperient forchildren. Spring Aperients; for children, nothing is betterthan:--1. Brimstone and molasses; to each teacupful of this, whenmixed, add a teaspoonful of cream of tartar. As this sometimes producessickness, the following may be used:--2. Take of tartrate of soda onedrachm and a half, powdered jalap and powdered rhubarb eachfifteen grains, ginger two grains. Mix. Dose for a child above fiveyears, one small teaspoonful; above ten years, a large teaspoonful; above fifteen, two; and for aperson above twenty, three teaspoonfuls, or the whole. Aperient Pills. --To some adults all liquid medicinesproduce such nausea that pills are the only form in which laxative medicines can be exhibited; the following is ausual formula:--Take of compound rhubarb pill, a drachm and one scruple;of powdered ipecacuanha, six grains, and of extract of hyoscyamus onescruple. Mix and beat into a mass, and divide into twenty-four pills. Take one,or two, or if of a very costive habit, three at bed-time. Infants' Aperient. --Take of rhubarb fivegrains, magnesia three grains, white sugar a scruple, manna fivegrains; mix. Dose, varying from a piece half the size of a sweet-pea toa piece the size of an ordinary pea. For Weak Eyes. --Two grains acetate of zinc, in twoounces of rosewater; filter the liquor carefully, and wash the eyesnight and morning. A Simple Vapor Bath. --It is not generally known thatthe settlers in the remote parts of the West make use of the following simplemode of procuring a vapor bath: The patient is enveloped in blankets, which areclosely fastened about the neck, leaving the head exposed. Thepatient sits on a chair; under the chair is placed a basin or deep dish, withhalf a pint of alcohol, whiskey or gin which is ignited.The blankets lap over each other, enveloping the whole, and are closed to thefloor by other blankets, &c., as much as possible. In a very few minutesthe patient is in a profuse perspiration; he is then immediately put to bedbetween warm blankets. Ear Ache. --Sometimes ear-ache isconnected with chronic ulceration in the internal and external part of theear, when injections of warm water and soap are advisable.In this case there is sometimes a constant foetid discharge, for which thefollowing mixture has been recommended:--Take of ox-gall, three drachms;balsam of Peru, one drachm. Mix. A drop or two put into the ear with alittle cotton. Pains after Exertion. --It is not generally known topedestrians that the pains in the knees and legs, which usually followafter a long excursion, and which continue with some persons for two or threedays after, may be prevented or considerably lessened, by bathing the partsaffected in cold spring water, immediately before going to bed. Careshould be taken if the feet be dipped in the water, to afterwardsdry them thoroughly with a rough towel. For a Cough. --Quarter of a pound of linseed; quarterof a pound of raisins; two ounces of stick liquorice; two quartsof soft water, to be boiled until reduced to half the quantity. Whenstrained, add a quarter of a pound of brown candy, pounded; one table-spoonfulof good old rum, one table-spoonful of lemon juice, orvinegar. A cupful to be taken on going to bed, and more frequently ifrequired. To be warmed. Nipple Liniment, by Dr. Sigerbundi. -- Aqueousextract of opium, one grain; Fresh lime water, three drachms;oil sweet almonds, fresh and cold pressed, three drachms. Mix the whole, and preserve in a covered pot. The label should directthe application of this liniment by means or very fine lint, and that thenipples be covered with a piece of skin spread with wax, a hole beingleft open in the centre to permit the free passage of the milk. Pomade (for healing slight tumors.) -- Whitepitch, pure, one pound; resin, one pound; yellow wax, one pound; gumammoniac, twelve ounces; oil of hemlock, four ounces. Spread upon sheepskin, and apply the plaster to the sore. Pomade Souveraine, by Laforet (for the Cure ofCorns.) --Take one ounce black {Illegible}itch, half an ounce galbanum, and one scruple of salammoniac, dissolved in vinegar; add one and a half drachmdia{Illegible}hylon. Take only sufficient to cover the corn, and spreadit upon a piece of {Illegible}heepskin. After some days remove the{Illegible}laster, and the corn comes with it. CéraFortifant (for the Nails.) --Oil of{Illegible}entise, half an ounce; salt, half a drachm; {Illegible}esin,one scruple; alum, one scruple; {Illegible}rax, one scruple. English Court-Plaster. --Stretch upon {Illegible}frame a piece of thin black silk, and with a camel's-hair brush pass over itthree or more coats of isinglass, dissolved in boiling water. Togive the silk an {Illegible}greeable odor, when applying the last{Illegible}oat mix in a little compound tincture of{Illegible}enzoin with the isinglass. The color can be varied by taking silk {Illegible}f any desired shade. Theintervals between the application of the coats should be sufficiently long topermit a thorough drying of each. Collodion. --This is a liquid adhesive{Illegible}laster, to be applied with the brush {Illegible}pon sores and cuts.It is made by dissolving gun-cotton in rectified ether, mixed with one-eighthits bulk of strong alcohol. A slight addition of Venice{Illegible}urpentine increases its adhesiveness. Toothache Collodion. --This is the plain{Illegible}ollodion, holding in solution one grain of {Illegible}ulphate ofmorphia to every ounce of {Illegible}quid. It is almost a specific for the{Illegible}oothache, which results from an exposed {Illegible}erve. Blistering Collodion. --The etherial ex{Illegible}actof cantharides, dissolved in collosion, forms a most convenient, active, and{Illegible}learly blistering liquid. If the blister {Illegible} opened at theside, the film of collosion remains unbroken; and, by thus rotecting the sore,obviates the necessity of dressing it with ointment. For Burns. --Apply cotton wooldip{Illegible}ed in oil as soon as possible, and keep it on till thefire is entirely out, which will usually take from two days to a week. For a Cut. --Wash off the blood in cold water,and bind it up with a clean cotton bandage; if it inclines to bleed, put onscraped lint, after bringing the edges of the wound together as closely aspossible, and bind it rather tight. Or use sticking-plaster. When a Nail or Pin has been run into thefoot, instantly bind on a rind of salt pork; if thefoot swell, bathe it in a strong decoction of wormwood, then bindon another rind of pork, and keep quiet till the wound is well. Thelockjaw is often caused by such wounds, if neglected. For a Bruise or Sprain. --Bathe the part in coldwater, till you can get ready a decoction of wormwood. This is oneof the best remedies for sprains and bruises. When the wormwood is freshgathered, pound the leaves and wet them either with water orvinegar, and bind them on the bruise; when the herb is dry, putit into cold water, and let it boil a short time, then bathe the bruiseand bind on the herb. Always keep cotton wool, scraped lint and wormwood onhand. The Ear-ache is usually caused by a sudden cold.Steam the head over hot herbs, bathe the feet, and putinto the ear cotton wool wet with sweet oil andparegoric. Prescription for Camphor Cake. -- Scrape intoan earthen vessel one ounce and a quarter of spermaceti and one ounce and ahalf of white wax; add six drachms of powdered camphor, and fourtable-spoonfuls of best olive oil. Let it stand near the fire untildissolved, stirring it well. Plaster for Pain in Side or Cough to be applied between theshoulders. --One ounce burgundy pitch, one ounce beeswax,one ounce and a half of resin, one ounceof camphor gum dissolved in two teaspoonfuls of brandy over aslow fire. To be kept in tin boxes, and when used spread on kid. The Cure of Intemperate Habits. --A notion prevailsthat a person addicted to alcohol stimulants cannot at once leave themoff without danger of illness, or great and long-continued suffering, This isan error. A cup of tea or coffee will supply the needed tonicwhen a sense of exhaustion is felt, and we have the authority of an eminentphysician for stating that no constitutional injury will be suffered fromimmediate and total abstinence. The uncomfortable feelings will subside inforty-eight hours, and will be entirely over in a fortnight. Any man who has firmresolution can break himself at once of the fatal habit of drinking. MISCELLANEOUS RECEIPTS To take Stains out of Linen. --For acid stains, wetthe part, and lay on it salt of wormwood; then rub it, and hold the partover a lighted match, for the sulphurous gas; or, tie up pearlash in thestained part; scrape soap into cold water, for a lather, and boilthe linen till the stain disappear. Stains of wine or fruit that have been long in the linen maybe removed by rubbing the part on each side with yellow soap, thenlaying on a mixture of thick starch in cold water, rubbing itwell in, and exposing the linen to the sun and air till the stain comes out.The process may be renewed, and, when dry, sprinkle the part with water.Stains may be taken out by dipping the linen in sour buttermilk anddrying in a hot sun. Then wash in cold water and dry it several times aday. A certain way of extracting fruit orwine stains from table linen is to tie up some cream of tartar inthe stained part (so as to form a sort of bag), and then to put the linen intoa lather of soap and cold water, and boil it awhile. Thentransfer it wet to lukewarm suds, wash and rinse it well, and dry andiron it. The stains will disappear during the process. Another way is to mix,in equal quantities, soft soap, slaked lime, and pearlash.Rub the stain with this preparation, and expose the linen to the sun with themixture plastered on it. If necessary, repeat the application. As soon as thestain has disappeared, wash out the linen immediately, as it will be injured ifthe mixture is left in it. Iron moulds may be wet, kid on a hot water plate, and a littlesalt of lemon applied. Wet and renew the process. Be careful not to have theapplication too strong. Oxalic acid will effectually remove the stains. Mildewmay be taken out by mixing soft soap with powdered starch, halfas much salt, and the juice of a lemon; lay it on both sides ofthe part, and leave it on the grass day and night. To prevent flannels fromshrinking or losing their color, put them into a pail the first time ofwashing, and pour boiling water on them, letting them lie till cold. Remove ink spots by soaking the part in milk immediately; then washout in cold water without soap. To destroy Crickets. --Put Scotch snuff upontheir holes. Cockroaches may be banished by red wafers. Paint is destructive toall insects, and so is'lime. Polish for Tables. --One pint of linseed oil,half a pint of turpentine, two ounces of beeswax, sixpence worth ofwhite rosin. Boil the mixture in a saucepan, and put it in a bottle foruse. Varnish for Mahogany. --One pint of linseedoil, a wine glass of spirits of turpentine; simmer it slowlytill near coming to a boil. Take all the stainsout of the mahogany, and clean it perfectly. When dry brush it with a featherdipped in the bottled mixture. Rub it some time with soft linen; then take aclean housecloth and rub off the oil, continue rubbing till the tablewould not soil a cambric handkerchief. Instead of covering your glasses and pictures with muslin, coyer the framesonly with cheap yellow cambric, neatly put on, and as near the color of thegilt as possible. This leaves the glasses open, and is a barrier to dust andflies. When faded, it can be recolored with saffron tea. When mattresses become hard and bunchy, rip them, take out the hair,pull it thoroughly, let it lie a day or two to air, wash the tick, lay in thehair as light and even as possible, and stitch it down as before. The mattresswill be as good as new. Britannia ware should be first rubbed gently with a woollen cloth andsweet oil, then washed in warm suds and rubbed with soft leatherand whiting. Thus treated, it will retain its beauty to the last. To clean Sponges. --When very foul wash them indiluted tartaric acid, rinsing them afterwards in water; it willmake them very soft and white. Be careful to dilute the acid well, as itis very corrosive and therefore should be weak. For outside Paint. --But ten gallons of rawlinseed oil in a kettle over a slow fire, and let it simmer gently. Addfour ounces sugar of lead. Stir up, and when cold, it is fit to use asboiled oil or varnish. Take of yellow ochre fifteen pounds, of white lead ten pounds, ofburnt umber one pound, of Indian red two pounds. this will make abeautiful chocolate color. Add to it half a pound of dry groundlitharge. Stir it up well, and when well stirred add oil according tojudgment--about two gallons. Green tea is good to restore rusty silk. It should be boiled iniron--a cupful to three quarts. The silk should not be wrung, but ironeddamp. Lime sifted through coarse muslin, and stirred pretty thick withwhite of egg, makes a strong cement for glass or china. Plaster ofParis, pulverized, is still better, and should be stirred by the spoonfulas it is wanted. The best way to clean gold is to wash it in warm suds made ofdelicate soap, with ten or fifteen drops sal volatile in it. Thismakes jewelry very brilliant. Rye paste is more adhesive than any other, and is much improved byadding a little pounded alum while it is boiling. Straw matting should be washed in salt and water, and dried with acoarse towel. The salt prevents their turning yellow. Skimmed milk and water, with a bit of glue in it,heated scalding hot, is excellent to restore old, rusty, black Italian crape.If clapped and pulled dry, it will look as well as new. Washleather gloves should be washed in clean tepid suds. If you are troubled to get soft water for washing, fill a tub orbarrel half full of wood ashes, and fill it with water to makelye. A gallon of strong lye put into a great kettle of hard water willmake it soft as rain water. Pearlash or potash is used,but costs something, and is apt to injure the texture of the cloth. In May and June, the little millers that lay moth eggs, begin toappear. Brush your woollens and beat out your furs, and pack them away in adark place covered with linen, pepper, red cedar chips,tobacco, and best of all camphor,or any strong spicy smell, will keep moths out of your chests and drawers. Sewthe things tightly up in linen, leaving no room for the insect to enter. Save phials and bottles; apothecaries and grocers will give something forthem. Woollens should be washed in very hot suds, and not rinsed;lukewarm water shrinks them. Silk should be washed in wateralmost cold; hot water turns it yellow. It may be washed in sudsmade of white soap; but no soap should be put on it. It will notdo to smooth all silk with a hot iron; either rub it dry with a soft cloth, orput it between towels, and press it with weights. To take spots out of Cloth. --Sal ammoniac,one ounce; rectified spirit, two wine-glasses full; aquadistillata, one and a half pints. Apply with a sponge. Recipe for Ink. --Half a pint of good stalebeer, two ounces of galls, half an ounce of copperas, halfan ounce of gum arabic pulverized, a quarter of an ounce of rockalum. This is to be kept in a pitcher close to the fire for a week,frequently stirred with a stick, and slightly covered with a large cork. Theink will never mould nor lose its color or substance. It will bear halfas much beer for future use. If it thickens, thin it withbeer. To take an impression from a Writing. --Add a littlesugar to the ink you write with, then lay a sheet of thin unsizedpaper, damped with a sponge, upon the writing, and pass over it, verylightly, a flat smoothing-iron, moderately heated. To sweeten Casks. --When musty it is best to unheadlarge casks, and whitewash them with quicklime. Or they may be matched withsulphur mixed with a little nitrate of potash, and afterwardswell washed. Small casks may be sweetened by washing them first withsulphuric acid, and then with clean water. To preserve Brass Ornaments. --Beat salammoniac into a fine powder, then moisten it with soft water,rubbing it on the ornaments, which must be heated over charcoal, andrubbed dry with bran and whiting. To color Harness. --The color of harness that hasbecome rusty or brown by wear may be restored to a fine black, after the dirthas been sponged off. Boil logwood chips in three quarts of softwater, to which add three ounces of nut-galls finely powdered, andone ounce of alum; simmer the whole together for half an hour, and itwill be fit for use. A harness blacking is thus made: Melt two ounces ofmutton suet with six ounces of beeswax, then add one ounce ofindigo, finely powdered, six ounces of sugar-candy, dissolved inwater, and two ounces of soft soap; mix, and simmer over thefire, when add a gill of turpentine. Lay it on with a sponge, and thenpolish. To preserve Polished Irons fromRust. --Polished iron-work may be preserved from rust by a mixture ofcopal varnish with as much olive oil as will give it a degree ofgreasiness, adding as much spirit of turpentine as of varnish. Thecast-iron work is best preserved by rubbing it with black-lead. But where rusthas begun to make its appearance on grates or fire-irons, apply tripoli withhalf its quantity of sulphur, intimately mingled on a marble slab, andlaid on with a piece of soft leather: or emery and oil may beapplied with excellent effect. To clean Kid Gloves. --First see that your hands areclean, then put on the gloves and wash them, as though you were washing yourhands, in a basin of spirits of turpentine, until quite clean; then hang them up in a warm place, or where there isa good current of air, which will carry off all the smell of the turpentine.This method was brought from Paris, and thousands of pounds have been made byit. To clean German Silver. --After using, it should beplaced immediately in hot water, washed well, and wiped dry with a softcloth. Once a week let it be washed in soap-suds, and then cleaned withfine whiting, or prepared chalk, mixed with whiskey orspirits of wine, so as to make a paste, which should afterwardsbe brushed off. Should this metal become discolored, or spotted byvinegar or other acids, wash it first, and then clean it with sweetoil and powdered rotten-stone. Blacking. --The best blacking for preserving theleather of boots and shoes, and which will make it perfectly watertight, is thefollowing:--Take of yellow was one ounce and a half, of mutton suet fourounces and a half, horse turpentine half an ounce, ivory black threeounces; melt first the wax, to which add the suet, and afterwards thehorse turpentine; when the whole is melted remove it from the fire; mix ingradually the ivory black, constantly stirring till it is cold. Thiscomposition is sometimes run into moulds, and sold under the name of blackingballs; when it is used it may be laid or rubbed upon a brush which should bewarmed before the fire; it is also the best blacking for every kind of harness;when it is wanted in a large quantity, it may be gently melted in a ladle orpot over a chafing-dish with live coals. To preserve Picture Frames. --Varnish theframes with water in which onions have been boiled. To clean a Carpet. --Beat the carpet free from dust,and lay it down. To two gallons of water put two ox-galls. Rub iton the carpet with a hand scrubbing-brush. To clean Silk. --Pare and slice thin three washedpotatoes. Pour on them half a pint of boiling water, and let it standtill cold. Strain the water, and add an equal quantity ofalcohol. Sponge the silk on the right side, and when half dry, iron iton the wrong side. The lightest colored silk may be cleaned and brightened bythis process; also cloth, velvet, or crape. To iron velvet--lay a damp towelover the bottom of a hot smoothing iron; put on it the wrong side of thevelvet, and pass a whisk brush over the pile till the surface is free fromwrinkles. To renew scorched or browned Linen. -- This is anaccident attributable entirely to the ignorance of the laundress, in notknowing how to regulate the heat of her irons. To remedy this:--Add to a quartof vinegar the juice of half a dozen large onions, aboutan ounce of soap rasped down, a quarter of a pound of fullers' earth,one ounce of lime, and one ounce of pearlash, or any other strongalkali. Boil the whole until it is pretty thick, and lay some of it on thescorched part, suffering it to dry. Repeat this process for one or twowashings. To extract grease spots from Silks, Muslins,&c. --Scrape French chalk, put it on the grease spot,and hold it near the fire, or over a warm iron or water-plate, filledwith boiling water. The grease will melt, and the Frenchchalk absorb it; brush or rub it off; repeat if necessary. Camphene willremove grease also. To clean Marble. --Take two parts of commonsoda, one part of pumice-stone, and one part of finely powderedchalk; sift it through a fine sieve, and mix it with water; then rubit well all over the marble, and the stains will be removed; then wash themarble over with soap and water, and it will be as clean as itwas at first. To take oil and grease out of Boards, Marble,&c. --Make a paste with fullers' earth and hot water; cover the spots therewith, let it dry on, and thenext day scour it off with soft or yellow soap. Or: --Make a paste with soft soap,fullers' earth, and a little pearlash, and use it as above. To clean Buckskin Gloves. --First wash in warmwater and soap, until the dirt is removed; then pull them out intotheir proper shape, or stretch them on wooden hands. Mix a littlepipe-clay, or pipeclay and yellow ochre, according to the colorrequired, with vinegar or beer. Bub this over the outside of thegloves, and let them dry gradually in the shade; or if in the house, not toonear the fire. When about half dry, rub them well, and stretch them on the handor wooden mould; after they are rubbed and dried, brush them with a soft brushto get out the dust. Finally, iron the gloves with a smoothing iron moderatelyheated, taking the precaution to place a cloth or piece of paper overthem, and they will look like new. To make an efficacious and durablePaste. --Good and durable paste may be made withflour in the usual way, but rather thick, with a proportion of brownsugar and a small quantity of corrosive sublimate. A drop or two of theessential oil of lavender, peppermint, anise, orbergamot, is a complete security against moulding. Paste made inthis manner, if kept in a close covered pot, may be preserved in a state fitfor use at all times. To make Blue Ink. --Dissolve a small quantity ofindigo in a little oil of vitriol, and add a sufficient quantityof water, in which is dissolved some gum arabic. To remove Ink-stains from Printed Books,&c. --Procure a little oxalic acid, which dissolve in a smallquantity of warm water, then slightly wet the stain with it, when itwill disappear, leaving the text uninjured. To paint Silver Flowers on Silk. --Paint flowers,leaves, &c., on white silk, with a camel's-hair pencil dipped in asolution of nitrate of silver: immerse this while wet in a jar of sulphuricacid gas, by burning sulphur in a jar of atmospheric air. Thedrawing will have a beautiful silvery appearance. To remove Ink or Fruit Stains from theFingers. --Cream of tartar, half an ounce; powdered salt ofsorrel, half an ounce--mix. This is what is sold for salt oflemons. To clean Tin Covers. --Boil some rottenstone and asmall quantity of prepared whiting in some sweet oil for twohours, till it acquires the consistency of cream. To perfume Linen. --Rose-leaves dried in the shade,or at about four feet from a stove, one pound; cloves,caraway-seeds, and allspice, of each one ounce; pound in amortar, or grind in a mill; dried salt, a quarter of a pound; mix allthese together, and put the compound into little bags. To prevent Colored Things from Running. --Boil aquarter of a pound of soap till nearly dissolved, then add a small pieceof alum and boil with it. Wash the things in this lather, but do notsoap them. If they require a second water, put alum tothat also as well as to the rinsing and blue water. This willpreserve them. To preserve Pencil Marks. --If you haveanything drawn or written with a lead pencil that you wish topreserve from rubbing out, dip the paper into a dish of skimmedmilk. Then dry it, and iron it quickly on the wrong side. To dry Plants for Preservation. --The followingimproved method of drying plants is the result of much experience:--The plantsyou wish to preserve should be gathered when the weather is dry, andafter placing the ends in water, let them remain in a cool place tillthe next day. When about to be submitted to theprocess of drying, place each plant between several sheets ofblotting-paper, and iron it with a large smooth heater pretty stronglywarmed, till all the moisture is dissipated. Colors may thus be fixed, whichotherwise become pale, or nearly white. To wash White Silk Lace or Blonde. -- Take ablack bottle covered with clean linen or muslin, and wind the blonde round it,(securing the ends with a needle or thread,) not leaving the edge outward, butcovering it as you proceed. Set the bottle upright in a strong cold lather ofwhite soap and soft water, and place it in the sun, having gentlyrubbed the suds up and down on the lace. Keep it in the sun every dayfor a week, changing the lather daily, and always rubbing it slightly when yourenew the suds. At the end of the week, take the blonde off the bottle,and (without rinsing) pin it backward and forward on a large pillow. The pinsshould be of the smallest size. When quite dry, take it off, but do notstarch, iron, or press it. Lay it in long loose folds, and put it awayin a pasteboard box. Thread lace may be washed in the same manner. To clean Silver. --Dissolve two teaspoonfuls ofpowdered alum in a quart of moderately strong lye, stir in a gill ofsoft soap, and remove the scum or dross that may rise to the surface.After washing the silver in hot water, take a sponge and cover everyarticle with this mixture. Let the things rest about a quarter of an hour,frequently turning them. Next wash them off in warm soap-suds, and wipethem dry with a soft cloth. Afterwards brighten them with rouge powder, or withwhiting and spirits of wine. Preserving the Color of Dresses. -- The colors ofmerinos, mousseline-delaines, ginghams, chintzes, printed lawns, &c., maybe preserved by using water that is only milk-warm; making alather with white soap, before you put in the dress, instead of rubbing iton the material; and stirring into a first and second tub of water alarge tablespoonful of ox-gall, No colored articles should be allowed toremain long in the water. They must be washed fast, and then rinsedthrough cold waters. Into each rinsing water stir a teaspoonful ofvinegar, which will help to brighten the colors; and after rinsing, hangthem out immediately. If they cannot be conveniently ironed at once, let themhang till they are quite dry; and then damp and fold them on the following day, a quarter of an hour before ironing.We need scarcely say that no colored articles should ever be boiled orscalded. To wash Ribbons, Silk Handkerchiefs, &c. --A goodsatin ribbon may be made to look very well by washing it first in coldwater, to which add a few drops of spirits of wine; then in a latherof white soap, and lukewarm water; afterwards rinse it in coldwater, pull it even, and dry it gradually. When dry, stretch out theribbon, and sponge it with a weak solution of isinglass orrice-water, to restore the stiffness and gloss. To iron the ribbon, layit within a sheet of clean smooth letter paper (the paper beingboth under and over it), and press it with a heated iron moved quickly. If thecolor is lilac, add a little dissolved pearlash to the rinsingwater. If green, a little vinegar. If pink, or blue, a few dropsof oil of vitriol. If yellow, a little tincture of saffron. Othercolors may be set by stirring a teaspoonful of ox-gall into the firstwater. If white, a saltspoonful of cream of tartar mixedwith the soapsuds. Unfigured silk handkerchiefs and scarfs may be washed andironed in the above manner. The proportion of spirits of wine is about atablespoonful to a gallon of water. To clean White or Colored Kid Gloves. --Put the glove on your hand, then take a smallpiece of flannel, dip it in camphene, and well but gently rub it over theglove, taking care not to make it too wet. When the dirt isremoved, dip the flannel (or another piece if that is become dirty) intopipe-clay and rub it over the glove; take it off, and hang it up in aroom to dry, and in a day or two very little smell will remain; and if donecarefully they will be almost as good as new. In colored ones, if yellow, usegamboge after the pipeclay, and for other colors match it in dry paint. Sympathetic Inks. --These are preparations used forwriting on paper, the marks of which are invisible until acted upon bysome agent. They are frequently employed in secret or playful correspondence.By heating the paper until it is nearly scorched, they may be renderedvisible. Sulphate of copper and sal ammoniac equal parts, dissolved inwater or onion juice, writes colorless, but turns yellow whenheated. A weak infusion of galls turns black when moistened with weakcopperas water. The diluted solutions of nitrate of silver and terchloride of gold darkenwhen exposed to the sunlight. Aquafortis, spirits of salts, oil of vitriol, commonsalt, or salpetre, dissolved in a large quantity of water, turnyellow or brown when heated. Solution of nitromuriate of cobalt turns green when heated, and disappearsagain on cooling. Solution of acetate of cobalt, to which a little nitre has been added,becomes rose-colored when heated, and disappears when cooling. To make a common Knife-Board. --Cover with thick buffleather, on which are put emery one part, crocus martis three parts, invery fine powder, mixed into a thick paste, with a little lard orsweet oil, and spread on the leather to the thickness of a shilling. Itgives a far superior edge and polish to knives, and will not wear the knifenear so much as the common method of using brick-dust on a board. Harness-makers' Jet. --Take one drachm ofindigo, a quarter of an ounce of isinglass, half an ounce ofsoap, four ounces of glue, one pennyworth of logwoodraspings, and one quart of vinegar; boil the whole together over a slowfire till reduced to one pint. A small quantity is then to be taken up on aclean sponge, and thinly applied to harness, boots, &c. --taking care thatthey are previously well cleaned. To restore the Color of Mahogany. -- Wash well withsoap and water, and then polish daily with the followingoil:-- Take half an ounce of alkanet root, cut small, and add to a pintof linseed oil; when this has stood for a week, add half an ounce ofpowdered gum arabic, and an ounce of shellac varnish; let these stand ina bottle by the fire for a week, then strain. Rub well in. Cement for the Mouths of Corked Bottles. --Melttogether a quarter of a pound of sealing wax, the same quantity of rosin, acouple of ounces of beeswax. When it froths, stir it with atallow candle. As soon as it melts, dip the mouths of the corked bottlesinto it. This is an excellent thing to exclude the air from such things as areinjured by being exposed to it. To take Impressions of Leaves. --A very beautiful andcheap way of taking impressions of leaves is to take a small quantity ofbichromate of potash, (say a teaspoonful,) which may be had at anydruggist's; dissolve it in a saucer full of water, then pass the piecesof paper on which the impressions are to be taken through the solution,and while wet, press the leaves, &c., lightlyupon it, and expose it to the sun, which should be shining powerfully. Whenperfectly dry, remove the leaves, and a perfect facsimile will remain in alight lemon shade, while the rest of the paper will be of a darkbrown tint. Bichrome, as it is generally term, is in dark yellow crystals,which should be powdered previous to using it. To wash a White Lace Veil. --Put the veil intoa strong lather of white soap, and very clear water, and let itsimmer slowly for a quarter of an hour. Take it out and squeeze but not rub it.Rinse it in two cold waters, with a drop or two of liquid blue in the last.Have ready some very clear and weak gum arabic water, or some thinstarch, or rice-water. Pass the veil through it, and clear it byclapping. Then stretch it out even, and pin it to dry on a linen cloth, makingthe edge as straight as possible, opening out all the scallops, andfastening each with pins. When dry, lay a piece of thin muslin smoothly overit, and iron it on the wrong side. To clean Freestone. --Wash the hearth withsoap, and wipe it with a wet cloth. Or rub it over with a littlefreestone powder, after washing the hearth in hot water. Brushoff the powder when dry. To black a Brick Hearth. --Mix some black leadwith soft soap and a little water, and boil it--then lay it onwith a brush. Or mix the lead with water only. To clean Brass. --Rub it over with a bit of flanneldipped in sweet oil--then rub it hard with finely powderedrotten-stone--then rub it with a soft linen cloth--and polish with a bitof wash leather. Rub creaking hinges with soft soap. Common Tins. --Throw some wood-ashes into awash-kettle, pour on water till it is two-thirds full, and then let itboil. Or make a strong lye. Dip in the tins when it is boiling hot; and, ifthey are very dirty, leave them in about ten minutes. Take them out, and coverthem with a mixture of soft soap and the very finest sand. This must berubbed on with a coarse tow-cloth. Then rinse them in a tub of coldwater, and set them in the sun to drain and dry. When dry, finish byrubbing them well with a clean woollen cloth or flannel. They will look verynice and bright. You may clean pewter in the same manner. To clean Alabaster. --Make a mixture, in theproportion of two ounces of aquafortis to a pint of cold water, whichought to be filtered. Dip a clean brush in this liquid, and wash the alabasterwith it for five minutes or more. There should be a brush small enough to go inthe most minute parts. Then rinse it with cold clear water, and set inthe sun for two or three hours to dry. The aquafortis will make the alabastervery white. Soap should never be used. Cleaning Japanned Waiters, Urns, &c. --Rub onwith a sponge a little white soap and some lukewarm water, andwash the waiter or urn quite clean. Never use hot water, as it willcause the japan to scale off. Having wiped it dry, sprinkle a littleflour over it; let it rest awhile, and then rub it with a soft drycloth, and finish with a silk handkerchief. If there are white heatmarks on the waiters, they will be difficult to remove. But you may try rubbingthem with a flannel dipped in sweet oil, and afterwards in spirits ofwine. Waiters and other articles of papier maché should be washed with a spongeand cold water, without soap, dredged with flour whiledamp; arid after a while wiped off, and then polished with a silkhandkerchief. Cheap Contrivance for Filtering. --A very cheap and good contrivance for filtering is to take alarge garden flowerpot, and lay in the bottom a piece of sponge, so as to coverthe whole. Upon this put a few smooth clean pebbles, to keep the sponge in itsplace, and fill up the pot, to within two or three inches of the brim, with amixture of one part of powdered charcoal to two parts of fine sharpsand. Then cover the top of the pot with a piece of clean white flannel,tied tightly round the rim with a twine, but so as to sink or sway down in thecentre. Set the flower-pot in a pan or tub, and pour the water into theflannel, letting it filter through the charcoal, &c., and, by thetime it has passed through the sponge, and come out at the bottom, it will beclear. Knives and Forks. --Handles of ebony should becleaned with a soft cloth, dipped in a little sweet oil; and afterresting awhile with the oil on them, let them be well wiped with a cleantowel. Ivory or bone handles ought to be washed with a soaped flanneland lukewarm water, and then wiped with a dry towel. To preserveor restore their whiteness, soak them occasionally in alum-water thathas been boiled and then grown cold. Let them lie for an hour in a vessel ofthis alum-water. Then take them out, and brush them well with a smallbrush (a tooth-brush will do), and afterwards take a clean linen towel, dip itin cold water, squeeze it out; and, while wet, wrap it round thehandles, leaving them in it to dry gradually,--as, if dried too fast, out ofthe alum-water, they will be injured. If properly managed, this processwill make them very white. To clean Black Lace Veils. --These are cleansed bypassing them through a warm liquor of bullock's gall and water;after which they must be rinsed in cold water, then cleansed forstiffening and finished as follows: Take a small piece of glue, aboutthe size of a bean, pour boiling water upon it, which willdissolve it, and when dissolved, pass the veil through it, then clap it betweenyour hands. To take out paint from a dress. -- When fresh (havingwiped off as much as you can), it may be taken out by repeated applications ofspirits of turpentine or of spirits of wine, rubbed with a softrag or a flannel. Ether also will efface it, if applied immediately. If thepaint has been allowed to harden, nothing will take it off but spirits ofturpentine, rubbed on with perseverance. Indelible Marking Ink without preparation. --Onedrachm and a half nitrate of silver (lunar caustic), one ounce distilledwater, half an ounce strong mucilage of gum arabic,three-quarters of a drachm of liquid ammonia; mix the above in a cleanglass bottle, cork tightly, and keep in a dark place till dissolved, and everafterwards. Directions for use:-- Shake the bottle, then dip a clean quill penin the ink, and write or draw what you require on the article; immediately holdit close to the fire, or pass a hot iron over it, and it will become a deep andindelible black, indestructible by either time or acids. To take Impressions of Butterflies'Wings. --Clip the wings of the butterfly. Lay them onclean paper, in the form of a butterfly, when flying. Spread some thickclean gum water on another piece of paper, press it on thewings, and it will take them up; lay a piece of white paper overit, and rub it gently with your finger. Then draw the body in the space leftbetween the wings. Clothes Sails. --Take four ounces of fuller's earth,dried so as to crumble into powder, and mix with it half an ounce ofpearlash. Wet it with a sufficiency of lemon-juice to work itinto a stiff paste. Then form it into balls, and dry them in the sun, or on the top of a moderately warm stove.When quite dry put them away for use. They will be found efficacious inremoving grease spots and stains from articles of clothing, firstwetting the spot with cold water, and then rubbing on the ball;afterwards drying the place in the sun or by the fire, and then washing it offwith a sponge and clean water. Fine Home-Made Candles. --Take ten ounces of freshmutton fat or suet, a quarter of a pound of bleached whitewax, a quarter of an ounce of camphor, and two ounces of alum.Cut or break up all these articles, and then melt them together, skimming themwell. Have ready the wicks (which should be previously soaked inlime-water and saltpetre, and then thoroughly dried), fix them inthe moulds, and pour in the melted liquid, proceeding as in making common mouldcandles. Candles made in this manner of the above materials, are hardand durable, and will not run; burning also with a very clear light. Packing Household Articles. --In packing for theremoval of a family to a distant place, let all the boxes and trunks benumbered, and the numbers put down in a book; let some one who overlooks thewhole of the packing, set down every article, denoting the exact box or trunkin which it is placed, and the order in which the things are put in, beginningwith those at the bottom. By this means, after arriving at the place ofdestination, you will know, by consulting your book, where to find whatever youwant; and which of the boxes it will be best to open first. Also, in a long seavoyage, if there is occasion to have a trunk brought from the hold to get outof it any particular article, your book will tell exactly in which of yourtrunks the article is. To wash Vials. --Put into a washkettle some siftedashes, and pour on it cold water. Then put in the vials (withoutcorks), place the kettle over the fire, and let it gradually come to a boil.After it has boiled awhile, take it off, and set it aside; letting the vialsremain in it till cold. Then take them out, rinse, drain them, and wipe theoutsides. You may wash black bottles in the same manner. If you have occasionto wash a single vial or bottle, pour into it through a small funnel eithersome lye, or some lukewarm water in which a little pearlash hasbeen dissolved; shake, let it stand awhile to soak. Then rinse it well incold water, two or three times. If it still smells of the formercontents, soak it in more pearl-ash water (with the addition of a littlelime), or in more lye. Cleaning Kettles and Saucepans. --A receipt forcleaning the inside of kettles or saucepans of the hard, stonysubstance, resulting from continually boiling hard water:--In akettle of boiling water, put about the sixteenth part of an ounce ofsal-ammonia. Let it boil one hour, and then the substance will bedissolved, and is readily disengaged from the metal. To remove Black Stains from the Skin. --Halfan ounce each of cream of tartar and oxalic acid, mixed and poundedtogether, kept in a covered cup in the drawer, and marked "poison." To use it,wet the black stains with the corner of a towel, dipped in water, rubon a little of the mixture. Then immediately wash it off with water, andafterwards with soap and water, and the black stains will bevisible no longer. This mixture will also remove ink, and all other stains fromthe fingers, and from white clothes. It is more speedy in its effects,if applied with warm water. For cleaning Wainscots, and other PaintedWoods. --Four ounces of potash and four ounces of powderedquick-lime are to be mixed together, andboiled for half an hour in three quarts of water; this mixture is tostand until it is cold, and quite clear; the clear liquid is then poured off,and a painter's brush, dipped into it, is to be passed over the surface of thewood, in the same way as for painting, immediately afterwards washing withcold water. This mode of cleaning will frequently render a new coat ofpaint unnecessary, and it has the advantage of being destructive to theeggs of insects which may be deposited in the interstices of the wood;where there is reason to suspect that bugs are in the wood, it may be well, asan additional precaution, to add to the mixture two drachms of corrosivesublimate. Balloons from Turkey's Crops. --Free the cropfrom a thick coat of fat; turn the inside out, and wash the food away;soak it in water for a day or two, then lay it on a cloth, and with abone or knife scrape off the internal coat of the stomach; wash it welland dry it with a clean cloth; then turn the crop, and make an incision throughthe external coats, taking particular care not to cut through the membrane;draw the coats at once over the neck, which must be cut long for greaterconvenience in using the balloon when finished. Proceed with the otherneck in the same way; tie it firm with silk, and cut it close to thebody of the balloon; it must be then distended with wind and hung up to dry. Itmay then be painted and varnished, but will not require it if properlyprepared. It may be made large enough to contain a gallon of gas, and so lightas to weigh only thirty grains. Black Paper for Drawing Patterns. --Mixlamp-black and sweet oil; with a bit of flannel cover a sheet ortwo of large writing-paper with this mixture; then dab thepaper dry with a bit of fine linen, and keep it for using in thefollowing manner:--Put the black side on another sheet of paper, andfasten the corners together with small pins. Lay on the back of the blackpaper the pattern to be drawn, and go over it with the point of a steelpencil; the black paper will then leave the impression of the pattern onthe under sheet, on which you must draw it with ink. If you draw patterns on cloth or muslin, do it with a pen dipped in a bit ofstone blue, a bit of sugar, and a little water, mixed smooth in ateacup, in which it will be always ready for use, if fresh; wet to a dueconsistence as wanted. Preservation of Books. --A few drops of any perfumedoil will secure libraries from the consuming effects of mouldiness anddamp. Water-proof Boots. --Saturate the boots withsolution of Caoutchouc (India-rubber), till they will absorb no more, atintervals of a week, without needing to leave a coating on the surface. Thesolution is made with an ounce of India-rubber in a pint of spirits ofturpentine, or coal naphtha, kept warm, and occasionally stirredtill dissolved, which takes three or four days. In a boiling water bathit can be done in a few hours. To clean Head and Clothes-brushes. ---Put atable-spoonful of pearl-ash into a pint of boiling water. Havingfastened a bit of sponge to the end of a stick, dip it into the solution, andwash the brush with it, carefully going in among the bristles. Next pour over;it some clean hot water, and let it lie a little while. Then drain it,wipe and dry it before the fire. To make Artificial Red Coral Branches for theEmbellishment of Grottoes. -- Take clear resin, dissolve it in abrass-pan, to every ounce of which add two drachms of the finest vermilion; when stirred well together, choose the twigsand branches, peeled and dried; then take a pencil and paint the branches allover whilst the composition is warm; afterwards shape them in imitation ofnatural coral. This done, hold the branches over a gentlecoal-fire till all is smooth and even, as if polished. In the samemanner white coral may be prepared with white lead, and blackcoral with lampblack. A grotto may be built, with little expense, ofglass, cinders, pebbles, pieces of large flint, shells, moss, stones,counterfeit coral, pieces of chalk, &c., all bound orcemented together with the above described cement. To clean Cane Chair Bottoms. --Turn up the chairbottom, and with hot water and a sponge wash the cane-work well, so thatit may become completely soaked; should it be very dirty, you may addsoap. Let it dry in the open air if possible, or in a place where thereis a thorough draught, and it will become as tight and firm as when new,providing that it has not been broken. To clean Decanters. --Roll up in small pieces somecoarse brown paper, then wet and soap the same, put them into thevessel with a little lukewarm water, and some common soda, shakethem well, then rinse with clean water, and it will be as bright andclear as when new. To render Shoes Water-proof. --Mix a pint ofdrying oil, two ounces of yellow wax, two ounces of turpentine, and halfan ounce of Burgundy pitch, over a slow fire. Lay the mixture, whilehot, on the boots or shoes with a sponge or soft brush; and, when they are dry,lay it on again and again, until the leather becomes quite saturated, that isto say, will hold no more. Let them then be put away, and not be worn untilthey are perfectly dry and elastic: they will afterwards be found not onlyimpenetrable to wet, but soft and pliable, and of much longe duration. To clean papered Walls. --The very best method is torub them with stale bread. Out the crust off very thick, and wipestraight down from the top, then go to the top again, and so on. The staler thebread the better. To cleanse Feather Beds and Mattresses. --Whenfeather beds become solid or heavy, they may be made clean and light thus: Rubthem over with a stiff brush, dipped in hot soap-suds. When clean, laythem on a shed or any other clean place, where the rain will fall on them. Whenthoroughly soaked, let them dry in a hot sun for six or seven days, shakingthem up well, and turning them over each day. They should be covered over witha thick cloth during the night. This way of washing the bed-ticking andfeathers makes them very fresh and light, and is much easier than the oldfashioned way of emptying the beds, and washing the feathers separately, whileit answers quite as well. Care must be taken to dry the bed perfectly, beforesleeping on it. To keep Eggs --Half a pint of salt,half a pint of lime to two gallons of hot water. Cover theeggs with the solution. To preserve various kinds of Friuits through theWinter. --Apples can be kept till June, by taking only those thatare hard and sound, wiping them dry, then packing them in tight barrels,with a layer of bran to each layer of apples. Envelope the barrel in alinen cloth, to protect it from frost, and keep it in a cool place, but not socold as to freeze the apples. It is said that mortar, laid over the topof a barrel of apples, is a good thing to preserve them, as itdraws the air from them, which is the principal cause of their decaying. Careshould be taken not to have it come in contact with the apples. Topreserve oranges and lemons severalmonths, take those that are perfectly fresh, and wrap each one in softpaper; put them in glass jars, or a very light box, with whitesand, that has been previously dried in an oven a few hours, after it has beenbaked in. The sand should be strewed thick over each one of the oranges,as they are laid in the jar, and the whole covered with a thick layer of it.Close the jar up tight, and keep it in a cool dry place, but not so cool as tofreeze the fruit. To preserve grapes, gather them on a dry day,when they are not quite dead ripe, and pick those that are not far off from thesteins. Lay the bunches of grapes in a glass jar, and sprinkle aroundeach of them a thick layer of bran, so that they will not touch each other.Have a thick layer of bran on the top, and cork and seal the jar very tight, sothat the air may be entirely excluded. To destroy Cockroaches, Ants, and other HouseholdVermin. --Hellebore, rubbed over with molasses and put round theplaces that cockroaches frequent, is a very effectual poison for them.Quicksilver and the white of an egg, beat together, and laid witha feather round the crevices of the bedsteads and the sacking, is veryeffectual in destroying bugs in them. To kill flies, when so numerous as to betroublesome, keep cobalt, wet with spirit, in a large shallow plate. Thespirit will attract the flies, and the cobalt will kill them very soon.The flour of sulphur is said to be good to drive ants away, if sprinkledaround the places that they frequent. Weak brine will kill worms ingravel walks, if kept moist with it a week in the spring, and three or fourdays in the fall. COMMON SIMPLE DYES. To dye Black. --Allow a pound of logwood toeach pound of goods that are to be dyed. Soak it over night in softwater, then boil it an hour, and strain the water in which it isboiled. For each pound of logwood, dissolve an ounce of blue vitriol inlukewarm water sufficient to wet the goods. Dip the goods in--whensaturated with it. turn the whole into the logwood dye. If the goods arecotton set the vessel on the fire, and let the goods boil ten or fifteenminutes, stirring them constantly to prevent their spotting. Silk and woollengoods should not be boiled in the dye-stuff, but it should be kept at ascalding heat for twenty minutes. Drain the goods without wringing, and hangthem in a dry, shady place, where they will have the air. When dry, set thecolor by, put them into scalding hot water, that has salt in it,in the proportion of a teacupful to three gallons of the water. Let thegoods remain in it till cold, then hang them where they will dry; they shouldnot be wrung. Boiling hot suds is the best thing to set the color ofblack silk-- let it remain in it till cold. Soaking black-dyed goods in sourmilk, is also good to set the color. Green and blue, Dye, for Silks and Woollens. --Forgreen dye, take a pound of oil of vitriol, and turn it upon half anounce of Spanish indigo, that has been reduced to a fine powder. Stirthem well together, then add a lump of pearlash, of the size of apea;--as soon as the fermentation ceases, bottle it--the dye will be fitfor use the next day. Chemical blue is made in the same manner, only, usinghalf the quantity of vitriol. For, woollen goods, the East indigo willanswer as well as the Spanish, and comes much lower. This dye will not answerfor cotton goods, as the vitriol rots the threads. Wash the articles that areto be dyed till perfectly clean, and free from color. If you cannotextract the color by rubbing it in hot suds, boil it out, andrinse it in soft water, till entirely free from soap, as thesoap will ruin the dye. To dye a pale color, put to each quart ofsoft warm water that is to be used for thedye, ten drops of the above composition;--if you wish a deep color, more willbe necessary. Put in the articles without crowding, and let them remain in tillof a good color--the dye-stuff should be kept warm. Take the articles outwithout wringing, drain as much of the dye out of them as possible, then hangthem to dry in a shady, airy place. They should be dyed when the weather isdry--if not dried quick, they will not look nice. When perfectly dry, wash themin lukewarm suds, to keep the vitriol from injuring the texture of thecloth. If you wish for a lively bright green, mix a little of the abovecomposition with yellow dye. Yellow Dyes. --To dye buff color, boil equal parts ofannatto and common potash, in soft clear water. When dissolved,take it from the fire; when cool, put in the goods, which should previously bewashed free from spots and color; set them on a moderate fire where they willkeep hot, till the goods are of the shade you wish. To dye salmon andorange color, tie annatto in a bag, and soak it in warm soft soapsuds, till it becomes soft, so that you can squeeze enough of it throughthe bag to make the suds a deep yellow--put in the articles, whichshould be clean, and free from color; boil them till of the shade you wish.There should be enough of the dye to cover the goods--stir them while boiling,to keep them from spotting. This dye will make a salmon or orangecolor, according to the strength of it, and the time the goods remain in. Drainthem out of the dye, and dry them quick, in the shade--when dry, wash them insoft soap suds. Goods dyed in this manner should never be rinsed inclear water. Peach leaves, fustic, and saffron, allmake a good straw or lemon color, according to the strength of the dye. Theyshould be steeped in fair soft water, in an earthen or tin vessel, andthen strained, and the dye set with alum, and a little gum arabicdissolved in the dye, if you wish to stiffen the article. When the dye-stuff isstrained, steep the articles in it. Red Dyes. --Madder makes a good durable red, but nota brilliant color. To make dye of it, allow for half a pound of it three ouncesof alum, and one of cream of tartar, and six gallons ofwater. This proportion of ingredients will make sufficient dye for sixor seven pounds of goods. Heat half of the water scalding hot, in aclean brass kettle, then put in the alum and cream of tartar, andlet it dissolve. When the water boils, stir the alum and tartarup in it, put in the goods, and let them boil a couple of hours; then rinsethem in fair water--empty the kettle, and put in three gallons ofwater, and the madder; rub it fine in the water, then put in thegoods, and set them where they will keep scalding hot for an hour, withoutboiling--stir them constantly. When they have been scalding an hour, increasethe fire till they boil. Let them boil five minutes, then drain them out of thedye, and rinse them, without wringing, in fair water, and hang them inthe shade, where they will dry. To dye a fine crimson, take for each pound ofgoods two and a half ounces of alum, an ounce and a half of whitetartar--put them in a brass kettle, with sufficient fair water to coveryour goods, set it where it will boil briskly for several minutes; then put inthe goods, which should be washed clean, and rinsed in fair water. Whenthe goods have boiled half an hour, take them out, without wringing, and hangwhere they will cool all over alike, without drying; empty out the alumand tartar water, put fresh water in the kettle, and for eachpound of goods to be dyed, put in an ounce of cochineal, powdered fine.Set the kettle on the fire, and let the water boil fifteen or twentyminutes; then put in sufficient cold water to make it lukewarm, putin the goods, and boil them an hour and aquarter--take them out without wringing, and dry them in a shady place. Theblossoms of the Balm of Gilead, steeped with fair water in avessel, then strained, will give silk a pretty red color. The silk should bewashed clean and free from color, then rinsed in fair water, and boiledin the strained dye, with a small piece of alum. To dye a fine delicatepink, use a carmine saucer--the directions for dyeing come with the saucers. Itis too expensive a dye for bulky goods, but for faded fancy shawls and ribbons,it is quite worth the while to use it, as it gives a beautiful shade ofpink. Slate-colored Dye --To make a good dark slate color,boil sugar-loaf paper with vinegar, in an ironutensil--put in alum to set the color. Tea grounds, set withcopperas, make a good slate color. To produce a light slate color, boilwhite maple bark in clear water, with a little alum--thebark should be boiled in a brass utensil. The dye for slate color should bestrained before the goods are put into it. They should be boiled in it, andthen hung where they will drain and dry. To preserve Steel Pens from Corrosion. Dipthem for a few moments in ethereal solution of gold. This covers them with afilm of pure metallic gold, which prevents the ink acting upon the steel.
