WITH A SAUCEPAN OVER THE SEA CHAPTER ONE - Soups COCKA LEEKIE. (Scotland.) THIS is the oldest recipe for soup known, as it dates back to the fourteenth century. Wash and trim 1 dozen leeks, cut them in pieces half an inch long, discarding roots and tops, then fry them in 1 ounce of butter, with 2 stalks of celery and 1 carrot, cut fine. When brown but not burnt, add 1 1/2 quarts of chicken broth and I cup of cooked chicken, cut into dice. Simmer, covered, 2 hours, then add salt, pepper, and yolk of an egg, blended with a little of the broth, first, before adding to the soup. PETITE MARMITE. This is the national soup of France, and just now very fashionable in first-class restaurants. It is always served in the earthen pot in which it is cooked, set on a fancy plate. Each mouthful should convey a distinct taste of a separate vegetable. The marmites are sold at the crockery stores in the French quarter, but an ordinary earthen Boston bean pot will answer equally well to serve it in. The stock can be first cooked in a large kettle, used for soups, every day. Cut up 6 pounds of beef and the shin bone, an old chicken, -which can be used for croquettes or salad,- 2 large carrots, 1 leeks, and 2 turnips. Add 3 cloves, a bayleaf, some parsley, thyme, and sweet marjoram, 1 gallon of water. Bring it to a boil, skim it, and let it simmer 8 hours. Take off the fat, clarify it, and use it for frying or braising. Add salt and pepper sparingly, set it away overnight, after straining it. To 1 quart of this, heated in the earthen pot, add 1 cup of sliced carrots, turnips, or string beans, cut thin and cooked. Also 4 slices of toasted bread or rolls. Using this recipe for stock - it is given by a reliable chef at one of the clubs-it will make 3 1/2 quarts, sufficient for a week; 1 pint a day, with the addition of milk or vegetables or any other thickening, will do for a small family. Such concentrated stock requires an equal amount of water in cooking a second time. It may also be used in making sauces. PURÉE JACKSON. (Paris.) Wash, parboil, and pare 6 large potatoes. Slice them, add 2 ounces of butter, fry lightly, then add salt, pepper, nutmeg, a bayleaf, some parsley, 2 ounces of chopped ham, 1 sliced onion, and 6 stalks of celery. Simmer for 3/4 hour. Press through a sieve, add 1 pint of white stock made from chicken or veal, and 1 pint of boiling milk, 2 ounces of butter, and the yolk of 1 egg, blended with a little of the milk. Stir well, add some bread, toasted and cut in dice, called croutons, and serve at once. EGG SOUP. (Monte Carlo.) Cut 6 slices of stale bread and dip them lightly in sugar. Put them in the oven to brown, and have ready 1 pint of white stock and 1 pint of boiling milk, blended with the yolks of 3 eggs and 1ounce of butter. Add salt, pepper, and nutmeg and a spoonful of chopped parsley. Pour over the slices of toast and serve, after keeping hot, ten minutes. QUEEN SOUP. This is said to have been invented for Marie Stuart by the royal cook when she lived in France as dauphiness. It was a favorite with both Victoria and Napoleon Bonaparte. Cook 2 large onions with 2 pieces of celery, both cut up, in 2 ounces of butter. Add some parsley, thyme, and a bayleaf, 1 chicken cut into joints, and 2 quarts of water. Simmer for 4 hours. Take out the chicken, cut the meat of the wings and breast into dice, and keep the dark meat for croquettes or salad. Chop one dozen blanched almonds, the yolks of 2 hard-boiled eggs, and 2 slices of bread soaked in milk. Pound these with the meat and press through a sieve; add to the soup, strained, 1 cup of boiling cream or rich milk, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Serve at once, hot. CHICKEN SOUP. (As made in Nice.) Cook 1 ounce of ham with 1 1/2 quarts of chicken broth for 1/2 hour. Add I cup of young carrots cut into dice, 1 dozen small white onions, and 1 cup of turnips, cut into dice, all cooked previously, also two tablespoonfuls of cooked shredded cabbage, the meat from breast and wings cut into dice, and 2 tablespoonfuls of boiled rice. Strain the soup before adding the vegetables and chicken, season it, and serve. LOBSTER SOUP. (Paris.) Boil 1 fine hen lobster weighing 2 pounds. Pick and chop the meat and pound the coral with 1 ounce of butter and rub it through a sieve. Add to the meat 2 quarts of white stock, 1 onion, parsley, thyme, and the rind of a lemon. Cook 1/2 hour, add a blending of flour and butter, and rub it through a sieve. Season it with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, add 1/2 pint of whipped cream, and serve, giving a little cream to each person. LOBSTER SOUP. (London.) Cut into dice the meat of a boiled lobster, fry it with 1 carrot, 1 onion, 4 pieces of celery, all sliced, parsley, thyme, and the rind of a lemon, in 2 ounces of butter. Add 6 ounces of rice flour, or cooked rice rubbed to a paste, 3 pints of good stock, and the meat and pounded coral. Cook 1/2 hour, press through a sieve, add 1 glass of sherry, some of the meat in pieces, and made into force-meat balls with bread, herbs, eggs, and poached in a little broth. CREAM OF SHRIMPS. (As made in Nice.) Boil, shell, clean, and chop fifty shrimps, fry them in 2 ounces of butter, add 1 slice of stale bread, 3 anchovies, 4 ounces of boiled rice, 1 sliced onion, salt, pepper, and 1 quarts of white stock. Cook this 1 hours. Press through a sieve a tablespoonful of sherry or a glass of white wine, and serve hot. CREAM OF SHRIMPS. (As made in Paris.) Parboil, shell, clean, and chop fifty fine shrimps, fry in 1 ounces of butter, add 1 cup of bread-crumbs of stale bread, not the crust, salt and pepper, 2 quarts of fish stock or that made of chicken or veal, 1 clove, 1 onion, sliced. Save six of the shrimps to add, cut into dice, before serving. Cook 2 hours, press through a sieve, add 1 cup of boiling cream, a little nutmeg, and the shrimps and 2 tablespoonfuls of sherry. LOBSTER SOUP. (As made in Nantes, France.) Cook 1 ounce of chopped ham, 1 onion, and 1 carrot, cut fine, parsley, thyme, and a bayleaf , in 1 ounce of butter. Add 3 pounds of lobster meat, cooked and cut into dice, 1 pint of white wine, and 1 1/2 quarts of veal stock. Simmer 1 hour. Strain the soup, add 2 cups of boiled rice and 1 hard-boiled egg sliced and some butter. Season and serve with croutons. CONSOMMÉ COLBERT. (France.) Clarify 1 quart of beef stock, well flavored and made from fresh meat, add 1 tablespoonful of sherry, and in each plate put an egg, poached in water and vinegar, to keep it firm and white. Add salt and pepper to taste and serve very hot. SOUP BONNE FEMME. (Provincial France.) This is the broth of the farmer and peasant's wife, wholesome and nourishing. Wash, dry, and cut up 2 large lettuces, 1 pound of sorrel, and 1 pound of spinach. Add 1 1/2 quarts of good white stock and simmer, with 1/4 pound of butter, 2 onions, and 2 carrots, for 1 hour. Add a blending of 1 ounce of butter, 1 ounce of flour, the yolks of 2 eggs, and a cup of boiling milk, salt, and pepper. Press through a sieve, and serve with croutons. PECTORAL BROTH. (A French convent soup, given to delicate nuns.) Cut up an old fowl and put with the liver, heart, and gizzard, 1 quarts of water, with a handful of marshmallow root and 2 cups of barley, 1 carrot, 3 onions, parsley, thyme, and sweet marjoram. Simmer for 3 hours, strain the broth, pressing the barley through a sieve ; add the yolk of I egg, salt, pepper, and a tablespoonful of rum or brandy. It should be reduced to almost a quart, and is very healing. PIGEON SOUP. (Belgium.) Blend 1 ounce of butter with 6 ounces of flour, add 3 pigeons, cut up and fried in butter, 1 ounce of chopped ham, 1 quarts of consomme or veal stock, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , 1 leek, and a piece of celery. Cook 1 hour, strain it, cut the meat into dice, add 1 cup of cooked green peas, salt, pepper, 1 cup of cooked and sliced carrots, and a glass of white wine. FROG SOUP. (Normandy.) To 1 1/2 quarts of white stock, add 1 1/2 ounces of flour, an onion, parsley, celery, salt, and pepper. Cook it 1 hour, strain and add 1 dozen frogs' legs, fried in butter, and a glass of sherry. Cook 1/2 hour more, add the yolks of 2 eggs, blended with 1 cup of hot milk and a little butter. HARE SOUP. (Poland.) Cook the bones, trimmings, gravy, and stuffing of some cooked rabbit with 3 onions, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, sliced, 2 cloves, a little mace, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , and a piece of celery. Add 1 ounce of butter, and then, when fried together, add 1 quart of beef stock. Cook 2 hours, strain it, taking out the bones and pressing the rest through a sieve. Add 1 dozen forcemeat balls, made of bread-crumbs, chopped ham, herbs, egg, and butter, and poached in stock, a tablespoonful of port wine, and salt and pepper. LIVER SOUP. (Poland.) Cut 1/2 pound of liver into slices, add flour, - a spoonful, - 1 ounce of butter and 1 onion, cut fine. Fry this and then pound it, add three slices of stale bread, in crumbs, salt, and pepper and 3 pints of brown stock. Boil 20 minutes, press through a sieve, add yolk of 1 egg and some chopped parsley, and serve at once. EEL SOUP. (Hamburg.) Clean and cut into 2-inch pieces 2 pounds of eels. Add 1 pint of boiling water, salt, pepper, parsley, 1 carrot, 1 onion, and 1/2 cup of vinegar. Cook 20 minutes, then add 1 cup of finely sliced carrot, cooked in water until tender, and 1 cup of cooked peas, 2 quarts of white stock, parsley, some thyme, and sweet marjoram, one half of the eel broth and salt. Finally blend and add 1 cup of hot milk and the yolk of 1 egg and pour into a tureen over the eels. Pass with this a dish of stewed pears, as they do in Hamburg. FRENCH GIBLET SOUP. Chop the liver, wings, gizzard, and heart of a turkey, or 2 chickens fine, and fry them in 1 ounce of butter with 1 onion; add 1 quart of beef stock and 1 pint of hot water, salt, pepper, 1 onion, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, 2 pieces of celery, and 2 ounces of rice. Cook for 1 hour and serve hot. ENGLISH GIBLET SOUP. Fry the chopped giblets in butter, as above, add 2 ounces of flour, stir, and when brown, add 1 quart of beef stock, a bayleaf , some parsley, 3 pieces of cooked celery, cut into dice, 2 sliced hard-boiled eggs, a tablespoonful of sherry, and 6 forcemeat balls, made of the meat of the fowl, bread, herbs, and egg, poached in broth. Heat all well and serve hot. OXCHEEK SOUP. (England.) Fry 2 ounces of chopped ham with 1 onions and 2 carrots, minced, a bayleaf , some parsley, in 2 ounces of butter. Add 2 small heads of celery, 1 parsnip, and 2 slices of toast, a little mace, 1 clove, and 5 quarts of water, and the oxcheek cut into dice. Simmer gently 5 hours. Season to taste. It will make about 4 quarts of rich but economical broth. OXTAIL SOUP. (England.) This recipe and the one above were brought by French refugees who had learned, during exile and enforced poverty, how to make the best of their resources. Cut 3 oxtails into pieces and steep them in water for 2 hours. Drain them, fry in 2 ounces of butter or suet, add salt, pepper, 2 carrots, 1 leek, 1 onion, a piece of celery, 1 clove, and some parsley. Simmer 3 hours, remove the bones, and put the meat into the soup, add 6 small white onions, fried in butter until tender, and serve with croutons. CALF'S HEAD SOUP. (Recipe of the Hotel Star and Garter, Richmond, England.) Parboil and bone a calf's head. Put the bones and the meat, cut up, in 4 quarts of water with 1 ounce of flour, salt, pepper, a bayleaf , some parsley, a clove, 1 carrot, and 1 onion. Cook 4 hours, take out the bones, cut the meat into dice, strain the soup, add the meat, 3 hard-boiled eggs, sliced, 1 dozen poached forcemeat balls, made of some meat, bread-crumbs, herbs, and egg, 1 glass of sherry and 1 lemon, cut in slices. Serve at once, hot. BATTENBERG SOUP (as made at Windsor). Cook 1 calf's foot, 3 pounds of soup beef, 3 carrots, 3 onions, 2 cloves, a piece of celery, parsley, and thyme, in 3 1/2 quarts of water for 4 hours. Take out the meat, remove the bones, put the meat, cut up, back in the soup, and set aside until next day. Skim off the fat-clarify it, as directed for frying or braising-strain the soup, add sufficient flour and butter to thicken it, the meat, 1 glass of sherry, salt, pepper, and 1 cup of hot cream. REGENT'S SOUP. (England.) Add to the bones, stuffing, gravy, and trimmings of cold roast duck or game, 2 quarts of beef stock, 1 carrot, 1 onion, 1 turnip, 1 head of celery all cut up, 4 ounces of barley, parsley, thyme, and a clove. Simmer 2 hours, press through a sieve, season to taste, add the pounded yolks of 3 hard-boiled eggs, half a cup of boiling milk, and a glass of sherry. PEPPER-POT. This dish is peculiar to Spain, but it was imported to Jamaica, whence the negroes took the recipe north. In Philadelphia, there are several small restaurants, kept by darkies who are famous for pepper-pot. To 3 quarts of water add 1 pint of vegetables, cut up, any kinds, mixed, you happen to have, in equal parts, using beans, peas, celery, carrots, onions, rice, lettuce, etc., also potatoes, add 1 pound of mutton, 1 pound of salt pork, and 1 pound of honeycomb tripe, cut up and fried in butter or suet, 1 bayleaf , 1 clove, parsley, thyme, and sweet marjoram. Cook, closely covered, 3 hours. Set aside to cool, remove the fat, thicken with flour and butter and yolk of an egg, add salt and pepper, and serve very hot. CLEAR GAME SOUP. (Poland.) Cut up a calf's foot, add the bones and scraps and gravy of any cold game, duck, or rabbit, 2 ounces of chopped ham, 1 onion, 2 carrots, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , a bit of mace, and a piece of celery. Cook it with 2 quarts of water for 3 hours. Strain and clarify it with white of an egg, add salt, pepper, a glass of sherry, 1 hard-boiled egg, and 1 lemon, sliced. PIGEON BROTH. (Boulogne.) Lard and roast 4 fine pigeons, cut up the meat and put the bones and gravy in 1 quart of stock to cook. Chop the meat, with one onion, 1 pound of bread-crumbs soaked in milk, and 1 ounce of butter. Add to the rest and cook 1 hour. Press through a sieve, add 1 tablespoonful of port or sherry, salt, pepper, and some slices of toasted bread. LOBSTER MULLIGATAWNY. (England.) Cook 2 ounces of chopped ham, 1 carrot, 1 onion, 1 bayleaf , some parsley, 1 ounce of butter. Add two pounds of boiled lobster, cut into dice, 1 quart of veal stock, 1 spoonful of sherry, 1 ounce of flour mixed with 1 ounce of butter, a table-spoonful of curry powder, then cook 1/2 hour. Add the yolks of 2 eggs and 1/2 cup of hot cream, press through a sieve, and serve with a dish of boiled rice. LENTEN BROTH (as made in the convents of France and Austria). Cook 2 pounds of flounders or any white fish, cut up, with 1 carrot, 1 onion, 1 turnip, 2 pieces of celery, and a bunch of herbs, with 1 quart of water, for 2 hours. Take out the fish, remove skin and bones, and put the fish back again, add 1 pint of boiling milk, mixed with flour and butter, the yolk of an egg and juice of a lemon, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Press through a sieve and serve hot. FISH BROTH (as made in Sweden). Take the water in which a large fresh fish has been boiled, add any scraps or gravy, left over; reduce by boiling to 1 quart. Strain it, add 1 leek, 6 potatoes, 1 carrot, cut up, a bayleaf , and some parsley. Simmer for 1/2 hour, add 1 pint of hot white stock, salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of sherry, and 12 oysters. Cook ten minutes more and serve. TURKEY SOUP. (Rouen.) Chop the dark meat of a turkey, add the gravy, bones, skin, and stuffing, 1 cup of bread-crumbs, an onion, some parsley, and 2 quarts of water. Cook 3 hours, add salt and pepper, nutmeg, 1/2 cup of boiling milk, mixed with a little butter and flour, and press through a sieve. TCHI. (Russian Soup.) Make 1 pound of sausage meat into small balls and fry them brown. Chop 2 large onions and the heart of a cabbage, fry them in butter or suet, add 2 ounces flour, salt, pepper, parsley, and 3 pints of stock. Cook 1 hour, add the sausage balls, and 1 glass of tarragon vinegar. CRÉCY SOUP. (Flanders.) The Prince of Wales always eats a bowl of this every 26th of August, in memory of his ancestor, the Black Prince, and the battle of Crécy. Wash, scrape, and slice 12 fine young carrots; cook in 1 ounce of butter with 1 spoonful of chopped ham or bacon, 1 onion, 1 turnip, a bay-leaf, parsley, and sweet marjoram. Stir while cooking, add 1 quart of stock, simmer two hours. Press through a sieve, add salt, pepper, and nutmeg and croutons. CONSOMMÉ RACHEL. (France.) This soup was created for the great actress who, like most people of genius, was a bonne fourchette. Mix 1 cup of finely chopped and cooked chicken with sufficient white stock to make a paste. Season it and cook, like a custard, in a pan of water. Then cut in squares. Heat 1 quart of consomme with a thickening of flour and butter, 1 ounce of each, and the yolk of an egg and 1/2 cup of cream. Add salt, pepper, the chicken custard, and 2 tablespoonfuls of cooked green peas. POTAGE REUNION (invented for a banquet of a peace congress). Boil 1 pound of cooked salmon in 2 quarts of white stock for 1/2 hour. Add salt and pepper and a blending of 1 cup of milk, some flour, butter, and yolk of an egg. Cook carefully ten minutes longer; add 1 tablespoonful chopped parsley, a little nutmeg and salt. Press through a sieve, add 2 dozen small cooked oysters, and serve at once. CRÊME FERNEUSE. (Paris.) Peel and shred 4 large onions, 2 leeks, a bunch of herbs, 2 ounces ham or bacon, and fry in 2 ounces butter. Add 2 ounces boiled rice, 1 quart milk, and 1 quart of veal stock. Cook 20 minutes, add 1 piece of celery, 4 peeled and sliced potatoes, the same amount of turnips, and simmer 1 1/2 hours. Add 1 cup of boiling clam or oyster juice, salt, and pepper. Press through a sieve and serve at once. POTAGE JACQUELINE. (Paris.) Blend 1 cup of milk, yolks 3 eggs, and 1 ounce flour, over the fire. Add 1 1/2 quarts chicken broth, boiling hot, salt, pepper, parsley, then strain it and add one tablespoonful of boiled rice, the same of cooked green peas, carrots, and asparagus, cut up. POTAGE BELLE FONTAINE. (Paris.) Cook 1 quart good veal stock with 1 tablespoonful of chopped ham and the meat of a chicken, about 2 cupfuls, minced very finely. Simmer for 40 minutes, add salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a teaspoonful of onion juice, then press through a sieve. Finally, add 1 cup of cooked and shredded cabbage. CREAM of BARLEY SOUP. (Vienna.) Cook 2 ounces barley, 1 onions, and 2 carrots, sliced, 1 bay leaf, and some parsley, for 3 hours, in 1 quarts veal or chicken stock. Add yolks of 2 eggs and 1 cup of hot milk, and press through a sieve. Season and add 1 cup of asparagus tips or green peas, already cooked. ITALIAN SOUP. Cook 1/2 pint of fine cornmeal - they call it semolina in Italy-with 1 ounce butter, 1 quart white stock, salt, pepper, and nutmeg for 1 hour. Add some parsley, stir and strain it, then add the yolk of an egg, blended with 1/2 pint hot milk. Serve with grated Parmesan cheese and croutons. A FRENCH SOUP OF LEEKS. In the provinces they make many savory soups with vegetables which contain all the mineral salts we need so much for our nerves and blood, especially in the spring. Trim and slice a large bundle of leeks, discard the greenest part of the tops and fry the rest in 2 ounces butter, add 2 ounces flour, then a pint of hot milk and a pint of white stock, parsley, salt, and pepper. Cook 40 minutes, add yolk of one egg, and serve with croutons. GERMAN VEAL BROTH. Cut up 2 pounds of the knuckle of veal and cook it in 3 quarts water, with 1 carrot, 1 onion, 1 clove, salt, pepper, parsley, and thyme. Simmer for 4 hours. Cool, skim, and strain it. To 1 1/2 quarts of this stock add 1/4 pound cooked vermicelli, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a pinch of nutmeg, and the yolk of an egg blended with half a cup of milk. TURNIP SOUP. (Rouen.) Pare and chop 1 quart of turnips, fry in 2 ounces butter or suet, add half a spoonful of sugar and some parsley, and 1 pint consommé. Cook 3/4 hour. Make six slices of toast, pour the turnips, well seasoned, into a dish, lay the toast over, dot with butter, and bake 1/2 hour. This is served in Rouen with a tureen of hot consommé and a tablespoonful given on each plate, but it can also ONION SOUP WITH CHEESE, ITALY (See page 19) An illustration of a meal with a plate of three toast, a bowl of soup, and two glasses of wine. be made into one broth, cooking the turnips in the whole amount of stock, pressing them through a sieve and putting toast on top, when serving. Is excellent made of rabbit stock, instead of beef. VEGETABLE SOUP (made in France, during Lent). Fry 2 carrots, 2 turnips, 2 onions, 1/2 pint string beans, 1 leek, 1 cup of spinach with some parsley and a bit of celery, in 2 ounces butter. Add 1 ounce flour, 1 quart, and a pint of milk, 1 pint of stewed tomatoes, and a pinch of baking soda, also a blade of mace. Simmer for 2 hours, press through a sieve, add a teaspoonful of sugar, a little butter blended with flour, and 2 tablespoonfuls each of cooked rice and peas. TOMATO SOUP (as made in Germany). Cut up 1 pound of veal from the breast, add the bones and 1 ounce butter, 1 onion, and 1 carrot, and 3 quarts water, parsley, salt, and pepper, 1 pint tomatoes and 1 green pepper, cut up and free from seeds. Cook 3 hours, add a spoonful of sugar and 1 cup of boiled rice. ONION SOUP, WITH CHEESE. (Italy.) This is a favorite soup at the French and Italian restaurants in New York. It is the "plat de jour" for Mondays. Slice four large onions very thin, fry them in butter, and add them to 1 quart of well-flavored beef consommé. Put these in an earthen pipkin or marmite, and arrange on top four slices of toasted bread, on which sprinkle 2 tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese. Keep these hot, and serve in the dish, one slice of toast for each person. Small yellow bowls, such as are used for custards, etc., are generally passed with the soup, instead of ordinary soup plates. The foreign flavor depends greatly upon such trifles, imitating the inns of the old country. CHESTNUT SOUP. {A French recipe.) Boil 1 quart of large and sound chestnuts in salted water for 20 minutes; peel and chop them. Add 1 quart water, a teaspoonful of salt and one of sugar, and the rind of a lemon. Cook for half an hour, then rub through a sieve. Add 1 quarts white stock, a tablespoonful of butter blended with a tablespoonful of flour, pepper, and a little parsley. Stir for twenty minutes and rub through a sieve. Serve with toast. CHESTNUT SOUP. (Italian style.) Peel and blanch fifty large chestnuts. Cook them in sufficient veal stock to cover, with 2 tablespoonfuls of bread-crumbs, 1 teaspoonful of salt, a little pepper and nutmeg, for 2 hours. To every quart of this now add a pint of hot milk. Press through a sieve, add the yolk of one egg, a tablespoonful of sherry, and serve with croutons. CHEESE SOUP. (Southern France.) Peel, slice, and fry 6 onions with 1/4 pound of ham, minced, and 2 ounces butter. Add 1/2 pound bread-crumbs, 3 pints good white stock, - preferably chicken, - salt, pepper, and a blade of mace. Cook for 1/2 hour, add 1/4 pound grated Parmesan cheese, and yolks of 1 eggs. Strain it by pressing it through a sieve, and serve at once. CUCUMBER SOUP. (Greece.) Peel 4 large cucumbers, slice them, and remove the seeds. Fry with 1 ounce butter, add salt, pepper, a blade of mace, 1 pint hot milk, and 1 quart white stock. Cook 1 1/2 hours. Thicken with flour and butter and press through a sieve. OYSTER SOUP. (A French recipe.) Drain 1 quart of oysters and season with salt, pepper, a blade of mace, a bayleaf , and 1 ounce butter. Add 1/2 pint of white stock and cook fifteen minutes. Remove the oysters and herbs, and to the stock add the juice of the oysters and 1 pint of hot milk, the yolk of 1 egg, some parsley, and a blending of flour and butter. Put in the oysters, and after stirring a few moments serve hot. ONION BROTH. (Dieppe.) Parboil 6 large onions, slice them, and toss in 1 ounce of butter with salt, pepper, and some parsley. Add 1 1/2 tablespoonfuls of flour and 1 quart of white stock, made from fish or chicken, also 1 pint of hot milk. Press through a sieve and serve with slices of toast. POTATO SOUP. (Normandy.) Parboil, slice, and pare ten large potatoes. Drain them and add 1 onions, sliced, 2 bits of celery, and 1 ounce butter. Cook for 10 minutes, add 4 slices of stale bread, and 1 quart of white stock. Simmer for 2 hours, add salt, pepper, and nutmeg, 1 pint of hot milk blended with flour and butter. Press through a sieve and serve with croutons. POTATO SOUP. (Geneva.) Parboil and pare 6 large potatoes, fry them in 1 ounce of butter, add salt, pepper, parsley, a blade of mace, and a bayleaf , also 1/4 pound of chopped ham. Cover with 1 quart consomme, add a teaspoonful of sugar, 1 of butter, 1 of flour, and the yolks of 2 eggs. Press through a sieve. COD SOUP. (Brittany.) To the flesh of three fine medium-sized cod, add 3 quarts veal stock, parsley, thyme, sweet marjoram, and a bayleaf , also an onion. Cook 2 hours, press through a sieve, add flour blended with butter, salt, pepper, 1 glass of white wine, and 1 dozen oysters. Simmer for 10 minutes and then serve. TURNIP SOUP. (Northern Italy.) Pare, slice, and fry 1 1/2 quarts of turnips, with 1 tablespoonful sugar, 2 ounces butter, and 2 ounces flour. Add 1 pint of tomatoes, parsley, bayleaf , and thyme. Simmer 1 hour, press through a sieve. Add 1 cup of hot beef stock and a table-spoonful of grated cheese, salt, and pepper. CREAM of RICE. (Paris.) Wash, drain, and parboil 1/2 pound of rice; add 1 quart of chicken broth, salt, pepper, and parsley, and a tablespoonful of chopped onions. Cook 1 hour and press through a sieve; add yolks of 2 eggs mixed with 2 tablespoonfuls cream and 6 forcemeat balls and some asparagus tips, both cooked previously. The balls must be made of chicken and bread-crumbs. CREAM of CELERY. (Paris.) Cut off the tips of one head of celery and mash it with a potato-masher, then boil it twenty minutes in 1 pint of chicken broth. Blend 2 tablespoonfuls of flour with the same amount of butter, add salt and pepper, stir in 1 pint rich, boiling milk and then strain it carefully. BLACK BEAN SOUP. (Spain.) Brown one onion with 1 ounce butter, add 1 pint of black beans soaked over night and drained, 1/2 a shin of beef and 3 quarts of water, 1 teaspoonful of allspice and cloves, tied in a bit of muslin, some parsley and thyme. Cook 4 hours, press through a sieve, add salt and pepper, 1 hard-boiled egg, and 1 lemon, sliced, and 1 glass of sherry. PURÉE OF BROAD BEANS. (Brittany.) Cook 1 1/2 pints of fresh Lima beans in salted water with 1 ounce chopped ham, some parsley, a clove, and an onion. When tender, drain and add 1 ounce butter and strain the liquor and put it aside. Press the beans through a sieve, add 1 pint of stock, 1 pint hot milk, salt, and pepper. It is best made with chicken or veal broth. Reduce the liquor by boiling and add to the soup. Serve with croutons. PURÉE OF STRING BEANS. (Italy.) Pick and string and cut up 1 pint of beans, parboil, and strain them, and add 1 pint white stock and 1 ounces butter mixed with 2 ounces flour. Cook 20 minutes, season, and press through a sieve. Add 1 cup of hot cream or rich milk and serve. POTAGE ST. GERMAIN. (France.) Cook 1 quart fresh peas in water to cover, with some parsley, 1 leek, and 1/2 ounce butter, added. Press all through a sieve. Stir in 1 pint of hot stock, chicken or veal, with yolks of 2 eggs, pepper, salt, and a little nutmeg. Add 1/2 a tea-spoonful of sugar and 1 cup of boiling cream. LEMON SOUP. (France.) This is a very dainty soup and deserves to be better known. Heat 1 1/2 quarts of chicken stock and make some forcemeat balls of a little cold chopped chicken, bread-crumbs, herbs, and yolk of an egg. Poach them in the stock and keep warm. Now thicken the stock with 1/2 cup of milk or cream, mixed with the yolks of 3 eggs, salt, and pepper, the juice of a lemon and a pinch of nutmeg. Serve with slices of toast. A convent recipe, dating to the days before the Revolution. CREAM of LETTUCE. (France.) Wash and drain three large heads of lettuce, chop them, and fry them with 1/4 pound of butter. Add salt, pepper, a bunch of parsley, 5 ounces of rice, and 2 quarts of white stock. Cook for 45 minutes, press through a sieve, add 1 pint of boiling milk, and serve with croutons. SORREL SOUP. (Provincial France.) This recipe comes from the country, but the homesick students can always find sorrel soup in the little restaurants of the Latin Quarter. Pick sufficient sorrel to make a pint of puree, chop it, and add 1 ounce butter; cook, stirring well, for 20 minutes. Add 1 ounce flour and press through a sieve; let it cook again, with 1 pint hot milk and 1 pint of stock; season it with salt, pepper, and nutmeg and stir in the yolks of 2 eggs. Strain it again and serve with croutons. ENDIVE SOUP. (Alsace-Lorraine.) Trim and parboil 4 heads of chicory, drain it and chop it very fine. Add 1 ounces butter, salt, pepper, and mace, and 1 ounces flour. Then add 1 quart of veal stock and 1 cup of boiling milk. Cook for 1 hour, add yolks of 2 eggs, beaten in 1/2 cup of milk, and strain it through a sieve. Serve at once. LENTIL SOUP. (Bavaria.) Soak 1 pint of lentils overnight, drain them, and add 1 quart of stock and 1 pint of water, some parsley, 2 leeks, a bit of celery, 2 ounces of chopped ham, an onion, and a carrot. Cook 3 hours, rub through a sieve, add the juice of a lemon, salt, and pepper. If not thick and smooth, add a tablespoonful of flour, mixed with as much butter. VEGETABLE MARROW SOUP. (England.) Vegetable marrow is a species of squash, and the latter is a good substitute. Peel and slice a large squash; fry it in 2 ounces butter, with salt, pepper, and 4 ounces of flour. Add 1 quart of milk and 1 pint of strong veal or chicken stock, some parsley, onion, and a carrot. Cook for 1 hour, press through a sieve, add a pinch of sugar, a tablespoonful of butter, and serve with croutons. TUSCANY SOUP. (Italy.) Peel and slice and fry 2 egg-plants, with 1 ounce of butter and as much flour, salt, pepper, a blade of mace, 3 large tomatoes, 4 mushrooms, some parsley, and then add 1 quart of consomme. Cook for 1 hour, press through a sieve, add 2 table-spoonfuls of grated cheese and 2 ounces of cooked 27 macaroni. In Italy, the above mixture is baked in a dish, and a spoonful is added to every plate of consomme when serving, but the recipe as here given is better suited to American tastes. CABBAGE SOUP. (Sicily.) Trim and slice a nice head of cabbage, parboil it, and drain it and chop it finely. Fry it in an ounce of butter; add a tablespoonful of flour, salt, pepper, and 1 quart of veal broth. Simmer 1 hour, press it through a sieve, add 1 pint of hot milk, season it, and serve with croutons. GREEK BROTH. Cut up a shoulder of mutton, or the neck, take out the bones and add to both meat and bones 2 quarts of water, 1/2 pint split peas, 2 tablespoonfuls of chopped ham, 1 onion, 1 carrot, some parsley and thyme. Cook 3 hours, remove the bones, cut up the meat and press the rest through a sieve. Season to taste and return the meat to the broth. PRUSSIAN SOUP. (A national dish.) Cut up and fry in 3 ounces of suet 2 heads of celery, 1 carrots, 1 turnips, 1 onions, 2 leeks, and 1 pound of potatoes. Add 1/2 pound of beef cut into dice, cover and steam, but do not let it burn. Then add 2 quarts of water, 1 pint of dried beans soaked overnight, and a bunch of herbs. Cook 4 hours, press through a sieve, and add salt and pepper. PUCHERO. (Spanish Soup.) This also is a national dish, common to rich and poor. Cut up three pounds of beef, 1 pig's foot, 1/2 pound of ham, the giblets of a fowl, and three handfuls of garbanzos, or chick peas. Simmer 2 hours, add a slice of pumpkin, free from seeds, 1 large carrot, 1 head of lettuce, 1/2 a cabbage, and a bunch of herbs. Cook 1 hour longer, add 6 small sausages, and boil till they are done. Strain and thicken the soup and serve the meat and vegetables, neatly arranged on a separate dish. GARBURE. (Another national dish of Spain.) Parboil, peel, and slice a small white cabbage, drain it, and add 1/4 pound of sliced bacon, salt, pepper, a clove, 1 leek, 1 carrot, 1 onion, and 6 pieces of celery. Stir these with, enough suet or butter to brown them, add two quarts of good stock, and cook for two hours, or as much as will cover the meat and vegetables. Make a forcemeat with 1/4 pound of stale bread, butter, stock, and herbs, and line a dish with it, arranging the vegetables, etc., in layers with forcemeat between. Add enough stock to moisten all and have forcemeat and a layer of grated cheese on top. Bake in the oven half an hour and serve with a tureen of hot consomme. When helping the latter, put a table-spoonful in each plate. HUNGARIAN SOUP. Chop 2 cups of cold roast duck with 1 ounce of parsley, bayleaf , and thyme. Fry in 1 ounce of butter, add 1 ounce flour, then 1 quart of beef stock, and 1/2 pint of white wine or cider. Cook 1 hour. Rub through a sieve, add some pieces of duck and 1 green pepper, sliced and free from seeds and fried in butter, also 1 cup of cooked barley, salt, and pepper to taste. MANNHEIM SOUP. (Germany.) To 1 quart of stock add sufficient tomatoes and herbs to make a cream when strained, heat it again, and add 1 ounce of rice and 1/2 pound of cooked salmon or shrimps chopped fine, an onion, a carrot, and thyme and parsley. Cook 1/2 hour or longer, rub through a sieve, and serve with a plate of boiled rice. CHERRY SOUP. (Berlin.) Trim and stone 1 pint of red cherries, add I pint of water, juice and grated rind of a lemon, cinnamon, sugar to taste, and 3 tablespoonfuls of wine or cordial, claret is the best. Cook until done and serve, hot or very cold, with a plate of buttered toast. It will take about half an hour to cook, mashing the fruit well. These fruit and wine soups are favorite hot weather fare in Austria and Germany. APPLE SOUP. Pare and stew 8 fine apples in 1/2 pint of water. Add sugar to taste, press through a sieve, flavor with lemon juice and nutmeg and add a tablespoonful of cornstarch. Cook about ten minutes, add, when cool, 1 pint of white wine or cider, and pour it over 4 apples, sliced and cooked in syrup. STRAWBERRY SOUP. Wash and drain 1/2 pound of strawberries, sprinkle them with sugar, set them aside. Make a syrup of 1 pound of sugar and 3 pints of water, add 1 1/2, pounds of strawberries and the juice of a lemon. Mash, strain, and cool this; add 1/2 pint of light wine and the sugared berries. Serve very cold. WINE SOUP. Mix rapidly on the fire 1 quart of white wine, 1 quart of water, 1 tablespoonful of cornstarch, yolks of 6 eggs, juice and rind of a lemon, and 4 tablespoonfuls of sugar. Stir it, but do not let it boil for 20 minutes. Then add the beaten whites sweetened with sugar, and put on ice to cool. CHOCOLATE SOUP. (Italy) Boil 2 ounces of grated chocolate, a spoonful of vanilla, sugar to taste, and one quart of milk, until smooth. Add the yolks of 4 eggs well beaten, take off and pour over slices of stale sponge cake. Serve cold. COLEVA. (All Souls Broth. Greece.) Boil 1 quart of milk, add 1/2 pint of cooked barley, 1/2 cup each of washed raisins and currants, 1 cup of chopped raw apples and nutmeg, sugar and cinnamon to taste. Cook for 1/2 hour and serve hot. The peasants are very fond of this, which they make and put in dishes on the graves of the dead, All Souls' Eve, for the yearly feast of the departed. CHAPTER TWO-- Fish, Eggs, and Sauces SHRIMP CUTLETS. (Vaucluse.) CHOP and mince 1 1/2 pounds of freshly boiled shrimps. Melt 2 ounces of butter and add 2 ounces of flour, then 1 cup of boiling cream, also the minced fish. Stir and boil and take off the fire, add the yolks of 3 eggs and a pinch of nutmeg, salt, pepper, and some chopped parsley. Pour into a buttered pan 1/2 inch deep ; when cold, cut into shape, dip in egg and crumbs, and fry in boiling lard. Stick a small piece of macaroni, to imitate a bone, at the end of each cutlet and serve with a good sauce, Tartare or Bechamel. SHRIMPS, ST. JACQUES. (Trouville.) Shell 1 quart of boiled shrimps, chop them, and fry in 1 ounce of butter with an onion. Add 1 cup of milk, salt, pepper, parsley, and the yolk of 1 egg. Stir, but do not let it boil. Pour into buttered dishes or clam shells, cover with bread-crumbs and bake till brown. Serve with sliced lemon. SHRIMPS, BORDELAISE. Cut into dice 1/2 can or 1 cup of shrimps, add 1 tablespoonful of chopped ham, 1 ounce flour, and 1 ounce of butter, mixed, 1 cup of stock or consomme, 1 tablespoonful of tomato sauce or mushroom ketchup, 1 slice of chopped onion, a bayleaf , and 1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley. Cook carefully until the sauce is smooth and thick, adding salt and pepper. INDIAN PUFFS. (England.) Pick and chop finely 1 pint of freshly boiled shrimps, add a tablespoonful of butter and a teaspoonful of curry powder, and as much cream or white stock as will make it a smooth paste. Roll sufficient pie-crust very thin, cut into 4-inch squares, fill with this, fold in triangles, and fry them in boiling fat. Serve on a napkin garnished with parsley. CRABS (as cooked in Marseilles). Boil, pick, and chop into dice 6 large crabs, fry in 1 ounces of butter with 1 tablespoonful of minced onion, 1 ounce flour, 1 green pepper, free from seed, and 4 pods of ochra, all cut into dice, add some parsley, 1 cup of white stock, and 2 table-spoonfuls of white wine. Cook 20 minutes, season to taste, and serve with a border of boiled rice. SOUFFLE OF LOBSTER. (Nice.) Blend 1 ounce of butter with 2 ounces of flour; add 1 gill of milk, salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and 1/2 pound of cooked and chopped lobster, then the yolks of 3 eggs, 6 oysters, chopped fine, a gill of cream, whipped stiff, and the beaten whites of 3 eggs. Pour into a buttered mould, steam like a custard for 1/2 an hour, turn out carefully and cover with a white sauce, containing mushrooms. LOBSTER, EN CASSEROLE. (Southern France.) Boil, pick, and cut up a fine large lobster; fry it in olive oil, adding onions and carrots, 2 of each, a bayleaf , some thyme, parsley, and half a glass of sherry or white wine. Be sure to rub the casserole or earthen saucepan with a bit of garlic before putting in the ingredients. Cook for 20 minutes, stirring it, then take out the lobster, add 1/2 cup of stewed tomatoes to the sauce and as much consommé. Cook for 10 minutes longer, put in the lobster, and serve in the casserole with slices of toast and seasoning to taste. LOBSTER OMELETTE. (Paris.) Chop finely the meat of a lobster, 2 pounds, add 1 pint of white broth, thyme, bayleaf , and parsley, the juice of a lemon, and 2 tablespoonfuls of cream. Cook for 10 minutes, season it, and press through a fine sieve. Have ready a light omelette, and pour this across it before folding it and around it, when folded, on the dish. LOBSTER, ST. STEPHAN. Cook and cut up a large lobster, sauté it in olive oil, add parsley, salt, pepper, and a tablespoonful of chopped onion. Add cup of white stock and 1 tablespoonful of Chablis, cook 10 minutes, and serve hot. LOBSTER AND OYSTER PLANT MOUSSE. (Paris.) Boil, pound, and press through a sieve the flesh of a lobster, add 1 tablespoonful of mayonnaise, the same of melted aspic jelly, and 1/2 pint of whipped cream. Pour into a border mould and set on ice to harden. Boil and cut into dice sufficient salsify to fill the centre when turned out, and mix it with some mayonnaise dressing. Serve cold. LOBSTER. (Mariner's Style.) Boil and cut into dice the meat of a lobster, add 2 onions, chopped fine, a bit of garlic, 2 ounces of butter, and then 1/2 cup of white stock, mixed with the yolks of two eggs. Add parsley, salt, and pepper, cook carefully 20 minutes, add a spoonful of lemon juice and a glass of white wine. Serve In the casserole in which it was cooked. SHRIMPS (as cooked in Nancy). Parboil, cut into dice, and fry 18 shrimps with 1/2 ounce of butter and 1 ounce of chopped ham. Add 1 cup of white broth, parsley, salt and pepper, and the juice of a lemon. Pour into a dish over squares of toast. LOBSTER (à la Careme). Boil, pick, and mince the meat of a large lobster, add salt, pepper, lemon juice, or a tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar, 2 ounces of butter, as much flour, and 1/2 cup each of cream and stock. Cover with bread-crumbs and bake 1/2 hour. BOUILLABAISSE. (Marseilles.) Cut up into pieces and remove the bones from 3 pounds of fish, --say, one pound each of cod, halibut, and bluefish, although any fresh fish in due proportion will answer. Add 6 shrimps or 1 lobster or 1 crabs, cooked, and cut into large pieces, 1/2 pint of olive oil; fry lightly, and add 1 lemon and 2 tomatoes, 1 onion and 1 carrot, all sliced, 1 pinch of saffron, --as much as lies on a ten-cent piece,--a bayleaf , and some parsley. A clove of garlic is used, unless the casserole is rubbed with it before cooking. Stir for 10 minutes; add 1 cup of stock and 1 glass of white wine or cider. Cook 15 minutes longer, pour out into a bowl, place slices of toast in the casserole, and return the fish and vegetables, allowing the sauce sufficient time to soak into the toast, and adding salt and pepper to taste. XMAS CARP (as cooked in Poland and Italy on December 24, for supper). Clean and scale the fish, --any white fish may be substituted, --cut it into slices, and fry it with onion, parsley, thyme, salt, and pepper. Add 1/2 pint of white wine to every 2 pounds of fish and cook for 10 minutes, then put the dish in the oven and bake for half an hour or until tender. Add 2 lemons sliced, and a cupful each of chopped almonds and currants. Cook long enough to soften the latter, adding stock if not moist enough, and serve in a deep dish. FISH (as cooked in Russia Easter Eve). Chop sufficient cold fish, boiled previously in water and vinegar, with onion, carrot, and herbs, then freed from bones and skin. Mix with as much mayonnaise dressing as will cover and set on ice 1 hours. Melt some aspic jelly and whip it very stiff, and fill a mould shaped like a cross in alternate layers of jelly and fish. Set aside to harden and turn it out on a bed of lettuce leaves garnished with a border of whole hard-boiled eggs. The originality of this quaint dish lies entirely in the shape of the mould, which must be a square or Greek-cross shape. MATELOTE OF FISH. (Normandy.) Skin and slice 2 pounds of fresh fish, either all one sort or several kinds mixed. Fry it in a ounces of butter with 20 white and very small onions till brown. Add 1 1/2 ounces of flour, salt, and pepper, 6 sliced mushrooms, and a spoonful of lemon juice, a bunch of herbs, 1/2 pint of red wine, and 1/2 pint of consomme. Cook 1/2 an hour, season it to taste, and serve in the casserole. It is a sort of northern bouillabaisse. BOURRIDE. (Marseilles.) Cut up and fry 2 1/2 pounds of salt water fish, with a crab, a bit of garlic, parsley, thyme, a bay-leaf, a clove, a glass of hot water, and a glass of cider. Boil 20 minutes, add a tablespoonful of flour an ounce of butter, the juice of a lemon, the yolks of 1 eggs, pepper, and salt. Add the outside of a green pepper, chopped fine, and the pods of 2 ochra. Cook ten minutes longer, carefully, and serve in the same dish, hot. BRANDADE. (MONTPELLIER.) Soak for three days 1 1/2 pounds of salt cod renewing the water often. Drain it, cover with hot water, and boil 15 minutes. Remove the skin and bones and chop the fish, then fry it with 2 chopped onions and 2 tablespoonfuls of olive oil. Cook 10 minutes, pound this all well, return to the fire and add the juice of 2 lemons, a tablespoonful of oil, and twice as much cream. Beat and stir and season it, adding mace and parsley and the juice of one more lemon. When perfectly smooth and well cooked, pile it on a plate and serve with a white sauce containing oysters, mushrooms, and shrimps. CARP (as cooked in Coblentz). Clean and cut into strips 1 pounds of carp or any white fish, add one glass of claret, 1/2 pint of consomme, salt, pepper, some parsley, thyme, and a clove, 1 cup of chopped mushrooms, 1 carrot, and 1 onion, shredded. Cover, and let it simmer for an hour. Add a tablespoonful of capers and serve, poured on slices of toast. MACKEREL, BAKED IN CREAM. (Austria.) Skin, bone, and slice a large fish into four pieces, season it and fry it in butter. Drain it and keep warm. Mix 1/2 pint of white stock or Bechamel sauce with two tablespoonfuls of sherry and the yolk of an egg. Stir over the fire, pour it over the fish, adding chopped parsley, onion, and bread-crumbs over the top of the dish. Bake till brown. MACKEREL. (Germany.) Clean and score across the back a large fresh fish, add two cups of hot water, a teaspoonful of salt, an onion, and two tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Cook 40 minutes, drain it, reduce the sauce, strain it, and add 1 dozen capers; cook a few minutes longer and pour over the fish. PICKLED MACKEREL. (Germany.) Skin, bone, and cut into pieces 4 pounds of fresh mackerel, put it in layers in a stone crock , sprinkling herbs, pepper and salt and bayleaves between each, using 1 tablespoonful, cut fine, of all the herbs. Press down, cover with vinegar, and seal air-tight. Bake in a moderate oven 6 hours. It will keep several days in a cool place. Good for supper. STAR-GAZY PIE. (Cornwall.) Clean and scale some fresh mackerel, season it with parsley, thyme, sweet marjoram, and bay-leaves. Butter a dish and line it with bread-crumbs, put in the fish, in layers, with herbs and crumbs between. Add the yolks of 4 eggs beaten with 2 tablespoonfuls of tarragon vinegar, cover with a layer of thinly cut bacon and a very light pie-crust. Bake 2 hours and serve, hot or cold. FINDON HADDIE SAVORY. (Scotland.) Dip the fish in boiling water, and take out all the bones and skin. Pound the meat in a mortar, add a little pepper, salt, and a spoonful of lemon juice, also 1 ounce of butter and a tablespoonful of cream. Cook and stir until thick and pour over slices of toast buttered and dipped for an instant in hot water. For supper or lunch. TROUT (as cooked in Geneva). Broil the trout, first dipping them in olive oil, lemon juice, onion juice, and seasoning. Make a sauce of 1/2 pint of consommé, a tablespoonful of claret, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, and a teaspoonful of anchovy sauce. Cook and strain and pour over the fish. BAKED SHAD (as cooked in France). Butter a large, flat earthenware dish, lay the shad, split open, upon it, and cover with a forcemeat made of the roes, some bread-crumbs, parsley, bay-leaf, thyme, butter, and 6 mushrooms, all chopped and mixed together. Sew the fish up and bake for an hour, basting it with 1/2 pint of white stock, seasoned with lemon juice, sherry, onion, and carrot. BROILED FISH (as cooked in Normandy). Clean and split a large fish, such as flounder, bluefish, or mackerel, cover it with a mixture of sweet oil, vinegar, chopped onion, herbs, salt, and pepper. Set in a cold place for an hour, turning it several times. Drain it, dip it in bread-crumbs, then in egg and more crumbs, and broil till brown. Serve with Tartare sauce. SOLE, à la Normande. Make a forcemeat of bread, herbs, oysters, and truffles, mushrooms, and 1/4 pound of ham, all cut up and mixed with 1/2 cup of white stock. Stuff the fish with this, squeeze the juice of a lemon over it, dot it with butter and bread-crumbs. Lay it in a dish, pour over it 1/2 pint of white stock, mixed with some parsley, pepper, and salt. Bake 40 minutes, basting often, and serve in the same dish, adding more stock, if too dry. FISH SALAD (as made in the Tyrol). Remove skin and bonesand flake 1 cups of cold boiled fish, add 1/2 pound of cold boiled shrimps, cut into dice, mix with 4 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, a little pepper, 1/2 teaspoonful of celery seed, and 2 tablespoonfuls of capers. Stir well and add 1 green pepper, cut up finely and free from seeds, and then enough mayonnaise dressing to make it moist. Serve in a bed of lettuce leaves with bits of aspic jelly and 2 hard-boiled eggs sliced and arranged as a garnish. FISH PIES. These are served at all of the English and French inns, and are not hard to make at home. Dip 1/2 pound of stale bread-crumbs in enough milk to moisten, add 1 ounce of butter, a little salt and pepper, and beat until smooth over the fire. Add parsley, thyme, and a bayleaf , and take off to cool. Skin and bone 2 good flounder, cod, bass, or mackerel; scrape and pound half of the flesh and add it to the bread mixture. Season the rest, cut into slices, and arrange it in layers in a deep dish, with forcemeat of the fish and bread between, and dropping little bits of butter here and there. Have ready 1 cup of fish broth or consomme or veal stock, rather thick and well seasoned; pour it over and arrange slices of bacon on top, under a lid of fine puff paste. Leave a hole in the middle for the steam to escape, cover with a layer of buttered paper, and bake 3 hours in a slow oven. Take off the paper, and when the pie is brown, fill the hole with 1/2 cup of stock, mixed with a tablespoonful of sherry or white wine, and serve cold. MACKEREL PIE. (Scotland.) Make a forcemeat of the roes and some parsley, onion, butter, bread-crumbs, thyme, sweet marjoram, and the yolk of an egg. Cut the fish into strips and roll them with a filling of this. Arrange neatly in a deep dish, pour in 1/2 cup of stock and cover with a layer of mashed potatoes. Bake 3/4 of an hour and serve hot. FRIED OYSTERS. (Holstein style.) Open and drain 2 dozen fine large oysters, dry in a napkin, and keep the juice for soup. Mix some salt and pepper, 1/2 a cup of flour, a little butter, and the yolk of 2 eggs. Dip each oyster in this, covering well, then in a mixture of equal parts bread-crumbs and grated cheese. Fry them in boiling fat, drain and garnish with parsley and lemon. SALMON CROQUETTES. (A Swedish recipe.) Fresh salmon is very fine and plentiful in Norway and Sweden, but canned fish may be used instead. Cook 1/2 pint of white stock with 1/2 ounce of butter, yolks of two eggs, parsley, pepper and salt, onion juice, and then add sufficient chopped salmon, free from bones, and stir well. Let it cool, make into croquettes, dip in eggs and bread-crumbs, and fry till brown. Drain carefully and serve with Tartare sauce and border of parsley. SALMON (as cooked along the Rhine). Cut up 3 shallots, 2 parsley roots, and a bunch of the leaves, with thyme, a bayleaf , a clove, and 3 carrots. Fry these in butter and add 1/2 pint of white wine. Lay the fish in a flat dish, pour this over, cover closely, and stew it until tender. Take out the fish, strain the sauce, thicken it with flour, butter, and a cup of rich milk, then pour it over the fish and serve with parsley and lemon. The fish may be cut into cutlets before cooking, if the kettle is too small to hold it. SALMON (as cooked in Provincial France). Cut 1 1/2 pounds of salmon into four pieces, season to taste, add juice of a lemon and 1 ounce of butter. Cook it in a pan and add 1 dozen oysters, 6 shrimps, cut into dice, and 1 cup of white stock thickened with flour and butter. Stir for 10 minutes, or until the oysters and shrimps are done; add the yolk of 1 egg, a tablespoonful of sherry, and arrange the fish on a dish, with the sauce poured over. BAKED SHAD ROE. (Northern France.) Skin two large roes and lay them on an earthen plate which has been sprinkled with bread-crumbs, chopped onion, and parsley, 3 mushrooms minced, and some butter. Cover with more of these, and pour over 1 cup of white stock mixed with a spoonful of sherry. Bake in the oven 1/2 an hour, drain off the sauce, strain it, and thicken it with flour and butter. Pour it over the fish once more, cover the top with bread-crumbs, and sprinkle lemon juice here and there. Brown it in the oven and serve hot. MACKEREL (as cooked in the Tyrol). Wash and dry 2 fresh mackerel, put in a saucepan with salt, pepper, nutmeg, parsley, and chopped onion, and 2 tablespoonfuls of cider. Cover and cook 1/2 hour, add 1 cup of veal broth, thickened with flour and butter, the yolk of an egg, and a tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar. Strain this sauce, pour over the fish again, dot with bread-crumbs, and bake a light brown. Serve in the same dish in which it is baked. Earthen dishes are always used abroad, red, striped with yellow or black. TURBAN OF SOLE. (Paris.) Trim two large soles or flounders into cutlets, fill them with a forcemeat of fish, bread, herbs, and egg, roll and arrange in a ring-shaped mould. Cook like a custard, in a pan of water, for 1 hour or they can be tied securely with thread and cooked in stock. Drain the fillets, take off the string, arrange in a circle and fill the centre with a sauce made of 1 cup of white broth, 1 cup of oyster juice, some butter and flour, 1 dozen oysters, yolks of two eggs, salt, pepper, and chopped parsley. RICHMOND EEL PIE. (England.) Skin, clean, and cut up 2 large eels, wash and dry them and cook with 1 ounce of butter, 2 table-spoonfuls of chopped mushrooms, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, 1 minced onion, a bayleaf , salt, pepper, rind of a lemon, 1 glass of sherry, and a cup of consomme. Cook until the eels are tender, strain the sauce and thicken it with flour and butter. Line a deep dish with pastry, arrange the eels in it and pour the sauce over, with sliced hard-boiled eggs on top. Then cover with a lid of thin pastry, ornamented with leaves of the same, glaze with yolk of an egg and bake it 1 hour in a moderate oven, serve hot or cold. RECIPE FOR FRYING FISH. (New Haven) Wash and dry the fish, sprinkle it well with flour, salt, and pepper, then dip it in egg and bread-crumbs or coarse oatmeal, and fry in a deep pan of boiling fat. CRABS AND TOMATOES. (Provence.) Boil enough crabs and chop fine; to each pound add 1/3 as much bread-crumbs, 1/2 pint of tomato sauce, rind and juice of 1/2 a lemon, salt, pepper, parsley, and 1 glass of Chablis or sherry. Stir well and serve hot, with a border of toast or fried potatoes. CRABS, STYLE OF SAINT LAWRENCE. Saint Lawrence was that early martyr who was broiled for his faith, and French cooks commemorate his suffering somewhat strangely in naming and cooking this dish. Chop 3/4 pound of shelled crabs, add 1/2 pint of white stock, a tablespoonful of sherry or lemon juice, salt, pepper, and a tablespoonful of grated cheese. Cook for 10 minutes, pour over slices of toast, and add more cheese, on top. Brown with a salamander or in a very hot oven. OYSTERS IN CREAM. (German fashion.) Drain 24 oysters, add the juice of a lemon, 1 ounce of butter, salt, and pepper and bring to a boil. Melt 1 ounce of butter, add 2 teaspoonfuls of flour, 1/2 pint of white stock, a spoonful of mushroom ketchup, and cook and stir 5 minutes. Blend the yolks of 2 eggs with 1/2 cup of cream or milk, add to the sauce and pour over the oysters. OYSTERS IN FORCEMEAT. (A French recipe.) Cook 18 oysters with 1 ounce of butter, 1/2 cup of juice, pepper, and salt, for 10 minutes. Have ready 6 ounces of forcemeat made of equal parts of chopped chicken and bread-crumbs, an egg, herbs, a spoonful of butter and seasoning, mixed with enough milk or stock to make a paste. Dip each oyster in this, covering thickly, then in bread-crumbs and egg, and fry brown. Serve with a white sauce and border of parsley. SCALLOPS (as cooked in Brest, France). Fry 1 pint of scallops in 1 ounce of butter, add 2 minced onions, a tablespoonful of flour, and 1/2 pint of the juice, also the yolks of 4 eggs and 1/2 cup of bread-crumbs. Bake in small shells. TROUT. (Provincial France.) Clean, wash, and dry 6 fine trout, add salt, pepper, a carrot, a bay leaf, and some thyme, and 1 pint of water mixed with 1 tablespoonful of vinegar. Cook for 15 minutes, drain the fish and cover them with a sauce made of 1/2 pint stewed tomatoes, 2 truffles, 6 mushrooms, and an onion, cut up, 12 olives and some parsley. This must boil 15 minutes before straining it over the fish and using the olives as a garnish along the edge. Serve at once, very hot. SMELTS (as cooked in Dresden). Clean and dry 18 large smelts, take out the bones and stuff them with a forcemeat of bread-crumbs, butter, chopped oysters, and mushrooms, seasoned to taste. Put in a dish, cover with some chopped onion, the juice of a lemon, 1/2 pint of milk or white stock, and 1 ounce of butter. Bake for 1/2 hour. Serve with a border of parsley and more sauce made of flour, butter, milk, or stock, in a bowl, separately. COLLARED EELS. (Germany.) Clean and split and bone one large eel, dust it with salt and pepper and set aside. Chop 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1 beet, a tablespoonful of capers, 2 pickles, 1 onion, and 3 anchovies, with salt and parsley. Cover the eels with this, tie in a cloth, and cook for 1/2 hour in half water and half vinegar and a bayleaf . Drain, untie, and put in a mould with sufficient melted aspic jelly and turn out on a dish, with mayonnaise, when cold. RAGOÛT OF EELS. (Normandy.) Cut up and fry in butter 1 1/2 pounds of eels, add 1 glass of white wine or cider, 1 tablespoonful of mushroom ketchup, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. After 10 minutes add 1/2 pint of white stock, 6 mushrooms, 12 oysters, 6 forcemeat tails (made of fish, chicken, or veal ), and 6 shrimps, all cooked. Stir, and add the yolks of 2 eggs and serve at once. SALT COD (as cooked on the coast of Spain). Soak and parboil 2 pounds of cod. Serve with a sauce of tomatoes, onions, green peppers, olive oil and stock, in proper proportions, with herbs and seasoning, then arrange with a border of fried potatoes. COD AND OYSTER PIE. (England.) Flake and remove the bones from cold cooked fresh fish, add to each cupful 6 oysters, 1/2 cup of stock, mixed with a tablespoonful of oyster juice. Season to taste, pour into a dish and bake, with a thin crust of paste on top, or a layer of mashed potatoes. FORCEMEAT FOR FILLING FISH CUTLETS. (Paris.) Chop finely, 2 shrimps, 6 oysters, I tablespoonful of parsley, 6 small mushrooms, and the rind of a lemon. Add 1 cup of bread-crumbs, a little nutmeg, salt, pepper, and the yolk of an egg. Beat and stir well. If not needed at once, it may be put on ice for a day or two, but it is better made fresh. FRENCH PANNED OYSTERS. Drain fifty oysters, add 2 ounces of butter, mixed in a pan or casserole with 2 teaspoonfuls of flour and 1 teaspoonful of chopped parsley. Stir, blend, and season. When the oysters begin to curl, add the yolks of 2 eggs and, still stirring, pour over slices of toast. SAUCE FOR CUTLETS, CROQUETTES, OR FISH. Beat 2 eggs with salt, pepper, and the juice of a lemon. Add it to 1/2 pint of boiling milk, stir in a pan of hot water until it thickens, adding 1 tablespoonful of parsley. This is a very useful and economical recipe. DUTCH SAUCE. This is the same as above, made richer. Stir and blend over the fire 1/2 pint of melted butter and the yolks of four eggs, set in another pan, like a custard. Do not boil, merely keep hot, or it will curdle. Add salt, pepper, and 2 tablespoonfuls of lemon juice and a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and a tiny pinch of nutmeg. BECHAMEL SAUCE. (Rich.) Blend 2 ounces of butter with 1 1/2 ounces of flour, add 1 pint of white stock (preferably chicken ), and 6 chopped mushrooms. Stir for 20 minutes, add 1/2 pint of hot cream and the juice of a lemon, strain it and cook 5 minutes longer. Plain. Chop 1 carrot, 1 piece of celery, 1 small onion, 1 bay-leaf, salt, and pepper, and cook with 2 ounces of butter and 1/2 ounce of flour, stirring constantly. Add 1 pint of very rich milk and cook 10 minutes longer; strain for use. Bechamel sauce is served with chicken or delicate entrées; it has no equal for the purpose for which it was invented over a century ago. TOMATO SAUCE (used for rich entrées and braised dishes). Cook 1 ounce of butter with 1 ounce of chopped ham, 1 onion, 1 carrot, some parsley and a bay-leaf and a clove. Chop the onion and carrot. Cook for 5 minutes, then add 1/2 cup of consommé or melted beef extract, 1 cup of stewed tomatoes or 3 fresh ones, sliced, a tablespoonful of butter and flour, mixed; season to taste. Stir and cook 20 minutes, then press through a sieve. VALENCIA SAUCE (for chicken or sweetbreads). Chop 1 truffle, 3 mushrooms, and 3 slices of tongue, very finely; mix with 3 tablespoonfuls of boiled rice and a tablespoonful of stock. Stir and cook for 10 minutes, add 1/2 cup of stewed tomatoes and a tablespoonful of grated cheese. Cook until smooth and pour around or underneath the chicken, etc. TARTARS SAUCE. Make 1/2 pint of good mayonnaise with the yolk of a raw egg and the yolk of a hard-boiled one, adding a teaspoonful of French mustard, a tea-spoonful of lemon juice and a tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar, after first blending 1/2 pint of olive oil with the two eggs. Add salt and pepper, a tablespoonful of chopped capers, the same of chopped chives, and half as much parsley and gherkins. These must all be minced and pounded as fine as possible. Stir well and press through a sieve. Serve with jellied fish, fried fish, or salads. PRINCE OF WALES' SAUCE. (For Fish.) Cook a handful of burnet, chervil, and parsley and tarragon leaves, in boiling water for five minutes. Drain and chop very fine, with 2 boned anchovies, yolks of 2 hard-boiled eggs, a pinch of mustard, and the yolk of a raw egg. Pound these to a paste, and add 1/4 pint of pure olive oil and a tablespoonful of lemon juice. Strain for use. CHERRY SAUCE. (Germany. For pork or game.) Wash, stone, and set aside 1 pound of ripe red cherries. Simmer the kernels, with water to cover 15 minutes. Then strain the water, add to it the cherries, 1 pint of water, 4 cloves, 1 glass of claret, 1 slice of stale bread, and enough sugar. Cook half an hour, press through a sieve, and re-boil it until rather thick. Serve hot. GARLIC SAUCE. (Provence.) Peel and chop 2 cloves of garlic; boil in 4 waters, drain, and chop fine. Add 1/2 pint of stock, a blending of flour and butter, yolk of I egg, and a pinch of salt. Strain before use, serve hot, with entrées. GOOSEBERRY SAUCE. (England. For mackerel.) Trim and mash a pound of green gooseberries, add sugar to flavor, a spoonful of corn starch, and the juice of a lemon. Cook 10 minutes, add a pinch of cinnamon and a spoonful of butter, simmer until thick, and press through a sieve. ORANGE SAUCE. (Spanish. For game.) Parboil the outer yellow rind of 2 large oranges. Drain these, cut into thin strips, and add the juice and a glass of port wine and 1/2 cup of white stock. Cook ten minutes, strain, and then add salt and pepper, if desired. Serve, separately, in a bowl. MONTPELLIER BUTTER (for garnishing cold fish, jellies, or filling sandwiches). Mix 1/2 pound of parsley, tarragon, watercress, and chives, in equal parts. Boil them one minute in hot water, drain and chop them very fine, with the yolks of 3 hard-boiled eggs, 3 anchovies, free from skin and bones, 1 tablespoonful each of capers and gherkins, chopped fine, a little onion juice, salt, and pepper. Pound these and add 1/2 pound of fresh butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of olive oil, and 1 tablespoonful of lemon juice. Mix all well and press through a sieve. Set on ice until needed. It is usually pressed through a pastry tube, to form roses, along the edge of the dish, or on top of the fish. ESSENCE OF HAM (used for flavoring sauces). This will keep some time on ice. Chop 3 pounds of lean ham with 4 onions, 2 carrots, 2 parsnips, 4 mushrooms (or a tablespoonful of mushroom catchup ), and add 1 ounce of butter, 3 truffles, 1 cup of veal stock, 1 clove, and some thyme and parsley. Stir, cover very closely, and simmer 1 hour. Strain it through a fine sieve. A tablespoonful will flavor a pint of sauce or as much soup. FAMILY CULLIS. (Old English recipe for foundation of sauces.) Blend 1 tablespoonful each of flour and butter, add 1 cup of good consommé, a glass of white wine, some parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , and a bit of mace, also 3 mushrooms, salt, and pepper. Cook, covered, for 1/2 hour. Strain through a sieve. Will keep some time on ice, and useful for adding flavor to entrées or sauces. CHIPOLATA GARNISH. (A Spanish recipe.) In Spain chicken or sweetbread or any entrée is rendered attractive by the addition of Chipolata. Cut up into neat pieces equal parts of carrots, chestnuts (parboiled and free from shell), mushrooms, turnips, and small sausages. Cover with consommé and cook until tender, adding a spoonful of sherry, pepper, and salt. CARAMEL (for coloring soups). French cooks keep a bottle of this on hand to use for gravies and soups which are too pale. Stir 1/2 pound of sugar and a tablespoonful of water constantly over the fire until a rich brown, being very careful not to let it burn. Add 1 cup of water and a little salt and cook 10 minutes longer. Cool and strain it and bottle tightly in small bottles. Will keep a year, if corked, and in a cool place. GREEN. (Coloring for Desserts.) Red coloring may be made with cranberries, and yellow, with saffron. Clean and scald and drain and pound a quart of spinach. Press through a sieve, add 1/4 as much sugar, and boil it with the juice, 1/2 an hour. FRENCH AROMATIC SEASONING. Mix 1/4 ounce each of thyme, bayleaves, and laurel, sweet marjoram, and rosemary. Dry these in the oven, and reduce to powder. Add 1/2 ounce each of powdered nutmeg and cloves, a teaspoonful of black pepper, and as much salt. When all are well mixed, sift, and put into bottles closely corked, for use. A pinch of this improves the flavor of soups, entrées, sauces, etc., when fresh herbs are not at hand. FRENCH SEASONING. (Another recipe.) Dry and pound together 1 1/2 ounces of thyme, 1 ounce of bayleaves, the same of sweet basil and summer savory, and also of sweet marjoram. Add a teaspoonful each of pepper and salt, 1 ounce of cloves, 1 nutmeg, and 1/2 ounce of mace, rubbed with the rind of a lemon and a clove of garlic. Dry in the oven, and strain and bottle for use. TARRAGON VINEGAR. This adjunct to flavoring sauces and salads can be had at the grocery stores, about thirty-five cents a pint bottle. But it is easily made at home if you buy tarragon plants from a large florist, and by planting them in the garden, or in boxes, the fresh leaves will be useful all summer, so that in the fall, before frost, what is left can be made into vinegar. This plan gives a constant supply for a year. Gather the leaves on a dry day, wash them to remove insects, dry them, and after bruising them, adding about a pint to a quart of wine vinegar, add a tablespoonful each of chopped parsley and chives. Infuse for a week, strain it, and bottle closely. ENGLISH RECIPE FOR FRYING FISH. Wash the fish, dry it well, dust it thickly with flour. Beat an egg light, dip the fish carefully, then dip it in bread-crumbs. Fry in a deep pan, in butter, olive oil, or suet, very hot. JEWISH RECIPE FOR FRYING FISH. (Prague.) Mix 6 ounces of flour, a pinch of salt, yolk or one egg, and 1 ounce of olive oil, well together, add 1 gill of tepid water, set aside 1/2 hour in a cool place. Beat in the white of the egg, which has been beaten stiff, dip each fish in this, then in bread-crumbs, and fry in oil or fat, very hot. The Jews do not use butter for frying, as their religious laws forbid it, but they are, the world over, past masters of the art of frying, and especially in the older cities of Europe, where they have kept to the ancient modes of living. POACHED EGGS. (Normandy.) Fry an onion, 1/2 clove of garlic, - which may be omitted, - some parsley, thyme, and a bayleaf , in 1 ounce of butter. Add 1/2 pint of red wine (or cider ), the same of consommé, or white stock, and cook until well blended. Add salt and pepper, strain it, and pour around 6 eggs, poached in vinegar and water, drained, and laid on toast, previously dipped in hot water to soften it. Garnish with parsley. FRIED EGGS. (Marseilles.) Fry four very fresh eggs in olive oil, drain them, add to the oil in the pan 1/2 cup of consommé, 1/2 a green pepper, chopped and free from seeds, and 6 mushrooms. Cook this carefully, and pour around the eggs. EGGS. (Carmelite Convent recipe.) Butter a dish, pour into it a purée of asparagus tips, parboiled with herbs and seasoning, drained, mixed with a cup of cream, or white broth, and pressed through a sieve. Arrange this evenly, and break over it carefully four or more fresh eggs. Bake until the eggs are firm. This can also be made with a foundation, or mattress of spinach, or any other vegetable. EGGS (à la Gruyère). Melt 1/4 pound of grated Gruyère cheese with a teaspoonful of butter, 1 cup of chicken broth, some chopped onion and parsley, nutmeg, and salt. When well blended, add four well-beaten eggs, stir until firm, and serve on toast. FONDUE. (Switzerland.) Take as many eggs as there are people, add 1/3 of their weight in grated cheese, and 1/2 their weight in butter. Beat the eggs, white and yolks, together, add the cheese and butter, salt and pepper. Cook until it is thick, and pour into a deep dish. Add parsley if desired. POACHED EGGS. (Roumania and Turkey.) Make a purée of 1 pound of cooked and chopped calves' liver, 1 cup or less of stock, parsley, pepper, and salt. Put this through a sieve, arrange on a dish, as a bed for 6 poached eggs, and pour around a sauce made of stock, flavored with capers or tarragon vinegar. EGGS (as cooked in Nuremberg). Peel 4 hard-boiled eggs, dip them in batter, fry brown, dip and fry again, until twice the usual size. Serve with a sauce of tomatoes or on a bed of spinach, cooked and made into a paste. FRIED EGGS (as cooked in Scotland). Make a forcemeat of 1/2 cup of milk and equal parts of bread-crumbs and chopped ham, the yolk of an egg, and a little French mustard. Dip fried eggs in this, then fry again, and serve with a salad of watercress. EGGS (as cooked in Lyons). Peel and slice 6 hard-boiled eggs. Make a sauce of 2 large white onions, chopped fine, 1 ounce of butter, add 1/2 pint of stock, parsley and seasoning. Pour this over the eggs, in a border of fried potatoes. FRIED EGGS. (Alsace-Lorraine.) Wash and slice neatly 1 large cooked carrot; add 1 gill of white stock, a spoonful of butter, 12 roasted and shelled chestnuts, and 2 sausages, sliced. Stir and cook 20 minutes, add salt, pepper, and a spoonful of sherry. Pour over the 10 fried eggs, with the vegetables around. SPANISH OMELETTE. Beat the whites and yolks of 6 eggs separately, and add salt, pepper, 1/2 tablespoonful of flour mixed with as much milk; pour into a buttered pan and cook till firm. Before folding it on a plate pour between the following sauce. 1 bayleaf , 1 onion, some parsley, 1 green pepper, free from seeds, 4 fresh mushrooms, a tablespoonful of ham, all chopped fine, and 1 lamb's kidney, sliced. Fry these in butter or olive oil, add 3 tomatoes, skinned, and 1 cup of consommé. Cook these 1/2 an hour before pouring in the omelette. FRENCH OMELETTE. Beat the whites of 5 eggs very stiff and set aside in a cool place. Beat the yolks well with salt, pepper, butter the size of a walnut, 2 table-spoonfuls of cream, a little nutmeg, 1/2 spoonful of onion juice, and 1 spoonful of chopped parsley. Add these lightly to the whites and cook in a hot, buttered pan. This makes a very tender, delicate omelette. CRUMB OMELETTE. (A German recipe.) Beat the whites and yolks of 6 eggs separately, adding to the yolks 1 cup of cream blended with a tablespoonful of cornstarch and a cup of bread-crumbs. Stir, season with salt, pepper, and parsley and a little chopped onion, pour into a buttered pan and cook until it is brown before folding. Can be served with a purée of spinach or any vegetable made into a cream, or it can be made as an ordinary omelette, the bread being cut into dice and fried before adding, in the centre. CHAPTER THREE - Meats and Entrées ROAST LAMB (as cooked in Brittany). BONE and stuff a fine leg of lamb, with a mixture of bread-crumbs, parsley, sweet marjoram, onion, and yolk of an egg. Cook it for 1 1/2 hours, pricking the skin first and rubbing it with garlic. Baste often with the drippings and one cup of stock added. Make a purée of 1 pint of boiled Lima beans, mashed with butter, seasoning, and white stock, pressed through a sieve. Put this on the dish, place the meat over it and pour the gravy, reduced and skimmed of fat, over all. BRAISED SADDLE OF LAMB. (Normandy.) Bone a saddle of lamb and fill it with a force-meat of bread-crumbs, onion, herbs, butter, egg, and 1/2 pound of chopped veal. Roll it, tie it, and lard the upper side with thin strips of pork. Put it in a pan with 1 pint of white stock, 2 onions, 1 carrot, some celery, parsley, and thyme. Cover with a tight lid and let it cook in the oven for 1 1/2 hours. Let it cool in the sauce, remove the fat from the latter, and reduce it by re-boiling. Dip the meat in some of the sauce and then in bread-crumbs, and brown it in the oven. Pour the sauce around, after straining it, and arrange a border of stuffed tomatoes or spinach or baked onions or potatoes, whichever is most convenient. LEG of MUTTON. (Gascony style.) The province of Gascony, in the south of France, is renowned for good cooking, just as Normandy is in the north. Boil 2 cloves of garlic in several waters, to remove the crude taste, chop them with 6 boned anchovies, and rub the mixture into slits cut across the skin of a nice leg of mutton. Dredge the surface closely with bread-crumbs, put into a pan holding 1/2 pint of consommé and bake it 2 hours, basting it often with the sauce. Serve with a border of vegetables, or spaghetti, previously cooked and seasoned. The anchovies and garlic give a peculiar flavor much esteemed by those who like bourgeois cookery. ROAST VEAL. (Italian method.) Bone, stuff, and tie a nice loin of veal, put it in a pan with 2 ounces of butter, 1/2 cup of water, and salt and pepper, then roast it 2 hours, basting often. Drain it, dip it in half a cup of white stock mixed with the yolk of an egg and some parsley. Dust LEG OF MUTTON, GASCONY ( See page 68 ) An illustration of a plate of leg of mutton with other side dishes. CANNELONS AND BATONS DE JAKOB, MARSEILLES ( See pages 77 and 167 ) Two decorative oblong plates which, one filled with four cannelons and the other one filled with batons de jakob. it thickly with bread-crumbs and grated cheese, and bake it or brown it with a salamander. Serve with a border of potato croquettes. BREAST of VEAL. (A German recipe.) Cut into pieces a fine breast of veal, add salt, pepper, 2 onions, and 1 carrots, sliced, some parsley, thyme, and a bayleaf . Add also sufficient water to cover, and cook, with a lid on the pan, 1 hour. Take out the veal, remove the bones from each piece, and dip it in butter and bread-crumbs. Broil these cutlets, and when brown, serve with a sauce of the gravy, strained and seasoned with a table-spoonful of vinegar and two tablespoonfuls of pickled and chopped gherkins. ROAST LOIN of PORK. (Germany.) Boil the pork until tender, then roast it in the oven with 3 onions, 3 carrots, sliced thin, parsley, thyme, and a clove. Baste with 1 cup of hot water or stock, and after half an hour strain and skim the gravy and reduce it by rapid boiling until there is barely enough to coat the surface of the meat. Dust it all over thickly with crumbs, and sprinkle a tiny bit of cinnamon here and there. Bake until brown and serve with cherry sauce.(See recipe.) ROAST PIG. (England.) Clean and singe a fat young pig. Stuff it with a forcemeat of bread, 2 pounds of pork and 2 pounds of veal, sage, thyme, lemon-peel, some parsley, onion, salt, pepper, and mace, mixed with the yolk of an egg. Sew up the slit and set the pig on its feet, basting it with butter, until done. ROAST GOOSE. (England, Michaelmas Day.) Singe and clean a fat goose, stuff it with the liver chopped fine, 1 cup or more of bread-crumbs, 2 ounces suet, lemon peel, nutmeg, and onion, sage, parsley, salt, pepper, and 2 tablespoonfuls of cream. Baste it with butter, dredge it with flour till brown, and serve with apple sauce. ROAST GOOSE (as cooked at Arles, Southern France). Singe, clean, and truss a young fat goose. Stuff it with 4 onions, parboiled, 4 ounces of bread soaked in milk, 3 ounces butter, a tablespoonful of parsley, a little nutmeg grated, and 4 ounces of chestnuts, all chopped fine and well mixed. Add salt and pepper. The chestnuts must be, of course, roasted, blanched, and cut up. Put the goose in a pan with 1 carrot, some celery, parsley, sweet marjoram, 1 onion, and a clove. Braise it, or cook, closely covered, in its own steam, for 2 hours. Take it out, strain, skim, and reduce the sauce and mix it with a cup of stewed and strained tomatoes. Heat it again and pour around the goose. FILLET OF BEEF, MIGNONNE. (Paris.) Broil a fine fillet of beef, dusting it first with salt, pepper, onion juice, and olive oil. When brown, pour around a sauce made of 1/2 cup of cream whipped stiff, with 2 tablespoonfuls of grated horse-radish, pepper, and salt. Garnish with sliced and fried bananas. BROILED STEAK. (English chop-house recipe.) Mix 1 tablespoonful of olive oil, a teaspoonful of salt, and a pinch of pepper. Rub this over the steak and set it aside with the sauce on it for 2 hours, in a cold place. Drain it, put it on a broiler, and sear it quickly, then cook it slowly, putting a few ashes over the hot fire, for about 10 minutes. When the meat looks puffy, but being careful to lose none of the juice, remove to a hot dish and place a bit of butter on top. Garnish with parsley. HENRY IV.'S RECIPE FOR BOILED CHICKEN. Henry the Fourth was that beloved king of France who said that he wanted the poor man to have a fowl in a casserole every Sunday-since the peasants were terribly poor and taxed before that time. He was a jolly fellow and came from a part of France famous for good cooking. Clean a fat hen, singe it, and then chop the liver with 1 cup of bread-crumbs or more, if needful, 1/2 pound of ham, 1/2 cup of milk, 6 chestnuts and 6 truffles, nutmeg, parsley, thyme, sweet marjoram, and a grating of garlic or onion juice. Add the yolks of two eggs. Now fill the belly, the crop, and the cavities of the legs and wings, which must be boned and all tied firmly. Brown it in butter, add 1 carrots, 2 onions, sliced, 1/2 cup of rice, and a pint of water. Cover very closely and simmer for 1 hour. Serve with the sauce poured around or in the same dish in which it was cooked. Any one who has tried this will admit that it has a superior flavor. CHICKEN ROYAL (invented for one of the early queens of France). Bone a large fat chicken or a capon, fill it with a forcemeat of bread, herbs, mushrooms, eggs, and onion, seasoned and chopped. Truss it, lard it with bacon, and cover it with oiled paper. Bake in a pint of consommé , basting often. When tender, take off the paper, let it brown, reduce and strain the sauce, and serve with a purée of chestnuts, boiled, shelled, pounded, flavored with stock, and strained. CHICKEN À LA MARENGO (invented for Napoleon, the night of the battle). Joint and fry a tender chicken in 4 spoonfuls of olive oil, with three shallots, a clove of garlic, a bayleaf , some parsley, and thyme. When brown, take out and keep warm. Add to the oil 1 pint of white stock and the yolk of an egg. Stir until thick, strain, and pour over the chicken. Serve with a border of poached eggs, on strips of toast. ROAST CHICKEN. (Paris.) Clean, stuff, and roast a fine fowl, larding it with bits of bacon, and basting with 1 cup of consommé. Strain the sauce, add 1 onion, some parsley, and the livers, chopped fine, a cup of bread-crumbs and the juice of an orange. Boil, strain again, and serve with a salad of watercress. CHICKEN (as cooked in Monte Carlo). Melt 2 tablespoonfuls of butter in an earthen dish or casserole with 1 carrot, 3 onions, sliced, 2 bayleaves, salt, pepper, and some thyme. Add a young fat fowl, cut into joints, and let it get brown. Then add 1 pint of consommé and cover, air tight; cook 3/4 of an hour; it must simmer all that time. If the fowl is old, it will take longer to cook it. Add 2 tablespoonfuls of sherry, a dozen potato balls fried in butter, a dozen button mushrooms, and some chopped parsley. Let it cook 10 minutes more, and serve in the same dish, or the charm of it will be lost. FRIED CHICKEN (as cooked in Vienna). Clean and cut up a fat chicken. Cover it for 3 hours with a mixture of lemon juice and olive oil, parsley, a bayleaf , and seasoning. Drain, dip each piece in egg and bread-crumbs, and fry brown. Mix 1 cup of white stock with 1 cup of rich milk, the yolk of an egg, and 10 small mushrooms. Season and cook carefully and pour around the chicken, first adding a little chopped parsley and the juice of a lemon to the sauce. CHICKEN (as cooked in Spain and Portugal). Clean and cut up a fat fowl, fry it in 2 ounces of butter with 1 ounce of ham and an onion, chopped fine. Add 1 quart of consommé, 1 pint of stewed tomatoes, 2 dozen bits of ochra, 1 cup of rice, and 1 green pepper, free from seeds and sliced. Season and cook, closely covered, for 1 1/2 hours. CHICKEN, STEWED (as cooked in Hungary). Clean and truss a fat fowl; fill it with bread-crumbs, onion, herbs, and yolk of an egg. Tie the breast with slices of lemon and salt pork, then wrap in oiled paper. Add 1 onion, 1 clove, and some parsley and 1 cup of white stock, or enough to cover it. Cook, covered, 1 hour. Strain the sauce, add 1 cup of hot cream, a pinch of paprika, some butter, the yolk of an egg, and some parsley. Pour around the chicken and serve with rice. FRIED CHICKEN (as cooked in Florence). Cut up a fat fowl and parboil it in 1 pint of white stock. Drain it, reduce the stock, and add the yolks of 2 eggs and the juice of a lemon, and strain it. Dip the chicken in the sauce, then in crumbs and grated cheese, and fry brown. Serve the rest of the sauce in a bowl. CHICKEN À LA CRÉCI. (Flanders.) Chop 1/2 pound of bacon, fry it with 12 tiny white onions, 12 button mushrooms, 2 carrots, and 6 chestnuts; cut into dice in 2 ounces butter. Add a large chicken, which has been cut up and cooked for 1/2 hour in some broth. Add also salt and pepper, a blade of mace, and a glass of white wine or sherry. Cook, covered, for 40 minutes and serve hot. CHICKEN EN MATELOTE. (Normandy.) Joint a nice chicken and fry it in butter. Add 6 small onions and a carrot, sliced, 6 small mushrooms and 6 parsnips, cut into dice, parsley, thyme, sweet marjoram, salt, and enough stock to cover. Simmer in a closed pot for 1/2 hour. Strain the sauce and add to it 1 anchovy, cut up, 1 teaspoonful of capers, and 1 glass of claret. Return it to the fowl, cook 20 minutes longer, and serve with slices of toast. CHICKEN CUTLETS. (A recipe of Provence.) Chop very fine the meat of a fowl, to make 2 cupfuls; it must be cooked first. Add 2 ounces of butter, salt, pepper, and 1/2 cup of rich milk or cream. Divide into balls, flatten like a chop, dip in egg or bread-crumbs, and fry in hot fat. Arrange on a dish, with tomato sauce. CUTLETS OF CHICKEN (invented for one of the French monarchs). Cut up the meat of 1/2 a chicken, - that cooked in the soup will answer best, - add 6 mushrooms, and 1/2 ounce cooked and chopped beef tongue. Fry these in 2 ounces of butter, with 2 teaspoonfuls of chopped onion and 1 ounce of flour. Add, next, 1 pint of chicken broth, and cook until a smooth paste, stirring often. Add yolks of 2 eggs, juice of a lemon, some parsley, and salt. If too thin, pour off, by straining, half the sauce, and let it harden in a pan. Mould into cutlets and dip each in the sauce, then in crumbs. Fry in butter or lard and serve in a circle, with the sauce diluted with 1/2 cup of boiling milk. CANNELONS OF CHICKEN. (Marseilles.) This is a combination of croquette and ravioli , which is a popular dish in Italy. As we go south in France, approaching Spain or Italy, we find borrowed traits of cookery. Chop fine 1 cup of cooked chicken, mix with a spoonful each of flour and butter, 2 spoonfuls of cream, the yolk of an egg, salt, and pepper, and some parsley. Make into a thick paste. Roll out some fine puff paste very thin; cut it into squares of four inches, and filling with the above, fold and pinch the edges. Fry or bake them until a light brown. Drain, serve in a pile, with sauce or parsley. CANNELONS. (Another recipe.) Chop equal parts of cooked chicken and tongue with a spoonful of chopped ham, some cream, egg, butter, and herbs, as before. Moisten with sufficient sauce or stock. Roll puff paste very thin, spread evenly with the mixture, and roll like a jelly cake. Lay these on a baking dish, glaze them with yolk of egg, and bake until brown. Serve in same dish. TRUFFLED CAPON (served in France, Xmas Day). Singe, clean, and stuff a fine fat fowl with a forcemeat of 1 pound of truffles, sliced, 2 onions, salt, pepper, a bayleaf , some thyme and a bit of garlic, and 2 pounds of cooked and chopped chestnuts, peeled and boiled in stock. Lard it with bacon and roast it; serve with a cream sauce in which mushrooms and oysters are cooked. An elegant affair but costly. TURKEY MARQUISE. (Paris.) Cut the white meat of a boiled turkey into strips 2 by 4 inches. Dip each in a forcemeat, covering well, made of 6 ounces of bread-crumbs soaked in milk, 4 ounces of tongue, and 6 oysters, cut fine; add 3 tablespoonfuls of white stock, pepper, salt, and 2 eggs. This must be well beaten, seasoned, and pressed through a sieve. Place in a buttered pan and bake 10 minutes until brown. Arrange carefully on a dish, in a circle, and in the centre pour some Brussels sprouts cooked in white sauce and some sauce poured over. Around the edge arrange a purée of chestnut, and let it steam, with a plate over all, 20 minutes. Serve in the same dish. GALANTINE OF TURKEY. (Montpellier.) Montpellier is a French town known far and wide for its ways of cooking cold meat or game in jelly or salad, served in a mould and often garnished, with mayonnaise or Tartare sauce. Clean, bone, and stuff a turkey with a forcemeat of equal parts bread, veal, ham, and tongue, adding herbs, onion, yolks of eggs. Tie the fowl in a cloth and cook it for four hours in sufficient stock to cover it. Let it cool, put in a mould with melted aspic jelly, decorating it with sliced truffles, hard-boiled eggs sliced, and capers. When cold and firm, turn out and serve in slices. STEWED CHICKEN. (Germany.) Clean and cut up a fowl, cook it gently in 1 1/2 pints of white broth until tender. Take out the chicken, skim and strain and reduce the sauce by rapid boiling, add 1 ounce of chopped almonds, pounded, in 1/2 pint of milk, seasoned with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, pour over the chicken. Serve with a border of boiled rice. CREAM of CHICKEN WITH POACHED EGGS. (An old convent recipe and used still in provincial France as a Lenten breakfast dish.) Mince and pound the best part of a cooked fowl, add salt and pepper, and enough milk or white stock to make a paste when pressed through a sieve. Cook and stir over the fire, pour it on a dish and, arrange 6 poached eggs, with a border of parsley, on top. KIDNEY AND MUSHROOMS. (France.) Soak, parboil, and cut up a kidney, fry it in 2 ounces of butter or soup fat, add salt, pepper, an onion, chopped, and 12 button mushrooms, some parsley, and 1/2 pint of consommé, also a tablespoonful of white wine or sherry. Cook and stir 10 minutes, and serve on toast. KIDNEY AND OYSTER PUDDING. (England.) Clean, parboil, and slice 4 lamb's kidneys, add 1 pint of oysters and their juice, some butter, salt, pepper, and parsley. Cook and stir until tender, then make a batter as for pudding, roll it out and cover a bowl, lining it first with this, and filling with the oysters and kidney. Tie a cloth over all, and boil it about an hour, drain it, and serve with white sauce. Or the batter can be boiled, then slit open and filled with the oysters, etc. This way makes the kidneys and oysters more tender. Add the yolk of an egg to the gravy before pouring it in. CASPACHO. (A national dish of Spain.) Mince a large white onion, add 1 fine cucumber sliced, and 3 tomatoes cut up. Put in layers in a bowl, dust with salt, pepper, parsley, and breadcrumbs, adding oil and vinegar as for salad. There must be plenty of the latter, and the whole served ice-cold. This is the most popular summer dish in Spain. BACALAO. (Spain.) Soak and parboil 1 pound of salt cod, mix it, in flakes, with 1/2 pint of tomato sauce, made of stewed tomatoes, an onion chopped fine and fried in a tablespoonful of olive oil, a pinch of cinnamon, salt, and pepper. Bake this In an earthen dish with slices of bread and butter over the top. COULIBAC. (Russia.) Make a paste as for baba pudding or Savarin, and roll it very thin. Cut into a large square, fill it with a forcemeat of veal, rice, eggs, herbs, butter, stock, and mushrooms, and roll it up like jelly cake. Dust the top with crumbs, and bake it 1 hour. Serve with hot wine sauce, in slices. BUONBOCCONI. (Genoa.) Steep 1 pound of beef marrow, drain, chop, and pound it, and press through a sieve. Add 5 ounces of chopped candied peel, and citron, mixed; beat these with 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, and the zest of an orange, and the yolks of 2 eggs. Put a spoonful between two circles of puff paste, and bake them in a hot oven. Serve in a mound, with a good sauce. DOLMAS. (Greece and Turkey.) Chop fine a sufficient quantity of cold cooked lamb or mutton, add an equal amount of boiled rice, season to taste, and add as much milk or white stock, blended with the yolk of an egg, to make a thick paste. Fill lettuce leaves with this, roll them up and cook in water or a little stock for l/2 hour. Drain them, arrange on a dish, and pour a sauce over them of milk, yolk of egg, parsley, and the juice of a lemon. QUEEN'S TIDBITS. (France.) Make a good puff paste, roll it very thin, cut into circles and put two together with a filling as for chicken croquettes, and bake in a hot oven. Sweetbreads or mushrooms, mixed with stock, may be used instead of chicken. These are dainty morsels, but very rich fare. MACEDOINE IN ASPIC. (Normandy.) Make 1 quart of good aspic jelly, and while yet liquid, line a fancy mould with a part of it. Fill the centre with a pretty arrangement of equal parts of cooked and sliced sweetbreads, tongue, liver, mushrooms, truffles, and sausage. Serve cold, turned out on a dish, with mayonnaise dressing. The more meats used, the better. BRAISED QUAILS. (Maison d'or, Paris.) Pick, clean, and split 6 quails. Roast them for 4 minutes, then put them in a casserole with 1 carrot, and 1 onion, sliced, 1 ounce of butter, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , and 3 sliced green peppers, freed from seeds. Stir for 5 minutes, then add, over the fire, 1 pint of tomato sauce, 1/2 glass of sherry, and 3 tablespoonfuls of mushroom ketchup or sauce. Cover and cook for 10 minutes more in the oven, then serve in the casserole . KIDNEY STEW. (Baden-Baden.) Soak, parboil, and slice a fine calf's kidney. Fry it in 2 ounces of butter or dripping, adding salt, pepper, and 2 tablespoonfuls each of chopped truffles and mushrooms, and 1 tablespoonful of sherry, also parsley. Cook for 10 minutes more, serve with a border of fritters made according to recipe given elsewhere. LAMB CHOPS. (Monte Carlo.) Trim 8 thinly cut chops from the leg, add some parsley, mace, a piece of butter, and sufficient milk to cover and simmer, in a closed pan, for 1 hour. Drain the chops, dip each in bread-crumbs and yolk of egg, and fry in butter. Thicken the milk with flour and butter, yolk of an egg, and flavoring of lemon juice, pepper, and salt, strain it over the chops, which can be arranged in a circle round green peas or fresh beans. MUTTON CUTLETS. (Prague.) Cut up a neck of mutton, and boil the cutlets in sufficient stock to cover, with an onion, a carrot, and some herbs for 3/4 hour. Drain them, make a sauce of 1 spoonful each of flour and butter, 1 cup of boiling milk, salt, pepper, 1/2 cup of grated horseradish, the juice of 1/2 a lemon, and yolk of 1 egg. Pour this around the chops, dust them with some bread-crumbs, and brown in a hot oven. Serve with spinach or potatoes. VEAL CUTLETS. (Vienna.) Slice, pare, and flatten 2 pounds of veal, add salt, pepper, and dip them in egg and bread-crumbs. Fry them in bacon fat, and arrange on a dish with 1/2 a teaspoonful of capers on each, and a garnish of anchovies, sliced lemon, and parsley. Serve with potato salad. SAUER-BRATEN. (Germany.) Steep a good-sized piece of beef in vinegar for 2 days. Drain it, lard it with bacon, dust it with mixed spices ground fine, salt, and pepper, and brown it in melted butter or dripping. Add then 2 carrots, and 2 onions sliced, a bayleaf , parsley, thyme, and sweet marjoram, also the rind of a lemon, and 1 pint of boiling water. Simmer, covered, for 3 hours. Take out the meat, skim the gravy, add vinegar to taste, thicken it with a little flour, then strain, and pour over the meat Serve with sauerkraut. SPANISH OLIO. (Olla Podrida.) Clean, parboil, and cut up a fine fat rabbit, add 12 oysters, 2 cups of consommé, a little mace, salt, pepper, some parsley, thyme, and a bayleaf . Cook, covered, until tender, about 1 hour in an earthen pot or bowl. Strain the gravy, add 1/4 pound of butter, 1 tablespoonful of flour, an anchovy minced fine, a tablespoonful of wine or Worcestershire sauce, and pour over the rabbit. Serve with a pint of mixed cooked vegetables, in the same dish, onions, beans, green peppers, carrots, cabbage, etc. LITTLE MUTTON TURNOVERS. (Turkey.) Chop 1 pound of cold mutton, add salt, pepper, cinnamon, and 1 chopped onion to a pound of meat. Cook with 1 ounce of butter, and make some good puff paste, roll it thin, cut into squares, and fill with spoonfuls of the meat. Pinch the edges, brush with melted butter, and bake in a hot oven. Serve in a mound, with a sauce or border of parsley. AMOURETTES. (Old French and Roman recipe.) Cut up and steep 2 pounds of beef marrow. Drain it, add salt and pepper, and 1 cup of tomato sauce. Then add 1/2 pound of chopped ham and 1/4 pound of cooked and sliced truffles. Line a mould with forcemeat, made of bread-crumbs, herbs, and butter, then fill with the above mixture. Steam it for 3/4 hour, turn out on a hot dish, and serve with mushrooms, and 1/2 pint of white sauce. SWEETBREADS (as cooked in Dauphiny). Soak and parboil 2 large heart sweetbreads, drain them, lard with strips of pork, and place in a casserole with 2 carrots and 2 onions sliced, and some parsley, and 1/2 pint consommé. Cover closely with a pie plate, on which put something heavy, and braise them. In France the plate is of earthenware, and live coals are kept on top to assist the baking or braising, as it is called. Serve with green peas. SWEETBREADS FINANCIÈRE. (Paris.) Trim and parboil two pairs of sweetbreads; fry them with 1 ounce butter, 1 carrot, 1 onion, some herbs, and 1 cup of stock. Cook for 3/4 hour, strain the stock over them on a dish, and serve with a border of 6 truffles, 6 mushrooms, 6 olives, 6 cocks'-combs, and 6 forcemeat balls made of chicken, bread, etc., which have been simmered in 1/2 pint of stock, with a glass of Madeira. SWEETBREADS (as cooked in Italy). Soak and parboil 2 large heart sweetbreads. Cut each into 4 pieces and fry in butter with salt, pepper, and parsley. When cool, dip each in some white stock or Bechamel sauce, then in egg and bread-crumbs and fry until brown. Serve with a brown sauce with mushrooms and a border of spaghetti, both cooked, the latter with tomatoes and cheese on top. SWEETBREADS. (Modena.) Blanch and cut into 4 pieces a pair of fine sweetbreads. Season, fry them, and drain them. Have ready 1 cup of cold chicken and the same of beef tongue, cut into strips, also a cup of cooked spaghetti, covered with tomato sauce. Arrange the spaghetti in the middle of a plate, put the sweetbreads over it and arrange the chicken in one end of the plate and the tongue at the other. Pour some tomato sauce over all and serve hot. BROILED SWEETBREADS. (Paris.) Blanch two fine sweetbreads and cook them for 20 minutes in a cup of stock. Drain them, and when cold dip them in a rich cream sauce. When BRAISED SWEETBREADS, DAUPHINY ( See page 87 ) A decorative plate of sweetbreads garnished around with vegetable. VEAL AND MUSHROOMS, GERMANY ( See page 93 ) An illustration of a plate of veal with mushrooms. this is firm, roll them in bread-crumbs and a thin slice of ham, then tie each in oiled paper. Broil them on a gridiron, take off the paper, and serve with a border of spinach. SWEETBREAD CUTLETS (as cooked in Montpellier). Soak a pair of large sweetbreads in salt and water, parboil them, and let them cool. Cut into shape and dip in aspic jelly, melted. When it is firm, arrange in a circle and fill the centre with asparagus tips cooked in stock and cut up; pour mayonnaise sauce over the asparagus and put on ice until needed. SWEETBREAD CROQUETTES. (Paris.) Parboil, cool, and chop 4 small or 3 large sweetbreads. Cook with 1 ounce of butter, salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of chopped onion, 1/2 pint of cooked mushrooms, 1 cup of white stock, and the yolks of 2 eggs. Add juice of a lemon, parsley, and a little nutmeg. Mix all well and roll into balls. Dip into eggs and bread-crumbs and fry in hot fat. STEWED SWEETBREADS. (England.) Parboil a pair of sweetbreads, trim them, and cut into 8 pieces. Cover with a pint of veal broth, add salt, pepper, parsley, sweet marjoram, and a little mace. Cook, covered, for 40 minutes. Take out, strain the sauce, add the beaten yolks of 2 eggs. Pour it around and serve. VEAL CUTLETS (as cooked in Venice). Chop 1/2 pint of mushrooms, 2 onions, some parsley, thyme, and 2 ounces of bacon. Mix with 1 ounces of butter, season it and rub it through a sieve. Cover 2 pounds veal cutlets with this on both sides; cover these with oiled paper and cook in a little stock, turning often until tender. Take off the paper, add water or stock to the sauce, yolks of 2 eggs, and juice of a lemon, skim it, strain it, and pour over the cutlets. VEAL CUTLETS (as cooked in Metz). Lard 6 fine cutlets with strips of bacon. Put in a pan with 1 ounce butter, 2 onions, 2 carrots, sliced, and the trimmings of the veal, some parsley, a bayleaf , and a cup of consomme. Brown the cutlets in the butter, add the rest, cook, covered, 2 hours, strain sauce, add tomatoes to it. BAKED MUTTON CHOPS. (Italy.) Braise 6 chops in stock with 2 carrots, an onion, parsley, thyme, and sweet marjoram. Let them brown, drain them, and reduce the sauce. Add to it 1/2 cup bread-crumbs, yolk of 1 hard-boiled egg, 6 mushrooms, salt, and pepper. Chop this fine and dip each chop in it, then in grated Parmesan cheese. Bake in the oven until brown and serve with Tartare sauce. MUTTON CHOPS (as cooked in Southern France). Trim and season 5 cutlets; fry them in 1 ounce butter. Chop 5 small onions and fry them in butter; when soft but not brown, add the juice of a lemon, some parsley, and the yolks of 2 eggs. Stir until thick and add salt and pepper. Cover the chops on both sides with this, and lay them on a dish ; dust bread-crumbs thickly over all and bake until brown. Serve with green peas. BRAISED CHOPS. (Poland.) Trim 7 chops, fry in butter, and let them cool. Make a forcemeat of 1/4 pound bacon, 1/2 pound calf's liver, some bread-crumbs, 1 carrot, 1 onion, 1 bayleaf , parsley, salt, and pepper. Chop these well and cook for 10 minutes, rub through a sieve, coat the chops on both sides with it. Cover each with buttered paper and braise, in the oven, basting with 1/2 cup of brown sauce or stock. Take off the paper, strain the sauce around, and serve with a border of fried potatoes. LAMB CHOPS. (Madame de Maintenon.) Trim the chops, make a forcemeat of chopped ham, bread-crumbs, and mushrooms, in equal parts, mixed with onion juice, parsley, butter, and seasoning. Put a tablespoonful on each chop; roll it in buttered paper. Bake, in a closed tin, in a hot oven, then mark them with a hot skewer, to imitate the wires of a gridiron. Serve in the papers with peas. This dish was invented to please the king whom the lady married. EPIGRAMMES OF LAMB. (A famous French entree.) Pare, season, and fry 4 lamb chops. Dip each in crumbs and broil. Take a breast of lamb, cooked in broth, remove the bones and cut it into 8 pieces. Dip each into cold Bechamel or stock made of chicken, then in crumbs and fry brown. Arrange these two alternately, chops and cutlets, overlapping, in a circle, and fill the centre with green peas, string beans, and asparagus tips, cooked, a cupful of each, and pour around a good sauce made of milk or stock, herbs, etc., as convenient. FRICANDEAU OF VEAL (invented by the cook of Leo X., Jean Careme). Take 3 pounds of the fillet of veal, 4 inches thick, and cut it round or oval, to fit a baking dish or casserole . Lard it closely with strips of bacon; add to this 1 carrots, 2 onions, 1 turnips, and 1 ounce of ham, sliced, parsley, a clove, the trimmings of the veal, salt, pepper, and 1/2 pint of consomme. Lay the fillet on top of this, and, covering it closely, bake until tender. Baste it often. A short time before serving, strain the gravy, thicken it with flour, and serve in the same dish, with spinach, or tomatoes, stuffed or fried potatoes. GRENADINES OF VEAL. (French.) Cut 4 slices, one inch thick, from a cushion or noix of veal; flatten it and put into a saucepan with thin slices of ham and 1/2 cup of white stock, a carrot and an onion and some parsley. Cook in the oven 1 hour, basting often. Strain the sauce, pour over, and serve with peas. VEAL AND MUSHROOMS. (Germany.) Make a forcemeat of bread, herbs, some cold veal, yolk of an egg, and milk to moisten. Have ready 8 slices of thinly cut veal; fill with this and roll, tying to keep in shape. Put into a pan with 1 onion, some butter, salt, pepper, parsley, and a spoonful of chopped ham and 1 cup of veal stock. Cook 1 hour, take out, strain the sauce, and add to it 6 mushrooms. Cook these until tender, add a spoonful of sherry and press through a sieve; arrange the veal on this and serve. CREAM of VEAL. (Germany.) Chop and pound 1 pound of veal tenderloin, add as much bread-crumbs, moistened with milk, the yolk of an egg and the beaten whites of two, and enough milk to make into a paste. Stir and season and pour into a buttered mould. Steam it like a custard for an hour, and serve with a sauce. MINUTEN FLEISCH. (Germany.) Slice 1 1/2 pounds of tender veal very thin; cut into 4-inch squares and season to taste. Put in a pan with 1/2 cup of claret, and, when well steeped, take out, dip in flour, and lay in a buttered pan with some parsley, half a cup of consomme, and the juice of a lemon. Bake 40 minutes, or until tender, and serve with the sauce around. GOULASCH. (Hungary.) Boil and cut into bits the meat of a calf's head. Fry it with an onion in butter, add salt and paprika, 1 pint of brown stock or sauce, and 12 balls cut from potatoes and fried in butter, also 12 onions cooked in butter till brown. Arrange the meat in centre and the vegetables around. POERKOELL. (Hungary.) This is another national dish of the country. Cut into 2-inch squares 2 pounds of veal from the shin. Add half as much of the tenderloin of fresh pork, and fry both with an onion, some herbs, and a little paprika. Cover with 3 cups of bouillon and cook 1 hour. Serve with a vegetable border. PUCHERO. (National dish of Spain.) Put 2 pounds beef with a pig's foot, the liver of a chicken, cut up, 3 cups of dried peas soaked overnight, 1 quart of water, some herbs, and an onion. Do not cut the meat and pork. Cook, covered, for 1 hours. Add 2 leeks, a carrot, and a head of lettuce, a slice of squash or pumpkin cut into shreds, and 6 small sausages or balls made of sausage meat. Cook 1 hour longer, arrange the meat neatly with the vegetables, etc., around, strain the gravy, and pour it over. Serve with a border of toast. PUNSKI. (Russia.) Chop and fry 1 onion; add the meat of a sliced fillet of veal; fry it, season it, and let it cool. Chop it fine with the yolks of 3 hard-boiled eggs and a little parsley, thicken it to a paste with some good broth. Roll out very thin some fine pastry dough, cut into circles, and by putting two together, fill with the meat. Let it rise a little, brush with the yolk of an egg, and bake until brown. Serve on a dish with a good sauce. MINESTRONE. (Italy.) Chop 2 ounces bacon; add a slice of ham, a cabbage, shredded, 2 cups of string beans, 4 table-spoonfuls of celery cut into dice, as much peas, asparagus tips, and a cup of stewed tomatoes. Then add 2 quarts of broth, 1 pound of rice, and some sliced Bologna sausage. Cook for 1 hour; add a cup of grated Parmesan cheese and serve hot. This is a national dish. LEICESTERSHIRE MEDLEY. (England.) Line a dish with some good pie-crust; bake it until a light brown. Cut up 1 pound each of roast beef, bacon, and cored apples. Fill in alternate layers, seasoning with salt, pepper, and powdered ginger, and when it is full, a pint of ale, or enough to moisten all. Put on a lid of the dough and bake in a moderate oven 2 hours. Serve hot or cold. LANCASHIRE HOT-POT. (England.) Take 3 1/2 pounds of choice mutton, in chops, from the neck, 4 mutton kidneys, 20 oysters, 4 onions, sliced, and 3 pounds of potatoes. Slice the potatoes and kidneys, and arrange all in alternate layers in a deep dish, seasoning with herbs, salt, and pepper. Put a layer of potatoes on top, and moisten with oyster juice. Bake in a slow oven until the top is crisp. Cover at first with a pie plate to keep in the steam, cooking about 3 1/2 hours. JACOBIN'S POTTAGE. This is a particularly tempting dish, popular in the old convents in France before the Revolution. Chop the meat of a cold turkey fine; add 2 ounces of grated Parmesan cheese, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Make four or five slices of toast, put in the bottom of a dish, and add 1 cup stock, then the chopped meat and a sprinkling of crumbs. Bake 1 hour, add lemon juice on top. ENGLISH HAGGIS. Haggis is peculiar to Scotland, but few people outside of that country care for it as originally made, - from the intestines, lungs, and stomach of a sheep, - so the English version is given, as likely to be popular when once it is tried. Weigh and chop the tongue, liver, and kidneys of a sheep, then add half their weight in fat bacon, minced fine, 2 slices of stale bread in crumbs, 2 anchovies, pounded, a spoonful of lemon juice and the grated rind, pepper, salt, and two eggs, beaten. Stir well, pour into a mould, steam it for 2 hours and turn out. Serve hot, with a sauce, if desired. BAKED CALF'S HEART. (England.) This is a very old dish and called usually, "Love in Disguise." Wash the heart well, wipe it, and fill it with a forcemeat of chopped veal, bread-crumbs, herbs, onion, seasoning, and yolk of egg. Tie it in oiled paper and bake it for 1 1/2 hours, basting often. Take off the paper, sprinkle it with flour, and let it brown. Serve it in slices, with a puree of spinach, or tomatoes, or mashed potato. OXFORD JOHN MUTTON. (England.) This is an old way of cold meat cookery. Melt some butter; add some thinly cut slices of underdone mutton, shaped in circles as large as an egg. Season with salt, pepper, onion juice, parsley, thyme, and a blade of mace. Stir it well, and when brown, add 1 cup of good stock or gravy, free from fat, then a spoonful of currant jelly, and a spoonful of flour, blended with as much butter. Stir five minutes more and serve hot. BACHELOR'S STEW. (England.) This is still another old recipe, a relic of the days before clubs became plentiful and lonely men cooked their meals on the hob of the little fire-place of their own rooms. Buy a slice of the fillet of veal, 2 inches thick, weighing 2 1/2 pounds. Fry it in a pan with some butter, a slice of lean ham, 2 carrots, 3 onions, sliced, and some celery and green peas, 1/2 cupful each, or more if desired. Add a spoonful of Worcestershire sauce and a cup of boiling water. Cover very closely, and let it simmer for 1 1/2 hours. Thicken the gravy with flour and pour it around the meat and vegetables, neatly arranged. TRIPE (á la mode de Caen). Tripe is cooked in various styles at Caen, Dijon, Venice, Lyons, and Toulouse. That of Caen is justly the most delightful. Clean, scald, and scrape 1 1/2 pounds of tripe - or it can be bought already dressed. Cut it into neat pieces about 1 inches square, and put it in an earthen casserole with 1 large carrot, and an onion, sliced, 1 clove, 1 bayleaf , a bit of thyme, and a spoonful of chopped parsley. Fry these in butter ; add a pint of consomme and a tablespoonful of white wine or cider; cover closely and cook until tender. It must be served in the casserole , as it is abroad. TRIPE (as cooked in Lyons). Cut into narrow strips 1 pound of cold boiled tripe. Fry it in 2 ounces of butter or soup fat, clarified, with 2 large sliced onions, parsley, pepper, salt, and a tablespoonful of vinegar. When brown, pour into a dish, and serve with a border of Lyonnaise potatoes. The recipe for these can be found in any cook-book. CALLALOU. (A Greek dish, brought by sailors to Marseilles.) Cut into slices two dozen ochra pods, add a little salt, and set aside for 15 minutes. Then wash them with warm water, drain, and boil until tender. Drain them once more ; add two handfuls of string beans, sliced and cooked. Cut also 2 egg plants into squares, 5 large tomatoes, and slice 2 large onions, and core and slice 2 green peppers. Cook all of these in butter or dripping, stirring until almost dry; season, add some chopped parsley, cook 10 minutes more, and serve hot. CASSOULIC. (Provence.) Chop the remains of any cold meat into dice; add some bacon and onions, cut up half as much of cold cooked lima or white beans, pressed through a sieve, and enough gravy or stock to moisten. Stir; add salt, pepper, parsley, sweet marjoram, and a pinch of nutmeg; pour into a dish, and sprinkle bread-crumbs thickly on top. Bake 1/2 hour and serve with tomato sauce. CASSOLETTE. (Languedoc.) Make a puree of cooked white beans, add salt and pepper and as much finely chopped turkey, chicken, or duck. Fry an onion, 2 slices of bacon, and 2 tomatoes, sliced, with 2 cloves, parsley, and the beans and meat, well blended. Now add 1 pint of good broth, enough to make a paste; pour into a dish and bake until brown. This is a very old dish and very good to eat, besides. ANDOUILLETTES OF NANCY. Nancy, St. Menehould, Aries, and Lyons are as famous for their sausages as Frankfurt and Brunswick and Bologna. But the French preparations are much daintier than those of Italy and Germany. Take 2 pounds of veal and one of fresh pork. Cook the latter two hours in salted water, and chop both very fine, with 2 onions, 3 truffles, and 4 mushrooms, adding parsley, salt, and pepper. Mix well and press into sausage skins, - which can be bought from a butcher, - tie them at intervals of 2 inches and boil them for an hour in 1 quart of consomme flavored with 2 carrots, 2 turnips, and 1/4 of a cabbage. This can be used later for soup. Let them cool, cut apart, and fry them 25 minutes in butter, then serve them with omelette or poached eggs. PIGS' FEET (as cooked in St. Menebould). Clean and split 2 large feet, then tie them securely and put in a quart of stock, or broth, with salt, pepper, a carrot, an onion, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , a clove, and two pieces of celery. Cover and cook 3 hours. Drain, remove the bones, put under a weight, and when cold dip in butter and bread-crumbs and broil until brown. Serve hot with Tartare sauce or a cream sauce with mushrooms in it. CROWDIE. (Scotland.) Skim the fat from 2 quarts mutton broth, add 1/2 pint of oatmeal and 2 onions chopped fine, salt, pepper, and parsley. Cover; cook 3 hours; strain it, and serve with slices of toast. HOWTOWDIE. (Scotland.) Clean, truss, and stuff a fine fowl with a force-meat of veal, bread, herbs, and yolk of egg. Brown it in a pan with 4 ounces of butter or drippings ; add 1/2 pint good stock, and cook, with some parsley, thyme, salt, 6 small onions, and a bayleaf , for an hour, tightly closed. Serve with a border of cooked greens. KEDGEREE. (England.) Soak 1 pint of split peas overnight, drain them, add I pound of rice, salt, pepper, and 1/2 a tea-spoonful of ginger. Stir and cover with 1 quart of water. Stir and cook slowly until done and almost dry. Make into a mound, garnish with fried onions and sliced hard-boiled eggs. HODGE-PODGE. (England.) Cut a neck of mutton, about 6 pounds, and cut into chops, except the scrag end, which use whole. Add to both 1/2 pint water, 6 small onions, cut in halves, 6 turnips and 2 carrots, cut into dice and 1/4 of a cabbage, sliced. Simmer for 1/2 hour, add 2 ounces barley and some herbs. Cook until the meat is tender, take out the scrag, and strain the sauce over the meat and vegetables on a dish. Serve with thick slices of toasted bran bread. This is a very old recipe for family stew. BEEF TONGUE (as cooked in Alsace-Lorraine). Boil a tongue until tender in some stock. Drain, cool it, and remove the skin and uneven end. Cover it with egg and bread-crumbs and bake it 1/2 hour, basting it with 1 cup of port wine. Make a puree of chestnuts by boiling, peeling, and chopping 1 quart, adding sufficient white stock and seasoning, and a pinch of mace. Press through a sieve ; it will look like vermicelli. Place the tongue on top, and serve hot, with a good sauce made of tomatoes, onions, herbs, bacon, etc. BEEF TONGUE (as cooked in Italy). Boil and slice in strips a tongue; put it in a dish with a sauce made of 3 minced onions, fried in butter with a teaspoonful of flour, 2 of lemon juice, and a cupful of chopped mushrooms. Boil this 10 minutes, and pour over, adding bread-crumbs on top and bits of butter. Bake 20 minutes, and serve with spinach, or peas, or spaghetti cooked with tomatoes and cheese. BEEF TONGUE (as cooked in France). Parboil and skin a tongue. Add one pint of white broth, parsley, thyme, a clove, 1 onion, 1 carrot, and a turnip. Cook for 1 hours. Cool it, and slice it in 12 pieces, across. Arrange in the original shape with a forcemeat between, of 4 ounces bread, soaked in milk, some mushrooms, herbs, butter, salt, and yolks of two eggs. Lay it on a dish ; cover with a layer of the stock, some crumbs over all, and bake, sprinkling some cheese over it, for 1/2 hour. Serve in the same dish. FRENCH KIDNEY STEW. Slice, season, and fry in 2 ounces of butter 2 fine veal kidneys which have been soaked and parboiled. These must be cut into dice, and then added, parsley, pepper, and salt. Merely brown the kidneys, or they will be tough. Now mix 3 sliced mushrooms with I/2 cup of stock or consomme, thickened with flour and some butter, juice of a lemon, and a glass of sherry. Boil and pour over the kidneys, previously placed on slices of toast. BRAISED CALF'S LIVER (as cooked in Italy). Boil and lard a fine fresh liver. Put it in a dish with 1/4 pound of chopped bacon, 1 carrots, 2 onions, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , salt, and pepper, and a pint of consomme. Cook 2 hours, add 1 cup of stewed tomatoes and a tablespoonful of sherry wine. Strain and reduce the sauce, after cooking 20 minutes longer. Brown the liver with a little flour, sprinkled over, and pour the sauce around, with 6 freshly fried mushrooms, and a border of cooked spaghetti. BLANQUETTE OF VEAL. (France.) Cut up, and soak in water for an hour, 2 pounds of the shoulder of veal. Drain it and cover with water, adding salt, pepper, and a bay-leaf. Boil slowly and skim often, for an hour. Take out the meat, put it with 2 ounces butter, parsley, and an onion, and then, when a pale yellow, add 1 ounce flour, 1/2 pint fresh peas, and 1 cup of the gravy. Strain the rest, add the yolk of an egg and the juice of a lemon, and pour over all. RAGOUT OF LAMB. (Germany.) Cover 2 pounds of the breast of lamb with cold water, and simmer for ten minutes. Throw away this water, and cut up the meat into pieces. Add 1 sliced onion, a carrot, a piece of celery, parsley, sweet marjoram, pepper, and salt. Cook these with a little butter, and the meat, 10 minutes; dredge with flour, add 1/2 pint mutton broth - or hot water - and stew until tender. Take out the meat, add yolks of 2 eggs and a tablespoonful of vinegar to the sauce, strain it, and pour over. Serve with sorrel. LAMB RAGOUT AND RAVIOLI. (Italy.) Boil 2 pounds of the neck of lamb and 3 quarts of water, salt, pepper, parsley, a turnip, and 2 onions, sliced and cooked in butter. Simmer for 3 hours, cut the meat into small pieces, reduce the broth by rapid boiling, and add 1 dozen ravioli - see recipe - previously poached in broth. Serve the meat garnished with these, and the strained broth, in a bowl. RAGOUT OF DUCK. (Ireland.) Clean and cut up a fine young duck, fry it in butter or drippings, with an onion, and 2 ounces chopped ham, add 1 ounce flour, stir, and add 1/2 pint of hot water and a tablespoonful of vinegar, some parsley, a little thyme, and a piece of celery. Cover, and cook 1 hour, season, and serve with a border of potato croquettes, or mashed potatoes, browned. SCOTCH STEW (from a private recipe book). The border tribes and lairds have been forced, for several centuries, to economize closely, and when they can get a piece of fresh meat, they utilize every scrap most carefully. Poverty has taught them many secrets besides caution and self-control. Peel and chop 6 small onions, add a pint of cold water, and cook for 1 hour. Strain the water, thicken it with flour and an ounce of butter, add a cupful of gravy, left over from the meat used, and skimmed, a tablespoonful of Worcestershire and another of tomato sauce, some parsley, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Mix and pour over the cold roast mutton, or turkey, or veal cut into pieces, with 6 boiled and peeled potatoes, and cook for 20 minutes, covered with a thick layer of bread-crumbs. KEBOBBED MUTTON. (England.) Bone, stuff a shoulder of mutton with bread-crumbs, onions, herbs, egg, and lemon peel, and a little butter; coat it with egg and crumbs, herbs, and chopped onion, and bake till brown, basting it with its own gravy of butter, and 1/2 cup of hot water. Add a tablespoonful of ketchup to the sauce, and serve with boiled onions or green peas. MINCED LAMB. (Southern France.) Remove the fat and gristle from as much cold roast lamb as would fill 2 cups, and chop very fine. Cook it with an onion, a tablespoonful of butter, salt, pepper, some parsley and nutmeg. Add 1 cup of white stock or sauce, and the yolk of an egg. Cook carefully and pour on slices of toast, previously dipped in hot water and drained. Pour around some nice sauce, and garnish with parsley. BEEF HASH (as cooked in Russia). Chop 2 pounds of lean raw beef (or underdone roast beef ) with 1/4 pound of suet, 2 onions, some parsley, salt, and pepper. Add 1 cup of consomme and 1/2 cup of bread-crumbs. Stir well, pour into a mould) sprinkle with crumbs on top, and a spoonful of lemon juice. Bake until brown, and turn out on a border of mashed potatoes. ITALIAN BEEF CROQUETTES. Chop very finely 3/4 pound of cold roast beef, add 1/2 pound of stale bread-crumbs which have been soaked in enough stock, 1 spoonful of chopped onion, fried in butter, salt, pepper, and parsley. Stir on the fire until smooth, add 2 table-spoonfuls of stewed and strained tomatoes, and the yolk of an egg. When cool, make into croquettes, dip in crumbs, and fry in boiling fat. Serve with mushroom or caper sauce. CHICKEN CROQUETTES (as made at the Jockey Club, Paris). For one dozen, cut 3/4 pound boiled chicken very fine, with 1/4 pound or 1/2 of button mushrooms, 1 tablespoonful of butter, the same of flour, yolks of 2 eggs, and 1 glass of sherry. First, fry an onion in butter, add flour, then a cup of chicken broth, the other things chopped fine and seasoning. When it boils, add the eggs, and take off to cool. When firm, make into shape and fry. This is a very delicious recipe ; the croquettes are soft inside and hard outside, as they should be, if well fried. But the fat must be abundant and boiling. MOCK RABBIT. (A German supper dish.) Mix 1 pound of raw chopped beef, and as much lean veal, also chopped, with 4 eggs, 1 cup of bread-crumbs, a little salt, pepper, nutmeg, parsley, thyme, and a spoonful of onion juice. Beat all well, and shape on a dish into an oval loaf. Cover with egg and bread-crumbs; put in a pan lined with slices of pork ; baste it in oven while baking it, and about 40 minutes. Serve hot or cold and in slices. ANGELS ON HORSEBACK. (English supper dish.) Cut 2 ounces of bacon into very thin slices, wrap each around a fat oyster, put three on a skewer, using all required, and fry in butter; serve that way on toast, with slices of lemon. WINCHESTER CUTLETS. (England.) Mix 1/2 pound of cold minced chicken, veal, or lamb, with 1/2 pound bread-crumbs, 1 ounce butter, yolk of one egg, salt, parsley, and a spoonful of flour. Mould into chops, put a bit of macaroni in the end of each, to imitate a bone, dip in eggs and bread-crumbs, and fry brown. Serve with tomato sauce or a puree of spinach. VENTNOR PUDDING. (England.) Mince some cold roast beef, and to every pound add 1/2 pound bread-crumbs, soaked in a little stock, a spoonful of butter, a spoonful of curry powder, pepper, celery, salt, and an onion chopped fine. Mix well, pour into a dish, cover with 2 whole eggs, well beaten and seasoned and bake until brown. Serve hot. PILAFF OF BEEF. (Barcelona.) Cut 1 pound of tender beef-fresh meat - into 4-inch slices, add 1 onion, minced fine, in butter, a bit of celery, some parsley, thyme, seasoning, and sufficient stock to moisten all. Cook until the meat is done, add a spoonful of white wine, pour on a hot dish, arrange around 1/2 pound of rice, boiled, in some stock, and cover with tomato sauce. BRAISED BEEF, en daube. (Marseilles.) Lard closely 6 pounds of beef, and soak overnight in enough mild vinegar to cover it. Drain it ; brown it on both sides in a casserole or deep pan, with a little suet and some flour. Add 1 1/2 quarts of boiling water, 2 bayleaves, 6 cloves, 6 allspice, some parsley, 2 carrots, 1 turnip, and 1 onion, sliced, salt, and pepper. Cover closely, and cook slowly for 4 hours, turning the meat several times. Take it out of the broth, and put in a mould of proper size; lay a weight on top and let it cool. Clarify the broth, add sufficient gelatine to make a jelly, and pour around the meat in the mould. When firm, turn out and serve cold, in slices. BRAISED BEEF. (English recipe.) Lard 4 pounds of beef, from the rump; season it with salt, pepper, allspice, and chopped onion. Tie it neatly, and fry it in 1 ounces of butter or soup fat (the skimming of stock ), then pour off the grease and add 1 pint of consomme, 1 cup tomatoes, a spoonful of sherry, 2 onions, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, sliced, and some parsley. Cook, covered, for 3 hours. Take out the meat, press the broth through a sieve, thicken it with flour, and pour around the meat. BEEF STEW (as cooked in Poland). Bone and stuff a loin of beef or about 5 pounds with a good forcemeat; tie it firmly and brown it on one side in a little suet. Add 1 quart of stock or boiling water, and cook it for 3 hours, covered, with, if hot water is used, some onions, carrots, celery, and herbs. Strain the stock, reduce it by rapid boiling, add 1 cup of cooked and strained tomatoes and have ready a red cabbage, cooked and sliced and dipped in vinegar, one dozen small onions and 6 beets, cooked and sliced; arrange these nicely around the meat and pour the sauce over. Serve hot. BOILED BEEF (as cooked in Hungary). Chop the beef used in stock very fine, and arrange in shape of a mound. Garnish with shredded lettuce, hard-boiled eggs, gherkins, and capers; prepare a dressing of oil, vinegar ( tarragon preferred), onion juice, salt, and pepper; pour over all and serve cold. SOUFFLÉ OF GAME. (Germany.) Chop and pound 1 cups of the meat of rabbits, guinea fowl, partridges or duck, very fine {the dark meat of a turkey will do); add 1 ounces of boiled rice, 1 ounce butter, salt, pepper, 1/2 cup of stock, and some parsley. Mix well and pass through a sieve. Add yolks of 4 eggs and the beaten whites of two; stir and pour into a mould. Bake until brown and serve hot. SALMI OF GAME. (Scotch hunter's recipe.) Chop and cut into dice the meat of any cold game, to make 2 cups. Add to the skin, bones and gravy and trimmings, 1 glass of claret, 2 small chopped onions, thyme, a clove, a cup of consomme mixed with a tablespoonful of flour and 2 tablespoonfuls of tomatoes. Cook and stir and strain ; add the game and 6 stoned olives; cook a little longer, and pour over slices of toast. GOOSE LIVER KLOSSE. (Germany.) This can be made equally well of calf's liver. In Germany, goose is a favorite fowl, and there are plenty of livers left over for fancy cookery. Crumble 1 slices of stale bread and soak them in enough milk to cover. Melt 1 ounce butter, add 4 beaten eggs, parsley, salt, and a pinch of spice. Stir until it thickens, add bread, and 1 cup of chopped liver - parboiled - and make it all into bails. Poach these in broth for 1/2 an hour. Drain and serve in a pile, with a good sauce. This is a good dish, and the recipe can be made, baking the whole in a dish, instead of as above. PARTRIDGES WITH CABBAGE. (Northern France.) Slice and parboil a head of cabbage. Lay it on a dish and on each piece a partridge, stuffed with sausage meat, mixed with some chopped herbs, 2 onions, 2 carrots, and 1/4 pound butter. Add 1 cup of stock and cover very closely ; cook slowly for 1 hours. Arrange the cabbage on a dish with the birds on top and pour the gravy over all. JUGGED HARE. (England.) Clean, skin, and cut up a rabbit; fry it in butter or a little dripping until brown. Mash and bone 2 anchovies; chop some herbs, mace, parsley, and lemon peel. Line an earthen jar or bowl with slices of bacon ; put in the rabbit, with bacon and the above flavoring in layers, adding 4 tablespoonfuls of ale, and on the top some bacon and an earthen lid which must be fastened air-tight, with flour paste. Set in a saucepan of water and boil for 4 hours. Take off the cover and serve cold. JUGGED HARE. (Another recipe. Yorkshire style.) Skin, clean, cut up, and fry a rabbit, in butter; put it in a wide stone crock with 1 glass of port wine, a little cinnamon, a clove, a bayleaf , juice of a lemon, over all, a layer of forcemeat, made of bread-crumbs, herbs, egg, and butter. Smooth the top, cover closely, and set in a pot of water. Cook 3 hours and serve with currant jelly. CIVET OF HARE. (England.) Clean and cut up a rabbit; fry all in some butter, adding some chopped ham, about 2 table-spoonfuls. Then add 1 1/2 pints stock, thickened with some flour, 6 small onions, 1 bayleaf , 1 bit of mace, salt, pepper, and 6 chopped mushrooms. Simmer 1 hour, strain the sauce, add a spoonful of port wine, or the juice of a lemon. Arrange the meat on toast and pour over the sauce. RABBIT (as cooked in Venice). Cut up three fine rabbits, melt 1 ounce of butter and add 1 ounce chopped ham and some parsley, onion juice, and herbs; fry, and add the meat. When brown, add 1/2 cup of white broth and cook until tender. Strain the sauce, add the yolks of 3 eggs, a tablespoonful of capers, and salt and pepper. If not enough, add hot cream or milk and pour over. RABBIT CAKE. (Germany.) Boil a rabbit in water with onions, carrots, herbs, etc., using this broth for soup and cutting up the meat of the rabbit. Chop it very fine ; add 1 cup of mashed potato, 1 onion chopped in butter, 1/4 pound of beef tongue, parsley, thyme, and seasoning. Chop well, and add 1 cup of white stock; arrange on a dish in a mound and put bread-crumbs over and bits of butter. Bake till brown and serve with mushroom or tomato sauce. ASPIC OF RABBIT. (Austria.) Cook slowly, until tender, in 3 pints of water and 1 cup of wine vinegar, 2 fine rabbits, adding a teaspoonful of salt, 1/2 as much peppercorns, 4 white onions, fried in butter, and 1/2 a lemon. This will require about an hour. Strain through a sieve, and add enough beef stock to make 2 quarts, a packet of gelatine soaked in a little hot water, and boil once more, then let it cool. Make a forcemeat of 1 calf's liver, chopped fine with 1/2 pound of ham, 2 hard-boiled eggs, 1 cup of bread-crumbs, 2 tablespoonfuls of butter, parsley, salt, pepper. Mix all this, finely chopped, and bake it a half hour in an oiled tin ; when cold, slice it. Line a mould with jelly, made as above, and fill in layers with forcemeat, jelly, and rabbit, cut in slices. Cover the top with jelly, - it must be melted in order to do it right,-and set on ice. Turn out and serve with mayonnaise dressing. VENISON (as cooked in Roumania). Lard a piece, about 4 pounds, of venison from the leg, and brown it, in butter or dripping, on both sides. Add 1 cup of claret, 1 cup of consomme, 1 stick of cinnamon, a spoonful of sugar, salt, and pepper, and some parsley. When cooked 1 hour, add 2 dozen large prunes which have been soaked overnight and drained ; then cook for 1 hours, closely covered, longer. Strain the sauce, arrange the prunes as a border, and pour the sauce over all. VENISON. (Hunter's recipe.) Butter a large sheet of c lean paper, and sprinkle it with salt. Spread a paste of flour and water over a board, and wrap the saddle of venison in it, then cover it closely with the paper, tying it to keep it in place. Put it in an earthen dish with 1/2 cup of butter and a glass of port wine, and baste it often while cooking, adding hot water if too dry. It ought to cook slowly, long enough to he tender. Ten minutes before serving, take off the paper and paste, sprinkle the meat with flour, and let it brown. Serve with a sauce of bread-crumbs called panada. PIG'S HARSLET. (English.) Wash and dry 1 pound of calf's liver, 1 pair of sweetbreads, 1/4 pound of fresh pork. Cut these into very thin slices, add salt, pepper, sage, and chopped onion. Arrange in layers, to form a loaf, and cover with a pig's membrane, which any butcher can obtain, -and bake it, basting it often with butter. When it has cooked 1 1/2 hours, dust it with bread-crumbs, and let it brown. Serve with a brown gravy, made of stock and flavored with sherry. HEAD CHEESE. (Nancy.) Boil the forehead, ears, and feet of a pig in 1 quart of water, until the meat will fall from the bones. Cut it into 1/2 inch squares, add salt and pepper, sage and sweet marjoram, and return to the broth and cook till it is thick, then take out the bones and strain it. Arrange the meat in a mould, and pour the jelly over it. When cold, turn out and slice. PIGEON PIE. (England.) Cut 2 pigeons, after cleaning them, into four pieces, each ; cut into pieces 1 inch square 1/2 pound of beef tenderloin, season with salt, pepper, parsley, and chopped onion, arrange the meat in a dish, and cover with 1 cup of stock, then a layer of sliced hard-boiled eggs, and a layer of bacon. Sprinkle a little flour over each piece of meat before putting in. Add a tablespoonful of walnut catchup to the stock, and cover all with a thin puff paste, brushed with the yolk of an egg, to glaze it. Bake in a good oven 1 1/2 hours, serve hot or cold. BEEFSTEAK PIE. (England.) Cut 2 pounds of fine steak into thin strips, season, and dust with flour. Roll each strip, and arrange in a deep dish with two lamb's kidneys, cut up and parboiled, 1 dozen oysters, 1 onion chopped, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , some bits of butter, and a cup of hot water. Cover with a layer of puff paste, gashing it in several places to allow steam to escape, and brushing it with yolk of egg. Bake 2 hours in a moderate oven, and serve very hot. VEAL AND HAM PIE. (Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire.) Pork pies are made here, and exactly like the following recipe, but they are not so palatable to Americans as the more delicate mixture of veal with the ham. Slice 1/4 pound of ham very thin, and cut 2 pounds of veal into strips, and cover it with boiling water, - setting the ham aside, - add the bones of the veal and some herbs, and cook 1 hour. Remove the meat, and return the bones to the broth, adding salt, pepper, a bayleaf , summer savory, thyme, parsley, a slice of onion, and a carrot. Boil this slowly 2 hours, or until it equals 1/2 pint. Strain and set aside. Make some forcemeat of bread, herbs, and yolk of egg into 8 balls, and fill a dish with layers of ham, veal, and the balls around the sides. Add half of the broth, cover with paste as above, and bake 1 hour, making the lid artistic with cut leaves, yolk of egg being used over all. Do not touch the edges, or they will not rise. Leave a hole in middle, and, when baked, pour in the rest of the broth. Serve hot or cold. A very fine old dish. VEAL AND HAM PIE. (A more fancy recipe.) Butter a dish, and fill it with layers of sliced veal seasoned with salt, pepper, and mace, cold ham, and sweetbreads, parboiled and sliced, adding 1 dozen truffles cut fine, and a cup of rich stock, and a lid of puff paste. Bake 3 hours, pour a glass of sherry or claret or white wine through the hole, and serve hot or cold. VEAL LIVER PIE OR PATE. (Germany.) Parboil and mince finely 1 pound of calf's liver; add 10 ounces of bacon. Mix well, adding salt, pepper, and nutmeg, 1 tablespoonful of parsley, 1 onion, chopped and fried; then add the beaten yolks and the stiffly beaten whites of 2 eggs. Line a mould with butter and bread-crumbs, fill it with this mixture, arrange on top a layer of boiled and sliced potatoes, dusted with salt, pepper, and butter. Bake for 3/4 hour, and serve hot or cold, turned out on a dish or in the dish. NORMANDY PIE. Normandy is best known for its preparations of flounder or sole, although it is the birthplace of the very best cooks in the world, and is only rivalled in fame by the province of Gascony, in the south. Because the Pope used to hold court at Avignon, French people always declare that the environs of that town will be famous among epicures. For, as some one aptly says, the angels taught them how to cook. Bake a tall tart of puff paste, lining a high mould with it, and turning it out very carefully. Make a ragout, or stew, of a large flounder, - or any firm white fish, - cutting it into pieces, baking it in a dish with butter, herbs, and white wine, only enough to cover it. Take out, add to the wine 12 oysters and 12 mushrooms, cooked in butter, and 1 dozen croutons, or crusts of bread, toasted, the size of a quarter, I cup of oyster juice, yolks of 2 eggs, beaten, with I cup of white broth, salt, and pepper. Let these cook together carefully, then fill the pie with them, the crust having, of course, been kept warm. TOULOUSE PIE. Toulouse is celebrated for its cookery of sweetbreads. Make a tall tart or high pie, as in above recipe, and fill the crust with a mixture of 2 cups of white stock or Bechamel sauce, 6 button mushrooms, 6 sliced truffles, 6 forcemeat balls made of chicken, bread-crumbs, herbs, and yolk of egg, add 2 sweetbreads, parboiled and cut into 1 inch squares. Heat these, all having been previously cooked together, and pour into the vol-au-vent or pie. BURGUNDY PIE. Chop fine the breasts and wings of two chickens, add 1 cup of bread-crumbs, or full half a pint, 1/2 cup of melted butter, salt, pepper, and the beaten yolks of 3 eggs. Add 2 chicken livers and 2 gizzards and the hearts, boiled 1 hour in 1 cup of stock and cut up, also the stock. Then add 2 tablespoonfuls of chopped ham and as much chopped mushrooms. Stir all, and cook together for 10 minutes. Line a mould with puff paste, fill with this, and cover with paste. Bake 1 1/2 hours, pour 1 cup of stock in hole, serve hot or cold. PERIGORD PIE. Clean and bone three large partridges, seasoning well, and stuff them with a rich forcemeat of bread, dried herbs, and parsley, and the livers of the birds, chopped fine, and an equal amount of grated ham. Then pare and chop 1 pound of truffles, and line a dish with puff paste. Bake until the crust is yellow, fill with the birds and the truffles, in between, adding a cup of stock, and over the top a layer of forcemeat, over that lay strips of paste, criss-cross, and bake it 1 1/2 hours in a moderate oven. ROMAN PIE. Clean and cut up a rabbit into joints, boil it until tender in 2 quarts of water with onion, celery, carrot, and herbs. This can be used as soup, when set aside. Cut all the meat off the rabbit into very thin slices, and discard the bones. Have ready 2 ounces of boiled macaroni, 2 ounces of grated cheese, salt, pepper, and 1/2 pint rich milk, also an onion, chopped fine. Mix the milk with the cheese, seasoning, and the yolk of an egg, and line a dish with the macaroni, fill with the slices of rabbit, and pour the sauce over all, covering with a thin layer of puff paste. Bake it 1 hour, turn it out, if possible, and serve with a brown or tomato sauce. FIFE PIE. (Scotland.) Cut a plump young rabbit into joints, make a forcemeat of the liver, - or chicken livers, if preferred,- parboiled and minced, bread-crumbs 2 ounces of bacon, thyme, parsley, lemon peel, nutmeg, pepper, and salt, and yolk of an egg. Form into balls. Arrange the meat in layers, with thin slices of bacon between, and the balls here and there. Pour in one cup of consomme and a spoonful of white wine, cover with puff paste, and bake 1 1/2 hours. Best eaten cold, as the Roman pie is better eaten hot. LARK PIE. (Pithiviers.) This is a celebrated pie, eaten only at this French town, but an excellent imitation can be made in this country, using our own reed birds. Line a dish with puff paste, bake it 10 minutes to color it, and allow it to rise, cover this with a layer of sausage meat, and fill it with 12 fine birds, stuffed with a forcemeat containing truffles, then cover them with another layer of sausage meat, and another of paste. Paint the outside with yolk of egg to give a fine glaze, and bake it 1 1/2 hours. A hole left in the centre must now be filled, pouring in a cup of melted aspic jelly, flavored with a little wine, and the pie served cold. TURKEY PIE. (Amiens.) Cut into thin slices the dark meat of a cold roast turkey and half as much beef tongue. To every pound of both, allow 1 ounce of butter and four truffles, salt and pepper. Make a stock from the bones, gravy, and stuffing, with 1 pint of water, onion, carrot, and herbs, also a bayleaf ; when this has cooked 1 hour, reduce it to a cupful. Pour it over the meat and truffles, arranged in a dish, and cover the top with a thin layer of pastry or a thick layer of bread-crumbs. Bake 1 hour, serve hot or cold. DUCK PIE. (Chartres.) Line a dish with puff paste, bake it to color it, and then fill it. Mix 1 pound of sausage meat with onion, parsley, salt, and pepper, chopping the onion fine. Cut into thin slices the meat of 1 fine cooked ducks, - if made of the remains of roast duck less sausage will be needed, - let these slices be left for an hour in a mixture of olive oil, pepper, onion juice, and tarragon vinegar, then drain and arrange in layers in the dish, with the sausage meat between. Cover with a fancy lid of paste, egg it to make it glaze, and bake it 1 1/2 hours. Serve hot or cold. GOOSE PIE. (Strasburg.) Cut the meat from the bones of a roast goose, and put the bones, gravy, and stuffing in a quart of water with herbs and a carrot, celery, and an onion. When it has cooked 2. hours, strain it, and reduce It to a pint. Arrange a layer of boiled and mashed onions in a dish, along the sides and bottom, seasoned to taste, then a layer of meat, and so on, until full. Pour in the sauce, to which is added a spoonful of sherry and 1/2 cup of stewed tomatoes. Put a lid of paste on top, and bake 2 hours. Serve hot. IMITATION PATE DE FOIES GRAS. (France.) The French make an excellent liver pie, cheaper than those of geese livers made in Strasburg. Parboil and drain a fine tender calf's liver, chop it very fine, discarding all tough bits, and adding as much cold boiled beef tongue, free from skin and fat, which must be cut into dice, 1 dozen mushrooms, also cut up, salt, pepper, parsley, and 2 onions minced and fried in butter. Line a dish with puff paste, fill with these, after it has been baked ten minutes to color it, and first adding 3 eggs, well beaten. Strips of pie-crust can be laid on top. Bake it one hour. Serve cold. RABBIT PIE. (Saxony.) Clean and cut into joints a fine young rabbit. Chop 1 pound of fresh pork and 1/2 pound of veal suet, with a laurel leaf ( bayleaf ), an onion thyme, parsley, pepper, salt, and 2 cloves. Line a dish with this forcemeat, lay the rabbit on top, in alternate layers, adding 3 hard-boiled eggs, sliced, 6 mushrooms, and 6 oysters, finally I glass of cider or white wine. Let there be a layer of forcemeat, covered with bread-crumbs, on top of all, cover closely 3/4 hour, then let it brown while baking. Serve hot or cold. CHICKEN PIE (as made in England). Cut into dice 2 ounces ham, 4 mushrooms, and 4 truffles, add 2 ounces butter mixed with 1 ounce of flour and 1/2 pint of white stock and a spoonful of rum or brandy. Add, after stirring on the fire for 10 minutes, 2 cups of chopped cold chicken, - not cut too fine, - 8 gherkins, cut in slices, some parsley, seasoning, and 3 anchovies, chopped and boned. Line a dish with paste, bake it until yellow, fill with this, with paste on top. Bake it an hour, and serve cold. Used for picnics on the Thames, or when shooting. CHICKEN PIE (as made in France). Joint a large chicken, parboil it, using the water for soup, and cut the meat from the bones and skin. Make a forcemeat of the liver, 2 ounces of ham, 4 ounces of tongue, 2 ounces of butter, and the yolks of 3 boiled eggs. Season, add onion juice, and chop fine. Line a dish with paste, bake it yellow, fill in alternate layers of meat and the forcemeat. Add 1 cup of stock mixed with a tablespoonful of lemon juice, a layer of paste, and bake it 1 1/2 hours. Serve hot or cold. CHICKEN TART (invented for Madame de Pompadour). Parboil 1 pound of spaghetti, being careful not to break it. Drain it, and line a mould, twisting it all around. Fill the centre with a mixture of 1 cups of cold chopped chicken, 1/2 cup of cream blended with some flour and butter and yolk of an egg, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and chopped parsley. Steam it like a custard, 1 hour, turn it out on a dish, and pour around it some good tomato sauce. Serve hot. HUMBLE PIE. (England.) This is a very old dish. Many years ago, in feudal times, the retainers, " below the salt," had a pie, so named, made of the meaner parts of the game killed in the chase. Nowadays, the same proportions of suet, herbs, bread, etc., are cooked with veal, which results in a pie not to be despised. Mince finely 1 1/2 pounds of the fillet of veal, adding 1 dozen oysters, 1 pound of beef suet, parsley, thyme, sweet marjoram, pepper, and salt, a teaspoonful of sherry, and the yolks of two eggs, also 1 cup of bread-crumbs. Beat and stir to a smooth mixture, line a dish with paste, as above, and when it is yellow, fill with this, cover with strips of paste, and bake it in a slow oven 2 hours. Serve with a brown sauce. ANNASTICH. (A German-Jewish recipe.) Wash 1 pound of rice, add 1 quart of good white broth, and cook it, stirring often, for 1/2 hour. Add some parsley and thyme and a chicken, stuffed and tied as for roasting, and, covering closely, cook slowly until the fowl is tender. Take out the chicken, strain the broth, add the yolk of an egg, the juice of a lemon, and 1/2 a teaspoonful of saffron, - which may be omitted,-and pour over. CHAPTER FOUR - Vegetables and Salads GREEN PEAS (as cooked in France.) BLEND tablespoonful of butter with a teaspoonful of flour, add 1 pint of young peas and a small bunch of parsley, 1 cup of water, and 6 shallots or tiny onions. Cook 40 minutes. Take out the parsley, then add salt, pepper, and a teaspoonful of sugar, yolk of 1 egg, and a small piece of butter. Stir and serve hot, on toast, if desired. LETTUCE AND PEAS. (Provincial France.) Parboil 4 heads of lettuce in 1 quart of broth, - which can be used as soup, - remove the centres and fill with green peas, a little chopped onion, and a little flour. Tie these neatly, cover with 1/2 pint white stock, and simmer for an hour. Untie, arrange on toast, and pour the sauce over, adding salt and pepper. PUREE OF PEAS. (French.) This puree of peas, or of any other vegetable, can be served as a separate course or for the foundation of an entree, chops, or sweetbreads, or to fill an omelette, or garnish a roast. Boil 1 quart of green or dried peas with a bunch of parsley, an onion sliced, salt, and a little butter, using only-enough water to moisten. Drain, when tender, press through a sieve, add some more butter, a pinch of sugar, and some pepper. Smooth into a neat mound, if used for a garnish. PEAS PORRIDGE. (England.) Cook 1 quart of peas in a quart of water, with a tablespoonful of dried mint, and a tablespoonful of butter. Boil, covered, slowly for 2 hours, add salt and pepper, and some butter rolled in flour. Stir, add a pint of hot milk, and press through a sieve. It should be thick. Serve hot. ASPARAGUS (as cooked in France). Wash the heads and boil in salted water for 10 minutes. Drain, cut off the green or tender parts, mince it finely, with an onion to each bundle, chopped fine, salt, pepper, and the beaten yolk of an egg. Stir until hot, and pour over slices of toast. ASPARAGUS (as cooked in Spain). Boil the asparagus in salted water, drain it, and cut into equal lengths, discarding the tough parts. Arrange on a dish, and edge it with I dozen freshly poached eggs, cooked in vinegar and water. Pour over all a good sauce, Hollandaise or Bechamel or caper. Serve hot. SPINACH (as cooked in France and Germany). Plunge the spinach into boiling salted water; when tender, drain it and chop very fine. Add to each pint, 1 ounce of butter, 1 ounce of flour, and 1 gill of cream or white stock. Season with salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Press through a sieve, and arrange on a dish in a mound. Garnish with sliced hard-boiled eggs. STRING BEANS (as cooked in Brittany). String and cut into dice 1 quart of nice young beans, boil in salted water; when tender, drain them and put in a saucepan with an ounce of butter, a tablespoonful of finely chopped onion, and fry them lightly. Add parsley, pepper, and salt, 1 cup of white broth or hot milk, and the juice of a lemon. Serve at once. WHITE BEANS (as cooked in Brittany). These are often served with roast lamb or leg of mutton. Boil 1 pound of dried beans, drain them,-they should have been soaked overnight, - add 2 ounces butter, a tablespoonful of lemon juice or tarragon vinegar, and salt, pepper, and a cupful of a consommé. Press through a sieve, and arrange in a mound. POTATOES, PILGRIM STYLE. (A Trappist recipe.) Boil and slice 6 large potatoes; make a frying batter of 1 cup of milk, 1 egg, beaten, 4 table-spoonfuls of flour, and some parsley, adding 4 sliced onions, fried in butter. Stir these, add the potatoes, and barely enough milk to cover, also some chopped parsley, a little nutmeg, and plenty of bread-crumbs on top of the dish. Bake until brown. POTATOES (as cooked in Mantua). Beat 2 cups of freshly mashed potatoes with 1 cup of white stock, the yolks of 2 eggs, and a table-spoonful of cream or butter, salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Pour into a shallow dish, smooth the top, and cover closely with grated Parmesan cheese. Bake 1/2 hour, until brown. POTATOES (as cooked in Flanders). Boil and slice 4 large potatoes, and add a table-spoonful of chopped onion, as much parsley, pepper, salt, and 1/2 cup of rich milk. Stir and pour into a dish, cover with the yolk of an egg, mixed with 1/2 cup of bread-crumbs. Bake until brown. BAKED TOMATOES {as cooked in Sicily). Take out the centres from 6 large tomatoes, put these centres with 2 tablespoonfuls of butter or olive oil, 1 onion, and a bit of bacon chopped fine, some parsley, salt, pepper, and a clove pounded, also a tablespoonful of sherry or any white wine. Cook this, add 1/2 cup of bread-crumbs or enough to fill the tomatoes, dust with bread-crumbs and grated cheese, and bake 1/2 hour. Serve with a white sauce. BAKED TOMATOES. (Florentine style.) Take out the centres of 6 large tomatoes. Rub a clove of garlic across an earthen casserole, and fry in it an onion, chopped, in a spoonful of butter or olive oil. Add 6 mushrooms, 2 large livers of chickens, both minced finely, and a spoonful of lemon juice. Cook these, add yolks of 2 eggs and sufficient bread-crumbs. Fill the tomatoes, bake them 1/2 hour. CELERY (as cooked in Italy). Take off the roots and tops of 4 heads of celery. These can be used for flavoring soup. Parboil the celery, then cook it with 1 ounce butter, salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of minced ham, and a cup of white stock. When tender, strain the sauce, arrange the celery on pieces of toast, pour the sauce over, having added to it the yolk of an egg and a tablespoonful of grated cheese. Bake until brown. CAULIFLOWER, AU GRATIN. (Italy.) Wash and trim 2 fine heads of cauliflower, boil it in salted water, then drain it and arrange in a pudding dish. Make a sauce of 1 cup of white stock mixed with 1/2 cup of milk or cream, yolks of 2 eggs, and 1 ounce of grated cheese. Stir on the fire until thick, pour it smoothly over the cauliflower, dust thickly with crumbs and cheese, adding salt, and bake half an hour. CAULIFLOWER FRITTERS. (Italy.) The Italians make everything into fritters. Fritters are, like macaroni, a national dish. Parboil and drain a fine fresh cauliflower, cut it into branches and dip each into a frying batter. Make this of a tablespoonful of flour, I ounce of butter, I/2 cup of milk, and the yolk of an egg well beaten, salt, and pepper. Fry in boiling fat. Serve alone, or with a good sauce. MUSHROOMS ON TOAST. (A French recipe.) Slice and peel 1 pound of fresh mushrooms, add 1/2 cup of water, 2 ounces of butter, salt, pepper, and juice of a lemon. Cook 10 minutes, strain it, add to the sauce 1/2 cup of white stock, the yolk of an egg, and a little nutmeg. Toast 3 large pieces of bread, put the mushrooms on top, and pour the sauce over; garnish with parsley. MUSHROOMS (as cooked in Southern France, or Provence). Peel, slice, and fry 1 pound of fresh mushrooms in some butter with onion, a clove of garlic, if desired, salt, pepper, and a cup of stewed tomatoes, cooked with a tablespoonful of stock, some parsley, and a bayleaf . Add some chopped capers, and serve at once, hot. MUSHROOMS WITH EGGS. (A Hungarian recipe.) This is excellent. Peel and slice 1 pound of fresh mushrooms. Cook them until tender - remember that mushrooms, like liver and kidney, must not be cooked too long or they will be tough-in sufficient white broth to cover, adding some butter, onion, herbs, and seasoning. Press this through a sieve on an earthen plate, lay on it, very carefully, four or more poached eggs. Add salt and pepper, and serve. PURÉE OF MUSHROOMS. (Paris.) Cook 1 pound of mushrooms in stock to cover, as above, take out the mushrooms and add to the sauce 1 ounce of grated ham, 1 cup of stewed tomatoes, some chopped onion, nutmeg, parsley, and a bayleaf , salt, and pepper. Cook until thick, add the mushrooms and press through a sieve. Served in Pans as a sauce for baked shad, filling for an omelette, or, by adding an equal amount of bread-crumbs, baked in a dish. Or else add to the puree a glass of Burgundy, and serve, with slices of hard-boiled eggs, on toast. CARROTS (as cooked in Lille, Flanders). Scrape and slice 1 pound of young carrots. Add 1/2 pint water, 1 ounce butter, a little salt, and a pinch of sugar. Cook, covered, until tender, add the yolks of 2 eggs, beaten in 1/2 cup of milk or cream, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and chopped parsley. EGGPLANT (as cooked in Provence). Rub the saucepan with garlic, put in 2 small eggplants which have been sliced and broiled over the fire, a little butter or olive oil, an onion, chopped fine, some parsley, seasoning, a cup of stewed tomatoes, the juice of a lemon, and a spoonful of anchovy paste. Cook until tender, and arrange on toast or as a garnish for macaroni. FRIED EGGPLANT. (Naples.) Pare and slice and drain 2 large eggplants, dip each slice in egg, crumbs, and grated cheese. Fry till brown, or else arrange on a dish and bake. Serve with white or tomato sauce, or one of capers. STUFFED EGGPLANT. (A Turkish recipe.) Cut off the tops of 2 small eggplants, chop the inside with as much calf's liver and bread-crumbs, herbs, egg, and a little salt and pepper. Fill, add crumbs and butter, bake 1/2 hour. STUFFED CUCUMBERS. (Turkey and Greece.) Peel and cut off the end of fine large cucumbers, scoop out the seeds, and fill with a mixture of cold boiled rice, chopped chicken or lamb, herbs, and white stock. Cover with 1 cup of white stock or a cup of milk, and stew till tender. Add to the sauce the yolk of an egg, juice of a lemon, some flour and butter, parsley, and a tablespoonful of capers. Strain before adding the latter, pour over and serve hot. STUFFED VEGETABLE MARROW OR SQUASH. (Austria.) Peel and remove the centre from a large, flat squash, slicing it across. Fill both these halves with a forcemeat made of cold minced veal or game or fowl or fish, and an equal amount of bread-crumbs 1/2 cup of milk or white stock, herbs, and seasoning. Tie these two parts together, and cook in white broth or water. Drain, put in a dish, pour over a sauce made from stock, and serve with a border of boiled rice or mashed potatoes. BOILED ONIONS. (A French recipe.) Peel and fry 12 small onions, adding a pinch of sugar, salt, and pepper. When brown, add 1 cup or more of consommé, to cover, set in the oven with a plate over the dish, and serve when tender. STUFFED ONIONS. (Germany.) Parboil 6 large onions. Drain them, cut out the centres, and chop them with a cup of bread-crumbs, 6 mushrooms, 2 tablespoonfuls of sausage meat, 4 tablespoonfuls of capers, and 1 of gherkin pickles, minced parsley, salt, and pepper. Mix with 1/2 cup of stewed tomatoes, fill closely, and bake 20 minutes. Serve with a good white sauce. CABBAGE (as cooked in Provence). Remove the outer leaves from 1 fine heads of cabbage, slice them, and parboil in salted water. Drain them, add salt, pepper, 1 ounces butter, parsley, thyme, a bayleaf , a clove, and garlic or chopped onion, and 1 pint of white stock. Cook for 1 hour, strain the stock and reduce it to half, pour over the cabbage, on thin slices of toast. BAKED CABBAGE (as cooked in Normandy and Flanders). Take off the outer leaves of a large head of cabbage. Scoop out the heart, - having first parboiled the cabbage, - stuff it with bread-crumbs or boiled rice, mixed with some bacon, cold minced mutton or veal or fish, herbs, onions, yolks of 2 eggs, and seasoning. Tie neatly, boil in stock or hot water 1 hour, strain the stock, and pour over, or make a good sauce ; serve with potato croquettes. ARTICHOKES (as cooked in Lyons). Trim 6 large artichokes, cut into quarters, and parboil 10 minutes in salted water. Drain, put them with 2 ounces butter, and fry them, add juice of a lemon, salt, pepper, a glass of white wine, and 1/2 cup of stock. When tender, arrange on toast, and pour sauce over all. RICE (as cooked in Andalusia, Spain). Warm 1/2 pint of olive oil or butter, add 1/2 pound boiled rice, 1 1/2 pounds of chicken, cut into dice, onion, parsley, a pinch of saffron, and seasoning. In Spain, garlic is used, but it is not necessary. Cook 45 minutes, stir well, and arrange on a dish. Brown with a salamander, and squeeze a lemon over it before serving. Wash and drain 1/2 pound of rice, cook it with plenty of salted water until tender. Drain again, let it dry, add 1/2 ounce of butter, a pinch of mixed herbs, salt, pepper, and the meat of a dried haddock which has been soaked, dried, and flaked. Mix and pour in a dish, cover with the whites of 3 boiled eggs, also the yolks, chopped fine, 1/2 cup of stock, - made from fish-bones, - and plenty of grated cheese. Bake 1/2 hour and serve, garnished with parsley. BORDER OF RICE. (Toulouse.) Boil and mash 1 1/2 pounds of rice, add 1 ounce of butter, and press it into a ring-shaped mould. Bake it like a custard, and turn out on a dish. Make a ragout or stew of 1 cup of white stock, 1/2 cup of cream or milk, yolk of an egg, seasoning, I pair of boiled and sliced sweetbreads, and 6 mushrooms, cut up. Cook this until smooth, and pour into the circle of rice. Serve hot. INDIAN CURRY of FOWL. (Used in England.) Mix 2 teaspoonfuls of curry powder with 1 of flour, cut up and fry a chicken in butter or dripping, with an onion and some parsley, add the curry and flour, 1 1/2 cups of stock, and 1 cup of rice or grated cocoanut, wet with the juice of a lemon. Stir and serve. CURRY of SWEETBREADS. (England.) Cut into dice equal parts of boiled sweetbreads and chicken, mixed with 2 teaspoonfuls of chopped bacon, 2 ounces of butter, an onion, and seasoning. Fry these carefully, add two spoonfuls of curry powder, a tablespoonful of flour, and enough white broth to moisten. Stir and cook 20 minutes, add the juice of a lemon, and serve with a border of rice. INDIAN PILAU. Cut up a fowl and fry it in butter, add a spoonful of curry powder, a tablespoonful of capers and gherkins, mixed, also a cup of tomatoes and a cup of rice. Stir and cook, and serve hot. INDIAN BURDWAIN. {England.) Add to 1 pint cold water, 1 tablespoonful of chopped onion, salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of anchovy sauce, 1 ounce butter mixed with flour, a tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar, and as much Madeira wine, if convenient. Cook until thick, add any cold game or fowl or meat, cut into dice, cook 20 minutes, add the juice of an orange, and serve with a border of rice. MACARONI. (Bologna.) Parboil in plenty of salted water 1/2 pound of macaroni, drain it, add sufficient white stock to cover it, and cook until tender and all the broth is absorbed, then put it in a shallow dish, grate cheese over it, adding 1/2 pound of sliced and parboiled mushrooms ; brown slightly with a salamander, and serve with spinach. MACARONI. (Genoa.) Boil 8 ounces for 10 minutes in salted water, drain it, add 1 quart of consomme; when cooked and absorbed, add I teaspoonful of French mustard mixed with 1 ounce of butter and 1/4 pound grated cheese, some pepper, and a teaspoonful of onion juice. Stir well, add crumbs over the top, and bake until brown. SPAGHETTI. (Prevailing method all over Italy.) Wash and parboil 1/2 pound of spaghetti, drain it, add 1 pint of stewed tomatoes, mixed with a little stock or beef extract, some chopped onion and herbs, also a small piece of ham, cut up. This must be cooked for 20 minutes, then strained and seasoned, before pouring it over the spaghetti. Italians also use a clove of garlic in this sauce, but that can be left out. Stir the spaghetti well; serve with a plateful of grated Parmesan cheese. SPAGHETTI. (Amalfi.) Parboil and drain 1/4 pound of spaghetti, add 1/2 pint of veal broth and 2 tablespoonfuls of grated cheese, preferably Parmesan, mix well, pour into a dish, arrange the yolks of 6 hard-boiled eggs, at intervals, and a thin layer of puff paste, on the top. Bake it until brown. MACARONI, Á LA PONTIFFE. (Rome.) This is also made of spaghetti. The original recipe, however, calls for 8 ounces of ribbon macaroni, or lazagnes , cooked 15 minutes in boiling water, and drained. Line a buttered mould with this ; fill it with a forcemeat of bread, herbs, and chopped liver, thin slices of chicken and ham, with sliced hard-boiled eggs, and button mushrooms. Add a cup of chicken stock and bake 3/4 hour. Turn it out and serve with a sauce. MACARONI. (Palermo.) Mince 1 onion, and fry it in butter, add a little flour, and 1/2 can of tomatoes, salt, pepper, a spoonful of sugar, and cook 10 minutes. Strain it, add 1 cup each of cooked macaroni, chopped ham, and chicken, and 3 green peppers, cooked, and finely shredded, and free from seeds, the yolk of 1 egg, and 1/2 cup of boiling milk or broth. Stir well, and serve hot. PHEASANT AND MACARONI. This also is a luxurious dish, prevalent in all of the Italian cities. It can be made of any kind of game. Chop the meat of duck or partridges, rabbits or guinea fowl, into dice, using the remains of roast birds, put the bones and trimmings, gravy and filling with water to cover, onion, parsley, a bay-leaf and a carrot, and let it cook slowly. To each 1/2 pound of meat add 2 chopped shallots, salt, pepper, nutmeg, a tablespoonful of mushroom catchup and as much sherry, the sauce strained, flour, and butter. Add 6 ounces of macaroni, cooked in stock, put in a dish and bake it. GNOCCHI. (Italian savory fritters.) Chop 1/2 pound of the white meat of cold cooked chicken very fine, make an equal amount of paste, such as used for éclairs and cream puffs (no sugar ), chopped parsley, salt, pepper, and onion juice, also a tablespoonful of grated cheese. Take this, well mixed, in large spoonfuls and poach them in boiling broth, drain them, arrange on a dish in a neat pile, cover with grated cheese, and bake until brown. Serve with tomato sauce. RAVIOL. (Italian forcemeat balls.) These are used in soups, to garnish roasts or entrees or as a separate course. Chop some lamb or chicken very fine, add to every 2 ounces, 1 ounce of bread-crumbs, 1 ounce grated ham, 1 onion, grated, yolks of 2 hard-boiled eggs, mashed with a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan cheese. Add, mixing well, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and the yolk of an egg. Roll out some good puff paste very thin, cut into rounds, fill with a spoonful of this, pressing 2 pieces together. Poach them in boiling stock and serve on a bed of asparagus or spinach. RAVIOLI. (Another recipe.) Chop 1/4 pound of veal very fine, add 2 ounces of sausage meat, 2 ounces butter, 1 ounce beef marrow, 1 teaspoonful of mixed herbs, salt, pepper, 1 cup of spinach, cooked, drained, and chopped fine, with 1/4 pound of grated cheese, 2 eggs well beaten. Stir well, form into balls, lay them on a dish, dust thickly with grated cheese, and bake until brown. Serve with a sauce. BADEN NOODLES. (Germany.) Melt 6 ounces butter, and mix with it slowly the yolks of 2 eggs and 1 white. Stir until frothy, add salt and pepper, 5 ounces of flour, very slowly, then the yolks of 1 more eggs, well beaten. Drop in spoonfuls in boiling water, drain, when puffy,- about 10 minutes, - arrange neatly on a dish, dust with grated cheese, and bake till brown. Serve with a good sauce, or with some vegetable, artistically garnished. FRENCH POTATO CAKES. Mash 3 boiled potatoes with 1 ounces of butter, some grated cheese, - a heaping tablespoonful,- salt, pepper, and 5 beaten eggs. Form this into flat cakes, and fry in boiling fat. Serve as a border, or in a mound, with some parsley along the edge. POTATO SOUFFLE. (Germany.) Boil and mash 8 potatoes, press through a sieve, add 1 onions, and 2 tablespoonfuls of ham, chopped fine, and both cooked in butter, salt, pepper, and the yolks of 3 eggs, and parsley. Add finally 1/2 cup of stock, and the beaten whites of eggs. Bake in a dish, with bread-crumbs over. MUSHROOMS AND CREAM. (Northern France.) Clean and trim 1 pound of fresh mushrooms, fry them in 1 ounce of butter, adding pepper and salt, cooking 6 minutes. Add 2 tablespoonfuls of white stock, some parsley, and 1/2 cup of cream. Cook 4 minutes longer, and pour over slices of toast. CARROTS AND ASPARAGUS. (Alsace-Lorraine.) Peel, and slice the carrots into small squares, add as much asparagus; also cooked, cut into the same-sized pieces, using only the best part-Cover with white stock or milk, and heat well together. If milk is used, add flour, butter, yolk of an egg, and parsley. HARICOT BEANS (as cooked in Burgundy). Burgundy being the province where wine is plentiful because of the vineyards, everything there is cooked in it. Soak 1/2 pound of red beans overnight. Drain them, add 1 ounce of butter, an onion, cut fine, 1 clove, some parsley and thyme, and enough consomme to cover. Boil slowly until tender but dry. Take out the herbs, add salt and pepper, and 1/2 cup of red wine. Serve hot, as a separate course. SAUER KRAUT. (Germany.) Shred finely 3 white cabbages, add 1 ounce of salt, 1 cup of water, and 1/2 spoonful of cream of tartar. Cover and mash, keep it under a weight, in a warm place. In 3 weeks it will be ready for use. It must be cooked several hours before serving, and eaten with bacon, or small sausages. LETTUCE SALAD. (Normandy.) Wash and pick 2 heads of salad lettuce. Dry the leaves, and tear them apart. Make a dressing of salt, pepper, yolk of 1 eggs, 1/2 cup of cream, 1 dozen capers, and 4 teaspoonfuls of tarragon vinegar. Beat well, and pour over the leaves, toss and stir until every leaf is coated. GASCONY SALAD. (France.) Trim, wash, and cut up a head of endive, dry it, and cover it with a dressing of 2 parts of olive oil to 1 of tarragon vinegar, salt, pepper, a teaspoonful of anchovy paste, and a pinch of celery seed. Have in the bowl a crust of bread rubbed with garlic, and toss salad and dressing together for 10 minutes, then remove the crust and serve. FISH AND ONION SALAD. (Nantes.) Peel and core 6 small white onions, put a bit of butter in the centre of each, and bake them, in a covered pan, 1 hour, until tender. When cool, slice them, add 6 large sardines, free from bones and oil and skin, cut up, and 6 sliced hard-boiled eggs, some chopped parsley, and salt, and pepper, with a mixture of olive oil, and lemon juice, and tarragon vinegar. Mix all well, arrange on a dish, with slices of toast and parsley, very cold. SALAD OF BRUSSELS SPROUTS. Boil 1 pint of sprouts, and drain them ; when tender, sprinkle with chopped onion, olives, walnut kernels, and capers, in equal parts, all chopped fine, and two teaspoonfuls of lemon juice. Pour over these, when well mingled, a good mayonnaise dressing, and serve. SWEDISH SALAD. Bone and skin 4 sardines, cut each into 4 pieces, add an equal amount of cold sliced and cooked meat, in pieces 1 inch square, 30 drops of onion juice, 1 cooked and sliced beet, 1 cooked and cut up potato, a spoonful of chopped parsley. Mingle these in a bowl lined with lettuce, cover with a dressing of 6 tablespoonfuls of oil, 2 of vinegar, - tarragon preferred, - salt, and pepper. Mix these carefully, and garnish with hard-boiled eggs. RUSSIAN SALAD. Cut into dice 1 cup each of cold chicken, tongue, and fish, - all cooked, of course. Arrange on a dish, in three parts, the tongue in the middle, with a border of 1 carrots, 4 potatoes, and 1 cup of string beans, being careful to keep each distinct, and a dressing over all as above. Before serving, pour a mayonnaise over it, evenly. RUSSIAN SALAD (without meat ). Cut 8 carrots into dice, 3 raw tomatoes in slices, and chop 1 onion and a handful of watercress. Mix it with 1/2 pint of mayonnaise, add the chopped onion, and pour this over the rest, on a bed of lettuce leaves. Garnish with a tablespoonful of capers, here and there. SALMON SALAD. (Norway.) Remove the skin and bones of 1 pound of cold cooked fish and flake it into pieces with a fork. Mix it with the sliced yolks of 3 hard-boiled eggs, a tablespoonful each of chopped olives and capers, and gherkin pickles, then add enough mayonnaise dressing, and arrange on a dish edged with lettuce leaves and pieces of aspic jelly, if this is at hand. SWEETBREAD SALAD. (Austria.) Parboil one pair of large sweetbreads and cut them into dice; in cooking them season the water with onion, carrot, celery, and parsley, or else cook them in some white broth. Mix the pieces with an equal amount of cooked green peas, and cover with mayonnaise. Stir well; serve on a border of lettuce. This is both dainty and good. CHICKEN SALAD. (England.) Mix 1 tablespoonful of capers, 2 ounces of chopped ham, 3 hard-boiled and sliced eggs, some tarragon' leaves and chopped chives, or young onion, 1 anchovy, free from bones and pounded, all well together. Cut a cooked chicken into neat strips, and dip each into this, mixed with sufficient aspic jelly, melted, to stiffen when cool. Arrange these strips, thickly covered with this mixture, in a ring; fill the centre with cooked carrots and celery, cut into dice, and as much green peas, covering them with a thick mayonnaise. Set on ice until stiff, and serve very cold. Garnish with parsley. ALEX. DUMAS' RECIPE FOR SALAD. Cut into dice cooked white potatoes and beets in equal parts, add half as much raw sliced tomatoes, pickled gherkins, and anchovies, or tunny fish, arrange on a dish with chopped onion and sliced eggs, a French dressing being poured over and all mixed. Add the yolk of an egg blended with a tablespoonful of olive oil and a teaspoonful of French mustard, then serve with a border of lettuce. ONION AND PEPPER SALAD. (This recipe was obtained from the chef of an exclusive Paris restaurant and is unknown to most people.) Chop 6 green peppers, free from seeds, and 1 large Bermuda onion very, very fine. Add salt, pepper, French mustard, 1/2 pint olive oil and juice of a lemon, mixed with one inch of preserved ginger, cut up fine. Serve on a bed of lettuce leaves ice cold. SALAD FRANCILLON. (Paris) Pare and slice 1 pound of small potatoes. Cook them slowly in 1 pint of consomme for 20 minutes, until tender but not broken. Then drain them and set aside. Parboil 3 dozen small oysters. Wash, peel, and slice thinly 1/2 pound of truffles. Cover them with 1 gills of sherry, add a slice of onion, and cook for 5 minutes. Drain and cool all these, arrange them on a dish and pour over a French dressing, to which is added 1/2 glass of champagne or Chateau Yquem; pour this carefully and serve ice cold. SALMAGUNDI. (Old English salad.) Wash and split and remove the bones of two large Dutch or Scotch herring, and mince the fish with the white meat of a fowl, 2 hard-boiled eggs, 1 onion, 1 anchovy, a tablespoonful of grated ham or tongue, and season with salad oil, vinegar, pepper, and salt. Then arrange in a mound on a dish and serve with a border of lettuce. The recipe was brought from Spain to England in early times. ASPARAGUS AND SHRIMP SALAD. (Germany.) Boil 27 asparagus tips, cut into short pieces, without ends that are hard; add an equal amount of cooked and sliced shrimps. Mix these well with a mayonnaise dressing, using capers, French mustard, and a border of lettuce leaves. Serve with cheese and crackers. ABERDEEN SANDWICHES. Chop fine 2 ounces cold chicken, 1 ounce of ham or tongue; add two tablespoonfuls of white sauce and a pinch of curry powder. Fry some squares of toast in butter, cover with this, and bake for 10 minutes. Serve hot as an appetizer. SALMON SANDWICHES. (England.) Chop 1/2 pound of salmon, free from bones and skin, very fine. Add an equal amount of mayonnaise and two tablespoonfuls of chopped capers. Beat well and spread between thin slices of bread. FRENCH CHEESE SANDWICHES. Slice brown bread very thin, spread with a layer of jam or marmalade, strawberry or peach preferred, and over this a layer of cream cheese, very fresh. Cover with another slice of bread. Serve for afternoon tea. FRENCH SWEET SANDWICHES. Roll puff paste into very thin layers, cut into strips, and bake until crisp. Take these, about one inch wide and three long, spread with whipped cream and a layer of jam, putting two together. FRENCH SAVORY SANDWICHES. Make a paste as for eclairs, bake in small pieces, and when light split with a knife and fill with a mixture of equal parts mayonnaise dressing and chopped game or chicken. These are very delicate. ASPARAGUS AND SHRIMP SALAD, GERMANY ( See page 155 ) An illustration of a plate of asparagus and shrimp salad with sliced lemon garnished around the plate. BATH BUNS, ENGLAND ( See page 171 ) A decorative plate with eight bath buns. CHAPTER FIVE - Cakes, Puddings, and Pastry RICHMOND MAIDS OF HONOR. (England.) THESE celebrated cakes, or tarts, were invented by Queen Elizabeth, and are still sold at Richmond. Beat 2 eggs, add 1 quart of milk, and the juice of a lemon. Set in a pan and skim off the curd. Drain it, mix with yolks of 4 eggs, beaten with the grated rind of the lemon, some sugar to taste,- the lemon can be rubbed on it, in two lumps, - a little cinnamon and nutmeg, 6 ounces currants and 1 glass of brandy. Mix well and fill shells of puff paste. Bake 20 minutes. LEMON CAKES, OR KING HENRY'S SHOE STRINGS. (England.) Beat the yolks of 6 eggs well, add 1/2 pound sifted sugar, the grated rind of a lemon, and 2 tablespoonfuls of orange-flower water. Beat all well, add slowly 6 ounces flour, then whites of eggs beaten stiff, and the juice of a lemon. Pour into ladyfinger tins or on a large pan, very thin; bake 1 hour slowly, and cut in strips. KING HENRY'S SHOE STRINGS. (Another recipe.) Mix 1/4 pound flour and 1/2 cup of milk, 1 1/2 ounces butter, juice of a lemon and sugar to taste. Stir on the fire for 10 minutes, take off, and add the beaten yolks of 4 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls of chopped almonds. Pour into a pan and bake. Cut into strips and dust with sugar. QUEEN CHARLOTTE'S CAKE. (England.) Mix 1 pint flour, 1 cup warm milk, 1/2 yeast cake, and 1/2 pound butter beaten to a cream with 1/4 pound powdered sugar, 4 eggs, 1/2 pound chopped candied peel, a teaspoonful of cinnamon, and a cup of chopped almonds. Mix as usual, let it rise before adding I cup more flour and the nuts and peel, etc., then let it rise again. Pour into a Turk's head mould and bake 1 hour. While hot, pour over a syrup, made of 1 cup sugar, 2 table-spoonfuls of water, and a teaspoonful of vanilla, wine, or cordial. Dust the top with powdered sugar and serve hot, in slices. PARSNIP CAKES. (Very old English recipe.) These do not taste of parsnips at all, and can be found still in the little country farms or cottages. Boil 3 parsnips until tender, mash and press through a sieve, mix in proportions of 1 tea-cupful to 1 quart of hot milk, 1/2 pint of yeast, some salt, and flour to make a stiff batter. Cover, set in a warm place, and when risen to twice its size, knead into fiat cakes, very thin. These must rise again and be baked until brown. Can be eaten with butter, like crumpets or scones, or with gravy, like Yorkshire pudding, with a roast of meat. PARKIN CAKES. (England.) These are eaten on Guy Fawkes' Day. Mix 1 1/2 pounds of flour, 3/4 pound butter, 1 1/2 pounds fine oatmeal, 2 pounds brown sugar, 2 ounces of powdered ginger, 1 pint molasses, 3 teaspoonfuls of carbonate of soda, and 1 ounces butter, and a tea-spoonful of vanilla or lemon. Let it stand 1 hour. Roll into thin cakes, and bake in a slow oven at least an hour. Half the recipe is sufficient for a small family. SHREWSBURY CAKES. (England.) Mix 1 pound powdered sugar with 2 pounds flour, add nutmeg and some caraway seeds, - currants may be used instead,- 1 eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, and 6 ounces melted butter. Roll out very thin, cut into diamonds, and bake. These are very fine, and will keep a long while in a tin box. BRANDY SNAPS. (England.) Mix 1/2 pound butter, 1/2 pound brown sugar, 1/2 pound flour, and 1 pint molasses. Drop in spoonfuls in a buttered tin, and bake in a hot oven. Take out and put near the fire to dry. These are favorite cakes with school-children in England, and are crisp and curly when rightly-made. HERMITS. (England.) Mix 2 eggs, 2 cups brown sugar, 1/2 cup butter, 1/2 a cup of currants, 1 teaspoonful of chopped cloves, the same each of grated nutmeg and soda, melted in water, and of cinnamon. Beat all well, add enough flour to make a stiff paste, and roll out thin. Cut in rounds, and bake in a hot oven. POOR MAN'S CAKE. (England.) Rub 1 pint of flour with a piece of butter the size of an egg, well together, add 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder to the flour first. Beat 1 whole egg with 1 cup of milk and 1 cup of sugar, pour these into the flour and butter, and flavor with lemon or nutmeg. Bake in a moderate oven, and cut in slices. Ice with sugar icing, if desired. SCOTCH CAKES. Cream together 3/4 pound butter and 1 pound sugar, add 1 pound of flour, a tablespoonful of powdered cinnamon, and 1/4 pint of milk. Roll out very thin, cut in rounds, and bake 1/2 hour. MANX CAKES. Rub the zest of a large lemon on sufficient sugar - loaf sugar - to obtain all, weigh this, and add more, enough to make 8 ounces. Pound it, add 8 ounces rice flour, beat 8 eggs very light, dissolve the sugar in these, adding the flour slowly. Stir all, and bake in buttered tins about 1/2 hour. HONEY CAKES. (Basle, Switzerland.) Melt 2 ounces butter, add 1/2 pound of honey, stirring well, take off the fire, and let it cool. Add the minced rind of a lemon, 2 ounces sweet almonds, chopped fine, a little nutmeg, 1/2 ounce carbonate of soda, dissolved in a little water. Mix these well, and set in a cold place 12 hours. Roll out l/2 inch thick, cut into squares, decorate with nuts and chopped citron, then bake 25 minutes m hot oven. This recipe makes 1 dozen. ALMOND CAKES. (Pithiviers.) This French town is as celebrated for its almond cakes as Basle is for honey cakes. Travellers ask for them, but can rarely obtain a recipe for either. Blanch and pound 8 ounces sweet almonds and 1 ounce bitter almonds, add 6 tablespoonfuls of sugar, and 8 eggs well beaten, 6 tablespoonfuls of dry flour, and the zest or rind of a lemon. Add 1/2 pound of butter, and stir all lightly. Pour into small buttered tins and let it rise before baking, covered with paper, for 1/2 hour. NORMANDY SHORT CAKES. Mix 1/2 pound sugar and 1/2 pound fresh butter to a cream, add 1/2 pound flour slowly, roll out thin, and cut in rounds. Bake on oiled paper, in hot oven, and eat with cream cheese and fruit jam. WESTPHALIAN BUTTER CAKES. Sift 3 pounds flour, add 2 cups sugar, 7 eggs well beaten, zest of 1 lemon, 1/2 pint milk, and 1/2 pound of melted butter. Mix the butter with the sugar, add the eggs, then the milk and flour. Beat all well, spread on buttered pans, and set to rise. Butter the tops, dust with sugar, cinnamon, and chopped nuts, prick with a fork here and there, and bake till done. Serve hot, cut in slices, for lunch or tea. NORMANDY SPICE CAKE OR GINGERBREAD. This is the cake of the "gingerbread fairs," common in rural France. Warm 1 pint molasses, add 1/2 pound fresh butter, 1/2 ounce each of powdered ginger and allspice, a teaspoonful of mixed anise and coriander seed, and the rind of a lemon, grated. Add enough flour to make a dough, and set it to rise in a cool place, add then 2 ounces each of chopped cherries, citron, and currants or candied peel, roll out an inch thick, cut into rounds or squares, and bake in hot oven. It can be iced, if desired. NUREMBERG GINGERBREAD. Beat 4 eggs, add 1/2 a grated nutmeg, 6 cloves pounded, 2 ounces of candied peel chopped fine, 8 ounces sugar; mix all for 10 minutes, add slowly 1/2 pound flour, a pinch of salt, and a teaspoonful of baking powder, then 8 ounces of chopped sweet almonds. Stir all well, pour into tins 1/2 inch deep. Bake 1/2 hour, ice with chocolate, and cut into slices or strips. GERMAN SUPPER CAKES. Make a batter with 1 pint hot milk, 1 small cup of yeast, and enough flour to make a dough. Set it to rise overnight, add the next morning 1 cup of sugar, mixed with 1 cup of butter and 1 eggs. Beat all well, and set to rise. Pour into pie plates, adding more flour if needful, and set to rise till light; rub over with 3 tablespoonfuls of cinnamon and sugar mixed, and 1 ounce butter. Bake in hot oven, and eat warm, sliced. APFEL STRUDEL. (German Apple Cake.) This is a very fine cake, but not often made properly, as it takes time. Mix 1 tablespoonful of butter with 1 large cup of flour, add 1 egg and sufficient milk to make a stiff paste. Knead for I/2 hour, lay aside and cover, near the fire. Mix 1 dozen peeled and sliced apples with 2 cupfuls of fried bread-crumbs, 1/4 pound of chopped almonds, 3/4 cup of currants or raisins cut up, and 1 table-spoonful of cinnamon. Mix all well, and rolling the dough very thin, spread this evenly over it. Now fold it and pull until as thin as paper, but not broken. Roll up like jelly cake, curve in shape of an 8, and bake 1 1/4 hours, basting often with 1/2 cup of butter. Serve either hot or cold, in slices. MADELIENES. (Paris.) Beat 4 ounces butter with 3 ounces sugar, add the yolks of 4 eggs, a teaspoonful of orange-flower water, and the grated rind of a lemon, then add 4 ounces flour and the stiff whites of 4 eggs. Fill small pans, buttered, cover with split almonds and sifted sugar. Bake 1/2 hour in moderate oven. NAPOLEONS. (Paris.) Beat 6 ounces butter, 2 ounces sugar, 2 ounces sweet chopped almonds; add 1/2 pound flour, and stir well. Then add the yolk of 1 egg, roll out very thin, and bake in a tin. When cold, cut in strips, spread with jam or whipped cream, and put two together. DELICIEUSES. (Paris.) Make the recipe for madelienes into very small cakes, bake, then split them. Fill each with cream, whipped and sweetened with cordial or wine, put them together, and dip each in icing, flavored with lemon or strawberry, coffee or pistachio. Serve as dessert, or at five o'clock tea. SAVARIN. (Paris.) The Savarin and Baba are so much alike that the same recipe will do for both. They are familiar to all tourists, and very rich and light. Mix 1 pound sifted flour, 4 ounces sugar, 1/2 pound butter, 8 eggs, and 1 ounce Vienna yeast. Melt the yeast in 1/2 pint warm milk, and set to rise. It is best to add only a little flour, then, when risen, the rest. When light, add the eggs and sugar and butter melted, and stir till smooth with the rest of the flour. Line a mould with butter and chopped almonds, and pour in the dough, 3/4 full. When risen to the edge, bake in a moderate oven 1 1/2 hours. Before turning out, gash the top with a knife, pour over it a syrup of sugar and water boiled, and some rum, serve on a plate decked with raisins or candied fruit. BRIOCHES. When Marie Antoinette was told that the people were starving for bread, she said, " Give them brioches! " These are a troublesome but dainty cake, popular all over France. Sift 1/2 pound flour, and mix half of it with 1/4 ounce Vienna yeast and water to make a paste. Knead it, and put in a large bowl of warm water near the fire. Mix the rest of the flour with 1/4 ounce sugar, a pinch of salt, a tablespoonful of water, 5/4 pound butter, and 2 eggs. Beat all for a while, adding the eggs one by one. Then throw the dough on a table six times, to make it light, take out the ball of paste, now floating on the water, and roll both together several times. Put to rise for 2 hours in a cold place. Then bake it 40 minutes, egging the top to glaze it, in a hot oven. Turn out and dust with sugar. GÂTEAU ST. HONORÉ. (Paris.) This is a more fancy brioche, made somewhat differently. Boil 2 gills water, 3 ounces butter, and a tea-spoonful of sugar for 2 minutes, add 1/2 pound flour, mix until the paste is smooth and does not stick to the pan. Take off and add, one by one, 6 unbeaten eggs. Butter a pie plate and cover with a thin layer of this, then make balls of the rest and set on as a border, fastening with white of egg. Bake until a light brown, serve cold with a filling in centre of preserves, and whipped cream on top. BATONS DE JAKOB. (Marseilles.) Melt 1/2 cup of butter in 1 cup of hot water, and stir till it boils; add 1 cup of flour, and stir till smooth. Take off, add 3 unbeaten eggs, one by one, and stir well. Pour on a pan in cakes, 1 inch wide and 4 long; bake 25 minutes in moderate oven. When cold, open them with a knife, fill with a soft custard flavored with vanilla, and ice with coffee. SWEET CANNELONS. (Marseilles.) These, like the above, are peddled along the streets on little trays. Roll some good puff paste very thin, cut in strips, and roll them around a stick, dust with sugar and fill the centre, where the stick held the edges overlapping, with whipped cream, after they are baked. TCHEUREKS. (Greek Easter Cakes.) These are also sold on the street at the season, during Passion and Holy Weeks. Mix 4 1/2 ounces butter with an equal amount of sugar, add 5 eggs well beaten, 1 cup of milk, 2 ounces yeast, and 10 ounces of flour. Let it rise for 2 hours, form into shape of a large fleur-de-lis, or 3-pointed flower, -- to represent the Trinity, - ice with sugar, and bake 1 hour. ROUMANIAN CAKE. Mix 1 1/2 pounds flour with 2 ounces sugar, grated rind of a lemon, 1/2 teaspoonful of cinnamon, and a pinch of powdered cloves. Warm 1/2 pound of honey, add this, and knead all well. Cover and set to rise 1 hour. Roll out 1 inch thick, put in pie plates, cover with chopped nuts and brown sugar, and bake in moderate oven. Cut into strips, and eat hot or cold. RUSSIAN CAKE. Mix the yolks of 5 eggs and 1/4 pound of sugar; add slowly 3 ounces flour, 2 ounces chopped almonds, a spoonful of anise seed, and the whites of eggs beaten stiff. Bake in long narrow tins lined with paper, cut in slices, and dry in the oven until crisp, before serving. GERMAN XMAS CAKE. Mix 1/2 pound butter with 1/2 pound powdered sugar, add yolks 6 eggs, and 3/4 pound of flour. Beat the sugar and butter before adding eggs, well beaten separately, and then the flour and a spoonful of vanilla. Roll out and form into cakes the shape of an S or a U, cover with an icing of sugar and water boiled, adding currants and candied peel, if desired. Bake in a very hot oven. HOBELSPANE. {German dessert cakes.) Sift 3 ounces of flour, add a pinch of salt, the grated rind and juice of a lemon, yolks of 5 eggs, and enough water to make a paste. Let this stand 1/2 hour. Roll it out thin, cut into strips, twist these like curls, and fry in hot fat. Dust them with sugar, and serve hot, with a sauce of melted grape preserves. May be cut in squares instead. GENOA CAKE. (Italy.) Mix 1/4 pound currants, 1/4 pound candied orange and lemon peel and citron, chopped and mixed, a pinch of cinnamon, 6 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 1/2 pound flour, and a spoonful of lemon juice. Beat these well, add 4 beaten eggs and 2 spoonfuls of brandy. Pour into a shallow pan and bake 20 minutes. Ice with sugar icing flavored with vanilla, and let it brown a little. Eat cold, cut in slices. TWELFTH NIGHT CAKE. (England.) Beat 2 pounds butter with 2 pounds powdered sugar, 1 nutmeg grated, 1/4 ounce each of cinnamon, mace, ginger, and allspice. Beat 10 minutes, add slowly 20 eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, and beat for 10 minutes more. Add 2 pounds flour, 4 pounds currants, 1/2 pound chopped almonds, 1/2 pound each of chopped lemon and orange candied peel, and citron, and a glass of brandy. Bake, in a pan 1/2 full, lined with paper, 4 1/2 hours. Will keep 2 months. PLUM CAKE. (England.) Beat 1 1/2 pounds butter with 1 pound sugar, add beaten whites of 8 eggs, 1 1/2 pounds flour, 1 pounds currants, 8 ounces each of chopped candied lemon peel and citron, 1/2 ounce of mixed cinnamon and nutmeg, the zest of 2 oranges rubbed on 4 lumps of sugar. Beat after adding each ingredient, then fully 1/2 hour together. Pour into a tin lined with four layers of buttered paper, and lay two on top. Bake 3 hours ; ice it with vanilla or chocolate icing. BATH BUNS. (England.) Mix 1 pound flour, a tablespoonful of yeast, and 1 cup of milk; let it rise overnight, or for several hours, near the fire ; add 6 ounces of melted butter and 4 eggs, well beaten. Knead all, and let it rise again for about an hour. Make into balls as large as a peach, press the tops, and lay in some currants and candied peel. Dust with sugar, and let rise for 10 minutes; bake in moderate oven 3/4 hour. HOT CROSS BUNS. (England.) These are made on Good Friday. Rub 1/4 pound butter with 2 pounds flour, a tablespoonful of yeast, and 1 1/2 pints warm milk. Let it rise 1 hours, add 1/2 pound sugar, 1/2 pound currants, and 1/2 a grated nutmeg. Knead into a dough and form into buns, set these in a pan, cut a cross on top of each, brush with butter, and let stand for 15 minutes near the fire. Bake for 3/4 hour in good oven. SHEEP-SHEARING BUNS. (England.) Made in the time of sheep-shearing in the country. Boil 1 pint of milk, add 4 ounces butter, and when cool, add enough flour to make a stiff paste, 3/4 cup yeast, and a pinch of salt. Let it rise, add 2 eggs well beaten, 2 1/2 cups sugar, 1 cup currants, and more flour, to make a firm dough. Let it rise for 5 hours. Make into buns, let them rise, rub with sugar and bake till brown. SUFFOLK BUNS. (England.) Rub 4 ounces butter with 1 pound flour, 1 spoonful of salt, 2 spoonfuls of baking powder, 3 table-spoonfuls of sugar, and 3 tablespoonfuls of currants. Mix well, add 2 eggs well beaten, whites and yolks separately, and a little milk to make a stiff paste. Roll out, cut in rounds 1 inch thick. Bake in a slow oven. ENDCLIFFE BUNS. (England.) Mix 6 ounces sugar with 4 ounces butter, add 1 egg, 1 1/2 pounds flour, 1/4 ounce baking powder, 6 ounces currants or raisins, and 1/2 pint milk. Beat the egg, white and yolk separately, before adding. Mix all, and bake in a hot oven with sugar over. Cut into squares when serving. GENEVA BUNS. (Switzerland.) Make a batter of 1 pound of flour, a spoonful of yeast, and 1/2 pint milk. Let it rise for an hour, add 1 beaten egg mixed with 1/2 cup of milk, 2 ounces sugar, and 2 tablespoonfuls of candied peel and currants. Cover and let rise for 1/2 hour, make into rolls, brush with egg, and bake for 20 minutes in hot oven. SPATZEN. (German Sparrow Cakes.) Make a thick batter of sufficient flour, 1 egg, milk, and some salt. Beat well and spatter it into a pan of boiling fat with a fork, or by dropping through a colander. Cook 5 minutes, drain, and serve as a garnish to dessert, dusted with powdered sugar. May be cooked in water instead, and browned in oven with crumbs. YORKSHIRE TEA CAKES. Rub 6 ounces butter with 2 pounds flour, 2 eggs well beaten, 1 pint milk, and 1 ounce German yeast. Knead and cover, and set to rise. Divide into ten cakes, rolled thin and cut round, set to rise. Bake 1/2 hour. Serve hot. CRUMPETS. (England.) Mix 1 pint warm milk heated on the fire, 1 ounce butter, 1 egg, some salt and flour to make a batter. Add 1/4 pint fresh yeast. Cover and let it rise 15 minutes, near fire. Bake in large muffin rings. Serve hot, cut in half, buttered, for supper or five o'clock tea. GÂTEAU DE RIZ. (French Rice Pudding.) In France rice pudding for grown people is never liquid and milky, but a firm, handsome affair, garnished with fruit, and served with a wine or custard sauce, on a dish. Cook 4 ounces rice in 1 quart milk with 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, and rind of a lemon. Simmer till tender and the milk is absorbed. Cool it, add yolks 6 eggs beaten, then the whites beaten stiff, some nutmeg, 2 tablespoonfuls of raisins and chopped citron. Mix well, pour into a buttered mould lined with bread-crumbs, bake 1 hour. Turn out, and serve hot or cold with a soft custard flavored with sherry. RICE PUDDING (as cooked in Nancy). Cook 1/2 pound rice, 2 ounces sugar, and 2 ounces butter for 3/4 hour, stirring now and then. Add 1 egg well beaten, then line a buttered mould with this and with layers of cooked apricots between the layers of rice, - preserves will do,- put rice on top and bake 3/4 hour. Turn out and serve hot, with a sauce made of the juice of the fruit, sugar, and vanilla. SABAGLIONE. (France.) This is an old and delicious dessert. Make a custard of the yolks of 5 eggs, 3 glasses of Fron tignac or Angelica, and 3 spoonfuls of sugar. Cook slowly, in a pan of water, and pour into glasses. Serve ice-cold. FRANGIPANE. (Italy.) This is another custard, old and good. Beat 6 eggs very light, add 1 pint milk and 1 spoonfuls of flour. Cook it with 1/4 pound sugar, stirring until thick, add 2 ounces of crushed macaroons, and a glass of brandy or rum, the grated rind of a lemon, and 2 ounces butter. Cook in a pan of water; when smooth add a spoonful of vanilla. Serve cold, in cups, or use to fill little tarts. POMPADOUR PUDDING. (A French recipe.) Add 2 ounces fine white bread-crumbs to 1/3 pint of boiling cream, when cool, beat with 5 ounces finely chopped suet, 1 ounce of flour, 2 ounces crushed macaroons, 2 ounces stoned raisins, 2 ounces candied peel or preserved cherries chopped, zest of a lemon, and a pinch of nutmeg. Beat well, add yolks 4 eggs, and a glass of brandy, pour into mould and steam it. Serve with a custard sauce, hot, flavored with oranges or sherry. CIDER JELLY. (England.) Melt 2 ounces of gelatine in sufficient wafer, add 2 1/2 pints of cider, and boil and stir until thick, adding 1 pound of sugar. Strain it, pour into a mould; when stiff, turn out and serve with cakes and cream. TANSY PODDING. (Old English recipe.) This is still eaten in country towns, and is considered wholesome in the spring. Pour 3 table-spoonfuls of the expressed juice of bruised tansy-leaves over enough bread-crumbs to absorb it, add 3 ounces of blanched and pounded almonds, 2 ounces of sugar, 2 ounces of butter, 1 teaspoonful of grated lemon peel, 3 beaten eggs, 1/2 pint of cream or milk. Boil, like a custard, and serve with lemon sauce, hot. BAKEWELL PUDDING. (Derbyshire.) Line a dish with puff paste, then a layer of gooseberry or peach jam, and some chopped candied peel. Fill with a custard made of the yolks of 6 eggs and 3 whites, 5 ounces of melted butter, 6 ounces of sugar, and a glass of lemon brandy, or any old-fashioned wine or cordial, with sufficient milk to make it smooth. Bake 3/4 hour, and serve cold, in the same dish. MARROW PUDDING. (A famous old dish at Cambridge.) Chop finely 3/4 pound of beef marrow and 6 ounces of bread-crumbs. Add 1/4 pound sugar, 1/4 pound currants, 2 beaten eggs, a spoonful of brandy, 2 spoonfuls of sherry, 1/4 pound of chopped and mixed candied peel and citron. Beat and pour into a mould, bake it 1 hour, and turn out, with custard sauce around it. RICE-MILK. (Sweden.) Wash 4 ounces rice, add 1 pint milk and a pinch of salt. Put it in a double boiler, let it boil until it is a perfect cream, stirring often. When tender, pour into a bowl and serve with sugar, very cold. EASTER PUDDING. (England.) Mix slowly 1/2 pint milk and 4 ounces rice flour, add 1 pint boiling milk and stir on fire for five minutes. Add 2 ounces butter, 2 ounces sugar, and boil for ten minutes more. When cool, add, stirring it, 1 gill of cold milk, and the grated rind of a lemon, 6 eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, 1 ounces sugar, and 1 ounce currants. Beat well, pour into a dish, bake until brown, and serve cold, with cream. INGOLDSBY XMAS PUDDING. (England.) Mix 1 pound raisins, 1 pound currants, 1 pound of sugar, of flour, of suet and bread-crumbs. Add 1/4 ounce each of candied peel, allspice, a little nutmeg, and rind of a lemon, 8 eggs, well beaten, 2 glasses of brandy or rum. This makes two large puddings. Boil each in a bag, for 7 hours, and serve with blazing wine sauce. YORKSHIRE PUDDING. Make a batter of 6 eggs, 3/4 pint of milk, and 1/2 pound of flour. Beat well and pour into a shallow pan. Fill with 1 pound steak and 1/2 pound stewed kidney, cut in slices, and 1 cup of stock. Lay the rest of the batter over. Bake 3 hours. Serve hot. This is really an entrée. PLUM PUDDING. (A Two-Guinea prize recipe.) Seed and chop 1 pound raisins, add 1 pound of chopped suet, 3/4 pound stale bread-crumbs, 1/4 pound brown sugar, grated rind of a lemon, 1/4 pound flour, 1 pound currants, and 1 ounce grated nutmeg, 5 eggs, 1/2 pint brandy, and 1/2 pound chopped candied peel. Beat the eggs and add the brandy, mix all the rest, well, cook in 3-pound greased moulds, for 6 hours. Cook 6 hours longer at the time of using, and serve with wine sauce. WINE PUDDING. (Germany.) Mix 1 quart of white wine, Angelica, Catawba, or Sauterne, with 1/2 pound sugar, juice and rind of 2 lemons, and a heaping teaspoonful of cornstarch dissolved in as much water. Boil the wine, add the lemon, the sugar, cornstarch, and well beaten yolks of 7 eggs. Stir but do not let it boil after adding the eggs, pour into a bowl, set on ice, and serve with cream and little cakes. CHESTNUT PUDDING. (France.) Boil and peel 1 quart of chestnuts, then cook them for 1 hour with 1 cup of milk. Rub through a sieve, add 1 cup of sugar, a little mace, some salt, and 1/2 teaspoonful of vanilla. Then add the yolks of 5 eggs beaten, and the stiffly beaten whites. Mix, pour into a dish, and bake 15 minutes. Serve hot or cold, with jam or custard sauce or whipped cream. ALMOND PUDDING. (Buda-Pesth.) This is a Jewish recipe. Much of the Jewish cookery is very dainty and well flavored. Blanch 4 ounces sweet almonds and 3 of bitter almonds, dry them and pound very fine. Add 4 ounces of powdered sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of rose-water, yolks of 4 eggs, and the beaten whites of 3. Whip for 10 minutes, pour into a buttered mould, and bake in a quick oven. Turn out and serve hot or cold, with cream or sauce. VERMICELLI CHESTNUTS. (Italy.) Peel, blanch, and drain 20 large chestnuts, cover them with a syrup of sugar and water, and cook until tender. Take out, flavor the syrup with vanilla or any cordial, add the chestnuts, press all through a sieve or colander into a pretty dish. Use alone, or as garnish. Can be served with a lemon sauce, whipped cream, or melted jam. ALMOND DELIGHT. (Hungary.) Blanch, dry, crush, and brown 1/2 pound of Jordan almonds in a little sugar. Add the whites of 6 eggs beaten stiff, and 4 tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, mix lightly and pour into a cake tin, bake in a quick oven till yellow. When cold, split it with a knife, and fill with whipped cream, sweetened and flavored with wine. VICTORIA PUDDING. (England.) Boil 1 pint of fresh milk, add a spoonful of vanilla extract, 6 ounces of fine bread-crumbs, 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 1 tablespoonful of brandy, 1 ounce of raisins, and 3 beaten eggs. Butter a mould and ornament it with cherries and citron cut like leaves to imitate a wreath, pour in the pudding, steam it, and when done, turn out, serve cold. SOMERSETSHIRE FRUMENTY. Frumenty is a very old and wholesome dessert, especially for children and elderly people. Cook 1 quart of cracked wheat in 1 quart of water, with a pinch of salt, slowly, until soft. Add 1 quart of milk, and stir it until as thick as cream. Take off the fire, strain it, add sugar and nutmeg to taste, and 2 tablespoonfuls of washed currants. Stir again over the fire until the fruit is soft, add the beaten yolks of 2 eggs and take off. Serve cold in a bowl for supper or lunch. LINCOLNSHIRE FRUMENTY. Stir 1 quart of wheat mush over the fire with 2 quarts of milk, until thick and smooth, add 1/4 pound of mixed raisins and currants, then, when tender, still stirring, the yolks of 6 eggs beaten, sugar, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Serve cold, in bowls or cups. DEVONSHIRE WHITE-POT. Beat 4 eggs, add 1 pint of cream, and sugar and nutmeg to taste, also a handful of raisins which have been soaked in hot water to soften. Pour into a dish which has in the bottom a layer of sliced stale bread, buttered. Bake in a slow oven, and serve cold. DEVONSHIRE JUNKET. Mix 1/2 a teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon with 2 tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar. Add a glass of brandy, and stir well; then add one quart of fresh milk and rennet to curdle. Stir until it begins to set, and serve with clotted cream. LONDON SYLLABUB. Dissolve 3 ounces of sugar in 1/2 pint of sherry, add some nutmeg and 2 quarts of milk direct from the cow; serve with white of egg, beaten, on top of each glass. ENGLISH TRIFLE (as made at Windsor). Cut a pound of loaf cake into very thin slices, and arrange in a dish, with a custard, between each layer, of 1/2 pound of crushed macaroons, 1 glass of sherry, yolks of 4 eggs, 1 gills of milk, a tea-spoonful of cornstarch, 2 ounces of sugar, and the zest and juice of a lemon. Cook this until thick, strain for use. After putting it in the layers of cake and over the top, spread a layer of apricot jam or plum marmalade over all, and finally spoonfuls of whipped cream, flavored with vanilla. Serve very cold. It can be garnished with citron and fruits. ROLY-POLY. (England.) Make a good stiff batter, using eggs and milk, etc., roll it out thin, spread a layer of jam or marmalade evenly, fold it up, dust with flour, and tie in a cloth. Boil it 1 1/2 hours, drain, untie, and serve, in slices, with wine or cream sauce. CLARET JELLY. (England.) Melt 1 ounce gelatine in 1/2 pint of boiling water, add 1 quart of claret, 3/4 pound sugar, rind and juice of a lemon, and stir until it boils, strain and add a pinch of powdered cinnamon. Pour into a mould, set on ice, and turn out. Serve with cream. CLARET AND STRAWBERRIES. (France.) Dissolve 1/4 pound sugar in a pint of claret, or more, if needed, to sweeten, pick sufficient strawberries, cover with this and set on ice for an hour before use. Eat with crackers and cream cheese. ROD GRUID. (Norway and Sweden.) Mash and strain 3 boxes of currants, add water to make 1 quarts of juice, 1 pound sugar, 1 stick of cinnamon, rind of 1 lemon. Boil it, skim it, add 1/2 pound sago; when melted and clear, pour into moulds. Set on ice, eat with cream. LÉCHE CREAM. (A convent recipe.) Beat yolks of 3 eggs, and add the beaten white of 1, add carefully 1/2 pints of milk, blended with 4 tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, as much sugar, and a spoonful of grated lemon peel. Boil all, but stir to prevent burning, until smooth. Pour into a shallow dish, lined with sliced sponge cake or lady fingers, through a sieve. Dust, when cold, a pattern of cinnamon or nutmeg on top, and serve with cream. This is peculiar to the Tyrol and Black Forest. Warm but do not boil 3/4 pint of milk, mix the yolks of 3 eggs and 3 ounces of sugar, add to the milk, stir well, then having dissolved 1/2 ounce gelatine in the warm milk, stir until thick, but do not boil it. Add a spoonful of vanilla, strain it, and add 1/2 pint of whipped cream. Pour into a mould, and serve with strawberry sauce, made by cooking a cup of fresh berries, or canned ones, with sugar to sweeten, the juice of 1/2 a lemon, and sufficient hot water to make a thick syrup when strained. Cool it, and serve both very cold. STRAWBERRY BAVARIAN CREAM. This can be made also of peaches or pineapple, or any fruit in due proportions. Pick and press through a sieve sufficient berries to make a pint of pulp, add 10 ounces of sugar, 1/2 a teaspoonful of vanilla, and 1 1/2 ounces of gelatine, melted in 1 cup of water. Stir until almost firm, add sufficient whipped cream to fill a 3-pint mould. Set on ice. HONEYCOMB CREAM. (Switzerland.) Strain and sweeten the juice of 2 lemons and an orange, add 1 1/2 pints of hot cream or rich milk, set these in a pan of hot water, stirring until thick, then pour from a height into a glass dish, so as to froth it well. Set on ice, and when firm, serve. HOLSTEIN CREAM. (Germany.) Infuse the rind of a lemon for 1/2 hour with a pint of cream, in a warm place. Then boil it, add a teaspoonful of ground rice and two tablespoonfuls of sugar. Boil, stir a little longer, pour into a dish with slices of sponge cake in it, and set on ice. Serve cold. PINEAPPLE CREAM. (France.) Chop and core 1 large ripe pineapple, add 9 ounces of sugar and 2 tablespoonfuls of brandy, and set aside 1 hours. Cook the peel and core in 1/2 pint water for 1 hour, strain, cool it, and add to the rest. Boil it 1/4 hour, skim it, add 3/4 ounce melted gelatine, cook 10 minutes longer, add 1 1/2 pints cream. Whisk until frothy, set in a mould on ice. Turn out on a glass dish when firm. ALPINE BASKETS. (Switzerland.) Make a mixture of whites of eggs and sugar as used for kisses and méringues, drop in large spoonfuls on buttered paper, set on a board and bake until yellow. If the spoonfuls have been given the right shape,--a pastry bag is the best thing to use,- the baskets, which must be scooped out of any soft part in the centre, will be a good shape. Stand them on end, let them dry, and fill with whipped cream, sweetened and flavored with a little cordial or vanilla. Drop small red strawberries over the tops. MÉRINGUES. (Paris.) Beat the whites of 5 eggs very stiff, add slowly 1 pound of the finest pulverized sugar, beat long and well, then drop in spoonfuls on sheets of oiled paper, set on tin or boards. Bake until yellow, cut them off, and join two together. This makes 25 small méringues. Use for afternoon tea. MARASCHINO JELLY. (France.) Squeeze and strain the juice of an orange, a lemon, and a peach, add 12 tablespoonfuls of orange-flower water, 1/2 ounce of sugar, and the zest of a lemon. Melt the sugar in 1 glass of water before adding. Put these with 1 1/2 pints of jelly made from calf 's feet or gelatine, 1/2 pint of Maraschino cordial, and the shells and beaten whites of 6 eggs. Line a mould with strawberries dipped in claret, and pour this over, through a sieve. Set on ice, and serve with custard or whipped cream. GOOSEBERRY FOOL. (England.) Trim 1 pound of green gooseberries, cook with 1 cup of water and 3/4 pound of sugar. When soft, press through a sieve, add 1 pint of rich milk or cream, boiling hot, then put on ice in a bowl, and serve cold. JELLY of GREEN GAGES. (England.) Skin and stone 1 1/2 pounds of ripe gages, add 10 ounces of sugar, and a few of the kernels, blanched. Boil to a pulp, add 1/4 ounce of dissolved gelatine, and pour into an oiled mould. Serve cold, with cream. APRICOT CUSTARD. (Vienna.) Strain and make a pulp of 1/2 pint of stewed apricots. Mash these through a sieve, add 6 ounces of sugar and the juice of 1/2 an orange, cook and stir until thick, then add the whites of 4 eggs well beaten, pour into a dish, dust with sugar, bake 20 minutes in hot oven, and serve at once, with wine sauce or cream. APRICOT CREAM. (France.) Stone and slice 1 pint of cooked apricots, add juice of a lemon, 4 ounces sugar, and a tablespoonful of Maraschino or Kirsch cordial. Boil, stirring it, add 3/4 ounce melted gelatine, in a cup of hot water, press through a sieve, set on ice in a dish, stirring until almost firm. RICE AND APRICOT CROQUETTES. (France.) Drain 4 large apricots, preserved or canned or. freshly cooked with sugar, halve them and remove the stones. Fill the centres with rice, boiled with milk and sugar until thick and flavored with vanilla. Put two halves together, dip each whole in more rice, then in chopped almonds and yolk of egg, and fry in boiling fat. Arrange on a plate, with a good sauce or melted jam or custard. Dust the balls with powdered sugar. COFFEE CUSTARDS. (Very old French recipe.) Grind 2 ounces of freshly roasted Mocha coffee, add 1 cup of boiling milk, and set in a warm place 40 minutes. Strain it, mix it in the ordinary way, with sufficient milk and eggs to make 1 quart of custard, and pour into cups. Bake these in a pan of water, very carefully, and serve cold. CREAM of TEA. (Paris.) Make a strong infusion of fine Oolong tea, take 2 gills of it and strain it. Add 5 ounces sugar, beaten with the yolks of 4 eggs, stir it on the fire until it thickens, then strain it, add 3/4 ounce gelatine melted in 1/2 gill of hot water, having first added 1 1/2 gills of cream to the egg while on the fire. Beat in some stiffly whipped cream, enough to make 1 pint in all, and pour into a mould, set on ice. FRENCH APPLE CREAM. Peel, core, and slice 6 large apples, add 1 cup of water, a pinch of cinnamon, and 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar. Boil and stir and strain it into a dish, cover with sugar, and glaze with a salamander. Serve cold, with custard or milk, and small fancy cakes or buns. COMPOTE OF APPLES. (Cherbourg.) Pare and core and cut into halves 6 large, fine apples. To each pound add 1 pound sugar, rind of 1 lemons, and a little ginger. Cook, covered, for 1 hour. Add 1/2 cup of cider, and boil for 1/2 hour, then stir in a spoonful of vanilla, and let them cool, arranged in a dish. Serve with whipped cream, and garnish of cherries, citron, or Angelica. APPLES EN CASSEROLE. {Provincial France.) Peel and core 4 large apples, put them in an earthen dish with 1 wineglassful of brandy, juice of a lemon, a little cinnamon, and 1 cup of sugar. Cover closely, and bake in the oven for 3/4 hour. Cover with sugar and chopped nuts, glaze with a salamander, serve with a pitcher of rich milk. BAKED APPLES AND RICE CROQUETTES. (An English dessert.) Pare and core 4 fine apples, add 1 cup of water, 1 ounces sugary juice of a lemon, and some nutmeg to the skin and cores. Cook 1/2 hour, strain, add the apples, bake 1/2 hour, and put on a dish with alternate arrangement of rice croquettes and bits of jam. APPLE BALLS. (Germany.) Peel and chop 5 large apples, add 1 ounce butter, 3 ounces of sugar, and rind and juice of a lemon. Cook and stir until smooth, add yolks of 3 eggs, and 2 teaspoonfuls of cornstarch. Cook 10 minutes, press through a sieve, and let it cool. Make into balls, dip in egg and crumbs, fry brown in a kettle of boiling lard. Put a bit of angelica or citron in the end of each to imitate a stalk, dust with sugar, arrange on a dish, and serve cold with a white sauce. PEARS (as cooked in Roumania). Peel, slice, and core 8 large pears. Add 1 roll, sliced thin, toasted and crushed to powder, 2 crushed cloves, and 3 pints of water. Cook for 1 hour, covered, press through a sieve, add 1 ounces of sugar, the juice of a lemon, and 1 glass of white wine. Cook 20 minutes more, set on ice, serve with cream and sponge cakes. COMPOTE OF ORANGES. (France.) Peel, seed, and divide in quarters 4 large, sweet oranges, cook them with 1/2 pint sugar syrup, added to 1 glass of cordial, Maraschino, or Kirsch, for 1/2 hour. Cool, set aside, and serve cold with biscuits. COMPOTE OF RICE AND APPLES. (Northern France.) Boil 1/2 pint rice with 1 quart of water 20 minutes, drain it, add 1 ounces sugar, 1 ounces butter, and rind of a lemon. Stir, cool, and strain it, pressing out all the water. Arrange in layers on a dish with 5 large apples, pared, sliced, and cooked in syrup, between. Put a layer of rice on top, dust with sugar, and bake 1 hour. Arrange with a custard poured over, flavored with wine, called " sabayon." It can be served cold or hot. OMELETTE CELESTINE. (French.) (Named after Pope Celestine, founder of a strict order of monks.) Boil 1/2 pint of milk and 2 tablespoonfuls of rice flour, 4 ounces of powdered sugar, and a spoonful of vanilla. Stir to prevent burning or clotting for 10 minutes, add the yolks of 3 eggs and 1/2 ounce of butter. Stir, take off the fire, and keep hot. Make an omelette of 6 eggs and before folding, fill with this cream. Dust with sugar, brown with a salamander, and serve it with plum or peach marmalade. SMALL OMELETTE CELESTINE. Mix by beating 6 eggs with 2 ounces of pounded macaroons, 1 tablespoonful of sugar, and a pinch of salt. Make of this 4 small omelettes, and fill one with orange marmalade, one with green gages, one with currant jelly, and one with apricot jam. Dust with sugar, glaze them brown, and serve hot. FANCY FRENCH OMELETTE. Beat yolks of 4 eggs with the rind of a lemon, rubbed on 1 ounces of loaf sugar, which must be crushed and added, the whites beaten very stiff, 1/4 pound flour, and 1/2 cup of whipped cream. Mix all well, pour into a buttered pan, and bake in a hot oven 5 minutes. Fold it on a plate with a filling of cider apple-sauce, boiled thick, glaze it with sugar and serve. OMELETTE WITH CORDIAL. (Paris.) Beat 5 eggs and 1 ounce sugar, add a table-spoonful of Kirsch, melt 2 ounces butter in a pan, pour in the eggs, cook until set. Roll it on a dish, fill with 2 tablespoonfuls of apricot jam, mixed with a glass of Kirsch. Dust with sugar, glaze brown, and serve at once. RUM OMELETTE. (Paris.) Beat 1 eggs with 1 ounces of sugar and a glass of rum. Pour this into a buttered pan with 2 ounces melted butter, cook until set, roll it on a dish, pour a glass of rum over it, light it, send to the table on fire. BAKED SWEET OMELETTE SOUFFLE. (Germany.) Scald and pound 2 ounces of pistachio nuts, add the yolks of 3 eggs, 1 ounce of powdered sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon. Beat all well, add the 4 beaten whites, and put in a dish. Sprinkle thickly with sugar and bake till high and brown. Serve at once. GAUFRES. Gaufres are made everywhere on holidays, sold hot on the streets in France. They are a very delicate sort of wafer, rich but crisp. Mix 1 pound of pastry flour with 6 eggs, add 1 pound fresh butter, melted till soft, 1 spoonful of yeast, and 1 pint of cream or rich milk. Beat all well and long. Set aside in a cold place 2 hours, pour into gaufre irons and serve hot, with sugar. Gaufre irons can be bought at the French hardware stores. ENGLISH WAFERS FOR TEA OR DESSERT. Mix 1/2 pound of sifted flour, 1 ounce of butter, and 1 pinch of salt with sufficient milk to make a firm batter. Roll it very thin, as thin as paper, - cut into rounds, and bake in hot oven till crisp but not burned. They are better eaten fresh, but will keep in a tin box some days. DANISH WAFFLES. Beat 1 pound butter until creamy with 1/2 pound sugar, add yolks of 6 eggs, 1 pound of flour, 1 quart of warm milk, and the whites, beaten stiff. Bake in a waffle iron and dust each with sugar, when serving, with jam or preserves. This can be made in half the recipe, as this amount makes 24. NORMANDY CUTLETS. (A convent recipe.) Dip 4 thick slices of stale bread in sufficient custard to moisten, dip In crumbs, and fry in butter, Serve with baked apples and a sauce of sugar, water, cider, and cinnamon, cooked until it is thick and poured over. Put a little currant or plum jam on each apple. GERMAN KONGLAUFFE. Beat 10 ounces of butter with 1/4 pound sugar, which has mixed with the zest of a lemon and a little nutmeg. Add 4 ounces of flour and 2 eggs, well beaten. Work these well together, add 3/4 pound more flour, 1 whole eggs, and the yolks of 4 one by one. Add finally 3/4 ounce of yeast, dissolved in 1/2 cup of milk. Butter a mould, Sine it with chopped nuts, and pour in and bake 1 3/4 hours. Turn out, serve in slices, with cream sauce or melted jam. IMPERIALS. (English Tea Cakes.) Beat 6 ounces of butter to a cream, add 1 pound of flour and 8 ounces of sugar, then 2 ounces of candied peel, chopped fine, the zest of a lemon, 1/2 pound currants, and 4 beaten eggs. Drop in balls on a tin and bake until brown. IMPERIAL SCHMARN, (German pancakes.) Whisk the yolks of 5 eggs with 1 pint of cream, or rich milk, and beat the whites very stiff. Add to the yolks and cream 4 ounces of flour and 1 tablespoonful of sugar, 1 ounce of raisins, and 1 ounce of chopped almonds. Then add the beaten whites, stir and fry on a griddle with 2 ounces of butter, either whole or in 3 parts. Let it brown; when light, sift it with sugar and serve with preserves or hot vanilla or wine sauce. SWISS ROLL OR BAKED PANCAKE. Mix 1/2 pound powdered sugar with the yolks of 4 eggs, beaten light, add 1/4 pound of flour and the whites, beaten stiff. Line a dish with oiled paper, sift sugar thickly inside, pour in the batter, sift more sugar on top, and bake about 7 minutes in a hot oven. Spread it with jam, roll it up and serve, hot or cold, cut into slices. CREAM PANCAKES. (Paris.) Whisk the yolks of 3 eggs and the whites of 2, separately, add a small cup of cream, a tablespoonful of sugar, and enough flour to make a batter, also butter the size of an egg. Fry this in butter, roll it up with a filling of apricot or plum jam. Can be made in one or more cakes. PANCAKES WITH MARRONS. Use the same recipe as for cream pancakes, but fill with a purée of cooked chestnuts, sweetened and flavored with maraschino cordial. Dust each, on the dish, with sugar and glaze until brown. Serve with orange marmalade or lemon syrup. MACAROON PANCAKES. (A French recipe.) Mix 1 tablespoonful of rice flour and 2 table-spoonfuls of milk, taken from a pint of milk and set aside. Beat the yolks of 4 eggs, add the rest of the milk, 1 spoonful of melted butter, and 2 ounces of sugar. Stir on the fire until thick but not boiling, cool it, add 2 tablespoonfuls of chopped candied peel, a little cinnamon, 1/4 pound of stale, crushed macaroons, and a spoonful of orangeflower water. Finally, add the white of a well-beaten egg and 2 whole eggs. Pour into a buttered dish, bake until brown, and roll up, with a filling of apricot, green gage, or gooseberry jam. Glaze the top with sugar before serving. CURRANT PANCAKES. (England.) Infuse the thin rind of a lemon in 1 pint of warm milk, on the fire, strain it, add 2 ounces butter, 1 ounces of sugar, stir, and add 8 ounces of flour mixed with 6 beaten eggs and 1 table-spoonfuls of water, and a tablespoonful of rum or brandy. Stir in lightly 1 cup of cleaned and dried currants, fry on a griddle, and dust with sugar. FADGES. (Irish Pancakes.) Boil 1/2 pint of milk and 3 ounces of butter, stirring to prevent burning. Take off, add I pound of whole wheat flour and a pinch of salt, and beat well. Roll out 3/4 inch thick, cut into squares and cook on a griddle, turning often, for 1 1/2 hours. Serve with butter or preserves. FRITTERS OF FOUR NATIONS. These were supposed to have been originated by a French cook to commemorate a peace treaty several centuries ago. Peel and slice two large fine apples, remove the core, and cover them with 1 ounce of sugar and a tablespoonful of brandy for 1/2 hour. Drain them, dip each piece in jam, peach, or apricot, then in frying batter, and fry them in boiling fat. Glaze with sugar and serve at once with a good sauce. VIENNA FRITTERS. Boil 2 ounces butter, 2 teaspoonfuls of sugar, grated rind of a lemon, and a cup of water, 10 minutes. Add 5 ounces of flour and stir until it is smooth, then take it off the fire, and add, one by one, beating between each, 5 eggs, beat them until light and drop in spoonfuls in boiling fat. Dust with powdered sugar and serve with wine sauce. FRENCH FRITTERS. Make a batter as for the recipe above, roll it out very thin, and cut into rounds. Put two of these together with a filling of orange or pineapple marmalade, strawberry jam or preserve, free from juice. Pinch the edges and fry brown. Dust with sugar and serve hot. SPANISH FRITTERS. Make a batter of 5 ounces of rice flour, a pinch of salt, rind of a lemon, 1 pint of milk, 1/4 pound sugar, and 1 ounce of crushed macaroons. Add while on the fire 3 eggs, and take it off to cool. Make into balls, dip in bread-crumbs, and fry brown. Dust with sugar and serve with a sauce. MI-CAREME FRITTERS. (Rome.) These are eaten in Lent all over Rome; they are peddled along the street. Boil 3 cups of milk, add sugar to taste, 1 ounce of butter, and the yolks of 4 eggs, and enough corn meal - called semolina in Italy - to make a firm paste, a tablespoonful of brandy, or cordial to flavor. Make into rings, dip in flour, fry in lard, and dust with sugar. Always eaten with gooseberry jam, in Italy for supper. PINEAPPLE FRITTERS. (France.) Take some fritters as in recipe for Vienna fritters, fry in lard, and split each fritter before serving, fill with some pineapple jam, or stewed fruit, boiled down and flavored with vanilla. Close the fritters, arrange on a dish, dust with sugar, glaze them and serve with whipped cream. GERMAN NOODLES. Mix 3 fresh eggs with as much flour as will make a stiff paste. Knead this well, using plenty of flour, until all moisture is absorbed. Roll as thin as paper, dry it near the fire, and cut into strips half an inch wide; poach these in a great deal of salted water, boiling for 5 minutes, drain them, serve in soup or alone, with a good sauce or entrée. BANBURY TARTS. (England.) Banbury, of nursery fame, is celebrated for a certain kind of tart or turnover which its bakers have sold for many years. Beat 1/2 pound butter to a cream, with 1 pound of candied orange and lemon peel, cut fine, 1 pound currants, 1/2 ounce of cinnamon, and 1 ounce of allspice. Make some puff paste, quite rich, set it on ice overnight, and roll it, very thin, cut into squares. Fill these with the mincemeat, fold into triangles, pinch the edges, dust with sugar and yolk of egg, bake 15 minutes in a hot oven, and serve cold. ROUEN TARTS. (Northern France.) Make a paste as for Vienna fritters, line small muffin rings with it, bake a light brown, fill them with a cream made of 2 eggs, beaten with 2 tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of very rich cream, and a tablespoonful of lemon juice. Cook this carefully before pouring in, or else fill and bake again, for 10 minutes. Dust the tops with sugar. ITALIAN TARTS. (Turin.) Have ready six sponge cakes, tall and round, like tarts, scoop out the centres, and roll the out-sides in jam, then in chopped nuts. Fill with a half a peach, preserved or stewed, free from juice, on top of a layer of sweetened whipped cream. Serve cold, for afternoon tea or dessert. BAVARIAN TART OR PIE. Make three thin layer cakes from a good recipe, and put them together with a stiff filling of whipped cream, sweetened and flavored with straw-berry juice. Cover the top and sides with icing of the same flavor, both pink and daintily made. Serve, sliced, for dessert. Decorate the top with candied cherries and leaves of citron, cut thin, in a wreath. This is a good and very pretty cake, though called a tart. VIENNA TARTS. Mix 6 ounces of granulated sugar, 6 ounces of flour, 6 eggs, and 6 ounces of fresh butter. The butter must be melted, and added last. Beat well, for at least 10 minutes, before adding the butter, then 10 minutes more, and pour into a tin, thinly ; bake it in a moderate oven until brown. Cut with a sharp knife into strips, 2x4 inches, spread with jam and put together, covering the tops with whipped cream and chopped nuts. GOOSEBERRY TARTS. (England.) Make as many shells of puff paste as required; bake them until light; when cold, fill them half-way with gooseberries cooked to a purée, and cover with whipped cream, sweetened. Serve at afternoon tea. VIENNA TART. Roll out some good puff paste, line a plate with it, and bake it, then fill it with a rich custard, flavored with lemon or vanilla; when firm, put a circle of cooked peaches, halved, around the edge, then one of green gages inside of that, and fill the centre with cherries. Serve cold, in the same dish, with whipped cream. KING'S TART. (Germany.) Mix one pinch each of cloves, cinnamon, and mace with 4 ounces of chopped almonds, 2 ounces of chopped peanuts, 2 ounces of citron, and 2 ounces of stoned raisins, the rind and juice of a lemon, and 2 1/2 ounces of bread-crumbs, wet with milk. Beat in 6 eggs the whites and yolks whisked separately, and 4 ounces of sugar. Pour into a shallow dish, and bake in a moderate oven. Turn out when cold, and serve with a sugar syrup flavored with wine or cordial. ANGELICA AND APPLE TART. (France.) Pare and core some fine apples, cook them with water to cover, sugar, lemon juice to taste, and a little nutmeg. When tender, pour off the syrup, add as much angelica, candied or fresh, cut up as apples, cook until thick, line a dish with puff paste, bake it ten minutes, fill with the apples and the angelica and syrup, cover with a méringue, as for lemon pie, bake until brown. Serve cold. WESTPHALIAN APPLE TART. Pare and chop 15 apples, fry them in butter, add 4 spoonfuls of apricot jam, and beat until smooth. Then add 1/4 pound of butter beaten to a cream, yolks of 4 eggs, and 1/4 pound of bread-crumbs, a spoonful of vanilla, and 6 ounces of powdered sugar. Spread this over the top of the apples, laid in a shell of paste, and bake 15 minutes in a hot oven. GALETTE (eaten in France on Epiphany Day). Rub together 6 ounces of butter and 1/2 pound of flour, beating well. Add a pinch of salt and 1 well-beaten eggs, knead it carefully and roll it out into a large cake, 1/4 inch thick. Bake it in a hot oven on a buttered tin. Beat together 1 ounce melted butter, yolk of 1 egg, and 1/2 pint of cream, sugar to taste, and a spoonful of cordial, lemon juice, or vanilla. Fill the cake with this, roll up and glaze with sugar, sifted over the top. Serve hot, cut in slices. WAFERS FOR DESSERT. (Provincial France.) Work up 1/2 a pound of Brie, Gruyère, or very fresh American cheese with as much butter, until smooth. Add 4 eggs, a little water, and flour to make a stiff paste. Roll out and fold it 3 times, then cut it into thin sticks, 1/2 inch wide, and bake in a hot oven on a buttered tin. Bake brown and serve very hot, with salad or fruit. FANCHONETTE. (French cream tart.) Line a dish with fine puff paste, bake, then fill it with a custard made of 1/4 pound each of flour and sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs, and 1/2 cup of cream or milk, cooked carefully until it is smooth, in a double boiler. Add flavoring of wine or vanilla, pour a méringue over the top, sweetened to taste, decorated with cherries and citron. GIMBLETTES. (French Doughnuts.) Beat 3 eggs very light, add 4 ounces of powdered sugar, 2 spoonfuls of chopped lemon peel, and 6 tablespoonfuls of flour. Roll out, after mixing well, into a thin paste, cut into rings, and poach them in boiling water. When they rise to the top, take off, brush with yolk of egg, and bake in a moderate oven 20 minutes. WONDERS. (Isle of Jersey.) Beat 1/4 pound of melted butter and 1/4 pound of sugar to a cream. Add 3 beaten eggs, 1 pound of flour, and a little nutmeg. Knead well and set to rise. Cut into large rings, twist these, and fry in boiling fat. Dust with sugar. Real wonder cakes are cut in rounds, then two slits are cut across the centre, and these pieces are twisted without breaking. LOVE CAKES. (Germany. Eaten at Moravian love feasts.) Boil 2 cupfuls of honey and 1 ounce of sugar. Add 4 ounces of chopped almonds and simmer 5 minutes longer, then add 8 ounces of chopped candied peel, 1/2 a teaspoonful of bicarbonate of soda, 1/2 a nutmeg, grated, a pinch of cloves, a teaspoonful of cinnamon, rind of a lemon, grated, and a tablespoonful of rum or sherry. Cut into pieces, 4x2 inches large, after adding enough flour to stiffen and rolling it very thin. Bake these in a slow oven, ice with sugar, and eat cold. In Germany they are served with wine to drink, and a bowl of stewed dried apples. APPLE FLAWN. (England.) Line a deep round tin with puff paste, bake it, and fill it with apple-cider jelly, mixed with 2 tablespoonfuls of currants and boiled down pretty thick. Over the top spread a layer of orange marmalade and a lattice of puff paste. Bake it to brown the paste and serve cold. APPLE TIMBALE. (Milan.) Line a deep dish with puff paste, bake it, and fill it with sufficient apples, cooked in a syrup with vanilla and sugar to taste, and reduced rather thick. When stiff, turn out on a dish and serve with a border of candied cherries and a custard sauce, cold. RHEIMS BISCUITS. {A favorite French dessert cake.) Beat 15 ounces of powdered sugar with the yolks of 10 and the whites of 12 eggs, add a pinch of salt and beat it over the fire while it is cooking slowly. When it has risen twice its size, take off and beat until cold. Add 6 ounces of flour and stirring well, pour it into buttered tins, shaped like lady-fingers. Dust with sugar and bake in a slow oven until a rich yellow. RUSSIAN BISCUITS. Mix 1/2 pound of sifted flour with 1 ounce of sugar, a pinch of salt, a spoonful of caraway seed, and 1/2, pint of milk or cream. Beat all well, roll out thin, cut into 32 oblong strips, and bake 6 minutes in a hot oven. Eat cold, with salad or cheese or stewed fruit. PROFITEROLLES. (Paris.) Heat but do not boil 1 ounces butter, 1 ounce of sugar, and 1/2 pint of milk. Add 1 spoonful of orangeflower water and enough flour to make a paste. Beat in 3 eggs and bake in balls as large as a peach, in a slow oven. When high and crisp, let them cool, split them in half, and fill with a custard, whipped cream, or jam. APPLE TURNOVERS. These are made by the farmers' wives at harvesting. Boil as many green apples as needed with sugar to taste, cinnamon, some butter, and the juice of a lemon. Make some good paste, roll it thin, cut in squares, fill with this, boiled thick, and fold in triangles. Dust them with sugar, and bake until brown. Eat them with cream, hot or cold. FRENCH APPLE PIE. Line a plate with puff paste, brush it with egg, prick it with a fork, and bake it until light and brown. Fill it with a mixture of 8 baked apples, free from cores and skin, rubbed to a purée with 4 ounces of sugar, 1 ounce of butter, the grated rind of a lemon, and yolks of 2 eggs. Cook it for 10 minutes, pour it in, and cover with strips of paste. Bake until brown. FLORENTINE APPLE PIE. Pare and core 1 pound of fine apples. Stew, but do not let them break in a syrup of 1 pint of water, and 1/2 pound sugar. Fill a dish with a layer of puff paste, arrange the apples inside, with orange marmalade in the centres of each, and a little chopped citron here and there, the syrup boiled down with a spoonful of vanilla, and poured over. Lay strips of paste across, bake, and when cold serve with whipped cream. SAXONY APPLE PIE. Line a deep dish with puff paste, bake it 10 minutes, fill with 6 large harvest apples, boiled in syrup with cinnamon dusted over, sugar and bits of butter. Pour over them 1 egg beaten with 1 ounce sugar and 1 ounce of chopped almonds, bake this until done, and serve cold. QUINCE PIE. (Spain.) Line a plate with paste, bake it brown, fill it with a layer of quince marmalade, then whipped cream, flavored with sugar and wine, and decorated with preserved cherries, angelica, or citron. Serve cold. ENGLISH PINEAPPLE PIE. Line a plate with puff paste, bake it 10 minutes, or longer, to raise the crust. Fill it with a puree of pineapple cooked with sugar, the juice of a lemon, and a little nutmeg or vanilla until thick. Pour over this a meringue as for lemon pie, of sugar and white of eggs, bake till a light brown. Serve cold. MANHEIM ROLLS. (Germany.) Mix 2 eggs, 6 ounces flour, 2 ounces sugar, and 1 ounce of anise seed to a paste. Cut into long rolls, twist them, glaze with yolk of egg, and bake until brown. For afternoon tea or lunch. SWISS ROLLS. Mix 1 ounce Vienna yeast, 1 pinch of salt, 1/4 pint tepid milk, 1 ounce of butter, and 1 pound of flour well together. Cover and set aside for 3 hours. Make into a dough with 1/2 gills of milk, lukewarm, and set for 1/2 hour longer. Roll into fancy shapes, set to rise in the pan for 15 minutes. Bake in a hot oven 20 minutes. Serve with coffee or chocolate, for breakfast. VIENNA ROLLS. These excellent rolls are served fresh, for break-fast, with good coffee, with whipped cream on top, unsalted butter, and fresh eggs, sometimes honey, too. They should be eaten the same day as made. Mix 2 1/2 pints of flour, 3 eggs, 1 gill of milk, 1 ounce of yeast, melted in the milk, and a pinch of salt. Beat all well; set aside to rise. Put on a floured board, roll into a thin sheet, cut into squares of 6 inches, fold these across so that a point comes on top, pull the ends to form a horseshoe, paint with white of egg to make them flaky, and bake in a hot oven. FRENCH ROLLS. Dissolve a teacupful of yeast in 1 quart of warm milk, add 1 pound of fine flour, and set to rise 3 hours. Add a tablespoonful of sugar, a pinch of salt, and make it into a dough. Let it rise now 4 hours, then knead it on a board, roll very thin, cut in squares, fold as above, make into horseshoe, bake them, after brushing them with melted butter, and setting to rise for 1/2 hour, for 15 minutes, in a hot oven. CHAPTER SIX - Ices, Preserves, and Confections FLORENTINE ICE CREAM. MAKE a custard of the yolks of 6 eggs, the rind of 1 orange, and 3/4 pint of boiling syrup, made of sugar and water. Beat with an egg-beater, but do not let it boil. Add 3/4 pint of cream, mix well, and strain. Freeze it for 1 hours, and turn out of the mould on a dish. GINGER ICE CREAM. (England.) Mix on the fire 6 ounces of sugar, rind of a lemon, and yolks of 6 eggs. Add 1 1/2 pints of boiling cream, and stir until it is thick. Add 2 ounces of chopped preserved ginger, mixed with a spoonful of rum, and pounded. Stir for a while, then strain; freeze it 3 hours. Serve it with sponge cakes or jumbles. FRENCH NUT PUDDING, ICED. Chop 4 ounces of shelled and blanched nuts, filberts, or pecans, add 4 ounces of sugar, and cook until brown but not burnt. Add 1/2 a pint of milk and a spoonful of vanilla. The nuts must be pounded before adding to the rest. Mix yolks of 8 eggs with 5 ounces of sugar, add the nuts, etc., and 1 pint of boiling cream. Stir until smooth, strain it, and freeze 2 hours. Serve it with a cold custard sauce. ICED RAISIN PUDDING. (France.) Pick and seed 1/2 pound of fine raisins, add 1/2 gill of maraschino cordial, and simmer until soft. Beat yolks of 6 eggs and 6 ounces of sugar, add 1 1/2 pints of cream, and stir until thick. Then add 1 1/2 ounces of melted gelatine, stir, and add 1/2. gill more cordial. Pack into a mould, set on ice, but do not freeze. Serve with little fancy cakes. PRALINE. (French Almond Ice.) Blanch, chop, and brown 1/2 pound of almonds, stir them with 4 ounces of sugar until a reddish color, then pound to a paste. Add 1 1/2 pints of boiling milk, yolks of 8 eggs, and 6 ounces of sugar. Stir till thick, add 1 1/2 ounces of gelatine, melted; strain all carefully, and add 1 pint of whipped cream. Pour into a mould and freeze 2 hours. FROZEN ORANGES. (French.) Scoop out the pulp from 4 large oranges, opening a small hole only. Cover the skins with water while the juice is strained; add 1 glass of any kind of cordial, sugar to taste, a cup of mixed chopped raisins, candied peel, and peach preserves. Fill the skins with this and freeze. Serve in the skins, on a plate, garnished with leaves or flowers. JUDITHA. (A recipe of the Polish Jews.) Cook 1 pint of gooseberries, mash, and strain them. Add 2 beaten eggs, and sugar to taste. Have ready a mould of vanilla ice cream frozen, scoop out the centre, fill it with this, freeze it again, and turn out on a dish. This is a very good and little known combination. RAISINÉ DE BOURGOGNE. This is an old and very delicious French marmalade. Boil 2 pounds of ripe grapes with 1 cup of water, stirring until soft. The grapes must, of course, be free from seeds and stems. Press through a sieve, forcibly; add 2 pounds of ripe pears, peeled and sliced, and stir until reduced to half the amount. Sweeten to taste, strain again, and put into jars. Set it, in the jars, in the oven overnight, then keep in a cool place. Serve with toast or rolls, for breakfast or afternoon tea. JAM COMBINATIONS. The good housewives of Southern France, Provence,- and of the part near Bar-le-Duc, which is famous for its preserves, - have many secrets of combining two flavors by long boiling of the fruits. This results in a very fine marmalade, little known over here. Indeed, almost every old lady has her special kind which she offers to guests, saying: " My grandmother made it so ! " Some of these combinations are given, and if tried, will be found delightful: 1. Black Currant and Apples. 2. Black Currant and Rhubarb. 3. Cherry and Raspberry. 4. Red Currants and Raspberry. 5. White Currants and Gooseberries. 6. Lemon and Green Gages. 7. Apple and Quinces. 8. Rhubarb and Orange. 9. Lemon and Apple. 10. Apricot and Plum. DAMSON CHEESE. (England.) Select sound, ripe plums. Put in a stone jar with 1/4 pound of sugar to each pound of fruit. Set the jar in boiling water, and cook until tender. Remove the stones, and cook longer, to a pulp. Add now 1/2 pound sugar to each pound of fruit, and cook slowly until thick and almost dry. Put into jars, seal, and keep in a cool place. Slice, to eat with toast or bread. CHERRIES AND CURRANTS IN SYRUP. Stone fine, large cherries, red ones preferred. Boil 1 1/2 pints water, and 1 pound sugar for each pound of fruit, cook 15 minutes, add the fruit and cook 20 minutes more. Strain the syrup, add to it the juice of 1 pint of currants to each 4 pounds of cherries, some brandy or maraschino, and cook 10 minutes rapidly. Pour over the fruit, and seal hot. RASPBERRIES AND CURRANTS. (Bar-le-Duc.) To 4 pounds of raspberries add 1 pound of currants. Bruise the currants, and strain the juice. Add to it 3/4 pound of sugar to each pound of juice, including the weight of the berries, left whole. Boil and skim for 20 minutes, add the fruit, - raspberries, - and cook 20 minutes more. When the syrup jellies on a plate, take off, and bottle, while hot, in jars. SOME OLD ENGLISH RECIPES. APPLE AND QUINCE JAM. Take 1 pint of quince juice, left from preserves, add 1 pound of sliced apples, and 3/4 pound of sugar. Boil 2 hours, stirring well. Pour into glasses while hot and seal. The jam must be thick and well blended. LEMON AND RHUBARB JAM. Scrape, slice, and weigh the rhubarb, allow 1 pound of sugar, chopped rind of 1 large lemon, and l/2 ounce of bitter almonds, sliced, to each 1/2 pounds of rhubarb. Boil very gently, stirring often, for 1/4 hour. Add the juice of the lemons, - as many as are required m above proportions, - boil a little longer, until thick, and pour into jars. Put the nuts in a bag, and take them out before sealing. Young rhubarb needs about 3/4 hour to cook; old fruit requires 1 1/2 hours. RHUBARB AND ORANGE JAM. Wash, scrape, and slice the rhubarb; to each pint add 3/4 pound of sugar, and the rind and pulp of 3 oranges. Discard the pith and seeds. Cook slowly for 2 hours. Put into jars and seal. This and the one above, made with lemons, are excellent to eat for breakfast, with hot cakes. GOOSEBERRY AND CURRANT JAM. Pick and trim some fine ripe gooseberries, add 1 cup of red currant juice to each 3 pounds of berries, and to each pound add 1 pound of sugar. Mash fine, reduce to a pulp, cook until thick, and put in jars. LEMON JAM. This is used to eat with toast or hot cakes, or as sauce for puddings. Mix the grated rind and juice of 3 lemons with 1 pound sugar, 5 eggs, - the yolks only, - and 1/2 ounce of butter. Cook in a double boiler, stirring often, until thick. Set away to cool. Will keep a week or more, in a cold place. APRICOT JAM. Pare and stone 3 pounds of apricots, add 1 pound of sugar, and let them stand 8 hours. Then cook them, with a few of the kernels, and another 1 1/2 pounds of sugar, making in all 2 1/2 pounds to each 3 pounds of fruit. Boil gently, mash with a spoon until thick, and put in jars. GREEN GAGE JAM. Wash the fruit, and to each pound allow 1 pound of sugar. Remove the stones, cover with the sugar, and let it stand for 6 hours. Simmer until it is thick, press through a colander, cook 1 hour more, and put in jars. GOOSEBERRY JAM. Trim the berries, and allow 1 pound of sugar and the juice of a lemon to each pound of fruit. Bring to a boil, skim it, then cook, stirring often until thick, and it jellies on a plate. Strain through a colander, and put into jars. Strawberry or blackberry, or any other jam, is made this way. SCOTCH ORANGE MARMALADE. Weigh the oranges and set aside an equal weight of sugar. Put the fruit, whole, into cold water to cover, bring to a boll, pour off the water and add as much more, and simmer until the fruit can be easily pierced with a fork. Cut the fruit in thin slices, throw away all of the seeds, return to the water, add the sugar and cook until it jellies, about an hour or less. Put into jars for use. They can be cooked with the same amount of sugar, cutting the skin first into strips, discarding the pith and membrane and seeds, and adding the pulp to the water and sugar. ROSE JELLY, to serve with Pork or Game. (England.) Collect the red seed pods of the rose when the frost has turned them, wash them, slit open, and take out the seeds. Add to every pint of pips 1/4 pint of white wine vinegar and 3/4 pound of sugar. Boil and stir rapidly, rub through a sieve, and cook for 1/2 hour longer. Cool and pack into tumblers, for use. Will keep in a cool place. ALMACK'S PRESERVES. (Old English recipe.) Split, pare, and stone 2 dozen plums, 1 dozen apples, 1 dozen pears. Arrange them in an earthen jar in alternate layers, adding 1 pound of sugar to each pound of fruit. Set in a pan of water and stir constantly on the fire until thick, about 1 hour. When cold, cut in slices. GERMAN METHOD OF PRESERVING FRUIT. Weisbaden is famous for its perfect preserves,- whole and well flavored, in syrup. A German housewife of repute insists that this recipe is the secret method so profitable to the firm. It results, at least, in a good imitation and good eating. Take 1 pound of sugar to each pound of cherries, strawberries, currants, plums, etc., any fruit, but cooked alone. Put the sugar with 1/2 as much water on the fire, make a thick syrup, put the fruit in it, and boil it but once. Pour into earthen plates, cover with sheets of glass and set in the hottest sun for 3 days, taking it in at night or covering with oilcloth. The natural heat draws out the flavor better than any stove, and the fruit keeps its shape perfectly. Put into jars and seal closely, for use. TUTTI-FRUTTI. (Italian way of preserving mixed fruits.) Italy is a country of confectionery. It was Italians, as princesses, marrying kings of France, who brought luxurious cooking, especially the making of sweets, to Paris. Before those days, France was barbarous. Take 1 pound each of strawberries, currants, huckleberries, cherries, peaches, plums, grapes, and pineapple, each in season, if not possible to get at once. Cut up and stone the large fruit. Add 1/2 pound of sugar to each 2 pounds of fruit and 1/2 pint of brandy. Put in layers, with only the sugar and brandy between. Good for ice creams. Do not cook it at all. Add some cooked chestnuts to it when using for ice cream, in proportion of 1/2 pint of mixed fruit to each quart of cream. ROSELEAF JAM. (A Greek recipe.) Gather the petals of fresh red roses, being sure that they are free from insects. Add an equal amount of sugar and only enough water to dissolve. Set in the sun under glass until the sugar is well melted, then cook it for 20 minutes, stirring well. Pour into jars and cork tightly. Served with coffee, to guests, who call in the afternoon. TURKISH DELIGHTS. These are the sweetmeats of the harem, imported at such high prices. Boil 2 1/2 pounds of loaf sugar with 1 3/4 pints of water; when it is clear, add 65 drachms of starch, dissolved in a little cold water. Stir until the sugar has become a thick paste, add 25 drachms of water and 1 cup of chopped almonds; flavor with rose, lemon, or any fruit extract. Pour into oiled pans, 1 inch deep. When cold, cut into squares and dip each into powdered sugar. They will keep some time in tin boxes. CITRON DIAMONDS. (Another Turkish confection.) Pare and chop 1 large fresh citron. Cover it with water and boil until tender. Drain it, add enough lemon juice or lime juice to cover. Renew, by straining this juice, for 3 days. Drain it finally, put into enough boiling syrup of sugar and water, and stir until a thick, green paste. Add 1/4 cup of rosewater, and boil until it hardens when dropped into ice water. Pour into oiled pans, 1/2 inch deep; when cold, cut into diamonds, dip in sugar, and put away in boxes. ALMOND NOUGAT. (Montelimert, France.) Boil 4 ounces gum arabic and 8 ounces of cold water until clear; strain, add 1 pound of pulverized sugar, and stir on the fire until thick. Beat it with an egg-beater, add then the stiffly beaten white of 1 egg, a tablespoonful of vanilla, and a pound of blanched and chopped almonds. Pour into an oiled mould, after stirring well; set in a dry place to cool, cut into squares, and wrap each in oiled paper. MARRONS GLACEES. (Paris.) Boil, shell, and chop 2 3/4 pounds of fine chestnuts ; add 1 cup of sugar and pound to a paste. Put in a pan with 1 cup of milk, a tablespoonful of butter, and a teaspoonful of vanilla. Stir until thick and smooth. Take off, cool, make it into balls; and when hard, dip each in chocolate or coffee icing. Serve for afternoon tea or dessert. LEMON AND MARASCHINO BONBONS. (Italy.) Soak 2 ounces of gum arabic in enough water to dissolve, add 1/4 pint of maraschino, and enough sugar to make a stiff paste when beaten. Make into balls, dip each into some good lemon icing, set aside to dry and use for dessert, or for entertainments. BARLEY SUGAR. (England.) This is a favorite candy with English school-children, and it is more harmless than most confections. Dissolve any amount needed, say 1 pound of granulated sugar, in only enough water to moisten. Cook it until clear and it will crack when dropped in water. Flavor with the juice of a lemon, pour into oiled pans, and when almost stiff, cut into strips and twist these, dusting with powdered sugar. APPLE SUGAR. (Germany.) Boil 1 pint of the juice of cooked apples, or as much cider with 2 pounds of sugar, until it cracks when dropped in cold water. Take out in spoonfuls, twist into sticks, dust with sugar as above, for use. CURRANT LOZENGES. {England.) Cook 3 quarts of ripe currants with a little water, bruising until soft. Press out all the juice, add 1/4 pound of sugar to each pint, simmer 3/4 hour, add 1/2 ounce of gelatine to each quart of this, stir well, pour into pans. When cold, drying near the fire, cut into diamonds, and dust with sugar. Put away, or serve for dessert or entertainments. CANDIED ANGELICA. (France.) Cut the stalks, free from roots and leaves, in April. Cut into inch-pieces, cover with sugar syrup, and cook until tender. Drain them, dust with powdered sugar, dry in the oven, and put away tightly for decorating puddings or ices or flavoring desserts. MARCHPANE. (Germany.) Chop 1/2 pound of sweet and 1/2 ounce of bitter almonds. Add 1/2 pound of sugar, and boil to a paste. Knead it well, roll thin, and cut into squares. When these are dry, dip them in fancy icing, and use for dessert. SIENNA CANDY. (Italy.) Boil 1 pint of honey, 2 pounds of chopped almonds, 3/4 pound of chopped filberts or pecans, a teaspoonful of cinnamon in powder, and 1/2 pound of grated chocolate. When thick and smooth, cool and roll out, cut into round cakes and dry in the oven. VIENNA CHOCOLATE. Scald 3 cups of milk and 1 cup of cream, add 3 heaping tablespoonfuls of grated chocolate, 2 of sugar, the same of cornstarch, and a teaspoonful of vanilla. Stir until smooth, cook 5 minutes more, beat the whites of 2 eggs very stiff with a spoonful of sugar. Add a spoonful to each cup when serving the chocolate. TURKISH COFFEE. Boil 8 coffee cupfuls of cold water, add 8 tea-spoonfuls of sugar and 12 spoonfuls of ground Mocha; stir it; when it bubbles, take it off. Do this 3 times. Then let it settle; pour it equally into each cup. CHAPTER SEVEN - Hot and Cold Drinks HEIDELBERG PUNCH, OR HEBE'S CUP. PEEL and slice 1 large cucumber; add the thin rind of a lemon and 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar; mix well. Add 3 tablespoonfuls of brandy, 6 of sherry, a pint bottle of vichy, and a pint bottle of claret. Mix these thoroughly; set on ice an hour before serving. SOME ENGLISH RECIPES. REGENT'S PUNCH. Grate the rind of 2 lemons and 1 oranges, then add a teaspoonful of vanilla, 4 cloves, and 1 inch of cinnamon stick. Cover with a hot syrup made of 1 1/2 pounds of sugar and 1 pint of water. Infuse in a warm place several hours, add the juice of 12 lemons and 1 pint of rum. Strain it; serve very cold. GEORGE THE IV.'S PUNCH. Mix on the fire 1/4 pound of sugar, grated rind of 1 lemon, and 2 oranges, with the juice and pulp. Add 1 cup of boiling water, stir until cold, then add 1/2 pint of pineapple syrup, 1/2 pint of strong green tea, 1 large glass of maraschino, 5 tablespoonfuls of rum, 1 pint of brandy, and 1 pint or more of champagne. Strain, add more sugar, if desired, and serve very cold. PONY PUNCH. Mix 1 cup of gunpowder tea, the zest of a lemon rubbed on 3 lumps of sugar, 1 teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon, juice of 3 lemons, a little nutmeg, and 1/2 pound of sugar made into syrup, with 1/4 pint of water, also 1 pint of white wine, 1/4 pint each of brandy, rum, and whiskey. Mix, boil it, and strain it. Serve very hot. INSTITUTION CUP. Mix 1 pint of champagne, 1 gill of pineapple syrup, 1 gill of strawberry syrup, 1 sliced orange, and 1 glass of brandy. Shake well and pour into tumblers half full of shaved ice. OXFORD GRACE CUP. The juice of a lemon, and the thin grated rind of a lemon, must be added to some beer, 1 1/2 pints, then add 1 pint of sherry, and sugar to taste. Stir until dissolved, add 4 slices of toasted bread, and set aside for 1 hours. Add a grating of nutmeg and serve cold. CHAMPAGNE CUP. Mix 1 bottle of champagne, 2 bottles of soda water, a glass of brandy, a glass of Curacoa, some slices of cucumber peel, and the juice of a lemon. Moselle or Sauterne can be made into cups, the same way. GRANDFATHER'S NIGHTCAP. (Old English.) Fifty or a hundred years ago every middle-aged gentleman, and a great many ladies, took a hot drink before retiring at nine or ten o'clock. Nowadays, the same class of people are apt to sit up very late and to depend upon drugs for a good night's sleep. Beat the yolk of 1 egg with 1/2 teaspoonful of allspice and 1 gill of rum, a tablespoonful of sugar melted in 1 cup of boiling water. Whisk this well and stir; strain into a hot glass, placing the beaten white on top, dusted with nutmeg. BROWN BETTY (an old Oxford drink). Melt 1 pound of sugar in 1 pint of water; add, when boiling, a pinch of cloves, pounded, some cinnamon, 1/2 pint of brandy and 1 quart of good ale. Add a little ginger and nutmeg. Serve it in glasses, ice-cold in summer, and very hot in winter. LAWN SLEEVE. (Old English.) Roast a lemon, stuck with 3 cloves; add 1/2 cup of water, a pinch of mace, allspice, and cinnamon. Stir on the fire, add 1 quart of sherry and 4 spoonfuls of melted calf's foot jelly, the lemon cut in slices, and 6 lumps of sugar, and after boiling, some nutmeg. Serve hot, in a bowl. MARIGOLD WINE. (England.) Boil 6 pounds sugar, 1 pound honey, 2 1/2 gallons water, and the beaten whites of 2 eggs, for 1 hour. Add, skimming often, 3 quarts of marigold flowers and 1 pound of stoned raisins. Cover and stir often, for three days ; add the chopped rinds of 1 oranges, 1/4 pound sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls yeast, and 3/4 pint of brandy. Strain and keep nine months before using. METHEGLIN. (Old German and English.) Mix 1/2 gallon currant juice, 4 gallons of boiling water, 7 1/2 pounds of honey, 3/4 ounce of cream of tartar, for 1/2 hour. Let it ferment, add 1 quart of brandy, strain, and bottle. Use in 3 months time. BITTERS FOR COCKTAILS. (England.) Infuse 1 ounce cardamom seeds, 4 ounces gentian root, 2 ounces sliced orange peel, in 2 quarts of rectified spirit for 1 week. Then strain for use and bottle. ATHOLE BROSE (for a cold). (England.) Boil 1 tablespoonful ground oatmeal, 1/2 pint water, a tablespoonful honey, and one of cream. Add 3 glasses of whiskey punch; strain it into glasses and serve hot. OXFORD BISHOP. Rub the zest of a lemon on 3 ounces of loaf sugar; add the juice of the lemon and a spoonful each of cloves, cinnamon, ginger, allspice, and mace, and cook with 1/2 pint of water for 1/2 hour, slowly. Add a pint of good port wine, heat it together and serve, without straining, very hot. GIN SLING. Mix 1 pint of sugar syrup, a glass of brandy, the same of gin, a slice of lemon, and a pint of soda water. Serve cold. ROMAN PUNCH. Mix 1 pint of champagne, 1 pint of rum, the juice of 12 lemons, the grated rind of the lemons, and the whites of 12 eggs beaten to a froth. Freeze this and serve in cups. CAUDLECUP. This is old English, a drink offered to callers upon a new baby. To 1 pint of thin oatmeal gruel, add yolk of 1 egg, 1 glass of sherry or port, the grated rind of a lemon, 4 lumps of sugar, and a little nutmeg. Heat it on the fire, stir, and serve hot. CHRISTMAS BOWL. Break up 9 small sponge cakes and 1/2 pound of macaroons in a bowl. All must be stale. Add 1 pint of malaga or sweet raisin wine, 1 table-spoonfuls of sherry, 2 ounces of sugar, and some nutmeg, also 1 1/2 pints of thin custard. Stir well; serve cold with a wreath of holly around the edge. WASSAIL. This is another Christmas drink, but quite different. To 1 pint of ale add 1/2 ounce of grated ginger, 1/2 ounce of grated nutmeg, a pinch of cinnamon, and 1/2 pound of brown sugar. Heat it and stir, but do not boil. Add 1 more pints of ale and 1/2 pint of sherry or malaga, the zest of a lemon, rubbed on a piece of sugar, and, finally, 6 cored and roasted apples. It must be served hot in a bowl, each person taking an apple in a cup, too. SACK POSSET. (Sir Walter Raleigh's recipe.) Heat 1/2 pint of sherry and 1/2 pint of ale, add 1 quart of boiling milk or cream, sugar to taste, and some grated nutmeg. Let it stand on the back of the fire an hour, and add, just before serving, the yolks of 2 eggs, then beat it all well and serve hot. SACK POSSET. (Another way.) Mix 1/4 pound of sugar with 1/2 pint of sweet white wine, stir until hot, add the beaten yolks and whites of 5 eggs, and 1 pint of boiling milk and some nutmeg. Pour from pitcher to pitcher until frothy and serve hot. LEMON POSSET. Squeeze and strain the juice of 3 lemons, add 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar, and stir, then 1 spoonful of brandy and nutmeg, 1 1/2 pints of boiling milk which has been heated with the grated rind, add some chopped almonds and froth it by pouring from a height and serve hot. LAMB'S WOOL. Heat 1 pint of good ale, add sugar and nutmeg to taste, lemon peel, and a pinch of cloves and ginger. Put in a bowl with 3 apples, roasted and sliced, and 3 pieces of toast. Serve very hot, as a "nightcap." ALE FLIP. Mix 3 pints of ale, 1 tablespoonful of sugar, a little mace, 1 pounded clove, and a tablespoonful of butter. Let it boil, add the beaten white of 1 egg, and the yolks of 2. Beat and stir well, to make it frothy. SCOTCH HOT PINT. Mix 2 tablespoonfuls of ale with 1 well-beaten egg, some nutmeg, and 1/4 pint of whiskey. Stir in 2 pints of boiling hot ale, add sugar to taste, and pour in from a height to make it frothy. Serve hot. MULLED WINE. This is another old English drink, often met in novels in which the early part of the last century is depicted. Boil 1 teaspoonful of cinnamon, mace, and cloves, in equal parts, with 1/4 pint of water, and 1 pint of claret and sugar to taste. Stir and serve hot with toasted sponge cakes. MAY NECTAR. (Germany.) Take 6 leaves each of fresh tarragon, milfoil, or yarrow, geranium and pimpernel. Add 3 each of currant, sweet basil, lungwort, balsam, and lavender. Put these with 20 pieces of balm, 1 of peppermint, 2 sprigs of woodruff, a lemon, sliced, an orange, sliced, 1/2 pound of sugar, and 4 pints of German Rhine wine. Strain it after it has in-fused 2 hours; add 2 dozen or more large straw-berries and serve in a bowl, very cold. The herbs may be found in most old-fashioned gardens. MEAD. (Old English and German.) To 12 gallons of pure water add 20 pounds of honey and the whites of 4 eggs, well stirred in. Boil 1 hour, add a spoonful each of ginger, cloves, cinnamon, and mace, a little rosemary, then, when boiled and cooled, a spoonful of yeast. Let it ferment until it stops working. Keep it cool, but do not bottle it for use before 6 months. CAPILLAIRE. This syrup is used in mixing drinks, or taken with water, by the people who sit at the little tables in Paris, on the sidewalk, at dusk. Infuse 20 ounces of fresh maidenhair fern, roots and tops, in boiling water to cover it. Keep it warm 10 hours, strain it, add sugar to taste, - 3 pounds to 3 pints of water. Then add 2 table-spoonfuls of orangeflower water, cook 5 minutes more, strain it, and bottle for use. BLACKBERRY CORDIAL. (Germany.) Cook 1/2 bushel of blackberries until juicy, strain under pressure, and add 1/4 pound of allspice, 2 ounces of cinnamon bark, 2 ounces of cloves, and 2 grated nutmegs, all tied in a bag, also 1 pound of loaf sugar to each quart of juice. Simmer 15 minutes, add 1 pint of brandy to each 3 pints of juice. Bottle closely for medicinal use in hot weather. RHUBARB WINE. (England.) Mash 5 pounds of rhubarb, add 1 gallon of water; let it stand 5 days, add 4 pounds of sugar and the rind of a lemon. Stir it well, set aside, strained and covered. In 6 months bottle for use. ORANGE WINE. To make 9 gallons, add the strained juice of 90 oranges to 27 pounds of sugar in a clean cask. Put the pulp, no seeds, to 1 1/2 gallons of water. Cook all together, strain it, add more water, stir every day for 10 days. Bottle it and use it after 3 months. ORANGE BRANDY. (England.) Put the thin rind of 6 oranges with 1/2 pint of juice and 2 quarts of French brandy, in a stone jar. After 3 days, add 1 1/4 pounds of sugar and stir well. The next day, strain it and cork tightly. The longer it is kept, the better the flavor, but it can be used in a month. DAMSON WINE. Bruise 3 1/2 gallons of damson plums, add 2 gallons of boiling sugar syrup, made of 3 1/2 gallons of water and 7 pounds of sugar, boiled down. Cook 1 hour. When cool, add 1 gill of yeast. Cover for 9 days, strain it and add 1 pound of chopped raisins; when it stops working, add 1/2 ounce of essence of almonds and strain and bottle. Keep it 10 months before using. CURRANT WINE. (England.) Stem the currants, put in a bag and bring to a boil with enough water to cover. Press out the juice, add 1 gallons of water to each gallon of juice, and 2 tablespoonfuls of yeast. Cover for 2 days ; add 3 pounds of sugar to each gallon of wine ; stir and strain it and keep it 3 months before bottling for use. It improves with age. GOOSEBERRY CHAMPAGNE. (England.) Trim and mash sufficient fruit, sound but un-ripe ; add to each gallon 1 gallon of water and cover for 2 days. Keep it in a warm place and stir it often. Strain it under pressure, add 4 pounds of sugar to each gallon, and cover for 3 days more. Then strain it, add 1/2 pint of gin. Keep it in a cask 12 months, then bottle for use. IRISH USQUEBAUGH. Stem 1 pound large raisins, add the zest of an orange on lumps of sugar, bruise well, add 1/4 ounce each of cloves and cardamom seeds, and 1/2 a nutmeg, grated. Put in a jar, add 1/2 gallon of brandy or light whiskey, 1/2 pound of rock candy, and some brown coloring. Shake every day, and in 2 weeks strain it and bottle for use. It is a cordial, very old-fashioned. ORGEAT. (France.) Pound 1/2 pound of blanched almonds, add 1 ounce rosewater and 1 quart of boiling water; cool, strain, and sweeten it. Use to flavor dessert. NOYEAU. (France.) Blanch 1/2 pound bitter almonds, add the grated rind of 1 lemon, bruise and pound in a mortar, and then put in a jar with 1 gallon of good spirits of wine and 1 quart of water. Cork it very tight, shake it each day for a week, add 2 pounds of sugar made into a syrup with I quart of water. Strain it, cover it, in a week bottle it closely. Improves with age. KIRSCH. (Germany.) This cordial can be bought at the grocer's, but is more cheaply made at home. Mash 1 pound of wild plums, take out the stones, and open them to get the kernels. Cover pulp and kernels with 1 gallon of brandy, add sugar to taste, and let it stand 1 month. Strain and bottle for use. CURACOA. (France.) Peel and chop the rind of 8 oranges, cover for 3 days with 1 gallon of French brandy, strain it, add 3 pounds sugar, stir and bottle tightly, using small bottles. Improves with age. Use for flavoring. QUINCE CORDIAL. (Germany.) This is good for flavoring or to drink. Grate enough quinces to make 1 quart of juice when squeezed dry ; add 1 pound sugar, 6 ounces of bruised bitter almonds, 1/2 dozen cloves, and 1 gill of brandy. Mix and cover, set aside for 1 weeks. Strain it and bottle it. NONPAREIL CORDIAL. (France.) Peel and grate 1 large pineapple, add 18 fine green gages, 12 seckel pears; to each 4 pounds of fruit add 6 pounds of sugar and 3 pints water. The fruit must be cut fine. Cook 3/4 hour, skimming often. Strain it; add, when cold, 3 quarts of gooseberry brandy. Keep 6 weeks before use. VIOLET VINEGAR. (Germany.) Gather the flowers only of wood violets; cover with wine vinegar, and set in the sun in a closed jar, for 4 weeks. Use a glass jar. Strain it, and cork for use. A spoonful in water, with sugar, will cure nervous headaches. POSTSCRIPT. HINTS AND SECRETS. The kitchen lore of the old countries across the sea includes many useful bits of wisdom. Experience teaches even fools after a space of time, but a bright individual needs but a hint. Some of these ideas have reached us, having been introduced by the various excellent teachers in cooking schools, who have done their utmost to spread light and lessen extravagance and illnesses, resulting directly or indirectly, from that waste. In speaking generally, we will say that England is foremost in the art of roasting and broiling meats; France takes the palm for soups and sauces - a soup is only a prolonged sauce; Germany and Austria are prize bakers of bread, cakes, and pastry; Italy and Hungary excel in fancy desserts and confectionery, all the best confectioners or their head cooks are Italians ; and Spain and Russia follow at the rear, trying, with indifferent success, to imitate the other countries in each branch of the great art. Norway and Sweden have a peculiar place apart; they know how to do everything domestic in the cleanest, cleverest way, and are cosy, home-loving people, but have been so quiet since their last war - long ago - with the neighboring countries, and so isolated in situation, that few travellers realize how fine they are indeed, they combine the vivacity and ingenuity of the French with English patience and neatness and German honesty and thoroughness. Some day a Swedish cook-book will be written to astonish the world. Foreign cooks use very little salt and pepper compared with Americans. Good pure food, with the simple, fresh flavor inherent, does not require seasoning to heighten its excellence, and stale meat or adulterated materials are not thus rendered any more wholesome. In coming back to America after a trip abroad, you notice first the excess of salt in everything, especially bread and butter; then the muddy complexions and harsh voices. Too much salt, as any one knows, irritates the mucous membranes and causes skin diseases, and too much pepper inflames and dries the blood, injuring the liver beyond repair. In Europe, especially in France, they think that soup is most important once a day, strong, nourishing, satisfying. Even the poorest peasant has good broth. It satisfies hunger, keeping one from eating too much meat; and according to French tradition, the glass of light wine taken after, called " le coup d'aprés," robs the doctor of a fee. If stock is made, and all scraps utilized, soup can be had each day for dinner. Nothing need be wasted. Even the dish of hash, left over, can be turned into excellent soup. If it were heated again, it would be tough and tasteless. An onion, a carrot, some herbs, and the meat with the gravy must be put with enough water, boiled an hour or more, strained and thickened with flour and butter, then, say, a little boiled rice added, or some croutons, with salt and pepper. Half a dish of macaroni and cheese, with the gravy and bones of fried chicken, an onion, a carrot, a bit of celery, and some herbs, water, of course, will, if cooked awhile, and rubbed through a sieve with the addition of a cup of boiling milk, the yolk of an egg, or some butter and flour, salt, pepper, and chopped parsley, and a pinch of nut-meg, result in a very appetizing soup. So on indefinitely. Not a scrap need be wasted; when first principles are learned, inspiration can guide. Centuries of taxation have taught foreigners such economy. In making soup stock, strain it, after long simmering, but let it cool in an open bowl. Next day, remove the cake of fat on top; clarify it by cooking it in a pan of water. The impurities will sink to the bottom, and the fat in a solid piece can be used for frying or braising, as the flavor, including vegetables and herbs, is better tasting and more wholesome than lard. French cooks, too, take the fat from chicken broth when it cools, clarify it, then use it instead of butter for pastry or delicate frying. Fish should have a separate pan of fat, clarified after each time of using, and this, instead of being thrown away, will keep some time in a cold place. In preparing stock, cut up the meat into dice, split the bones so that the marrow will come out, and add to the nutriment, then clean and cut the vegetables with exceeding care. Potatoes should first be parboiled before using in soups or stews, as they belong to the deadly nightshade family, and the poison passes off with the first water. Onions and garlic, so beloved by the French and Italians, lose their sharpness and rank flavor by parboiling. One of the best French hotels in New York, where the opera stars always go for certain country dishes, dear to their childhood, has a special sauce of garlic, for entrees, a recipe of Gascony, but so delicate, because of this first boiling, that few people can resist it. About a quart of cold water to each pound of meat, with one teaspoonful of salt added, when the stock is strained to be put away, one spoonful to each quart of stock, is the right proportion. Use as little pepper as possible. Some of our most expensive hotels ruin their cooking with too much pepper. A French cook would be offended if more pepper or salt was asked for at the table, for the proper amount should be added before serving. Cold cooked vegetables are never nice warmed up ; a foreign cook would turn the beans or peas, or whatever it is, into a cream soup, made with milk and yolk of egg, if stock is not at hand, or would use them to garnish meats, or served with mayonnaise as a mixed salad. Equal parts, say a cupful each, of peas, string beans, potatoes, carrots, or cauliflower, make a salad fit to give the most fastidious guest. Pretty garnishing of lemon or parsley, hard-boiled eggs, or any vegetable, has much to do with the looks of a dish, as well as to the taste, for the mouth literally waters when hunger is excited by the eye or the sense of smell, and digestion is easier when food is enjoyed. The water in which vegetables or rice has been cooked - excepting potatoes and cabbage - would be used by a French cook, with additions, to make good soup; the water from boiled mutton, with herbs, onions, carrots, rice, or barley, is not bad when served as mutton broth, and the water from boiled fish, with the same seasoning, some milk and oysters, with the liquor from the oysters, and flour and butter to thicken it, results in a nice soup, richer in flavor than the usual stewed oysters. Even a chicken can be cooked with water to make soup, then taken out, stuffed in the way generally done, with bread-crumbs, etc., and dredged with flour, and basted with butter or the fat of bacon, in the oven, will provide a palatable roast. This is because most of the flavor, as well as the weight, departs in smoke or steam, in cooking. Meats, fried or roasted before the fire, lose from one-quarter to one-third their size and considerable of their succulence. That is why cooks grow fat, absorbing the best of what they send to the dining-room while bending over the fire. Braising is the method used in Europe for making a dish of meat or fish rich and appetizing, since only by braising, in a closely covered saucepan, and slow cooking, can the effect be obtained. French cooks put charcoal, or live coals, on the hollow lid of the earthen pan, to improve the flavor, but a tin pie plate, with the same addition, will do as well. A little box of growing herbs, the price and names and uses of which can be found in any large florist's catalogue, lightens expense, and helps to make soups, sauces, and salads savory. Plants always grow well in the kitchen because of the moisture and warmth. The French cook knows a trick of giving a delicious flavor, by rubbing the gridiron, or the joint of mutton, or the inside of the soup-pot, with a bit of garlic. Only the best of it is left to accentuate the original flavor. The chapon , or bit of bread rubbed with garlic, is used in salad, mixing with the dressing, and imparting a fascinating but indescribable touch. It is an insult to human beings to offer the meat or stews merely warmed over. Even an English woman will broil thick slices of rare beef or mutton, serving them with a good sauce, and English children are never given cold meat, but have soup or chops, or milk puddings, because it takes sharp hunger and strong digestions to assimilate meat that is cold or cooked twice. The albumen of the meat becomes tougher. But stewed kidney and liver are fairly good when properly prepared a second time. The kidney, with onion, gravy, herbs, and tomatoes, makes a nice sauce for an omelette; and the liver, if chopped very fine, can be used with bread-crumbs, to stuff baked tomatoes, or egg-plant or cabbage. It can be made into forcemeat balls for meat pies or soups, or cut up into dice, served with rice, and a little stock, to imitate chicken pilaff. Stock is so much better for the basis of sauces than hot water that every cook should manage, by intelligent thrift, to have a supply on hand, and even half a cupful will improve a dish wonderfully. Bits of cold ham or bacon, chopped fine and added to a little stock, makes the sauce richer, - in fact, a few bones, a bit of ham, an onion, a carrot, some celery and parsley, and a pint of water boiled down to half, will, if strained and seasoned, take the place of real stock. A cup of stewed tomatoes can be turned into sauce or soup, or the end and bone of a beefsteak, with barley, herbs, a bayleaf, carrot, onion, and a cup of tomatoes, added to the water needed, will result in a good broth. When it is strained and seasoned, a little sugar improves it. French cooks use sugar for a great many things ; a little goes a long way, however. Instead of hash, which grows tiresome, a foreign cook will often serve a savory sausage, chopping equal parts of beef or veal, and pork with herbs, onion, and seasoning, binding it in sausage skins - always to be obtained from the butcher - and boiling them an hour. The famous and dainty sausages of Aries and Lyons contain garlic and chopped truffles. When cooking eggs, these can be fried in the same pan, and are, at least, pure and harmless. Food is often wasted by keeping it improperly ; the soup allowed to get cool under a plate which turns it sour, or the milk or butter left too close to fish or meat, or the vegetables and dry groceries allowed to get mouldy through being kept in a warm, damp place. A cook who likes her business, or a wife who has the welfare of her family at heart, should be glad of any hints relating to these matters. The Germans aptly say that the kitchen is to the house what the stomach is to the body. And also, when the doctor calls, he should enter by way of the back door, and thank the cook for that neglect which calls for his costly visits. A plain cook should know how to boil, bake, fry, and broil. A fancy one is supposed to know how to lard meats, to bone fowls, whip cream, make good mayonnaise and croquettes, stock and glaze and ices. Rolls and bread and pickles and preserves are sold at the grocer's, but every-day cookery of substantial food has to be done at home. Here are a few more ideas. To glaze meats, reduce beef stock by rapid boiling, and when as thick as molasses, paint the surface of roasts, to make them shine. A boiled ham - ham and tongue and corned beef should cool in the liquor they are cooked in, to give them tenderness and flavor - is a very ornamental dish, decked with a paper frill around the bone and the surface glazed, then outlined in a pattern or name, with melted lard and a pastry tube. The elaborate effects of foreign cooks are made by such simple means. To lard fish or meat with strips of pork, first sear the surface over the fire, that tightens the skin and makes it easier to draw the needle through. Freeze pie-crust before baking it, to make it light, and paint the tops of pies with yolk of egg to make them brown and shiny. When serving baked apples, or stewed dried fruit, a spoonful of sherry is added by a French cook, to improve the taste of the juice. To produce a soft tender crust on bread or cake, they rub the surface, before baking, with melted butter, and they make rolls look flaky by painting the outside with white of egg. To make a crisp crust on a cake, they add a spoonful of ice water to the dough or dust the top with sugar before baking, and they rarely cook a cake without lining the tin with oiled paper, to keep the temperature even. They gash the top of cakes, made with yeast, with a knife, to let out the steam, and they put a mixture of sugar and water on the top of these latter kind, to make them brown and tempting when done. They never use the fingers to pinch the edge of pies, for they know that the heat of the hand keeps the paste from rising. Thus it will be seen that the little extra trouble taken will be worth while, and nothing is without use. A RUSSIAN DINNER. First, serve Zadzouski , and Champagne. Caviare. Sandwiches. Cold Tongue and Salt Herring. Tchi. Coulibac. Punski. Braised Venison. Meat and Vegetable Salad. Baba Pudding, Brandy Sauce. Black Coffee and Russian Tea. GREEK EASTER FEAST. (Poland, Roumania, Russia, and Greece.) Cottage Cheese in form of a Cross. Roast Sucking Pig or Young Lamb. Hard-boiled Eggs, marked with a Cross. New Honey. Unleavened Bread. Jellied Fish, in Cross-shaped Mould. Dolmas. Calialou. Stuffed Cucumbers, Lemon Sauce. Tcheureks. Roseleaf Jam. Black Coffee. FRENCH PICNIC LUNCHEON. Lobster and Oyster-plant Mousse. Sweet and savory Sandwiches. Galantine of Turkey. Perigord Pie. Almond Cakes. Strawberries in Punch, of Iced Sweet Wines. Claret. SCOTCH SUPPER. Whiskey Punch. Ale. Mackerel Pie. Howtowdie. Haggis. Hot Scones, buttered. Hot Pint. Lemon Posset. Orange Marmalade. ENGLISH GARDEN PARTY. Veal and Ham Pie. Chicken Salad. Sandwiches. Wafers. Gooseberry Fool. Syllabub. Richmond Maids of Honor. Fruit Ices. Regent's Punch. Institution Cup. Claret Cup. OLD ENGLISH SUPPER. Kidney and Oyster Pudding. Jugged Hare. Lancastershire Medley. Frumenty. Salmagundi. King Henry's Shoe Strings, Damson Cheese. Rhubarb Wine. Grandfather's Nightcap. Stilton Cheese. GERMAN KAFFEE KLATCH. (Coffee Party-Ladies' Sewing Circle.) Oysters in Cream. Potato Salad. Nuremberg Gingerbread. Apfel Strudel. Konglauffe. March-pane. Coffee with Whipped Cream. Vienna Chocolate. A TROUBADOUR DINNER IN OLD PROVENCE. (Arrange the table with garlands of laurel, interwoven with violets and roses, in clusters. Have no cloth. Use old-fashioned china or silver.) Cream of Cheese Soup, in yellow bowls. Bouillabaisse, in earthen dish. Amorites. Roast Goose, Artesian style. Cassoulic, with Mush-rooms. Egg-plant, Tomato Sauce. Endive Salad, Gascony style. Fresh Cheese. Batons de Jakob. Sweet Cannelons. Rhubarb and Orange Jam. Coffee. Claret.
