FÖRSTA AFDELNINGEN. Part One. YEAST AND BREAD. Yeasts. Boil three ounces hops in three quarts of water for half an hour. Put a handfull of dry sifted flour into a stone jar, and scald it with enough of the hopwater to make a stiff paste and set aside. Let the rest of the hopwater boil slowly for an hour and a half; strain it on the paste without stirring, and set aside to cool. When bloodwarm add a small handful of malt, mix well; tie a cotton cloth over it and let it stand untouched in a moderately cool place for forty-eight hours; then bottle and keep in a cool, dark cellar or other suitable place. In another way. Boil one pint hops in two gallons water for half an hour, strain into a crock and let it become lukewarm; add two even tea spoons salt and a pint best brown sugar; mix half a pint flour smooth with some of the liquor, and stir all well together. Three days later add three pounds boiled and mashed potatoes , stir well and let stand a day or more; then strain and put in jugs, but for a day or two leave the corks loose. The yeast should be made two weeks or more before using, as it improves with age. Shake the jug well before using. Potato yeast. Peel and boil five potatoes , mash; add a tablespoonful of flour, a pinch each of sugar and salt and when bloodwarm add one and a half gills of stock yeast, and let it ferment for six hours. Potato yeast with hops. Take two handfuls of hops, put half a gallon water over them in a new coffee pot, and boil slowly for an hour. Pare and grate half a dozen large potatoes into a two gallon stone crock, add a half cup sugar and a tablespoon each of salt and ginger, pour over this half a gallon of the boiling hopwater, stirring all the time. When milk warm add one cup good yeast; set in a warm place until it rises, and then remove to the cellar or other cool place. The hopwater must be added to the potatoes immediately, or they will darken and discolor the yeast. This is a valuable recipe, and the manner of boiling the hopwater is especially recommended. Potato yeast without hops. Take four good sized potatoes , peeled, boiled and mashed, four tablespoons white sugar, one spoon ginger, one spoon salt, and two cups flour; pour over this a pint of boiling water and beat until all lumps disappear. After it has cooled sufficiently add to it one cup of good yeast, and set aside to rise. When it has risen put in a glass or stone jar, cover and set it aside in a cool place for use. Hop yeast. Boil a handful of hops in two quarts water for 20 minutes; strain one half of it in three pints of sifted flour, and when the other half is cool, mix slowly with the paste. Stir in a pint of strong brewers yeast. Bottle and cork loosely and let it ferment. Next day cork tight and put in cellar. BREAD. Boston brown bread. One pint each of rye or Graham flour and as much indian meal, one cup molasses, not quite as much sour milk. One and a half teaspoonful soda, and a half pints cold water. Put on a stove over cold water, which gradually bring to a boil. Steam for four hours and place in an oven to brown over. All kinds of bread thus prepared becomes better from the steaming. Another way. Two cups wheat flour, cups Graham, one cup indian meal, one teaspoon soda, one cup molasses, 3 1/2 cups milk, and a little salt. Beat well and steam for five hours. Cornbread. Beat two eggs very light; mix with them one pint either sour milk or butter milk and one pint yellow sifted indian meal. Melt one tablespoonful butter with one teaspoon of salt and add to the mixture. Dissolve one teaspoon soda in a small portion of the milk and add finally. Beat all up very hard and bake in a pan in a brick oven for 45 minutes. Another way. One pint Corn meal, one half teaspoon soda, one teaspoon cream tartar, one teaspoon salt, one egg, and milk enough to make a stiff batter. Bake in a hot oven. The pans in which you bake should be hot and well greased before putting in the batter. Another way. One pint corn meal, sifted; one pint wheat flour, one pint sour milk, two eggs beaten lightly; half a cup sugar and a piece of butter as big as an egg; add lastly one teaspoonful soda in a little milk; add to the beaten eggs the milk and meal alternately, then the butter and sugar. If sweet milk is used, add one teaspoonful cream tartar. Bake for twenty minutes in a hot oven. Graham bread. One quart warm water, one half cup brown sugar or molasses, one fourth cup hop yeast, and one and a half teaspoon salt; thicken the water with unbolted flour to a thin batter; add sugar, salt and yeast, and stir in more flour until quite stiff; put it into pans and let it rise, then bake in an oven heated to an even temperature, with a gradual rise afterward. Rye and indian bread. Take one quart rye meal, two quarts Indian meal and scald it. The scalding may be done by placing the flour in a pan and pouring over it just enough boiling water to make it wet, not enough to make it a batter, stirring all the time with a spoon. Then take one half cup molasses, two teaspoons salt, one teaspoon soda, one teacup yeast; make it as stiff as can be stirred with a spoon, mixing with warm water, and let it rise over night. Next put it in a large pan, smooth the top with cold water, let it stand a short time and bake five or six hours. If you put in oven late at night you may let it remain over night. Graham may be used instead of rye. PANCAKES, BISCUITS, ETC., ETC. Remarks. Soda, Saleratus, Cream of tartar and baking powder, as found in the american market, are often adulterated through mixture with terra alba or white sand. To test them, put a teaspoonful in a glass of water; if pure it will dissolve, otherwise there will be a gathering on the bottom of the glass. Some baking powders contain alum and should not be used, being very injurious. Graham gems. A pint of sour or buttermilk, one teaspoon soda and a little salt; beat all well together and add one egg, a tablespoonful molasses and Graham flour sufficient to make a stiff batter. Mix thoroughly. Bake in gem pans well greased and quite hot, in a quick oven. Another way. Three cups sour milk, one teaspoon soda, one spoon salt, one tablespoon brown sugar, one spoon melted lard, one beaten egg. To the egg add the milk, then the sugar and salt, then the Graham flour with the soda mixed in) together with the lard. Make a stiff batter so that it will drop, not pour from the spoon. Have the gem pans very hot, fill and bake fifteen minutes in a hot oven. Indian gems. Mix quickly a quart of Indian meal with sufficient water to make a thick batter; add a teaspoon of salt and stir thoroughly. Have the pans hot and greased and bake in a quick oven ten minutes. Sweet milk gems. Beat one egg well, add a pint of new milk; a little salt and Graham flour enough to make it thick enough to drop nicely from the spoon. Heat and butter the pans before dropping in the dough. Bake in a hot oven twenty minutes. Wheat muffins. Mix one pint milk, two eggs, three tablespoonfuls yeast and a spoon of salt with flour enough to make a stiff batter. Let it rise four or five hours, and bake in muffin rings in a hot oven for about ten minutes. Graham muffins. Use Graham instead of wheat flour, as above, and add two tablespoons molasses. Biscuits. Dissolve one rounded tablespoon of butter in a pint of hot milk; when lukewarm stir in one quart of flour, add one beaten egg, a little salt, and a teacup yeast. Work the dough until smooth. If in winter set in a warm place, if in summer a cool place to rise. In the morning work softly and roll half an inch thick, and cut into biscuits. Let them rise for 30 minutes, when they will be ready to bake. Another way. Take one quart sifted flour (loosely put in) two heaping teaspoons tartaric acid and one moderately heaping teaspoon soda, one teaspoon salt, and three gills of water. Shape biscuits with spoon and flour ed hand. Soda biscuits. Sift one quart of flour; add one teaspoon soda and two of cream of tartar (or three of good baking powder ), one of salt, and one tablespoonful white sugar. Mix all thoroughly and rub in one level tablespoonful of lard or butter (or half of each). Wet with a half pint sweet milk, roll out on board, about an inch thick. Cut with a biscuit cutter or tumbler, and bake in a quick oven fifteen minutes. If you have no milk, use water, but take more lard or butter. Cinnamon cake. When making yeast bread and the sponge is ready to be kneaded, take a portion and roll out to one quarter of an inch; put thin slices of butter on top and sprinkle with cinnamon, and then with sugar. Let it rise. Bake for breakfast. Vienna rolls. Have ready in a bowl a tablespoonful butter or lard, made soft by wanning a little, stirring with a spoon. Add to one quart of unsifted flour two heaping teaspoons of baking powder; mix and sift thoroughly together, and place in the bowl with the butter. Take enough sweet milk to form a dough of common thickness and put into the milk half a teaspoon salt, and then stir it into the flour etc. with a spoon, forming the dough, which turn out on the board and knead till smooth. Roll out half an inch thick, and cut with a large round cutter; fold each over to form a half round, wetting a little between the foils to make them stick together; place on buttered pans so as not to touch, wash over on tops with milk to give them a gloss and bake immediately in hot oven for twenty minutes. Will not hurt to let them stand half an hour before baking. Coffee rolls. Work into a quart of bread dough a rounded tablespoonful of butter and half a cup white sugar; add some dried currants (well washed and dried in an oven) sift some flour and sugar over them and work into the other ingredients. Make into small rolls, dip into melted butter, place in tins, let rise a short time and bake. Rusks. Three pounds flour, half a pound of butter, same of sugar, two eggs, a pint and a half of milk, two tablespoons rose water, three tablespoons strong yeast. Sift the flour into a large pan, and rub it into the but- ter and sugar; beat the eggs very light and stir into the milk, adding the rosewater and yeast. Make a hole in the dough, pour in the mixture, and slowly work it into a thick batter; cover and set by a fire to rise. When light knead it well. Cut into small cakes, and knead each separately; lay them near to each other, but not touching, in shallow pans well dusted with flour; prick each one with a fork, and set in a warm place to rise again. When quite light bake in a moderately heated oven. They should be eaten the same day. Lebanon rusks. One cup mashed potatoes , one of sugar, one of home-made yeast, three eggs. Mix well, when raised lightly add half a cup of butter or lard, and flour enough to make a soft dough; when light, mold into small cakes, and let them rise again before baking. If wanted for tea, set at 9 a. m. Johnny cakes. Scald a quart indian meal with water enough to make a thick batter; add two or three teaspoons salt; mould into small cakes with hands flour ed. Fry them in fat enough to cover them. When brown on one side, turn them. Boil them thus for 20 minutes. When done, split and eat with butter. French crackers. One and a half pounds flour, the same amount of sugar, three quarters of a pound butter, five eggs (only the whites ). Before baking wash over with egg and dip in sugar. Egg crackers. Six eggs, twelve tablespoons sweet milk, six tablespoons butter, half a teaspoon soda. Mould with flour and roll out thin. Graham mush. Sift Graham meal slowly into boiling water, salted; stir briskly until as thick as you can stir with one hand. Eat with milk or cream, or sugar and butter. Oat meal mush. To two quarts boiling water, well salted, add one and a half cup best oat meal; stir the meal in by degrees, and after stirring up a few minutes to prevent it from settling down in a mass at the bottom, leave it to cool three hours without stirring. (All mushes of this kind should be cooked in a custard kettle). This mush is especially recommended as a breakfast dish, and it is very excellent for children who need muscle-producing food. Waffles. Take one quart flour, two tablespoons good baking powder, one spoon salt, and one spoon sugar, all well mixed. Add a tablespoouful of butter, two eggs and a pint and a half sweet milk. Cook in waffle-irons well heated and greased. Another way. One pint flour, one pint sweet milk, three eggs well beaten, a piece of butter the size of an egg or larger, a little salt, one heaping teaspoon cream tartar, half a teaspoon soda. Melt the butter and stir in flour, milk and eggs. A third way. One quart flour, one teaspoon salt, a tablespoon melted butter and milk to make a batter. Mix and add two beaten eggs, two teaspoons tartaric acid, and one of soda. Stir well and bake. Buckwheat cakes. Use buckwheat of the very best kind, free from grit and aduleration with rye and corn. Warm one pint milk and one pint water. Put half of this into a stone crock, add five tea - spoons buckwheat flour. Stir and beat well; add the rest of the milk and water, and lastly a cup of yeast. Buckwheat cakes. (Without yeast. ) Two cups buckwheat flour, one of wheat flour, a little salt, three teaspoons baking powder; mix thoroughly, and add equal parts of milk and water until the batter is thick enough. If they do not brown well, then add a little molasses to the batter. French pancakes. Beat together until smooth, six eggs and a half pound of flour, melt four ounces butter, and add that to the batter with one ounce sugar and a half pint milk; beat until smooth. Put a tablespoonful at a time into the fryingpan, slightly greased, spreading the batter even by tipping the pan about. Pancakes. (Another way.) Put in an earthen pan four whole eggs, a pinch of salt, one of sugar, three spoons of flour; beat with one quart of milk. The preparation must be very light. Bake the pancakes in a frying pan, very thickly spread with butter, turn them upside down on the table, put some currant or other jelly on one side; roll them; put them on a plate; powder them with sugar. ANDRA AFDELNINGEN. Part Two. MEAT DISHES. Remarks. If you desire to obtain very nice and palatable dishes you will, of course, be particular in the selection of meats to be used. Meat from old, lean animals has a coarse, skinny fat, while the lean part (the meat itself) has a dark red color. To test the meat, press the finger into it. If the pressed part immediately swells up again, then it is fresh and good, but if the hole made swells out slowly, you can take for granted that the meat is old and bad. For steaks, sirloin or por-terhouse should be used, round steak being tough. The rule to prepare a roast is to fry it as many quarters of an hour as it weighs pounds, and 15 minutes extra. For instance, if a roast weighs 3 pounds, then fry it 45 minutes plus 15 or an hour altogether. But if the meat should be inferior, you may have to fry it a little while longer in order to get it properly done. Roast beef med potatis. An illustration of a roast beef surrounded by potatoe halves. Roast beef. Take a chunk of meat (according to pleasure as regards size). Beat it thoroughly all over; lay it in the roasting pan and baste with melted butter; put it in a well heated oven, and while roasting baste it frequently by its own drippings, which will make it brown and tender. If growing to brown through fast roasting, turn a glass of cooking wine into the bottom of the pan, and repeat that as often aa the gravy cooks away. Season with salt and pepper. You may also squeeze a little lemon juice over it. Beef steak with onions. Slice the onions thin and drop into cold water. Put a steak into the pan with a little suet. Skim out the onions and add them to the steak, season with pepper and salt, cover tightly and put over the fire. When the juice of the onions has dried up and the steak has browned on one side, remove the onions, turn the steak, replace the onions, and fry till done. Beef steak broiled. Lay a thick tender steak upon a gridiron, well greased with butter or suet over hot coals. When done on one side have ready a warmed platter with a little butter on it; lay the steak, without pressing it, cooked side down, so that the juices which have gathered may run on the platter, then quickly place it upon the gridiron again and cook the other side. When done place upon the platter again, spread lightly with butter, season with salt and pepper, and keep warm for a few moments over steam, but not long enough for the butter to become oily. Serve on hot plates. Garnish with sprigs of parsley, fried potato or browned potato balls, placed around the platter. Meat stew. Heat milk and water (about half each) and thicken with a beaten egg and a little flour. When nicely boiled, add the beef, either chipped or sliced as desired, and almost immediately remove from the fire, as the less it is cooked, the better. If the beef is very salt, soak it in warm water before boiling. Fricasse of beef. Cut the beef into thin slices, take som fine cut parsley, cut a small onion in four quarters, and put all together in a stew pan with a small piece of butter and some strong soup stock; Season with salt and pepper; let it simmer 15 minutes; then mix in the yolks of two eggs and a teaspoon Worcestershire sauce. Hamburger steak. Mince, but not too fine, some round steak, and mix with it an onion chopped fine, a little cayenne, black pepper and salt. (Some add a little currie powder, or part of a red pepper pod, if desired hot.) When well mixed, fry in a little lard or clear drippings; when well done dish on a small platter, and set in the oven long enough to brown over the top. Garnish with sprigs of celery top. Beef a la mode. An illustration of a rump with various vegetables. Beef a la mode. Into a piece of the rump, cut deep openings with a sharp knife; put in pieces of pork cut into dice and previously rolled in pepper, salt, cloves and nutmeg. In an iron stewpan lay pieces of pork, sliced lemon, sliced onions, one or two carrots, and a bay-leaf; lay the meat on and put over it a piece of bread -crust as large as the hand; pour over all a half-pint wine and a little vinegar, and afterward an equal quantity of water or rich broth, until the meat is half covered; cover the dish tightly and cook until tender; take out, rub the gravy through a sieve, skim off all fat, add some sour cream, and then return to the stewpan to cook ten minutes. If desired, the meat may be prepared some days before in a spiced vinegar or wine pickle. Meat balls. Cut thin slices from the leg of an ox, and be careful that you get the tender portion. Pound the meat well with a woodon club. Scrape away all cords and sinews; chop it very fine. Add to three pounds of meat one pound of good lard or butter, four eggs, four good rusks softened in sweet milk, a little finely chopped onion and salt and pepper to suit. This you work until it becomes consistent, then dilute it with sweet milk to make it sufficiently thin. Then you form balls in size to suit. Strew them with grated bread and fry in butter until brown. Serve with any kind of greens and also potatoes . Stewed beef. An illustration of a plate of stewed beef. Stewed beef. Mince some cold and rare roast beef including the fat; put in a small stew pan, rubbed with a clove of garlic, a little water, half a small onion, pepper and salt, and boil it until the onion is quite soft; then add the minced beef with some of its gravy and stew gently, but do not let it boil. Prepare toasted bread cut in small pieces and lay around the edge of a small dish; add a little vinegar to the stew and pour over it. Ragout of beef. Cut one or two slices of salt pork into dice, and fry until brown; pour in a little stock or water, in which cook three or four potatoes cut in slices, a sprig of parsley, thyme, and a small bay-leaf, pepper and salt. Half an hour before serving, put in slices of cold roast beef, adding a dash af vinegar if you like. Calfs head. An illustration of a calf's forward half. Stewed calfs head. Scald a calfs head, cut it in two, clean well and let it boil until it gets soft. Remove and separate all bones and other matter that cannot be used and cut the meat in slices. Put a pan on the fire with water in which stir a handful flour and an egg. Pour on it the bouillon made by boiling the head. When the gravy is done you put the meat in it together with some salt, pepper and sherry wine to give it an agreeable flavor. Veal steak. An illustration of a plate of veal steak. Veal steak. Cut some slices from a thick calfs leg. Pound them well and strew some salt and pepper over them. Melt a little butter in a frying pan over a hot fire, put the veal in the pan and let heat through quickly on both sides. Then place the veal with the butter in another pan, and when all the slices are done in this way, pour the butter back in the pan together with a pinch of flour. A spoon strong beef tea and a few drops soy are added thereto; beat and pour over the veal on a warm dish. It is served with eggs or greens. Veal cutlets. When they are cut so that one bone remains with each the meat is made into a round shape and chopped across with the dull side of the knife; then they are sprinkled with salt and pepper. In this state they can be kept two days. When to be used dip them in melted butter, roll in bread crumbs, mixed with chopped parsley, and fry in cast iron pan. Serve with vegetables. Glazed cutlets. These are prepared as the next preceeding and are fried on a hot copper plate or cast iron pan with very strong heat and but a few moments before serving. When taken from the frying pan they are dipped in warm meat juice and placed in a wreath around the plate with mushrooms or greens. MUTTON AND LAMB. Remarks. Mutton should always be quite fat. The fat should be clean, hard and white. If it is yellow the meat is old and should not be used. The lean part of a fat sheep is soft and tender, with a dark red color. The longer the meat is allowed to hang before cooking the more tender it gets. Mutton can be preserved by washing daily with vinegar. During summer flies are kept away from the meat by rubbing pepper and ginger into it. For a roast select from the shoulder or thigh, for cooking take the shanks or for stew the breast. Roast mutton. An illustration of a large roast mutton. Mutton with rice. Mince into dice, pieces of cold mutton, add one cup of cold boiled rice to each cup of meat; butter a sauce pan well, pour in a little water, add the mutton and rice, and stir until hot. Then pour in two eggs, slightly beaten and stir until cooked. Sprinkle with pepper and salt. Mutton and rice. An illustration of mutton and rice. Boiled mutton. Into a large pot of boiling water put a handful salt. Select a leg of mutton, with the fat clear and white; wash it and rub salt into every part. If desired rare, cook two hours; if well done three hours or more. Make sauce by a pint of hot milk thickened with flour; add butter, salt, pepper and two teaspoons capers, serve on hot plates. Lamb feet with yellow sauce. Scald the feet and put them in water a few hours. Boil them with salt, onion and pepper, when soft take them up. Pick away the large bones and cut the feet in two parts, make sauce of melted butter and flour, thinned with the water wherein the feet have boiled. Beat two eggs with two tablespoonsful of vinegar and a little salt, which all add to the sauce. Mutton frikasse. Break the breast or loin of a lamb, clean and boil in a little water. When the meat seems to be cooked, take it up and cut in small pieces. Then make a sauce of butter and flour fried together, to which add some of the bouillon from the meat. Add further some sugar, salt and the grated rind of a lemon; squeeze the juice of the lemon into the sauce also; add mushrooms frizelled in butter and lastly the meat When brought to boiling, beat three yolks of eggs and a tablespoon cream, but see that it does not boil, as it then is apt to curdle. Garnish the fricasse with roasted bread or pastry. Mutton chops. An illustration of a plate with one dozen mutton chops. Mutton chops. Roll them in salt and pepper, put in a frying pan; cover them and fry five minutes, turning but once. Then dip in a well beaten egg, and then in cracker or bread crumbs. Fry until brown on both sides. Broiled lambs head. A well scalded lambs head is cut in two and placed in water over night, so that all the blood is drawn out. Boil in salted water until the meat feels tender. Take up the meat and remove all the bones, all the white skin, as well as the ears, and everything that cannot be used, you also remove. Put the good parts in a large plate, salt and pepper; when cool, dip them in beaten eggs and roll them in bread crumbs. Then fry them brown in butter or lard. Mutton and potato pie. Mince cold mutton with a very little onion, salt and pepper, and put in gravy enough to make it quite moist: also a few capers. Put it into a buttered pudding-dish, spread the top with mashed potato, and set in the oven. When very hot, rub a piece of butter over the top, and brown in the oven. PORK. Remarks .-Be very particular in the selection of pork. Both the fat part and the lean one, ought to be very white, and the rind smooth and cold to the touch. Pork chops. Pork chops are usually fried, but if broiled, trim off most of the fat, and the meat for three inches from the small end, neatly; cook them thoroughly through, turning frequently; put on a hot platter; salt, pepper, and if most of the fat has been removed, butter them. Garnish the platter with sprigs of parsley around the edge. Pork. An illustration of various pork products. Roasted ribs. After trimming off the rough ends crack the ribs through the middle, rub with salt and pepper, fold over where cracked, and stuff with three teaspoons of bread crumbs, chopped onions and a little sage. Sew up tightly, put in the dripping-pan with a pint of water, baste frequently, turning once, so as to bake both sides evenly, until a rich brown. Boiled ham. Remarks :-The best ham always has a thin skin, the fatty part being firm; a small short bone, thinning out toward the end. The weight should be from eight to fifteen pounds. Test by running a knife along the lean part close to the bone, if the knife remains clean the ham is good, if greasy it is unsound or tainted. Take a ham, say of ten to twelve pounds, pour boiling water over it, and let it cool enough to wash and scrape it clean; put it in a perfectly clean boiler, with cold water to cover it; bring it to the boiling point, then place it on the back part of the stove or range to simmer steadily six or seven hours, or until it is tender, when test it with a fork. Be careful to keep the water at low boiling point, and do not allow it to get much above it. If not suspended in the pot, (the better way,) the ham should be turned once or twice in the water. When done, place in a large pan to skin; dip the hands in cold water, take the skin between finger and thumb, and pull downward from the knuckle. Set it in a moderate oven, placing the lean side downward; and if you wish it breaded, sift over it powdered crackers, and take one hour. Baking brings out a great quantity of fat, leaving the meat more delicate, and the ham will keep much longer in warm weather. Ham a l'Anglaise. Soak the ham, boil it in water, but not fully, leaving it a trifle rare. Then let it cool. Pull off the rind and cover the whole ham with bread crumbs, and then make a covering of beaten eggs. Thus prepared, put the ham in a pan and place it in the oven, where let it become almost brown. Then take it out and make a small but deep hole in the meat, fill with a glass of madeira wine, and let it remain in the oven 2 1/2 hours. Wrap a paper around the leg and serve the ham with sauce made of meat juice and madeira wine. Broiled ham. Cut the ham in slices of medium thickness, place on a hot gridiron, and broil until the fat readily flows out and the meat is slightly browned; take it from the gridiron with a knife and fork, and drop into a pan of cold water, then return again to the gridiron; repeat several times, and the ham is done. Place on a hot platter, spread it with sufficient butter, and serve quickly. If the ham is too fat, trim off a part. It is very difficult to broil ham without burning the fat, but this does not impair the flavor. Slices of salt-pork or bacon may also be cooked in same way. Pork chops, Swedish way. These chops are taken from the side of the back of the pig. Cut them in size according to desire, one bone for each chop. Pound them and put salt and pepper on both sides. Leave them thus an hour. Fry in a pan or on gridiron. Serve with browned cabbage or macaroni. Poultry and Game. An illustration of three birds. TREDJE AFDELININGEN. Part Three. POULTRY AND GAME. Fried chickens. Split them lengthwise, soak half an hour in cold water, wipe perfectly dry, and put in a dripping pan, bone side down, without any water. If the oven is hot and the chickens young, they should be done in half an hour. Take out and season with salt, pepper and some butter, let them then boil in a pan of water, wherein they lie placed close on top of each other. Baked chickens with parsnips. Wash, scrape and quarter a few parsnips; parboil for twenty minutes; prepare a young chicken by splitting open at back; place in a dripping pan, the skin side up, lay parsnips around the chicken, sprinkle with salt and pepper and add an egg -sized lump of butter, or two or three nice pieces of pickled pork; put enough water in the pan to prevent burning, place in oven and bake until both the chickens and parsnips are done a delicate brown. Serve the chicken separately on a platter, pouring the gravy in the pan over the parsnips. Fried Chicken. An illustration of a bound and fried chicken. Fricasseed chickens. When the chickens are all cleaned and prepared, let them boil a little in salted water. Skim well and put in a little ginger, a few roots of parsley and also some pepper. Put some butter and flour on the fire, to be beaten together with the chicken bouillon, into which squeeze some juice of lemon. Beat two yolks of egg with sweet cream and add that to the other, cut the chickens in nice pieces and put them in the sauce. Shake well but do not boil. Chicken Fricassee. An illustratio nof fricasseed chicken parts. In another way. Cut up and put on to boil, skin side down, in a small quantity of water; season with pepper and salt, also slices of onion if liked; stew gently until tender; remove the chicken, and add half a pint of milk or cream to the gravy; thicken with butter and flour rubbed smoothly together in a little of the gravy; let it boil a few minutes; add a little chopped parsley, and serve. A few slices of clear white celery from the bottom of the stalk may be added, if that flavor is liked. Parsley chicken. When the chickens have been picked and washed, cut them in four or more parts, according to their size; then put them in a well tinned kettle, (which cover closely,) together with butter, parsley, a pinch of salt, some white pepper, and a spoonful flour or bread crumbs. These things are to be laid in layers alternately with the chickens. Over it all pour a pint chicken or veal bouillon, and boil until the chickens feel tender. Then take out. Stir the sauce over the fire; if too thin, add two yolks of eggs. Finally pour the sauce over the chicken and garnish with slices of bread cut in triangular form and fried in butter. Parsley Chicken. An illustration of a plate of Parsley Chicken. Chicken with champignons. Take some fullgrown chickens, cut them and fry them slightly over a brisk fire in butter and champignons, pepper and salt. See that they are a little brown on all sides. Add flour and bouillon, making a pretty thick sauce. When they have fried a few minutes, put up the chickens on a warm platter. The sauce is finished with yolks of eggs, also pour in it a few drops of lemon essence, and then pour the sauce and the champignons over the chickens. Chickens with onions. Cut a chicken in pieces and put in a kettle, (but preserve the blood in a vessel,) boil with pepper and salt : Let it brown lightly. Sprinkle with flour and stir a few minutes. Add a quart bouillon and a pint of red wine. Force 13 ounces Spanish onions through a sieve; add that with spices. Thirty minutes later add 15 small champignons, browned in butter, and a little lemon juice. Thicken the sauce with the blood set aside fur this purpose, and pour the, sauce over the chicken. Chicken pie. Cut up two young chickens, and place in hot water enough to cover them, and as the water boils out add more, so as to have enough for the pie, and also for gravy to serve with it; boil until tender; line the sides of a four or six-quart pan with a rich baking powder or soda-biscuit dough a quarter inch thick, put in part of the chicken, season with salt, pepper and butter, lay on a few thin strips or squares of dough, add the rest of the chicken and season as before; five or six fresh, eggs beaten, or a few new potatoes in their season, may be also added; Take the liquor in which the chicken was boiled, with butter, salt and pepper, add part of it to the pie, and cover with the crust rolled a quarter inch thick, with a hole in the center the size of a tea-cup. Keep adding the broth as needed, and plentiful, as there cannot be too much of the gravy. Bake about an hour in a moderate oven. If the flavor of celery is liked, a few inside layers or slices of the bottom of the stalk may be put in with the strips of dough. In that case, garnish the top of the pie with small, bright celery leaves, neatly arranged in a circle. Goose a la daube. When the goose is cleaned, break the wings, the neck and the upper part of the legs; put all of the fowl ( heart, liver, etc.) in fresh water to remain for six hours; also in the same water, four scalded calfs feet. Then put all on the fire to boil with a little salt. Skim when boiling. Then add a piece of ginger, a few bay leaves, some cloves and roots of parsley; also French wine and vinegar. Boil until the goose seems tender; then take it up and let it cool, but let the calfs feet and the other parts of the fowl boil until they fall to pieces and the water becomes thick enough for the daube. Take up and strain it and let it cool; then skim off the fat. Garnish the daube with bay leaves, red beets and hard boiled eggs. Goose liver fried. The goose liver is cut in slices which sprinkle with flour and salt, whereupon dip them in beaten eggs, roll them in crumbs of bread, fry butter and serve. Goose with turnips. Pick the goose, take out the insides and wash it well. Boil it whole in water or some bouillon. Meanwhile brown some turnips in butter. Then melt a little butter together with some flour, to which add a part of the bouillon or water wherein the goose has boiled. Color the sauce with some Worcester sauce. Put the goose in a deep dish, garnish it with the turnips, pour the sauce over it and serve. Goose with horse radish. An illustration of a goose with horse radish. Goose with, horse radish. Take a goose, pass it over a hot fire, scald it, free it from the inside, boil it in enough water to cover it in the kettle. Take up and salt it. Strain the gravy and boil it with some ignited bread, sugar and two tablespoons horse radish; thicken with three yolks of egg and some cream. Serve whole or cut in slices with the sauce in the platter or in separate dish. Baked duck. Take a duck, pick it, remove the inside, clean well, and cut off head and feet. Put some butter on the fire to melt, put the duck into it with some salt, While frying, see to that it does not fry too hard, only enough to make the meat tender, which you easily find when the legs loosen from the side Take up when done, and then prepare the sauce with little flour and bouillon, from which the fat is skimmed. If the sauce is not brown enough, add some meat juice and strain. Serve with some salad if desired. Duck with olives. Take a young duck and treat as above. When the sauce is ready, add some cleaned and chopped olives. The sauce must not boil, only simmer a while. Cut the duck in pieces and put on the dish with peeled olives around the edges. Skim the fat from the sauce and boil it well. Turkey stuffed in French manner. Remove from turkey wighing fron seven to eight pounds all the inside matter; then dry it with a clean towel, but use no hot water. Take five pounds of meat from a young steer calf, scrape away all cords and chop it. Mix the minced meat with half a pound of kidney lard. half a pound of ox marrow and a portion of stuffing. Work this for a while until it becomes fine and smooth; then add three eggs, salt and pepper to suit, also a wine glass of French brandy. Mix well again and fill with it that part of the turkey where it had the crop, but on the uppermost part below the skin, put in slices of dressing. The stomach is filled in the same manner. Next sew the turkey together and line it with large slices of pork. The turkey ought to lie filled in this way three or four days in order to get tbe taste of the stuffing in the meat. Roast it but slightly and put it whole on the table. Remember that the stuffing swells. Hence do not fill to much. Roast turkey in English way. Kill several days before cooking, and let it, hang by the leys until used. Prepare in the usual manner; stuff with bread crumbs-rejecting the crust rubbed fine, moistened with butter and two eggs, and seasoned with salt, pepper, parsley, sage and sweet marjoram; sew up truss and place to roast in a rack within the dripping-pan; spread with bits of butter, turn it and baste it frequently with butter, pepper, salt and water a few minutes before it is done glaze over with the white of an egg; take up the turkey, pour off most of the fat, add the chopped giblets and and the water in which they were boiled, which thicken with flour and butter rubbed together: stir all in the dripping pan, let it boil well, and serve in a gravy Roast Turkey in English way. An illustration of a turkey roasted the English way. dish. Serve with celery-sauce and stewed gooseberries or cranberries. Garnish with fried oysters. Select a turkey of eight to ten pounds. If in roasting it is likely to brown to much, cover with a white paper, buttered. Roast turkey, in American way. An illustration of a turkey roasted the American way. Roast turkey in American way. Dress and rub the turkey well, inside and out, with salt and pepper; truss or twine it; put in a steamer and steam two hours, or until it begins to grow tender, lifting the cover occasionally and sprinkling lightly with salt; then take out, loosen the legs, and rub the inside again with salt and pepper. Make the stuffing as follows: Take a loaf of stale bread take off the crust and soften it in a pan of boiling water; drain off immediately and cover closely; crumble the soft part of the bread very fine, and add a half pound melted butter, or more if to be very rich, and a teaspoon each of salt and pepper. Drain off the liquor from a quart of nice oysters, bring to a boil, skim and pour over the bread crumbs, adding the soaked crust and one or two eggs; mix thoroughly with the hands, and if too dry, moisten with a little milk; lastly, add the oysters, being careful not to break them; or first put in a spoonful of stuffing and then three or four oysters, and so on until the turkey is filled, stuffing the breast first. Flour a small cloth and place over the openings, tying down with twine; spread the turkey all over with butter, salt and pepper; place in a dripping-pan in a well heated oven; add a half pint water and roast two hours, basting often with a little water, butter salt and pepper, kept warm a tin placed on the bark the stove. A swab is better than a spoon to baste with. Turn until nicely browned on all sides, and about half an hour before it is done, baste with butter alone and dredge with a little flour, which will give the turkey a frothy appearance. When the turkey is dished, if there is much fat in the pan, pour off most of it and add the giblets, together with the water in which they have previously been cooked until tender, now stewed down to about a pint; place one or two tablespoons flour (half of it browned flour ) in a pint bowl, mix smooth in a little cream or milk, and add to the gravy in the pan; boil several minutes, constantly stirring and pour into a gravy tureen. Serve with currant or apple jelly. Doves a l'Anglaise. Prepare four doves, put them in a kettle, cover them with pork slices, dilute with strong bouillon of chicken, cover them with buttered paper, put the lid on and boil until they become tender. Fry a piece of wheat bread, which ought to be three inches high, two inches wide below and one inch at the top. Prepare cauliflower, carrots and Turkish beans , as if for garnishing. Drain the doves, place the bread in the middle of the platter and arrange the doves on end around the bread, and fill the spaces between with the vegetables; put a crustad on top of the bread pyramid and fill it with Turkish beans , pour Bechamel sauce on the doves, and serve An illustration of a small roast bird. Roast pigeons. Clean and stuff the pigeons in the same manner as chickens; leave the feet on, dip them into scalding water, strip off the skin, cross them and tie them together below the breast-bone or cut them off; the head may remain on; if so dip it in scalding water and pick it clean twist the wings back, put the liver between the right wing and the body and turn the head under the other; rub the outside of each bird with a mixture of pepper and salt; spit them and put some water in the dripping pan; for each bird add a bit of butter the size of a small egg, put them before a hot fire and let them roast quickly, basting frequently; in about half an hour they will be done; when nearly done, dredge them with wheat flour and baste with the butter in the pan; turn them, that they may be nicely and easily browned; when done take them up, set the pan over the fire, make a thin batter of a teaspoonful of wheat flour and cold water; when the gravy is hot stir it in, continue to stir it for a few minutes until it is brown, then run it through a gravy sieve into a tureen and serve with the pigeons. Roast pigeon. An illustration od=f a roast pigeon. Pigeons on the spit. The breast skin, especially on young pigeons, should be removed, the pigeons rubbed with fine salt and tied around with slices of pork, as shown on cut, whereupon they should be put on the spit to roast for about five minutes before brisk fire. Put them on a warm plate and pour melted butter over them. Remove string but not the pork. Slice the pigeons in two lengthwise To the butter in the plate add a little Worcestershire sauce. Serve with greens. Pigeons on the spit. An illustration of three pigeons on a spit. FJERDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Four. FISH AND OYSTERS. Remarks. When the fish is fresh and good the eyes are al-ways full, protruding and clear, while the fins are of a clear red, the body stiff, and the smell not disagreeable. Salmon in order to be palatable, ought especially to he fresh. Mackerel that is not perfectly fresh, is of no use. All large fish are generally boiled, medium size fish are boiled or broiled, while small fish are best fried, very large fish are cut in slices for boiling or baking in the oven. Fish is less nutritious than meat, excepting salmon. White fish is the least nutritious, fat fish the hardest to digest. All fish ought to be well cooked and served warm. Pike with horse radish. Select a good sized pike, scale and rinse, but take care not to cut the gall; divide in pieces and boil in a pan with salt, pepper and a few bay leaves. The fish is done when the fins fall off. Serve with melted butter and grated horse radish. Eel and Pike. An illustration of two pike and an eel. Pike with parsley. Select a pike weighing more than three or four pounds as fish of larger size are as good. Scale, split and bone. If the pike is smaller, cut instead of splitting. Cook in a pan buttered with cold butter. Sprinkle some flour on the fish, no more than to thicken the surface a little. Add parsley finely chopped, a few slices of lemon, which are removed before serving. Shake the pan often while cooking. Baked pike. Spilt and take away all bones; cut the pike in pieces and salt. Let them stand an hour. Then dry in a towel. Beat three eggs in as much milk, put the fish pieces into it and next roll them in grated bread mixed with flour, whereupon it is ready for frying. Salmon a la Chambord. Prepare the salmon as for common cooking. Let the water run off; then remove the skin carefully. Dry the salmon and make it glossy with fish jelly. Next put on it four pike fillets or such of trout, which fasten with some fish meat and cover with buttered paper. Now place it in the oven until the fillets are ready, when you remove the papers and put the salmon up on a short pillar of rice where you garnish it with five slices of crab meat, fish meat and champignons. Now make it ragout of fish, carp milt meat, champignons and spanish sauce; pour in the platter and hide the rice with small groups of carp milt, small meat balls and crabs. American eel. Flay the eel, cut it in two lengthwise; remove the back bone and boil the eel in white wine, salt, pepper, some onion and a little parsley. Then put it under a light pressure; cut it in nice slices, dip these in melted butter and broil them. Serve the eel with thick boiled Spanish sauce with pepper. Stewed turbot with oysters. Clean the, turbot and put it in a pan or kettle with some salt and pepper and let boil. Meanwhile boil some oysters. But boil the oyster water separately 15 minutes for the sauce. Put some fresh butter and flour in a pan and beat together with the oyster water and a little of the water which the fish has boiled. Now put the smallest oysters in the sauce, and garnish the fish with the largest when serving. The sauce should be flavored with lemon juice. Fried smelts. Clean, rince and ,remove the bladder. Then dip in beaten eggs, to which has been added some salt. Next roll it in grated bread and fry in lard or butter. Serve with parsley and lemon slices. Stewed crab tails. Select big crabs, boil and take out the clean meat. Melt a tablespoon butter with a handful flour and, while heating, dilute with sweet cream until a sauce, not too thick, is obtained; to this add 2 or 3 tablespoons cream beaten with 3 yolks of eggs and also a little sugar and nutmeg. Now put the crab meat in and shake the pan well, boil over a low fire. Serve with small three cornered bits of pastry. Black bass with oyster sauce. Prepare the fish in the usual way and boil 10 or 12 minutes in strong bouillon. Take it up and let the bouillon run off, then serve with oyster sauce. Fillet a l'Orly. Make fillets of fish about 4 inches long and put them on a platter; cover them now with lemon juice, water, salt, pepper, sliced onion and parsley. After an hour take up and place on a linen cloth for the water to run off; then dip in so called Beignet dough and fry in lard. When the fillets are brown, take them up and put them on paper and then on a napkin, placed over a platter. Serve with fried parsley. Boiled perch. When the fish are scaled and cleaned from all the inside, boil in water with salt and a little parsley. Serve with boiled potatoes and parsley sauce or butter sauce. Codfish balls. Soak codfish, cut in small pieces, about an hour, in luke-warm water; remove the skin and bones; put in cold water and place on stove; when it boils change the water and let it boil again. Have ready some boiled potatoes , smashed and seasoned with butter. While both are hot, put half the codfish with the potatoes ; mix in a well beaten egg and mould into round balls or thick cakes; then fry them in hot lard or drippings, or drop them, like doughnuts, in fat, hot enough to float and skim out. By reheating them, cold potatoes may be used, in which case add a little cream, or milk and butter, and mix while hot. Stewed codfish. Pound the fish and soak 36 hours; take up, remove the bones and pick it to pieces, boil until tender. Melt in a pan a piece of butter together with a handful flour and add milk enough to make a somewhat thick sauce. Boil it and put the fish into it. Potatoes or cut carrots might be added. Season with pepper and salt. Whitling, English way. Prepare the fish by cleaning and washing; dip it in egg and grated bread, and then fry until lightly brown. Now let it get cold. Meanwhile make a sauce, place some butter in a pan with some flour and beat together with bouillon in which you have previously boiled two onions, two carrots and some greens. When the sauce is ready, add to it a pint of curry. Now put the fish in the sauce and let it boil, but only a minute. Dish it up on platter and strain the sauce over the fish. Whitling, English way. An oblong bowl filled with whitling and decorated with lemon. Broiled salt white fish. Freshen over night in sufficient buttermilk or sweet milk (skimmed milk will answer) to cover, placing it flesh side down. Serve with a gravy of hot cream, to which is added a half spoon of butter; salt to taste. Oysters in the shell. Open the shells, keeping the deeper ones for use; melt some butter, season with minced parsley and pepper; when slightly cooled, roll each oyster in it, using care that it drips but little, and lay it in a shell; add to each a little lemon juice, cover with bread crumbs, place in a baking pan, and bake in a quick. Just before they are done, add a little salt. Serve in the shells. Raw oysters on half shell. The finest for eating raw, are those known as Shrewsbury, Blue Points or Cherry Stones--the names of the beds from which they are taken. Wash the shells, open them, and detach the upper or deep shell; loosen from the under shell by cutting the muscle clear--some term it the heart; serve 6 or 9 too plate, with a quarter of a lemon --to squeeze over them--in the center. Serve finely shaved white cabbage with them. Broiled oysters. Select large ones, clean the shells, and open, saving the juice; put the oysters in boiling water a few minutes; take out and place each in a deep shell, with some juice; place on a gridiron over a brisk fire, and when they begin to simmer season with butter, salt and pepper and a drop of lemon juice if desired. Serve on the half shell, with celery as a relish. Grilled oysters with pork. On a small wire, bent in shape of a hairpin, string alternately, first a large oyster, then a small slice of salt pork; until the wire is full; fasten the ends into a long wooden handle, and hold before the fire until all are well browned. Serve with or without the pork, as preferred, seasoned with pepper. Broiled oysters in shell. Wash the shells very clean, put in a small wire basket, suspend in a kettle of boiling water, and when the shells open lift the basket, remove the upper shell, and serve on a hot platter unseasoned. Fricasseed oysters. Take a slice of raw ham which has been pickled, but not smoked, and soak it in boiling water for half an hour; cut it in quite small pieces and place it in a sauce pan with two thirds of a pint of veal or chicken broth, well strained, the liquor from a quart of oysters, one small onion minced fine, and a little chopped parsley and pepper. Let all simmer for 20 minutes and then boil rapidly 3 minutes. Skim well and add one scant tablespoon corn starch mixed in a cup of milk. Stir constantly, and when it boils, add the oysters and one ounce butter, after which let it come to a boil and remove the oysters to a deep dish. Beat one egg and add to it gradually some of the hot broth and when cooked, stir it into the pan. Season with salt, and pour the whole over the oysters. When placed upon the table squeeze the juice of a lemon over it. Fried oysters. Take large oysters from their liquor on to a thickly folded napkin to dry them off; then make a tablespoonful of lard or beef fat hot, in a thick bottomed frying-pan, add to it half a saltspoonful of salt; dip each oyster in wheat flour, or cracker rolled fine, until it will take up no more, then lay them in the pan, hold it over a gentle fire until one side is a delicate brown; turn the other by sliding a fork under it; they will fry in five minutes. Oysters may be fried in butter but it is not so good, lard and butter in equal parts being best. Oysters, to be fried, after dipping as directed, may be dipped into beaten egg first, then into rolled cracker. Scalloped oysters. Two tablespoonfuls of beef substance, two tablespoonfuls of cream; pepper and salt to taste; bread or cracker crumbs, and oiled butter. Scald the oysters in their own liquor, and boil. Put in the oysters and seasoning; let them gradually heat through, but do not boil. Put the bread or cracker crumbs and oysters in alternate layers in a baking dish, whereupon brown in oven. Serve very hot. Pyramid of crabs. Crabs arranged in pyramid and are served in a deep bowl and decorated with vegetable around the bowl. CRABS AND LOBSTERS. Remarks: Lobsters are good the year round, but are preferable between March and October. The meat of the male is the most solid, but the female is generally preferred on account of the eggs, which are used for sauce and garnishing. Contrary to general belief all the parts of a lobster are good and nutritious, with the exception of the stomach, which is situated at the back of the head and a bluish vein which extends from the head to the tail. These parts should therefore be excluded after cooking. The liver, which is often rejected on account of its green color after cooking, is the best part of the lobster. Small lobsters are to be preferred. If lobsters are purchased ready cooked, their soundness are proved by drawing the tail outwards slowly. If the tail returns to its former position in the same manner as a spring, the lobster was alive when put to boil, otherwise it was lifeless and should not be used. Stewed lobster. Take the meat from the lobster. The shell and the eggs you pound with some butter and put over the fire, adding water. Boil 30 minutes. Skim away the red lobster fat, strain and heat with flour added and also some sweet cream, While the sauce is boiling add powdered sugar and nutmeg to suit. Now put in the lobster and stir. Boiled lobster. Put the lobster in cold water and let it gradually rise to boiling. A medium sized lobster requires 30 minutes boiling, a large one perhaps an hour. After boiling split the lobster and remove stomach and vein. Steamed lobsters. Many persons think the lobster quite superior when steamed instead of boiled, the meat then being dryer and finer. Place them in a steamer or fish -kettle, the boiling water below, not high enough to reach the fish, and steam 20 or 30 minutes or until it turns bright red. Take out and dress as if water boiled. Lobster croquettes. Take any lobster remaining from table and pound it until the dark, light meat and coral are well mixed; put with it not quite as much bread crumbs; season with pepper, salt and a very little cayenne pepper add a little melted butter, about two tablespoons, if the bread is rather dry: form into egg -shaped or round balls; roll them in egg, then in fine crumbs, and fry in, boiling lard. In another way. Take lobster meat which is not too salty and cut it in small dice shaped pieces. If you desire to increase the quantity without adding more lobster, you can add some fish meat, similarly prepared, but do not take more than half as much of the latter. Mix both substances well and proceed as in the above description. In another way. Make a sort at butter of the lobster shells by grinding them. Put them in a pan with flour, and when it simmers, add some sweet cream, which beat until it becomes thick as mush. Then add some sugar and nutmeg; put in the lobster meat shake a while and let it cool. Now make balls and roll in grated bread and beaten eggs. Boil in butter. Crabs a la daube. Use small round cake forms, on the bottoms of these put some deers horn salt, on top of this place a poached egg and around that crab tails. But instead of eggs you can use oysters, forming a crescent or circle. When ready to be finished, place them hastily in hot water, dry them and put up in a platter, with an egg or lemon be-tween each daube. Stewed crab tails with white sauce. Boil the crabs and take out the meat. Put a spoonful butter and a handful flour in a pan and dilute with cream while beating. Then add 3 yolks of eggs and as much sweet cream, a little sugar and nutmeg. Put the crab tails into this and heat it up without boiling. Garnish with pastry. Crab tails with oil and vinegar. Boil the crabs quickly without salt. Take out the meat as whole as possible and remove the vein from the tail. Make a sauce of hard boiled yolks of egg, mashed, two tablespoons cream, two tablespoons olive oil, vinegar, mustard, cayenne pepper and sugar to suit. Put the crab meat in this, but do not boil. Serve with poached eggs. Fried crabs. Prepare the crabs by cutting off one fourth of an inch of the front part of the mouth, and scrape off both sides under the shell, afer which rince in cold water. Fry in butter or lard until a little crisp. Some prefer them breaded the same as oysters. Serve on toast with butter sauce. Garnish with a few sprigs of parsley and slices of onion. Dumplings for soup. Illustration of dumplings in different shapes. FEMTE AFDELNINGEN. Part Five. SALADS AND DRESSINGS. Remarks: Salads are of so many different kinds that they constitute not only agreeable middle dishes at a dinner, but make very often a sufficient meal in themselves. It is of great importance that all the vegetables that enter into a salad are perfectly fresh, all meats well cooked, and all vinegar or other fluids used should be of the best quality. Oil used should be the best French or Italian olive oil. Celery. To crisp celery let it lie in ice water two hours before serving. To fringe the stalks, stick several coarse needles into a big cork and draw the stalk half way from the top through the needles several times, and lay them in the refrigerator to curl or crisp. Horse radish. Horse radish is an agreeable relish and it has a particularly fresh taste in the spring. It should be scraped or grated, and placed on the table in a covered cap or bowl. Much of the horse radish bought in bottles is adulterated with turnips. Parsley. Good parsley is indispensable for a well regulated kitchen. Besides for other dishes, it is often used with salad and as garnishings. It is best green, but can be dried and preserved for winter use, when it should be hung in small bundles with the root ends up. Radishes. There are several varieties, all of which are served at table placed in a glass of water, having been previously cleaned by scraping. Salad a la Raspail. Melt pepper and salt in vinegar in the salad bowl; then stir in the oil; work it well in the bowl as long as possible. For salad of celery, add some mustard in the sauce, Salad for the breakfast table is prepared with hard boiled eggs and some dried chives. Lettuce salad. Take lettuce and cresses, half of each, and clean them well. Then prepare a sauce with 3 hard boiled yolks of eggs, which crush to crumbs, 3 tablespoonfuls fine olive oil, the same quantity vinegar, some cayenne pepper, and salt and sugar to suit. Put the green salad on a platter and stir in the sauce. Chicken salad. Boil one chicken tender, and chop fine; chop fine the whites of twelve hard-boiled eggs; add equal quantities of chopped celery and cabbage; mash the yolks fine; add two tablespoons butter, two of sugar, one tea-spoon mustard; pepper and salt to taste; and lastly, one-half cup good cider vinegar; pour over the salad and mix thoroughly. Salmon salad. Cut salt boiled salmon in small, square pieces. Mix these with similarly cut pieces of cold meat and cold potatoes . Then cut two apples, two pickled beets, two hard boiled eggs, a salt cucumber and a few buds of cress. Half of each cut mixed with the salmon; the other half you put up each part separately, on and around the salad, which ought to lie high on the platter. Garnish with a circle of poached eggs, parsley and crabs. Russian salad. Preserved red beets are cut in slices and fashioned into figures by a moulding iron kept for such purposes. Then cut in small pieces so called Turkish beans or lima beans . Pieces of boiled carrots and hard boiled whites of eggs are also formed into stars and other figures by an iron. Then cut celery and mix it all with olive oil, vinegar, salt and pepper. Used mostly for garnishing with. Italian salad. Boil in equal quantities, carrots, turnips, potatoes and red beets in salted water. Then let the water and the substance cool; now cut it in slices of even form and equal size. Add olive oil, vinegar, salt and pepper. Serve the salad within a circle made of pastry dough. Potato salad. Pare 6 or 8 large potatoes and boil till done, and slice thin while hot; peel and cut up a white onion into small bits and mix with the potatoes ; cut up some breakfast bacon into small bits, sufficient to fill a tea cup, and fry a light brown; remove the meat, and into the grease stir 3 tablespoons vinegar, making a sour gravy, which with the bacon pour over the potatoes and onion; mix lightly. To be eaten while hot. Cabbage salad dressing. Boil one cup vinegar; melt a piece of butter the size of a walnut in it, beat together one egg and one teaspoon each of mustard, sugar, salt, flour and half a teaspoon of pepper, pour the boiling vinegar on this mixture; stir it well, then put it back on the stove to boil again about a minute, and pour it over the cabbage. Oyster salad. Clean the oysters; cut lobster meat in small pieces; put these two parts in a well mixed sauce of hard boiled yolks of eggs, olive oil, vinegar and pepper. Cherry salad. Take large, brown, fresh and ripe cherries; clip of half off the stems; measure the berries and put them in a jar together with some bay leaves. Now take one quart French wine one half pint Rhine wine, half a pint of cognac, one pint vinegar, a pound and a half of sugar, a little white pepper and a few cloves to about a gallon of cherries. Boil and skim well; then, when cold, pour over the cherries. Cover it for preservation. Swedish salad. Take a salted herring and cut it in small dice shaped pieces; add to that as much beef, potatoes , red beets, apples and four soaked anchovis, all cut and chopped in the same way. To this add one tablespoonful of each of the following substances: dried caper, finely chopped cucumbers, chopped hard boiled eggs. Season the salad with salt, vinegar and olive oil making it taste a little odd but agreeable. Now put up and cover the salad with 24 oysters. Indian cress. Clean the cresses; let the water run off, place in an earthen jar and pour over it boiling hot vinegar. Cover the jar until cool: then put in glass jar and use to different kinds of sauces. SJETTE AFDELNINGEN. Part Six. SAUCES AND PICKLES. Remarks. Sauces are by far not the least important part of the art of cooking. Many a piece of meat, otherwise good, is often spoiled through being served with a poor or altogether unsuitable sauce. On the other hand a good, well prepared sauce will improve an otherwise poor dish. The general belief is that sauces are costly, but such is not the case, which we shall soon prove. The name of a sauce is always derived from its component part. Apple sauce. A very simple but often used sauce. Made by stewing the apples, while adding some nutmeg, sugar and cinnamon to make the taste piquant. It is usually served with pork steak or goose. Caper sauce for boiled mutton. Chop the capers a little unless quite small. Melt half a pint of butter and put the capers into it, adding a tablespoon of the juice in which you buy the capers. Green tomato sauce. Cut up a pint of green tomatoes; take 3 gills of mustard seed, 3 tablespoons mustard, 2 1/2 spoons black pepper, 1 1/2 spoons allspice, 4 spoons salt, 2 spoons celery seed, one quart chopped onion, ass much sugar, 2 1/2 quarts good vinegar and a little red pepper to suit. Beat the spices and boil all until done. Anchovy sauce. Add two teaspoons anchovy essence (to be had in every first class grocery,) to already made white sauce or butter sauce. Should be used for boiled fish, especially cod. Lobster sauce. Chop the meat from the claws and tail of a good sized lobster, but do not make it too fine. Half an hour before dinner, put it in half a pint drawn butter or white sauce. Lemon sauce. Cut three slices of lemon into very small dice, and put them into drawn butter; let it come just to boiling point, and pour over boiled fowls. Chili sauce. Use twentysix medium sized ripe tomatoes, two onions, four teaspoons pepper, two cups vinegar, two tablespoonfuls salt, twelve spoons brown sugar, two spoons ginger, two spoons ground cinnamon, one spoon cloves, one of allspice, and one of nutmeg. Boil gently for two hours. Cranberry sauce. After removing all imperfect or soft berries, wash thoroughly; place for about two minutes in scalding water; skim out or drain, and to every pound of fruit add 3/4 of a pound granulated sugar, a half pint water, and stew over a moderate fire. Be careful to cover, but don't stir the fruit, occasionally shaking the pan if in danger of burning. The berries will thus retain their shape and add to their appearance. Boil from five to seven minutes; remove from fire; turn into a deep dish, and set aside to cool. If to be kept, they can be put up in air-tight jars Butter sauce. Melt butter with flour in a frying pan and stir all the time, as it will otherwise fasten to the pan. If to be used for fish, add some of the water in which the fish has boiled. Sprinkle with pepper. Egg sauce. Put a large piece of butter in a pan and melt with some flour, which increase with water from the boiling fish. When boiling add 2 or 3 hard boiled eggs, finely chopped. Add some mustard. Dill sauce. Melt butter with flour in a pan and dilute it with bouillon or juice of boiling meat. When boiling add 2 yolks of eggs, beaten in bouillon. Lastly put in finely chopped dill and some vinegar. Italian sauce. Boil down little more than a pint Chablis wine to a quarter of a pint, then add one quart of Spanish sauce, a quarter of a pint brown veal bouillon and as much herb sauce. Let it all boil. Skim and serve. Oyster sauce. Scald 36 oysters as if for oyster soup. Make a quart of German sauce, add to that a big lump of butter and half a tablespoon lemon juice, also a little parsley, and finally the oysters. German sauce. Half a pint chicken -essence and half as much champignon- essence and 11/2 pints strong meat sauce. Let it boil down and finish with 4 yolks of eggs and some butter. Add chicken soup. Parsley sauce. Beat butter and flour together with a little fish juice ( water that fish has boiled in) and then add to it the same kind of juice to please. When ready, put in fine chopped parsley and salt. Mustard sauce. A piece of butter, a table-spoonful milk, two spoons mustard. Boil this down in fish juice, until the sauce becomes sufficiently thick. Then add some sugar and vinegar while boiling. Burning sauce. A third of a pint of cognac or French brandy is heated slightly and poured in a bowl over half as much powdered sugar. Just when the sauce is to be served, it is put on fire. It should be a little warm to burn. Should be served in a bowl of silver. Sauce for pheasants. The stomach and wings of 6 pheasants place in a pan or kettle together with one onion, two cloves, one carrot, one pinch of grated nutmeg and 1 1/2 pints madeira wine. Let it boil slowly in 3 quarts of bouillon. Skim and strain. Sour sauce. Mix 1 1/2 cups sugar and 1/2 a tablespoon flour in a little water; add 2 tablespoons vinegar or lemon juice, a quarter of a nutmeg grated and a pinch of salt, pour over it 1 1/2 pints boiling water, and boil ten minutes; just before taking up add a tablespoon of butter. Sweet sauce for pudding. In 1/2 a pint of melted butter with milk, stir three tablespoons powdered or granulated sugar, a little grated lemon-rind, nutmeg or powdered cinnamon; other flavoring fancied may be added to the milk in preparing the butter; is served with rice, batter or bread puddings. SJUNDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Seven. DISHES OF EGG AND MACARONI. Remarks: The nutritious qualities of the egg are greater than those of meats, although eggs of different kinds of birds differ somewhat in this respect. Hens eggs are no doubt the very best; turkey eggs are good, which also is true of the goose egg. Duck eggs may be more agreeable to the taste, but ought not, nevertheless, be eaten without other dishes. The fine and delicate nature of the egg, makes it especially suitable for invalids, the yolk more particularly so. The fresher the egg, the more wholesome it is. For a cook or housekeeper, there is nothing more provoking than to come across spoiled eggs often, consequently it is of importance to be particular in buying eggs. Do not put implicit faith in the often made declaration that "the eggs are perfectly fresh", but examine every egg yourself. There are several ways to make such examinations. One of these is to put the largest end of the egg to the tongue, if it feels warm, then the, egg is fresh, otherwise not. Another way is to hold the egg against the light, (in the sun or lamp light in a dark room,) for if transparent it is good. A third way is to put the eggs in water deep enough to cover them. Those which then lie on the side are good, but those standing on end are bad. Eggs that give a gurgling sound when shaken are bad. To boil eggs. There is a general mistake about boiling eggs. To be healthful and most digestible, the eggs should be cooked evenly, the white and yolk alike; in the rapid boiling by the usual rule of three or four minutes for soft, or five minutes for medium, the white becomes toughened before the yolk is scarcely cooked. To remedy this and render them not only more palatable and nutritious, less indigestible, boil them in a vessel having a tight fitting cover, (a common tin pail will answer admirably,) put in the eggs and pour boiling water upon them, about two quarts of water to a dozen eggs; cover tight and set off the stove; in about 7 minutes remove the cover, turn the eggs, replace the cover, in 6 or 7 minutes more they will be done, if but 2 or 3 eggs; if more, in about 10 minutes. Poached eggs. Bring a kettle of water to boil and put in a few drops vinegar. Break an egg carefully over a cup and let it glide slowly down in the water, which must not be deep enough to cover the egg. When the white part of the egg is firm take up the egg. More than one egg can be put in at once, only be careful that they do not float together. You can also put the eggs in cups or forms greased or buttered and place these in boiling water. Let them boil until the yolk becomes firm. Egg milk. Boil a pint of milk with some cinnamon. Beat two yolks of eggs with a little sugar, then beat that into the milk and serve. Eggcups. An illustration of a deep plate with three eggcups Egg in French way. Break as many eggs as you want and put them side by side on a platter or plate, which place on the hot stove until they become firm, meanwhile strewing some pepper on them. Then put half an anchovy on each egg and serve. Egg with wine sauce. Mix some flour in drawn butter and beat it together with boiling water. Boil and add a few well cleaned dried currants. When boiled, beat two yolks of eggs with French wine to suit. Have ready on a platter poached eggs and pour the sauce over them. This dish is mostly served for a light supper. Boiled eggs with capers. Boil as many eggs as you need, but no harder than you can peel off the shells. Then for sauce prepare four hard boiled yolks of eggs, which beat with two tablespoons olive oil and as much vinegar; strain and add a little more vinegar until the sauce gets thin enough. Two spoonfuls chopped capers is the next addition to the sauce, which pour over the eggs on the plate. Garnish with fried slices of bread. Baked eggs. Break 8 eggs inte a well buttered dish, put in pepper, salt, bits of butter and three tablespoons cream; set it in the oven, bake twenty minutes and serve hot. Cooked eggs with white sauce. Boil 8 or 10 eggs hard, pick off the shells and cut off one of the ends. Place them on a big platter and place it on the stove or in warm water to keep hot. Put on each egg one half of a split sardine. Next prepare a sauce of one tablespoon fresh butter melted with half a spoonful flour and diluted with chicken bouillon, when the sauce begins to boil, add a little nutmeg finely grated and some sugar to suit. Lastly heat 2 yolks of raw eggs in the sauce, which, after boiling, pour over the eggs and serve them warm. Egg with anchovis. Prepare as in foregoing; put the egg mixture in a tin pan, buttered; place cut up anchovis on top, then add the balance of the mixture. Bake in hot oven. Scrambled eggs. Break the eggs and beat them well; beat one small tablespoonful flour with a teaspoon salt and mix with the eggs. Add further a little more than a pint sweet milk. Put a pun on the fire, melt a spoonful butter in it and pour in the egg mixture. Stir gently with a wooden spoon until hot, when place the pan on a slower fire. Take it up when it begins to thicken. Do this with a spoon in as large pieces as possible and garnish them with parsley chopped fine. Serve hot with fried ham or bacon. Stuffed eggs. Boil eggs 8 or 10 minutes, after which allow them to cool length or crosswise. Take out the yolks and put them in a mortar; mix the yolks with half an ounce butter, some chopped parsley, mushrooms, nutmeg, pepper and a couple of anchvovis. Put this mixture in the boiled eggs, which put on a dish; heat them in the oven. Garnish with fried parsley. Omelet pan. An illustration of a frying pan. Omelet souffle. Separate the yolks from the whites of six eggs; add to the former five ounces powdered sugar and a tablespoon of flour ( rice flour is best), and flavor with vanilla, orange, flower water or lemon rind; stir all well together; whip the whites of the eggs and mix them lightly with the batter; put in a sauce -pan 3 ounces of butter, melt it over a bright but gentle fire, and when the omelet is set turn the edges over to make it of oval form and turn it off on to a granite or porcelain pie plate previously well buttered; place in oven and bake 12 to 15 minutes; sprinkle finely powdered sugar over it and serve immediately; is sufficient for 3 or 4 persons Omelet with spinach. Stew fresh spinach and make omelets as above directed; put the spinach on a platter and let the omelet glide over so it covers the spinach. Serve with salted herring. Macaroni a la Ricadonna. Put the contents of a two-pound can of tomatoes in a sauce -pan and let simmer 3 to 4 hours, until they become quite thick and jelly-like; in the meantime take 1/2 pound salt pork and a large onion, both cut into small pieces, and fry to a nice brown, taking care not to burn; pour them into the tomatoes and let the whole simmer together; cover the macaroni with boiling water and boil for 25 minutes; drain, put on a platter and pour over it the tomato sauce and put a generous sprinkling of grated cheese over the whole. Macaroni, in simple way. Boil the macaroni in water until tender, which will be about 20 minutes; mix a dessertspoon of flour with a tablespoon butter; add half a cup milk, a half teaspoon mustard, the same of salt and pepper, a quarter teaspoon cayenne and four ounces grated cheese; stir all together and boil 10 minutes; drain the water from the macaroni and pour over it the dressing; boil up once and serve hot. Baked macaroni. Break Italian macaroni in pieces of 5 or 6 inches in length and put them in boiling bouillon. When soft and swollen add to them a lump of butter, salt, white pepper and lastly grated cheese and cream. Take upp and put on a platter. This place in a hot oven and let them bake until they become light brown. Is usually served with meat dishes. Stewed macaroni. Break macaroni in pieces in length to suit and put them in boiling water in which some butter is melted. When soft take up. Melt in the same pan or kettle, butter and flour, adding some bouillon. In this you steep the macaroni, season with cream, salt, pepper and grated cheese. ÅTTONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Eight PUDDING, PIES AND PASTRY. Remarks. To begin with it is of the greatest importance that all the ingredients used for pudding should be fresh, as anything that is not strictly fresh will spoil the whole pudding. Eggs should be broken separately so as not to risk mixing an unsound one with those that are fresh. If the white and yolk of the egg are beaten separately it will be easier to get the cake or pudding to swell. Raisins and other dried fruit should be picked and rinced before using and the stones in most cases taken out. For puddings the dough should be freed from the lumps by mixing the flour with a small part of the milk to be used, the balance of the milk being added later. If the dough or batter is still uneven, run it through a cullender. Cooked puddings should be put on the stove while the water is boiling and kept there until ready. It should also be kept under water. When ready take up and dip in cold water, which will loosen the towel from the pudding. The pudding towel should of course always be very clean, but it should not be washed with soap as there will be danger of getting a soapy taste to the pudding. Puddings should be served immediately when ready, otherwise they will become hard and unappetizing. Apple pudding. One quart milk, 3 eggs, 3 teaspoons baking-powder. 2 spoonsful melted butter, flour to make a batter like griddle cakes; fill half a pan full of sliced apples and pour the batter over them; bake two hours and eat with a sweet sauce. English plum pudding. Beat 6 yolks and 4 whites of eggs very light, add to them a tumbler of sweet milk, stir in gradually 1/4 of a pound grated stale bread, a pound of flour, 3/4 pound sugar and a pound each of beef suet chopped fine, currants nicely washed and dried and stoned raisins well flour ed stir well and add two nutmegs, a tablespoon mace, one of cinnamon or cloves, a wine glass brandy a teaspoonful salt and finally another tumbler milk, boil in bowls or moulds five hours and serve with a sauce made with drawn butter, wine, sugar and nutmeg. It will keep several months when wanted, boil an hour before serving; a pound of citron or blanched sweet almonds will add to the richness of the pudding. Plain fruit pudding. One and a half cups flour 1 cup bread crumbs or grated bread, 1 cup raisins, 1/2 cup currants, 2 nutmegs, 1 cup suet, (chopped fine), 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 4 eggs, a wine glass brandy, 1 wine glass syrup and a little milk it necessary. Tie it hard in a cloth and boil 5 or 6 hours. Serve with wine sauce. Charlotte Russe. Whip 1 quart rich cream to a stiff froth, and drain well on a nice sieve. To 1 scant pint of milk add 6 eggs beaten very light; make very sweet, flavor high with vanilla. Cook over hot water till it is a thick custard. Soak 1 full ounce Cox's gelatine in a very little water, and warm over hot water. When the custard is very cold, beat in lighly the gelatine and the whipped cream. Line the bottom of your mold with buttered paper, the sides with sponge cake or lady fingers fastened together with the white of an egg. Fill with the cream, put in a cold place or in summer on ice. To turn out, dip the mold for a moment in hot water. In draining the whipped cream all that drips through can be rewhipped. Snow pudding. One-half package of Cox's gelatine; pour over it a cup of cold water and add 1 1/2 cups sugar; when soft, add 1 cup boiling water and the juice of a lemon; then the whites of 4 well beaten eggs; beat all together until it is light and frothy or until tho gelatine will not settle clear on the bottom of the dish after standing a few minutes; put in a glass dish, and serve with a custard made of 1 pint milk, the yolks of 4 eggs and the grated rind of a lemon. Fish pudding. Take a pickerel or pike weighing from 3 to 4 pounds, cleave it in two, rince it and scrape away all bones and cords. Then chop it with 1/2 pound cold butter. After chopping a while, put it in a stone mortar and pound it, meanwhile adding gradually a pound drawn butter; work this until it turns into a consistent dough that does not stick to the mortar. Now add 6 or 8 eggs, 1 at a time and stir well; add also 2 handfuls flour, salt and white pepper and also sweet cream enough to make it moderately thin. Grease the moulds with cold butter and flour them. Pour in the dough, but do not fill the mold or pan, whichever is used. Put it in boiling water for 2 hours and serve with wine sauce. French plum pudding. Place 1/2 a pound wheat bread in milk to soak. Then clean a pound of suet or ox marrow and chop it fine. Squeeze the milk through a linen cloth from the bread and mix it with the suet until it assumes the consistency of a batter. Next beat 7 eggs with 2 tablespoons of milk and add it to the bread and suet and put in at the same time 3 spoonfuls sugar, 1/2 pound scalded raisins and a pinch of salt. When well mixed butter a mould with cold butter and flour it. Pour in the mixture and put the mould (which must have a tight fitting cover) in boiling water or in a moderately hot oven to be cooked or baked. It is served with wine or brandy sauce. Herring pudding. Soak good herring in water for 3 hours; then cut in two, flay it and remove all bones. Put it in sweet milk for 1 hour, then, place it in a linen cloth to drain. Butter a mould well and put in a layer of boiled potatoes , cut in slices and upon that a layer of herring, continuing as long as the herring lasts. Between each layer strew grated bread and 2 tablespoon drawn butter over it. When the mould is thus filled, beat 3 or 4 eggs with 1/2 pint milk or cream and pour over it. Place the mould in a hot oven for an hour or until it raises and gets a nice color. When about to put on the table, cover the mould with a napkin. Serve with melted butter. Suet pudding. Four cups flour, 1 cup molasses, 1 cup suet chopped fine, 1/2 pound raisins, 3/4 of a cup of milk, 1/2 teaspoon soda and a little salt and cinnamon; boil two and one half hours. To be eaten with sauce. Cold rice pudding. An illustration of a decorative rice pudding, served in a deep bowl. Cold rice pudding. Boil a little more than half a pound rice in a little more than half a gallon cream for an hour on a slow fire; then set it in ice and work it there with a big' wooden spoon until it freezes slightly; mix into it several kinds of preserved fruit, such as pears, cherries, apricots, etc., which have been drained. Put the mixture in a mould and butter all the joints of the cover so that no water can penetrate. Then set the mould in ice for 2 hours. Dump it on a platter over which a napkin has been spread. Victoria pudding. One quart cream, the same amount grated bread, 6 ounces pounded sweet almonds mixed with some bitter almonds. Boil this and then add 4 ounces of vanilla sugar, the same amount of potato starch (or corn starch ). l0 yolks of eggs, (one at a time) and lastly 8 beaten whites of eggs. This mixture you now pour into a mould well buttered with cold butter and then sprinkle it with fine chopped pistachio. Potato pudding. Boil and chop potatoes very fine and mix it with 3 yolks of eggs, 4 tablespoons butter, melted, 4 spoons cream, grated nutmeg and a spoonful flour. Put in mould and bake in hot oven. Potato pudding. An illustration of a molded potato pudding placed on top of a napkin and served in a deep plate. Boiled biscuit or almond pudding. To 10 yolks of eggs add 1 pound granulated sugar and work the two parts well together. Then add to this one half pound wheat flour and as much sweet almonds and 1 ounce bitter almonds, together with the rind of a lemon, grated. Having beaten the whites of the eggs to a hard froth, mixing with it half a pound of melted butter, you now pour it all into a mould and cover it with a tight fitting lid. Put this mould in a pan or kettle filled with a tight cover. Then boil from 30 to 45 minutes. This pudding is served with sauce made of wine mixed with red juice of fruit and water; thicken with a spoonful flour. Or you may mix the wine with the juice of lemon with sugar. Boiled biscuit or almond pudding. A triangular shaped of almond pudding. Sweet orange pudding. Rub the yellow rind from 4 sweet oranges and 2 lemons; then squeeze the juice over some sugar, which put over the fire to boil together with a pint, gelatine, 3 beaten eggs and 1/4 of a pint French wine, (bordeaux). When it has boiled let it cool. Beat sweet cream to a hard froth and mix it in and place all in a mould on ice to freeze. When ready to serve dip the mould quickly in hot water and dump the pudding on a platter; garnish with orange slices boiled in sugar. Put a biscuit between each piece. Warm lemon pudding. Rub the rind from 4 lemons; squeeze out the juice on a piece of sugar. Fill a pint bowl with half French wine and half water; add 20 yolks of eggs and sugar to suit; put on stove and boil, beat and remove when it gets thick. Beat the whites of the eggs well and mix them with the rest; place all in a silver pan, sprinkle with sugar and put in oven to bake. It is done when it rises. Salmon pudding with rice. Wash 1 pound of rice thoroughly 3 times in warm water and boil it in 3 pints sweet milk and a half pound butter until it has swelled. Then add 6 ounces sugar, a little nutmeg and 3 or 4 eggs. Meanwhile have ready on a big platter 2 pounds salt salmon, which has then well soaked and chopped; mix that slowly together with the rice and finally put all in a well buttered mould and bake in oven, when the pudding rises bake it out and put it on a plate and serve with caper sauce. Egg pudding. Beat 8 eggs with half a spoon of flour; boil a quart of milk with a spoonful butter and pour over the eggs, beating briskly while so doing. Bake in hot oven and serve hot with meat balls. PIES. Paste for pies. One pound of flour, a little more for rolling-pin and board, half a pound of butter and same amount of lard. Cut the butter and lard through the flour (which should he sifted) and mix with sufficient ice- water to roll easily. Avoid kneading it and use the hands as little as possible in mixing. Puff paste. To every pound of flour allow one pound of butter, and not quite half a pint of water. Carefully weigh the flour and butter and have the exact proportion; squeeze the butter well to extract the water from it, and afterwards wring it in a clean cloth, that no moisture may remain. Sift the flour; see that, it is perfectly dry, and proceed in the following manner to make the paste, using a clean pasteboard and rolling-pin. Supposing the quantity to be 1 pound flour, work the whole into a smooth paste, with not quite half a pint water, using a knife to mix with; the proportion if water must be regulated by the discretion of the cook; if too much be added to the paste, when baked, it will be tough. Roll it out until it is of an equal thickness of about an inch; break 4 ounces of butter into small pieces; place these on the paste, sift over it a little flour, fold it over, roll out again, and put in another 4 ounces of butter. Repeat the rolling and buttering until the paste has been rolled out 4 times, or equal quantities of flour and butter have been used. Do not omit, every time the paste is rolled out, to dredge a little flour over the paste and the rolling-pin to prevent from sticking. Handle the paste as lightly as possible and do not press heavily upon it with the rolling-pin. The next thing to be considered is the oven, as the baking of pastry requires particular attention. Do not put it into the oven until it is sufficiently hot to raise the paste for the best prepared paste, if not properly baked, will be good for nothing. Brushing the paste as often as rolled out and the pieces of butter placed thereon, with the white of an egg, assist it to rise in leaves or flakes. As this is the great beauty of puff- paste, it is well to try this method. Mince pie. Use 2 bowls chopped apples, 1 of chopped meat, 1/4 pound chopped suet, the grated rind and juice of a lemon, 2 tea cups molasses, 1 large teaspoon each of cinnamon and cloves, 1 nutmeg grated fine, 1 pound stoned or seedless raisins, half a pound currants, a quarter of a lemon cut fine, 1 quart cider and sugar and salt to taste. Lemon pie. Grate the yellow rind and take the juice of 1 lemon, 1 cup sugar; take a heaping tablespoon of corn-starch and mix it with cold water; add a cup of boiling water, and cook a little; turn together; beat the yolk of 1 egg and add to the mixture; beat the whites of 2 eggs to a froth with a little sugar and put over the top after the pie is baked and set in the oven to slightly brown. Pumpkin pie. For 3 pies; 1 quart of milk, 3 cups of boiled and strained pumpkin, one and a half cups sugar, half cup molasses, 4 eggs, a little salt and 1 teaspoon each of ginger and cinnamon. Boston marrow or Hubbard squash may be substituted for pumpkin, and are much preferred by many, as possessing a less strong flavor. Apple pie. Stew sour apples until soft and not much water is left in them and rub them through a collender; beat 3 eggs for each pie and use 1 cup butter and one of flour for 3 pies: nutmeg seasoning. Cream pie. Thoroughly beat together half a cup sugar, the white of an egg and a tablespoon flour; then add a cup of rich milk, or part cream; bake with only an undercrust, and grate nutmeg over it. Peach pie. Line a pie-tin with puff- paste, fill with pared peaches, cut in halves or quarters, well covered with sugar; put on an upper crust and bake. Cherry pie. Line the dish with a good crust and fill with ripe cherries, regulating the quantity of sugar you scatter over them by their sweetness. Cover and bake. Eat cold with sugar sifted over the top. Mock mince pie. One egg, 3 or 4 crackers, half cup molasses, half a cup sugar, half cup vinegar, half a cup strong tea, 1 cup chopped raisins, a piece of butter. Bake. An illustration of different type of cakes, tarts and puffs. NIONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Nine. CAKES AND COOKIES. Remarks: All sugar and flour to be used should be sifted and weighed. Very hard butter should be warmed a little but not melted; if salted and packed, freshen it with cold water since first broken in pieces. It is only when sour milk is used that soda can be used, but with sweet milk cream of tartar must be used or baking powder. For all white and fine kinds of cake, use powdered sugar; for so called "rich cake", use crushed sugar and powdered mixed, and for dark cakes, use brown sugar. Old cake makers with experience are in the habit of beating the milk and all minor ingredients with the butter and the sugar, then the yolks of the eggs, then the whites and lastly the flour. Chocolate cake. One cup butter, 2 of sugar, 5 eggs, leaving out 2 of the whites, 1 scant cup of milk, 2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder; mix well in 3 cups of flour, bake in 2 long shallow tins. Dressing: Beat the whites of 2 eggs to a stiff froth, add a scant cup and a half of sugar; flavor with vanilla, add 6 tablespoons of grated chocolate; add the dressing when the cake is cold and cut in diamond slices. Imperial cake. One pound of flour, half a pound of batter, 12 ounces of sugar, 4 eggs, half a pound currants, (well washed), half a teaspoon soda dissolved in hot water, grated rind and juice of half a lemon, and 1 teaspoonful of cinnamon. Drop from a spoon upon a well buttered paper, lining a baking pan. Bake quickly. Rich bride cake. Take 4 pounds sifted flour, 4 pounds sweet, fresh butter beaten to cream, 2 pounds powdered sugar; take 6 eggs for each pound of flour, 1 ounce mace or nutmeg and a tablespoonful of lemon extract or orange flower water. Queen cake. Beat a pound of butter to cream and mix with a tablespoonful rosewater; add a pound fine white sugar, 10 beaten eggs and a pound and a quarter sifted flour. Mix well and beat, and then add half a pound of shelled almonds, blanched and beaten to a paste. Butter tin basins, line them with white paper, fill in the mixture one inch and a half deep, and bake for 1 hour in a quick oven. Sponge cake. The desirable feature of good sponge cake is its lightness, which is only attained by long continued hard beating; to do this well requires 2 persons. While, one beats the yolk for 15 or 20 minutes, as light and creamy as possible and then beats in 3/4 of a pound of sugar with rose water until thick and light, another person should beat the whites until well frothed then slowly beat into them the remaining 1/4 pound of sugar and whisk it until it no longer stiffens, or until the former preparation is complete. Now, lightly and steadily add the last mixture and the flour with the first, a little of each alternately, stirring only enough to mix them well, avoiding hard heating which would toughen the whole. The buttered pans should be ready, and whether round, square or patty pans, fill them half to 2/3 full: sift sugar over them and bake in a moderate oven. Material: Ten ounces of sifted pastry flour, a pound powdered sugar, 12 eggs, 2 tablespoons rose water, or other flavors may be used, as almonds, using an ounce blanched bitter almonds; lemon, use the grated rind and juice of 2 large lemons, mixed and strained after standing an hour, vanilla, use a tablespoon of vanilla sugar, beat in with the yolks at first--the 2 others mix with the sugar. Birthday cake. l 1/2 pound fine sugar, the same amount of butter, three and a half pounds of dried currants; 2 pounds of flour, half a pound candied peel, half a pound almond, 2 ounces spices and the grated rinds of 3 lemons, 18 eggs and a gill of brandy, Bake in oven 3 hours. Gold and silver cake. Gold part: 8 yolks of eggs, 1 cup of butter, 2 cups sugar, 4 cups flour, 1 cup sour milk, 1 teaspoon soda, 1 teaspoon corn starch and some lemon or vanilla. Silver part: 2 cups sugar, 1 of butter, 4 of flour, one of milk, 1 teaspoonful soda, 1 teaspoon corn starch, 8 whites of eggs and some almonds. Put in 1 spoon of each part alternately. Hasty cake. Two yolks and 2 whole eggs you beat with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar until it whitens. Then stir in a little grated lemon rind and a few pounded bitter almonds and a heaping spoonful of corn starch. Bake in moulds buttered and breaded. Lightnings. Stir a pound of butter together with half a pound sugar until it rises and forms small bladders. Then add 2 whole eggs, beaten with 2 whites, a little pounded cinnamon and bitter almonds, a spoonful gelatine and a pound of flour. Pour out the mixture on flat pans, bake, and cut in squares. This cake can be dried and preserved for some time. Emmy's cake. Pare and cut in 2 a number of apples, scald some plums and remove their kernel stones and then boil both parts together in strongly sugared water. A big piece of sugar, quickly dipped in water, must now be put in a wrought iron pan over the fire to be browned, but carefully guarded against burning. Place the sugar in a previously heated mould and put on the top the boiled apples and plums, which cover with beaten eggs. Bake in oven, tip over plate when ready, and serve with vanilla sauce. Fruit cake. One cup butter, 1 cup brown sugar, half pint sirup, 2 eggs, 1 cup sour milk, 1 teaspoon soda, 1 pound flour, one and a half pounds currants, same of raisins and cinnamon and spices to suit. Economical cake. One pound flour, 1/4 pound sugar, 1/4 pound butter or lard, half pound currants, 1 teaspoon soda, 4 whites of eggs and half a pint milk. To be real economical you can make a very good cake even if you leave out the eggs and currants. Beat the batter to a cream and stir in all the ingredients but the soda which add lastly when all is well worked. Put the cake into a buttered mould and bake in a moderate oven one hour and a half. California cake. Two cups sugar, l cup butter, 1 cup milk, 2 whole eggs, 3 teaspoonfuls baking powder and 3 cups sifted flour. Also fruit and flavors to suit. This recipe is enough for 2 cakes. Dough for fine cookies. Put a pound of the best butter you can get, over the fire and when it is well melted, pour it up on a platter, taking care that the salt does not go with it. Then beat it until it becomes white and frothy like cream. Add 5 or 6 yolks of eggs and enough fine sifted flour to make a thin dough. Mix 1/4 pint cream in this, and put the dough aside to become stiff, meanwhile you butter the moulds to be used with cold butter, which cover with floor with a wooden spoon, you now take (the stiffened dough and line the moulds with it to a (depth of half an inch. This dough is suitable to make pastry of for any kind of meat dish. In another way. One pound flour, 3/4 pound of good butter, half a pound of sugar, 2 eggs and a little grated lemon rind. Work it well and set aside to be used for tea bread, etc. Savarin cookies. Put one and a half pounds of flour to dry near the stove, make a hole in it and put in 1/2 ounce yeast and 1/4 of a pint milk. Beat to a thin dough, and when it rises, add 8 whole eggs, half pound sugar, some milk and 3/4 pound of well worked butter. Mix well with the hand and put on a baking table and work it until it no longer sticks to the table. Put in buttered moulds, bake, and then dip in sugar water mixed with vanilla. Vanilla cookies. Put half a pound butter and a pint and a half water over the fire; when boiling stir in flour enough to make a common dough. Lift it off and add 6 whole eggs, 1 at a time and sugar to suit. When well worked, put it up on a metal plate, copper preferred and let it remain until cold. Then take a piece at a time and make rolls, out of which make dice and cook in lard, turning them all the time. When brown put them up on paper to be drained from the lard. Finally place them in a heap on a platter and sprinkle vanilla sugar over them. Almond cookies. Work half a pound drawn butter until white; mix in half pound flour. Beat 8 yolks with half a pound fine sugar and add this to the other part. Beat the whites of the eggs to a froth and stir them in at last. Put paper on a pan and upon it in small portions, the dough, and cover with sugar and almonds. Place in oven and hake until light brown. Egg cookies. Eight eggs, 1 teaspoonful sugar and 4 of butter should be worked together with flour enough to make a moderately thick dough, which then should be rolled out quite thin. Of this cut small round cakes and put them in small moulds buttered with melted butter and prick them with a needle. Bake them till they become a light brown, dump them on platters and fill them with preserves Molasses cookies. Mix 1 quart sirup, half a pound sugar, 6 tablespoons cream, 4 eggs, from 2 of which remove the whites, half an ounce potash (salts of tartar) and 1 pound flour; add orange peels, cloves cinnamon, anis seed and half pound flour. When well worked let it rest awhile and then roll it out, cut and place in tin moulds to bake. Butter cookies. Common butter dough, prepared for similar purposes, is roled out to a thickness of a 1/4 of an inch. Then make a thin batter of sugar and almonds, beaten with the whites of eggs so as to become pliable; mould the cookies and line them with this batter and finally strew them with sugar and bake them. Serve them in pyramids. Vienna cookies. Beat 10 tablespoonfuls melted butter until it rises and assumes a white appearance; stir in 4 ounces flour. Next beat 8 egg yolks with 5 ounces sifted sugar. Mix both parts. When the oven is ready, (the oven must not be hotter than to make a white paper brown when put into it), put the batter in small moulds, buttered with cold butter and bake. Tarts. A pyramid shaped of tarts served in a deep plater. Spanish butter tart. Roll common tart dough to the thickness of a 25 cent piece. Out of this cut a bottom according to the size of the platter intended for serving. Then cut a smaller and thinner and so on until you have cut it up in smaller and smaller pieces, commonly 6 or 7. Put them separately on a buttered plate to be baked. When baked and ready to be served, place the largest undermost and the rest in order of size. Beat some whites of eggs to a froth and mix it with half a pound fine sugar and a few lemon drops. Polish the tarts with this and sprinkle the surface with coarser sugar. Put it in a moderate hot oven for a few minutes and then serve. English blind tart. Take already prepared tart or cake dough and proceed as in the foregoing number. When cut, put it on a platter spread with buttered paper and put some preserves on top; then wet with water and another cut on the first one. Then take a feather dipped in whites of eggs and pass it lightly over the surface. Bake in oven and when done sprinkle with sugar after which pass into the oven again to be glazed. Almond tart. Take a pound of almonds, 1 pound sugar, and pound them separately; break 24 eggs and part the yolks from the whites, add the sugar to the yolks and mix well and then add the almonds. Finally add 12 beaten whites and now put the whole into a mould to be placed in the oven, which must not be too hot. If you wish the tart glazed, beat whites of eggs with sugar and pass with a feather over the surface. Bread tart. Supposing you have 18 persons to serve, take 12 yolks of eggs and 5 whites, which mix well with half a pound of sugar until it rises, when you add half a pound pounded almonds scalded, 3 ounces pounded bread, 1 tablespoonful pounded cinnamon and 2 spoons cloves. Beat the other whites to a hard froth and add them also, and then put it all in a buttered mould and place in the oven, taking care that the heat is not too strong. Serve with preserves. Powder tarts. Twenty yolks and one and a half ounces shelled and pounded bitter almonds; mix this and add half a pound fine powdered sugar, 10 whites of eggs, beaten into a hard froth. Have ready a mould, buttered with melted butter and flour ed. Put the batter in and bake with slow heat. French tart with preserves. Work together 12 yolks, 4 whole eggs, and 3 pints powdered sugar until it begins to appear white; then pour in an eighth of a pint melted butter and add fine flour, sufficient enough to allow the dough to be rolled into a thickness of a half dollar. Out of this cut 9 or 10 cakes, round or oblong according to taste. Place these in buttered pans and prick to prevent bubbling. Bake then brown and put up on a platter, placing different kinds of preserves between them. Boil sugar in water until it fastens around the finger after it has been dipped in cold water. Dip a beater in the sugar water and sprinkle the tarts until covered. Sugar tarts with preserves. Weigh 10 whole eggs, break them and beat them for 1 hour, with the same weight of sugar. Then work in half that weight of flour. Bake the dough in layers between which place preserved currants or some other fruit that is not too juicy. Otherwise you may bake the tart whole and afterwards cut it into tea-bread. Waffles. Take 8 yolks of eggs, a little less than half a pint milk, half a pound flour, some cardomoms and 3 ounces melted butter. Beat to a hard froth the 8 whites together with a quart cream and then mix the 2 parts well. Warm the waffle iron and grease it either with a piece of pork or a piece of linen dipped in butter. Pour in a spoonful of the batter at a time and place the iron over the fire. Turn while baking. Sugar waffles. Beat 6, yolks and add half a pound of powdered sugar, beating fast all the time; then stir in 4 tablespoons of melted and cooled butter and half a pound of flour. Finally add to all of this the whites, previously beaten into froth, when you once more work the whole mixture. If the flour is not of the very best, you may add more of it. Bake as usual and serve with preserves. Almond moulds. Take a bowl and mix in it 1 egg, 6 ounces sugar, 1 ounce sweet and half an ounce bitter almonds, both kinds pounded fine, after having been scalded. Work this together with 6 ounces washed butter and 10 ounces flour. When well mixed, pour the dough thin in waffle moulds and bake in not too hot oven. Baked waffles. Take a pint sweet or sour cream and beat to a fast froth; then stir in flour until it feels quite steady for the beater; pour in half a pint of water. Meanwhile warm the waffle-iron and grease it with a little white wax or butter, and proceed with the baking. Test the first waffle and if not hard enough, add more flour, if too hard, more water. Yeast waffles. Beat 6 eggs together with a little flour and half a pint butter and a pint sweet milk, made tepid over the fire. Mix flour enough to make the batter as thick as porridge; lastly 2 spoons of good yeast. Let it rise and bake in the usual way. Cream monks. Beat 1 pint sour cream with 4 yolks of eggs, half an ounce of flour, 2 tablespoons powdered sugar and 2 cardamoms, pounded fine. Meanwhile beat the whites into a hard froth and stir into the batter; then bake the monks in a so called monk iron. Cream monks without eggs. Beat 2 pints thick sour cream into a hard froth; in another vessel make, by beating, a pretty thick mush of half a pint water and flour; mix this with the first and bake the monks in a iron, buttered with melted butter. When ready, do not pile them, but put them separately on a gray paper until serving, when place them on a platter and strew them with sugar. Doughnuts. Two cups milk, 1 cup sugar, half a cup butter, half a cup lard, 1 cup sponge yeast and 2 eggs; then add enough flour to make a pretty stiff dough, which must rise. When the doughnuts have been cut out, let them remain on the baking board until they rise, and then bake. They are then boiled in lard and after that clipped while still hot in powdered sugar. Common waffles. Take 1 quart flour, a teaspoon salt, a tablespoon melted butter and milk sufficient to make a thick batter; mix thoroughly; add 2 well beaten eggs, 2 heaping teaspoons tartaric acid and 1 moderately heaping teaspoon soda; stir well together and bake at once in waffle-irons. In another way. One pint flour, 1 of sweet milk, 3 eggs well beaten, a piece of butter the size of an egg and a half, a little salt, 1 heaping teaspoon cream-tartar, half a teaspoon soda; melt the butter and stir in flour, milk and egg. Sift the cream-tartar and soda through a fine sieve the last thing. Frothy waffles. One pint thick cream and a little sugar is beaten into a hard froth. Thereupon stir in a cup of flour beaten into half a pint water and further is added half a cup melted butter, meanwhile have the waffle-iron on the fire, making it real hot; grease it and bake. The waffles are placed on a platter and covered with sugar. French waffles. Dilute 2 ounces fresh beer yeast with 1 pint milk and stir in 2 pints flour. Put it in a warm place to rise. Then mix in half an ounce of sugar, 2 whole eggs and 4 yolks, and also some grated lemon peeling. Mix well again and finally add 12 ounces butter a little warm, 4 whites of eggs and 2 spoons cream, beaten into a froth. Put this batter in a warm place to rise until double its size. Bake in the usual manner. TIONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Ten. JELLIES AND PRESERVES. Remarks: Among the many different things where sugar enters as a chief ingredient are: jellies, preserves, creams, marmalades, candies, etc. When making jellies, it is important to know how much to use of the different parts and also to know for a certainty the way to make them, as one in this case easily may run the risk, to pay saved time and trouble by the waste of materials. All fruit used must be strictly fresh and good and if possible picked in the morning and in dry weather, as it then possesses the best aroma and keeps the longest. Concerning the sugar be it enough to say that it must be of the very best. Then is to be remembered that the vessels must, be of porcelain, granite, tin or finer metals, as copper or brass. If vessels of the last named metals are used, they must be kept shining by scouring. For stirring use wooden spoons rather than such of tin or silver. Jellies are best, kept in glass jars covered with white paper, coated with whites of eggs on the inside. Red currant jelly. As soon as the berries are picked and cleaned, boil then with some water and after that strain them through a cloth. Then weigh them and add their weight in sugar; put them for the second time over the fire and let them boil until as thick as jelly, then pour in glass jars for preservation. If you desire strawberry raspberry flavor, put some such berries in while boiling. Yellow jelly. Take some wine jelly (quantity according to taste) and let it cool, but not enough to become stiff, Pour it into a deep bowl and place it on ice, meanwhile beating it into a froth. It is then ready to preserve. Apple jelly. Wash some apples (somewhat sour) and cut them in slices with rinds and kernels, as that imparts a good flavor, then boil in a little water; when the apples begin to mash and become juicy, take them up and place in a straining cloth, where the juice is allowed to run off. Weigh the juice and add its weight in sugar and some lemon juice. Let it all boil over a slow cool fire until it thickens, skimming it all the time in order to make it clear. Preserve in glass jars in cool room. Orange jelly. Rub sugar on 5 or 6 oranges and then squeeze the juice out of them over a strainer. Pour the juice into a pan, add a little well water and some old French wine, (enough to flavor the jolly); also a good sized piece of gelatine and 2 beaten yolks of eggs. Put it on a brisk fire to boil 2 or 3 times. Then strain and preserve in bowls or moulds. Juice jelly. Take one pint and a half cherry and raspberry juice, and add to it 1 pint well water, or more if you desire. Put over the fire in a cast iron pan and increase the contents with 3 ounces isinglass jelly. Strain through a new cloth; and when it has cooled place it in some nice shape according to taste and let it freeze 3 or 4 hours. Jelly with fruit. Cover the bottom of a nice mould with gelatine and on the top of that scattering here and there, some grapes and red cherries in layers, in order to make the jelly look beautiful when ready and put up. When you have made a layer of berries, pour jelly over them and when this has become stiff, repeat with a new layer and so on, until the mould is filled, and set it down to freeze. In the same manner you may put in the jelly oranges and slices of apples and other kinds of fruit. Ornament the bowl with a wreath of fruit at the top, and a flower in the middle. Lemon jelly. Cut the lemons in two lengthwise and dig out all the inner part and then arrange the rinds in a pretty way on a platter. Keep lemon jelly on hand and fill the rinds with it, which now leave to cool and stiffin. Serve on flat glass dishes. Apples in jelly. Fill a few small and smooth moulds with gelatine and then put them aside to cool. Now remove with a spoon a piece of the jelly big enough for a piece of apple which has been boiled and cooled. Fill the hole with a part of the apple. Melt the removed jelly and pour it back into the forms, which is again allowed to stiffien. When they are to be served, dip them in hot water, dry them and tip them on a glass plate in the shape of a pyramid. Wine jelly. Take 1 ounce gelatine, 1/2 a pint wine, 1 pound sugar, a grated lemon rind and the juice of 2 lemons. Pour water over the gelatine and let it stand 1/2 an hour. Then pour over it 1 1/2 pints boiling water, (in the winter, for in the summer 1 pint is enough); add wine, sugar and lemons. Finally strain it through a fine sieve or a coarse towel, over a mould or in cups, which put in a cool place. PRESERVES. Preserved raspberries. For 3 pounds raspberries, take the juice of 1 pound red currants. Soak 5 pounds sugar in water and put it over the fire; together with the currant juice let it boil until it has turned into a thick syrup. Then add the raspberries and continue the boiling a few minutes. Skim incessantly and take it up with a big spoon. But the sugar must boil until a drop of it dropped on a plate remains whole, withouts preading the least. Then put in the raspberries and shake well. Preserved cherries. Remove the stones and then take as much sugar as the berries weigh. Dip the sugar in water and boil until it becomes quite thick. Then put in the berries to boil 15 minutes. Take them up with a big spoon. Let the sugar continue boiling until real thick. Then add the berries and let them boil a minute, skimming while boiling. Shake well, cool and put up in jars. Preserved red gooseberries. Remove the stalks and the hulls from the berries; then rince them and let the water run off. Weigh the berries and take their weight in sugar, of which make a thin paste; let that cool and then put in the berries and let them remain over night. In the morning put them over the fire and let them boil until they appear clear, then remove them from the fire and shake them until most of the heat has passed off. Then they are immediately put in jars for preservation. Red plums preserved in alcohol. For 5 pounds plums take 4 pounds powdered sugar. Put the plums in alternate layers with the sugar in a stone jar, which cover with the bladder of an ox or something similar and put a plate on the top. Place the jar in a deep iron or stone pan and pour in water to the height of the plums. Put the pan over the fire and boil for 5 hours. Then, take upp the jar and pour over the plums fine, strong alcohol; then cover the jar and let it remain in the water until it has cooled. The plums are now ready for preservation. Preserved orange peelings. Cut the oranges in two lengthwise and remove all the meat and also some of the white rinds. Put the halves i fresh water for 24 hours, changing the water four times. Then boil in fresh water until soft, when put them on a clean cloth to drain. Make a strong sugar water and when cold, cover the peelings with it for 8 days. Then take the water and boil it with more sugar until thick when pour it over the peelings while hot. Shake and skim, and preserve in jars. Preserved ginger pears. A peck of pears of rather a hard kind; peel and remove the kernels with a pen knife from the stalk end. Then take somewhat less than a gallon of medium quality syrup, and pour it in a kettle. Add to it the pears and a pound ginger, chopped into quite small pieces. Boil it over a gentle fire and have it covered, but shake it often and skim. If not strong enough add more ginger. Having boiled until the pears feel soft, pick them up carefully and put them in a jar and pour the juice over them through a strainer. Preserved peaches. Pick the peaches when only half ripe and put them in a kettle over the fire, being then covered with cold water. When they feel soft, take them up and place them on a clean linen. Cut them in two and remove the skin and stones. Next cook a strong sugar water, using sugar equal to the weight of the pears the juice of a lemon is added and then the peaches. These are now boiled until they appear lucid; if the water seems to thick, shake until the heat has passed off and then add a tablespoonful of brandy. The peaches are put in glass jars for preservation. If they later on are inclined to rise, boil the water once more and add more sugar, whereupon the peaches themselves are put in and boiled. Preserved apricots. Treat them in the same way as the peaches, but you may leave them unpeeled, if you so desire. They may sometimes need one more boiling. Be also careful that they do not rise after being put up. Preserved quinces. Peel the quinces and put them in a kettle with water enough to more than cover them. Let them boil about 30 minutes or until they become tender; then take them out and strain the water in which they have boiled through a woolen cloth. For each pound of fruit take 4 or 6 ounces sugar, sometimes 1/2 a pound, all depending on the sweetness of the fruit ). Boil and if the syrup is too thick, dilute with water. Baked quinces. Bake some nice ripe quinces in a heat stronger than used for baking apples. Then cut in two and remove the cores. Sugar them and serve them with cream and sugar before they have had time to become cold. Preserved apples. For a pound of apples take 1/2 a pound sugar. Let the sugar melt in cold water. Then let the syrup thus obtained, boil up and now pour it over the apples, which are allowed to cool before they are placed over the fire to boil for half an hour. Preserved grapes. Peel the grapes and stew them slightly; part the juice from them by straining and put the peelings in the juice, diluting it with some water and boil until they become soft, or about 30 minutes. Then add as much sugar as the grapes weigh and boil again. Preserved water-melons for salad. Melons grown late in the season are the best for this purpose, as they need not be ripe but large; the green are as a rule the finest. Peel them and cut them in 4 parts and also core them. Scald them and put them on a cloth. Then make a syrup of sugar with 1/2 pint vinegar to each pound sugar. Immerse the melons in this syrup and let them boil until they appear clear. Take them out, but let the syrup boil on until quite thick. Put the melons in jars and pour the syrup over them, while it is boiling hot. Cut them in slices when you serve. Red beets. Boil the beets in a little water, and when half cooked take them out, salt them and wrap them in a towel. When cold remove the outer skin and put them in a jar, into which pour vinegar and a little caraway. Preserved cranberries. Pick the berries early in the fall, when they are of a light red color. For each pound of berries, take 1 pound of sugar. Boil the water and pour over the berries and put them immediately in a sieve so that all the water may run off. Then spread the berries on a cloth. Meanwhile prepare the syrup as directed, and when ready, immerse the berries, which boil for half an hour. Fill the jars with the preserve and keep until needed. Remember to skim industriously while the berries are boiling and immediately after. ELFTE AFDELNINGEN. Part Eleven. PICKLES AND SALTED GOODS. To preserve dill. Gather the dill while fine and pick it free from the stalks; next chop it as fine as you need it for sauces and put it in a chopping trough and put good butter on it. Rub the butter well into the dill and then pack it in glass jars, with some salt on top and over that a layer of cold sheep tallow. When using it, you take the butter with it, needing no other. To preserve parsley. Proceed exactly as with the dill, but with the difference that parsley must not be chopped before it is served. Pickle it whole. To salt down parsley. Tie the parsley together in small bunches. These together with a few bunches of celery, are put in layers, between which place salt. On top of all put a cover or something similar with some heavy weight on, to press the parsley. Rinse it well before using. To salt down dill. Pick the dill as for pickle, but do not chop it. Put it in layers like parsley, with salt in between each layer. Then press it as above and do not forget to rince it well when you want to use it. To pickle various kinds of greens. Spinach, cabbage, cauliflower, peas or beans , asparagus buds, the fine green part of celery, all this may be placed in tins, together with some cold, fresh butter, which has been melted and skimmed. Fill the tin vessels, cover them well and keep them in a cellar or other cool place. These greens are used with great advantage for soups in the winter season. If small cans, use 1 at a time; but if they are large, put a layer of butter on the top, every time you have taken some. To freshen salt cucumbers. Common salt cucumbers which are green but have assumed a brown appearance by being salted, may be made green again by soaking in water for a day after which they are put in a kettle with vinegar, and placed on the fire, with some pepper, bay leaves and ginger. Do not boil, but let it all cook on a slow fire, until the cucumbers begin to look green. Then put them back in the jars. To preserve asparagus. Take white, coarse and brittle asparagus, and free it from all downy attachments. Then put it compactly in oblong tin boxes, with the buds one way, and now proceed as directed in foregoing numbers, but remember that the asparagus must boil 2 1/2 hours before serving. To dry carrots. Take fullgrown carrots, wash them well and scald them until they become somewhat soft, when put them on a linen cloth, sort them and cut them in slices to suit, which place on plates lined with white paper, and dry in a not very hot oven, while looking carefully that they do not dry too hard. When wanted for soups, put them first in tepid water, 6 or 8 hours. If the water is changed you may use the last for the soup. To dry spinach. The spinach ought not to be cut when covered with dew or rain, only in dry weather. It must be well cleaned, but not rinsed. The oven ought to be moderately hot. Well cleaned iron plates are used. Butter them with melted butter, over which spread the spinach thinly and put in oven. Take it out after a little while and cut the spinach loose with a knife and then spread it on a linen to dry in a warm room. When to be used, put it in tepid water for 2 hours and then scald it in an iron kettle. Lastly chop it and stew it as if fresh. To dry cauliflower. Cut cauliflower heads in small pieces, which clean neatly and string up by the stalk on strong threads. In that way hold them boiling, and then put them on linen, which suspend in a warm room or a garret, where the sun does not reach them. Spread them with big spaces between each. It dries slowly and becomes brown. Before cooking let it lie 4 hours in warm water. Should this then turn brown also, put the cauliflower in boiling water and then stew. To keep red onion. Perfectly ripe and hard onions, should be kept in an airy, well ventilated room, in order to dry slowly, then to be put in a big basket or box, which is to be kept in a place where it cannot freeze, although it, at the same time, must not be too warm. What is called Spanish onion is kept in the same way; but Portuguese onions should be tied up in small bunches and hung up in a cool place, while white onion is tied in wreaths and kept in the same manner. To keep roots in sand. Take a wooden box divided into several small spaces; then procure ordinarily fine sand, not too wet nor too dry, but a little damp. Deposit some celery roots in one of the spaces, but do not do so, until you have cut away the green growth around it, (but not all of it) and strew sand between them. In one of the other spaces, place onions, and proceed as will, the celery; then put in parsnips, then horse radish, etc., always remembering to put in the sand over and between them. Put them in the cellar to keep over the winter, and if they contract a disagreeable cellar taste, you have only to put them in water a few hours before using, to restore them. To keep roots in the ground. If you have access to a garden, or some other plat of cultivated soil, you may keep parsnips, carrots, horse radish and many other kinds of roots, simply by digging holes 1 yard deep, and depositing therein the things you want to preserve, 1 kind in each hole. Fill the holes with the earth and pack it well and then put up a stick to indicate what kind of root there is in each hole. To pickle tomatoes. Take round, smooth, green tomatoes; put them in salt water, cover the kettle and place it over the fire, so that the tomatoes become scalded, which is done by bringing it only to the boiling point. Take out the tomatoes. While the tomatoes now stay in cold water, have another vessel filled with vinegar, to which is added common pepper and mustard. The tomatoes are cut in two, the seeds shaken out and the insides dried with a cloth. They are now put in glass jars and the vinegar poured on. Must be kept air tight. Ripe tomato pickle. To 7 pounds ripe tomatoes add 3 pounds of sugar and a quart vinegar. Boil for 15 minutes. Take out the tomatoes, but let the syrup boil a few minutes longer. Spice to suit with cinnamon and cloves. Tomato catsup. Take a gallon tomatoes, skinned, 4 tablespoons of salt, 4 spoons black pepper, 1/2 a spoon allspice, 8 pods of red pepper and 3 tablespoons mustard. Boil all for 1 hour, and strain through a sieve or a coarse cloth. Let it cool, and then put it in jars to keep. Favorite pickle. One quart raw cabbage chopped fine, 1 quart boiled beets chopped fine, 2 cups sugar, 1 tablespoon salt, 1 teaspoon black pepper, 1/4 teaspoon red pepper, 1 teacup grated horse radish. Cover with vinegar and keep from the air. To pickle cabbage. Cut away all green leaves from the heads and then chop them as fine as possible; next pack the cabbage compactly in a barrell or box, in layers, putting a few drops of vinegar, some dill slips and a few barberries on each layer. When the vessel is full, put a bottom on it and a heavy weight on top. Then it remains standing until it ceases to ferment, when remove the weight and skim off the mold, if any. Then place the vessel in a cold room to be kept over the winter, a smaller weight is then placed on the top. To salt down beef. Cut a piece of the loin in two, cut out the bones and trim the beef into a nice shape. Then rub into it sugar and saltpeter and immediately thereafter with common salt. Let it rest a day; meanwhile prepare a brine of a gallon well water and 3 handfuls salt, skimming well while it is boiling. When cold pour it on the beef, which is turned every other day, in case the brine does not cover it. This beef can be cooked two weeks later. To dry pears. Scald large pears, peel them and cut them lengthwise; then put them in an oven to dry slowly. Next boil the peelings until the substance is out; strain and boil the juice into a syrup. When the pears are heated through, take them out and dip them in the syrup, and replace them into the oven. Continue thus as long as there is any syrup left. To dry apples. For this purpose use soft apples, which peel and cut in 1/2, removing the cores. Place them in the oven to become dry, but do not use common plates for this purpose, as the apples then become black. Salting pork. Cut off head and foot from the hog, remove the suet, part the back from the body, separate also the ribs and the hams and then cut from the middle part as big slices as you want. These pieces are now to be rubbed with fine salt and saltpeter, whereupon put them, skin side down, in a proper vessel, as a tub, with coarse salt on the bottom. Keep on thus as long as there is any pork left, sprinkling coarse salt between each layer. Finally put a plate on the top and on that a heavy weight. The pork is kept in a cool room. To smoke ham in the Westphalian way. Cut the hams from the hogs and let them lie 3 days in cold water, so as to freeze or get stiff at least; then salt them well with fine salt and let them lie that way for 8 days. Put them between 2 wide planks and press the blood out of them. Put again in salt and saltpeter; after 3 days they are ready to take up and smoke in cold juniper smoke for a month; when ready hang them in the ceiling of a room where a fire is kept. To smoke ham in the American way. Rub 2 ounces saltpeter into a ham weighing about 10 pounds and then let it rest 24 hours. After that time rub into it 3 pounds fine salt, 1 pound fine sugar and a handful crushed juniper berries, all first well mixed together. Let the ham lie 2 days before turning it, and having turned it, let it remain 14 days, turning it and rubbing it with the above mixture. It is now prepared to be smoked. The smoking need not be hard, and during that process, have it wrapped in old linen, which take off when through. An illustration of Various Kinds of Vegetables. TOLFTE AFDELNINGEN. Part Twelve. VEGETABLES. Remarks: The fresher all the greens are, the better, as they then are not only better tasting, but also more wholesome. The way to test whether fresh or not, is to bend or break them. If they show themselves brittle, easily breaking, then they are good, but at least partly spoiled if they are flexible and tough. Otherwise it is easy enough to judge by the appearance of a vegetable whether it is fresh or not. Generally it is possible to restore comparative freshness of partly wilted products of the garden by simply sprinkling them with cool water and putting them in a cellar or other cold and dark room. As to cooking, remember that soft water is much to be preferred to well water. All greens ought to lie in cold water a few hours before boiling. If well water must be used, then put some soda in it, before placing it over the fire; moreover it must be borne in mind, that vegetables must not boil too long or too short a time as they in either case will be spoiled, and in connection with this is to be noticed that young vegetables stand less boiling than older and more ripe ones. The water should always be well salted and the greens not put in before it has begun to boil, because they only harden by laying in the water waiting to boil. Onions should bo soaked in warm salted water before boiling. Beans, corn, etc., need no preparation for the boiling. Carrots, turnips and onions should not be split, but cut in rings sidewise in order to cook so much easier. For further particulars see under the head of potatoes. Gathering asparagus. Gather with the morning dew upon it; do not cut it off, but snap it, avoiding the hard or woody part of the stalk; tie in bunches, 8 to 12 stalks to the bunch, according to size; when purchased the bunches come in much larger sizes, and should be divided. If to be kept some time before using (never more than a day), place the bunch upright in about 1/2 an inch of cold water, and keep cool. The larger stalks, or first cut, are prepared vinegrette, with white sauce, or fried; the small ones or second cut, like green peas, and are better if taken from the water when still firm; if boiled soft they loose their flavor. Asparagus. Put the green part into boiling water, slightly salted; boil 5 minutes and pour off the water; add more boiling water and boil 10 to 15 minutes; then put in a lump of butter, salt and pepper (some stir in a thickening made of 1 teaspoon flour mixed with cold water ); toast 3 thin slices bread; spread them with butter, put in a dish and turn the asparagus over it. Cucumbers boiled or fried. Peel and split them lengthwise in 4 parts; take out the seeds, and cut in pieces about an inch long; put them in boiling water with a little salt and boil until done; put them in a towel to dry; put some butter in a frying-pan, and place it over a good fire; when hot put in some chopped parsley, salt and pepper; 2 minutes after put in the cucumbers, fry a few minutes, tossing them now and then, and serve. Raw cucumbers. Select those of medium size and very fresh, which have not lain in the sun before gathering, and put them in cold water for 1/2 an hour; an hour before they are required peel thin, and slice on a slaw cutter set close, or very thin with a knife commencing with the thick or blow end, or they are very likely to be bitter; let the slices drop into a pan of cold water, in which let them lie for 10 minutes; pour off the water and replace once or twice; finally cover them with ice, and set away in the refrigerator until wanted to serve, when salt and pepper them and pour over good cider vinegar; some add salad oil also. From being an indigestible, strong and dangerous edible, by this process they become wholesome and very relishable. (Sliced onions are also served with them, but they should be mild, the Bermuda onions being the best. Dessert. An Iluustration of Various Fruits including Pineapple, Orange and Pears. Stuffed cabbage. Cut out the heart of a large fresh cabbage by gently spreading back the leaves, to do which without breaking, pour over it boiling water; fill the vacancy with finely chopped and boiled veal or chicken rolled into balls with the yolk of an egg. Tie firmly together with twine, or lie it in a cloth and boil in a covered kettle 2 hours. This is a very fine dish and quite economical in using cold meats. Browned white cabbage. Take a hard white head, clean it from all green leaves and cut away the stem. Take a little each of salt, pepper and sugar or syrup and put that in where the stem was. Tie up the head with strong cords and place it with it piece of butter in a pan or kettle, provided with tight cover and there let it light brown and tender. Meanwhile you must look carefully to see that it does not burn; when cooked take it out, and mix a little flour in the remaining juice, which pour over the cabbage. Serve with meat. White cabbage with cream. Clean a cabbage head and cut away the stem; then cut it in small parts, which scald in boiling water until soft. Take it out and place it in a strainer for the water to run off. Melt some butter with flour and mix into it milk and cream, 1/2 of each; sugar, salt and nutmeg to suit. When the sauce boils stir into it 2 yolks; then put, in the cabbage and shake well without boiling, only heating. Serve on platters with meat dishes. Red cabbage a la Orleans. Take a head of middle size, boil it in 1/2 gallon bouillon, wherein place an onion lined with cloves, and 2 glasses red wine. Then spice it quite strong and stew it. Makes a very fine dish. Cauliflower with crabs. Take a few fat crabs and clean them, scald them, and take good care of the meat, while pounding the shells and preparing them fur a crab butter. Meanwhile scald some white cauliflower in salt water, having added a piece of butter. When it is soft take it out and let the water run off. While this is done, cover the cauliflower to keep it warm. Make a somewhat thick sauce of the crab butter and dilute it with the juice of the cauliflower and a little cream; add sugar, salt and nutmeg, or mace to suit the taste. Put the crab meat into the sauce and shake over the fire without boiling. Serve the cauliflower on a platter, with the crab stew arranged around it. Use as middle dish. Spinach. When picked, cleanse and scald it; then put it in cold water for a few minutes; now strain and squeeze it, then chop fine with a little flour. Melt some butter in a kettle, put in the spinach and stir well, diluting according to need with sweet milk. Must not boil long, only a minute; add sugar and nutmeg. Baked onions. Use the large Spanish onion, as the best for this purpose; wash them clean, but do not peel, and put them into a sauce -pan, with slightly salted water; boil an hour, replacing the water with more, boiling hot, as it evaporates; turn off the water and lay the onions on a cloth to dry them well; roll each one in a piece of buttered tissue paper, twisting it at the top to keep it on and bake in a slow oven about an hour, or until tender all through; peel them, place in a deep dish, and brown slightly, basting well with butter, for 15 minutes; season with salt and pepper, and pour some melted butter over them. Peas stewed in cream. Into a sauce -pan of boiling water, put 2 or 3 pints of young green peas and when nearly done and tender, drain in a collender dry; then melt 2 ounces butter in a clean stew-pan, thicken evenly with a little, flour and hold it over the fire, do not let it brown; mix in a gill of cream, add half a teaspoon white sugar, bring to a boil, pour in the peas, keep the pan moving for 2 minutes, until well heated when serve hot. Fried parsnips. Scrape and slice them lengthwise, about 1/4 inch thick, and fry brown in a little butter or clear beef drippings; if previously boiled, they will fry sooner, or the remnants of those boiled for dinner may be used. Boiled parsnips. Wash and scrape them, and remove any black spots or blemishes and if quite large, quarter the thick part. Put them into boiling water, salted with 1 heaping tablespoon to 1/2 gallon water; boil rapidly until tender, drain, and serve in a vegetable dish; are usually served with salt fish, boiled pork or beef. Stewed parsnips. Wash, scrape and slice 1/2 inch thick, put in a frying-pan with half a pint hot water a tablespoon butter, season, cover closely, and stew until all the water is cooked out, stirring to prevent burning: they should be a cream light brown. To clean and prepare carrots. Trim off the small roots; wash and scrape them gently, the skin only; wash well; drain and cut in slices 1/4 inch in thickness, either across or lengthwise. Boiled carrots. When prepared as above, put them in a sauce -pan with a little salt and enough water to more than cover; boil gently until tender, then drain; the time will depend upon how young and tender they are. Dry beans , Lima, white or colored. Dry beans should be soaked in water for some time, from 5 or 10 to 24 hours, if a year or two old; if doubtful as to the age, it will do them no harm to soak them the longer time, and drain. If white beans are used, the smaller sized ones are the best. Their nutriment although overrated, is great, and for making a very palatable and cheap soup are very valuable. To boil --Put the beans in a sauce-pan with cold water, and boil gently until tender; as the water evaporates, fill up with cold water. Never use any salt in boiling dry beans , as it prevents their cooking. When boiled tender, drain, and they are ready to be baked, or used as they are. With pickled pork or bacon --Boil a quart of beans as directed above; cut in dice. 1/2 a pound of salt pork or bacon --about medium fat and lean--and put it in a sauce -pan over the fire; when half fried, add the beans , mix and stir for a minute, and place in a warm oven for about 20 minutes, stirring occasionally; when done, sprinkle on the top some chopped parsley, pepper and salt to taste, if not already sufficiently salt. Ham or fresh pork may be used instead of salt, pork or bacon, if preferred. Boston baked beans . Soak in fresh water over night a quart of small white beans; in the morning change the water and put them in a porcelain kettle, with water enough to cover, and parboil until the skins wrinkle; then pour off that water, mix the beans with salt, and put them in an earthen bean-pot (do not use a tin pan); take a a piece of fat salt pork, score the top and place in the middle of the beans ; in a cup mix a tablespoon molasses, a teaspoon dry mustard, a half teaspoon baking soda, and pour over the beans ; fill the pot with warm water, cover the top with the earthen lid, and bake in a slow oven all day, being careful not to let the water dry out, and thus dry the beans ; keep replacing the water until about 3 o'clock, and then let them remain in the oven untouched until 4. Spinach with bouillon. Pick the spinach and clean it, then scald it for 8 minutes over a brisk fire; put it immediately in fresh water and stir so as to make it cool quick and retain its color. Now squeeze out the water and chop it fine together with flour. Melt butter in a pan, put the spinach in it for a few minutes, while stirring, dilute with bouillon or the juice of the spinach. The spinach can be served with chopped, hard boiled eggs, poached eggs or slices of bread cut small and browned in butter. Stewed asparagus. Leavings of boiled asparagus, as also the smaller parts of the plant, may be used for this purpose. Prepare it as usual and cut in pieces 1 1/2 inches long. Now make a sauce of melted butter and flour, and dilute it, while stirring all the time, with bouillon or the juice in which the asparagus has boiled. When the sauce boils stir in 2 or 3 tablespoons sweet cream and 1 or 2 yolks of eggs, all according to the quantity of the asparagus. Immerse the asparagus, stir well and serve on a platter. Then have ready some stewed crab tails with which to garnish the asparagus, as if with a wreath. Fried celery stalks. Peel the celery and cut it somewhat thicker than for salad. Then mix grated bread or bread crumbs and sugar; break 3 eggs and heat them well; dip the celery in the egg and roll it in the bread and sugar. Next put it in a frying pan with butter and brown it on both sides. It is now ready to be served. Sauce is prepared by beating the butter and the eggs with white wine. Garnish with fried parsley. Welch beans . Shell and scald the beans ; then stir some flour and butter together, diluting it with bouillon; put the beans into the sauce and boil gently. They are finished by adding some sweet cream and a yolk beaten with the cream; season with sugar, salt and nutmeg, also a little parsley. Can be served with meat dishes. White beans. Soak them an hour in cold water; then put them in cold water over the fire; put some butter in the water. In order to impart a good flavor, add some drops of lemon juice, besides salt and pepper. Brown beans . Soak in cold water for 1 hour; then they are put on the stove in cold water to boil until mushy, when syrup and vinegar are added according in taste. They are then served with salt meat, pork, fried fish, etc. Green peas. Peas are always best when picked just before shelling and cooking. Place them then in boiling water with a little salt and let them boil until tender. Then add salt and butter to suit. Fried egg plant. Cut the plant in slices 1/3 of an inch thick and dip these in beaten eggs mixed with some salt and pepper. Then roll them in bread crumbs and fry them in hot lard. Stuffed and baked tomatoes. From the blossom end of a dozen tomatoes --smooth, ripe and solid--cut a thin slice, and with a small spoon scoop out the pulp without breaking the rind surrounding it; chop a small head of cabbage and a good-sized onion finely, and mix with these fine bread crumbs and the pulp; season with pepper, salt and sugar, and add a cup sweet cream; when all is well mixed, fill the tomato shells, replace the slices, and place the tomatoes in a buttered baking-dish, cut ends up, and put in the pan just enough water to keep from burning; drop a small lump of butter on each tomato, and bake 1/2 hour or so, till well done; place another bit of butter on each, and serve in same dish Stewed tomatoes. After scalding and peeling, cut them into a stewpan; season and let them simmer (not boil) for 3/4 of an hour. May be cooked with soft bread crumbs or small squares of bread, using nearly as much bread or crumbs as tomato, adding it after they are nearly done. POTATOES. To select potatoes . As a general rule the smaller the eyes the better the potato. Choose those of medium size, and as smooth as possible. By cutting a slice off the larger end it may be discovered if sound; if spotted or having a large hollow they are not, and therefore inferior. Of the variety to select from depends greatly on the season; some sorts keep better than others; others decay and go out of market as the season advances; Potatoes should be kept in a dark but cool and dry cellar, to prevent vegetating. Copper strainer. An Illustration of a Copper Strainer with a Long Handle. To prepare potatoes . Old potatoes should be peeled before boiling or stewing, and immediately dropped into cold water, to remain until required, in order to save them clear in color, as exposure to the air darkens them; wipe each one dry before cooking; for the same reason, when sliced, let the slices drop info a pan of cold water. To cook potatoes . Steaming is now generally regarded as far preferable to boiling potatoes ; first, from being more easily accomplished, and next, they cook a little sooner, and if watched, frequently tested, and taken up as soon as done, will preserve the starch, i.e., be more mealy and dry. The great point in steaming, boiling or baking is to know when done, and act accordingly, or they will be watery or "soggy," as it is homely, but expressively termed. For this reason too, it is essential that potatoes of a uniform size should be selected for each cooking, commencing with the largest, and continuing each time until the supply is exhausted. Quite large potatoes , for steaming or boiling, should be cut in 4 parts, smaller ones in 2; remove the middle or core, if hollow or defective, also all worm holes or other blemishes. Very old potatoes may be vastly improved by soaking in water over night; if quite watery, a small piece of lime dropped into the water in which they are boiling will cause them to cook dryer than without. New potatoes should be boiled in 2 waters. Medium sized new potatoes will cook--boil or bake--in 20 to 30 minutes; matured or old ones in about double that time, and either, when peeled, some 15 minutes sooner. Potatoes in French style. One quart cold boiled potatoes cut into dice, 3 tablespoons butter, 1 of chopped onions and 1 of chopped parsley, pepper and salt; season the potatoes with the salt and pepper, fry the onions in the butter, and when they are yellow add the potatoes ; stir with a fork, being careful not to break them; when hot add the parsley, and cook 2 minutes longer. Potatoes for every day in the week. On Sunday, peel, steam and mash; add milk, butter and salt and then steam and beat like cake batter until nice and light; the longer the better.--Monday, baked potatoes in the skins; be sure to take them up when done, or they will be wrinkled and watery; if not served immediately, do them up in a napkin and tie close to keep hot.--Tuesday, peel them and bake with roast beef, cooking them under the meat. --Wednesday, prepare in Kentucky style, (see below).--Thursday, peel, steam and serve whole.--Friday, peel, cut in thin slices lengthwise, sprinkle with pepper and salt, and fry on a griddle greased with butter or beef drippings, and turn like pancakes.--Saturday, potatoes boiled in their jackets. Potatoes in Kentucky style. Slice potatoes thin on a slaw cutter placed over a pan of water, and let stand 1/2 an hour, which hardens them; put them in a pudding-dish or dripping-pan, with salt, pepper and about half a pint of milk; bake for an hour, take out and add a lump of butter 1/2 the size of an egg cut in small bits and scattered over the top. The quantity of milk cannot be exactly given; enough to moisten the potatoes , with a little left as a gravy. Potatoes in butter. Peel and cut the potatoes ; wash them and wipe them with a towel. Put a piece of butter in a pan and let it melt but not brown. Add the potatoes and let them remain 3 or 4 minutes or until they become light brown. When they feel soft to the finger, take them off the fire and serve while hot. Fried potatoes . Peel 6 potatoes of middle size and cut them in pretty thick slices. Put quite a big lump of skimmed fat in a pan to melt over a brisk fire. Immerse the potatoes in the fat and stir with a big spoon so that the potatoes become evenly fried; it ought to be ready in 10 or 12 minutes; then put it over a griddle to drain; sprinkle it with fine salt and use it for garnishing. If potatoes with a hard fried crust are wanted, fry them 5 minutes longer. Potato box. Peel the potatoes , boil them and let them cool. Then grate or pound them and mix with a large lump of butter so as to make a kind of mash, which mix with a tablespoonful of bread crumbs, a little sugar and pounded bitter almond, salt, pepper, 2 tablespoons sweet cream and 4 eggs. Shape the mixture on a platter and put it in the oven to bake. When the potatoes have puffed up it is ready, and can be served to roast beef or beef a la mode. Of potatoes thus prepared you can also make roulets, which dip in egg and bread crumbs, and fry in butter or lard. Potatoes with sauce. Brown in a pan butter and 3 red onions chopped fine; otherwise 1 chopped poruguese onion will do. When brown pour on some water, and immediately thereupon put in the potatoes , which should be peeled and cut in 2 or more pieces, all according to their size; add salt, pepper, parsley and chives. This is to boil over a gentel fire. It is served as a middle dish with sauce made as follows: Melt butter or lard in a pan; sprinkle flour on top, and also a few onions. When the onions are brown, dilute with bouillon and season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Let it boil until the onions fall to pieces. Just before serving, add a few drops vinegar. Potatoes fried raw. Peel the potatoes and cut in fillets. Put a lump of butter in a pan and let it melt over a strong fire. Brown the potatoes in the butter; and when soft put them on a warmed platter and sprinkle with fine salt. If the potatoes are very small, you may cook them whole in butter or lard. If in lard, they should, when done, be laid on fine blotting papper for the fat to be absorbed. Potato snow. Take large and very white potatoes , as free from spots or blemishes as possible, and boil them in their skins in salt and water until perfectly tender, but not overdone; drain and dry them thoroughly near the fire, and peel; put a hot dish before the fire, and rub the potatoes through a coarse sieve on to it; do not touch them afterwards or the flakes will fall; serve as hot as possible. Six potatoes are enough for 3 persons. Sweet potatoes . Dress, clean and bake them in an oven for an hour, or place in a steamer and steam from 1/2 to 3/4 of an hour; or when steamed and nearly done scrape and peel them, place in a pan and bake 1/2 an hour; or, cut them (steamed or boiled) in slices and fry in butter or lard; or, peel and slice when raw, and fry a layer at a time on a griddle or in a frying-pan, with a little melted lard, using care not to cook them too long, or they will become hard; or drop in boiling lard in a frying-pan, turn them till a nice brown on both sides; or, halve or quarter them and bake in a pan with roast beef, basting them often with its drippings. Soup tureen etc. An Illustration of a Soup Tureen along with A Goblet and Soup Spoon. TRETTONDEAFDELNINGEN. Part Thirteen. SOUPS AND MUSHES. Weak fish bouillon. For this purpose use only fish with solid meat, such kinds as carp, perch, pike, flounder, etc. Proceed as follows: Put the fish selected in a copper pan. For each 2 1/2 pounds fish with bones, take a gallon of water. Let it boil and skim; now add to it onions and carrots. Continue the boiling with a very slow fire until the fish boils to pieces. Fish bouillon. For each pound fish use 1 quart water, and boil it together with carrots, celery, parsley, onions, a couple of cloves, half a bay leaf and a piece of butter. Let it boil until the fish goes to pieces. Then let the bouillon go through a sieve, while the fish is drained without pressure. Finish the bouillon with a few beaten yolks of eggs and enrich it with fresh greens fried for 1/2 an hour in butter. Put roasted bread in the plate and pour the soup over it. Then serve with cheese. Soup-meat croquettes. An illustration of a plate of croquetties placed on top of a folded napkin and decorated with some vegetable. Russian fish soup. For this soup is used perch, pike or other fish. Cut it in pieces, pour weak fish bouillon over it and spice it with 1 onion, 2 cloves, 1 1/2 ounces pars- ley, 2 bay leaves, 1 pinch of salt, and the same of nutmeg. Let it boil until the fish is soft and then pour it through a sieve or cloth. Cut the fish in small pieces or chop it fine and then put it in the soup, which boil to suit the taste. Add some slices of lemon if agreeable. A glass of white wine will tend to enrich it. Spinach soup. Chopped spinach fried slightly in butter and flour, place in a pan in boil, and while boiling slowly it is diluted with bouillon. Beat five yolks of eggs with 2 pints cold boiled cream and pour that into the boiling soup, stirring while so doing. Serve the soup with fried bread slices. Soup on cucumbers. Peel 5 cucumbers and cut in two, removing the cores. Then cut them in slices and boil them until soft, then drain them. Brown them in a kettle with a little butter and a pinch of sugar. Add 2 tablespoonfuls beef jelly and 10 spoons cream sauce. Let boil briskly a few minutes, and then force it through a hair sieve. Next put it back into a kettle, mixed with good bouillon. Just before serving season it with salt and pepper, and a little butter. To be eaten with fried slices of bread. Green peas soup. Take 1 1/2 pints sugar peas, the same quantity of English green peas (or if you have none of the latter, take so much more of the former), less than a pint of carrots cut in small dices, and boil it all together in weak bouillon. Add some asparagus, if handy, shortly before the peas are ready boiled. When it is all boiled, finish the soup with a little butter and flour and chopped parsley, salt, sugar and nutmeg or mace. Serve hot. Soup a la Colbert. Form 20 small round balls of fine carrots, 20 others of turnips and as many of cauliflower. Scald the turnips and Skim and cooking spoons. An illustration of different kind of cooking spoons. carrots in separate kettles; drain them, and put them once more into separate vessels and pour over them strong chicken soup. Put 1/4 ounce sugar into each of the kettles, let the soup boil in the vegetables and then put the carrots and turnips together in a kettle with 1 1/2 pints soup, which bring to boiling, and then drain. Meanwhile scald the cauliflower cuts in salt water and let them drain; now put all the vegetables together in the soup bowl and add to them 3 quarts boiling strong soup. Serve the soup with 12 poached eggs on a platter. Genuine turtle soup. Cut off the head of the turtle and let the blood drain 15 hours. Take out the inside; cut off the 4 fins and saw her in 4 parts. Boil them and the fins in water; take up when the shells loosen, clear away all slimy parts, put her in a kettle with a bouquet, carrots, onions, salt and pepper; skim and boil 4 hours. Take 3 gallons of water to 10 pounds of turtle. Boil, skim and season with salt, pepper, onion, cloves and boil 4 hours. Take 8 pounds cut up beef, 8 pounds cut up veal, 1/2 ounce basil, 1 ounce marjoram, 1 ounce rosemary, 1 ounce thyme, 1 ounce bay leaves, 6 ounces parsley, 30 ounces onion, 20 ounces parsley roots, 50 ounces champignons, 2 ounces celery and a pinch of cayenne pepper. Brown all this in 12 ounces butter and as much flour. Dilute with 2 1/2 gallons turtle soup and add to it a browned chicken. Boil four hours. Strain the soup and boil it 1 hour. Cut the turtle in slices, put them in a kettle with 2 bottles madeira wine and boil 20 minutes. Serve the turtle and the soup in bowls and put a little lemon juice over it. White cabbage with pork. Cut a hard white cabbage head in small parts after having picked away the outer leaves. Meanwhile put a kettle on the stove with water and some butter or pork fat in. Put in the cabbage and let it become brown, stirring it well. Add bouillon, beef or pork juice, according to circumstances, and finally season with allspice and marjoram. When the cabbage has boiled a while with these spices and feels tender, finish it off with some butter fried with flour. If not of a nice brown appearance, add some worcester sauce. Eaten with pork or meat dishes. White cabbage with milk. Clean white cabbage, cut it in small fillets and scald it in water, as in the above description. Then drain it well and next boil it in sweet milk, finishing it with butter and flour melted together. Sugar, salt and nutmeg may be added to suit. Potato soup. Peel and wash some good potatoes and then boil them until soft in bouillon. Take them out and force them through a strainer and put them back into the bouillon, in which at the same time boil fine fillets of carrots, parsnips, roots of parsley. Serve the soup quite hot and then put in some finely cut parsley. If the bouillon is not sufficiently spiced, you may remedy that by putting some white pepper and ginger in a piece of linen which when tied together by threads, boil with the roots and potatoes . If yon have no bouillon, water with butter in may serve the purpose. Soup of Welch beans . Shell the beans and break off the so called nails. Take half a gallon (more or less) and boil them in water wherein has been placed a little butter and salt. Scrape and wash a few carrots, cut them in thin round slices until you have obtained a pint and boil them with the beans in very little water. When they are all soft take take them out and place them on a platter. Melt a spoonful butter in the pan, add a spoon of flour to it, add further the juice, stir well and finally put in the beans and the carrots. Now pour in sweet milk enough to make a moderately thick soup. When boiling add a little parsley and grated nutmeg. This finishes the soup. If the beans are overgrown they may have a bitter or stringent taste, which may be mitigated by first scalding the beans in a separate water. They may be improved by yolks of eggs, cream and sugar. Sago soup. Half a pound raisins, a piece of cinnamon, half a lemon. Boil these for a while. Then stir in a pint sago, taking good care that it does not make lumps. If the soup should become too thick, thin it with water; and if too thin, mix some corn starch in cold water and pour into the boiling soup. Add wine if you so desire; also sugar. Green gooseberry soup. Pick and wash a gallon unripe gooseberries and boil them in a cast iron pan or one made of clay. The water should be half a gallon and the time for boiling 10 minutes. Then press them through a hair sieve and add sugar and cinnamon to suit. Boil it again in the same vessel and thicken with a spoonful corn starch dissolved in cold water. Grate some of a lemon rind and also of an orange rind and put that in the bowl in which the soup is to be served. Pour in the soup and stir. Hip soup. Hip is the fruit grow on the dog rose bush. Boil half a gallon of them in 2 gallons of water. When soft take them out and pass them through a hair sieve. Then take the parts squeezed out together with the juice and put it over the fire, adding half a pound raisins, a little cinnamon and lemon peelings. Boil 15 minutes. Soak a spoonful corn starch and put in the soup. Sweeten it, to suit and finally flavor it with a handful sweet almonds, which strew over the soup in the bowl. Cherry soup. Pound in a mortar 9 pints of fresh brown cherries until the stones are crushed. If there is time for it the berries may be placed in cold water over night previous to using them, as thereby a stronger taste of the stones is procured. A few hours may even do. When done with the pounding, squeeze the mass through a cloth, put the juice in a pan with sugar enough to make the soup as sweet as you want it. Dilute with water if need be, and when the soup boils, stir in a heaping spoonful corn starch, mixed with a pint of water. When the soup boils again, pour it up and let it become cold. When ready to serve add some dumplings made of wine or apple jelly, or preserved cherries. Serve with small sweet biscuits. Soup of dried cherries. Two pounds dried cherries, should be pounded in a stone mortar until all the stones are crushed, then to be placed in a high but narrow jar. There pour over them a gallon boiling hot water and stir good with a silver spoon. After an hour, or when the soup seems clear, separate the clear soup from the thick part with a sieve; add to the thick part a gallon boiling water and stir again; now let it settle and then add the new clear soup to the one already obtained. The clear is to be boiled with a little cinnamon and lemon peeling, and also 1 pound sugar; thicken with a spoon of corn starch. Have ready in another kettle, boiled prunes or plums and raisins and add to them the cherry soup with juice and all. The soup is now ready and may be served warm or cold with sweet biscuits or rusks. Wine soup. Boil half a gallon water for a while with the yellow rind of a lemon, cut very thin, the juice well squeezed out and strained into the water; add 4 ounces of sugar; when the soup has a sufficiently strong lemon taste, take out the rind. Now soak a spoonful of corn starch in 1/2 pint of French wine, and thicken the soup with it, stirring while so doing. Beat 6 or 8 yolks of eggs in the soup bowl, together with 2 spoonfuls sugar, until quite frothy. Pour on this, in the bowl, first 1 or 2 spoonfuls of the soup, stirring it well; then a little more, and again more until all the soup is emptied, stirring all the time. Then serve the soup with sweet biscuits. If you want rather a mild sort of a soup, you may dispense with the lemon juice and add instead a few spoonfuls of sweet cream to the yolks. Crab soup. Thicken good bouillon with butter and a little flour. Then prepare 40 big crabs by boiling them and chopping the meat of the tails and the claws very fine and mixing it with 8 eggs, some sweet cream, 10 sweet rusks, 5 ounces butter, a spoonful sugar, a little nutmeg and less than a pint white wine. Of all this is to be made meat balls, which boil 1/2 hour in bouillon. Now boil the shells of the crabs and all the other parts, except the stomachs, (which throw away), in a quart of water with 1/2 pound butter, until all the substance is boiled out and then strain it, and let it cool. The fat on the surface of the water is added to the soup and enough of the water itself, to impart a pretty good crab flavor. The bouillon and a pint red wine (St. Julien) is poured on, and the meat balls are put into the soup; it is now ready to serve. Italian soup. Break half a pound macaroni in small pieces and boil them until soft in clear bouillon, which ought to be a little brown. Now beat together 6 eggs, 1/2 pint cream, 1/4 of a pint melted butter and 1/2 pint or more grated parmese cheese. Pour it all into a buttered mold and put it in boiling water, where it remains until it has thickened. Then pour it out and add to it long square pieces of macaroni already boiled. Onion soup. Take 1 onion for each person served, not to small a size. Brown the onions in butter and pour bouillon over them, and if you have some meat jelly to use with the bouillon, so much the better. Thicken with browned butter and flour and serve with butter and bread in French manner. Ox tail soup. Take 10 pounds of ox tails, cut them in pieces at the joints. Rinse them well and put them in water while melting some butter in a kettle. Put the chopped pieces of the tail in the kettle and some salt and white pepper. Fry while constantly stirring. Melt a piece of butter in another pan and put in a turnip, some celery, a few carrots and parsnips, and fry them until quite hard, not burning them. When brown, pour over bouillon made of veal and beef. When this has fried for 30 minutes, strain it with the bouillon of the ox tails. Then thicken it with butter and flour. Put the oxtails in the soup. 1 or 2 pieces to each plate to be served, also a couple pieces of egg. Finally pour in some port wine. Chicken soup Prepare 1 or 2 chickens with feet, wings and heart. Place it all over the fire to fry with a lump of butter. When fried take it up and separate the breast, but pound all the rest in a mortar, having added to it a piece of calfs shoulder. All the butter in which the chickens were fried, is now to be boiled with an onion, a celery, 2 carrots and some white pepper; let it boil 2 hours. Then strain it and skim off the fat; salt and season to suit, Cut square pieces of the chickens breasts and put them in the soup bowl. Add 2 yolks, if you wish, and then serve. Cabbage soup. Place over the fire 1/2 a pound pork and an onion, both cut in pieces; in another pan, melt 1/2 pound butter over a slow fire for 10 minutes. Previous to this boil 5 heads of Brussel cabbage; squeeze and chop them and add them to the pork, to be boiled for 5 minutes. Then stir into it 2 tablespoons of flour, then a gallon bouillon, and a quart milk. Add sugar, pepper and salt; then strain, skim, and serve. Puree of cauliflower. Melt in a pan 2 ounces butter, 2 ounces pork, 1 ounce flour, some onion, celery and bay leaves. Ten minutes over a strong fire will be long enough. Then add to it 2 cauliflower heads already browned and a gallon veal bouillon. Boil a while, sugar it, salt it and force it through a sieve. Then add 1 quart of milk and boil again. Thicken with 3 yolks of eggs and 1/4 of a pint cream, Before serving add to the soup a head of a boiled cauliflower cut in pieces. Beer soup. Take 1/2 gallon of small beer and 2 cardamoms and also some ginger; boil it together in a pan or kettle. When reaching the boiling point, stir in a quart of sweet milk and a handful flour. Sweeten with sugar or syrup to suit. Beer and milk. Boil a quantity of milk and small beer separately, and when ready to serve mix 2/3 of the milk with 1/3 of the beer and sweeten to suit. Chocolate. For 1/2 pound chocolate, take 1 1/2 quart of milk and half as much water. Put the chocolate in cold milk and place it over the fire while stirring. Let it boil half an hour and then sweeten to suit. Warm almond milk. Scald and pound 4 ounces sweet and 2 ounces of bitter almonds. They ought to be pounded in a stone mortar and diluted with 2 tablespoonfuls milk during the time. Then boil about a gallon sweet milk and stir into it the pounded almonds with sugar enough to make it moderately sweet. Then strain and serve. Vanilla milk. Put about a gallon sweet milk over the fire aud let it boil a few minutes with a pod of vanilla, which is to be taken out again after a while. Beat 2 eggs in a bowl and pour the vanilla milk over them and stir thoroughly. Add sugar to suit the taste. It is now ready to serve. Boiled yeast milk. Bring a gallon sweet milk to boiling point and then place aside to cool. Stir into it half that measure of thick sour cream and now let it stand that way over night. Spread a napkin over a coarse strainer which must be placed over a platter. Pour the mixture on the napkin. Thus the whey is separated from the other part. Beat half a gallon thick sour cream to froth, dilute it with as much milk. Into this put lumps of curdled milk from the napkin. Diluted wine. Put into a bowl a lump of sugar and let it dissolve in cold well water, a piece of ice may also be put with it. Then put in slices of lemon or lemon peelings, cut very fine; also the juice of 1 or 2 lemons, all according to taste and convenience. Lastly pour on it old or young French wine with grated nutmeg. Makes a delicious soup for summer. Beer and juice. Half a gallon good small beer and a goblet bottled beer; sugar syrup or sugar and the juice of half a lemon, also the rind of a lemon cut in small pieces. Sprinkle with grated nutmeg and eat with rusks. Bouillon with rice and eggs. Wash and rinse 1/2 pint of good rice and bring it to boil in a kettle of water, which strain off and let the rice boil again, this time in a little weak bouillon. When the rice begins to curl it is ready and it is then placed in the soup bowl, where hot bouillon is poured over it. If it is desired to have eggs in the bouillon it is to be remembered that they must be fresh and good and poached a little ahead of the time. One egg is to be placed in each plate of soup. Bouillon with dumplings. Beat 2 eggs with a tablespoonful sugar; add 2 spoonfuls cream, 2 of melted butter, 3 of flour and 1 pounded cardamom. Work this for a little while. Then flour the table and roll the batter to the thickness of a finger. Then cut it in pieces of the size of a thimble. Boil up some clear bouillon and let the dumplings boil 2 minutes. Thickened brown bouillon. Just before the soup is to be served, a little butter and flour is beaten together and then thinned with hot bouillon. To a gallon of bouillon take 4 yolks of eggs and 1/2 pint of cream, which beat in the bowl; then pour in the soup and salt it to suit. Eat with toasted bread. Bouillon. Boil 9 pounds of ox beef in a sufficient quantity of water on a slow fire. In another vessel boil carrots and parsnips cut fine, onions, peas pods and celery. The 2 parts are mixed when the meat has been separated from the bouillon, which must boil until quite firm. Dumplings in beef soup. Two tablespoons butter should be worked with a wooden spoon for five minutes; add 1 pint of sweet cream, 4 yolks of eggs, and 2 whites, also some wheat flour. Salt, sugar and nutmeg to suit. Now shape with a teaspoon small dumplings and boil them. Test the batter by making and cooking only one first. Small dumplings. Beat 2 eggs with a spoonful sugar; add 2 spoonfuls cream, 2 of melted butter, 3 of flour and 1 cardamom. This is to be worked for a while. Then flour the table, roll the dough thick as a finger and cut dumplings the size of a thimble. Boil as above. Butter mush. Put 1/2 pound fresh butter over the fire. When it is melted, work into it as much flour as it will take, making it quite thick. Stir it for quite a while, and then add to it a spoonful of sweet milk; stir and continue adding milk until it is like common mush. Salt and eat with cream, sugar and cinnamon. Rice mush. Wash the rice well, first in cold, then in tepid, and finally in boiling hot water. Afterwards let them boil in sweet milk with some butter added. The butter is used to get the rice to mash so much the sooner. When half cooked, add more milk, if it is to be had, otherwise use water. Continue thus until the rice is moderately thick. Then salt it to suit. If much water is used, you may beat 2 yolks and a little cream and put in to make it richer. Eat with sweet cream, sugar and cinnamon. Rye mush. Take newly harvested and threshed rye, or otherwise gleanings from the barn floor. Put an iron pan with water over the fire, and when it has become hot, place the rye in it and stir steadily until it begins to crack and the rye assumes a light brown color. When dried this way, grind it in a hand mill, but not fine, about the size of small rice. This done, stir it into boiling water already salted. Boil for 1 hour and eat with cream and milk. When cold this mush is hard, and can be cut in slices and fried in butter. Apple mush. Take good Carolina rice and wash well in warm and cold water and then boil it until quite thick, adding some lemon peelings and cinnamon. Meanwhile peel good apples, cut them into slices and boil them into a mash. Mix the apple mash and the rice and add sugar. Put it up in a bowl and garnish with cream beaten into foam. Can be served both cold and warm. Mush fried in oven. Wash and boil rice, using milk, until a firm mush is obtained. Put it in a mold. When a skin has begun to form on the surface of the mush, put in here and there, small pieces of butter, and then strew sugar thickly over it; also cinnamon. Now place it in an oven and let it stand until brown. Serve with sweet cream. DUMPLINGS, FARCES, ETC. FOR SOUPS. Dumplings for beef soup. Work 2 tablespoonfuls cream with a wooden spoon for 5 minutes; add to it a little less than a pint sweet cream, 4 yolks, 2 whites and some good wheat flour, also some sugar, salt and mace to suit. Form small dumplings out of this batter, using a wooden spoon for the purpose. Boil in bouillon. In another way. Beat 2 eggs with a spoonful sugar; add to this 2 spoonfuls cream, 2 of melted butter, 3 of wheat flour, and 1 cardamom, pounded; work it awhile. Then flour the table, roll the dough as thick as a finger, and cut it in pieces the size of a thimble. Put these dumplings in clear bouillon and boil them for 2 minutes. Dumplings of bread crumbs. Use the same kind of dough as in the foregoing, with the difference of having bread crumbs instead of flour. Small meat balls. Scrape 1/2 pound of veal, free from all sinews; chop and pound it together with a piece of butter. Then mix this farce with a little cream or milk, bread crumbs, 3 eggs, white pepper and salt. Shape them into nuts with a teaspoon and boil thorn in bouillon. They are need in soups. Meat balls of chicken. Take the breast of a hen or chicken and scrape it well and then chop and pound it in a stone mortar together with a piece of fresh butter, making the mixture elastic and cohesive. Then stir into it 2 or 3 eggs, a few spoonfuls sweet cream and milk, white pepper and mace to suit. Now make balls of the dough; generally they are made the size of a nut. Boil in bouillon. Fish balls. Split a small pike in two and remove all the bones; then scrape the meat from the skin, chop and pound it together with 2 ounces butter and some fine lard or tallow, so as to make it pliable. Work into it 1 tablespoon of wheat flour and 2 eggs, but only 1 at a time; also sweet cream, salt and mace. Make small dumplings and boil in bouillon. Meat balls with cabbage. Chop and pound together 2 pounds of ox farce and 1 pound fish farce, making an even dough of it. Mix into it 3 eggs, some cream, nutmeg, white pepper and salt. When very well worked, form out of if, with 2 spoons, small balls, which boil in bouillon and use in sour or white cabbage. Meat balls of fowls. If you want them white and nice, take the breast of 2 pheasants; scrape them well and treat as directed for meat balls of chicken. FJORTONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Fourteen. CUSTARDS, CREAMS AND ICES. Remarks. The successfull preparation of these delicacies is a matter of considerable care and attention and the following condensed directions are necessary: A custard-kettle is almost indispensible, but one may be improvised by setting a tin pail within a kettle or sauce-pan; it is made of blocked tin or tinned iron, one within the other, forming a water bath. Gelatine used for creams should be soaked for an hour or so in a little cold water or milk set in a warm place; a bowl set in the top of a tea kettle will be most convenient. Use it by pouring in the hot custard just after removing from the fire. For creams or custards, eggs should be beaten in stone or earthenware to attain the creamy lightness desirable. For custards the usual rule is 4 eggs, a cup of sugar and a salt-spoon salt to a quart of milk. Bake in a baking-dish until firm in the center, taking care that the heat is moderate, or it will turn mostly to whey; it will thus be more delicate. For boiled custards, the yolks alone should be used, but for economy the whole egg; boil the milk in the custard-kettle, and when, by a light foam on top it shows to be about boiling, add the sugar; let it remain a few minutes, stirring until it thickens a little, but not long enough to curdle, then immediately set the inner kettle or pail, if not a custard-kettle, in cold water, or at once turn out into a cold dish; curdling will result from its standing in the kettle. Boiled custards require the closest attention until finished. A box-wood or heavily tinned iron spoon, with a long handle, should be used for custards or creams. The moulds for charlotte russe, blanc mange, and all other creams should first be wet with cold water before setting on the ice to harden. Gelatine is not neccessary for charlotte russe; the filling may be made stiff enough by using an egg whip, beater, or whip churn. Fine cream for filling. Mix 12 yolks together with 4 ounces flour, the same weight of sugar, a pinch of salt and somewhat less than a quart cream. Place it all over the fire; remove when it begins to become firm; do not let it boil; stir until cool. Is used for filling small tarts. Brandy cream. Rub off the yellow outer skin of 3 lemons on a piece of sugar; cut the lemons in two and squeeze out the juice. Pour a pint of well water on the sugar and then the same quantity of arrack or French brandy. When the sugar is dissolved and the mixture has the right degree of sweetness mix into it 10 yolks and 6 whole eggs. A few minutes before serving the cream, pour it into a pan with room enough for stirring, then let it boil a moment over a brisk fire, stirring all the time. It is now ready to serve. Egg cream. One pint cream, as much milk, 1/2 pound of sugar, 10 yolks and a handful flour. Put all this over a fire and let it boil while stirring it incessantly. Then remove from the fire and still stir till all the heat has passed off. Beat 6 whites of eggs to a firm froth and stir it gently into the other part. Put it now into a deep platter or bowl and cover it thickly with fine sugar. When the sugar is dissolved, put the cream into a pretty warm oven where it is to remain until it puffs up. Lemon cream. Put a pint French wine into a kettle, as much water, and 16 eggs from which 8 whites have been separated. Rub the yellow skin from 3 lemons over a pound sugar and squeeze the juice of the lemons through a strainer over the sugar. Let all this be brought to the boiling point while stirring it all the time. Then take it off from the stove, but continue to stir until most of the heat has passed away. It is served in a crystal bowl and eaten cold. Vanilla cream. One pint sweet cream and a piece of vanilla are to be boiled together. When it has boiled down to half its bulk thin it with another pint of cream and add 2 ounces of sugar. Then stir into it 8 eggs. When thickened, take it off and pour it in a bowl, removing the vanilla. Serve it cold and garnished with preserves and biscuits. Cream of whites of eggs. One pint of cream and as much milk, 1/2 ounce bitter almonds pounded fine, and 1/2 pound of sugar. Place this on the stove and let it boil up. Ten whites of eggs beaten into a froth and half an ounce starch soaked in milk, must now be stirred into the boiling cream, which remove immediately from the fire, but continue the stirring till the cream has begun to cool. Add some lemon juice. Serve in crystal bowl and garnish with preserves. Tea cream. This is prepared exactly in the same way as coffee cream, as per below, using tea instead of coffee. Coffee cream. Put a quart of cream over the fire and when boiling, add to it 1/4 ounce of coffee which has been roasted to a light, brown color. Then lift it off and cover it. When cool, strain through a fine sieve over a kettle and add 8 yolks of eggs and sugar to suit. Place the kettle on the stove again and stir the mixture continually until it thickens. Then remove from the fire and stir until the heat has passed off. Pour it into a crystal bowl and serve cold. Frozen cream. Beat thick sweet cream with sufficient sugar to make a hard froth, but have also a lemon peeling in it and then put in something to color it pink red. Put it all in a mould and place that in salt and snow or ice to freeze for about 2 hours. When ready to serve dip the mould in hot water, wipe it, empty the cream on a platter, and garnish with sugared bread. Cherry cream. One quart dried or fresh cherries are to be pounded in a mortar until the stones are crushed, then boil them in 1/2 gallon well water, using a pan made of brass if possible. After a little while, having stirred all the time, force it through a sieve and then let it settle. Put the clear part back into the kettle and add the yellow peeling of a lemon, a little cinnamon and sugar or syrup. Boil again. Soak a few spoonfuls corn starch in water and stir it. Add this to the boiling cream and stir well so that the starch does not become lumpy. Ready to serve with beaten cream. Chocolate cream. For half a gallon of sweet cream take 1/4 pound chocolate and sugar to suit. Then take 8 eggs from which separate 5 whites. Put it all in a pan or kettle and place it on the stove with a brisk fire to boil some minutes, while you stir it. Now lift it off, but do not cease to stir it before it has cooled. This cream is to bo garnished with preserves. Apple cream. Boil some apples with sugar in a covered kettle. When boiled as soft as mush pass them through a sieve and let them stand until cold. Beat cream to a froth and let that settle. Take enough of this froth to mix with the apple mash, adding sugar and the grated rind of a lemon; stir well again. Put up the cream on a platter or bowl and garnish it with small tarts and sugar biscuits. Wine cream. Take a pint red wine and mix in so much sugar and water that a medium strong wine taste remains. Add to it 2 slices lemon peeling, 2 crushed cardamoms and a little cinnamon. Now let it boil a while or until it has a pretty agreeable taste. Take it off and strain. Put the juice on the stove, adding more sugar. Soak 2 spoons of corn starch in cold water and stir it into the mash and boil. Take up and serve cold with cream. Frozen preserve cream. Beat a quart sweet cream to a froth. Remove the upper part of the froth to another dish. Beat again and again, skim off, continuing thus till there is no more cream. Now mix into it the kind of preserve you wish, raspberry, cherry, etc. Put it all in a mould, place it on ice and let it freeze. When ready to serve, dip the mould in warm water, wipe it, and put the contents in a dish. Eat with tarts. ICES. General hints. There are 2 entirely different and distinct kinds of ice cream produced by confectioners or professional caterers in this country, one known as Neapolitan (originally produced at Naples, in Italy), and the Philadelphia, originated in that city. The former contains a greater proportion of eggs, and is rich, smooth and solid as butter, of a lemon yellow color and custard flavor. The latter has the full, rich flavor of sweet cream, and of a creamy white tint. The materials for ice cream are principally cream, sugar, eggs, all varieties of flavors, fruit and their juices, ice and salt; also may be added different colorings. Regarding cream, it may be said here that it can have no substitute, either by dilution with part milk, or milk and either tapioca, arrowroot, cornstarch or the addition of gelatine; the production will not be ice cream, but a frozen milk custard. The first operation is the cooking of the cream and sugar, with or without eggs, according to the kind (Neapolitan or Philadelphia) desired. For family use, select one of the new patent freezers, as being more rapid and less laborious for small quantities than the old style turned by the hand. All conditions being perfect, those with the crank and revolving dashers effect freezing in 10 to 15 minutes. Freezing. Take the freezer containing the ice cream, as above, from the ice-pail, remove the ice and water; replace the freezer and pack with ice nearly to the brim, sprinkling a quart of coarse salt uniformly through it as it is put in; cover and fasten the can and turn the crank until difficult to turn longer; open the can, remove the dasher, scrape the hardened cream from the sides with a spatula, and beat the contents with a wooden paddle till smooth, but no longer; close the can, draw off the salt brine into a bucket; add fresh salt and ice, covering also the top; wrap a blanket or a piece of carpet around and over the ice-pail; wet it well with icy brine and let it stand for one hour and a half or 2 hours; open the freezer, scrape down and beat the cream again, and again pack with fresh ice and salt to harden and ripen. Be very careful not to let a drop of brine or a grain of salt get into the cream. In very warm weather it may be necessary to renew the ice and salt a second or third time; it should always be done whenever the brine floats the ice. All the directions being followed no better ice cream can be produced. Neapolitan ice cream. Strain and beat the yolks to a smooth cream, add the sugar and again beat; strain and whisp the whites to the stiffest possible froth, and stir briskly with the yolks and sugar; then mix with the cream, adding such flavors as are needed to be cooked. Cook the whole in a custard-kettle over a brisk fire, stirring continually until it will slightly coat the blade of a knife, but not run; then be careful it does not curdle. Take it off the fire and strain through a wire sieve into a crockeryware bowl; cover it with gauze and let it cool; pour it into a freezer (which should be of at least 6 quarts capacity), and set it in the ice pail or tub; pack it well with ice, and let it stand, covered only with gauze, until thoroughly cold, when it is ready for freezing. Philadelphia ice cream. It is sometimes made from uncooked cream, if fresh, and if desired of a very light or snowy texture; this is better, but must be beat during the entire, freezing, vigorously. It will swell or increase in bulk from a quarter to a third, but looses in quality, and consequently the cooking is preferable, giving it greater body and richness. Cook it in a custard-kettle, as previously directed, until the water in the outer pan boils; take it off the fire, add the sugar and any flavors that may be cooked with it; stir until the sugar is entirely dissolved, let stand for a few minutes, strain and cool same as the Neapolitan. Fruit juices are not to be cooked with cream in any case, but mixed with the sugar; stir until a clear syrup is produced, and stirred into the ice cold cream before commencing to freeze it, or better, beaten into it just after it is frozen. In attempting to freeze cream when even lukewarm, it is apt to curdle or become granulated; it is also more rapidly and easily frozen if first chilled, and with less ice. Strawberry ice cream. Squeeze or pass a gallon of fresh nice strawberries through a sieve, taking care that the kernels do not go along. Add to this 1 pound granulated sugar or its equivalent in sugar syrup. Put this into a freezer and let it congeal during constant stirring. When it appears evenly frozen add to it a little less than 1/2 gallon of cream beaten into a hard froth and mixed with 4 ounces sugar. All this must be worked into the ice cream rapidly, so that the cream gets no time to freeze before the right moment. Now freeze it, while working it with a spade till it is smooth and evenly frozen. It is necessary to be very careful with all kinds of ice creams where beaten cream is used, as it is very easy for the froth to freeze too early. For this reason it is needful to mix the sugar into the cream first or you may mix the cream with the purée at once. Raspberry ice cream. Crush the berries and squeeze out the juice through a clean cloth and then mix it with a few drops of lemon juice, and add sugar syrup to suit. Finally pour it all into the freezer and work it as already described. Cherry ice cream. This is prepared in the same way as the proceeding, but the stones are to be removed before the berries are crushed, as the juice otherwise is apt to be too bitter. Boil a piece of lemon peeling in the sugar syrup, you can also stir in some fine flour into the juice, but then stir till all the sugar is melted Ice cream of apples and pears. Make a marmelade of the fruit and mix it with a little boiled lemon juice and sugar, whereupon pour it into the freezer and work it until it is half frozen as before described, but afterward with the ice cream spade until hard. Chocolate ice cream. One quart cream, 4 ounces unsugared chocolate, 1/2 pound of sugar, and a piece of vanilla are to be boiled together. Meanwhile beat 5 yolks of egg in a deep dish, into which pour the hot mixture, stirring all the time. Then put it all back into the pan or kettle, to be heated up but not to boiling. Thereupon strain it several times through a fine sieve. When cool put it in the freezer and proceed as above. Almond ice cream. Take 1/2 a pound sweet almonds and 6 bitter almonds, scald, shell and pound them. Now boil 1/2 gallon cream and 1/2 pound sugar and stir the almond pulp into it. Then take it up and let it cool; strain it, boil it again and add 8 well beaten eggs. Place it once more over the fire and let it thicken, still stirring. Let it cool, while being continually stirred. Lastly treat it in the freezer as in other cases. Melon ice cream. One quart of well water and 12 ounces sugar are to be boiled together until it has shrunk to a quart in volume. Then pour it into a dish. Meanwhile have cut into slices a good, ripe melon, from which the outer hard rind as well as the kernels are removed. The melon slices are to be put into the syrup, and then cover it all and let it stand and become cold. Now strain through a new sieve, and add to it a few drops of lemon juice. Freeze as in the case of vanilla cream Orange ice cream. Beat well 12 yolks and 1 whole egg in a pint cold milk. Take half a pound of fine sugar and dissolve it in a pint boiled milk and add it to the other part, and stir until it is cold, when pour into the freezer; now to be worked until thick. Later add the juice of 6 oranges and the peelings of 3 oranges. Work it again until firm. Beat 1 quart cream to a hard froth and stir that in at last, and work it again. Chestnut ice cream. One pound and a half chestnuts are to be shelled and scalded, whereupon remove the fine shell. One and a half pounds sugar and a quart well water are now put on the stove to boil until it is as thick as a thin dough. Into this put the chestnuts to be boiled till hard. When the syrup is boiled down pretty low, put the chestnuts into a stone mortar and pound them to pieces. Put a quart sweet cream on the stove and boil it. Beat 12 yolks and pour the boiling cream over them. Place it on the fire, stir and let it thicken. Now pour it up and let it become cold. Then this part and the chestnut pulp are to be mixed by taking 1 spoonful at a time of each, as long as it lasts. Half a gallon sweet cream, cooled on ice, must be beaten into a firm froth and added to the other parts; it is now ready to be frozen as directed. When the cream is well frozen, you may add any kind of preserve that does not contain salt. FEMTONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Fifteen. SOUFFLEES, COMPOTES, MARMELADES. Small soufflees of chicken. Take considerably more than a pound chicken meat, chopped very fine and pounded in a mortar and then passed through a sieve. Now boil down a pint cream sauce to 3/4 of its volume and mix that with the meat. Let it cool and add 5 yolks and a pinch or two of salt; this again is to be increased with 5 whites of eggs, beaten hard until frothy. All is to be filled into small paper boxes, thus to be baked for 15 minutes in a moderately hot oven. Small soufflees of game. This is made very much the same as the preceding number but instead of cream sauce, spanish sauce is to be used; the sauce is boiled down with the crop of the game selected. Vanilla soufflee. Put 2 pints sweet cream on the stove to be boiled together with 6 ounces sugar and vanilla enough to give it a good taste. Beat 14 yolks of eggs in a deep dish, and pour gently over them the boiled cream while beating and stirring all the time, after which pour it back into the pan again to bo brought to the boiling point rapidly. Take off and let cool and then stir into it 8 beaten whites. Remove the vanilla. Bake it with sugar sprinkled over the surface. Egg soufflee. One quart sweet cream and 1/2 pound sugar are to be boiled together, with a little orris root or violet root. Then beat 8 or 10 yolks well and pour the boiling cream over them, but put it back into the pan immediately to become thick during constant stirring. It is now taken off to be cooled, while still stirring. When cold stir in 6 beaten whites and a little sugar. Then pour it up on a dish and cover it with fine sugar. Now the soufflee is ready to be put into the oven, not too hot, there to remain till it begins to rise. Boiled soufflee. Half a pound butter, as much sugar, and 10 yolks. Work this well over the fire, heating it, but without boiling. Then cool it and stir in the whites, first beaten quite hard until frothy, also the juice of 2 lemons and the peelings of one. Put in a covered mould, which place in water and boil 1 hour. Soufflee of sour cream. Beat 1 pint sour cream very thoroughly with 2 ounces sugar, 6 yolks (1 at a time), and lemon or vanilla. Let it be brought to boiling, while stir-ring, but take care that it does not curdle. When cold stir in the whites, which must also be beaten. It needs 20 minutes in the oven. Cheese soufflee. Beat a quart thick sweet cream till frothy, and mix in 6 yolks and 1/2 pound grated parmese cheese. When it is ready for the oven stir in 8 whites beaten very hard. Let it bake till it begins to rise. Coffee soufflee. A little less than half a gallon milk is to be boiled and poured over somewhat less than half a pound roasted coffee, then to be well covered and let alone for an hour. Then strain and stir in six yolks and six whites of egg, all beaten, and also six ounces flour and half a pound sugar. Put it all into a deep dish which has been buttered. Bake in hot oven and strew sugar on it before serving. Brandysoufflee. About a pint of cream and eight yolks, boil during steady stirring. Then lift it off and cool it, still stirring. Now add sugar and brandy to suit, whereupon stir in eight whites, previously beaten to a froth. Pour the mass into a buttered mould and bake in an oven. Serve with brandy or wine sauce. Rice soufflee. Take half a pint rice, rinse and cook, and cook again with a quart well water, a little sugar and the yellow rind of a lemon. After a while let the fire go down, so that the rice simply simmers. When curling on the surface let them pass through a course sieve. Now mix in some lemon juice and more sugar if needed. Beat three whites of eggs to a hard froth which stir in gently when the rice has cooled. Bake it in a moderately hot oven, and sugar it when ready, before serving. Lemon soufflee. Take twenty yolks and a pound of crushed sugar; rub off the yellow rind of four lemons on the sugar; scrape them and rub again until all the yellow is off; the other part of the sugar is to be pounded and powdered (or you may use already powdered sugar ), then to be worked with a wooden spoon for an hour, but only in one direction. Squeeze the juice from six lemons over a strainer and mix in. Beat 16 whites and stir them in gently. Then bake, but strew no sugar on the soufflees. Chocolate soufflee. Dissolve half a pound chocolate in a pint boiled wellwater. When all dissolved add to it one quart cream and half a pound sugar, and let it boil 15 minutes while stirring all the time. Now separate the whites from ten eggs, and beat the yolks thoroughly in a deep dish; pour on the hot chocolate; let it boil again for a minute, while stirring until it thickens. Pour it up and let it cool; now beat six whites and mix them with a little sugar; stir this gently into the chocolate when cooled. Pour the batter on silver or porcelain plates and put in a pretty hot oven. Red soufflee sugar. Boil half a pound of sugar until it becomes quite consistent, as for candy, for instance. Meanwhile work into it two yolks and a few spoonfuls powdered sugar, making it thick and pliable. Add some carmine and stir well. When removing the sugar from the fire pour the mixture quickly into it and stir until it begins to rise; then tip it on paper, but do not let it come in contact with the least air draft, as it then collapses or falls together. Apple compote. Take some fresh apples, peel them and cut them in 3 or 4 parts; remove the core. Put a pan over the fire with water and 1/3 wine, quantity to be determined by circumstances; add a little sugar, cinnamon and two lemon slices. When all this has boiled long enough for the sugar to dissolve, put the apple pieces into it and let them boil gently until they become soft. Now take them up, but carefully so that they do not fall to pieces; put new apple pieces into the syrup to be boiled, and continue thus until they all are cooked. Then put them on a glass platter and pour the syrup wherein they have been boiled over them. Plum compote. Put some big plums in a pan with a little water; when they commence to simmer take them up and remove the skin from them; then split them in two, break the stones, take out the kernels, and put the latter as well as the plums in a syrup already prepared in the same way as for apple compote. Now put them on a platter and serve them on crystals. If the syrup is too thin boil it down with more sugar, and add a few spoons French cognac or good brandy. Apple mash with cream. Peel the apples and cut them in slices; boil in water and some sugar or syrup, adding lemon peeling. Let them boil until converted into a mash, when they are taken off and cooled. They are now served on glass-platters with froth of cream on top. Sweet cream is served separately. Pear compote. Peel the pears lengthwise and cut them in two so that each half retains a part of the stalk. Remove the core with a pen-knife, scrape the stalk and cut it away partly. Next proceed as when making apple compote. But if the pears are hard they need to boil two or three hours. They are served cold with apple jelly for garnishing. Cherry compote. Treat this as plum compote, but with the difference that you leave the cognac out. Instead thereof stir in two tablespoonfuls corn starch soaked in water. By this the juice becomes thicker. Shake the cherries in this carefully until they cool, when the compote is ready. Orange compote. Peel and wash the oranges, freeing them well from the white thin skin; cut them in smaller or larger clefts, sugar them, and put them up on glass platter. Apple marmelade. Soft and ripe apples are to be cut in thin slices and boiled in a little water to a mash, then to be passed through a sieve. Take twice the weight of the mash in sugar, dip it in water, and add it to the mash in the kettle, which keep boiling while stirring. When it begins to get clear and thick, put it up in jars to be kept for future use An illustration of a plate of cheese and a sponge cake, a deep bowlful of pears and two other plates of fruits. Plum marmelade. Place on the stove green or yellow plums that are soft and ripe. Use a preserve kettle and as little water as possible. Stir constantly until it mashes. Then put it up in a coarse sieve, through which force it. Now take twice as much sugar as the mash and dip that in sugar and put it in the kettle to boil with the mash. Stir well all the time while boiling. When the marmelade begins to appear clear and thick put some of it on a plate, and if it then hardens like jelly and permits cutting it is ready. Put it now in jars before it cools, when it becomes too stiff. Lemon marmelade. Five pounds fresh, nice and yellow lemons with thick rinds and eight pounds of sugar are to be treated like bitter orange marmelade. See next number. Bitter orange marmelade. Five pounds of ripe oranges are cut right across as fine as possible, cored, and boiled in a quart of water until the pieces yield readily to the pressure of the finger; then add ten pounds of sugar. Boil over low fire until the marmelade is perfectly clear; them pour up and let cool, later to be put in jars. This marmelade will keep long, and is especially agreeable on coffee and tea tables. Sweet orange marmelade. Is prepared like bitter orange marmelade. SEXTONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Sixteen. CANDIES AND CARAMELS. Chocolate candy. One pound sugar is to be boiled in a little water, while stirring with a deep ladle. When boiled so that it forms bladders put in grated chocolate, then remove it from the fire, but work it still with the ladle until it thickens like a mush. Then pour it into flat paper boxes to half stiffen, so you can cut it in the fashion you want to have it. Twisted caramels. Boil a pound of sugar in a little water. When boiled down to the point that you can draw threads with the sugar, put a stick in water and then in the sugar. When the sugar that fastens to the stick is hard or glassy it is ready to lift off from the fire. Now add the essence you prefer. Then pour it upon a smooth stone, buttered, and roll it with the hands into long caramels of the thickness of a finger, which twist and cut to please. Burned almonds. Wet a pound of sugar in water and put it in the caramel pan to boil with a little red juice of some kind. When thick add to it unpeeled sweet almonds which are to boil until they begin to crack and snap. Then lift off, but still stir till it stiffens. Then pour it up and take away the almonds. Wet the sugar and put it back into the pan which let boil on strong fire. Now put in more almonds and so on till the last. Coffee caramels. Steep half a pound roasted and ground coffee in a pint, or a little more, boiling hot water; strain and add 1 1/3 pound sugar and 1/4 pint sweet cream. Let it boil together over a strong fire. Pour it up on an oiled smooth stone or a buttered plate. When cold cut the dough with a brass wire provided with wooden sticks at both ends. Sugared fruits. Boil the sugar to bubble sugar (see below) and cover the fruits with a thin layer of it. This is mostly used for preserved fruit which has been strained and dried on a register. Let it cool and stiffen after the glazing. Bubble sugar. Bubblesugar is obtained when small bladders are formed on the ladle which has been dipped in the boiling sugar syrup and swung over the kettle. It is then taken off and kept for future use. Drops for coloring. For one half ounce cochineal take half a gallon water and boil it until it has only a fifth of its original volume. Then let it cool and put it in a bottle to use, when needed for coloring of candies. Almond wreaths. Pound for an hour in a stone mortar one pound of sugar and four whites of eggs, and next stir it with 12 ounces of sweet almonds and four ounces bitter almonds. Force the mass through waxed paper in fashions to suit and dry them in a cool oven. Raised candy. Work a pound of powdered sugar and ten yolks in a deep dish for an hour; then mix two ounces flour into it. Next add a few drops cedar extract. Roll out the dough to the thickness of a double coin, and now cut out the figures you wish. Put them on waxed plates. Pencil them with red drops mixed with sugar. Put it in oven and when they rise they are ready. SJUTTONDEAFDELNINGEN. Part Seventeen. COFFEE AND TEA. General remarks about coffee. The cultivation of this esteemed berry is widely diffused throughout the tropical belt nearly around the world. Its name is said to be derived from Kaffa, a district lying south of Abyssinia, where it was first cultivated and used as a beverage. In most countries it is picked by hand; but in Arabia it is left to ripen until nearly ready to fall. This may be one reason for its strong and superior flavor. The active principle of coffee is coffeine, and is employed to some extent in medicine. Coffee possesses considerable nourishing qualities, and both tea and coffee produce an agreeable, exhilarating effect, being a stimulant without being an intoxicant. When taken in quantities or quite strong, it produces wakefulness and is not beneficial to the system. The popular taste, like that for tea, is very extended, those of strong flavor being most in demand. Of the different coffees imported here, Java and Mocha rank the highest with connoisseurs, and are generally used mixed in the proportion of four to six ounces of Mocha to the pound. The bulk of all coffee used in this country is Rio, Santos, or those of South or Central American production. The former possesses a strong but not delicate flavor, while the latter are milder. The West India islands produce fine coffees, which are known under their respective names, as San Salvador, Costa Rica, La Guara etc. To roast coffee. Pick over, wash, and dry enough for a week only, and to each three pounds add a lump of good butter, the size of a large hickory nut, when the coffee is hot; roast in a revolving roaster, which, if constantly turned, will roast more evenly than by stirring in a dripping-pan. If no regular roaster is convenient, brown it in the oven, or on the top of the stove or range, watching and stirring continually, that it may not burn; a single berry when burned will taint the whole mass, and the flavor, which is very volatile, pervade the whole house. It should be roasted evenly, a dark rich brown, and should be tested frequently, by placing a kernel on the table pressing it with the thumb, and if tender and brittle, so it crushes easily, it is done. When roasted properly it will grind into particles, distinct and granulated. Coffee swells about one-third in bulk, and loses about sixteen per cent in roasting. When roasted, keep in an air-tight tin can or box, and grind only medium fine the quantity needed, immediately before using. Ground coffee. As it as rather generally believed that all put up or ground coffees sold in bulk are more or less adulterated with peas, carrots, chiccory or more harmful substances, the safest way is to either purchase the green berry and brown it yourself, or freshly browned and ground at the time it is bought; a small quantity frequently, that it may not lose the flavor before consumed. Some persons like the flavor uf chiccory, and it may be purchased by itself and mixed with good coffee in the proportion of a teaspoon to each quarter of a pound. A good substitute is also browned and ground carrot, using two teaspoons to the same quantity of coffee as above. To test the genuineness of ground coffee take a pinch between the wetted finger and thumb; roll it, and if pure it will remain in grains; if adulterated it will form into a ball. When freshly browned coffee may not be obtained, the following French method is probably the best for roasting, as it is said to develop the strength and flavor more thoroughly. To make coffee. To extract and retain the greatest amount of aroma is the great object to be attained in coffee making, and to effect this in the most effectual manner opinions differ. Many consider that percolation, filtering or leeching is the best process, and to this end there are many contrivances, both in tnis country and in England and France, among which may be mentioned the French biggin, the English syphon iron, the National or old Dominion coffee-pot, the coffee and tea -press, and many others, all of which filter or leech hot water through ground coffee, and most of them produce a clear, rich fluid, probably as near perfect as possible. The theory is that by boiling, the finest and greater part of the aroma escapes in the vapor. To the filtering process many object on economical grounds, urging that not more than half the virtue of the coffee is extracted, and hence it takes very much more than by slightly boiling. The following method partakes of both, and also obviates the purchase of an expensive utensil. Take an ordinary coffee-pot, the spout having a tight-fitting cover; form a ring of thick wire that will fit just outside the top of the pot, leaving a space for the hinge, if any; to this attach a thin but stout muslin bag, wider at the bottom than top, and reaching to within two inches of the bottom; the seams should be lapped and doublystitched, so that none of the ground coffee will come into the pot. Now heat up the empty coffee pot with boiling water. Put on the bag with the ground coffee and pour boiling water gently over it. When through you may serve the coffee or bring it up to boiling beforehand. Coffee may be made clear by putting a part of the white of an egg in, or part of the shell. Or dash some cold water into it when taking it off from the fire. Good cream instead of poor milk improves the coffee wonderfully if of inferior kind. But when using milk have it warm and mixed with eggs. Coffee without both milk and cream is nevertheless the most healthy especially for persons with poor digestion. Both the tea and coffee pot ought to be kept very clean and once a week rinsed out by boiling some borax in them. Never wash them inside, only rinse them well in two or three waters. Black coffee. This is an afternoon beverage and is considered very wholesome. It is made very strong and served in small cups 15 or 20 minutes after dinner. Gentlemen usually mix it with brandy or wine. Black coffee is best made with the filtering process. TEA. General remarks. The botanical name of the shrub is Camillia thea. Neither its origin nor the date of its first cultivation in China is now known. The teas of China are classed as black and green--distinctions not of different species of the plant, but to the age of the leaf when gathered, and method of preservation. Each has several sub-varieties named from the district which produced the article or some peculiarity in the article itself. The quality of tea depends greatly upon the age of the leaf at the time of picking The younger the leaf, the more delicate the flavor. Of black teas are Bohea, Congon, Souchong, Caper, Oolong, Pekoe and others; the highest quality is possessed by Pekoe. When the leaves are so very young as to be covered by a down, it constitutes the Flowery Pekoe. The green teas comprise Twankay, Young Hyson, Old Hyson, Hyson Skin, Imperial and Gun Powder, the latter being the first gathering and the finest. Imperial, Young and Old Hyson are grades from second and third pickings, while the inferior light leaves winnowed from the Hysons form the Hyson skin. The teas of Japan are classed according to manner of curing, as basket-fired, pan-fired, and sun-dried; they are grown in two crops spring and fall, the latter being the best. Originally Japan teas were uncolored, but now they have quite as much coloring as the Chinese sorts, while they lack the body of the latter. Tea dust. This, now generally kept for sale by grocers and teadealers, is the siftings of finer grades of tea carefully saved and imported. While afforded at a much less price than regular tea it is much stronger and usually superior to cheap grades of tea. The chief objection to its use is its pulverized condition. This may be obviated, however, by the use of a wire tea bag or a bag suspended in the pot similar to that suggested for coffee; or it may be poured through a fine strainer into tea cups. Tea making. It is not a difficult process, a few simple directions being observed. The hotter tea is served the better, and it is worthless and insiped when only lukewarm. A teaspoon of the leaf to each person and one over is the rule in using teas of ordinary quality, and it may here be observed that the better grades, and consequently higher priced teas are really the most economical ones to use. The pot or urn should be well warmed with hot water, letting it stand two or three minutes. Put in the tea and add 1/2 or 3/4 of a pint of water, boiling, and then let it stand to draw, not boil, for 5 or 10 minutes, and then fill up with boiling water. When there is a large party to provide for it is better to have two pots in use. Remember that you can not make good tea of wellwater, the lime destroying it. When mixing teas the rule is to take four spoons black to one green, or more, according to taste. ADERTONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Eighteen. MALT AND WINE BEVERAGES. General directions. The malt for brewing ought to be somewhat coarse. It is to be soaked in cold water in the evening about 8 o'clock, so to remain till about 2 o'clock, when two men should work it 1 1/2 hours with boiling hot water. Then let it stand covered till the thick part has settled, when the liquid is to be poured into the pan or a kettle intended for boiling and then again into the tub, and so alternately four times. When in the boiling vessel for the last time, proceed as follow: Make a layer of juniper sticks, place on them a dozen straw wreaths, then straw, and finally another wreath around the tub. Now put hot water on it and place the malt on top. When the liquid is ready boiled, pour it over the straw, and back into the pan, and so on until it becomes clear. Then take off the first and strongest as much as you need for ale. After that squeeze 3 pounds scalded hops and make the liquid sufficiently bitter and boil for 2 hours while skimming, now and then adding a dipper of water so as to keep the quantity the same. Then strain into a tub and let it cool; when ready for the yeast, put the hand into the liquid, and when you feel a cold line around the joint of the hand add half a gallon common good yeast whereupon pour it out and in a few times. When it appears white on the surface, put it in a barrel and place it in a cellar. Make small beer by pouring hot water on the malt after the strong beer is obtained. Juniper ade. For 30 gallons ade take 2 gallons Barley malt and 2 gallons ripe and rinsed juniper berries, which are to be pounded by a piece of birch in a big stone mortar or otherwise an iron kettle. Then put the berries in a tub, pour fresh well water on them and let them stand over night. Over another tub put wooden sticks and straw, well cleaned; pour the berries thereon and let the liquid run through 3 or 4 times, until it looks clear. Meanwhile scald 1/2 pound of hops and put it with some water over the fire to boil with steady stirring. Then add this to the juniper liquid and stir so as to make it a little warm. Then stir into it some good beer yeast; now cover it with a clean cloth and on that a felt, and thus it must remain until it rises. Press out the substance in the straw by hot water and add to it the risen ade, making the keg full. It is to be preserved in a cellar or other cool place. Ginger ale. Put 15 gallons well water over the fire, and when boiling immerse 1 1/2 pounds sugar, 1/2 pound pounded ginger and less than 4 ounces cream of tartar, take it immediately from the fire and pour it into a wooden vessel adapted for fermentation. S queeze out the juice of 6 lemons and strain it with 1/2 pint of rum, added into the liquid, which now must stand covered a while. When tepid add a pint of yeast and leave it 30 minutes, strain the ale through a linen cloth and bottle it; keep in a cool room. Honey beer. Sixteen gallons water, 3 pounds honey, 1/4 pound of good hops, the latter rinsed in hot water 3 times. This is to be boiled 1 hour or until the hops begin to sink and settle; then dilute it with the same quantity water as has evaporated during the boiling. After this new boiling strain the hops apart, and set the liquid to cool. When still warm add to it a little less than a quart good yeast and stir well; then put it in a clean and dry keg or barrel, close it well up and deposit in the cellar. Eight days later bottle it and seal the cork, then let it remain in the cellar on sand. Mead. Stir up a gallon of honey in a kettle with 9 gallons water, boil and skim well. Then add a handful hops to he boiled for 1 hour or until 1/4 has escaped in steam. Then pass it through a fine sieve to a clean wooden vessel, there to remain till most of the heat has passed off. Now add 4 or 5 spoons yeast. Then leave it to stand 4 days. Then pass it through a woolen cloth and put it up in a barrel, in which put 3 ounces thoroughly cleaned and dried raisins and the peelings of 4 lemons. Close up well and put the barrel in the cellar. Sugar beer. To 8 gallons fresh well water add 1 1/2 gallons home made beer or ale and 2 gallons fresh ale in the process of fermentation. In dry bottles put 1 or 2 raisins and 2 teaspoons granulated sugar --that much in each. Cork the bottles and let them stand 8 or 12 days. Make in small lots, as it does not keep long. Carolina. Two split lemons and 1 bottle old French wine are placed for a few hours on ice. Then add 3 bottles old French wine, 2 of new, 1 of Madeira and 1 of champagne. Squeeze out the juice of both lemons at once, but put only 1 in the bowl, and be careful that no kernels go along. Extra fine punch. Nine pounds fine crush sugar are to be boiled in 1 1/2 gallons water until a thick syrup is obtained. Strain this and let it stand 24 hours to cool down. Then mix it gradually with fine arrack or French brandy, work it for an hour with a silver ladle or something similar. After that strain again and bottle it. If allowed to remain untouched for at least 1/2 year it will turn oily and become very agreeable. Common toddy. Put a few pieces of sugar in a goblet or tumbler and pour cognac, arrack or rum (brandy will do) on it and then boiling water. Toddy can also be made of Port wine and Madeira, using less water. Egg toddy. Separate a yolk from the white and put it in a glass with 3 or 4 spoonfuls powdered sugar; work it well with a teaspoon until it commences to rise. Then pour in boiling water to suit and finally cognac or brandy. Glee wine. Six crushed cardamoms, 1/2 ounce cinnamon, 1 pound raisins, the yellow rind of 1/2 a lemon and a few sweet and bitter almonds. This together with a quart French brandy and a pint arrack, is to be placed in a brulot boiler or tinned copper pan, where let it burn a while, stirring all the time. Put over it a gridiron and on top of it 2 pounds of sugar to be dissolved by the flame from the beverage in the bowl or boiler, whereupon pour in the Madeira. If no gridiron is to be had, add the sugar to the contents of the bowl and let it boil 1/2 hour. Brulot. To 1 quart red wine take 1 pint or more of water and add to that 4 crushed cardamoms. Place this over the fire, and add further a little cinnamon and sugar to make it as sweet as you like. When it has boiled awhile and the wine has a taste of the spices pour it up in a mug of porcelain and serve it in cups. You can proceed with white French wine in the same manner. Lemonade. Boil a gallon well water with a pound sugar and a lemon, the juice of which squeeze out over a strainer. Then pour on it 1 quart French wine, when it is ready to serve. Lemonade with juices are made similarly but the lemons are then left out and the water may be cold. NITTONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Nineteen. JUICES AND VINEGARS. Cranberry juice. Take one pint water to each gallon "lingon" or cranberries. When they have boiled 15 minutes, strain; to each quart of the juice take a pound sugar. Let the juice and the sugar boil for 15 minutes and skim all the time; then take off and let cool. It is now ready to put in jars or stone bottles. Must be corked and sealed and kept in a cellar. Cherry juice with sugar. Brown and well ripe cherries are to be pounded in a stone mortar so as to crush both stones and kernels; then put them in a jar and let them stay there for 24 hours. Strain and add 12 ounces sugar to each pound of juice. Boil for half an hour in a preserve kettle, and skim well. When cold pour it in bottles which cork, seal and put in cellar. Raspberry juice with sugar. Place two pounds cleaned raspberries in a crock and put in it a little fine vinegar, cover and let stand for 48 hours in a cool room. Then squeeze out the juice through a linen cloth. Melt 2 pounds sugar in a quart of water, and boil until the spoon with which you skim becomes coated with the sugar. Pour the juice into the syrup and boil 20 minutes. When it is cool pour it in bottles. Of above quantity two bottles are obtained. Black currant juice with sugar. Clean and wash ten pounds black and five pounds red currants, and place them in a kettle over the fire with a gallon of wellwater to boil for half an hour. Strain the juice through a thin cloth, and for each pint of juice take a pound of sugar. Place this over the fire and let it boil for 15 minutes, skimming all the time. Now ready to put in bottles or jars. Red currant juice with sugar. This is made as black currant juice with sugar. Black currant juice without sugar. Clean three gallons currants and put them with half a gallon raspberries in a thoroughly cleaned and dry barrel, size according to the quantity. Pour over it boiling well water enough to leave room only for fermentation. Then let the barrel lay in a cellar for a couple of days. But during this time stir it several times with a spade adopted for the purpose; shortly before it goes to the cellar add to it a pint of alcohol. The barrel is now immediately closed and covered with a dough of ashes and water around the hole. In the barrel have a little tap hole, which close with a cork; after 5 or 6 weeks put the juice in clean bottles. This is done by letting it run through the little hole, in which then have two or three little sticks or twigs to prevent the berries from going through. Now cork and seal the bottles and keep them in a cellar. Gooseberry juice. Clean and otherwise prepare green or yellow gooseberries and thereupon pound them with a piece of wood till they are all crushed and the juice begins to run. Then stir in a pint of good yeast for each 16 or 20 gallons pounded berries. Now cover them well and let them ferment eight or ten days. Then bring the juice through a cloth by putting one ladle full at a time in the cloth and then squeeze, continuing thus till it all is out. Now let it ferment in some kind of a vessel, and let it remain covered four or five days. When it appears clear pour it in bottles; cork them, seal them, and keep them in cellar. The older this juice is, the better it is also, and is especially good with jellies, creams and lemonades. Mixed juice. Take currants, raspberries, strawberries and cherries in equal quantities, pound them, with the stones, and place them somewhere to ferment for eight days. Then press out the juice, weigh it and boil it with its own weight in sugar for fifteen minutes; then skim and when it appears clear as oil, let it cool. When cold, pour in bottles or jars, which cork well and seal and keep in a cellar. VINEGAR. Common vinegar. Take ingredients in proportions as follows: eleven gallons boiled water, two pounds and a half of sugar, honey, or syrup, three quarts fine brandy (Swedish if possible) and six ounces cream of tartar. The water must be tepid when you commence. The vessel used must be shaken every day for three whole weeks, and then lay still until the vinegar is ready. Finer vinegar. Gooseberries little more than half ripe are to be pounded in a stonemortar or wooden vessel until mashed; put the mash in a linen bay and press it. Take the juice obtained and place it over the fire in a stone kettle, adding the rinds of a few fresh lemons which have been squeezed, taking care that no seeds come along with it. When it has boiled and become clear strain it through a tight cloth into a stone jar and let it cool. When settled pour it into bottles or jars. It is used even in such cases as require lemon juice. Tarragon vinegar. Let the tarragon hang in bunches or be spread to dry in a room where no sunlight enters. Then rub it to pieces and fill a bottle half full with it, and then add some vinegar. Place the bottle aside for 2 weeks, during which time it becomes vinegar. Raspberry vinegar with sugar. Take two gallons raspberries, one gallon vinegar and a quart red currants and make a mash of it. Then let it remain untouched for four days. Now squeeze out the juice and weigh it, then take half that weight in sugar and add to the rest, putting it all on the stove to boil for 30 or 45 minutes. When clear and cold pour it in bottles or jars, which may be kept a long time in a cellar if well corked and sealed. Raspberry vinegar without sugar. Take 3 quarts berries and put them in a jar with a good deal of space to spare. Pour over them a gallon very strong vinegar, stir with a spoon, cover and let it stand for eight days. Then squeeze them through a tight cloth and filter it through a woolen cloth. After having cleared, pour in bottles, cork and seal, and keep in a cellar. French spice vinegar. Take basil, thyme, rosemary and tarragon, a handful of each--two handfuls marjoram, balm mint, curled mint and bay leaves together, two spoonfuls crushed dill seed, one spoonful black pepper and allspice mixed, and finally pounded cloves. Put all this in a large bottle with a wide neck and pour on to it good vinegar, and let it stand in a warm room 2 or 3 weeks; then strain the vinegar and keep it well covered. A little of this used in steak sauces and ragouts imparts a fine taste and saves much spicing. This vinegar has the special merit of communicating its flavor immediately. LIQUORS. Wormwood liquor. Take somewhat less than four ounces wormwood, green and fresh if possible, otherwise dry will do. Put it in 2 gallons french alcohol or cognac; let it stand eight days to be well extracted, but add to it 3 cloves and a little cinnamon. Then strain and filtrate the extract. Now prepare a syrup of two pounds of sugar and a pint of water which purify with beaten whites of egg. Mix the wormwood extract with the syrup, but no more than that the absinthe becomes moderately thick, like an oil, for instance. Otherwise work it like punsch and bottle it. Absinthe in another way. Take a pound wormwood leaves and let them become quite dry, in the shed if you can, and in an airy place. Afterwards put them in three quarts good alcohol, where it is to remain two weeks, then to be strained into a pan standing in another vessel filled with water. Mix it now with about 2 ounces gum arabic dissolved in 1/2 pint water and pint thick sugar syrup. Angelica liquor. Pick the leaves of a couple of angelica twigs, cut them in small pieces and put them in good alcohol mixed with sugar, dissolved in water; a few cloves and a little cinnamon. Let it stand and soak for 6 weeks, and then filtrate it. Ingredients are: 1/2 pound angelica, 1 1/2 pound alcohol, sugar to suit, and 2 quarts water. Anisette. Ten ounces anise seed (fresh preferred) is to be put in a gallon of alcohol with the yellow rind of 2 or 3 lemons and a little cinnamon. This is set aside for a month. After that time strain the extract and dilute it with 3 quarts of water and 4 pounds sugar boiled down to a thick syrup, cooled and cleared. Work it like punsch, then bottle. Essence of almonds. Scald a pound sweet almonds and a few bitter ones, shell them and let them stand in water to extract. After that pound them to a fine paste in a stonemortar, using a few drops af water at a time. When ready with the pounding add half a pint of water to the mixture and wring it through a straining cloth and place it in a cold room. Dissolve about five pounds of sugar in half a gallon water and boil it a while, whereupon add the almond paste. When cold pour it in bottles and keep in the cellar. Vanilla liquor. A quarter of an ounce of vanilla in a bottle containing half a gallon alcohol; let stand 3 weeks in a sunny place to be extracted. Then finish with sugar syrup. Curacao Wash in tepid water the yellow rinds of five lemons, five oranges and five bitter oranges, and dry them in an oven. Then put them together with a little cinnamon and mace in half a gallon alcohol, and let it remain thus for a month and then mix it with sugar syrup. TJUGONDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Twenty. GARNISHINGS AND FARCES. Truffle for larger garnishings. Truffle for this purpose ought to be quite round and large. Trim it well, put it in a little pan, containing half strong chicken soup and half Bordeaux wine. Then pour over it melted butter, and put in an onion to which has been attached a clove or two; add also some pepper and other common spices and a slice of on unpeeled white onion. Fasten the cover of the pan well and let it all boil for 15 minutes. Then lift the pan off the fire, and leave the truffle in the juice to cool. Truffle for garnishing to first courses. Peel and trim the truffle and boil it ten minutes in chicken soup and Madeira; let it cool in the juice, then cut in the shape of olives or small balls, but keep the boiled refuse (not the peelings) for sauces. Strain the juice through a cloth and use it as essens to gravies. Truffles, cockscombs, olives, ect. An illustration of few truffles, cockscombs, and olives. Farced olives. Clean the kernels from 1 1/2 pounds big round olives and scald them three minutes in boiling water. Then mix some chicken farce with some herb sauce (se sauces) and fill the olives with this mixture and use it for garnishing. Champignons. Peel and put them for a moment in cold water; drain on linen cloth, and boil in water, with lemon juice and salt. For ten or twelve sponges of average size take two spoonfuls water, two ditto lemon juice and one ounce salt. Place the pan or kettle on a brisk fire, then add 3 ounces butter and put in the peeled champignons to boil for 6 @ 7 minutes. Then take them out and put in a bowl and cover with paper, preventing them from becoming black. Use them to garnish with. Fried champignons. Peel and wash the sponges, cut them in slices, put some butter in a frying pan, place the champignons in it with salt and pepper and let them fry for four minutes. Then sprinkle them with flour and let them stand a minute over the fire. Dilute with some bouillon, add a teaspoon chopped parsley and an onion. Stir well. Farced champignons for garnishings Take 24 white, solid and good champignons of uniform size. Wash them and cut away the stalks (which keep for future use); put them in a pan well buttered. Boil down a pint Spanish sauce, half an ounce beef jelly and a pint herb sauce. After the boiling this becomes quite thick. Put some of it on the champignons, a little on each, separately, strew fine bread crumbs over them and fry in the oven for ten minutes. Use to garnish. Tomato farce. Select tomatoes of uniform size, cut away the green stalks, scald and peel them. Remove the cores and fill the empty space with a farce of boiled down Spanish sauce mixed with some herb sauce. Then pour some oil in a frying pan, put the tomatoes with the farce in it, strew bread crumbs over them and place the pan over the oven until they are ready. They are then used for garnishing. Puree of white beans. Boil the beans with water, salt and butter, also one onion and a few other spices. Then press them through a sieve, though not before they have become sufficiently soft and place them in a pan with some bechamel sauce. Let the puree boil down, press it through a sieve; mix with butter and cream. Garnish. Cucumbers. Cut cucumbers of average size in four parts; peel and core them, and then cut them in oblong uniform pieces which scald first and then boil for a minute. Now let them drain, then to be placed in a sauce made of strong bouillon, flour and melted chicken fat, and spiced with cloves, salt, pepper and a lemon, peeled, cored and cut in slices. Let the cucumbers cool in the sauce. Garnish with them. Spinach. Prepare the spinach as usual. Then let them remain over the fire with the butter. Sprinkle some bechamel sauce over them; add finally a pinch of nutmeg and some butter. Carrots. Peel and shape the roots; scald them; boil them in a strong soup made of chicken; add salt, sugar, pepper and glaze them by letting them boil on over a gradually waning fire. Spinach, carrots, celery, etc. Illustration of raw carrots, spinach, celery, and other type of vegetable. Fried celery. Peel and cut the celery in pretty thick slices; dip them in beaten eggs, roll them in bread crumbs mixed with sugar, and then fry in butter until they turn a nice light brown color. When ready, take the fried butter, mix with yolks and white wine, and pour over the celery. Cauliflower bouquet. Clean and cut the cauliflower in equally large clefts. Scald them first and then boil in water, salt and butter on a very low fire, so that they do not fall to pieces. Garnish with the stalks downwards. Puree of hare. Take a young hare, cut it in four parts. Brown them in butter. Pour over it a quart Borgoyne wine and half a gallon strong chicken soup; boil by a low fire, skim the fat and strain the sauce when the hare has boiled enough. Let the sauce boil down to half of its volume, and then dilute it with 3 pints Spanish sauce, boil again until a thick mush is obtained. Remove all the thin skins from the hare, chop the meat fine, and finally put it into the sauce. Strain the puree and keep it for garnishing purposes. Fish farce. Take a good sized pike, weighing about 3 pounds, and cut it in two from the back, splitting it; remove the bones and the inside; wipe off the blood with a clean towel, peel off the skin, scrape and chop the meat together with a pound kidney tallow and half a pound butter. After that, pound it all for an hour in a mortar. Now take 6 eggs, one at a time, and work them into the farce. Then one handful flour, one pint milk, some sugar, salt and white pepper. Boil in a mould or in a napkin, using salt water. Farce for imperial soup. For this soup is used the same kind of farce as for chicken fricassee, only with the difference that on the paper spread with butter is also spread a layer of green spinach leaves, first boiled or rather scalded. Upon that a part of the farce, then spinach, again farce, and then again spinach. Wrap the paper well around and boil as above. When serving it for the soup it is cut across in nice slices. Every other layer is then green and every other white. Moulded farce. Spread half a sheet of writing paper with good cold butter; then take calf farce and place it lengthwise on the paper, and make it even with a spoon. Then roll up the paper, giving it the appearance of a sausage, closing both the ends; continue thus with sheet on sheet as long as there is any farce left. Then boil it slightly in a kettle, turning the papers all the time. Take up carefully and remove the papers before entirely cold, and cut the farce with a sharp knife in nice slices. Finally mould them with a moulding iron according to taste. Moulded fowl farce. Shape of already prepared fowl farce (see above) a bird with legs and wings; wrap the latter with buttered paper. Treat the breast as if it was of a real bird and put it on a buttered paper and then in a kettle containing melted butter. Cover the fowl with a similar paper and pour boullon over it immediately. It should be covered and fried slowly for 45 minutes. Eat with its own sauce mixed with some flour. Oysters for garnishing. Scald large oysters in boiling water for two minutes; let them drain, dip them in cold water, and let them drain again in a sieve. Crabs. Select 20 crabs of large and uniform size; put them in a kettle with a pint good vinegar, some salt and pepper, one onion cut in small squares, and a little parsley. Boil 20 minutes. Shake the kettle to insure even boiling. Ocean mussels. Select the smallest which always are the best, and scrape away with a knife all the sand from the shells; wash them perfectly clean and then boil them with white wine, a little onion and some parsley. Then separate the mussels from their shells; rinse the former in tepid water, let the water run off, and garnish. Bread garnishing. Take the inside of soft wheat bread and mould it with iron into any desired, shape; then fry it light brown in butter. Asparagus tops. Cut away the tops after having scraped and cleaned the asparagus; scald in salt water, let this water run off. Then fry the asparagus quickly in butter, but take care that it does not go to pieces. Garnish. An illustration of different type of ingredients such as a beg of rice, two packages of salt or sugar and so on. Glazed chestnuts. Remove the outer shells from the chestnuts and then dip them in boiling water, thus preparing for the removal of the other shell. Now put the nuts in a pan spread with butter and pour strong soup made of ox-beef and Veal (half each) over them. Let them boil carefully so as to preserve them whole. When ready glaze them with beef jelly. Farce of veal. Take a pound of veal free from all bones and remove all cords and nerves, and then chop it fine. Clear away the membranes from 1 1/2 pound of kidney tallow of an ox, and mix that with the veal after having chopped it fine; add two ounces salt; pound it all in a mortar together with two eggs. This is what is called a farce. Now place it on ice or in a cool corner. Put in a pan two eggs, one ounce flour, one pint milk and a pinch of salt. Place this over a fire and let it reach the boiling point. Then put the pan in a vessel filled with cold water in order to cool it off quickly. Put the farce back into the mortar and pound it with the mixture, which pour in gradually. Add in the same way two eggs and four ounces washed ice. Make a little fricassee of the farce, boil it in water. If found too hard add more ice, This farce is to be made quickly in a cool room. Fricassee of fish. Pound and press 1 1/2 pounds pike meat through a cloth. Mix it with 12 ounces butter the same weight of wheat bread soaked in strong bouillon, two eggs and thickly boiled german sauce or something similar. Mix it all well, then test as above whether the farce is of the proper thickness. Do not forget to add salt, pepper and nutmeg. Farce of carp, eel and other kinds of fish is made in the same way. Liver farce. Take 1 1/2 pounds fat calf liver, four ounces veal, half a pound wheat bread soaked in strong bouillon, salt, pepper and nutmeg. Pound it all into a farce, which press through a sieve, and then back into the mortar to be pounded anew, adding five yolks of eggs by degrees into the farce. Then test and boil as above directed. All farces ought to be as light and as delicious as possible, for which purpose it is always best to finally add some whites of eggs beaten hard. Grouse farce. Remove all the bones from the fowls, which then spread over the table, and put into each a tablespoonful of veal farce. Then sew up the grouse very nicely. Place a kettle on the stove and put some butter in it. Put the grouse in this with the breasts turned upwards. Be careful that they do not burn. They need to fry for about 30 minutes. Then take them up, pull out the threads, cut up the fowls with a thin sharp knife, and serve them with champignons or truffle. False grouse. Make a farce as if of fowl, but instead of grouse take some veal farce together with the breast of the grouse. This is to be worked hard; then mould common grouse breasts of this, and into them are to be fitted by incisions finely cut olives. Thereupon fry them in butter, placing the grouse on the flat side. They need frying fully 15 minutes. Served with greens of all kinds. TJUGUFÖRSTA AFDELNINGEN. Part Twentyone. ESSENCES, EXTRACTS ETC. Anchovis essence. Clean fifteen large anchovis and boil them slowly in a pint of water. When it has boiled down to a pretty thick mush, strain it through a fine sieve; then pour the juice in bottles for future use. Remember that it ought to be thick and brown as syrup. Champignon essence. Take two pounds fresh champignons, clean and wash them; put them in a pan with a half gallon chicken bouillon, a little lemon juice, 1/2 ounce salt. Let it boil for 15 minutes; then strain and bottle. If this essence is boiled on game it is called fumet. Fish essence. Take four pounds fresh salt -waterfish; clean, flay, and cut to pieces, which boil in water, with one carrot, two red onions, two bay leaves, some parsley, two cloves, very little pepper, half a bottle white wine and three quarts strong fish bouillon or water wherein fish has been boiled. Mire-poix. One pound of veal, as much lean pork, cut in small square pieces and browned with two carrots cut in slices, two onions and a bouquet (see Bouquet). A gallon bouillon and half a gallon Madeira wine is added; also white pepper. Boil two hours. Cold marinade. One pint wine, as much vinegar, water the same; mix and add six large red onions, one carrot, one celery, all cut in nice slices; further add bay leaves, parsley, thyme, cloves, mace, pepper (whole) and salt. Let this stand a day before using it. It is mostly used for all kinds of meat dishes to impart a taste of game. Oysters prepared for sauces. Break open the oysters and put them together with their juice and a piece of butter in a pan which place over the fire. When the butter has melted, shake all and let it go through a sieve. Then put the oysters in the sauce obtained through the sieve. It is now ready to use as sauce for fish dishes. Oyster flour. Having removed the oysters from their shells, not forgetting to let the juice come along, you chop them and mix them with wheat flour, making a pretty consistent dough, out of which shape small cakes, to be dried on the stove or other warm place. Then pound them fine and strain them. With the flour thus obtained you can thicken such sauces as you want to give an oyster taste. Chicken essence. Separate the breast and legs from six chickens. Cut up the stomachs and boil them for two hours in a gallon water. Skim well while boiling; strain the juice through a napkin, part all fat from it, and put it up for future purposes. EXTRACTS. Fine meat jelly. Take three pounds of beef and cut it in slices free from bones; then add three pounds of veal and tie with strings to the same portion of calfs leg, and boil it all with two gallons water and 3 ounces salt. Skim well. Add a bouquet made of onions and carrots (12 ounces each). Boil slowly. When the bouillon is cooked, strain it and put it in another pan to boil down a third of its volume. Then strain it through a linen cloth and keep it in a porcelain jar. Next day when it has become solid, remove the fat crust on the top and also the matter settled on the bottom. Now boil it a minute while stirring steadily with a wooden spoon. When thick as a porridge, strain it and keep it in a jar. Veal jelly. Spread some slices of pork on the bottom of a pan. On the top of this put the inside part of a calfs loin, cut in slices also; add some onion and carrots. Pour on a big spoonful or two of strong bouillon or water if bouillon is not to be had. When the juice has boiled away, place the pan by the side of the fire in order to let the contents become hard. But the thick mass must not be allowed to fasten itself to the bottom too fast. When it begins to assume a nice brown color add a little bouillon and let it boil a while, while skimming carefully, thus preventing it from becoming turbid. Finally strain and keep in stone vessel. Instead of bouillon take white wine for diluting if you so desire. This jelly is used to color soups, sauces and other things. It can also serve for garnishing purposes if some substance is added. Substance of beef. Good substance is obtained by boiling down to half its quantity good bouillon, which must be done by very slow boiling. If you desire a perfectly clear substance, then add at the last boiling two whites of eggs which have been beaten to a hard froth, whereupon let the liquid pass through a fine sieve or a cloth. By using gelatine or calfs leg a less expensive and at the same time clearer substance is obtained, but the first described one is much preferable with regard to health. In the same manner make substance of veal, mutton and pork. Aromatic meat substance. Take five pounds of beef, the inside loin to be preferred, one chicken and one calfs leg. All this is to be boiled with 3 quarts of water, and having skimmed the boiling parts well, add two cloves, salt, white pepper, carrots and parsley; also a bottle of white French wine. Let the whole boil 5 or 6 hours on a slow fire, so as to make 3 pints good bouillon. Pour this into a jar and let it congeal. When you want to use the substance take off the fat crust and heat the substance in a pan with 4 beaten whites of eggs, parsley and a slice of lemon. Stir while boiling. Brown jelly for roastbeef. Remove all fat from the juice which has run from the roastbeef while roasting; thicken it with some butter and flour browned in the pan; color it with some soy and a few spoonfuls Madeira wine. Then pour it over the steak. TJUGUANDRA AFDELNINGEN. Part Twentytwo. MISCELLANEOUS PREPARATIONS. Bouquet. A mixture of spices, to be used especially for sauces, is called a bouquet, and is generally made as follows. One ounce parsley twigs, one fifth of an ounce thyme, the same weight of bay leaves. Wash the parsley. Put the other two parts in the middle and cover them with the parsley, which wrap all around. Then tie it, and cut off the loose parsley twigs which otherwise may fall away. The bouquet ought to be one inch in length. A simpler bouquet may be made of parsley and chives. To make soy. When in the spring, meat and pork is taken up to be smoked the brine may be used for soy. Boil the brine, and when it curdles and looks clear, strain it. Then boil 4 ox feet with ginger, cloves, strong pepper, (1/2 ounce), a pound of onions, a bunch of tarragon thyme and marjoram. When the feet feel soft there is about 1/2 gallon brine left, which strain and allow to cool. Boil 3 pounds of lump sugar. Put the brine in it, and boil a while. Lobster or crab butter. Take all the refuse matter of lobsters or crabs, as the stomachs, etc. Crush and pound it together with a large piece of butter, equal the lobster matter in weight. When pretty fine put it over the fire to fry slightly, adding some boiling water after a while. Stir and skim as long as any red matter comes to the surface. Stain through fine sieve; let it settle. It is to be used for all kinds of lobster and crab dishes. To make green soap. Gather tallow and fat (not suet ) found as refuse matter in the house, and when ready for the soap making melt it down in a large kettle and let stand to stiffen. Then weigh it. Fat in meat bones should now be taken and crushed very fine and placed in a pan filled with water and well covered, thus to boil for 12 hours. Then pour out the water, let it cool and remove the fatty bottoms, which are to be used for the soap. Then take 20 pounds tallow and 6 pails of strong lye made of birch ashes, so strong that a fresh egg floats in it. Pour this lye into a large kettle and also the tallow which now is to be boiled for 4 or 5 hours, during which time use a large iron or copper dipper to lift up and pour own again the lye as long as it swells or gets frothy. When it begins to thicken dilute with weaker lye, and continue boiling until it becomes long and sticky. Now take a spoonful of the soap and put into a bowl of stone, add as much water and a pinch of salt; stir and let cool. If it then turns hard in the bowl pour a quart of salt in the kettle. Then pour the soap into a wooden vessel, and water is added; stir for 2 hours. If to loose, add salt, stir again. Burned sugar to color sauces. Some pieces of sugar are to be dipped in water and then put in a candy or frying pan. Place this over fire to boil until the sugar turns brown or black. But it must not burn too hard, as it then leaves no coloring matter Dilute the sugar with water and let it boil again. Then bottle it and use for coloring bouillons, sauces, etc. In the trade you will find small caramel balls, so called colorantes, which give a nice yellow color and a fine taste to bouillon. For sauce or ragout take only half a ball. Brown these balls as described, but use no water, or at least but a few drops. To glaze meat dishes. Boil steak juice over strong fire until it turns quite thick, and stir it constantly until it sticks like jelly to the wooden spoon used. Then lift the pan off the fire immediately and pour the juice into a jar. When ready to use it place either the whole jar or part of the juice in a smaller vessel, all according to the quantity needed, in boiling water in order to let the juice or jelly melt. Then pour some of it two or three times over the dish to be glazed, a thin shiny skin is thus made. It is much used for ox tongue. It can be made of any meat or pork jelly. To get a strong taste to cheese. Take rich cheese made of sweet milk and put down into a dry barrel or large tub (according to the quantity of cheese) with hops spread in the bottoms. Place the cheeses on their edges, with hops between and around their sides, leaving no part of any cheese uncovered. In this way the cheeses may be kept very long, but the hops must be aired every three months, and the cheese then scraped very well; and the oftener you scrape it, the sooner it gets the strong smell. The cheese placed in the bottom of the barrel or tub at first should be placed on top at the next change, and so on. Aspic. An illustration of an Aspic in a Dessert Plate. Aspic. This is in reality nothing but common meat jelly, used in this case for binding together a mixture of several sorts of meat, as chicken, veal, goose etc., all put in a mould and garnished with truffle, eggs and parsley. With the addition of a little lemon juice pour the clear meat juice over it all. Open the mould when the jelly is stiff. To make gelatine. Take 3 pounds of good hartshorn, free from sickly smell and clean it well in water. Then put it over the fire in a clean kettle with 3 or 4 gallons of wellwater to boil covered for 24 hours, during which time guard well against burning it. When the water has shrunk to about one gallon, strain it through a fine sieve and set it aside to cool; let it remain thus till next day. when it is ready and may be used for jellies as well as blanc mange and a la daube. Put another gallon water on the horns left, in the kettle and boil 3 or 4 hours again, whereupon strain and put up as before, thus obtaining a weaker substance. Proceed similarly a third time, but when the horn becomes soft enough to crush between the lingers it has lost all strength. To make potato flour. Take large potatoes . Wash them well. Tie a sheet over a large tub or other wooden vessel and grate the potatoes over it. Now and then put some water on the sheet, stirring it so that the flour goes through the sheet. Continue thus as long as there are any potatoes left, always seeing to that the flour goes through, to which end sprinkle water on the sheet quite often. Fill the vessel nearly to the brim in this way, and after that let it stand about an hour for the flour to settle. Then bale out the dark water and replace it with new water, until the vessel is half full. Keep on charging water this way until it becomes clear in the vessel. Each time a change is made, which ought to be twice a day, stir up the flour from the bottom. Finally empty all the water and spread the flour on a dry sheet to drain. Then the flour is dried on plates in a moderately warm oven. Veal substance. Put seven scalded and split calfs feet in fresh water over night; then change water, taking 2 gallons well water, and place over the fire, boiling until there is only a quart left of the substance when strained. This substance is used only for puddings, and then according to need by boiling some of it, adding something else to impart the flavor desired, as for instance vanilla or lemon. To smoke eel. For this purpose take large or small eels, but the larger, the better. Cut away half of the head; rub the eels with salt so as to free them from all sticky matter. Now split them open in the back and extract the bone neatly. Wipe them on clean linen cloth and rub them again with salt. The next day take the eels and with small sticks prepared for the purpose, strain and stretch them crosswise, letting the sticks remain tied to keep them in this position. The smoking is done as in other cases of fish, only remembering that it requires a longer time to smoke eel. Swedish caviar. Take the spawn of middle sized pikes and clean away all films. For a quart of the spawn fry one or two onions in the ashes: then peel and chop them fine and add them to the spawn together with some white pepper, two spoonfuls dark soy and salt according to need. With this work the spawn for quite a while; then put it up in a jar, cover it with a cloth, and after a few days eat it with butter and bread. If it suits the taste, mix the caviar with some fine vinegar. Medvurst. To 8 pounds finely chopped beef take 4 pounds of raw pork cut in small square pieces and mix both parts with half a pint of strong bouillon, one quart French brandy, pounded pepper, cloves, and salt to suit, and also saltpeter, a small quantity. Have prepared some cleaned skins of ox bowels and pack the sausage in them as compactly as possible; then tie them up, but leave a loop for the sausage to hang to when it is being smoked. When all is filled in thus, rub the sausages with some fine salt and saltpeter mixed, and put them in a proper vessel to remain there for 3 days, turning them once a day. Take it up and wipe on linen cloth; next tie some long sticks around each sausage, and hang them up to be smoked in cold smoke, which generally takes 3 whole days. Now remove the sticks and keep the sausages in cold room. To salt salmon. To 20 pounds salmon take one ounce saltpeter, 3 ounces sugar and half a gallon Luneburg salt. Having split the salmon and removed all the fins, cut it up in pieces of size to suit and rub them with the salpeter, some sugar and a little salt, all mixed, and then put it in the tub with the rest of the salt between the layers, so that no piece is left without salt. The skin sides should be put to each other, the meat sides likewise. Uppermost on the salmon put a piece of linen with salt on. The back bones can be salted on top, but not the middle pieces of the salmon, as they spoil sooner. Best though, to salt them in a separate vessel. Pickled cucumbers. The small green ones, termed gherkins, are the best to use. Clean them well in cold water with a brush, removing all prickles, and soak in a strong rock- salt brine for about three days; take them out and put into wide-mouthed bottles or jars, with a few cloves of garlic, pepper-corns , cloves, rock- salt, and a bunch of seasonings, composed of bay leaves, tarragon, or other flavoring herbs, to taste, all tied in a Swiss muslin bay; fill each jar with vinegar as soon as it boils, and when the jars are perfectly cold cover them air-tight. They should be looked at every two or three days for the first three weeks, and should the pickles or vinegar turn white, throw away the vinegar and spices, and add new hot vinegar and fresh spices; cover when cold as before. Small white onions may be pickled with the cucumbers if desired. Pickled onions. Select small silver-skinned onions; remove with a knife all the outer skins, so that each onion will be perfectly white and clean; soak them in strong brine three days, drain. Place in a jar first a layer of onions three inches deep, then sprinkle with a mixture of the following: Two teaspoons each chopped horse radish and cloves, four tablespoons cinnamon bark and half a teaspoon cayenne pepper to each gallon of pickles; then another layer of onions; thus repeat, until jar is filled; bring vinegar to boiling point; add to that brown sugar in the proportion of a quart to each gallon, and pour while hot over the onions. Picalilli. One large white cabbage, fifty small cucumbers (gherkins), five quarts small string beans , eight small carrots, one dozen sticks celery, five red peppers, three green peppers, two heads cauliflower; chop fine, soak over night in salt and water; wash well, drain thoroughly, and pour over them hot vinegar spiced with mace, cinnamon and allspice; turn off vinegar and scald; place in common well covered jars, or seal in cans while hot. Fried frogs legs. The most popular way of cooking is frying, either plain, breaded or with an egg batter, the same as oysters, but longer, as they should never be underdone. They may be cooked in other ways as well. The French were the first among European nations to use frogs legs as food. Their use has become quite general in America and they are now ranked as delicacies. Only the hind legs and quarters are used. Stewed frogs legs. Skin, boil five minutes, and throw in cold water to cool, then drain. Put in a stew-pan (for four dozen legs) two ounces of butter; when melted lay in the legs and fry about two minutes, tossing them in the pan occasionally. Put over them a teaspoon flour by sprinkling, and stir; add two sprigs parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, ten cloves, a clove of garlic, salt, white pepper and half a pint of white wine; boil gently until done, and remove the legs; reduce the sauce by boiling, strain, and mix in the yolks of two eggs; pour over the legs and serve. Sweet pickles. They may be made of any fruit that can be preserved, including the rinds of ripe watermelons and cucumbers. The syrup is made in the proportions of three pints of sugar to a quart of vinegar. Use the best vinegar and "C" coffee or best brown sugar. The spices to be used are principally stick cinnamon and whole cloves; the latter stuck in the fruit if desired. Clam fritters. Take raw clams fresh from the shells and chopped fine; make a batter of the juice, an equal quantity of sweet milk and four eggs to each pint of the liquid, with sufficient flour to stiffen; fry in boiling lard the same as other fritters. Salt ox tongue. Boil the tongue until tender, and then remove the skin and the root of the tongue. If to be served whole cut the tongue in slices, still hanging together in its tongue shape. Potato croquettes, standing erect, are well suited to serve with this dish. Also mustard, if wanted. Cold ox tongue. Let the tongue be half cooked in salt water; then flay it and add a small onion, a little dill and parsley, a piece of yellow lemon rind and a few peppers, also a spoonful of butter. Boil till ready. When real soft and tender cut the tongue in slices and garnish with red beets, carrots, hard boiled eggs, green dill, parsley, bay leaves, lemon peelings. Finally pour clear meat juice over the tongue and let it cool. Lined ox tongue. Half boil the tongues, peel off the skin; then let them cool and line with finely cut pork, which is to be drawn through the tongue with a needle. Now put them in a kettle with a piece of butter, one onion and some ginger. During the cooking pour the juice of the tongue over them and take them up when soft. Thicken the sauce with flour; add to it also some browned sugar, to give it color, some mustard and a glass of French wine. Cut the tongues in slices, place on platter and pour the sauce over it. Ox tongue with caper sauce. Take an already cooked tongue and slice it; put the slices in caper sauce and shake while bringing to boiling. Serve with its own sauce. Pickled salmon. Select the best kind of salmon, shiny in the skin, the meat of a strong red color,and medium size, or from seven to ten pounds. Wash and wipe it, cut away the head and the tail; split the middle piece from the back, following the back bone as close as possible. Bone the middle pieces well, cut them in two parts each and wipe them on linen, but do not rinse. Mix a tablespoonful of pounded saltpeter, four spoons of sugar, and 1 1/2 ounce salt, and then rub the mixture well into the salmon, after that put the pieces with their meaty sides to each other in a tub, the bottom of which is sprinkled with coarse salt and fresh dill. A cover with a weight on is now to be placed on the salmon, while the tub is covered with branches of spruce or something similar; then place the tub in a cool room or on ice, thus to remain for at least 24 hours, when it is ready. It might be taken up and used after 12 hours, but the fact is that it becomes the better for standing longer. It is served in long, broad slices with the skin left on, and they are garnished with fresh dill. Eaten with oil, vinegar, pepper and sugar. Potato crust with chicken filet. An Illustration of a Potato Crust Filled with Small Pieces of Chicken Fillet. Rice crust with hare puree. Wash 2 1/2 pounds rice in several waters, boil it in twice its own measure of water and some spices, covering it while boiling with a thin slice of pork. When the rice gets crispy, take it out and pound it to a paste in a mortar, and afterwards press down hard into some nice mould provided with a cover. Then take it out of the mould carefully and pencil it over with drawn butter, then to be placed in the oven to get a nice brown color. Now take away a quarter of the rice and fill the space with hare puree, and garnish with slices of baked hare filets lined with truffle and 10 @ 12 boiled shelled egg. Put up the puree in a pyramid. The eggs must not be hard. Potato crust with chicken filet. Pare and wash four pounds of potatoes ; boil them in water and salt until half cooked; then empty the water and place the pan in the oven till the potatoes are soft. Now pound and press them in small quantities through a strainer. Take two eggs and a piece of butter (about half an ounce) to each quart of puree, mix it all with a little flour, shape it in a mould, cover the surface with beaten eggs, bake it and make a hole in it (see above). Then take two chicken filets, cut them in two lengthwise, line them with fine pork, and bake and glaze them. Make a puree of the rest of the chicken meat, put a part of the puree in the potato crust, place the filets in a wreath on top, and add the remainder to the puree in a central pyramid. A little thick boiled down german sauce, thickened with chicken essence, is poured over it all. Bechamel sauce. Melt butter in a pan, adding a spoonful flour, milk and cream. Boil and stir steady; then strain the sauce, and use it for meat dishes. If you desire to use it for veal or mutton, then mix it with bouillon, salt, white pepper and, if wanted, some crab or lobster butter. Calfs kidney. Fry the kidney in butter and season with salt and pepper; if too fat, do not take all the fat. Chop it fine and mix it with six yolks of eggs, half a pint sweet cream, bread crumbs and some salt and nutmeg. Shortly before serving the kidney put a pan over the fire and heat it well. Pour the mixture in it, stir well till it thickens to a loose porridge. Serve immediately with herring. Calfs liver. Take a liver of fatted calf, wrap it up in its own membrane and put it in a kettle containing some melted butter. Add som allspice, bay leaves and salt. While frying pour on either bouillon or milk. After an hour take up the liver, and now put in the same kettle a little flour, which stir while boiling. This sauce finish with some vinegar and sugar syrup, Put the liver on a platter and strain the sauce over it through a sieve. Puree of truffle and sauce. For about ten persons take a little jar of truffle. Cut each piece with a knife crosswise so as to make slices of it, which afterwards chop with a knife quite fine, but not too fine. Melt fresh butter in a pan, and put some flour in it, then poor into it strong bouillon and meat juice, also a tablespoon full of East Indian oil. When this has boiled together put in the chopped truffle and let it boil slowly while stirring diligently. Make the sauce in the same manner, but dilute with bouillon, making it of suitable consistency. Chicken with tomato puree. Prepare the chickens as usual, but use no parsley. Fry them light brown, cut them in slices, put the pieces in a wreath around the plate on which they are to be served, together with the tomato puree. Lined chicken filets with truffle puree. Take fat chickens and pull off the skins. Part each breast from the bone, which may be done with a pen knife. Put them on a porcelain platter and sprinkle them with salt and white pepper. Let them lie that way a little while. After that line end half with five layers of fine cut truffle. Butter a flat pan and put the filets close to each other with the truffle side turned upwards. Put butter on a white paper and cover the filets with it and put a lid over them. Fry on slow fire 4 or 5 minutes and serve them with truffle puree. Rabbit on the spit. An Illustration of a Rbbit Tied to a Skewer with Strings. Fried rabbits. Flay them and clean them; pack them in a deep vessel with rosemary, basil and thyme, and put them away in a cool place for 24 hours. Then fry and serve them as hare, but pour on them a few drops of vinegar. Calfs brain. An Illustration of Calf's Brain in a Plate. Calfs brain. Soak the brain, cut in two and boil in strong bouillon. Then cut it in long but not very thin slices. Put them in a circle on the platter with a slice of fish farce between each slice of calfs brain. Garnish with anchovis, pepper, cucumbers and boiled pork slices. Pencil the circle with beaten yolks and leave it for a few minutes in the oven. Then fill the empty middle with a stew of crabs tails and red sauce. Ham a la francaise. Put the ham in a kettle with very little water, thus preventing the juice of the ham to waste while boiling. Now add salvia, parsley and tarragon. When the ham seems to be almost cooked add a bottle of white wine. Now let it boil over a slow fire, and when it has become real tender take it out and remove the rind. It needs three hours boiling, but the wine must not boil with it more than 45 minutes. Serve with sauce of veal juice and garnish with cauliflower. Pork with curry. Cut two pounds of lean unsalted pork in small square pieces, fry in butter and mix with onions, chopped and browned, a spoonful curry and salt. Boil 45 minutes in a quart of water or bouillon, if handy. When the pork is taken out let the sauce boil on to only half of its bulk, and than pour it over the pork. To this you may serve rice boiled in bouillon. Pork filets. Put slices of pork and veal in a kettle to be steamed. Salt and pepper. On this put closely lined pork filets, two onions with a clove in each, a bouquet, and two carrots cut in slices just enough to cover the filets. When the filets are taken out with the other meat, strain the sauce, skim it and add some lemon essence to it. Serve with some puree made of vegetables. An illustration of a Pork Chop. Venison. When young, the fat is thick, clear and close, and the meat a reddish brown. It first begins to taint near the haunches; test by running in a knife or steel; if tainted, there will be a rank smell and a greenish appearance. It may, however, be kept a long time by the following process: Wash it well with milk and water, and dry perfectly with a cloth; then dust ground black pepper over every part. The flesh of the doe about four years old is the sweetest and best. Either the haunch, neck, shoulder or saddle should be roasted, the breast broiled, and fry or broil the steaks with salt pork. Being a rather lean meat, roast requires much larding. The steaks require more cooking than for beef. Saddle of venison. Use a saddle of venison of about ten pounds. Cut some salt pork in strips about two inches long and an eight of an inch thick, with which lard the saddle, with two rows on each side. In a large dripping-pan cut two carrots, one onion, and some salt pork in thin slices; add two bay leaves, two cloves, four kernels of allspice, half a lemon, diced, and season with salt and pepper; place the saddle of venison in the pan, with a quart of good stock and a small piece of butter, and let it boil about fifteen minutes on top of the stove; then put it in a hot oven and bake, basting well every five minutes, until it is medium rare, so that the blood runs when cut; serve with jelly or a wine sauce. If the venison is desired well done, cook much longer, and use a cream sauce with it. Squirrels. There are many species common to this country, among them the black, red, gray and fox. Gophers and chipmunks may also be classed as another, but smaller variety. They should be carefully skinned and laid in salt water a short time before cooking; if old, should be parboiled. They are fine when broiled, the hind quarters being the choicest parts, unless when in the fall they are fat and full breasted. Are excellent cooked in any other way, with thin slices of pork. They are also delicious when made into a pie, like veal or chicken. TJUGUTREDJE AFDELNINGEN. Part Twentythree. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. To make hens lay in winter. Keep them warm. Keep corn constantly by them, but do not feed it to them. Feed them with scraps when lard and tallow has been tried, or fresh meat. Chop some green peppers finely, or mix Cayenne pepper with corn meal to feed them. Let them have a frequent taste of green food. To preserve steel pens. Steel pens are destroyed by corrision from acid in the ink. Put some old nails or steel pens in the ink, and the acid will exhaust itself on them, and the pens in use will not corrode. To remove ink spots. Ink spots on the fingers may be instantly removed by a little ammonia. Rinse the hands after washing in clear water. A little ammonia in a few spoonfuls of alcohol is excellent to sponge silk dresses that have grown "shiny" or rusty, as well as to take out spots. All silks, particularly black, become almost like new when so sponged. To smooth flat-irons. To have your flat-irons clean and smooth rub them first with a piece of wax tied in a cloth, and afterwards scour them on a paper or thick cloth strewn with course salt. To sweeten meat. A little charcoal thrown into the pot will sweeten meat that is a little old. But not if it is in any way tainted, for it is then unfit to eat, but only if kept a little longer than makes it quite fresh. To clean glass and glass wares. For washing windows, looking glasses etc. a little ammonia in the water saves much labor, aside from giving a better polish than anything else; and for general housecleaning it removes dirt, smoke and grease most effectually. Moths in carpets. Persons troubled with carpet moths may get rid of them by scrubbing the floor with strong hot salt water before laying the carpet, and sprinkling the carpet with salt once a week before sweeping. To clean the inside of jars. This can be done in a few minutes by filling the jars with hot water and then stirring in a teaspoonful or more of baking soda. Shake well. Than empty the jars at once, and if any of the old smell remains, fill again with water and soda. Shake and rinse well in cold water. New kettles. Fill the kettle with clean potato peelings, boil them for an hour, then wash the kettle with hot water; wipe it dry, and rub it with a little lard; repeat the rubbing for half a dozen times after using. In this way you prevent rust, otherwise so easy to gather in new kettles. To clean sponges. Rub a lemon into the sour sponge and then rinse it several times in lukewarm water. In this way the sponge will be as fresh as a new one. Frozen windows. The window panes can be kept free from ice by rubbing them with a sponge dipped in alcohol. To clean feathers. Cover the feathers with a dough of pipe clay and water. When dry, shake off the powder and curl them with a knife. To test nutmeg. Prick the nutmeg with a pin, and if good the oil will immediately spread around the little hole. To make hard water softer. Pour a gallon good lye in a barrel containing 25 @ 30 gallons water. To clean jewelry. For cleaning jewelry there is nothing better than ammonia and water. If wery dull and dirty, rub a little soap on a soft brush and brush them in this wash, rinse in cold water, dry first in an old handkerchief and then rub with buck or Chamois-skin. Their freshness and brilliancy when thus cleaned can not be surpassed by any compound used by jewellers. Blanket washing. To do this properly, use plenty of water, and never any soap that has resin in it; many cheap soaps are 60 to 75 per cent resin, and are injurious to clothes and to the hands. Resin hardens the fiber of wool. A little bluing will do no harm in washing white blankets. Blankets should be shaken and snapped by two persons until almost dry. No kind of flannels or woolen goods should ever be washed in cheap strong soap as it is the potash, resin, and soda in cheap common soaps which hardens and colors animal fiber yellow. To clean silk and thread gloves. Place them on the hands, and wash with borax water or white castile suds, same as if washing the hands. Rinse under a stream of clear water, and dry with a towel, keeping the gloves on until half dried. Then remove carefully, fold so they will look as nearly as they were as it is possible, and lay between clean towels under a weight. For washing red linen table. Use tepid water, with a little of Smith's powdered borax, which sets the color; wash the linen separately and quickly, using but little soap. Rinse in tepid water, containing a little boiled starch; hang to dry in the shade, and iron when almost dry. To wash flannels so they wont shrink. To prevent shrinking, it is well to add a little ammonia to your suds, wash rapidly in tepid suds, rinse quickly in tepid water, and dry at a moderate heat. To restore velvet. When velvet gets matted down, hold over a basin of hot water with the lining next to the water; the fiber will soon rise and the velvet look as well as ever. To wash lace curtains. Shake the dust well out of the lace; then put the curtains in teped water in which a little washing soda has been dissolved, and wash at once carefully with the hands in several waters, or until perfectly clean; then rinse in water well blued and also blue the boiled Kingsford's starch quite deeply, and squeeze, but do not wring. Pin some sheets down to the carpet in an unoccupied airy room, then pin on the curtains stretched to the same size they were before washing. Silver polish for shirts. Take an ounce each of isinglass and pulverized borax, one teaspoon white glue and two teaspoons of the white of an egg. Cook these ingredients well in two quarts of Kingsford's fine starch. Starch bosoms in this, and dry. Before you iron, apply some of the polish to the bosom, collars or cuffs with a cloth well dampened. Iron at once with a glossing or polishing iron. To enamel shirt bosoms. Melt together with a gentle heat, one ounce white wax and two ounces spermaceti; prepare in the usual way a sufficient quantity of Kingsford's starch for a dozen bosoms, put into it a piece of this enamel the size of a hazel- nut, and in proportion for a larger number. This will be found the very best kind of a polish. To clean white zephyr goods. Rub in flour or magnesia, changing same as fast as it looks dirty. Shake off the flour, and hang in the open air a short time. To clean alpaca. Sponge with strained coffee. Iron on the wrong side, having black cambric under the goods. TJUGUFJERDE AFDELNINGEN. Part Twentyfour. MENU. How different foods digest. It is always best to take breakfast about one hour after rising; say, anywhere between five a. m. and nine a. m.; dinner between twelve m. and two p. m., with a light tea or supper between five and eight p. m.; and one should not go to bed at once after supper; nor should one take any active exercise immediately after dinner. As to what is best to eat or drink, almost everything provided as food for man, properly prepared, is good in moderation, and every thinking person should so practice it. However, some food takes longer to digest than others, as shown by appended memorandum of those most commonly used: Digested in h. m. Apples, sweet, raw...... 1 50 Apples, raw, hard ...... 2 50 Barley, boiled.......... 2 -- Digested in h. m. Bass, broiled............ 2 -- Beans, boiled............ 2 30 Green corn, boiled....... 3 45 Beef, fresh--lean, rare, roasted................ 3 -- Beefsteak, broiled....... 3 -- Beef, old and salted..... 4 15 Beets, boiled............ 3 45 Bread, corn, baked....... 3 15 Bread, wheat, fresh...... 3 30 Bread, wheat, stale...... 2 40 Butter................... 2 30 Cabbage, raw............. 2 35 Cabbage with vinegar..... 2 -- Cabbage, boiled.......... 4 40 Cheese .................. 3 30 Chicken, fricasseed...... 2 45 Codfish, dry, boiled..... 2 -- Duck, roasted............ 4 -- Eggs, hard boiled........ 3 30 Eggs soft................ 2 50 Eggs, raw................ 2 -- Goose, roasted........... 2 30 Lamb, broiled............ 2 30 Liver, beef.............. 2 -- Hash (meat and potatoes) 2 30 Milk..................... 2 -- Milk, boiled............. 3 -- Mutton................... 3 -- Oysters, raw............. 2 55 Oysters, cooked.......... 3 30 Pork, roasted .......... 5 15 Pork, salted............. 5 40 Pork, stewed............. 3 -- Potatoes, boiled......... 3 30 Potatoes, baked or roasted 2 Digested in h. m. Rice, boiled.............. 1 -- Sago, boiled.............. 1 15 Salmon, salted............. 4 -- Tapioca, boiled............ 4 -- Trout, boiled.............. l 30 Turkey, boiled............. 2 25 Turnips, boiled............ 3 30 Veal, broiled.............. 4 -- Venison, broiled.......... 1 35 Swedish "smörgåsbord". I. Fresh butter. Several kinds of bread. Roasted bread. Cheese. Oysters. Caviar. Anchovis. Sardines. Smoked and salt tongue. Pickled salmon. Pouched eggs with crabs tails. Dublin stout or seltzerwater. II. Fresh butter, bread and roasted bread. Caviar. Ham. Shelled lobster, broken in small pieces. Anchovis. Sausage. Herring. Other cold fish fried. Fried chestnuts. Cold meat cut in slices. III. Fresh butter and bread. Two kinds of cheese. Warm boiled potatoes, unpeeled, and herring. Small lobsters and oysters. Small boxes of salmon. Large pork sausage in slices. Smoked salmon. Radishes. IV. Fresh butter and bread. Cheese. Caviar. Roasted bread. French sausage in juice. Smoked tongue. Goose breast. Pork-omelettes. Hard boiled eggs, chopped. Liver. Sausage. Radishes. V. Bread. Butter. Cheese. Radishes. Cut herring. Hard boiled eggs. Salt ox tongue. German sausage (medvurst). Sardines. Crabs tails. Anchovis. Oysters. Fried fish, cut in small pieces. Caviar and roasted bread. Smoked goose breast. Smaller dinners. I. Crab soup. Bouillon with macaroni. Baked whiting. Fricadelle on veal with puree Jelly with tart. Cheese. Dessert. II. Turtle soup. Bouillon with vermicelli. Pike or perch a la financiere. Oyster on shells. Baked hazel hen with salad. Asparagus and french peas. Compote. Ice cream. Dessert. III. Vegetable soup. Boiled trout. Lined beef filet with vegetables Goose liver pie. Asparagus with butter. Baked fowl with salad. Vanilla pudding. Ice cream. The Text Appearing on this page is in Swedish language. Grand dinners. I. WINES: Turtle soup........................ Sherry. Bouillon and macaroni.............. Claret. Salmon............................. Champagne. Deer steak......................... Champagne. Turkey with rice.................. Pichon. chicken with farce................. Pichon. Lobster with jelly................. Old Madeira. Baked snipes with salad............ Old Madeira. Asparagus with sauce hollandaire... Sherry. Jelly and fruit.................... Sherry. Cheese. Butter. Cakes. Preserves. Oranges. Candies...... Tokay. II. Julienne (soup)..................... Pontet Canet. Rice croquettes, stewed crabs tails. Sherry. Salmon and spinach.................. Sherry. Roast beef filet and vegetables.... Champagne. Truffled chicken.................... Chateau Leoville. Baked grouse with salad............. Chateau Palmer. Fresh beans. Orange pudding...................... Champagne. Jelly............................... Chateau Palmer. Ice cream........................... Pale sherry. Cheese and cakes.................... Port wine. Fruits and candies.................. Cap Constantia. The Text Appearing on this page is in Swedish language. III. Julienne au consomme. Veal cutlets. Perch with potatoes. Veal leg and truffle. Cutlets with fine peas. Champignon omelettes. Lobster. Snipes or chickens, baked. Asparagus with butter. Champagne jelly. Ice cream. Dessert. Wines to be selected from foregoing menus. IV. Bouillon. Mock turtle soup. Veal fricadelle with champignon puree. Smoked salmon with spinach and pouched eggs. Veal cutlets. Glazed ham. Partridge with truffle. Goose liver pie. Baked snipes or chickens. Cold preserve pudding. Asparagus with butter. Cheese and cakes. Dessert. The Text Appearing on this page is in Swedish language. V. WINES: "Smörgåsbord". Crab soup........................... Golden sherry. Fresh boiled salmon................. Chateau Margaux. Mutton, baked in oven............... Murcobrunner. Small lobster pies.. ............... Chambertin. Baked chicken with salad............ Veuve Cliquot. Ice cream pudding. Fruits and candies. Cheese and cakes. Coffee. VI. "Smörgåsbord". Julienne soup. Asparagus omelette with crabs tails. Smoked salmon with spinach and eggs. Old sherry. Beef filets with truffle............ Steinberger Cabinet. Jelly pudding....................... Mumm Cremant. Peas with oil ...................... Port wine. Baked woodcook with salad........... Pale sherry. Ice cream. Mixed fruits. VII. SUPPER. Broiled salmon. Ham in jelly. Lobster a la daube. Pie of game. Deer steak with gooseberry jelly. Baked hazel hens. Salad More simple menus for 6 or 8 persons. Adopted for the different seasons. Dinners. Januari--April. Bouillon with vermicelli. Boiled perch with browned butter. Roast beef with glazed onion. Stewed cauliflower. Baked hazel ben with salad. Vanilla cream on ice. Tarts. Suppers for 6 or 8 persons. I. "Smörgåsbord." Fish farce with crab sauce. Baked woodcock with salad and cucumbers. Mush fried in oven, with cream. II. "Smörgåsbord." Cutlets with peas. Pie of hare. Vanilla cream on ice with tarts. Dinners. Maj-August. I. Bouillon with poached eggs. Boiled salmon och browned potatoes. Deer steak with cucumber salad Butter tarts and some kind of cream. II. Bouillon with rice. Pike baked in oven and caper sauce. Beef steak and potatoes. Pancakes and preserves. III. Wine soup. Croquettes of beef. Pudding. Suppers. I. "Smörgåsbord." Broiled doves. Biscuit pudding, vanilla sauce. II. "Smörgåsbord." Canned salmon with sauce. Baked hazel hen with salad. Mixed preserves with beaten cream. Dinners. September--December. I. Julienne soup. Carp or eel. Fried calfs liver with wine. Crab pudding. Fried rabbit. Orange compote. II. Crab soup. Perch with white wine. Roast beef with peas and potatoes. Asparagus. Omelette soufflée with lemon. Suppers. I. "Smörgåsbord." Omelette with spawn. Glazed oranges. II. "Smörgåsbord." Omelette aux herbes fines. Baked chicken with champigon sauce. Lemon cream with tarts. III. "Smörgåsbord." Cold pike with sauce. Veal cutlets with vegetables. Cream cake with preserves. Weights and measures. 1 Quart sifted flour (well heeped) weighs 1 lb. 3 Coffee-cups sifted Hour (level) weigh 1 lb. 4 Tea-cups sifted flour (level) weighs 1 lb. 1 Quart unsifted flour weigh 1 lb 1 oz. 1 Quart sifted indian meal weighs 1 lb 4 oz. 1 Pint soft butter (well packed) weighs l lb. 2 Teacups soft butter (well packed) weigh 1 lb. 1 1/3 Pint powdered sugar weigh 1 lb. 2 Coffee-cups powdered sugar (level) weigh 1 lb. 2 3/4 Tea-cups powdered sugar (level) weigh 1 lb. 1 Pint granulated sugar (heaped) weigh 14 oz. 1 1/2 Coffee-cups granulated sugar (level) weighs 1 lb. 2 Tea-cups granulated sugar (level) weigh 1 lb. 1 Pint coffee "A" sugar weighs 12 oz. 1 3/4 Coffee-cups coffee "A" sugar (level) weigh 1 lb. 2 Tea-cups coffee "A" sugar (well heaped) weigh 1 lb. 1 Pint best brown sugar weighs 13 oz. 1 3/4 Coffee-cups best brown sugar (level) weigh 1 lb. 2 1/2 Tea-cups best brown sugar (level) weigh 1 lb. 1 Tablespoon (well heaped) granulated coffee "A" best brown sugar, weighs 1 oz. 2 Tablespoons (well rounded) of powdered sugar or flour weigh 1 oz. 1 Tablespoon (well rounded) of soft butter weighs 1 oz. Soft butter size of an egg weighs 2 oz. 7 Tablespoons granulated sugar (heaping) equal 1 teacup. 5 Tablespoons sifted flour or meal (heaping) equal 1 teacup. 4 Tablespoons soft butter, (well heaped) equal 1 teacup. 3 Tablespoons sweet chocolate grated weigh 1 oz. Canning Fruit.  Time for boiling Sugar to quart. Cherries - - 5 min. 6 oz. Raspberries - - 6 " 4 " Strawberries - 8 " 8 " Plums - - - 10 " 10 " Pie Plant - - 10 " 8 " Small sour pears, whole 30 " 4 " Bartlett pears, halved 20 " 6 " Peaches - - 8 " 4 " Peaches, whole - 15 " 4 " Pine apples, sliced - 15 " 6 " Crab apples - 25 " 8 " Sour apples, quartered 10 " 5 " Ripe currants - 6 " 8 " Wild grapes - 10 " 8 " Tomatoes - - 20 " none. Gooseberries - - 8 " 8 " Quinces, sliced - 15 " 10 "
