SPANISH DISHES. NO. 1. ALLIGATOR PEAR SALAD. (Recipe from Mexico.) Mrs. S. Y. Yglesias, 7 Albany street, Los Angeles.--Take two large alligator pears, peel and remove the stone; cut in one-half-inch cubes, sprinkle with salt, add two tablespoons or more of the best olive oil, with or without a very small piece of onion minced fine to flavor. Put in a salad dish already prepared with crisp lettuce leaves. NO. 2. SPANISH ASPARAGUS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2802 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Wash two bunches of asparagus and tie each bunch into three bundles, having the tips all one way. Cover with boiling water and cook about twenty-five minutes; then add to each bunch a level teaspoon salt and let simmer for five minutes. Place in a saucepan two level tablespoons butter, one small finely-chopped onion, a bay leaf and six pepper corns; cook without browning, then add three level tablespoons flour and two cups white stock (either chicken or veal broth.) Season, add a pinch of nutmeg and let the sauce simmer for twenty minutes. Beat the yolks of two eggs very light, and mix with one tablespoon lemon juice. Strain the sauce, return it to the saucepan and place on the back of range where it will not boil; add very gradually the eggs and lemon juice. Stir well and add a scant tablespoon butter. Serve the asparagus on toast and the sauce in a bowl. NO. 3. BAKED BEANS, SPANISH. Mrs. A. L. Parsons, Betteravia, Cal. --One and one-half pints beans, one large onion, one can tomatoes, red peppers to taste. Soak beans one night. In the morning fry the onion in olive oil or butter until slightly brown, adding the soft inside of three or four large peppers, or enough cayenne to suit taste; salt well, and add can of tomatoes; add this to the beans and bake three or four hours in a good oven; add small piece of salt pork or bacon if desired. NO. 4. SPANISH BEANS. (Original.) Mrs. J. A. Lucas, 1410 East Fifteenth street. Los Angeles.--Wash one pint of California pink beans in several waters, place on the fire in cold water and allow them to cook half an hour; drain off this water and cook them another half hour, add more fresh water, drain once more, then put them on again in more fresh water and add several slices of fat bacon and salt to taste. After they have cooked one hour, add one-third of a pint of canned tomatoes, one large onion sliced fine and chopped with one red pepper, and let boil until well done. NO. 5. SPANISH STRING BEANS. Mrs. L. Hugo, Placentia, Cal.--Take two pounds green string beans, chop fine. Put a tablespoon of lard in frying pan and one onion, cut fine, half of a dry red pepper, cut fine; let onion and pepper fry brown, then add three ripe tomatoes, cut fine, and stir in a tablespoon of flour; then add a quart of cold water, then the chopped beans with salt and pepper to taste, and let beans cook until tender; keep adding water as needed so as not to let them get too dry. NO. 6. BEEFSTEAK SPANISH. (From a caterer's notebook.) Mrs. H. A. Paca, Ocean Park, Cal.--Lay a slice of upper round steak, about two pounds, rather more than two inches thick, on a pie plate, leaving on the rim of suet, add a small teacup of water and baste every ten minutes for thirty minutes, baking in a moderate oven; remove from oven, sprinkle with a saltspoon of salt and half a saltspoon of pepper, and cover with a layer of sliced onions; bake fifteen minutes longer; sprinkle with a saltspoon of salt, then cover with a layer of chopped tomatoes (the solid meats of a can of tomatoes will answer.) Bake again fifteen minutes, sprinkle over it two tablespoons of grated cheese and place in oven long enough for cheese to melt nicely. There will be a thick rich gravy on it, deliciously flavored with onions and tomatoes. The steak will be very tender. NO. 7. BEEF, TOMATO GRAVY (SPANISH.) Mrs. Anna B. Rogers, 528 West Second street, Pomona, Cal.--Put lump of butter size of walnut in saucepan, cut two onions fine, brown slightly, stirring with fork; cut up in inch pieces two pounds of any good lean beef and brown in more butter if there is not fat enough to the meat, add water, salt and pepper to taste and one can tomatoes, strained; boil until tender, adding water to make enough for about six people; thicken with whole wheat flour. NO. 8. CHILI STEW. Florence Osborne, 1051 South Flower street, Los Angeles.--Cut two pounds of beef in slices; salt it and place in a pot in which you have heated two tablespoons lard; add one medium-sized chopped onion and stew about thirty minutes; now add one quart warm water, one-half pint canned or two large mashed tomatoes, four sliced Irish potatoes, one tablespoon chili powder and one clove of garlic. Cook slowly until done. NO. 9. SPANISH BEEF STEW. Mrs. George E. Decker, Box No. 548, Pasadena, Cal.--Take one can of roast beef, add one-half can of tomatoes, two onions, one-half red pepper. Cook until quite thick. NO. 10. SPANISH STEW. Mariane K. Miller, 2323 Leoti street, Los Angeles.--Melt two tablespoons butter, slice two small onions and mix with a bowl of meat, cut into pieces, brown all together. Then add one teaspoon flour, four or five tomatoes, two carrots, cut lengthwise, two tablespoons of Worcestershire, one tablespoon of chili sauce, one seeded red pepper, cut fine, one tablespoon salt and two or three cups of stock, and let simmer slowly until thick and done. Serve on platter and garnish with twelve large red peppers which are stuffed with the following: one cup tomatoes, two crumbed crackers, one level teaspoonful of salt and sugar, one lump of butter mixed. Fill peppers and bake slowly for twenty minutes. NO. 11. SPANISH STEW. Mrs. William Harmon, No. 168 North Daly street, Los Angeles.--Take two pounds of round steak, or lean stew meat, cut in inch pieces and stew until very tender in small amount of water. While the meat is cooking clean a dozen large ripe chili peppers by removing seeds and all the veins, excepting about seven or eight veins in all, (the veins are the hot part) then cover with water and let come to a boil; remove from the fire and when cool enough to handle, scrape with a knife the soft red chili, leaving the skin to throw away. Then fry three medium-sized onions in suet; add two small tomatoes and the chili you have just removed from the skins; add a little water, half a teaspoonful of sugar, and salt to taste; let cook until very soft, then rub through a strainer; add to the cooked meat and let all come to a boil; thicken with a very little flour rubbed smooth with milk. If the tomatoes are not tart add a teaspoonful of vinegar. NO. 12. SPANISH FISH STEW. Mrs. Anderson, No. 2257 Front street, San Diego.--Take two pounds barracuda, sea bass or rock cod, skin it and cut in four pieces. Slice one good sized onion thin. In the bottom of a large granite stew pan put two tablespoons olive oil, bacon fat or salt pork fat and fry your onion a light brown. Add one cup tomato and one cup water and let cook twenty minutes. Put in your pieces of fish and if necessary add boiling water until your sauce nearly covers them. Season with salt and pepper to taste, one good pinch of saffron and one tablespoon of oregano. Let simmer twenty minutes or until the fish is done. Thicken the sauce with one tablespoon of flour made smooth with water. Serve in a platter garnished with triangles of buttered toast. Sprinkle one tablespoon finely-minced parsley over the fish. This is very fine and well worth trying. The saffron may be purchased at any drug store. The oregano or Mexican wild marjoram can be had at any grocery where Spanish people trade. The stew is very good without it, but it gives a delicious flavor. When green peppers are in season, two cut fine and cooked with the tomato are an improvement. NO. 13. CHILI CON CARNE. Mrs. Jeff D. Shook, 246 New York street, Garvanza, Cal.--Take a good-sized piece of soup meat (not a soup bone,) boil till thoroughly tender; take out of water; mince very fine; have ready two good-sized onions, also minced fine. Put into a skillet a tablespoonful of butter, and after having coated the meat with flour, turn same with the onions into the skillet and brown. Add to it the water in which the meat was boiled and one teacup of bayou beans that have been boiled done; boil slowly for about three hours. Just before taking from the fire, add salt to taste and a heaping tablespoon of chili powder or sufficient to make it hot; must be rich and hot with pepper to be good. On a cool, damp evening, this is a most palatable dish. NO. 14. CHILI CON CARNE. Mrs. Ida C. Smith, 1327 Reid street, Los Angeles--Chop into small pieces one pound of beef, two small onions, two potatoes and two ripe tomatoes or half a can of tomatoes; to this add three pints of water, salt and one tablespoon of chili powder. Cook till meat is tender, then add one tablespoon flour to thicken. NO. 15. CHILI COLORADO. Florence Osborne, 1051 South Flower street, Los Angeles.--Take two chickens, cut up as if to stew; when pretty well done, add a little green parsley and a few onions. Take half pound large pepper pods, remove seeds and pour on boiling water; steam ten or fifteen minutes; pour off water and rub them in a sieve until all the juice is out; add the juice to the chicken; let it cook for half an hour; add a little butter, flour and salt. Place a border of rice around the dish before setting on the table. NO. 16. CHICKEN STEW (SPANISH STYLE) Mrs. B. Maguire, No. 506 1/2 West First street, Los Angeles--Cut in pieces one good size chicken; have a deep sauce pan hot with two tablespoons of the best olive oil. Fry together one onion, chopped fine, one clove garlic, season with salt, pepper, enough flour to brown; add one can tomatoes with a little sugar to taste, and simmer slow until done. NO. 17. CHICKEN TAMALES. EMILIA LUNDBERG, 1400 South Flower street, Los Angeles.--Take two quarts yellow dried corn, boil in water mixed with half cup lime. When well cooked, wash thoroughly, then grind the corn on a "metata," three times, till it becomes very fine. (The metata can be purchased at any Spanish store.) Have two medium-sized chickens boiled till quite tender; cool, then cut in small pieces. Mix with the corn, enough of the water in which the chickens were boiled to make it soft and add about two cups lard. Season with a little salt, and knead thoroughly. After this take three red chilis, remove seeds, then roast in a moderate oven for a few seconds. Take out and place in tepid water, then grind on a metata several times, together with almost a head of garlic. In a stewing pan place some lard (about a tablespoonful;) when hot drop in one onion, cut fine, a tablespoon of flour; let cook a moment, then drip in the chili, then the cut chicken, a cupful seeded raisins, a cupful stoned olives and salt and pepper to taste; let come to boil; take away from fire and cool. Have some dry corn leaves well soaked for several hours in cold water. Shake them well and apply a thin layer of the corn dough on the half of each leaf; then put a spoonful of the stew on the prepared leaf, and cover with the prepared leaves; tie the ends with strings made of the same leaf. When the tomatoes are finished place them in a large pot with a little boiling water; boil gently for one hour. Any other meat may be used if desired. NO. 18. BEEF TAMALES. Florence Osborne, No. 1051 South Flower street, Los Angeles.--Boil one pound of beef and pour over it some hot beef fat. Scald thoroughly one quart of meal, adding one teaspoonful of salt and a tablespoonful of lard. Cut off the upper end of corn shucks and put to boil in cold water; let scalded meal and shucks cool off; chop the beef fine and season to taste with the salt and chili powder. Put a thinn layer of meal on shucks (leaving shuck enough to turn ends and sides under;) then put a small quantity of meat in center. Put a few shucks in the bottom of a pot to prevent scorching and pack in the tamales, placing a weight on top. Cover with boiling water, adding one tablespoonful each of lard and chili powder. NO. 19. ENCHILADAS. Mrs. Robert Y. McBride, No. 942 Westlake avenue, Los Angeles--The first thing to do is to prepare the chili sauce by splitting open the chilis, about two dozen; and removing the seeds and the four or five veins that run lengthwise; put to soak in cold water and let remain two hours in order to take out the fire, or as the Spaniards have it, "that they will not ask you to take water." Throw off this water and cover with fresh, and put on the back of the stove, where they will barely simmer for one hour; put forward and boil rapidly for fifteen minutes. Remove from the stove and with a dull knife scrape the pulp from the skins. If you have allowed sufficient time for the soaking, your pulp will be all of a quarter of an inch thick. Now take a large onion, chop fine and fry in butter until a delicate brown; then into the same pan put a couple of spoons of flour, let brown and add the chili pulp, onion and a cup of strained tomato juice and a cup of the water in which the chilis were boiled; let simmer until the consistency of thick cream, season well with salt. While the chilis are soaking you can prepare the tortillas, or pancakes. Take one quart of flour, a large spoonful of lard, teaspoon of salt and moisten with water as for biscuits; take a piece of the dough as large as an egg and roll out to the size of a breakfast plate. When you have a half dozen rolled you may begin to bake, which you can do in either of two ways--by baking on top of the stove (the Spanish way,) or by frying in deep fat in a frying pan (the latter makes a richer tortilla.) Do not fry brown; the fat must not be as hot as for doughnuts. Proceed until all the dough is used, which will make about a dozen tortillas. Now have ready one pound of good eastern cheese, grated, a quart of olives, some finely chopped onion which you can fry lightly, (if preferred cooked,) one pound of stoned raisins, three hard-boiled eggs chopped fine. Have the chili sauce hot, dip the tortillas in one at a time; place on a large hot platter or on a hot plate in which it is to be served; on one-half place a little of the raisins, olives, cheese, egg; pour a spoonful of the sauce over it and fold over the other half of the tortilla; so proceed until all are filled; pour over what sauce remains and sprinkle a little grated cheese over all. Keep the sauce hot while preparing and serve as soon as possible. When I want the enchiladas extra fine, I have some minced chicken to add to the other filling and then with a cup of good coffee or a glass of claret nothing more is necessary for a delicious meal. NO. 20. CHILI SAUCE. (That won Gold Medal at Centennial.) Mrs. F. M. Caler, No. 1415 Arapahoe street--Boil two gallons tomatoes one hour; add two quarts chopped onions, two cups sugar, one-half cup mustard seed. Put into a bag, or tie in cloth, one tablespoon of whole black pepper, one tablespoon allspice and one tablespoon cinnamon bark and add to tomatoes; also add one teaspoon cayenne pepper, salt to taste, and three green and three ripe peppers, chopped. Boil four hours and then add two quarts vinegar and boil one hour. This sauce, put through a sieve, makes delicious catsup. NO. 21. SPANISH CATSUP. Emilie Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles--One-half gallon green cucumbers, one-half gallon cabbage, one quart tomatoes, one pint beans, one dozen onions, one dozen ears of green corn, two teacups white mustard, one pound sugar, three tablespoons turmeric, two tablespoons grated horseradish; three tablespoons celery seed, two tablespoons California olive oil; one tablespoon mace, one tablespoon cinnamon, one tablespoon cayenne pepper. Peel and slice the cucumbers; sprinkle with salt, and let them stand six hours. Prepare the cabbage in the same way. Chop the onions, let them stand in boiling water half an hour; chop the tomatoes, beans and corn, scald and drain; mix all the other ingredients; place in a jar with the prepared vegetables, and cover with boiling vinegar. NO. 22. BAKED GREEN PEPPERS, WITH SPANISH RICE. Mrs. J. W. Sowles, 627 East Chicago street, Pomona, Cal. --Cook one cupful of rice until tender, chop one onion, one red pepper and two green peppers very fine and fry slowly in frying pan with two small slices of bacon, or butter. When onion is tender, add three tomatoes or same amount of canned tomatoes let cook five minutes; add the cooked rice, season with salt and if not hot enough add a little red pepper and cook for five minutes again. Take one-half dozen bell or bull-nosed peppers, wash and cut stem end off and remove seeds. Place in baking dish and stuff with the Spanish rice. Put a small lump of butter on top of each pepper and bake till peppers are tender. Serve hot. Fresh tomatoes stuffed and baked in the same way are also very nice. NO. 23. FILLET GREEN PEPPERS. Mrs. A. R. Slernitzauer, 462 North Fremont avenue, Los Angeles.--Take twelve large green peppers, remove seeds, wash well. For filling take two pounds porterhouse steak, one onion and salt. Cook until done or until you have one cup of stock with the meat. Take the stock and meat, put in chopping bowl two tomatoes, one onion, two tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon butter, one cup raisins, two eggs, red pepper and salt to taste; chop fine. Stuff the peppers, fry in butter until a nice brown on all sides. Eat hot or cold. NO. 24. STUFFED BELL PEPPERS. Mrs. W. D. Drury, 234 South Union avenue, Los Angeles.--Wash peppers, cut off stem and remove seeds. Take scraps of cold beef or pork, chop fine, add pepper seeds, one large chopped onion and some bread previously moistened with hot water and a little butter, salt and pepper. Refill peppers and bake in hot oven. NO. 25. SPANISH EGGS. (Original.) E. L. D., 628 Court street, Los Angeles.--One dozen green chiles; roast a few moments, peel, remove seeds and chop; cook in sufficient water to steam tender; season with butter. Beat and season eight to ten fresh eggs; add the chiles and cook all a moment in hot butter. Serve at once. Very appetizing. NO. 26. SPANISH EGGS. Flora Farman, Monrovia, Cal.--One cup lean cooked ham, chopped very fine; five hard-boiled eggs. Cook one-third cup of stale bread crumbs in one-third cup of milk, to a smooth paste; mix it with the ham; add one-half teaspoon of mixed mustard, one-half saltspoon of cayenne pepper, and one raw egg. Mix well. Remove shells from the hard-boiled eggs and cover them with the mixture. Fry in hot fat two minutes. Drain and serve hot or cold. Cut them lengthwise and arrange on a bed of fine parsley. The contrast between the green, red and yellow gives a pretty effect. NO. 27. EGGS A LA MME. MURRILLO. L. Shields, box 355, Los Angeles, Cal.--Have three large, sound green peppers, plunge them into very hot fat for two minutes; take them out, and with a coarse dry towel remove the skin of each; then cut each pepper into halves, lengthwise; remove the seeds; have a frying pan on the hot range with two tablespoons sweet oil. Cut six very thin slices of raw ham, place them gently in the pan, add the peppers, also, and then gently cook for fifteen minutes. Prepare six pieces of dry toast, dress them on a hot dish, then place a slice of ham over each slice of toast, then half a pepper over the ham. Fry six eggs separately in clarified butter, and then gently place one on top of each pepper. Serve. NO. 28. SPANISH CHEESE. Mrs. James Clements, 610 South Fromont avenue, Los Angeles.--Take six good-sized chili peppers (green, not red,) put them into a hot oven and blister them; then peel off the outer thin skin. Take thin slices of cheese and wrap the pepper bulk around it, then fry in good sweet lard (not butter.) Now have a Spanish gravy made of six large ripe tomatoes, one chili pepper (the red,) one button of garlic, small onion, a pinch of salt and pepper, a small piece of butter; after thoroughly cooking together, strain and thicken with a little flour and water, and when ready to serve pour over the fried peppers and cheese. Serve hot. NO. 29. SPANISH RICE. Mrs. J. J. Grogan, Fullerton, Cal.--Wash well two cupfuls of rice, put on to boil in one quart of water, one teaspoonful salt. When it begins to get tender add one small onion, chopped fine, one cupful of chopped ripe tomatoes, (as much of the juice as is possible drained,) two tablespoonfuls of butter, a dash of pepper, two teaspoonfuls of chili powder mixed with a little cold water, and three heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar. Let it all cook slowly until well done. Delicious if served with mutton. NO. 30. SPANISH RICE. Miss Madge Cummings, Santa Paula, Cal.--To make enough for twelve persons, proceed as follows: Put two tablespoons of lard in a frying pan, and slice thin one small onion and let fry together with two cups of rice, until cooked a little; then add three-fourth of a can of tomatoes, and cook until rice is done. Season highly with salt, pepper (cayenne) and keep this mixture quite moist by adding sufficient hot water, when it becomes dry. NO. 31. SPANISH RICE. M. E. K., Pasadena, Cal.--One cup well-washed rice cooked soft, about one-half an hour, in kettle containing two cups of water and two cups strained cooked tomatoes, boiling and well seasoned with salt, cayenne, and two tablespoonfuls finely-minced onions, or a clove of garlic and two ounces of finely-cut or grated cheese. Shake to prevent sticking to bottom of pan. When soft set in hot water till serving time. NO. 32. RICE A LA VALENCIANA. Mrs. B. Maguire. 506 1/2 West First street, Los Angeles--Take cupful of Carolina rice and fry in two tablespoons of lard for a few seconds; add a little cut onion and a clove of garlic; also a cupful of chopped cold chicken, veal or ham; season with salt, pepper and a teaspoon of sugar. Pour boiling water to cover rice and simmer slowly. Do not stir while cooking. Remove cover when cakes are nearly done. NO. 33. SPANISH HAMBURG SOUP. Mrs. William Harmon, 158 North Daly street, Los Angeles--Put one pound of round steak through a meat chopper; with the fingers form into balls the size of marbles. Then fry one good-sized onion in suet, a golden brown; add teacup of tomatoes, two green chili peppers (seeds removed) and about a quart of water; when boiling add the meat balls; let simmer for one-half hour, then add two small potatoes cut into dice; let boil another half hour or until potatoes are done: season with salt and pepper, serve with crackers. NO. 34. SPANISH LUNCHEON DISH. Mrs. Charles Allison, Bakersfield, Cal.--Put one-half cup olive oil in a frying pan with a clove of garlic and an onion sliced fine. Fry brown. Add a pound of cold roast meat and fry brown, then add a can of tomatoes and a chili pepper. Meanwhile boil twelve sticks of macaroni in salted water twenty minutes, then add to meat with a cupful of mushrooms (fresh or canned;) pepper and salt to taste. When ready to serve cover thickly with grated Parmesan cheese. Serve hot. Meat should be cut in inch-thick pieces before frying. NO. 35. MEAT HASH SPANISH. Mrs. G. G. Watters, 715 Temple street, Los Angeles--Chop fine cold meat--beef, lamb or veal --about one pint; also chop one medium-sized onion; mix with meat, season with salt; put in bake pan; spread over top teacupful stewed tomatoes, sprinkle with grandma's Spanish pepper and a dash of Cayenne pepper. Bake till nicely brown. Serve hot. NO. 36. MEXICAN MEAT BALLS. Mrs. C. Hickson, 231 West Eighteenth street, Los Angeles.--One pound pork, one pound beef, chopped fine; one-third as much bread as meat, one egg, one small onion, chopped fine; salt and pepper to taste; one tablespoonful chili powder. Put chopped meat, onion, the bread (after being soaked in water and squeezed out,) salt, pepper and chili powder, into a pan with the beaten egg and mix thoroughly; then roll into balls the size of a small orange. Cook in a sauce which has been made, as follows: One quart tomatoes, salt and pepper to taste; one chopped onion, one tablespoon chili powder. Simmer this sauce until the onion is done; place the meat balls in the sauce and boil gently until done, which will be in about an hour; then remove them to a platter; thicken the sauce with flour and pour over meat. NO. 37. SPANISH PICKLE. Mrs. N.G. Ledgerwood, 1577 West Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--Three dozen large ripe tomatoes, two dozen onions, one and half dozen red peppers, chop fine and add twelve tablespoons salt, twelve tablespoons brown sugar, seven cups good vinegar, six teaspoons each of cloves, allspice and cinnamon. Boil three hours, put in spices while boiling hot, and put in glass jars. NO. 38. SPANISH FLITTER PUFFS. Mrs. A.H. Mulvane, 844 Court street, San Bernardino, Cal.--One tablespoon powdered sugar, two ounces butter, one teaspoonful salt, one cup water and yolks of four eggs. Put the water into a saucepan, add the sugar, salt and butter, and, whil it is boiling, stir in flour enough to have it leave the pan; then stir in one by one, the yolks of the eggs; now drop a teaspoonful into boiling lard and fry to a light brown. If nicely done they will be very puffy. NO. 39. SPANISH OMELET. Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles.--One cup boiling milk, butter the size of an eggs, yolks and whites separate, pepper and salt. Pour the boiling milk over the butter and crumbs. When cool add the yolks of the eggs beaten light; add salt and pepper to taste. Beat whites until stiff and dry, cutting and folding them into first mixture. Have omelet pan hot, and butter sides and bottom. Turn in mixture, spread evenly, place on range where it will cook slowly. When well "puffed" and delicately browned underneath, place pans on center grate of oven to finish cooking the top. Spread with tomato sauce before folding. Serve at once on a hot platter. Garnish with parsley and tomato sauce around omelet. Tomato sauce: Cook two tablespoons of butter with one tablespoon of finely chopped onion, until yellow. Add two cups of tomatoes, a small piece of red pepper. (One tablespoon sliced mushroom or minced ham may also be added.) Cook until moisture has nearly evaporated. Season with salt and Cayenne pepper. This will make two large omelets, each sufficient for five persons. NO. 40. SPANISH ONIONS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2802 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Peel two pounds of Spanish onions, put them over the fire in sufficient boiling water to cover them, with a teaspoonful of salt, and boil them until tender; meanwhile grate an equal quantity of bread crumbs and just moisten them with cold milk. When the onions are tender pull them apart with two forks and put them into a buttered earthen baking dish, in layers with the moistened bread crumbs; put a tablespoonful of butter over it in small pieces; place the dish in oven until well browned over; serve at once. NO. 41. ONION SAUCE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2802 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--An onion sauce which is good with roast teal duck is made by peeling and chopping fine a small onion; put it in a saucepan over the fire with a tablespoonful of butter and when the butter begins to brown, stir in a tablespoonful of flour. When the flouris brown, add half a pint each of port wine and boiling water, a level teaspoonful of salt, a quarter of a saltspoonful of pepper and a little grated nutmeg. Stir the sauce until it boils and then keep hot. When the birds are done pour the drippings from them into the sauce, mix them well with it, then serve hot. NO. 42. STUFFED AND BAKED SPANISH ONIONS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2802 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Six medium-sized onions, take out the centers with a scoop; parboil them for three minutes and then put them upside down on a cloth to drain. When drained, fill the inside with force meat of bacon or sausage, mixed with the heart of the onion, minced fine; also bread crumbs, pepper, salt, mace and a spoonful of cream. Stuff the onions with this, and simmer in the oven for an hour, basting often with melted butter. When done, take the onions up carefully without breaking; place them, open ends uppermost, in a vegetable dish. Add to the gravy in the baking pan the juice of half a lemon, four tablespoonfuls of cream and a little browned flour; boil up and pour over onions. NO. 43. SPANISH SWEET POTATO PONE. Emilie Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles, Cal.--(A recipe which originally came from the island of Barbadoes, and will instantly commend itself if you like sweet potato.) Wash, peel and grate the best quality of sweet potatoes. Measure five cups into a large bowl. Into this stir three cups of best West India molasses, two cups butter, (melt the butter carefully and do not let it get oily,) one cup preserved ginger, one cup of preserved orange peel, (orange peel and ginger to be cut fine,) one teaspoon salt, one tablespoon pounded ginger, and two tablespoons allspice, cloves, mace and cinnamon mixed. When all these ingredients are thoroughly mixed together, pour the pone in a well-greased pan, and bake in a moderately hot oven. Try it with a knife. When the blade comes out clean take it out of the oven. Let it get cold before taking it from the pan. It should look dark, like a rich preserve when properly baked. NO. 44. SHRIMP, CREOLE. M. V. G. --One tablespoon of butter in a saucepan; add a small onion, chopped fine; cook until onion is done. Then add one-third of a can of tomatoes, cook this fifteen minutes; add a can of shrimps, a coffee cup of sweet milk thickened with flour, one teaspoon of salt, one-fourth teaspoon of cayenne pepper, a dash of black pepper. Take off when boiled and turn over toasted bread; serve on hot plates. NO. 45. TENDERLOIN OF SOLE, SPANISH. Mrs. C. Hickson, 231 West Eighteenth street, Los Angeles--Four ripe tomatoes, or one-half can, two onions sliced and fried a light brown, 2 chili peppers chopped fine, one-half pound of salt pork cut in small pieces and fried, a pinch of salt. Boil all together until tender, then thicken with a teaspoonful of corn starch and set aside to cool while preparing the fish. Put one and one-half tablespoonfuls of good olive oil into a frying pan; when hot, put in fish which has been rolled in corn meal; fry a nice brown. Put fish in center of dish and pour sauce over it. Serve garnished with parsley and sliced limes. NO. 46. SPANISH SALAD. Miss Minnie May Hendricks, Los Angeles, Cal.--Pare four large cucumbers, four large tomatoes, one bunch of crisp celery, two heads of fresh lettuce, three green chili peppers. Then chop all separately and very fine. Then mix all together. Add one tablespoon vinegar, add the juice of one lemon, salt and pepper to taste. Set in cool place until ready to serve. NO. 47. SPANISH SPAGHETTI. Miss K. M. Phillips, 1235 West Seventh street, Los Angeles.--Take one-half pound ground steak and two ordinary-sized onions, ground, and cook with a good-sized piece of butter in skillet. Add a half can of tomatoes; season with salt and chili peppers. Add one-quarter pound cheese, cut fine. When thoroughly cooked, add a couple of handfuls of spaghetti, which has been previously boiled. Stir all together and serve. NO. 48. FRIJOLES. (Spanish beans.) Mrs. William H. Harmon, 159 North Daly street, Los Angeles.--Put one pint of pink beans to soak over night, then put them on to boil in salted water until tender. While they are cooking, fry two good-sized onions in bacon fat; add one-half can tomatoes, about six or eight red chili peppers that have been cleaned, and part of the veins removed, unless one likes them very "hot;" put them on in water and let boil a few minutes, then scrape off the red jelly-like chili from the tough skin, and add with the onions and tomatoes to the beans., Let all boil several hours until very soft, stirring frequently to prevent burning. NO. 49. SPANISH STRING BEANS. Miss K. M. Philips, 1235 West Seventh street, Los Angeles.--Chop one medium-sized onion very fine. Fry in one tablespoon lard. Add one-half can tomatoes; cook a little. Season with chili pepper, salt and a little sugar to counter-act acidity of tomatoes. Prepare one and one-half pounds string beans, put them with the tomatoes and onions; cook for fifteen minutes; add enough water so the beans can boil. Cook until the beans are tender and the water is boiled down. NO. 50. SPANISH STEW. (Original.) Ella M. Magee, 122 North Johnston street.--One tablespoonful washed rice; tablespoonful of butter, fry to a rich golden brown, stirring constantly. Cut up one onion, two potatoes, four peeled tomatoes; boil three red peppers soft, scrape the pulp from the inside with a knife; add one teaspoonful salt; place all in a covered stewpan; cook one hour slowly. NO. 51. SPANISH STEW. Mrs. Robert Y. McBride, 942 Westlake avenue, Los Angeles.--Cook some nice young peas in plenty of water. Fry lamb chops a delicate brown; remove the chops and thicken the gravy with flour; pour the peas and the water in which they boiled into the frying pan and when thickened add the chops; cover and let simmer for ten minutes, adding salt, pepper and a little Worcestershire sauce. NO. 52. CHILI CON CARNE. Ella M. Mageo, 122 North Johnson street, Los Angeles.--Two pounds chopped beef; one-fourth pound suet, one-half teaspoon salt; place in a covered stew kettle, steam until tender; remove the seeds and veins from eight red peppers, boil soft, rub through a sieve; add one teaspoonful onion juice; stew slowly one hour in covered kettle. NO. 53. ALBONDIGAS, OR MEAT DUMPLINGS. Mrs. E. H. Eberhart, 244 N. Chicago street, Los Angeles.-- Meat, raw or cooked, onions, chile, tomato, breakfast bacon, chopped very fine; season with salt and pepper; mix with corn meal (coarse meal is best;) make into small balls, and carefully drop into boiling water. Keep boiling until done. Season the gravy to taste. NO. 54. CHILE CON CARNE. Mrs. C. Y. Yglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--Grind chiles in a meat grinder or any other way to reduce to pulp; one dozen red chiles, remove the seeds and some of the veins; boil till tender; when cool grind in a meat grinder or scrape the meat and throw away the skin; cut in pieces about one pound of beef or pork, put on a stewing pan with one large spoonful lard, sprinkle with salt; stew for a few minutes, cover; when meat is nearly done cut fine a piece of onion, one clove garlic; throw in the stewing meat, cook a few minutes; add spoonful flour, cook two or three minutes, and then put in chile. If too thick add a little water, stirring all the time to prevent from burning. Cook a few minutes longer and it is done. NO. 55. CHILES RELLENOS. Mrs. C. Y. Yglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--Take one dozen green chiles, roast on a pan over the fire without lard; when skin becomes puffy they are done. When cold peel off the skin, cut off stem and remove seeds. For filling put in chopping bowl any cold meat, one onion, a clove or two of garlic, two tomatoes, stoned olives and raisins, half a cup if desired. When this is chopped fine add half a small cup of vinegar and fry on a pan with hot lard. Cool and fill one by one the chiles. When all are filled beat three eggs, whites and yolks separately, add a tablespoon flour and a spoonful of milk, season with salt and pepper. Now drop one by one the stuffed chiles in this batter and fry brown in hot lard. Serve hot. ANOTHER WAY.--Prepare the chiles in the same way as before, and for this filling use grated cheese instead of meat. NO. 56. CHILES RELLENOS. Mrs. A. A. Bradshaw, 1920 Front street, San Diego, Cal. --Skin several green peppers by frying slightly in hot lard; slit at side, removing seeds; stuff with preparation of chopped boiled beef, onion, thyme, few drops vinegar if liked, some bread crumbs, a little gravy or good broth, salt and pepper. Dip in beaten egg, then flour and fry or saute in oil, butter or lard. When done serve with sauce made by cooking together a spoonful of lard or butter, a little flour, then add water, sliced pears, apples and seeded raisins, cooking until tender. NO. 57. COLD RAW SPANISH. Mrs. James Clements, 510 S. Fremont avenue, Los Angeles. Six good-sized tomatoes, peel and take the seeds out, squeeze out water, put in chopping bowl, then take one onion, one very small bit of garlic, two small green chile peppers, one cucumber, put with the tomatoes. Chop all together; when fine enough to suit take salt, black pepper; a small bit of sugar, a dash of red pepper, and one-half cup vinegar (diluted) and heat it together. Let cool before putting over tomatoes. Put on ice and serve cold in lettuce leaves. NO. 58. ENCHILADAS, ARIZONA STYLE. Mrs. C. Y. Iglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--Prepare corn as for tamales, the finer the better. When corn is ground mix a little salt in a little water, mix with ground corn and a little grated cheese. Knead dough with hand until it becomes firm like that for biscuits. Take a piece of the dough about the size of an egg, press with hands into a little cake the size of a round cookie, and about half an inch thick. Have a frying pan on the fire with plenty lard, when hot fry enchiladas as any fritters to a light brown. They will be rich and puffy. Have chile sauce prepared as for chile con carne, only in the chile con carne the chile is put to fry with the meat and for the enchiladas you fry the chile separate and keep it in a pan on the back of the stove. When ready to serve the enchiladas dip one by one in the chile sauce and lay a row on a hot platter. Sprinkle with grated cheese that has been mixed with finely-chopped onions, or either of the two, or with stoned olives chopped fine with cheese and onions. Some prefer a fried egg on each enchilada instead of the onions and cheese. NO. 59. ENCHILADAS DE CHILE VERDE, MEXICAN STYLE. Mrs. C. Y. Yglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--Prepare enchiladas Arizona style except chile sauce. CHILE SAUCE. Take a dozen green chiles, boil till tender, grind or scrape the meat, don't use the skin (they will be so soft as to be mashed with the masher;) add a little water and fry on a frying pan, first frying a little flour brown, and then put in your chile, a little salt, and the sauce is ready. Dip enchiladas and serve hot. NO. 60. FRIJOLES (Spanish Beans.) Mrs. C. Y. Yglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--Soak over night one pint pink beans. Put them to boil next morning with a little salt until they are tender. When done put on a deep frying pan a large spoonful of lard; when hot fry a small piece of onion cut fine and flowing. Put in beans without the water in which they have been boiled; mash the beans thoroughly in the hot lard, then add the water in which the beans were cooked. Cook five to ten minutes. NO. 61. GALLINA A LA MEXICANA. Mrs. A. Molina, Box 544, El Paso, Tex.--Wash and unjoint nice spring chicken, and cover with salted water; add one small onion, so it can be removed after it has seasoned the chicken. Let cook one and one-fourth hours. Take out chicken and put where it will keep warm. Boil two eggs in shell until hard. Separate whites from yolks and while yolks are hot mash and mix thoroughly with one tablespoonful corn meal, and thicken with liquor chicken has been boiled in. Then add one cup of prepared red chile, let boil five minutes and add chicken and the whites of the eggs, chopped. NO. 62. GENUINE SPANISH CHICKEN TAMALES. Mrs. C. Y. Yglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--For one dozen good-sized tamales; One chicken, one pound lard, one-half pound red chiles, one dozen corn husks, two quarts white, dry corn, one pint olives. Prepare the corn the night before by putting to boil in enough water to cover, with half cup of lime dissolved in a little water. Don't put in the hard pieces of lime that settle in cup. Boil ten to fifteen minutes, take from the fire and let stand that way until next morning, when put in clean cold water and rub the corn with your hands to clean well. Wash two or three times more in cold water and it is ready to be ground. Grind the corn on a flat stone called a metate, but any other grinder is preferable. Now cut up chicken, boil till quite tender and season with salt. In the meantime remove seeds from chiles and put them in deep stewing pan with hot water, cook till tender, cool, drain off water and grind to a pulp. Put a piece of garlic in chile if desired. To prepare the chile after it is ground place in a stew pan a large spoonful of lard; when hot drop in a tablespoon of flour and a little salt, stirring so it will not burn, put in chile, cook five minutes; then put in cut chickenand stoned olives. Let all come to a boil, take away from fire and cool. To prepare dough take a large pan or basin, put in two cups of lard and beat it with hands. When real light put in corn, beat a few minutes, drop in some of the brothin which the chicken has been boiled, little at a time, beating constantly until dough is soft and smooth; season with salt. Into a glass of water drop a bit of the dough; if it rises to the top it is done, if not, beat it a little longer. Have some dry corn husks well soaked for several hours in cold water, shake them well, apply a thin layer of the dough on the half of each leaf; then put a spoonful of the prepared stew on a prepared leaf and cover with more prepared leaves. Tie the ends with strings made of the same leaves. Then place in a large pot with two pints of boiling water, steam gently for two or three hours. Soak in warm water a clean dishtowel, spread on the top of the tamales just before putting on the cover. To prevent burning place a few hard ends of corn husks on bottom of pot before putting in the tamales. Flank of beef or other meat may be substituted for chicken. NO. 63. MEXICAN HOT DISH. Mrs. A. N. Bradshaw, 1920 Front street, San Diego.--Fry three or four slices of bacon, then add one or two sliced onions, three or four tomatoes, same of green chiles, and three small summer squashes; salt and stew about one hour, removing bacon when ready to serve. NO. 64. SOPA DE ALBONDIGAS, OR MEAT BALLS. Mrs. C. Y. Yglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--One pound hamburg steak, or half pork and half beef, fresh, chopped fine. Mix with this half a cup of cold boiled rice. Rub on a chopping bowl one large spoonful of lard, if beef meat is used; if beef and pork,less lard. Now put in meat and rice, and break in two eggs. Rub this with your hand, season with salt, pepper, chile powder, one teaspoon of each; cut fine one onion, one clove of garlic, two or three tomatoes, a little chopped parsley, two or three peppermint leaves, chipped fine; half teaspoon wild majoram (oregano,) one tablespoonful of the dry seeds of china parsley or culantro; the last two ingredients mashed fine. The last two can be obtained in Mexican stores. Now mix all spices with prepared meat, roll into balls the size of walnuts and drop one by one in a deep stew pan containing one quart of hot boiling water, with a little salt. Boil as dumplings; serve with soda crackers. NO. 65. PINK BEANS, SPANISH. Soak beans and stew until tender; salt; add a can of tomatoes and little pieces of onions fried carefully in bacon grease or butter. Also add a pinch of cayenne pepper. Then cook for one hour. NO. 66. PREPARED RED CHILE. Mrs. A. Molina, Box 644, El Paso, Tex.--Take seeds and veins from red chiles until a five-pound pail is full of the pods; put them into cold water for one-half hour; then turn off cold water and pour on very hot water; let them stand ten minutes and turn off water. Repeat five or six times. The last water leave on and mash the chile with a potato masher through a colander until the pulp is all removed from the skins. Have a skillet with enough lard in which to brown two tablespoonfuls of flour, into this pour the juice of the chile, and add a small whole onion, a small lump of butter and salt to taste. Place on back of stove to boil slowly for an hour. This can be used for seasoning meats, in beans, for making enchiladas, or on any dish that one likes chile. NO. 67. SPANISH BEANS. Mrs. G. W. Wood, 1023 S. Olive street, Los Angeles.--Soak two and a half cups small red beans in water over night; after cooking two hours add one-half can strained tomatoes. Fry two good-sized onions a delicate brown in one-half cup olive oil (lard or butter will do;) add two whole chile peppers, salt to taste. Turn all into the beans and cook slowly one and a half hours. Just before they are done add one tablespoon vinegar. Will keep well and the more they are warmed up the better they taste. NO. 68. SPANISH BEANS. Mrs. John McInerny, 1118 S. Olive street, Los Angeles.--Two cups best pink beans, wash thoroughly, put in plenty of water to soak over night. In morning drain off water, place in kettle, pour over one quart hot water (not boiling,) with a pinch of baking soda, and boil slowly until soft. When soft drain off water, pour over them one quart of tomatoes, one or two red peppers, two good-sized slices of bacon, and enough salt to taste. Set on back of stove to boil slowly for two hours. NO. 69. SPANISH BAKED BEANS. Mrs. John McInerney, 1118 S. Olive street, Los Angeles.--One pint best pink beans, wash thoroughly, soak over night; in morning drain off water, place in a kettle with a quart of hot water, to which has been added a pinch of baking soda. Set back on stove so they can boil slowly until soft. When soft drain off remaining water, add salt. Have baking dish ready. Cut small thin slices of bacon, line bottom of dish with these, then place in a layer of beans, add a few pieces of red pepper, chopped fine, and a small teaspoonful of brown sugar, then another layer of bacon and beans prepared same as first, and so on until dish is filled within an inch of top. Pour over the whole as much tomato sauce as it will hold, place in a hot oven and bake one hour; serve very hot. Use canned tomatoes or ripe fruit that has been strained through a colander. NO. 70. SPANISH BEANS FRIED. Mrs. John McInerney, 1118 S. Olive street, Los Angeles.--One and one-half cups best pink beans, wash thoroughly, soak in plenty of cold water over night. In morning remove from water, place in kettle containing one quart hot water, to which a pinch of baking soda has been added. Set on stove where they will boil very slowly until very soft. As soon as soft drain off remaining water, season with salt and two red peppers chopped fine. Then mash very fine as you would potatoes. Have ready a large skillet, very hot; place enough slices of bacon in it to cover the bottom, cut very thin and fry very crisp; then remove and place on a large platter. Put in a warm place. Put the mashed beans in skillet, and fry in the bacon drippings until very brown, turn and when the other side becomes brown lift out on the platter with bacon. Serve very hot. Garnish with lettuce and thin slices of tomatoes. NO. 71. SPANISH CUTLETS. Mariane Kathrine Miller, 2323 Leoti street, Los Angeles. Take a thick cut of tenderloin steak, remove gristle and skin, and cut into pieces two inches square; then pound with blunt end of hammer until fiber is thoroughly broken. Have ready a plate of flour, seasoned with salt and pepper, in which place the pieces of meat. Cook both sides brown in hot fats and serve by heaping on lettuce in center of plate; pour hot butter over the meats, then garnish with twelve tomatoes in parsley. To prepare the tomatoes, remove the inside of twelve of them, and mix with three-quarters cup rice, one-half onion, one cup finely chopped meats, one teaspoon Worcestershire and chile sauce, and one teaspoonful each salt and sugar. Let simmer until thoroughly thickened. Fill tomatoes and replace the tops. Heat five minutes. NO. 72. SPANISH HASH. Mariane Kathrine Miller, 2323 Leoti street, Los Angeles. Stew one cup rice and add a lump of butter; then melt some butter and add one minced onion, and let brown: add two cups minced meats, two cups tomatoes, one tablespoon Worcestershire sauce, one seeded pepper, one-quarter spoon curry powder, twelve olives, one tablespoon salt; put in a dish a layer of rice, then meat, and finish the top with grated cheese and cracker crumbs. Bake slowly for fifteen minutes. NO. 73. SPANISH OMELET. Miss C. Hernstein. 2802 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Fry four thin slices of bacon until crisp, drain from the fat, add two tablespoons minced onion, cook in the hot fat until yellow. Add also two ripe tomatoes and one tablespoonful of green pepper, freed from seeds and chopped fine. Let them cook slowly without scorching while you beat four eggs slightly, add a little salt and four tablespoons hot water. Put one teaspoonful butter in a hot omelet pan, turn in the mixture and put it in the center, add the crisp bacon, finely crumbled, fold the other half of the omelet over, and turn out on a hot platter. NO. 74. SPANISH SALAD. Mrs. J. M. Reed, 5822 Monte Vista street, Highland Park, Los Angeles.--Four large cucumbers, one bunch celery, three large onions, four large tomatoes, two heads lettuce, three green peppers. Chop all separately very fine, then mix together and season with tablespoonful of vinegar, juice of one lemon and salt and pepper to taste. NO. 75. SPANISH RICE. Mrs. C. Y. Yglesias, 1037 Albany street, Los Angeles.--Soak for about an hour three-fourths cup of rice, drain, put a spoonful of lard in frying pan. When hot fry rice to a rich golden brown, stirring constantly. Cut fine one onion, one clove garlic and two tomatoes (large.) Have ready cleaned a half cup of fresh sweet peas, place all with rice and fry a few minutes more. Now put in a quart of soup bone or any other meat broth, season highly with salt and pepper, cover and don't stir any more. Let cook gently till the water is reduced. Fine with Spanish beans. NO. 76. SPANISH SHORTCAKE. Mrs. M. E. K., Pasadena, Cal.--Three eggs, whole of two, white of one saved for frosting, one cup sugar, one-half cup butter, two-thirds cup of milk, two cups flour, one teaspoon baking powder. Cream butter and sugar, and beat in eggs till very light, then add the milk and flour with baking powder sifted in it, and one-half teaspoon ground cinnamon. Bake in shallow tins and put on a thin frosting made with white of one egg and one teaspoon ground cinnamon. Put in oven and brown a golden brown. The cinnamon turns the frosting pink. NO. 77. SPANISH SOUP. Mrs. R. B. Stevens, 1056 Pine avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--Take one pint pink beans, wash well and cook until nearly done. Then add four good-sized onions, three green and three fresh ripe chiles, all chopped fine; one quart can tomatoes, mashed, one pound hamburg steak and one-half pound suet. Do not chop the suet but put in whole and remove when the soup is done. Salt well and add pepper to taste. Add water to the above ingredients to make about five quarts when done. Cook one hour longer and serve with crackers or toast. Fine for supper on cold rainy nights. NO. 78. SPANISH STEW (Original.) Ella M. Magee, 122 N. Johnston st., Los Angeles.--One tablespoon washed rice, tablespoon butter; fry the rice to a rich golden brown, stirring constantly. Add three pints boiling water, one onion, minced fine, two potatoes, cut up, with four peeled tomatoes, sliced fine. Boil three red peppers soft, remove seeds, scrape pulp from inside with a knife, place all in a covered stew pan, salt to taste; boil one hour. NO. 79. TAMALE PIE. Mrs. S. B. Bagnall, Oxnard, Cal.--One pound round of beef, with a little fat; one pound pork, fat and lean, cut in small bits or chopped coarsely in meat chopper. Put together to boil, keeping well covered with water. Prepare from dried chiles one-half teacup of pulp. This is done by removing seeds and veins, boiling in water until soft, and then scraping with a knife. When meat has boiled one hour add the pulp, one and one-half dozen olives, one dozen raisins, three cloves garlic, salt to taste. To make crust, put in saucepan two-thirds cup fresh lard (home made if possible,) one pint water. When boiling add one teaspoon salt, one large teacup corn meal, stirring in slowly. When cool enough to handle spread this on bottom and sides of shallow two-quart granite basin; thicken meat with one tablespoon corn meal, boiling about five minutes. Pour the meat onto the crust. Having saved enough of crust dough to make cover, work this into round, thin pats and place on top of meat. Bake in hot oven one-half to three-quarters of an hour. Better than tamales. Improves by warming over the second or third day. SOUPS. NO. 1. APPLE SOUP. F. M. Blagg, No. 4537 Marmion Way.--Wash and quarter three medium-sized rather tart apples; then boil till tender in sufficient water to make one quart of soup. Strain and mash through a colander, reboil add sugar to taste, a piece of butter the size of a walnut, and 2 teaspoonfuls of instantaneous tapioca. Serve with smal squares of bread fried in butter. NO. 2. ASPARAGUS SOUP. Miss M. H. Chapman, No. 124 Daly street.--Boil the asparagus with any kind of fresh meat or fowl, or use the broth in which they have been boiled. To every quart of this liquor add a heaping teaspoonful of flour stirred into a teacup of cream just before serving. Salt and pepper to taste. Serve with crisp toast. One hundred points of asparagus will answer for three full pints of broth; cut them in pieces two inches long; boil half an hour or until they come to pieces. NO. 3. BEAN SOUP. Caroline M. Tyler, Ocean Park, Cal.--Take a sufficient quantity of pink or brown beans to make a quart or more of soup; soak them over night, having previously washed them. In the morning place them on the fire with a ham bone and a quart of water, allowing this to simmer about three hours. In the mean time take a full pint can of tomatoes, a large onion, two green peppers, one red one, chopped fine as for chili sauce; add to this mixture, a teaspoonful of salt, a small teaspoonful of sugar and a teaspoonful of mustard; allow this to boil nearly as long as the beans; then remove from the fire and strain through a sieve, pouring the liquor into the soup. This makes a very palatable and nourishing soup for a working man's luncheon. If puree is desired mash the beans and strain through a colander. (This is my own invention and cannot be found in any cook book.--C. M. T.) NO. 4. BEAN SOUP. Mrs. S., El Monte, Cal.--Put into a saucepan two quarts of water, a pint or more of cooked beans, (some baked ones will do,) and about a pint of tomatoes. Add a sliced onion, the size of a walnut or larger, two tablespoonfuls of rolled oats and let boil for an hour or longer; add a pinch of soda, or enough to take away some of the acid of tomatoes, then mash through sieve or colander and return to saucepan; some milk and cream can be added to this which improves it, but as in the other recipe, it can be made without and seasoned with butter, pepper and salt. It is good warmed over the next day. When using rolled oats do not put saucepan lid on tight as it boils over easily. NO. 5. BEAN SOUP. Mrs. E. A. Pallab, R. F. D., R. 3, Santa Ana, Cal.--Take pint red beans, 1 gallon cold water; boil briskly until done; add water as it boils away; salt to taste; butter size of egg; serve hot with buttered slices of toast in soup plates; soup and few beans poured over. (Fine for school children's dinner.) NO. 6. BEAN TURTLE SOUP. Mrs. Franklin, Anaheim, Cal.--Soak over night one quart of black beans; next day boil them in the proper quantity of water, say a gallon, then dip the beans out of the pot and strain them through a colander, or if you have a jelly press it is better, as that keeps the hulls and only gives you the flour of the beans, which you put in the liquid you boiled them in. Tie up in a thin cloth some thyme, a teaspoonful of summer savory and parsley, and let it boil in the mixture. Add a tablespoonful of cold butter, salt and pepper. Have ready four hard boiled yolks of eggs, quartered, and a few force meat balls; add this to the soup, with a sliced lemon and half a glass of wine, just before serving the soup. This approaches so near in flavor to the real turtle soup that few are able to distinguish the difference. The FORCE MEAT BALLS for this soup are made as follows: One cupful cooked veal or fowl minced; mix with this a handful of fine bread crumbs, the yolks of four hard-boiled eggs rubbed smooth together with a tablespoon of milk; season with pepper and salt; add a half teaspoon of flour, and bind all together with two beaten eggs; the hands to be well floured; the mixture to be made into little balls the size of a nutmeg; drop into the soup twenty minutes before serving. The soup is very fine without the hard-boiled eggs or force meat balls. NO. 7. BEEF SOUP (for 6.) Mrs. Scales, No. 46 1/2 Magnolia avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--Three pounds fresh brisket; pour over this cold water to cover by one inch. At the same time place in half cup of barley; let boil slowly for three and one-half hours. Skim as required. Turn over meat every half hour. Put in salt to suit. One hour before taking off, put in one or two onions, acording to size; slice them; also a bay leaf. Ten minutes before taking off, place enough fresh or canned tomatoes in it to give it a color. Skim once more and serve. NO. 8. BEEF SOUP.. Mrs. T. F. McCamant, No. 121 Avenue 45, East.--Take shank bone of beef with considerable meat on it. Have it split into several pieces. After trimming and washing, put in kettle and boil briskly for a few minutes and skim. After that boil or simmer slowly for three or four hours, or until the meat will fall from the bone. During the process of boiling add two onions, salt, black pepper and a bunch of parsley, six cloves, two tablespoonfuls of vinegar and two teaspoonfuls of sugar. When the cooking is completed add enough water to make two quarts, after which strain through colander, skim off surplus grease and the soup is ready for the table. Tomatoes or other vegetables and rice may be added if desired. NO. 9. BEEF TEA SOUP. Miss Lillian Young, No. 1338 North West street, Santa Ana.--Two pounds round steak. Cut in small pieces and cover with quart of cold water and let stand half hour; add one large onion with a couple of cloves stuck in it, and simmer gently for one hour; add salt and pepper to taste. NO. 10. BLACK BEAN SOUP. Miss M. A. Myrick, No. 228 N. Avenue 22.--Soak two cups beans over night. Boil until soft enough to mash through a colander; after adding one quart of stock, add one-half cup tomatoe catsup, one sliced onion, salt and pepper, pinch of summer savoy. When the seasoning is cooked in, cut lemon in three slices and float on top as it is served at table. NO. 11. BOUILLON. Miss Emilia Lundberg, No. 2400 South Flower street--Six pounds lean beef from middle of round, one and one-half pounds marrow-bone, five quarts cold water, one teaspoon pepper corns, one tablespoon salt, celery, turnip, parsnips, onion, one-quarter cup each, cut in dice; wipe, and cut meat in inch cubes, put two-thirds of meat in soup kettle, and soak in water twenty minutes; brown remainder in hot frying pan with marrow from marrow-bone. Put browned meat and bone in kettle; heat slowly to boiling point; skim and cook at temperature below boiling point six hours, add seasonings and vegetables; cook one hour, strain and cool. Remove fat and clear (using white and shell of one egg to each quart of stock.) Serve in bouillon cups, hot or ice cold. NO. 12. BRAIN SOUP. Mrs. George Berenstein, No. 982 Vernon avenue--Two sets of brains, well cleaned; put a piece of butter the size of hen egg in kettle; some chopped onions, chopped parsley, pepper and salt to taste, then put the brains in and fry slowly. Have some beef stock, about a quart, mix with the brains; let come to a boil; beat one egg, a half cup of rich milk, a dash of nutmeg and stir in just before serving. Have ready some pieces of fried bread an inch square, and put about six pieces in each soup bowl and pour the soup over and serve at once. NO. 13. BUTTERKNOCKOLN. Mrs. E. T. Cooke, No. 149 South Los Robles avenue, Pasadena, Cal.--This Hungarian soup, and dainty dumpling is an excellent dish for invalids. It has been used in case of severe stomach trouble with the very best results. It is equally good for well people. A good-sized beef shank bone well broken; two pounds lean mutton. Wash, scrape and remove all particles which do not belong in a clean soup. Put to boil in cold water, sufficient to cover. Cook slowly, removing all scum, till the mutton drops apart when tried. Cool. Skim off all grease. Strain. Replace over fire, and when it boils gently, add the dumplings made as follows: One teaspoonful butter, beaten to cream; break in one egg; beat thoroughly; season with salt and a little grated nutmeg; stiffen with enough finely-rolled cracker crumbs to make a very soft dumpling. Drop this into the boiling broth, a teaspoonful at a time. (It will make three or four dumplings.) Boil five minutes. NO. 14. CELERY SOUP, rich and creamy. Mrs. F. Gamble, No. 19 Teller street, Tucson, Ariz.--A shank of beef, one large bunch of celery, or two small ones, and rich cream, one cup; a little flour. Make a rich broth of the shank, always putting into cold water, skimming off all the fat as it rises; when ready, take up the meat and thicken the broth with a spoon or two of flour, first rubbed in a little cold water; have the celery cut fine and boil it in the soup till tender; then add the cream; salt and pepper to taste, and serve at once. NO. 15. CHESTNUT SOUP. Mrs. Isobel Saxton, box 91, Orange, Cal.--One pound Spanish chestnuts, one pound good white stock, one-half pint cream, one-half pint milk, dash of grated nutmeg and mace, cayenne and salt, one-half teaspoonful sugar; slit the husks and boil for ten minutes; remove the husks and skin, put the chestnuts in a stewpan with the stock and boil until they are soft, then rub through a fine strainer. Warm up with the milk, cream, sugar, and seasoning. NO. 16. CLAM CHOWDER. Mrs. Clarence Allison, Covina, Cal.--One pint of clams, six large crackers; fry two slices salt pork in frying pan and turn fat into soup kettle; chop six potatoes fine, also onion; roll the crackers fine, chop the clams and pork, put in a layer of potatoes and onion, then one of crackers, then pork and clams, alternating in this way until all are put in. Add plenty of pepper and salt. Then add the clam liquor and as much boiling water as will more than cover them. Cook for one hour. Just before serving add one pint of hot milk. Stir often to prevent sticking. Makes enough for eight. NO. 17. CONSOMME (for twelve.) Mrs. Jennie Harrington, No. 821 South Broadway--Take two and one-half potatoes, two carrots, one can tomatoes, one stalk celery, one onion, chopped fine; add two pounds fresh beef, ground; mix chopped beef and vegetables in pan; break six eggs in pan with vegetables and meat; add one-quarter teaspoonful of allspice, one bay leaf, one tablespoonful salt, one pinch cayenne pepper and white pepper to season; add this mixed well together to one gallon chicken stock; let simmer on back of range four to five hours. Strain through cheesecloth and add juice one-half lemon and one wine glass sherry. NO. 18. CREAM CELERY SOUP (eight bowls,) for vegetarians: very good. H. J. West, Esepranza Sanatorium, Cal.--Take one big bunch of celery, cut up fine, both the root and the white stalks; put the cut-up celery into a stewpan and pour enough water over it to cover it up well. Add a pinch of salt and a teaspoon of butter. Then cut up the green celery stalks, likewise, and a small onion; put a slice of butter into a stewpan and let it melt. Put the cut-up celery and onion into the pan and let it simmer for ten minutes, stirring well meanwhile. Then add a small particle of bay leaf and four seeds of allspice; afterwards stir in a tablespoonful of flour; add one and one-half quarts of boiling milk and let it boil for ten minutes. Now strain through a fine sieve and add the thoroughly-boiled celery. Finally add a pinch of white pepper, a pinch of sugar and salt to taste. NO. 19. CREAM OF CELERY SOUP. L. B. Morton, 1625 Rockwood street--Chop stalks of celery, leaving on a few tops, to fill a quart dish; put in a stewpan and pour on a little more than one quart of water; simmer slowly till only about one pint of liquid is left; then strain and into the liquor left put one potato that has been finely chopped, and one tablespoon finely-chopped onion. When well cooked, add one quart sweet milk, lump of butter and one tablespoon flour rubbed smooth in a litte milk; pepper and salt to taste. Bring to a boil and serve with or without toasted squares of bread. Sufficient to serve six or eight people. NO. 20. CREAM OF CHICKEN SOUP. Mrs. Frank H. Davis, Glendora, Cal.--Cut in pieces a plump chicken and boil until tender; strain and to the liquor add one cup of boiled rice, two tablespoons flour in one-third cup of butter; salt and pepper; a dash of paprika and one cup of sweet cream. NO. 21. CREAM OF LIMA BEAN SOUP. Mrs. S. B. Bagnall, Oxnard, Cal.--Take one-half pint of clean, plump, dry lima beans; boil until tender. Put in a saucepan one good tablespoonful of butter, one medium-sized onion, (cut fine,) and three or four sprigs of parsley. Simmer over fire ten minutes, not allowing it to brown. Put mixture in with the beans, and let simmer ten minutes; then pass through through colander. Add one pint sweet milk, previously heated, one-quarter saltspoonful of sugar, and salt to taste. Leave over fire to keep hot, and just before serving add slowly one teacup of cream, stirring until well mixed. The above is sufficient for six plates. NO. 22. CREAM OF LIMA BEAN SOUP WITH NOODLES. Ella M. Holmes, Santa Monica, Cal.--Proportions for five persons; Lima beans, dry, one pint; butter two tablespoonfuls; one onion; cold water, two quarts. Wash and soak the beans three hours. Cook in salted water, with one onion, one and one-half hours. Sift through a strainer; put back in saucepan; add one pint sour cream, two spoonfuls of butter. Take one and one-half tablesponfuls of sweet cream, mix flour to make a stiff dough, roll very thin; cut as for noodles, and add to the soup. Boil five minutes; serve with plain or cheese crackers. Sour cream makes a better soup stock than meat broth. NO. 23. CREAM OF ONION SOUP. Helen M. Magee, No. 123 North Johnson street.--For five persons take a dozen mild-flavored onions, medium size, minced fine and fried to a pale yellow in butter; add two quarts cold water, seasoned to taste with salt, black and red pepper; boil slowly for half hour. Have ready in the tureen, the yolks of four eggs, well beaten. Add the soup slowly, a little at a time, beatink well, until the yolks are well mixed with the soup. Serve on a separate plate thin slices of toasted French bread or crackers with one tablespoonful of grated cheese to a plate of soup. This soup is a clear, straw-colored liquid, like thin cream, with no suspicion of onion about it. NO. 24. CREAM OF POTATO SOUP. Mrs. Goiny, San Diego, Cal.--Pare and cut into dice six medium-sized potatoes, chop fine one large onion. Place in kettle with just enough water to cover and boil until tender, then add one quart of rich milk. When scalding hot drop into it dumplings made as follows: Four heaping tablespoons flour, one teaspoon baking powder, pinch of salt, one tablespoon cream and water enough to make soft dough; mould into small lumps and drop into milk. Cook ten minutes. Do not remove cover till done. Lift kettle from stove occasionally to prevent burning. When ready to serve salt, pepper and celery salt to taste. NO. 25. CREAM OF POTATO SOUP. (Original.) Mrs. H--No. 1952 Lovelace avenue.--Boil four medium-sized potatoes; when done pass through fruit press and add butter the size of small egg; pepper and salt and beat until very light and creamy. Then add one quart hot milk, place over fire and beat constantly with egg beater until boiling point is reached, then add one egg (white and yolk beaten separately.) Serve immediately. Do not boil after adding egg or it will curdle. NO. 26. CREAM OF RICE SOUP. Miss Emilia Lundberg, No. 2400 South Flower street.-- Pearl barley, cracked wheat, sago, corn meal or rice can be used for this soup. Put over the fire in a thick saucepan with milk and water; as the grains soften it may be rubbed through a colander. To this pulp add enough hot milk to make a creamy soup; season it with salt, pepper and the least grating of nutmeg. Serve hot. NO. 27. CREAM OF STEAK SOUP. Mrs. B. N. Hurd, No. 1742 West Twenty-fourth street.--Take bones and pieces of meat left over from a broiled steak and boil two hours; add tomato or half a coffee-cup of canned tomato; one onion sliced, a pinch of curry powder. When well cooked, strain and add milk to make desired quantity and thicken slightly. Season to taste and add a good-sized piece of butter. NO. 28. CREAM TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. W. P. Elsdon, Highland Cal.--Pour off the juice from a quart can of tomatoes. Slice and boil two onions in a small quantity of water, pour off the water, and add to it the tomato juice; then add a quart of rich milk, (or a pint of milk, a pint of water, and a piece of butter, if milk is not plentiful.) Bring to a boil, and thicken with two tablespoons of flour. Very nice if the onion is omitted. The tomato from which the juice is drained can be used for scallop. NO. 29. CREAM TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. William Lawver, 1092 Pine avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--Put on to stew, one can or six ripe tomatoes, with one medium-sized onion and one small stalk of celery. When all are cooked very soft, rub through a sieve and season to taste with salt and pepper. Heat in a double boiler one pint of sweet milk thickened with two teaspoonfuls of flour, rubbed smooth in a very little cold milk. Cook moderately for ten minutes and add two heaping teaspoons of butter. Add to the tomato one-half teaspoonful of soda (if canned tomatoes are used, they will require a little more soda than fresh tomatoes,) Stir well and add the boiling milk. Strain and serve immediately with salted crackers. Be careful to prevent curdling by ceasing to cook as soon as the milk is added. NO. 30. DELICIOUS SOUTHERN SOUP. Miss L. Shields, Box 355, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take one large chicken, cut in pieces and fried; pound it in a mortar, then put the pounded chicken in a stew pan with a blade of mace, one onion sliced, one carrot grated, one tablespoonful chopped celery, one cup green peas, one cup okra sliced, one green pepper chopped, one gallon cold water, one-half tablespoonful salt. Cover closely and let simmer for two hours, then add one tablespoonful chopped parsley and serve. NO. 31. EAGLE ROCK SOUP. Mrs. Katie V. Frockelton, Eagle Rock Valley (Garvanza R. F. D.,) Ca--Take two pounds beef, put in kettle, cover well with cold water, cook moderately for four hours. Remove the meat and let it get cold to get the fat off. Return to fire and add six good-sized tomatoes, one onion, pepper and salt to taste. Cook one hour, then strain through colander. Return to kettle and add one-half pint of finely-mashed potato. Let come to boil and serve. NO. 32. FIFTEEN-MINUTE SOUP. Mrs. T. F. McCamant, No. 121 East Avenue 45.--Take two pounds of choice round steak, have it ground as for Hamburger; put into a stew pan and add two pints of cold water, a little salt, pepper, a small onion sliced thin, or, better, grated, and a few sprigs of parsley. Boil briskly for fifteen minutes, or longer, if you have time. Pour off the liquid, add a couple of teaspoonfuls of sugar, a tablespoonful of butter and serve with crackers. NO. 33. FIVE-MINUTE TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. A. C. Moore, No. 442 East Tenth street.--Four large tomatoes, one large tablespoonful flour, four ounces butter, one-half onion, (grate,) one-half teaspoon salt, one-quarter salt spoon soda, one pint boiling water, pepper to taste. Slice the tomatoes into a stew pan, add the salt and soda, set on the stove to stew while you put the butter and onion into a large skillet; as soon as the butter begins to brown add the flour, working it smooth; add the water, stirring it all the time until it boils, then pour in the tomatoes through a sieve, stirring until evenly mixed. Serve very hot with hot browned crackers. NO. 34. FISH SOUP. Mrs. Melton, Pasadena, Cal.--Take two pounds of any kind of fresh fish, separate the meat from the skin and bones. Let the skin and the bones boil up with three leaves of celery, a large parsnip, one onion and a good-sized bouquet of parsley, all chopped up. Add twelve seeds of whole pepper, six allspices and a small particle of bay leaf; one and a half quarts water. Let one-quarter of a pound of butter melt in a stew pan, add one and a half tablespoonfuls of flour, stir well and put this in the fish broth. Allow it to boil for five minutes, strain it and add a cup of cream and chopped parsley; pepper and salt to taste. Cut the meat of the fish into dice-like squares, let them simmer in butter for a while and put them into the broth. Or make dumplings of the fish and put them in the broth. NO. 35. FISH LA CREME SOUP. Mrs. A. R. Schiernitzauer, No. 462 North Fremont avenue--Take two pounds white meat fish; scrape the meat all off; put the bones and head in a quart of water, boil for one hour; put in salt, pepper, tablespoon butter. When done, remove the bones and drop the creme balls in while boiling. For la creme balls, take the meat, put in a deep wooden bowl, half cup cream, butter size of an egg, salt and pepper to taste; tablespoon prepared mustard; beat this all to a cream; drop by teaspoonfuls into the soup. Boil ten minutes; serve hot. NO. 36. FRENCH GUMBO. Mrs. Pratte Layton, No. 2323 Scarff street--choose a large fat old chicken, after being properly drawn and salted two hours, (better all night on the ice;) cut in small pieces, wash and drain in colander; have ready two teaspoonfuls of chopped onion; into kettle put dessertspoonful of lard with a scant one of flour, brown lightly; put in the chicken and stir continually until brown; then add five quarts of cold water. Salt to taste, with a dust of black and cayenne pepper; boil gently four hours. Fifteen minutes before serving, add quart of prepared okra, or if in season for fresh okra, slice pint of okra and add one hour before serving. Make at the same time a dish of mush; when cold cut in small diamonds, put on table served in plates. NO. 37. FRENCH SOUP (MADE IN AN HOUR.) Miss Jennie Swanner, No. 1426 North Main street, Santa Ana, Cal.--Cut into small pieces a pound of beef and a pound of veal; put them into a wide shallow sauce pan, with a carrot and an onion cut in slices; a few slices of bacon, and half glass of water. Hold it over the fire for a short time till the meat and vegetables begin to brown, taking care, however, that they are not burnt; then pour over the whole a pint of boiling water and lot the soup stew gently for about three-quarters of an hour; after which the soup only requires to be strained through a sieve to be fit for use. NO. 38. FRUIT SOUP. Mrs. M. A. Price, Hollywood, Cal.--One cup water, one tablespoon sago or bread crumbs, two tablespoons sugar, one cup raisins steamed fifteen minutes; one cup cranberries or pie plant juice, one cup strawberry juice; put sago in warm water in a double boiler, boil till clear; add sugar and raisins, then cranberry or pie plant juice; add strawberry juice; run through a colander; add a few strawberries; heat the soup and serve. NO. 39. GUMBO. Miss M. H. Chapman, No. 124 South Daly street--Cut up a fowl as if to fry; break the bones; lay it in a pot with a little fresh lard or good butter; brown it a little; when browned, pour on it a gallon of water; add a slice of lean bacon, one onion cut in thin slices, one pint of skinned tomatoes, two pints of young okra cut up, half a tea cup of rice and a few sprigs of parsley. Cover closely, occasionally remove the cover and skim off carefully all impurities that may rise to the top. Place the soup kettle where the water will boil slowly for at least four hours. NO. 40. LENTIL SOUP. Edith Rhynd, Brookside avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Three quarts water; salt, one cup red lentils (Egyptian,) two large tomatoes, two onions, one-quarter teaspoon thyme, one-third teaspoon sage; two stalks of celery with small leaves, one-quarter cup olive oil. Wash and pick over lentils thoroughly and put to soak over night in one quart cold water; next day shave fine onions, celery and tomatoes, put in kettle with lentils, thyme and sage, with water lentils were soaked in, adding two more quarts cold water, simmer for two hours; when cooked rub through colander, and ten minutes before serving add olive oil. If flavor of oil is not liked, add lump of butter size of an egg instead. This should make two quarts of soup when done. NO. 41. "LIGHT HOUSEKEEPING" SOUPS. By "Good Manager" --People with "buffet kitchens," who enjoy good home-made soup, will appreciate this: Take hamburger steak (raw) and put over the fire in cold water. Let come to a boil, then simmer very gently until the flavor of the meat is all extracted. Strain and your stock is ready. This is a good foundation for several kinds of soup, as the following list will show: Rice and tomato, vermicelli, macaroni, alphabet, vegetable (have your vegetables minced fine and they will cook in a few minutes;) noodle, tapioca, sago, and others which your ingenuity may suggest. If time is very limited, a little boiled rice from the delicacy store, may be added to your stock, and well seasoned to taste makes a delicious beef broth in short order; though boiling the raw rice in the stock gives more nutriment. NO. 42. MARROW BALL SOUP. Mrs. N. L. Lowman, No. 1063 Orange street--For a good clear bouillon, take soup bone, piece of lean beef, quarter of chicken, put on with cold water, let boil, skim well, then add parsley, celery, chile, tomato, carrot, onion, potato, a small quantity of each. Salt to taste, simmer for four hours. Strain well. For marrow balls, take marrow the size of a small egg soak in cold water several hours, then pour off water, beat marrow to a cream, add to each egg one heaping tablespoonful of grated and sifted white bread crumbs, until three of each have been well beaten in; be careful of the last spoonful of crumbs, as a few more or less crumbs are apt to mar the balls. Moisten your hands, roll into small balls, size of a marble, drop into boiling bouillon, cook fifteen minutes. NO. 43. MOCK BISQUE SOUP. Frances Tebbetts, No. 1607 South Grand avenue--Two cups milk, sprinkle of pepper, three tablespoonfuls butter, two cups tomatoes, three tablespoonfuls flour, one-quarter teaspoonful baking powder, one-half teaspoonful salt. Combine milk, butter, flour, salt and pepper as for white sauce. Mix tomatoes and soda; let the mixture stand five minutes; add to the white sauce, beat and serve immediately. NO. 44. MRS. HINCHLIFFE'S SOUP. Mrs. H. F. Bannard, East San Gabriel, Cal.--Take one and one-half pints rather weak soup stock, two tablespoons cream, two tablespoons flour, one egg, butter size of a small hen's egg, salt and pepper. Put stock on stove to heat, beat egg and cream together thoroughly, rub butter and flour to smooth paste and add to hot stock; let boil up once and then pour slowly over egg and cream, stirring constantly or the eggs will curdle. A most delicious soup. NO. 45. MUSHROOM SOUP. Miss Emilia Lundberg, No. 2400 South Flower street--One pound mushrooms, five cups chicken stock, one-half onion, one-third cup butter, one-quarter cup flour, one and one-half cups of cream or rich milk, salt, pepper, two tablespoons souteene. Chop mushrooms very fine, add to chicken stock with minced onion; cook fifteen minutes, and rub through a sieve; repeat, bind with butter and flour cooked together, then add cream and salt and pepper to taste. Just before serving add wine. NO. 46. NOURISHING BROTH. Mrs. Mayer, No. 660 Wall street--To make soup nourishing it does not necessarily take a mass of ingredients, nor is it necessary to boil it too long. For a family of six persons get a pound of lean beef or one-half pound of mutton and beef mixed (soup bones make the broth too greasy;) put it to boil with cold water on a slow fire; when boiling for half an hour, add two raw potatoes, grated fine, a little grated carrot, two pieces of cut-up celery; let that boil for fifteen minutes; take out your meat, add a little chopped parsley, a little salt. Have an egg beaten in your soup bowl with cold water, and then stir in your soup. There you have a nourishing and well-tasting broth fit for sick or well. NO. 47. ONION SOUP. Mrs. M. E. Kloeckner, No. 709 Locust street, Pasadena--This recipe came to me through a French woman. A soup without meat, and delicious. Put into a saucepan butter size of a pigeon's egg (clarified grease or fat off of soup answers about as well;) when very hot add two or three large onions, sliced thin; stir, and cook well until they are red; then add half teacup of flour, stir this also until it is red, watching it constantly, that it does not burn. Now pour in a pint of boiling water (stock or broth is better) and add salt and pepper. Mix it well, and boil a minute; then pour in the soup kettle and set on the back of the range until almost ready to serve. Add one and a half pints or a quart of boiling milk and two or three well-mashed boiled potatoes. Add a little soup to the potatoes first, then add more until it is smooth and thin enough to pour into the soup. Stir well and smoothly together; taste to see if it is properly seasoned with pepper and salt, as it requires plenty, especially of the latter. Let it simmer a few minutes. Put pieces of toasted bread (a good way of using dry bread) in diamond or cube shape, in the bottom of the turneen. Pour over the soup, and serve very hot. This soup may be made without potatoes, if more convenient, using more flour. However, it is better with potatoes. NO. 48. ONION SOUP. Mrs. I. Chadd, Fallbrook, Cal.--Take one medium-sized onion, chop it very fine; place the spider over a good fire; when hot, put in one and one-half tablespoonfuls of butter and add onions, stirring briskly all the while with a fork. When nice and brown, add one heaping teaspoonful of flour, with salt and pepper to taste. When flour is nicely browned, add one pint of cold water, still stirring briskly all the while with a fork until it has boiled full four minutes after adding the water. Serve immediately. NO. 49. OYSTER CREAM OF TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. L. J. Newcomb, No. 916 West Seventh street--One two-pound can of steamed tomatoes (or freshly cooked ones,) one quart milk, one pint drained fresh (or cove) oysters; put the tomatoes and milk on to heat, season the tomatoes with salt, pepper, butter (a pinch of baking soda ) to taste; also put pinch baking soda in the milk, make a thin thickening, with two teaspoons of flour and water; stir this in the milk while it is heating; when both milk and tomatoes come to a boiling point, stir the tomatoes slowly into the milk, then add oysters without further cooking, and serve immediately. Oyster crackers are particularly nice with this soup. NO. 50. PEANUT SOUP (original.) Mrs. M. E. Robertson, No. 2212 West Eighth street--Two tablespoons of peanut butter, one tablespoon of browned flour (plain flour may be used, but the browned is preferable;) cream together and pour slowly over this one pint of boiling water; stir constantly to keep smooth. Season with salt and pepper; add to this one pint of scalded milk. If too thick, add more hot water. Serve immediately with cretons or crackers. NO. 51. PEARL BARLEY SOUP. (Original.) Sarah M. Daley, No. 1929 First street--Get good-sized soup bone, a sheep skin and a small piece of liver. Put bones in kettle, cover with cold water, and salt to taste; let boil slowly; add one potato, small onion, a leaf or two of celery. Take another kettle with one and a half cups pearl barley, cover with a scant pint of hot water, let simmer, keep ladle in barley kettle and quite often stir, or better still, pour up and down the barley; this prevents sticking, also dissolves it. Every now and then take a ladle full of stock, pour through strainer into the barley; if the stock is rich enough add a little hot water. Chop the liver very fine, add to the soup bone; do this until all your stock is in your barley kettle. This soup is rich and nourishing, but not greasy; is good for sick or well, and is inexpensive. NO. 52. PEA SOUP. Mrs. H. D. Wetmore, No. 625 North Belmont avenue--Take one and a half pints pears, two tablespoons minced celery, one tablespoon minced onion, cooked together and put through sieve; add to this one quart milk, salt to taste, a dash of cayenne pepper and butter one-half size of an egg. Just before serving add one-half pint whipped cream. NO. 53. --POOR MAN'S SOUP. Lily Neilson, No. 1019 East Thirty-fourth street--Take a 15 or 20-cent shank bone, the upper part for preference, have the bone cracked, cut the meat into medium-sized pieces, put in a pan, cover with cold water, bring to a boil, skim well, cover closely, and let simmer for about three hours; stand aside till cold, when skim off all fat, (which may be utilized for basting other meat.) Meanwhile wash, peel and cut up into small pieces an onion, carrot, turnip and one or two steams of celery, with two tablespoonfuls of rice or barley; add to the broth with the water they were boiled in; season to taste. If preferred a little thicker, mix to a smooth paste two good tablespoonfuls of flour, with water, add and boil two or three minutes, stirring all the time. This quantity will make a substantial and nourishing broth at small expense for four people, for two meals. NO. 54. POTATO SOUP. Mrs. D. H. Imler, Tropico, Cal---Take four large potatoes, wash, pare and slice; place in kettle; pour over them four quarts of warm water; boil until done. Then add a thickening made of flour, cream or milk--water will do -- butter size of an egg; salt and pepper to taste. Let come to a boil and serve hot. Delicious and most excellent for invalids. Soups are always better when seasoning is added during the process of boiling. NO. 55. POTATO SOUP. Mrs. Rosa G. MacMahon, No. 212 South Cummings street--Three Irish potatoes, boiled, drain, mash fine; add one quart sweet milk, seven tablespoonfuls sweet cream, pepper and salt to taste. Immediately before serving add finely-chopped fresh parsley. NO. 56. QUEEN VICTORIA'S FAVORITE SOUP. Miss Emilia Lundberg, No. 2400 South Flower street--One cup stale bread crumbs, one-half cup milk, yolks of three hard-boiled eggs, breast meat from a boiled chicken, one and a half cups scalded milk, three and a half cups chicken stock, two and a half tablespoons butter, two and a half tablespoons flour. Soak bread crumbs in milk, add yolks of eggs and chicken meat rubbed through a sieve. Add gradually chicken stock highly seasoned. Bind with butter and flour cooked together. If too thick, add a little milk; or if not thick enough, add more cracker crumbs. NO. 57. RAVIOLI SOUP, ITALIAN STYLE. Mary L. Combe, No. 2705 Central avenue--(1.) Make a paste as follows: Have a pound of sifted flour on the table, form a hollow in the center, put in a teaspoonful of salt, with water enough to dissolve it; six eggs. Mix the whole together by pushing it from you with the palms of the hands; knead into a ball; wrap in a damp cloth and let rest one and a half hours. (2.) Chop very fine half pound of cooked chicken and three ounces of cooked ham, and the half of a calf brain and three egg yolks, two ounces grated Swiss cheese (or Parmesan cheese, ) salt, black pepper, a little pinch of grated nutmeg, chopped parsley; mix well. (3.) Divide the above paste in two parts, roll down as thin as possible; take one flat of paste, and with a tablespoon, put in straight rows two inches apart a number of balls of the above mixture, the size of a walnut; with a brush moisten the rows, then lay the second flat of paste over the garnished one,press between the rows to stick them together. With a pastry wheel part all the balls in squares, then every one is a ravioli. Range them on a small tablecloth, cover them with same. (4.) Fifteen minutes before serving plunge them in salted boiling water, boil two minutes, and let simmer on the side of fire for five minutes longer. Drain on a cloth. Range them by layers in a deep dish and spread grated cheese between each layer, moisten with four tablespoonfuls of beef extract, diluted with a pint of tomato catsup. Strain two ounces of melted butter and serve with a tureen of rich beef broth. NO. 58. RICE SOUP. Mrs. Oscar Leuschner, No. 1012 East Adams street--Take 15 cents worth of shoulder of mutton and put on to boil with three pints of cold water. Add one teaspoonful of salt. Let boil until the meat is nearly tender, then add two medium-sized carrots cut in dice, one medium-sized potato, two medium-sized leeks, cut fine, and a small half cup of rice. Let all boil till tender. Add more hot water before serving to make about two quarts. Lastly add a little parsley, cut fine, and a little pepper. This soup is simply delicious. NO. 59. ROYAL TOMATO SOUP. (For twelve persons.) Miss Wanda, Box 314, Altadena, Cal.--Boil down an old chicken in a quantity of water sufficient to furnish two quarts of broth. Then take a saucerful of cut up celery, one parsnip and one onion, medium-sized, cut into small pieces. Put about one-quarter pound butter in a stew pan and let it melt; then add the cut up vegetables and stir very frequently. Then add a particle of lemon rind, a small piece of mace, six pepper seeds and likewise six allspice. Let it simmer for about ten minutes, taking care not to let it get brown. Now add one kitchenspoonful of flour; stir the whole very well. This done, add the chicken broth and one can of nice, red tomatoes. Let the whole quantity boil up for one-half hour. Now add a teaspoonful of sugar, a pinch of red pepper and salt to taste. Mash through a fine soup strainer and add one cup of cream immediately before serving. NO. 60. RUSH ORDER SOUP. Mrs. Scales, No. 46 1/2 Magnolia avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--One bowl boiling water; sprinkle with salt and pepper; any kind of vegetable you may happen to have, cold or warm; slice thin. A trifle of meat if any is in sight; if not, place on tray and serve. NO. 61. SALSIFY, OR VEGETABLE OYSTER SOUP. Annie Matheson, Glendora, Cal.--One medium-sized bunch of salsify, scraped, cut into thin slices and put into water immediately to prevent turning black. Cook in salted water until very tender. Add one quart milk and small piece of butter; salt and pepper to taste. Serve very hot with salted crackers. NO. 62. SALSIFY CREAM SOUP. Mrs. O. A. Creider, 939 Lemon street, Riverside, Cal.--Take six or seven roots of salsify (oyster plant,) two quarts sweet milk, two large spoonfuls flour, butter size of two walnuts, salt and pepper to taste. Scrape the roots, and slice them into cold water (to keep them white,) then cook them one-half hour in water. Stir the flour into the butter until well mixed; add the milk to the cooking salsify when just ready to boil; add the flour and butter; let come to a boil; season. NO. 63. SORREL SOUP ("Soups a l'Seille.") Florence S. Le Hardy. Cahuenga, Cal.--Take two bunches sorrel, wash well; put in saucepan two tablespoonfuls of olive oil : when boiling, drop sorrel into it, cover; let simmer until quite tender; then, while in pan, chop with silver knife very fine; then add quart and half of boiling water, stir well; add salt, two raw eggs, broken and mixed without beating; drop in, stir all the while; when all comes to a boil, drop in cup of cream, stir briskly; send to table; to be served with browned dice of bread. Most delicious. NO. 64. SOUP A LA CANATRICE. Mrs. Frederick Stephens, No. 1504 North Main street, Santa Ana, Cal.--Very beneficial for singers. Ingredients for six persons: Three ounces sago, one-half pint cream, yolks of three eggs, one lump sugar, one bay leaf, and seasoning to taste; two quarts medium stock. Wash sago in boiling water, let it be gradually added to the nearly boiling stock, simmer for half hour, when it should be well dissolved. Beat up yolks of eggs, add to them boiling cream, stir these quickly in the soup and serve immediately. Do not let soup boil or the eggs will curdle. NO. 65. SOUP STOCK. Mrs. E. A. Pallah, R. F. D. No. 3, Santa Ana, Cal.--Stock for soup is best made for the average home cook from the leg joint of beef, the bones split open, put on to cook in plenty of cold water. When it first comes to boil, carefully skim; let simmer several hours, skim all grease off top and strain. Many various and delicious soups can be made from this stock, by adding vegetables, rice, tomatoes, potatoes, macaroni, vermicelli, pearl barley, flavoring according to taste, with onions, celery, parsley etc. NO. 66. SPANISH SOUP. Mrs. Mary L. Gaty, No. 1721 Bush street--Two large onions, one-half dozen small chile peppers, one can tomatoes, one large turnip, one-half can corn, two carrots; chop vegetables fine, put into one quart of water, boil until almost done; add tomatoes and corn, boil five minutes longer, then add one tablespoon of beef extract; stir until it dissolves; add one teaspoon Worcestershire sauce and one tablespoon catsup; salt to taste. This is fine. NO. 67. SPLIT PEA SOUP. Mrs. Edmund M. Price. No. 962 E. 39th st.--One pint split peas, washed and drained immediately; two-thirds of a carrot, sliced, one onion, with six cloves stuck in it, one-quarter pound of mixed salt pork, one-half teaspoon celery salt and a little pepper; put all together over a brisk fire with two and one-half quarts cold water; when it boils up, set back and cook slowly four hours. Season with more salt and pepper if desired; strain and serve with dice of bread fried brown in butter. NO. 68. STEW SOUP. Miss M. W. Beckwith, Altadena, Cal.--Two pounds of beef, five onions, five turnips, three-quarter pound rice, a large bunch of parsley, a few sweet herbs, pepper and salt, two quarts of water. Cut the beef up in small pieces, add the other ingredients and boil gently for two and one-half hours. Oatmeal or potatoes would be a great improvement. Time, two and one-half hours. Sufficient for eight persons. NO. 69. STONE SOUP. Florence S. Le Hardy, Cahuenga, Cal.--Take any piece of cold left-over meats or bones, etc., be it but one piece or even one bone, it all helps to season; pour over as much boiling water as is needed, allowing some for the pot; add salt, a potato or two, carrot, onion, celery, tomato, or any other vegetables; a little rice for thickening; let boil until all is well done. This is a most delicious soup. NO. 70. SUPERIOR VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. D. H. Imler, Tropico, Cal.--Take a good-sized soup bone, place in a kettle, cover with cold water. When it begins to boil, skim carefully. When a rich soup or stock has been obtained, prepare the following vegetables and ingredients and place therein: Pare and slice four turnips, four potatoes, four carrots, two onions, one-half small head of cabbage, four pieces of celery, cut in squares, one can of tomatoes, four sprigs of thyme and the same of parsley, eight cloves, four pieces of mace, salt, cayenne pepper or one-half pod of red pepper. Do not allow the ingredients to boil too rapidly, but boil at least two hours. Strain carefully. Serve soup hot, with salted crackers. The soup will be very rich and delicious, having all the flavors and substance of the ingredients. This soup prepared the day before serving is equally as good. NO. 71. SWEDISH SOUP. Miss Emilia Landberg, No. 2400 South Flower street.--One-third cup meal tapioca, one cup cold water, three cups boiling water, one-half teaspoon salt, three-inch stick cinnamon, one pint claret wine, one-half cup powdered sugar. Soak tapioca in cold water two hours; drain, add to boiling water with cinnamon and salt; let boil three minutes, then cook in double boiler until tapioca is transparent. Cool, add wine and sugar. Serve ice cold. NO. 72. --TOMATO SOUP. Alice J. Roche, 275 Center street, Pasadena, Cal.--Boil one quart tomatoes, one quart water, six whole cloves, six whole pepper corns, one and one-half tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon salt, twenty minutes. Brown two tablespoons butter and cook two tablespoons chopped onion in it until done; rub in two tablespoons corn starch; add this to tomatoes; boil ten minutes; put through a sieve; heat and serve with toasted crackers or stale bread; cut in small squares, fried in butter until brown. NO. 73. TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. M. A. Price, Hollywood, Cal.--Cook four large tomatoes and one-half onion; add water to make one pint. When hot add salt, pepper, one tablespoon butter, pinch of soda, 2 tablespoons sugar, one teaspoon celery salt, one tablespoon of flour, mixed with a little water. Before serving beat one-half pint of milk and add to the soup and serve immediately. NO. 74. TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. Mamie Grubb, Moorpark, Cal.--Six large cups of milk, one cup of mashed tomatoes, one tablespoon butter; salt and pepper to taste; one-fourth spoonful soda. NO. 75. TOMATO SOUP. Frances Tebetts. No. 1607, South Grand avenue. Two cups of tomatoes, two cups of water, three tablespoons butter, one to one and a half teaspoons salt, two tablespoons flour, one teaspoon celery salt, sprinkle pepper, two teaspoons sugar, one-half onion. Cook all ingredients together with the exception of the flour and butter for ten minutes. Melt the butter in another saucepan, add flour, then hot soup slowly. Boil for five minutes, strain and serve. NO. 76. TOMATO SOUP. Miss Evelyn Dooly, No. 623 Court street. One-half pint choice tomatoes, cook well, season well with butter, pepper and salt; add one-half pint boiling water; let simmer a moment; then add a generous pinch of soda to neutralize the acid (this is very important.) Lastly a pint or more of fresh sweet milk. Let come to a boil; remove at once. Add rolled cracker crumbs if desired. If properly made this will compare favorably with oyster soup. NO. 77. TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. E. R. Warburton, No. 1244 Sixth street, San Diego, Cal.--One can or four large tomatoes stewed; one quart of boiling water : strain and add small teaspoonful of soda, one pint milk, a little butter, pepper and salt. Be sure to put in soda before adding the milk. Let it scald, not boil, and add three crackers rolled fine. NO. 78. TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. Franklin, Anaheim, Cal.--Place over the fire a quart of peeled tomatoes; stew them soft with a pinch of soda. Strain it so that no seeds remain; set it over the fire again; add a quart of hot boiled milk; season with salt, pepper, a piece of butter the size of an egg; add three tablespoonfuls of rolled crackers and serve hot. Canned tomatoes may be used in place of fresh ones. NO. 79. TOMATO AND TAPIOCA SOUP. Mrs. H. E. Humphery, Whittier, Ca.--Take three pints of beef stock; add to it one quart stewed tomatoes, one bay leaf, one tablespoon of sugar, half the amount of salt; one salt spoon each cinnamon and cloves; boil one hour; when cool strain; beat a little the white of one egg; stir in and let come to a boil and skim, then add one cup of well-cooked tapioca. Have in your tureen one-half pint whipped cream, turn soup on this and serve at once. NO. 80. TOMATO CREAM SOUP. Florence S. Le Hardy, Cahuenga, Cal.--Take a quart of fresh or canned tomatoes, put in saucepan with cupful of raw rice; let cook until rice is done; strain, mashing well through colander; when ready to serve set on the fire; let come to a boil; drop quickly a cupful of rich milk, a pinch of salt; stir rapidly; serve. NO. 81. TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. S., El Monte, Cal.--Into two quarts of water put a pint of tomatoes, three tablespoonfuls of rolled oats, a heaping tablespoonful of minced onion and let boil an hour or longer. It can be made in less time when one is in a hurry, but the longer boiling improves it. Add about a quarter or less of a teaspoonful of baking soda to counteract the acid of tomatoes and to prevent milk from curdling. A teacup of rich milk and cream, or half of each, can be added just before serving. Pepper and salt to taste. If cream cannot be had, butter can be used for seasoning, but the cream makes it much nicer. It can be made without milk and still be good, the secret of success lying in the use of rolled oats and onions, which can be used in many kinds of soups. The oats not only thickens it nicely, but gives it strength and body, and a most wholesome and appetizing soup can be made in this way. Enough can be made to last two or three days by being reheated next day or else sealed up while boiling hot. It is even better the next day when warmed over, as all the ingredients are more thoroughly blended. NO. 82. TOMATO SOUP. Mrs. J. Pratte Layton, 2323 Scarff street--Have ready one quart of tomatoes, slightly stewed, one quart of boiling milk; into the tomatoes stir one teaspoonful of soda, when foam dries off, add gently to milk with lump of butter size of hickory nut; salt and black pepper to taste, with a few bits of green pepper. Strain and serve immediately. NO. 83. TOMATO SOUP PUREE. Mrs. M. E. Kloeckner, No. 709 Locust avenue, Pasadena, Cal.--Boil a dozen or a can of tomatoes until thoroughly cooked, and pass through a sieve. To a quart of pulp add a level teaspoonful of soda. Put into a saucepan butter or dripping the size of a pigeon's egg, and when it foams, sprinkle in a heaping teaspoonful of flour. When it is cooked stir into this a quart of hot milk, a little cayenne pepper, salt and a handful of cracker crumbs. When it boils add the tomato pulp. Heat well without boiling, and serve immediately. The soda mixed with the tomato prevents the milk from curdling. If short of milk, use part milk and part water. NO. 84. TOMATO SOUP, WITH RICE. M. E. Kloeckner, No. 709 Locust avenue, Pasadena, Cal.--Cut half a medium-sized onion into coarse slices and fry them in a little hot butter. Add to a quart can or ten or twelve large tomatoes cut in pieces, after having peeled them, and also two sprigs of parsley. Let it cook about twenty minutes, when remove the onion and parsley. Strain the tomato. Put into the stewpan butter or dripping the size of a pigeon's egg, and when it foams sprinkle in a teaspoonful of flour; when it has cooked a minute, stir in the tomato pulp; season with salt and pepper. It is an improvement to add a cup of stock; however, if it is not at hand, it may be omitted and a cup of boiling water used in its place. Return to the fire, and when hot, add a cupful of well-cooked, freshly-boiled rice, and half a teaspoonful of soda. NO. 85. VEGETABLE PUREE. Miss Emilia Lundberg, No. 2400 South Flower street-- Old cooked peas and spinach left over from day before may be made into a delicious soup by pressing through a sieve, taking pains to press all the pulp through that can be made to go through. Heat with milk (two cups of milk to each cup of vegetables.) Season and serve with bread sticks. NO. 86. VEGETABLE SOUP. Florence Fisher, No. 1500 Temple street--Good 15-cent shin bone of beef, put to cook in cold water, cooking it slowly two hours in about three quarts of water, adding more boiling water as it boils away. Strain and skim off every particle of fat. Add salt and pepper, one pint of chopped cabbage, four turnips, two parsnips, four small carrots, three medium-sized onions, three tomatoes, a few leaves of parsley, three-quarters of a cup rice, four medium-sized potatoes, all put through the course blade of food chopper, or chopped with chopping knife, except potatoes, dice them. Boil slowly two or three hours, or longer. This is as nice the second day as when first made. NO. 87. VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. T. H. Sullivan, San Jacinto, Cal.--Four potatoes, one onion, sliced thin, one turnip, two stalks of celery, cut fine, one small carrot, cut fine, one or two small apples, one large tablespoon of butter. Add half the butter with vegetables; let boil thirty minutes; strain; season with salt, pepper and butter. To each bowl add one large tablespoon of lemon juice. Keep the kettle closely covered that the flavor may not be lost. NO. 88. VEGETABLE SOUP. Nina Bell Sherman, No. 123 North Johnson street--For five persons. Take one-eighth head cabbage, one carrot, one potato, one-half turnip, one-half lemon, two stalks celery; mince fine, mash, let drip, put the minced vegetables in a deep saucepan with three quarts water and a little salt; boil for one and one-half hours. When ready to serve, add one glass of cream or milk, one tablespoonful butter and serve hot with slices of bread or toast. NO. 89. VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. John H. Tebbetts, No. 1607 South Grand avenue--Add to one pint of water and boil for one hour the following: Two large ears of corn cut from the cob, two sliced tomatoes, one onion, one carrot, one potato, and a little parsley. Mash through a colander, add one large tablespoonful of butter and three cups milk, boil up once and serve. The vegetables may be left without mashing. NO. 90. VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. T. F. McCamant, No. 121 East Avenue 45--One good-sized tomato, one small onion sliced thin, three pods of okra, a little parsley, celery, summer savory or thyme, three or four cloves, a few slices of potatoes, salt, black pepper, a tablespoonful of butter, and a little sugar. Boil half hour, or until all the vegetables are tender, and beaten to pieces with a fork. Add necessary amount of water. NO. 91. VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. C. W. Clayton, Whittier, Cal.--Procure a nice 15-cent soup bone; cover with cold water and boil until nearly done; then salt to taste and boil until tender. Then remove from kettle and to the broth add the following vegetables, chopped fine: Two potatoes, one large onion, one-quarter of a small cabbage, two carrots, one tomato, one green pepper, a few sprigs of parsley and celery leaves, and lastly, a few dashes of paprika. A little more water may be added if necessary, and cook until all are done. NO. 92. VEGETABLE SOUP. Miss Emilia Lundberg, No. 2400 South Flower street--Cut up a carrot, a turnip, a parsnip, an onion and a root of celery; fry in one ounce of butter until a delicate brown, then turn into a soup kettle; add two quarts of cold water, one-half cup rice, and one teaspoon salt; boil gently for one hour, then add a potato cut into very thin slices; boil 15 minutes longer; season with salt and pepper; stir in one-half teaspoonful of minced parsley and a generous lump of butter; serve at once. NO. 93. VEGETABLE SOUP. Beatrice L. Ecclestone. No. 1512 Maple avenue--Take a shank soup bone; cover with cold water and let boil slowly for three hours; remove from fire and let stand over night; skim off the fat, add salt, parsley and chopped vegetables, consisting of onions, celery, cabbage and carrots; boil for one hour. NO. 94. VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. M. E. Chase, Ventura, Cal.--Use the broth in which a large soup bone or pot roast has been boiled. Add one small handful of white beans, previously parboiled; one small handful lima beans; one tablespoonful of rice; one large onion; one cupful of chopped or sliced cabbage; one turnip, cut in dice; one large potato cut in dice; four sticks celery, cut a few sprigs of parsley, cut fine; one ear of sweet, or the same amount of canned corn; one pint of canned, or same of fresh tomatoes; one chile pepper; one-half teaspoon black pepper; a dash of cayenne pepper; salt to taste. Boil one and a half hours. This makes one gallon of soup. NO. 95. VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. Clarence Allison, Covina, Cal.--Have a good soup bone (a shank bone is best,) crack it open, cook steadily for several hours and let it stand until cold and the tallow rises to the top; skim all tallow off; the remainder should be a jelly. Cook again, this time adding vegetables, an onion, two good-sized potatoes, a carrot, two good-sized tomatoes, a handful of pearl barley, a tablespoonful of rice, a teacupful of broken maccaroni (break fine,) a dash or two of celery salt or a stock of celery. Add salt and pepper to suit. The secret of good soup making lies in cooking a long time until all vegetables are cooked to pieces. Some like the addition of a little browned flour stirred in just before serving. Some like noodles made thus: Take three eggs, a pinch salt and flour enough to make a stiff dough; roll thin, let them dry, cut fine, then cook for twenty minutes in the soup. Or make a good dough by taking one pint flour, a pinch of salt, two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder; mix with sweet milk to a stiff dough, cut in strips and cook twenty minutes in the broth. NO. 96. VELVET CREAM CHICKEN SOUP. Nina Bell Sherman, No. 122 Johnson street--Proportions for five persons: Fowl, one hen or chicken; vegetables, one onion, one carrot, one stalk of celery; water, three quarts. Time, two and a half hours. Boil the chicken in three quarts of water two and a half hours, with one onion, one carrot, one stalk of celery. Take off the fat, remove the bones, mince the meat and rub all through a colander. Thicken a cup of hot milk, with one and a half tablespoons of cornstarch and two tablespoonfuls butter; mix with the soup; add one beaten egg if liked. Stir on the fire one minute and serve. NO. 97. VIRGINIA SOUP STOCK. Mrs. J. L. Woodworth, 3709 Dayton avenue.--To four pounds lean beef (the inferior parts are good for this purpose) put four quarts of cold water; wash the meat and put it in the water without salt; let it come slowly to boiling point; skim well before the agitation of the water has broken the scum; add a little salt and a dash of cold water to assist the scum to rise; skim again, set back and let it boil gently one one side, or in one place, not all over, for six or eight hours, until the meat is in rags (rapid boiling hardens the meat and the flavor escapes with the steam;) add a little pepper, strain into a stone jar, let it cool and remove all grease. This stock will keep for many days in cool weather, and from it can be made all the various kinds of soups by adding onion, macaroni, celery, asparagus, green peas, carrot, tomato, okra, parsley, thyme, summer savory, sage and slices of lemon. Many of the herbs may be first dried, then pulverized and put in cans or jars for winter use. Celery and carrot seed may be used in place of the fresh vegetables. Macaroni should be first boiled in slightly salted water, cut in pieces one or two inches long, and added a short time before serving. To prepare soup for dinner, cut off a slice of the jelly, add water, heat and serve. Whatever is added to this, such as rice, tapioca, vegetable, etc., may be cooked before being added, as much boiling injures the flavor of the stock. In making soup from stock always scrape the sediment from the bottom of the slice of jelly taken as a foundation for the soup, add seasoning, water and vegetables. If potatoes are used they should be peeled, sliced and laid in salt and water for half an hour; cabbage should be parboiled and drained, and all other vegetables either sliced or cut fine, before adding them to the soup; boil until thoroughly dissolved; strain through a colander and serve at once. NO. 98. WHITE SOUP. Miss Emilia Lundberg, No. 2400 South Flower street.--A delicious soup, which may be served at a luncheon is made from almond milk. Blanch one-half pound of Jordan and ten bitter almonds and pound together in a mortar, moistening from time to time with milk till one pint has been used, after which press through a piece of fine cheesecloth. Scald three cups of milk with two tablespoonfuls of sugar and a half teaspoon of salt; stir in the almond milk and continue stirring till it is hot, then serve at once with croutons. For croutons cut out some thin rounds of bread one inch in diameter, arrange on a baking sheet, and sprinkle with fine sugar. Melt the sugar and glaze the croutons in a hor oven, repeating the process on the other side of the croutons. NO. 99. WINE FRUIT SOUP. Mrs. Carrie Berenstein, No. 982 Vernon avenue. Take one cup of raisins, one cup of prunes; wash and put them on in a quart of water with some stick cinnamon; when the fruit is cooked stir in a cup of sago, two slices of lemon, a pinch of salt, one-half cup of sugar, some apples fresh, or dried may be used. When the sago is transparent put in a cup of claret wine and serve hot or put in mould to be eaten cold as a pudding. NO. 100. WINE SOUP (A la Knowlton.) Mrs. Knowlton, No. 411 West Fourth street--For six persons. Take one and one-half cups tapioca, wash well and let soak in cold water for two hours; also take one pound seeded raisins, wash well and let soak in cold water in a separate dish. Have at hand four glasses claret, the cheapest, the best, because it will give the soup a more delicate tart flavor. Into a pot that will hold a gallon, or more, put three quarts cold water, then add one and one-half cups sugar, two or three sticks of cinnamon, the juice of three lemons; now add your tapioca and raisins and cook until the tapioca is done; then add your wine and boil about three minutes longer. Serve while hot. Stir while cooking or it will stick to the bottom of pot. If too thick add more wine or water. NO. 101. BEAN SOUP. Mrs. M. E. Bush, box 18. Carpinteris, Cal.--One pint white beans, pork, small piece, one onion, one tablespoon Worcestershire sauce, salt and pepper, one-quarter teaspoon soda, two cloves. Wash beans, put in two quarts cold water; add soda. When nearly cooked add pork cut in small pieces. When beans are thoroughly cooked, mash with potato masher; add one quart boiling water, salt, pepper, cloves and onion cut fine. Cook for five minutes. Serve with roasted crackers. NO. 102. BEEF SOUP. Mrs. I. Henry Johnson, Whittier, Cal.--Select a small shin of beef, crack the bone in small pieces and place in kettle with five quarts cold water; let boil two hours, then season with tablespoon salt and one teaspoon pepper; boil an hour longer; then add to it one carrot, two turnips, two tablespoons rice, one small head celery, one small onion; the vegetables to be minced into small pieces like dice, or put through a meat chopper. Afte those ingredients have boiled one-quarter hour add two small potatoes cut up fine. Let boil one-half hour longer and serve very hot. Should any be left add hot water to bring to boiling point and serve hot. NO. 103. CHILEAN WINE SOUP. Albert Lawrence, Vallejo, Cal.--Take a quantity of good grape wine (not made in a drug store,) boil it and thicken with tapioca, sago, pearl barley, rice or flour; flavor with cinnamon, nutmeg, or anything else to suit the taste, or serve without flavor. NO. 104. CLAM BROTH. Mrs. Ira R. Deacon, 503 W. Twenty-seventh street.--Especially recommended by doctors on account of the amount of albumen the clam contains, thus rendering the broth very nutritious. Take best quality of Long Island clams, cut by hand in small pieces, and cook thoroughly, in salted water. If large ones are used, one dozen to quart of water can be used, if small ones, one dozen to pint. Strain. Some like milk added before taking it. NO. 105. CLAM CHOWDER. Mrs. H. E. Brook, Los Angeles.--A quarter of a pound of lean bacon, cut in cubes and fried to a light brown color, one large onion and one large potato, cut in slices and fried; one-half can of tomatoes, boil slowly until the onion and potato are thoroughly cooked. Then add one quart boiling water, one can of shredded clams and butter size of egg. When it boils, stir one heaping tablespoon of flour smooth with a little water, add it and boil slowly for five minutes. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Take from fire and add one-half can condensed cream or similar amount of fresh cream --not milk. This chowder is as superior to ordinary clam chowder as champagne is to soda water. A serving for 6 people costs about 35 cents. NO. 106. CONSOMME AND SOUPS. Mrs. Ira R. Deacon, No. 503 West Twenty-seventh street.--Boil slowly several hours some leg of beef. Add vegetables and herbs for flavoring. Clarify with whites of eggs and strain through serge bags. TAPIOCA SOUP, with consomme. For one quart consomm take one and one-half ounces tapioca. When the consomme comes to a boil, sprinkle the tapioca into it so that it will not fall in a lump, and let simmer for 10 minutes. Two ounces tapioca will render the soup quite thick, and very good for children. VERMICELLI SOUP, with consomme. For one quart consomme take one ounce vermicelli; break it up slightly, and throw into consomme; when it comes to a boil, let simmer for 10 minutes and serve. MACARONI SOUP, with consomme. For one quart consomme take one and one-half ounces to two ounces macaroni (medium size,) break it into lengths of about six inches; parboil it in slightly salted boiling water for 15 or 20 minutes; strain and cool; then cut with a knife into lengths of about one or one and one-half inches. Throw in the boiling consomme, let simmer from 10 to 15 minutes until the paste is tender. Serve with grated cheese. PRINTANIER SOUP. Printanier means "springlike," is one of the prettiest soups made, and for this reason in France, is frequently served at banquets and on special occasions. It consists of consomme in which have been boiled some carrots, turnips, string beans daintily cut in fancy shapes; also some green peas and flageolet beans. JULIENNE SOUP. This soup is composed of carrots, turnips, cabbages, celery, leeks, French peas and lettuce, washed and cut into shreds. All of these are blanched by being plunged in boiling water, after which they are added to consomme and cooked into it. NO. 107. CORN SOUP. Mrs. E. A. Pallah, R. D. R. 8, Santa Ana, Cal.--Three medium-size ears green corn, grains to be cut open with sharp knife lengthwise down each row of grains; then scrape carefully with dull side of knife; mix corn pulp (free from skins of corn) with one pint rich milk; now add it to two pints boiling water; stir, bring to boil about five minutes; add butter size of egg; salt and pepper after finished cooking. To make with canned corn rub corn through colander. NO. 108. CRAB SOUP. Mrs. Berthold J. Lauterbach, No. 2115 West Court street--Put the crabs into a kettle of boiling water and thrown in a handful of salt, a sweet bay leaf and a generous dash of cayenne pepper. Boil until well done, usually half an hour. Take them from the water and pick out all the meat. To one pint or more of the crab meat, use one quart of sweet milk (or one pint of milk and one pint of water. ) Put into saucepan two generous tablespoonfuls butter, into which slice a medium-sized dry onion and cook until tender, but not brown. Add one-half teacup flour, stirring constantly to prevent burning; then add the crab mixture and the previously boiled milk. Simmer gently few minutes, and dash over each plateful a little grated nutmeg. NO. 109. GRANDMOTHER'S VEGETABLE SOUP. Mrs. S. P. Turner, Tustin, Cal. --Select of the upper shank of beef two pounds, wash and place in soup kettle with four quarts cold water; let stand one-half hour; wash and soak over night one cup navy beans; put in kettle with meat and boil together until all are tender, then add salt and black pepper sufficient for all. Have ready one cup of cabbage, cut or sliced fine; two onions sliced, two potatoes, small turnip and one carrot in cubes, one tomato, sliced; one small red pepper and sprig of parsley; put these in soup kettle and cook slowly until done, adding water from time to time to keep up the quantity; just before using thicken with one tablespoon each of corn meal and wheat flour dissolved in cold water. SALADS. NO. 1. POETIC RECEIPT FOR SALAD. Miss Broome (temporary residence,) 2604 Cottage avenue, Berkeley, Cal.--The Rev. Sidney Smith, the witty canon of St. Paul's, London, who thought that an enjoyment of good things of this earth was compatible with aspirations of things higher, wrote the following excellent receipt for salad, when the hot weather invites to a dish of cold lamb: Two large potatoes (boiled) pass'd through kitchen sieve, Smoothness and softness to the salad give; Of mordent mustard add a single spoon, Distrust the condiment that bites too soon; But deem it not, thou man of herbs, a fault, To add a double quantity of salt; Four times the spoon with oil of Lucca crown, And twice with vinegar procured from town; True flavor needs it, and your poet begs The pounded yellow of two well-boiled eggs. Let onion's atoms lurk within the bowl, And scarce suspected, animate the whole; And lastly, in the flavor'd compound toss A magic spoonful of anchovy sauce. Oh! great and glorious, and herbaceous treat, 'Twould tempt the dying anchorite to eat; Back to the world he'd turn his weary soul, And plunge his fingers in the salad bowl. NO. 2. AMBROSIA SALAD. L. E. M., 2713 Brighton avenue--Make a cup of the white heart of a crisp lettuce head; pile a few big red strawberries in cup and dust lightly with powdered sugar. Put in also a teaspoon of mayonnaise dressing. NO. 3. APPETIZING SALAD. L. Neilson, 1019 East Thirty-fourth street--Prepare a bunch of water cress, same as lettuce, letting it become crisp in cold water; then dry well; peel and core as many apples as needed, cut into dice; chop a hard-boiled egg, sprinkle over the top of salad. Make a French dressing; pour over the whole just before serving. This is excellent with game or roast duck. NO. 4. APPLE-CELERY SALAD. Mrs. Sherman Bullis, Dolgeville, Cal.--Chop equal parts of celery and tart apples and salt to taste, then make a dressing of one-half cup vinegar, two eggs, a piece of butter size of walnut, or tablespoon olive oil, if liked, and three tablespoons cream. Cook the eggs and vinegar in double boiler, then add butter, or oil, and last beat in the cream. (This is strictly original.) NO. 5. ARTISTIC SALAD FOR SIX. Lurline Middleton, 1543 West Eleventh street--Take six even-sized cucumbers, and the same of tomatoes, and cut the tops off nicely (cutting the cucumbers lengthwise) and scrape out the inside of both and mix with two belle peppers, a few lettuce leaves and one-quarter of an onion and chop fine; then refill the cucumber and tomato shells and arrange on salad plates, a cucumber and tomato to each plate, surround with lettuce leaves, and put a teaspoon of mayonnaise on top of each cucumber and tomato. NO. 6. AUTOMOBILE SALAD. Miss W. I. Puls, 824 Tenth street, Riverside, Cal.--Cut into small pieces four medium-sized tomatoes, draining off the juice and rejecting it from the salad; two medium-sized heads of lettuce, four stalks of celery and one-half cup pickled olives. Mix thoroughly and put together with the following dressing: Beat one egg until creamy; pour over it four tablespoons vinegar, scalding hot, stirring constantly. Place dish in hot water over fire and stir constantly until mixture thickens. Remove from fire and add one teaspoon butter and stir until melted. Add one-half teaspoon mustard, one-half teaspoon salt, one-quarter teaspoon pepper and dilute with enough sweet cream to make the dressing the consistency of cream. Add two tablespoons Underwood's deviled ham. Garnish with red nasturtium blossoms. NO. 7. BANANA SALAD -- Miss Terry, 344 South Grand avenue--Six bananas, one head lettuce, twelve English walnuts, parsley, French dressing. Strip one section of the skin from the bananas; remove the fruit and cut into dice one-quarter inch square. Put the diced bananas in dish, turn over them the dressing, let stand on ice thirty minutes. Then fill the skins with the prepared fruit, arrange on bed of crisp lettuce leaves; garnish with halves of English walnuts and finely minced parsley. French dressing: One-quarter teaspoon salt, one-quarter teaspoon powdered sugar, one-eighth teaspoon white pepper, four tablespoons olive oil, one tablespoon vinegar, one tablespoon lemon juice. Mix salt, pepper and sugar with one tablespoon olive oil, then add alternately the remaining oil, lemon juice and vinegar. NO. 8. BANANA AND NUT SALAD. Elisabeth M. Bugbee, 2916 South Figueroa street--Take an equal quantity of almonds and walnuts and roll them fine. Cut the bananas in halves and cover them first generously with mayonnaise dressing, which must not be too thick, but in which the mustard has not been omitted, and then cover with the nuts and place on a plate of crisp lettuce. Have chopped fine, a little apple and young celery, mix with mayonnaise, and put about two tablespoons lightly on each plate. This makes a very pretty dish and tastes even better. NO. 9. BEET SALAD. Miss Evelyn Dooly, 528 Court street--Very nice. Choice young beets, well cleansed, but not broken. Put on to boil in cold water. Cook until tender, when skin will easily rub off by putting them in cold water. Cover with vinegar. Dressing: Two tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon corn starch, pinch of salt; mix with three tablespoons vinegar and butter size of walnut; boiling water for consistency desired. Cook one minute or longer in double boiler. NO. 10. CABBAGE SALAD. Mrs. A. J. Adams, 823 South Flower street--Proportions: One small cabbage and one stalk celery, chopped fine. Cream dressing: One cup sharp cider vinegar, four eggs, one tablespoon mixed mustard, one teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon white pepper. Whip eggs with beater, then romp altogether. Heat in double boiler; take from fire when mixture thickens; add one tablespoon butter and three-quarters cup sugar. This bottled will keep well. Enough for two large salads and three small ones. Thin with cream of milk to the consistency of cream, when the salad is made. Three hard-boiled yolks mashed smooth improves cabbage salad, the rings of the whites used as a garnish. A good dressing can be made with two eggs. NO. 11. CABBAGE-CELERY SALAD. Mary H. Chapman, 124 South Daly street--For one quart cabbage and celery mixed, three parts cabbage to one of celery. Take the yolks of two fresh eggs, beat them until very light; add one pint milk, one tablespoon mustard, one tablespoon butter, one teaspoon salt; sugar and pepper to taste. Mix these ingredients, place over brisk fire and let come to boil; remove from fire, take whites of eggs and beat them stiff; pour your sauce into a salad bowl, and mix lightly your beaten whites, which mixture pour over and mix well with the cabbage and celery, chopped fine. Garnish the whole with two hard-boiled eggs. NO. 12. CALIFORNIA SALAD. Mrs. F. G. Martin, Station A, Pasadena, Cal.--Take four large ripe tomatoes, pare, chop and drain off part of the juice; add a pint chopped English walnuts, two or three stalks of tender celery chopped fine, and large mellow apple, chopped or ground. Salt the mixture and let stand a couple of hours and pour over it a dressing made as follows: Beat the yolks of two eggs until very smooth; add a spoonful of prepared mustard and very slowly beat in one-half cup of purest olive oil, or melted butter. Then stir in four or five tablespoonsful of lemon juice, and after beating a long, add three or four spoonsful of whipped cream. NO. 13. CALIFORNIA CHERRY SALAD. Mrs. Alice H. Ziesing, Glencoe, Ill.--Stone large California cher&ries, preferably the dark ones,) leaving them whole as possible. Marinate in a French dressing, made with lemon juice, instead of vinegar, for one hour. Dispose in a mound, the white inside, leaves of head lettuce, about twelve cherries to a plate, and place a spoonful of good mayonnaise over them, but do not entirely cover the cherries. If oil is objectionable, a cooked salad dressing may be used. Very delicious and a pleasing accompaniment to a dinner in red decorations. NO. 14. CHEESE SALAD. Mrs. Florence B. Wheatly, Sierra Madre, Cal.--Make a cup of two medium-sized, fresh lettuce leaves. In the center of this cup lay a slice of neufchatel or cream cheese and a slice of hard-boiled egg. Cut the egg so that the yolk shows a perfect circle of yellow in the center of a white ring. Serve with the following French dressing: Thoroughly blend with three tablespoons of olive oil, one-half teaspoon salt, one-fourth teaspoon pepper, a dash of paprika and a few drops of onion juice; then add one tablespoon of vinegar, a little at a time, beating the whole until thoroughly mixed. NO. 15. CHERRY SALAD. L. E. M., 2713 Brighton avenue.--Stone some firm large cherries and blanch same number of filbert nuts, stick the nuts inside cherries and pile on a crisp lettuce leaf on individual plates with a teaspoon of mayonnaise to one side. In which the cherries are to be dipped as they are eaten. NO. 16. CHESTNUT SALAD. Mrs. Robert Allan Reid, Sierra Madre, Cal.--Shell one pound of French chestnuts, being careful not to break the inner skin, boil about 15 minutes or until soft in water enough to cover; remove the skins and let them cool, breaking into small pieces; adding an equal quantity of celery cut into pieces. Serve each portion upon a leaf of crisp lettuce, dressed with the following mayonnaise dressing: The yolks of two eggs, one teaspoonful each of mustard, salt and sugar, well beaten together; add the juice of one lemon and stir in cup of oil, dropped slowly, and one-half cup vinegar. If it separates, beat the yolk of another egg and drop the mixture into it. Just before using, beat the whites of the eggs to a froth and add to it, thoroughly blending. On each plate, upon a small leaf of the lettuce, serve eight or ten small pieces of the meaty part of a grapefruit, undressed, and this, with a cheese ball made of chopped pecans and cream, cheese and a . or two laid upon the plate, makes a most attractive dish. NO. 17. CHICKEN SALAD. Miss Margaret W. Beckwith, Altadona Cal.--The remains of cold roast or boiled chicken, two lettuces, cucumber, a few slices of boiled beetroot and salad-dressing. Trim neatly the remains of the chicken, wash, dry and slice the lettuces, and place in the middle of a dish; put the pieces of fowl on the top and pour the salad-dressing over them) garnish the edge of the salad with hard-boiled eggs, cut in rings, sliced cucumber, and boiled beetroot cut in slices. Instead of cutting the eggs in rings, the yolks may be rubbed through a small sieve, and the whites chopped very fine, and arranged on the salad in small bunches, yellow and white alternately. This should not be made long before it is wanted on the table. The salad dressing: One teaspoonful of mixed mustard, one teaspoon of pounded sugar, two tablespoons salad oil, four tablespoons milk, two tablespoons vinegar, cayenne and salt to taste. Put the mixed mustard into a salad bowl with the sugar, and add the oil drop by drop, carefully stirring and mixing all these ingredients well. Proceed in this manner with the milk and vinegar, which must be added very gradually, or the sauce will curdle. Put in the seasoning, when the mixture will be ready for use. If this dressing is properly made it will be soft and have a creamy appearance. In mixing the salad dressing, the ingredients cannot be added too gradually, or stirred too much. NO. 18. CHICKEN SALAD IN TOMATO SHELLS. Mrs. A. J. West, 1514 New Hampshore Ct.--Fill tomato shells with following mixtures: Chopped chicken, celery, onions; mixed with cooked dressing. Use amount of material for ordinary salad. NO. 19. CHICKEN OR LOBSTER SALAD. Mrs. Frank A. Howe, 430 Cedar avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--Cut chicken or lobster in small pieces and add an equal amount of chopped celery. If the eastern celery is used it may be cut in small pieces. Dressing: To three eggs well beaten; add two tablespoons of sugar, one tablespoon butter, one tablespoon prepared mustard, one teaspoon salt, a little white pepper, a little red pepper. Heat one cup vinegar and add to above mixture. Cook, when nearly cold; add slowly two or three tablespoons olive oil. When ready to serve add one cup of whipped cream. NO. 20. COMBINATION TOMATO SALAD. Mrs. J. E. H. Wright, N. Cacumonga, Cal.--Six large tomatoes, three small cucumbers, one stalk celery, two heads crisp lettuce. Pour boiling water over tomatoes, then plunge into cold water and peel carefully; scoop out insides without breaking the shell; chop fine the peeled cucumbers and celery; make a French dressing of two tablespoons olive oil, one of vinegar, salt and pepper; mix with chopped vegetables; make a rich mayonnaise dressing with yolks of two eggs; one-half pint olive oil; drop oil slowly into eggs, stirring all the time until very thick; add juice of one lemon, salt, cayenne pepper and few drops of Worcestershire sauce, just before serving; trim salad bowl with lettuce; place tomatoes on it and fill them with chopped mixture; put one teaspoon mayonnaise on each and add to each a nasturtium blossom. NO. 21. CREAM POTATO SALAD. Mrs. Bertha S. Morris, 1016 Georgia street.--Boil six good-sized potatoes in their jackets, peel and slice in dish with two hard-boiled eggs, five or six pieces of celery, one onion and two sprigs parsley cut fine, pepper and salt a little, mix all together and then cover with the following dressing: Half cup of vinegar put on the stove to boil with piece of butter size of egg, beat up two eggs, add the hot vinegar, beating the eggs all the time, then add teaspoonful mustard and sugar and a speck of red pepper wetted with a little cold water, then set on stove and stir until it begins to thicken, beat half cup of cream into it when cool. NO. 22. CUCUMBER SALAD. Mary E. Benkert, 2180 W. Adams street.--Select six firm, even-shaped cucumbers, cut in two lengthwise, remove centers and put shells on ice until ready to serve. Chop centers, not too fine, and mix with a dressing made by mixing one teaspoonful each of sugar, salt, mustard and flour; add one-half cup of sweet cream and one well-beaten egg; cook in double boiler, stirring well; when heated add one-half cup vinegar, slowly; when it thickens, remove from fire and cool. When ready to serve mix with the chopped centers, put in the shells and serve on crisp lettuce leaves. NO. 23. CUPID TRIUMPH SALAD. Miss W., Glenwood Tavern, Riverside.--Peel and separate divisions, lengthwise, of an orange of medium size. Cut from inner side of each section enough to make crescent of equal width in all parts on a lettuce leaf; arrange these pieces to form a ring, this forming the "wedding ring." Then form outside this ring another of somewhat narrower width at the top of the outer ring; place the rind of a kumquat orange, divide to form prongs for a setting made of the thick part of a bunch of celery; cut to form a diamond, and you have the engagement ring. Fill the inner circle with celery chopped fine, with mayonnaise dressing. Hearts cut from slices of pickled beets may be scattered about the dish if desired. NO. 24. DELICIOUS WINTER SALAD. E. A. L., 1929 Ocean View avenue.--Pare four juicy sweet oranges; peel off every bit of the white inner skin; pull the lobes apart and cut each into four pieces. Scald a cupful of English walnut kernels; strip away the bitter skin and let the kernels get dry and cold. Mix with the bits of orange; set on the ice for an hour; heap in a glass dish lined with lettuce and serve with cream dressing; one egg, three tablespoonfuls vinegar, one tablespoonful sugar, one-half cup milk, two tablespoonfuls butter, one-half tablespoonful mustard, one tablespoonful salt, sprinkle of Cayenne. Beat the egg; add to it the butter (slightly melted,) the dry ingredients and vinegar and milk; put into a double boiler and stir over boiling water till thickens; set away to cool. NO. 25. DUCK AND ORANGE SALAD. Helen M. Magee, 122 North Johnson street.--Arrange a bed of chicory or celery leaves, with celery stalks sliced into one-quarter-inch pieces on a salad dish, and lay slices of cold roast duck down the center. On each side arrange slices of sour orange peeled. Garnish the ends of the dish, (but not on the salad) with shreds of orange peel. For three oranges and a pint of duck mix one-quarter teaspoonful salt, dash of pepper and one-half cup oil. Pour on salad, mix and serve. Suitable for luncheon party or chafing dish supper. NO. 26. EGG SALAD. L. E. M., --Cut hard boiled eggs in half, mash yolks smooth and add equal bulk canned deviled chicken, moisten with mayonnaise dressing, shape into balls, fill center of egg and press together and keep on ice. When ready to serve lay whole eggs in a circle on a nest of crisp lettuce leaves with dressing heaped in center. Garnish with capers and nasturtium leaves and blossoms. NO. 27. ENGLISH WALNUT AND CELERY SALAD. Mrs. W. G. Brown, Inglewood, Cal.--Shell enough nuts to make two cups of meats and boil them in salted water with a slice of onion, one-half dozen pepper corns and a blade of mace. Boil ten minutes; turn into a dish of cold water and remove skins. Cut crisp celery into small pieces--for the stated amount of nuts, three cups celery. Wipe the nut meats with a soft cloth and mix with celery and any good salad dressing. NO. 28. FIG SALAD. Clara M. Marks, 1016 Gratten street.--Put into salad bowl one-half pint honey; add to this twenty-five fresh figs; whip one quart cream, flavored with one tablespoonful brandy. NO. 29. FRENCH SALAD. Mrs. A. B. Williams, 838 1/2 South Flower street.--Drain the liquor from half a can of peas; add one pint finely cut celery, one cup blanched and broken English walnuts, one cup tart oranges. Toss together lightly, garnish with tender celery leaves and serve with any good salad dressing. NO. 30. FRUIT SALAD. Mrs. Geo Ream, 407 South Fremont avenue.--Six oranges, one can pineapple, four bananas, one-half pound California grapes, one-half pound English walnuts, one box Knox's gelatine. Draw juice from pineapple and dissolve one and one-half cups of sugar in it; cut fruit in small pieces and place alternately in a deep dish; heat sugar until thoroughly melted, then add gelatine, after first dissolving in a cup of cold water. Take from fire, when beginning to cool, strain and pour till set; serve with sauce or whipped cream. Other fruits may be substituted. NO. 31. FRUIT SALADS WITH DRESSING. Mrs. Kloeckner, 709 Locust street, Pasadena, Cal.--Fruits agreeable to each other may be blended, such as banana and orange, white grapes and orange, apple and celery. Three parts celery to one part apple covered with mayonnaise into which you have stirred an equal quantity of stiffly whipped cream, may be served at dinner. Shaddocks may be served on lettuce leaves covered with French dressing. As the inside lining of the fruit is bitter, cut in halves crosswise, and with a spoon remove the pulp and seeds. Use lemon for acid in salads, or salad dressing, when possible. It is more wholesome than vinegar. NO. 32. FRUIT AND NUT SALAD. Mrs. J. P. Robinson, 233 West Fortieth street.--Take equal part Malaga grapes, celery, English walnuts and good tart cooking apples; cut celery and apples into quarter inch squares. Pour over this a butter mayonnaise dressing, made as follows. To one-half cup vinegar add one teaspoon mustard and dissolve well. Put on to boil one cup milk in double boiler. Cream well three heaping tablespoonfuls of butter and one heaping tablespoon of flour, and add one-eighth teaspoon cayenne pepper. In another bowl beat yolks of two eggs; add two tablespoons sugar and one teaspoon salt. Into the bowl of butter, etc., add a little of the boiled milk, stirring well until very smooth; then add the remainder of the milk; continue to stir and boil. When thick add to it the eggs, vinegar, etc., and cook until it again thickens, stirring constantly. Pour into a bowl and when cold add two teaspoons lemon extract. This dressing can be kept for weeks in a refrigerator. NO. 33. GRANADA SALAD. (Mexican Pomegranate.) S. Miller, 454 North Fair Oaks avenue, Pasadena, Cal. Place the fruit in the ice box until cold. Cut open with a sharp knife across the fruit division. Scrape out the red particles with a silver spoon. Place on shredded lettuce hearts and serve with the following salad dressing: Yolks of six eggs, one teaspoon mustard, one teaspoon salt, six teaspoons sugar, half cup of vinegar, half cup rich milk, one tablespoon butter and dash of cayenne pepper. Beat yolks, mustard, salt and sugar together; add vinegar and milk; then remaining ingredients. Cook in double boiler until thick. A cup of whipped cream added just before serving improves this dressing. NO. 34. GREEN BEAN SALAD. Mrs. E. A. Pallah, Santa Ana, Cal., R. F. D. No. 3--One quart boiled tender, seasoned beans, cold; two tablespoons olive oil, two tablespoons vinegar; one tablespoon prepared mustard; mix; pour over beans. NO. 35. GREEN GRAPE SALAD. Mrs. W. G. Brown, Inglewood, Cal.--One cup green raisin grapes cut into halves and seeds removed, one cup English walnuts chopped, one and quarter cups roast pork chopped. Mix well and add any good salad dressing and a little salt. NO. 36. HUNTER'S SALAD. C. W. Siefert, corner Lake and Washington streets, Pasadena, Cal.--Roast six pounds leg of veal, set it away to cool; boil fourteen large potatoes and fourteen red beets, separately, and cool. Then cut all into small squares. Cut four herrings, six hard-boiled eggs into small squares. Mix the whole well and add three tablespoons of capers, three tablespoons French mustard, vinegar, olive oil, pepper and salt to taste, and you will have a salad, which, when put away in a stone jar will keep for weeks and always will be an appetizing dish, especially in countries with semi-tropical climate. NO. 37. INDIVIDUAL SALAD. Mrs. I. Henry Johnson, Whittier, Cal.--Two lettuce leaves, two slices tomatoes, one stalk of celery, sliced crosswise, two teaspoonfuls of chopped nut kernels, with a tablespoonful of the following for each small dish: One cup sour cream, yolk of egg, one teaspoon mustard, one teaspoon salt, one tablespoon sugar, dash of Cayenne pepper, a sprinkle of black pepper, quarter cup vinegar; thoroughly blend, but do not cook. NO. 38. JAPANESE SALAD. L. Shields, Box 355, Los Angeles, Cal.--Mince very fine, three medium-sized truffles, also two large, cold boiled potatoes; put these into a bowl and season with a tablespoonful of salt, half teaspoonful white pepper and one-third teaspoonful of nutmeg; pour one-half glassful champagne over all and let rest for two hours; then add eighteen whole cooked mussels, a teaspoonful of chopped chives, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and a tablespoonful of chopped celery. Mix all together, then dress the salad into a bowl, decorating it with small white lettuce leaves and ten fillets of anchovies. Serve at once. NO. 39. LETTUCE SALAD. Miss Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street.-- Lettuce should be separated by removing leaves from stalk, (discarding outer leaves;) was thoroughly in several waters, but on no account let leaves remain long in the water. Dry and arrange them loosely in the salad bowl. Keep in the ice box to serving time. A lettuce salad should be dressed at the last moment. With regard to the dressing of the salad, be sure to be sparing with the vinegar. There is a Spanish proverb which says that four persons are required to make a good salad: "A spendthrift for oil, a miser for vinegar, a counsellor for salt, and a madman to stir it all up." The French have a way of dressing salads which is to be recommended. First, dust over the lettuce half a teaspoon of salt and saltspoon of pepper; then rub the spoon (wooden preferred) with garlic. Measure in it four tablespoons of olive oil; pour it over the salad and mix thoroughly; then measure and pour over one tablespoon vinegar or lemon juice. Then toss it over so each leaf will receive its right modicum of dressing. The vinegar going over last cuts the flavor of the oil and gives an entirely different result from the ordinary salad with French dressing; the oil is less pronounced. A lettuce salad should be served every day. Do not serve it plain always. Sprinkle over your lettuce one day a spoonful of grated cheese; another day a few cold cooked peas; another day string beans finely sliced, a few beets and cold asparagus that has been left over, daintily chopped, Hard-boiled eggs cut in slices, chopped chervil or chives, etc., may also be used. For a company luncheon the salad may be served in boxes made of crackers, kept in place with ribbon and fastened at one corner by tieing in a bow, and garnish corner opposite bow with flowers. NO. 40. LOBSTER SALAD. Mrs. A. K. Schlernitzauer, 463 North Fremont avenue.--Cut the meat of two small lobsters into small pieces. Add a little of the fat and coral. Then season with salt and pepper. One small onion, five lettuce leaves, two celery leaves, two hard-boiled eggs, one teaspoon butter. Chop all very fine. When done add half cup white vinegar. Garnish with French lettuce leaves. NO. 41. MASHED POTATO SALAD. Mrs. Hubert Anderson, 1618 Wilton Place.--Boil and mash one quart potatoes. Make a dressing of two ounces fresh butter, one teacup cream, two tablespoons each of mustard and sugar; season with salt and pepper. Rub the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs to a powder, and add vinegar to moisten. Chop the whites very fine and mix in. Put a layer of potatoes in a salad bowl with a spoonful of dressing, dropped over it in spots, then another layer, then the dressing, until the bowl is filled. Top with dressing; garnish with parsley or sliced lemon. NO. 42. MOTHER-IN-LAW SALAD. M. A. R. 1019 South Figueroa street.--Very good and inexpensive. For dressing take one teaspoonful mustard, half teaspoon salt, quarter teaspoon black pepper, dash of red pepper, one small boiled potato (hot and mashed fine;) butter, a little more than half the size of the potato. Add one egg and half cup hot vinegar, stirred in slowly, so as not to curdle. A little sweet cream will make it better. For salad: A little cauliflower placed on a lettuce leaf -- cream sauce will not hurt-- cold boiled potatoes, minced fine, around it. Put on the dressing, and then trim with beets, cut in dice, carrots in thin slices, or olives, with the pits taken out. In this way you can use almost any cold vegetables left over. The salad should be the economical dish, and the appetizer at dinner. Try to make today's salad out of what was left from yesterday. NO. 43. NAVARINO SALAD. L. M. S., Cucamonga, Cal.--Soak a pair of sweetbreads in cold water until white; place in a saucepan with one-half teaspoonful of salt, a thin slice of onion and sufficent boiling water to cover, and simmer twenty minutes; drop in cold water until chilled, then break into bits; cut fine twelve large olives, one large boiled red beet, blanched celery to measure one cupful, and (if obtainable) one pared and diced cucumber. Soak one-half box gelatine in one pint strong, clear veal or chicken stock and heat until dissolved. Season with salt, cayenne and three tablespoons tarragon vinegar. Put the prepared meat and vegetables in alternating layers in tiny wetted molds; fill with the jelly and set away until firm. Serve in lettuce nests with mayonnaise. NO. 44. NEUFCHATEL SALAD. Mrs. Arthur B. Williams, 838 1/2 South Flower street--One Neufchatel cheese, beaten with one tablespoon each melted butter and sweet cream; season with pinch salt and pepper; add one cup chopped nuts or olives; mix well; roll in balls and serve with lettuce, watercress or some green salad. NO. 45. NUT SALAD. Alice J. Roche, 275 Center street, Pasadena, Cal.--Peel large, firm, smooth tomatoes; scoop out the inside and fill with chopped walnut meats, celery cut fine, and mayonnaise dressing. Place each one on lettuce leaves on a pretty china plate, and serve individually. It is very appetizing and makes a pretty table decoration. NO. 46. NUT AND CELERY SALAD. H. G. Stoddard, Tropico, Cal.--Cut celery and walnuts into dice shapes, using one-half as many nuts as celery. Serve on lettuce leaves with French dressing, consisting of one-half teaspoon salt, three tablespoons olive oil, one tablespoon vinegar. NO. 47. OLIVE AND MUSHROOM SALAD. Mrs. Edith Rhind, Brookdale avenue, Redlands--One-half pint ripe olives, pitted and chopped fine; one-half pint best canned French mushrooms, chopped fine; these, together with one tablespoonful mayonnaise dressing; heap on small crisp lettuce leaves, then put one teaspoonful of dressing of each portion. This amount will make four portions. NO. 48. ORANGE SALAD. Mrs. E. A. Pallah, Santa Ana--Peel oranges, slice thin across fruit, lay slices on plates (individuals;) whip one-half cup thick sour cream; add two tablespoons lemon juice, two tablespoons sugar. Drop spoonful on each slice. NO. 49. OYSTER AND APPLE SALAD. Grace A. Huntley, Station A. Pasadena, Cal.--Four lettuce leaves, small piece onion and parsley, four apples, one can cove oysters. Chop lettuce, onion and parsley fine. Add oysters and chop. Pare, core and cut the apples into dice. Mix with oysters, and serve on lettuce leaves with mayonnaise dressing. Drop five or six oysters over salad. NO. 50. PEACH AND ALMOND SALAD. Mrs. F. Benkert, 2180 West Adams street.--Blanch and cut almonds in thin slices, use one-fifth as much in bulk of sliced almonds as of finely-sliced peaches. Serve on lettuce leaves with a fruit salad dressing made by boiling one cup of sugar with one-half cup of water for five minutes, then pouring on the well-beaten yolks of three eggs. Return to the fire in double boiler and cook, stirring constantly until it thickens, cool and add the juice of two lemons. NO. 51. PEAR SALAD. Mrs. A. J. West, 1514 New Hampshire street--Take large-sized pears, peel and cut in halves. Place each half on a plate on which is a lettuce leaf. Chop hickory nuts and cut celery in small pieces; mix together with mayonnaise and put over pears, with dressing on top. NO. 52. PINEAPPLE SALAD. Miss Clara Evans McLeod, 184 East Arlington avenue, Riverside, Cal.--One can of best sliced pineapple (or equal quantity of fresh pineapple sliced and well sugared, and allowed to stand two hours;) two small oranges, three tablespoons chopped walnuts, three tablespoons celery (or more to taste,) cut fine. Cut the pineapple into small dice. Peel and remove all white from the oranges, slice and cut into dice. The celery must be cut and not chopped. Dressing: Beat two eggs until very creamy; add small teaspoon salt, a dash of paprica or cayenne pepper, one tablespoon sugar, one teaspoon mixed mustard, two tablespoons vinegar, and three of thick cream --not too sour. (You can in an emergency, use sweet cream if very rich.) Beat all together and set the bowl into a pan of hot water; stir constantly until the consistency of whipped cream. Mix the fruit with ice-cold dressing, the last minute before serving; place in salad bowl garnished with lettuce leaves, and sprinkle with chopped nuts. (This salad cannot be found in any cook book; is original and well tested.) NO. 53. POTATO SALAD. Berina Roth, P. O. Box 141, Ventura, Cal.--Cook potatoes with jackets on; when boiled, peel and cut in thin slices. Take one large head of celery, cut in very fine pieces; the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs, cut fine; one-half onions, grated; salt, peppers, red and black, and enough vinegar to taste. Just before serving add about two tablespoons of boiling water which moistens the salad. Mix well, then add about two heaping tablespoons of mayonnaise. If desired a little chopped parsley can be used. Put on platter, garnish wiht crisp lettuce leaves and pour mayonnaise over the whole amount. Take the two chopped boiled whites, with a little parsley chopped fine, and sprinkle lightly over all. Not expensive. NO. 54. POTATO OR CABBAGE SALAD. Mrs. T. S. Home, 434 Towne avenue.--Chop fine one small onion and four or five medium sized potatoes and pour over them the following dressing: One egg, beaten lightly; tablespoon of melted butter, two teaspoons sugar, teaspoon salt and one of mustard; three-fourths cup fresh sweet milk. Heat over boiling water; add gradually one-fourth cup vinegar, stirring constantly until it thickens. Garnish dish with lettuce leaves. For carrabe salad, chop cabbage fine and pour over it the dressing. NO. 55. SALMON SALAD, (with cream dressing.) Mrs. J. C. Stege, R. F. D. No. 2, Compton, Cal--Take two cans of salmon, drain the liquid off, arrange on a platter a row of lettuce and of tomatoes, and then salmon; pour the dressing over it. Cream dressing: one cupful sweet cream, one spoonful of flour, two whites of eggs, three spoonfuls of vinegar, two spoonfuls of butter, two spoonfuls of sugar, one level spoonful salt, one spoonful of pepper, one spoonful of made mustard. Heat the cream almost boiling, stir in the flour previously wet with cold milk, boil eight minutes stirring all the time; add sugar and take from the fire. When half cold, beat in the whipped whites of eggs; set aside to cool. When quite cold, whip in the butter and pepper, mustard and salt, and if the salad is ready, add the vinegar and pour over it. NO. 56. SARDINE SALAD. Miss B. E. Low, 1417 Hoover street.--Small can of sardines, chopped fine; two crackers, rolled fine; seven hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine; mix together with a little salt, pepper and mayonnaise dressing. Serve on lettuce leaves. NO. 57. SHRIMP SALAD. Mrs. Helen Wilde, Ventura, Cal.--Cut two hard-boiled eggs in halves, carefully remove yolks so as not to break whites. Take yolks, one small can shrimps, three medium-sized celery stalks, chop fine together; mix with half of following dressing: Yolk of one hard boiled egg, rubbed fine, one teaspoonful made mustard, a few drops of Worcestershire sauce, pinch of Cayenne, salt, tablespoonful of salad oil or melted butter, small cup of cream, and vinegar to taste. Fill whites of eggs with salad, cover with spoonful of dressing; place olive on top; serve on lettuce leaves. NO. 58. SPANISH SALAD. Mrs. Hubert Anderson, 1518 Wilton Place.--Select ripe, but not too soft bananas and and cut in thin slices; English walnut meat to equal one-third the quantity of bananas. Press nuts through a grinder or chop fine. Mix fruit and nuts lightly and and heap on a platter or salad dishes covered with crisp lettuce leaves. Pour mayonnaise dressing over the whole, taking care that it is seasoned sharply with cayenne or red pepper. NO. 59. STRAWBERRY SALAD. Mrs. M. Marks, 1016 Grattan street.--Choose the heart leaves of head lettuce, heap a few strawberries in each and dust them lightly with powdered sugar; lay a teaspoon of mayonnaise on each portion and serve with cut lemons. NO. 60. STUFFED TOMATO SALAD. Mrs. M., Santa Barbara, Cal.--Take six tomatoes of equal size; peel and scoop out inside, put on ice until ready to use. Then have ready one pint cold sweetbreads and as much celery cut in dice, also a few nuts and a red pepper chopped fine; mix the whole with mayonnaise and fill tomatoes. Lay them in a circle on a flat dish; take one head of lettuce, put a few leaves in center of dish; moisten with a little French dressing; encircle the whole with green shredded lettuce; have some small red radishes cut in roses; put at interals around with sprigs of parsley. This will serve six people. NO. 61. TOMATO SALAD. Miss E. L. Ecclestone, 1512 Maple avenue. Cut off the stem end of six large tomatoes, scoop out the inside, put the contents into a colander to drain; place in a bowl and chop not too fine; take one green pepper, remove the pith and seeds and shave fine; then add one head of celery, small onion, few radishes, all of which are chopped fine; mix with salt to taste, and add mayonnaise dressing; fill the tomato shells, place on ice to keep cool and serve on lettuce leaves with a quarter of lemon. NO. 62. TOMATO BASKET SALAD. (Jonathan Club style.) Mary L. Combe, 2705 Central avenue--Peel carefully a smooth, medium-sized tomato, removing seeds and core. Season the inside with salt and pepper. Then fill with diced cucumber. Throw French dressing over it, garnish with lettuce leaves and serve as a side dish with boiled or fried fish. Keep on ice till ready to serve. NO. 63. TOMATO SALAD SPANISH. Mrs. E. A. Pallah, Santa Ana, Cal., R. D. R., No. 3.--Pare six large meaty tomatoes; chop lightly so as not to be mushy, drain; one large onion, minced fine; a large green pepper, seeds removed, minced fine; salt to taste; mix all together; add two tablespoons vinegar. NO. 64. VEGETARIAN SALAD. Florence S. Le Hardy, Cahuenga, Cal.--(1.) Grate one large fresh carrot, one turnip, one onion; slice fine one large apple, several tomatoes sliced; add head fresh, crisp lettuce, handful ground peanuts, roasted or raw; mix all with rich mayonnaise, made of two eggs beaten up into olive oil until thick, then add a little lemon juice. (2.) Take small head of hard cabbage, cut fine, as for "slaw," add several pieces of celery, shalots, onion, all chopped fine; slice several ripe tomatoes, sprinkle handful of nuts or almonds; press juice of lemon over all; let stand awhile; add olive oil in generous quantity. Any "greens" can be used, such as mustard, beet tops, etc. NO. 65. WALDORF SALAD. Miss K. Hamin, 353 South Alvarado street.--Three-fourths cup chopped nuts, half cup chopped celery; one cup apple cut fine, dash of paprika, and salt to taste. Mix with mayonnaiseor any other salad dressing as preferred. Enough for six persons. NO. 66. WALNUT SALAD. Mrs. S., El Monte, Cal.--Chop fine or grind the amount of nut meats one wishes to use; bind together with sweet whipped cream, having the mass rather stiff; add a little salt and sugar and add enough lemon juice to make piquant. One can tell how much of last three ingredients to use by adding a little at a time until the mixture tastes just right. This recipe can be varied by using less walnuts and the same amount of finely chopped or ground apples. Pile smoothly on dish and decorate with halves of walnuts placed over top. NO. 67. WONDER SALAD. Mrs. A. B. Williams, 838 1/2 South Flower street.--Take one and a half pints of cabbage and apples and one cup peanuts finely chopped together. Dressing: One-half pint vinegar, one-third cup sugar, yolks of four eggs, half cup of butter, one teaspoon salt, same of mustard, speck of cayenne; cook until thick; cool and add one cup cream. NO. 68. APPLE AND CELERY SALAD. E. E. M. 1854 Carroll avenue.--After parting cut into small dice 2 cooking apples (ballefleur are best;) also an equal amount of celery; stir into this two tablespoons of Durhee's salad dressing or mayonnaise. Just before serving add about ten English walnuts chopped fine. Serve on crisp lettuce leaves. NO. 69. APPLE AND SWEET PICKLE SALAD. Mrs. M. M. Thompson, 1730 Los Angeles street.--Four medium-sized rather tart apples cut in small pieces, half pint sweet pickles (cucumbers, ) cut small; mix with the following dressing: Two eggs well beaten, add two good-sized tablespoons sugar, juice of one and one-half lemons, butter size of walnut, a pinch of salt and a little pepper; cook in a double boiler till thick; let cool before mixing with apples and pickles. Serve on lettuce leaves. NO. 70. BANANA SALAD. Regina H. Quesnel, 1436 Valencia street.--Make nests of lettuce on individual salad plates and put in the following: One banana cut in halves the long way; equal parts of apple and celery cut in dice, English walnuts shaved fine, and a few needed raisins; serve with the following dressing: Mix three teaspoons mustard, one and half teaspoons salt, scant half cup sugar and tablespoon cornstarch. Beat yolks of three eggs well, then stir all together. Drop three tablespoons olive oil in, little at a time, then two-thirds cup of vinegar slowly, then two-thirds cup sweet milk, little at a time. Boil until thick like custard, stirring constantly. When cold add whites well beaten. This makes a pint of dressing and will keep for days. NO. 71. CABBAGE SALAD. Mrs. C. G. Miller, 394 Ensign avenue.--Slice or chop cabbage very fine, for which make dressing of four well beaten egg yolks, one tablespoon butter or olive oil, half cup sugar, one tablespoon mustard, pinch of vinegar, stirred in slowly. Place over slow fire and stir until boiling point is reached; remove from fire and when cold add same amount of cream and pour over salad. This dressing may be used for any salad. NO. 72. CALIFORNIA SALAD. Mrs. Goodenough, 235 East Fourth street.--Take four oranges, peel, divide and cut so as to make a good bite. Lay on lettuce leaf. Pour mayonnaise dressing over. Chop walnut meats and scatter over the top. NO. 73. CELERY SALAD. Mrs. F. E. Poyer, Long Beach, Cal.--One boiled egg, one raw egg, one teaspoon sugar, one saltspoon each of salt and pepper, one teaspoon mustard (mixed.) Rub boiled egg fine and add beaten raw egg and the other ingredients; add sweet oil in small quantities and beat as long as the mixture continues to thicken; add vinegar till thin as desired. Pour over celery cut into bits half-inch long. Eat at once before vinegar injures the crispness of the vegetable. NO. 74. CHERRY SALAD. Miss Terry, 344 South Grand avenue.--Take large red California cherries, remove the pits, fill the cavities with filbert meats. Make dressing of yolk of one egg, scant teaspoon salt, half teaspoon mustard, one level teaspoon sugar, two tablespoons lemon juice, two tablespoons vinegar, one teacup olive oil. Thoroughly chill bowl, spoon and oil before using. Mix dry ingredients in the bowl; add yolk of egg thoroughly beaten; mix well, then add the oil, a drop at a time. Stir constantly, as the mixture thickens thin with the lemon juice and vinegar used alternately. Then add more oil till all is used. Arrange the cherries on bed of crisp lettuce leaves, pour over them the dressing; garnish with English walnut halves and finely minced parsley. NO. 75. CHICKEN SALAD. Mrs. Eugene Whitington, 1155 Santee street.--The breast of one chicken cut up in small blocks; one teacup almonds blanched and cut; three teacups white celery cut in blocks; one teacup Malaga grapes cut up and seeds removed. Mix ingredients well. Dressing: Yolks of four eggs, half teaspoon mustard, one-half teaspoon salt, pinch Cayenne pepper, one tablespoon flour, two tablespoons butter, half teacup sugar, one teacup vinegar; mix together, cook in double boiler until thick; when cold, add whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff froth, two cups whipped cream. Mix thoroughly with first ingredients; set on ice half hour before using. NO. 76. CUCUMBER SALAD. E. S. Miller, 464 North Fair Oaks avenue, Pasadena, Cal.--Dice fresh cucumbers and add salted peanuts rolled, not too fine, to equal one-third quantity of cucumbers; also add a little sweet chile cut in rings or fractions of rings. Cover with any good salad dressing. Serve either in cucumbers hollowed out boat fashion, or on shredded lettuce hearts. NO. 77. CUP AND SAUCER SALAD. Miss W. Riverside, Cal.--Take a suitable lettuce leaf for the "saucer." On this place a fine ripe tomato, having cut a slice from top of tomato, remove a large part of the inside meat and seeds. Fill this cup with any desired salad, or with this: Celery cut into small pieces, bits of pickled cucumbers (sweet or sour) or slices of fresh cucumbers, English walnuts chopped fine and minced apple with bits of the tomato. Mix, season and fill cup; over this put mayonnaise dressing. NO. 78. FRUIT SALAD. Mrs. Frank A. Howe, 430 Cedar avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--Take four oranges, four lemons, four bananas, one pint can pineapple, one-half pound white grapes. Remove seeds and cut fruits; sweeten to taste, using the pineapple juice. Dissolve one box of Knox gelatine in two cups cold water. Let soak a few minutes. Then stir in two cups boiling water. When cold, or nearly so, add the sweetened and mixed fruit and let set, or, the fruit may be arranged in layers by allowing the jelly to partially set before adding fruit. Do not get too stiff a jelly. NO. 79. FRUIT SALAD. Mrs. Frank Stone, 605 East California street, Pasadena, Cal.--Drain the juice from a can each of choice pears and sliced pineapple, also four large oranges cut into dice; add to this one and one-half cups sugar and boil about one-half hour, or until reduced to a thick syrup; pour this, while hot, over three-quarters of a cup of pecans or English walnuts cut into bits, and when cool add the juice of two lemons. Have the pears and pineapple cut into even pieces, and add these with the oranges and three-quarters of a cup of Maraschino cherries to the cold syrup. Mix all very thoroughly; flavor well with Kremette, using one-third of a cup or more, and chill for several hours before serving. NO. 80. GESPARCHIO, a salad or relish. Mrs. Franklin, Anaheim, Cal.--Six large tomatoes, peel and cut in cubes. Three slices of stale bread, remove the crust, cut the same as the tomatoes. Rub a salad bowl with a clove of garlic; take five tablespoons olive oil, one-and one-half tablespoons good vinegar, one-half teaspoon salt, a dash of cayenne pepper. Mix well. Garnish the bowl with lettuce leaves. NO. 81. LENTEN SALAD. L. Neilson, 1019 East Thirty-fourth street--Take a head of celery, wash, cut into half-inch pieces, pare, core, and cut into small cubes as many apples as will make a double quantity of the celery; sprinkle over some paprika or lemon juice; add a little finely-chopped parsley and a good tablespoonful of Parmesan cheese. Serve on crisp lettuce leaves with mayonnaise dressing. NO. 82. LETTUCE SALAD. Mrs. E. A. Pallah, Santa Ana, Cal.--Take six large lettuce heads, remove outside leaves and shred; salt and pepper to taste. Serve with following dressing: One-half cup thick sour cream, two tablespoons good vinegar or lemon juice, one large tablespoon sugar; or with this dressing: Two tablespoons salad oil, two tablespoons vinegar, one tablespoon prepared mustard, one small onion, minced. NO. 83. LOBSTER SALAD. L. M. Straszacker, 2180 West Adams street--Remove large claws and split a lobster lengthwise; lay lobster on a table, head toward you, tail curved under the body. Begin to cut at tail and cut entire length of body. Open body and remove tail meat and coral and set aside. Discard intestinal vein, stomach and fat, and wipe inside thoroughly with towel wrung out of cold water. Remove meat from claws and shell. Cut meat in one-half-inch cubes, salt and mix with following mayonnaise dressing: Put the yolks of four fresh raw eggs with yolks of two hard-boiled eggs in a cold bowl and rub until smooth. Then introduce salad oil, a few drops at a time, rubbing and adding oil until mixture has the consistency of jelly, then add teaspoonful each of salt, pepper and made mustard, and two tablespoonfuls of vinegar, added gradually. Set on ice to cool and mix with lobster just before serving. Arrange on beds of lettuce leaves and sprinkle top with chopped parsley and coral of lobster. NO. 84. NUTS AND CELERY SALAD. Mrs. N. G. Ledgerwood, No. 1577 West Twenty-first street--Cut the celery in crescent-shaped pieces and slice the walnuts, using one-half as many nuts as celery; add French dressing and arrange on celery leaves. Garnish with celery. French dressing: Mix one-half teaspoon of salt and one-quarter teaspoon pepper, with a tablespoon of vinegar, add three tablespoons oil, beating until blended. NO. 85. POTATO SALAD. Mrs. F. G. Martin, Station A, Pasadena, Cal.--Pare and boil in salted water four large potatoes; cut them in dice and add two chopped onions, the whites of three hard-boiled eggs chopped up and a couple stalks celery cut very fine. Pour over this one-half cup of very rich chicken or turkey broth and let stand an hour or so, then add the following dressing: Beat together two eggs, a spoonful salt, one-half spoon black pepper, two spoons prepared mustard, four tablespoons vinegar, and set on the stove, stirring constantly; when very thick add two heaping tablespoons butter, into which has been mixed the well-mashed yolks of three hard-boiled eggs. NO. 86. POTATO SALAD. Miss C. H. Archibald, Colton, Cal.--Boil six large "Irish" potatoes with the "jackets" on. Peel before quite cool; slice thinly and mix well with one good-sized onion, sliced. Sprinkle with pepper and salt. Dressing: Beat two eggs, add two tablespoons butter, three tablespoons vinegar (strong,) one-half teaspoon salt and one-half teaspoon mustard. Cook slowly in double boiler, stirring frequently. Pour over potatoes, mixing well together. Just before serving, stir in one-half cup of sour cream and slice one hard-boiled egg over the top. NO. 86. POTATO SALAD. Mrs. J. B. Kelsey, Palms, Cal.--Eight medium-sized potatoes, one small onion, one-half cup celery chopped very fine, two hard-boiled eggs. Slice potatoes very thin in salad dish, putting in salt to taste, alternating with the celery, eggs and onion, until all are used; then pour over the following dressing: One-half cup of vinegar (if very strong add a little water,) one tablespoonful butter, one dessert spoon sugar, one teaspoon salt, a pinch of mustard. Put the vinegar and butter on the stove to get warm; mix the sugar, mustard and salt with a little water and add to vinegar. Beat the eggs and add the vinegar, stirring constantly. Cook in double boiler until thick, then add two tablespoons olive oil. When cool, pour over the potatoes and leave stand one hour before using. This dressing may be used for lettuce or cabbage. The cabbage should be sliced very thin and covered with cold water one hour before using. NO. 87. POTATO SALAD. Hilda Krampe, No. 1973 Bonsallo avenue--Three cups hot boiled potatoes, one tablespoon chopped onion, one tablespoon chopped parsley, one-quarter cup finely cut celery or one tablespoon celery seed, two hard-boiled eggs, a speck of salt and pepper. Cut potatoes into one-half-inch cubes, add other ingredients, pour salad dressing over all and garnish with hard-cooked eggs. Salad dressing: Yolks of three eggs, one tablespoon sugar, three-quarters tablespoon salt, one-half tablespoon mustard, two tablespoons butter or olive oil, two tablespoons strong vinegar, one-quarter cup water. Mix dry ingredients, add eggs and stir together; add vinegar, water, then butter or olive oil; boil, constantly stirring, until thick. This will keep several weeks in a covered jar. When ready to use add milk or cream to thin to the desired consistency. NO. 88. POTATO SALAD. Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--For twelve people. Select ten medium-sized, good-flavored potatoes; boil until well done, dry out well. When cold peel and cut lengthwise three times, then slice thin. Sprinkle with one teaspoon salt and interlay one medium-sized onions sliced. Remove slices of onion before dressing; or, chop fine one onion, leave in potato. Salad dressing: Yolks four eggs well beaten; four tablespoons best cider vinegar or lemon juice, four teaspoons sugar, one teaspoon salt; beat well; place piece butter size walnut in granite saucepan, setting pan in boiling water or over steam; cook dressing, stirring constantly, (if you stop you are lost.) When thickened, remove, still stirring, keeping off bottom and sides. Half an hour before serving, mix with one large cup sweet cream, or freshly soured cream. Strain, add well-beaten whites of two eggs. Pour over potatoes, stirring lightly. Serve on crisp white or yellow lettuce. Garnish with narrow ribbons of red pepper, boiled tender, and young string beans pickled. Serve with it salted wafers. NO. 89. PRUNE AND NUT SALAD. Mrs. E. L. Hills, Redondo Beach, Cal.--Take fine large dried prunes, stew until tender; remove the stones carefully, so as not to spoil shape; put the meat from one-half a walnut in the center of prune and wrap the prune over it. Put each prune on a small lettuce leaf and some mayonnaise on each and serve. NO. 90. --SALMON SALAD. Mrs. Frank A. Howe, No. 420 Cedar avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--To each can of salmon, add the same amount of celery, which has been cut or chopped; one cup of broken English walnut meats. After being well mixed, pour over this dressing: Scald one-half cup vinegar; to the beaten yolks of six eggs add one teaspoon butter, one teaspoon dry mustard, one scant teaspoon of salt, three tablespoons sugar; add the vinegar and cook. When cold add one scant cup sweet cream and dash of red pepper. NO. 91. SARDINE SALAD. Mrs. T. F. McCamant, No. 121 Avenue 45, East Los Angeles.--Two cups sliced boiled potatoes, one can sardines, one hard-boiled egg, one tablespoon olive oil, one slightly heaping teaspoon mustard, one and one-half teaspoons salt, some black pepper, two teaspoons sugar, piece of onion size of almond, a few sprigs of parsley or a small stalk of celery minced fine, juice of one lemon, or an equal quantity of vinegar. Put the potatoes in a mixing bowl; pick the sardines to pieces with a fork and put them on top; add the other ingredients and then chop rather fine, mixing thoroughly, being careful to not mash it too much. Serve on leaf of lettuce, with a slice of boiled egg on top and a sprig of parsley. NO. 92. SHRIMP SALAD AND DRESSING. Mrs. Frances Hunter, No. 2818 Normandie street--One pint cold-bailed potatoes, sliced thin; one pint finely-shredded cabbage; one pint shrimps sliced flatways, taking out black thread; one-half pint celery, sliced thin; two hard-boiled eggs; two crackers, rolled fine; one teaspoon salt. In a dish put layer of potatoes, a layer of cabbage and celery, a layer of shrimps and egg, part of the crackers and salt, add four tablespoons of the dressing. Repeat till all the ingredients are used. Add dressing to top, take two forks and toss it up till well mixed; have salad dish lined with lettuce leaves and pile the salad in lightly. Keep in cool places till used. For dressing: To one cup vinegar and water (if vinegar is very strong) add three well-beaten eggs, one heaping teaspoon mustard, teaspoon of salt, one of sugar, a dash of red and black pepper and a piece of butter size of walnut, or olive oil, if preferred; beat well and cook in double boiler till a smooth custard; keep it cool. NO. 93. SHRIMP SALAD. Mrs. Charles E. Luizee, 1615 De la Vina street, Santa Barbara, Cal.--One can shrimps, one can green peas; place in lettuce leaf and cover with following dressing: Put five tablespoons vinegar over fire; when it begins to boil add well-beaten yolks of five eggs and stir until thick. Take from fire; add one rounding teaspoon butter and one teaspoon salad seasoning; let cool and add juiceof one-half lemon; when ready to serve, add one-half pint cream whipped stiff. Salad seasoning: Six level teaspoons salt, four level teaspoons Coleman's mustard, one-half teaspoon cayenne pepper; sift ten times; put away in can and it is always ready for use. NO. 94. STUFFED TOMATO SALAD. Mrs. E. T., 948 Albany street.--Peel six firm ripe tomatoes, take center out and chop it, not too fine; put in colander to drain; one cucumber chopped; six stalks of nice celery, chopped; one small onion, chopped; two green chili peppers, chopped. Mix all together; fill tomatoes with ingredients, place on lettuce leaves, garnish with sprig of watercress and serve with mayonnaise dressing. NO. 95. TANGLEWOOD SALAD. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.--One small head of cabbage chopped fine, one cup sugar, one-fourth cup vinegar, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon salt and little pepper, one cup of sour cream. NO. 96. TOMATO SALAD. Mrs. L. M. Curtis, Glendora, Cal.--Take some nice round tomatoes, cut off the tops, scoop out all the center, rinse in ice water, drain thoroughly and fill with a mayonnaise of celery or crab. Set each tomato on a bed of lettuce. Very attractive. NO. 97. TOMATO SALAD. Bertha Roth, postoffice box 141, Ventura, Cal.--Select perfect tomatoes, remove a slice from stem end and remove the pulp carefully; fill the shells with shrimp, chicken or cabbage salad; replace tops; drop tomatoes into cups which are large enough to leave an inch all around. Simmer the pulp with one pint of water, spices, salt, paprika, for ten minutes; strain; add two tablespoons gelatine, that has been soaked a few minutes in cold water; add vinegar to taste; place a little of this to harden in bottom of cups; then tomatoes and rest of jelly; unmold on crisp lettuce leaves, with a spoonful of mayonnaise on top. NO. 98. TOMATO SALAD. Mrs. I Henry Johnson, Whittier, Cal.--Peel without scalding as many nice, round tomatoes as are required; set each one in a lettuce leaf and place on platter or salad dish. Take the yolks of four eggs, beat and stir into a scant cup of vinegar; add to this a level teaspoonful of mustard,] moistened with ]water, an even teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoon of sugar, a heaping teaspoon of butter, a sprinkle of pepper, a dash of cayenne pepper; let simmer and stir till thick as cream; pour into a dish and cool. Put spoonful over each tomato just before sending to the table. NO. 99. WALDORF SALAD. Mrs. M. A. Price, Hollywood, Cal.--One-third cup blanched almonds, one-third cup chopped walnuts, one-half cup chopped apples, one-half cup diced oranges, one-half cup celery, cut in one-half-inch lengths; mix and use with mayonnaise dressing. NO. 100. WASHINGTON SALAD (Original.) Mrs. A. R. Brown, Rivera, Cal.--Two cocoanuts shredded, two pounds dark cherries, pitted. Dressing: Yolk of six eggs, the milk from the nuts, juice of two oranges and one lemon, grated rind, a little sugar to suit the taste, a pinch of salt, a teaspoon of peanut butter; boil until thickened, stirring all the time; lastly, fold in the stiffly-whipped whites of the eggs. Arrange the nut and cherries in layers in glas bowls, with the dressing set on ice to chill. NO. 101. WATERCRESS SALAD. Mrs. De. U. Morey, 185 S. Pasadena ave., Pasadena, Cal.--One large head of lettuce, cut fine; one pint of ripe or half ripe olives, chopped; one bunch of watercress and one green onion; cut the leaves and tips of the cress fine; cut the onion fine, and mix all together. Make a sauce of 1 egg, three tablespoons vinegar, two teaspoons sugar, one-half teaspoon salt, a large piece of butter and a pinch of mustard; beat the egg very fine by first beating the white to a stiff froth, then add the yolk and beat a minute longer. Cook in a double boiler, stirring until like cream;remove to cool; when cold add three tablespoons sweet cream and pour all over the salad. Garnish with hard-boiled eggs. (This is worth a trial.) NO. 102. APPLE AND CELERY SALAD. E. M. Magee 122 N. Johnson st.--Core and pare three apples, then cut crosswise into thin slices. Let each apple lie as it is sliced to insure replacing the slices to form the original apple.Squeeze the juice of half a lemon over the apple to keep it white. Slice crisp celery stalks into quarter-inch pieces, and dispose on a salad dish; upon the celery arrange the sliced apples. Fill the openings with mayonnaise, and insert a green celery tip in each apple. Pour on one-half cup of mayonnaise dressing; mix the whole together and serve. NO. 103. CABBAGE SALAD. Mrs. R. P. Taylor, 630 East Fifth avenue, Pomona, Cal.--Two large raw eggs, well beaten, six tablespoons cream, one-half teaspoon salt; six teaspoons vinegar and a piece of butter size of walnut. Cook, stirring constantly, until quite thick. Have one-half head of cabbage chopped fine; sprinkle with salt. Add to dressing when cold, two tablespoons cream and pour over cabbage. NO. 104. CALIFORNIA SALAD. A. B., Sierra Madre, Cal.--Remove the stones from stewed prunes and stuff with grated cheese. Slice fresh radishes as thin as wafers. Fill cups of lettuce leaves with the above on platters, and surround the edge with small half radishes. Pour any nice mayonnaise dressing over all, and serve, after chilling on ice. NO. 105. CARROT SALAD. Loretta More, Pico Heights.--Take six good-sized carrots, clean them well; wash and slice in thin round pieces; then put them to boil in just enough water to cover them; when tender drain them; then take good-sized green onion; chop it and mix with the already boiled carrots; add salt, pepper, olive oil and vinegar to taste. (It is healthful and delicious.) NO. 106. CHICKEN SALAD. Frances Tebbetts, 1607 S. Grand ave.--In mixing chicken salad, allow one yolk of an egg to each chicken and to four chickens one and one-half pints olive oil. Pick the chickens apart, removing carefully all fat and skin. Then take celery, pick likewise into small pieces and add it to the chicken until there is an equal quantity of each. Dressing: One level teaspoon of salt to each yolk of egg; pepper to taste; one teaspoon dry mustard, juice of one lemon --more if the lemon is not very juicy. The oil should be added a few drops at a time, stirring constantly. While stirring, add a few drops of vinegar. To this mixture add the last thing one-half cup rich cream, and when thoroughly mixed pour over the salad just before it is served. The object of the lemon is to cut the oil. NO. 107. CHICKEN SALAD. Mrs. Frank Trumble, Nordhoff, Cal.--Remove the skin and bones from two well-cooked chickens; cut the meat into small pieces; three full cups of celery, cut fine; six hard-boiled eggs, cut in small pieces. Use for dressing the following: Mix four well-beaten raw eggs with a pint of weak vinegar; put into a double boiler and heat scalding hot, not boil; when thick, add one tablespoon dry mustard, one teaspoon cornstarch, two teaspoons salt; a little cayenne pepper, one-half cup melted butter, and one-fourth cup sugar. Remove from the fire and when cold add one-half pint whipped cream. NO. 108. CHICKEN SALAD. Mrs. A. Norman Saxton, box 91, Orange, Cal.--One well-boiled chicken, with all fat, skin and gristle removed; two cups celery cut in dice; two eggs, whites and yolks beaten up well; two teaspoons of unmade Colman's mustard; butter size of large egg; small teaspoon salt; dessertspoon sugar; one-fourth teaspoon onion juice; generous dash of cayenne; one-half cup vinegar diluted with warm water; two tablespoons thick sweet cream. Melt the butter in a stewpan; add mustard, salt, sugar, cayenne, onion juice and vinegar. Cook in a double boiler like custard; must not curdle. When cold stir in the cream. Mix chicken and celery thoroughly with the dressing, and serve on crisp lettuce leaves garnished with hard-boiled eggs and a row of large ripe olives around the dish. NO. 109. COLD PORK SALAD. Mrs. E. A. Peck, Ventura, Cal.--Mince well the meatof a cold roast of pork. Take three-quarters same bulk of chopped celery. Set aside in a cool place while mixing the dressing. Rub the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs to a fine powder, add one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon pepper, two teaspoons white sugar, and three teaspoons salad oil, grinding hard and putting in only a few drops of the of the oil at a time. Then add one teaspoon of made mustard. Whip one raw egg to a stiff froth and beat into the dressing, then add one-half teacup vinegar, slowly. Sprinkle a little dry salt over the meat and celery, then pour the dressing over it, tossing and mixing well. (This cannot be detected from chicken salad.) NO. 110. FRUIT SALAD. Bessie McDonald, 1386 Ingraham street.--Slice pineapple, berries--either raspberries or strawberries --and oranges, or grapefruit. Mix with cream salad dressing or the following sweet salad dressing: Yolks of two eggs beaten until thick, then add one-half cup pulverized sugar, one teaspoon vanilla and one cup whipped cream. Serve very cold. NO. 111. FRUIT SALAD. Mrs. R. H. Young, Long Beach, Cal.--Remove the seeds from one-half pound of Malaga grapes (strawberries may be substituted.) Cut four small oranges and one pineapple into pieces. Mix and pour over it a dressing made with one-third cup lemon juice and one-half cup powdered sugar. Let it stand on ice an hour before serving. A pretty way to serve it is in grapefruit, orange, or apple shells. NO. 112. FRUIT SALAD. Mrs. W. M. J. Ritcha, Covina, Cal.--Soak one-half box of good gelatine; dissolve in one pint cold water one-half hour, then pour one pint boiling water over it; add four oranges in small pieces, four bananas in thin slices; add one can pineapple and cup sugar; stir all together and set in a cool place to harden; stir occasionally until it begins to set, so that the fruit will be all through the gelatine. If allowed to stand over night the most satisfactory result will be obtained. NO. 113. FRUIT SALAD. Mrs. M. E. Schalk, 244 1/2 West Eighth street-- Oranges, pineapples, bananas, strawberries, English walnuts, almonds, all chopped very finely, with a dressing of grape or strawberry juice. NO. 114. GRAPEFRUIT SALAD. Mrs. Moor, 1460 West Twenty-third street.--Cut three grapefruit in halves, crosswise, and scoop out the pulp; add one cup of English walnuts, broken in pieces, and mix lightly together. Serve on crisp white lettuce leaves, with mayonnaise. NO. 115. GREENLAND SALAD (Original.) Mrs. A. R. Brown, Rivera, Cal.--For each pint of water allow the juice of one lemon and the grated rind of a green lemon; one-quarter cup of sugar and one tablespoon of corn starch, creamed in a little cold water; add all the ingredients to the boiling water and stir until thickened; add enough spinach juice to give a good green tint; when cool add an equal amount of whipped cream. Have ready some blanched and pounded almonds and black walnuts, separate, lightly salted. Fill an ice-cream brick to a generous fifth with the lemon dressing; spread thickly with the walnuts; add another layer of the dressing of same thickness of first, which thickly cover with the almonds, then fill up the mold with the dressing and pack in ice until frozen. Serve slices in lettuce heart leaves. NO. 116. KIDNEY BEAN SALAD. Mrs. G. C. Richwine, No. 144 East Avenue 52.--Take one can kidney beans, one cup chopped sweet cucumber pickles, one cup chopped cabbage or celery, one-half cup chopped onion. Dressing: Three eggs, yolks only; one teaspoon salt; three tablespoons sugar, six tablespoons vinegar, eight tablespoons sweet cream, one teaspoon ground mustard, one teaspoon olive oil, or butter, one-quarter teaspoon cayenne pepper. Cook dressing in granite vessel until thick like cream; stir constantly. When cool, pour over salad. Serve on lettuce leaves. NO. 117. LOBSTER SALAD. Mrs. E. W. Van Horn, 930 E. 27th st.--Remove lobster meat from shell, cut into one-half-inch cubes; add an equal quantity of celery cut in small pieces kept one hour in ice water then drained on a towel. Moisten with creamdressing; arrange on a salad dish, pile slightly in the center, cover with dressing, sprinkle with lobster coral forced through a sieve and garnish with a border of curled celery. Cream Dressing-- One-half tablespoon salt, one-half tablespoon mustard, three-fourths tablespoon sugar, one egg slightly beaten, three tablespoons butter, three-fourths cup cream, one-half cup vinegar. Mix ingredients in order given, adding vinegar very slowly, cook over boiling water, stirring constatnly until mixture thickens. Cool. NO. 118. MELON SALAD. Miss C. Hunstein, 2802 Budlong ave.--Thoroughly chill a nice ripe watermelon. Cut off a portion from one end and with a large teaspoon or cereal spoon, scoop out the pulp in small portions, rejecting all seeds; by inserting the spoon perpendicularly and giving a quick turn all around you will have the pulp in almost perfect cones. Put them into a deep glass dish, sprinkle over them a mixture of salt, powdered sugar and a suspicion of mace or paprika; keep on ice for ten minutes or until chilled. NO. 119. ONION AND CABBAGE SALAD. Mrs. Chas Anderson, Hollywood, Cal.--Take a firm head of cabbage, cut the outside leaves away and use the new tender part. Cut the cabbage in very thin slices and put in a bowl of cold water for an hour. Peel an onion and slice; also fix the same as the cabbage is another bowl of water. When time to serve the meal, put the cabbage and onion all in a colander and let all the water drain off. Have a frying pan on the stove and put into it bacon cut in very small pieces and let the grease fry out--be careful not to burn it. When grease is out, pour one-half cup vinegar and one-half cup water into pan of bacon and grease and let boil a few minutes. Then put your salad into the regular serving dish and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Then pour the contents of the frying pan over the salad. Cover the dish so as to retain the steam for a few minutes. NO. 120. OYSTER SALAD. Miss Catherine Hayes, 125 N. Johnston st.--Cook for a few minutes a pint of oysters in their liquor. Drain and cover with this dressing: Beat well two eggs and to them add one-fourth cup each milk and vinegar, one-half teaspoon each mustard, celery salt, salt, dash of cayenne pepper and two tablespoons butter. Cook in a double boiler, until thick. Pour over the oysters and when cold, set on ice. Serve on a bed of watercress after mixing with a scant pint of diced celery. NO. 121. PERSIAN SALAD. Miss Marie Woods, 625 St. Paul ave.-- Lettuce, watercress, tomatoes and celery are the ingredients of this utterly delicious salad. Wash all thoroughly and put in the ice box for some time before preparing. Skin two large tomatoes and cut in blocks; chop the celery (one-half cupful;) cut up a small bunch of cress and shred one small head of lettuce. Take the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, a tablespoonful of rich milk or cream, a teaspoonful of chutney; mix well, add a saltspoonful of salt and half a saltspoonful of pepper. Beat all until perfectly smooth, then pour over the salad; season tomatoes and celery separately, each with one saltspoonful of salt. Garnish with lettuce leaves. NO. 122. POTATO SALAD. Mrs. N. G. Ledgerwood, 1577 West Twenty-first street.--Pare and slice some cold boiled potatoes; peel and slice thin one onion; mix on a salad dish and pour over them the following dressing: Three eggs (beaten,) one cup sour cream, one teaspoonful salt, one teaspoonful of mustard, one-half teaspoonful of red pepper wet in a little water, one-half cup of sugar, butter size of an egg. Mix all together, set on fire, add one pint of vinegar slowly and stir all the time, until it thickens, but do not let boil. NO. 123. POTATO SALAD. Mrs. Frank A. Howe, No. 430 Cedar avenue, Long Beach, Cal.--Take one quart of potatoes, boiled and cut in cubes; one small onion, chopped fine; whites of three hard-boiled eggs, sliced; mix all together and use the following dressing: One-half cup vinegar, one beaten egg, one teaspoonful mustard, (dry,) one teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoonful black pepper, pinch cayenne pepper; boil until it thickens, cool partially; add one-half cup cream, one-half cup butter and yolks of three hard-boiled eggs. No. 124. POTATO SALAD. Mrs. J.G. MoLean, 334 W. Seventeenth street--Four medium-sized boiled potatoes cut in one-half-inch cubes; piece of onion size of small walnut, minced fine; salt, pepper, celery, salt to taste; add two tablespoons best olive oil and warm over fire for a moment, but do not cook. Remove to dish of cold water; add one-half cup English walnuts sliced; one large tablespoon of minced parsley; one-half cup chopped celery; mix well with enough mayonnaise to season. Place in cup-shaped lettuce leaves; add small spoon hard mayonnaise and sprig of parsley and sprinkle with the walnuts. Mayonnaise for above; One-half cup lemon juice, yolk of two eggs, two teaspoons mustard, two teaspoons salt, one teaspoon celery salt and one teaspoon onion extract. Use enough lemon juice to make a thin paste of mustard, sugar, celery salt, etc.; add eggs beaten till light; then add olive oil, tablespoonful at a time and stir vigorously; occasionally add little of balance of lemon. Continue adding oil until it will slice--making one pint or more that will keep for weeks. When using add a trifle more lemon juice and white of egg beaten stiff. NO. 125. SALMON SALAD. Mrs. E.D. Talbot, 229 W. Fifth street, Lon Beach, Cal.--One small can of salmon; drain off the oil and pick out all the bones; add six medium-sized cucumber pickles, chopped fine; three eggs, boiled hard; rub the yolks smooth and add mustard, salt and pepper to suit the taste. Moisten with about half a cup of vinegar and pour over the salmon. Chop the whites of the eggs and put over the top. NO. 126. --SHRIMP SALAD. Lizzie Erwin Ward, 1019 Ingraham street.--Chop fine one can Dunbar shrimps; chop fine twice as much white celery; chop equally fine the whites of three hard-boiled eggs, and mix. Having boiled six eggs until mealy, and allowed them to become cold, cut them in halves crosswise and take out the yolks, keeping six of the white halves perfect as cups; chop the other six fine as above. Mash the yolks and smooth with melted butter of the same amount, or oil if preferred; add the juice of three lemons, salt, Cayenne pepper, a salt spoon of mustard and a little white pepper. When smooth add the minced shrimp, celery and white of eggs. Fill the egg cups, higher in the middle, allowing the white edges to be seen; make a mould or mound of the remaining salad, put on a platter and arrange the filled half eggs around it, and garnish with the white leaves of celery. (This is one of the most delicious, beautiful and successful salads and well repays the slight trouble in preparation. The color is pink.) NO. 127. SHRIMP SALAD. Mrs. J.M. Mangan, Oxnard, Cal.--One cup of shrimps, shelled, one stalk of celery, two small green onions, the white heart of one head of lettuce, one pickle, one sprig of parsley, six hard-boiled eggs. Remove shell from eggs; with sharp knife cut lengthwise, being careful not to break the whites; remove the yolks, put in separate bowl. Now chop or mince fine the other ingredients; mash the yolks of the eggs; mix with the vegetables; season with two tablespoons of vinegar; three large spoonfuls of mayonnaise dressing or one of melted butter and a little salt. Chop shrimps slightly; mix all well together; refill whites of eggs, set on a platter in a bed of crisp lettuce leaves. Pour over all one cup of mayonnaise made as follows: Yolks of two hard-boiled eggs, one raw yolk, a pinch of salt, a dash of red pepper and good olive oil, drop by drop, stirring briskly with a silver fork until you have used one-half pint of the oil. Garnish with whole shrimps. NO. 128. SOUTHERN CABBAGE SALAD. Miss Cathrine Hayes, 125 North Johnston street. Chop and cook one head of cabbage; pour off water and add half cup vinegar, two large tablespoons sugar, one of salt, half teaspoon mustard. Mix with cabbage. Add one egg, one cup milk, beaten together. Serve very hot. (Delicious dish.) NO. 129. TURKEY AND VEAL SALAD. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue--Take the white meat of turkey or veal, cut up fine; cut up a few pickles, the same way; also a few beets, one or two carrots, few potatoes. Carrots and potatoes must be parboiled. Chop up a bunch of crisp white celery. Sprinkle all with fine salt; pour mayonnaise dressing over it. Line salad bowl with lettuce or cabbage leaves, add a few hard-boiled eggs; garnish with sprays of parsley. NO. 130. VEGETABLE SALAD. Miss Cathrine Hayes, 125 North Johnston street.--One cup boiled beets diced; 1 cup cold boiled potatoes, one tablespoon chopped onion, two eggs--whites cut with beets, yolks run through sieve and sprinkled on top of salad. After dressing has been put on and mixed. Dressing: Twelve yolks of eggs, one cup cream, half cup sugar, half cup mustard, one cup vinegar, one cup butter, salt and pepper to suit taste. Put in double boiler and boil till like cream. NO. 35. HYGIA SALAD DRESSING. Mrs. Henry H. Wheeler, Pomona, Cal.--Two eggs, one-half lemon, two tablespoons olive oil, one cup whipped cream, sugar, salt. To the yolks of the eggs, beaten very stiff, add the oil and juice of the lemon very slowly, beating hard all the time, until it has all been added and is quite thick. Then add the beaten white of the eggs, salt and sugar to taste, and cup of whipped cream. Whip all together until very stiff, and set on ice until ready to serve. NO. 111. HYGIENIC SALAD DRESSING. Mrs. C.M. West, 519 W. Palm ave., Redlands, Cal.--(Original.) One egg, half pint pure olive oil, one lemon, one dessert spoon sugar, half teaspoon salt; have everything very cold, it saves time and labor; separate egg, putting yolk in large deep soup plate, beat it well, add sugar, salt and a little lemon juice, then the oil, a few drops at a time at first; alternate with lemon juice until all the oil is used; then beat the white of the egg very stiff and mix. NO. 123. MAYONNAISE DRESSING. Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1028 South Hill street, Los Angeles.--Three eggs, three tablespoons melted butter, one-half tablespoon salt, one-half tablespoon mustard, one tablespoon sugar, one-half cup vinegar, one-half cup sweet milk; thicken in double boiler; mix salt, mustard and sugar together, beat eggs, add butter, beat well; add salt, sugar, mustard and vinegar; stir the whole into the boiling milk. NO. 54. SHRIMP SALAD. Mrs. Chas, Andersen, Hollywood, Cal.--Take shrimps and put into good-sized bowl. Then in another bowl make a mayonnaise sauce as follows: Work a tablespoonful of fat with yolk of one raw egg and one hard-boiled egg; make into a smooth paste; adding little dry mustard, a little oil and a little vinegar. Then take out the insides of very large or medium-sized tomatoes; use the outside or shell for the foundations. Mix the mayonnaise and shrimps together thoroughly. Then take a nice leaf of lettuce and put on each plate and set the tomato on the leaf; fill the pocket with the filling and lay little bits of boiled meats at the sides of the lettuce leaf. NO. 53. TOMATO ICE SALAD. H.R. Jones, 2317 West Ninth street.--Peel firm ripe tomatoes, chop fine. Soften two tablespoonfuls gelatine in quarter cup water; let stand ten minutes; set over hot water to melt; strain to one pint of tomatoes; mix carefully. Season well with salt and paprika, few drops of lemon and onion juice. Turn into mold and put on ice with wet cloth around sides; let stand several hours until firm, or mold in cups half filled; if to be served on plates. Garnish with lettuce and mayonnaise. Do not pour boiling water over the tomatoes, as that destroys their distinctive fresh flavor; the dressing should be placed on ice too. The same directions may be carried out with fresh or canned tomatoes, boiled and strained. It is better than if made the day before, as tomatoes are very tricky. If not firm, heat and add more gelatine. (Delicate and refreshing.) BREAD AND ROLLS NO. 1. BAKING POWDER BISCUIT. Mrs. Lee R. Matthews, 720 W. Crow avenue, Pomona, Cal.--Sift together three cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder and one-half teaspoon salt; work into them one tablespoon lard or butter; moisten with one and one-third cups milk or water. Handle as little as possible and bake twenty minutes in hot oven. NO. 2. BREAD. Mrs. D. Brooks, 128 West Thirty-second street, Los Angeles.--One compressed yeast cake dissolved in one pint lukewarm water, two tablespoons sugar and enough flour to make a thick batter. Let stand covered about three hours in a warm place, then add one-half pint milk (if doubtful about milk, scald) and one and one-half pints water, all lukewarm; two tablespoons salt, and enough flour to make very stiff. Knead ten minutes, then cover with cloth and set in a warm place. Let rise eight hours or until nice and light, then mold into loaves. Let rise in pans one hour and bake in a steady oven. I use Kansas flour in preference or one-half Dakota or Minnesota with one-half California. NO. 3. BROWN BREAD. Mrs. J.J. Broughall, Ocean Park, Cal.--Two cups corn meal, one cup flour, one cup graham flour, one cup sweet milk, two cups sour milk, one cup molasses, one cup brown sugar, one cup raisins (seedless,) one teaspoonful baking soda. Mix all thoroughly and steam four hours, then dry off in the oven for ten minutes. Delicious. NO. 4. BROWN BREAD SANDWICHES. Maryane Kathrine Miller, 2323 Leoti avenue, Los Angeles--For bread, one cup graham flour, one cup white flour, three-quarters cup cornmeal, one-half cup molasses mixed with one-half cup sweet milk, one cup sour milk, one heaping teaspoon soda in one-half cup sweet milk; salt. FILLING: One tablespoon butter, one tablespoon flour, one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon mustard, one teaspoon sugar, one cup sweet milk, one-half cup vinegar, two eggs; boil thick. One cup chopped peanuts, one hard-boiled mashed egg. Mix peanuts with dressing and spread on thin slices of brown bread, with lettuce leaf between. NO. 5. BREAKFAST GEMS. Ada C. Whiteman, 3131 Baldwin street, Los Angeles--One egg, two tablespoons melted butter, one cup sweet milk, two tablespoons sugar, two cups flour, one teaspoon cream tartar, one-half teaspoon soda; bake fifteen minutes. NO. 6. CORN BREAD. Mrs. N.S. Alling, Lamanda Park, Cal.--One and one-half cup yellow corn meal, one and one-half cup flour, one-half cup white sugar, one-half teaspoon salt, three teaspoons baking powder; sift into a large bowl and pour over it one pint sweet milk, butter size of small egg, melted soft; stir in one well-beaten egg at the last. Put in a well-greased biscuit pan and bake forty minutes in a good heated oven, being careful not to burn. To be eaten while hot, with butter, or with sweet cream and sugar. NO. 7. CORN BREAD. (A recipe seventy years old.) -- Mrs. R.A. Mostert, Box 92, Hollywood, Cal.--One large cup corn meal, one small cup flour, one-half cup sugar, two eggs, two teaspoons baking powder, three tablespoons butter, one teaspoon salt, add milk to make a thin batter; mix like cake and bake in a biscuit tin. NO. 8. CORN BREAD. Mrs. Henry Roley, 162 Rubidoux avenue, Riverside, Cal.--Three eggs beaten separate, one cup cold boiled rice, one cut sweet milk, one cup sour milk, one-half cup lard, one-half cup sugar, one-half teaspoon soda; add corn meal; for thin batter. NO. 9. CORN BREAD. --One egg, one cup sweet milk, one-half cup corn meal, one cup flour. Into the flour before sifting put three teaspoons baking powder, also add a pinch of salt and tablespoon melted butter. Bake a rich brown. NO. 10. GEMS. (Original.) Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1023 South Hill street, Los Angeles--One teacup fresh buttermilk, two large spoons cream, one teaspoon soda, salt, two teaspoons sugar, one egg, one cup graham flour, one-half cup wheat flour. Bake in gem pans. Fine. NO. 11. GEORGIA CORN CAKES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Two cups sweet milk, one-half teaspoon salt, one teaspoon melted butter, enough corn meal to make a very thin batter. Bake slowly on a well-greased griddle. NO. 12. GRAHAM BREAD. Mary Stone Welch. San Diego, Cal.--Scald fresh sour milk; cut it across with knife; do not let it get too hot; drain well; mix with sweet cream, salt carefully. NO. 13. GRAHAM GEMS. (Quickly made.) Elizabeth M. Bugbee, 2915 S. Figueroa street, Los Angeles--To each cup of graham flour add one-third teaspoon salt, one teaspoon baking powder, one tablespoon melted butter, one tablespoon sugar, one cup equal parts of milk and water. Bake in hot oven twenty minutes. Can be made with sour milk, or cream and soda if desired. NO. 14. MILK AND POTATO BREAD. Miss Ida Edmonds, 114 1/2 South Union avenue, Los Angeles--For four loaves of bread take two medium-sized potatoes, peel, slice and cook in a quart of water. When done, put through a fruit-squeezer, then add a quart of fresh milk which has been scalded; let stand until lukewarm, then add one cake compressed yeast, add flour enough to make a light sponge, let rise and whip down two or three times. When sponge is light add one tablespoon salt, one tablespoon sugar and enough flour to make a stiff loaf; let rise again and make into four loaves; let rise again and bake in quick even oven about forty-five minutes. Start to make bread at 6:30 o'clock a.m. NO 15. MOTHER'S STEAMED BROWN BREAD. Mrs. Julia S. Holmes, 123 Johnston street, Los Angeles--One and a half cup wheat-meal flour, two cups corn meal, one-half cup golden syrup, one pint sweet milk, one-half teaspoon soda, one-half teaspoon salt, with one-half cup raisins. Put into a tin pail, covered tightly. Boil three hours in a kettle of water, then uncover and put in oven for half an hour to bake. NO. 16. NUT BREAD. (Original.) Mrs. Julia Sheldon Holmes, 122 Johnston street, Los Angeles--Scald one-half cup milk, add one-half cup boiling water; when cool, stir in half a cake of compressed yeast dissolved in half cup water; one tablespoon lard and butter, two tablespoons golden syrup, one cup chopped walnuts, one-half cup white flour, three cups wheat-meal flour. Knead and bake like ordinary bread. NO. 17. PARKER HOUSE ROLLS. S. Alice La Rue, 294 Riverside avenue, Riverside, Cal--Add three tablespoons butter, two tablespoons sugar and one teaspoon salt to two cups scalded milk. When lukewarm add one yeast cake dissolved in one-fourth cup warm water, and three cups flour. Beat thoroughly, cover and let rise until light, then add enough flour to knead (about two and one-half cups.) Let rise again and roll out to one-third inch thickness. Cut out with biscuit cutter, and with the handle of a case-knife, floured, make a deep crease through the middle of each piece. Brush over one-half of each piece with melted butter, fold and press together. Place in greased pans, one inch apart, cover, let rise and bake in hot oven from twelve to fifteen minutes. NO. 18. POTATO PANCAKES. (Original.) Mrs. G. Dombrowski, 389 West Vernon avenue, Los Angeles--Peel three good-sized potatoes, grate them raw, add to this three well-beaten eggs, one-half cup flour, one-half cup sweet milk, salt, and two teaspoons good baking powder. Fry in two tablespoons butter and lard, or olive oil, as with pancakes. NO. 19. SALT RISING BREAD. Mrs. J.J. McCurdy, 1316 Stanford avenue, Los Angeles--Take three spoons white corn meal and two spoons cannel or shorts and pour on it three-fourths of a pint of fresh milk just brought to the boiling point. Set this at night and let it stand twelve hours where it will keep warm and in an even temperature. Then strain it and if not enough add a little warm water to the batter and strain; thicken this with white flour, half a teaspoon salt and some of sugar which has been warmed, quite hot; stir it to about the consistence of batter cakes. Set it in a pan or kettle of water, blood warm, and keep it so for about two or two and one-half hours, when it should come up a foaming yeast and break in the middle. Have in a pan flour for the amount of break desired, and to it add one teaspoon salt and one tablespoon sugar for every two loaves of bread. Let rise and when twice its size make into loaves, let rise and bake. When you put it in loaves take a cloth and dip it in melted lard and grease over the top of each loaf. Some knead bread when it is set to rise in pan and knead again when it is put in bread pans; the writer stirs bread in pan and kneads only enough to shape into loaves. The cannel or shorts can be bought at most flour and feed stores. Pans and bowls should be warm, and should be washed out with hot soda water (sal soda). To keep the temperature of this bread the same from beginning to the end is the secret. All flour and all dishes used should be warmed. NO. 20. STEAMED BOSTON BROWN BREAD. Mrs. Margaret E. Trickle, 207 North Olive street, Los Angeles--One coffee cup New Orleans molasses, two cups sweet milk, one-half cup sugar, scant measure; one-half cup raisins, stoned, halved or chopped; two rounding tablespoons butter and lard, one teaspoon salt, one full spoon baking powder, one-half level teaspoon each of ground cloves and cinnamon, one level teaspoon baking soda, one pint yellow corn meal, one pint whole wheat flour, one pint Bohemian rye flour (a level pint.) Mix molasses, sugar, milk, salt and soda, then add cornmeal with butter and lard melted, rye, whole wheat flour with spices and baking powder; the raisins well floured stirred in last. Steam three hours, bake in a moderate oven fifteen minutes. This quantity will make five tin canned corn or pea cans full when cooked. Excellent. NO. 31. STEAMED BROWN BREAD. Ada C. Whitman, 3131 Baldwin street, Los Angeles. One cup Indian meal, one cup rye meal, one-half cup flour, one-half cup cleansed currants, one-half teaspoon salt, one-half teaspoon soda, one-fourth cup molasses, one and one-half cups sweet milk. Steam three hours. NO. 64. BUTTERED LOAF. Mrs. T. Johnston, care L.J. Rose. Oxnard, Cal.--One quart flour mixed with sponge of potatoes and yeast, a small piece butter, one egg and boiled milk, salt; mix thoroughly and knead for half hour or until dough will not stick to hands. Grease thoroughly with butter and put in a covered crook or bucket to rise. This will take from seven to eight hours. Then knead a few minutes again, grease and put in round pan for second rising. This will take from two to three hours. Bake in a moderate oven until thoroughly done and the top crust hard and dark brown. Take out of pan, chip off brown crust and grate top until smooth. Cut into four or five layers, around; butter with nice fresh butter; serve hot, slice then as cake, in triangular pieces. NO. 82. CORN BREAD. Mrs. M.A. Collins. Ontario, Cal.--Two cups sour milk, two cups corn meal, two cups bread crumbs, one-half cup sugar, one teaspoon soda, one teaspoon salt. Steam two hours. NO. 2. CORN BREAD. (Best yet.) Mrs. J.B. McLean. 334 West Seventeenth street.--One cup New Orleans molasses, one cup sour milk, mix well with one teaspoon salaratus; add one cup suet chopped fine, one cup English Walnuts, chopped fine; one cup Sultana raisins, one cup yellow corn meal and one and one-fourth cups white flour, in which has been sifted one teaspoon baking powder. Beat thoroughly; put into buttered basin (or bucket) and cover. Place in kettle and steam two and one-half hours. (All members of Wednesday Morning Club who partook of recent "New England" dinner will vouch for this being the "best yet.") NO. 7. CORN MEAL GRIDDLE CAKES. ("Mother's Way.") Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--One pint sour milk, small part cream, if you have it; half cup corn meal, yellow; 1 level teaspoon soda, teaspoon sugar, pinch salt; two eggs, separated and beaten. Scald meal, stir into milk, add flour to make rather thin batter; whites of eggs last. Fry on hot griddle, well greased, pour carefully, do not scorch, do not cook fast; turn before uper side stiffens. Color a golden brown. Eat with butter and maple syrup. Yum! Yum! Only an artist can bake these case. (Only mother's were trimmed with lace.) NO. 3. GRAHAM BREAD. Mrs. Catharine H. Pickett, 1314 Faxon street, Superior, Wis--Two cups sour milk and one of sweet, and one cup New Orleans molasses. Thicken with one-third of white flour to two-thirds of graham until the batter is as thick as for cake. Add large handful salt and two heaping teaspoons soda dissolved in milk; after mixing thoroughly thicken with graham flour until the batter drops from the spoon. Fill deep tins half full of batter and bake in slow oven. Do not cut until cold. Do not use sour milk that has become stale or your bread will be sticky. NO. 40. MUFFINS. Mrs. T.S. Home, 434 Towne avenue--Beat one egg, two tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon melted butter, cup milk, two cups sifted flour, two teaspoons baking powder; bake quickly in gem pans. NO 135. RAISIN BROWN BREAD. Mrs. M.A. Collins, Ontario, Cal.--Use coarse graham meal, known as Arlington meal. Mix and sift the dry ingredients together; Three cups graham meal, one cup flour, three and one-half teaspoons soda, one teaspoon salt; add to one scant cup molasses two and one-half cups sour milk, beat well and add at the last one cup of raisins seeded. Turn into buttered molds and steam four hours. May be put into pound baking-powder boxes, just enough to fill four. NO. 52. RICE WAFFLES. Mrs. T.S. Home, 434 Towne avenue.--Two eggs, well beaten, one teaspoonful salt, one teaspoonful sugar, one tablespoonful melted butter, one cupful boiled rice, one cupful flour, one and one-half cupfuls sweet milk. Mix all together, then add a dash of boiling water. Have waffle irons hot and well greased, and brown the waffles delicately. NO. 4. RYE BREAD. Mrs. Catharine H. Pickett, 1314 Faxon street, Superior, Wis.--(Original.) Scald two quarts best rye flour with one quart boiling water. Beat until free from lumps and when cool enough add yeast, setting in a warm place to rise. The next morning add a large handful salt and white flour enough to make a soft dough. After kneading slightly, let rise again and mould into loaves and bake in oblong tins made for baking leaves singly. If troubled by dough adhering to hands have a saucer of melted lard beside the moulding board, and by rubbing on the hands well before moulding each loaf sticking will be avoided. Bake longer than bread of all white flour. NO. 6. TANGLEWOOD BREAD. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.--Take at noon one quart of boiling potato water and mash two potatoes into it. Add one-half cup sugar, one pint of flour; if too thick, add a little water to make it smooth. Let stand until blood warm, then add one and one-half yeast cakes soaked in a little warm water, not too hot. Let stand until bed time. Then put two quarts of sifted flour in pan, and a handful of salt and one pint of sweet milk, not hot. Then add the sponge and mix in a stiff loaf. Let stand until morning. Then make out in loaves and bake one-half hour in a quick oven. NO. 5. TANGLEWOOD CORN BREAD. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.--Two cups corn meal, one cup flour, one cup molasses, one cup brown sugar; one cup sour milk, one cup boiling water, one level teaspoon soda, one level teaspoon salt; bake in a quick oven. NO. 55. ANCHOVY SANDWICHES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Cut rye bread into finger sandwiches; with a thin knife mix anchovy paste thoroughly with butter; spread thinly on the bread; press together; cut into small slices. Very toothsome with which to begin dinner, or for a late supper of ale or beer. NO. 45. CHICKEN AND OTHER SANDWICHES. Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--Cut the bread in thin even slices. Put together one and two, three and four, and so on, after buttering and spreading; cut once or twice. Do not remove crust. Filling No. 1. Chop cold two-thirds chicken, one-third veal, a little tender celery, season well. Bind with chicken gravy and spread thin. No. 2. Crisp lettuce, with salad dressing. These are delicious. No. 3. Rub smooth yolks of hard boiled eggs, with salad dressing; chop white very fine; mix all. NO. 117. LETTUCE SANDWICHES. Mrs. A. R. Sternitzauer, 452 N. Fremont avenue, Los Angeles.--One head lettuce, put into cold water for ten minutes; one cup English walnuts, minced fine, and a little salt; put the lettuce on bread; then the nuts, and one tablespoon olive oil. Fine for lunches. NO. 46. PEANUT BUTTER SANDWICHES. Mary Stone Welch. San Diego, Cal.--Boil peanuts until tender; remove hulls in cold water; mash. Season with buttr and salt. When cold spread between slices of bread. Good for school lunch. NO. 142. SANDWICHES A LA VICTORIA. Miss C. Hernstein, 2303 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Take a dozen very small rolls --round ones are best, cut a small piece from the end of each, remove the crumbs and fill with this mixture; Remove the white meat from a good-sized chicken; use nearly the same quantity of cold boiled ham; freshen eight Anchovies and drain them; chop all very fine and mix well; add enough mayonnaise, flavored with a few chopped chives to make a thick paste; fill each roll, replace the ends and serve on a folded napkin. CAKES. NO. 1. ANGEL CAKE. Mrs. W.H. Harmon. No. 158 North Daly street, Los Angeles.--Take whites of nine fresh eggs, one and one-fourth cups sifted granulated sugar, one cup sifted flour, one-half teaspoon cream of tartar, a pinch of salt, added to eggs before beating. After sifting flour four or five times, measure, then sift sugar and measure, beat whites of eggs about half, then add cream of tartar and beat until very stiff; fold in sugar, then fold in flour very lightly; flavor, put into ungreased cake pan and bake in moderate oven from thirty-five to fifty minutes. Turn upside-down, with pan resting on something to prevent cake from touching table; when perfectly cold cut loose from pan and frost with any desired frosting. (If properly made this cake will not be tough nor tasteless.) NO. 2. APPLE CAKE. Mrs. S. Moe, No. 162 West Thirty-eighth street., Los Angeles.--Put two large tablespoons of butter into a frying pan and when butter is melted put in one quart bread crumbs and keep stirring to prevent burning. When the butter has soaked all through the bread, stir in one-half cup sugar and remove from stove. Now put a layer of the bread crumbs in a granite cake pan and then a layer of apple sauce that has been flavored with vanilla and then a layer of bread crumbs and so on until the dish is full. Put little dots of butter on top; the last layer must be bread crumbs. Bake it in a rather slow oven about half an hour or until it is brown on top. When done let it stand in the dish until cool, then turn over on a plate and spread over it whipped cream that has been flavored with vanilla and also a little sugar. If desired it can be decorated with dots of current jelly. It is delicious if made right. If the apples are not tart enough, put in a little lemon juice. The cake can also be made with stewed and sweetened gooseberries instead of apple sauce. NO. 3. BLUEBERRY CAKE. Miss C. Hernstein, No. 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Mix one-half teaspoon of salt and two teaspoons baking powder with two cups sifted flour. Cream, one heaped tablespoon of butter with one-half cup of sugar; add the well-beaten yolks of two eggs, one cup of milk, the flour mixture and then the stiffly beaten whites. When well mixed stir in one and one-half cups of blueberries, well rolled in flour. Bake quickly and eat hot. NO. 4. CHOCOLATE OR BLACK CAKE. Mrs. William H. Harmon, No. 158 North Daly street, Los Angeles.--Take three eggs (whites beaten seperately,) two cups powdered sugar, or a little over one and one-half cups of granulated sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup sweet milk, three cups flour, three teaspoons baking powder, two squares chocolate. Cream, butter and sugar and yolks thoroughly, then add milk, then whites of eggs beaten stiff, then flour and stir hard; then add chocolate dissolved in a little hot water. Bake in greased pan in moderate oven, in a loaf; frost with white frosting, flavored with vanilla. (Original.) NO. 5. LOAF CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. George F. Rathbun, No. 779 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--Take one cup brown sugar, one-half cup butter, one tablespoon black molasses, one-half cup sour milk, three eggs, yolks only, beaten light, one teaspoon soda, five tablespoons ground chocolate, one and one-half cups flour, scant. Mix in order named and sift the soda, chocolate and flour together. Bake in slow oven. NO. 6. COFFEE CAKE. Mrs. George F. Rathbun, No. 779 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--Take one cup sugar, one cup New Orleans molasses, one-half cup butter, two eggs; mix all together. One cup coffee, three cup flour, two teaspoons soda, level; one pound raisins, one pound currants, one-fourth pound citron, chopped; one tablespoon ground cinnamon, one tablespoon ground cloves. Dredge, the raisins, currants and citron well with flour before using. Very easily made and is better if kept a long time before using. NO. 7. CORN STARCH CAKE. Mrs. E.A. Stickney, No. 1623 South Hill street,Los Angeles.--Take one cup white sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup sweet milk, one and one-fourth cups sifted flour, one-half cup cornstarch, two teaspoons baking powder, whites of two eggs, beaten to a feather; flavoring to suit the taste. A very delicate cake. NO. 8. DELICIOUS CREAM CAKE. (Original.) Mrs. Anna B. Rogers, No. 528 West Second street, Pomona, Cal.--Take one-half cup sour cream, one cup sugar, two small or one large egg, yolk and white, beaten separate; scant one-half teaspoon soda, one-tablespoon molasses, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, one-fourth teaspoon ground cloves, one-fourth teaspoon mace, one cup milk, two teaspoons baking powder, sifted with two cups sifted flour. Put the soda in sour cream, then add sugar, molasses andspices, then flour and lastly the white of egg; make about stiff as cup cake. Bake on three tins and put any kind of icing or cream filling between. The following caramel icing will be found very nice with this cake. One cup sugar, one-third cup rich milk, one teaspoon cocoa, or if preferred use one-half teaspoon red fruit coloring instead of cocoa; cook ten minutes, remove from fire and add one-half teaspoon vanilla; stir until right consistency and spread on cake warm; if it gets too stiff return to fire a moment to make smooth again. Another delicious filling for cake is made from three apples grated or stewed and mashed fine; one peeled lemon, grated; one egg, beaten stiff; one cup sugar, a few drops of lemon extract. Boil until thick like soft custard. NO. 9. DEVIL FOOD CAKE. Fleta Aikman, Azusa, Cal.--Part I. One-half cup of butter, one cup brown sugar, creamed; one cup sour milk, yolks of three eggs, one teaspoonful soda, three cups sifted flour. Part II. One-half cup grated chocolate, one cup granulated sugar, one-half cup sweet milk. Put on stove until dissolved, but not boil. When cool stir in Part I. Filling for cake: One-half cup of butter, two cups brown sugar, one-half cup sweet milk, boil twenty minutes; stir until cool. NO. 10. ELEGANT CAKE. Mrs. F.S. Webster, Imperial, Cal.--Take one-fourth pound butter, 2 cups sugar, added gradually; four yolks of eggs beaten until thick and creamy; one teaspoon vanilla, one cup milk, two even teaspoonfuls baking powder, three cups flour sifted four times; add the flour and milk alternately, then add the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs and mix thoroughly. Now divide this into thirds, two to be baked in two pans exactly alike. The remaining third is the dark one and you prepare it like this: Add tablespoonful dry cinnamon, one cup of floured currants, one-fourth cup shredded citron, one ounce melted chocolate; mix well and bake in pan exactly like the white is baked in. Be sure they are well done. Place one light cake on oiled paper, spread with soft icing quite generously, put on dark cake and spread with icing; then the remaining light cake; cover this with oil paper and set one of the pans on top and in the pan place three flatirons and leave it until next day, when you can frost the top and it is ready to use. For soft icing take two teaspoonfuls lemon juice, white of one egg and one cup confectioner's sugar; beat all together until fine and smooth. Use your judgment as to sugar; sometimes it takes more than a cupful. Can be kept a long time. NO. 11. FEATHER CAKE. Miss Ruth C. Stocks, Somis, Cal.--One cupful of sugar, one tablespoon melted butter or olive oil, half cup sweet milk, one cup flour, one egg, one teaspoon baking powder, a tiny pinch of salt, one teaspoon lemon extract or vanilla. NO. 12. FRENCH CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. T. Carroll. --Take whites of seven eggs, two cups sugar, two-thirds cup butter, one cup milk, three cups flour, two teaspoonfuls baking powder. The chocolate part of the cake is made just the same, only use the yolks of the eggs, with one cup of grated chocolate stirred into it. Bake in layers, the layers being light and dark; then spread a custard between them which is made with two eggs, one pint milk, one-half cup sugar, one tablespoon flour or corn starch; when cool flavor with two teaspoonfuls of vanilla. (Fine.) NO. 13. FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. T.H. Sullivan, San Jacinto, Cal.--Make a sponge of one pint of thin cream, which has been scalded and cooled to luke warm; one gill of liquid yeast, or one-half cake of compressed yeast dissolved in a gill of cream; one-half cupful of sugar and two and one-half cups flour; beat all together thoroughly, and let rise until light; add another half cup sugar, half cup rather thick cream, which has been scalded and cooled, one cup warm flour, and after beating together, set away to rise again. When well risen, add one cup seeded raisins, one-fourth cup citron chopped fine, one-half cup seeded dates, two well beaten eggs and about one and one-third cup flour; turn into brick loaf bread pan, let it rise until very light and bake. Set away until twenty-four hours old before using. NO. 14. GOLD LOAF CAKE. Mrs. Wm. H. Harmon, 158 N. Daly street, Los Angeles.--Take yolks of eight eggs, one cup granulated sugar, scant half cup butter, half cup sweet milk, one and one-half cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder. Cream butter and sugar thoroughly, beat yolks to a stiff froth and stir thoroughly into butter and sugar, put in milk, then flour and stir hard, bake in moderate oven. For frosting use one cup sugar, five tablespoonfuls water, white of one egg; let sugar and water boil until when dropped from the spoon it will hair; then pour slowly into the beaten white of egg, and beat hard until partly cool; then frost the cake. Flavor with any desired flavoring. (Original.) NO. 15. JAM CAKE. Mrs. E.H. Williams, 120 East Fern avenue, Redlands, Cal.--One-half cup butter, one cup sugar, three eggs, (save out the white of one for icing,) five tablespoons sour milk, two heaping cups of flour, one teaspoon soda, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon cloves, one cup jam, stirred in the last thing. Strawberry jam is the best to use. This makes two good layers, with white icing. NO. 16. KINDERGARTEN CAKE. Mrs. Clara Moulton, Loara, Cal.--Take one pint of sponge in morning before kneading, one cup sugar, three-quarter cup butter, (small,) one teaspoonful ground cinnamon, two eggs, one teacup chopped raisins, three-quarter teacup flour; beat it up before putting in flour and raisins and beat it good afterwards. Let it raise a long time, then bake it. Flour raisins so they won't sink. Add saleratus before raisins are put in. NO. 17. LAYER CAKE. Mrs. J.J. Bronghall, Ocean Park, Cal.--Take scant two cups granulated sugar, which has been sifted twice, add a good one-half cup butter and cream well, add one-half cup sweet milk, gradually, then one-half cup sweet milk with flour, a little at a time; three cups flour, sift twice, then measure, sift again with two level teaspoonfuls baking powder; whites of six eggs, beaten stiff. NO. 18. LEMON CAKE. (Finest ever.) Mrs. Clara Moulton, Loara, Cal.--Take one good cup sugar, one-half cup butter, three eggs, (save the yolk of one,) one-half cup milk, two cups of flour, one tablespoon baking powder, jelly between layers, one cup cold water, one cup sugar; the rind and juice of one large lemon, one tablespoon corn starch, heaping with the yolk of one egg and a little butter, and a little water. Put in the corn starch and yolk when it commences to boil and cool it before spreading the layers. NO. 19. LEMON LAYER CAKE. Mrs. L.S. -- Whites of three eggs, one cup sugar, butter size of an egg, two-thirds cup sweet milk, two cups flour, one and one-half teaspoons baking powder; flavor with lemon; bake in layers. Filling: Grate the yellow rind of one large lemon, add the juice, half cup sugar, tablespoon butter, tablespoon water, yolks of the three eggs, beat all together and boil five minutes; spread between layers; put white frosting on top if desired. NO. 20. PORK CAKE. OR FRUIT CAKE, without butter, eggs or milk. Mrs. F. M. Caler, 1415 Arapahoe st.--One pound fresh fat pork, two pounds raisins, one pound currants, one-fourth pound citron, one pint molasses, one pint boiling water, one cup dark brown sugar, one teaspoon each of allspice, cinnamon and mace, one grated nutmeg and one large teaspoon of soda. Put the pork through the meat chopper until it is the same softness as lard, then pour the boiling water over it, only saving enough to dissolve the soda; then add the sugar, molasses and other ingredients, with the exception of the fruit and one cup of English walnuts chopped, which should be added the last thing. Seed the raisins, slice the citron fine and wash and dry the currants and roll in flour before stirring in the cake; add enough flour to make stiffness of an ordinary fruit cake. Bake one hour. This will make four loaves and will keep as long as any fruit cake. (Original.) NO. 21. POTATO CAKE. (Very good.) Mrs. K.M. Philips, 1235 W. Seventh st., Los Angeles.--Take two cups sugar, three-fourths cup butter, three-fourths cup milk, two and a half cups flour, one cup of mashed Irish potatoes, four eggs, two bars grated chocolate, one cup chopped walnuts, two teaspoons baking powder, one teaspoon ground cloves, one teaspoon nutmeg, half teaspoon allspice, half teaspoon black pepper, pinch salt. Cream, butter and sugar together, add eggs and milk, lastly the flour. NO. 22. POUND CAKE. (Inexpensive, but very rich and creamy.) Mrs. N.S. Alling, Lamanda, Cal.--Take one and a half cups white sugar, half cup shortening, (butter or cottolene is best,) mix to a cream; add the yolks of two eggs beaten very lightly; flavor to taste (lemon or almond flavor is better for this kind of cake.) Sift together three teacups flour and three teaspoons baking powder, then add a little flavor to the mixture; add three-fourths cup sweet milk, a little at a time, with the flour (this prevents the milk from curdling;) add all the flavor and stir the mixture thoroughly until it is creamy. (Always stir cake one way.) Add half cup chopped raisins. Now beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth and add just before putting in the oven. Bake forty minutes in a well-heated oven. Do not turn. It is nicer when frosted. NO. 23. SOUR MILK LAYER CAKE. F.M. Fisher, Los Angeles.--(Original.) Take two cups sugar and one cup butter, creamed together; four eggs, whites and yolks, beaten separately; beat yolks well, add to creamed sugar and butter; quarter teaspoon salt, two and one-half cups of flour, sifted three times, with teaspoon of baking powder; one teaspoon soda dissolved in cup of milk. Use any desired flavoring; last put in the whites of eggs, beaten stiff. Bake fifteen or twenty minutes. Oil three pans with the least possible amount of lard; sift flour over them and the cakes will come out intact. This makes a very nice, moist cake, much nicer than baking powder and sweet milk. Filling: One cup of granulated sugar, five tablespoons sweet milk; boil just four minutes; stir until consistency to spread, flavoring with either lemon or vanilla, adding chocolate while cooling makes a nice filling. NO. 24. SPIRELLA FRUIT CAKE. (Original.) Mrs. C.L. Pardee, 1614 Winfield street, Los Angeles.--Take five cups flour, one and a half cups sugar, one and a half cups butter, half cup milk, one cup molasses, six eggs, three pounds raisins, three pounds currants, one pound citron, one nutmeg, two tablespoons cinnamon, two teaspoons allspice, one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon soda. Mix thoroughly, put in greased pans and steam for three hours. Remove from steamer and brown in moderate oven for about thirty minutes. Be careful not to scorch, and you will have the most delicate and deliciously flavored cake obtainable. NO. 25. SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. Linda Howard, 265 Henrietta Court, Pasadena, Cal.--Beat the yolks and whites of two eggs separately, and mix nearly all of one cup of sugar with the whites, the rest with the yolks. Add one cup of flour; one generous teaspoon baking powder and one-quarter teaspoon salt. After mixing all these well together, add one-half cup boiling water. NO. 26. --SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. William H. Harmon, 158 North Daly street, Los Angeles.--Take one and one-half cups sugar, three eggs, half cup water, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, juice of half lemon. Beat eggs very light; add sugar; beat hard; add water and lemon juice, then fold in lightly the flour that has been sifted several times with the baking powder. Bake from about thirty-five to fifty minutes in a moderate oven. Do not stir in flour, but fold it in, else cake will be tough. NO. 27. SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. George E. Decker, box No. 642, Pasadena, Cal.--Take one cup sugar, one cup flour, two teaspoons baking powder; mix well together, then sift. Add two well beaten eggs and four tablespoons boiling water, one teaspoon vanilla. Bake in two layers. Filling: Put one cup of milk in double boiler; beat together one egg, two heaping tablespoons of sugar, one heaping tablespoon of cornstarch, a little salt. Add to heated milk, cook until thickened, flavor with vanilla; cool slightly and spread between layers of cake and on top. Makes a delicious and easily prepared dessert. NO. 28. BANANA LAYER CAKE. Mrs. J.M. Shiner, 317 Douglas street, Los Angeles--Two eggs, one cup sugar, one-third cup butter, one-half cup milk, one and three-fourths cups sifted flour, three teaspoons baking powder; mix the baking powder well with the flour; cream the sugar and butter; add the well-beaten eggs and milk and stir the flour in gradually; bake in layers; put white frosting between and slice bananas and put between layers; put plain frosting on top. NO. 29. BLACKBERRY JAM CAKE. Mrs. S.S. Woodard, 1210 West Tenth street, Los Angeles--Take six eggs, two cups sugar, one cup butter (not extra full,) four cups flour, one cup sour milk, two teaspoons soda (extra full,) one nutmeg, one teaspoon cinnamon, two teacups blackberry jam. Bake in layers and put together with caramel filling. NO. 30. CHILD'S CHRISTMAS CAKE. Edna Maud Magee, 123 North Johnston street, Los Angeles--Cream three-quarters of a cup butter, add a cup and a half of sugar, three-quarters cup of milk, three cups flour, four level teaspoonfuls baking powder sifted together. Flavor with rose and lemon, mixed; stir in the beaten whites of five eggs; bake fifty minutes. When cold ice thickly; decorate with pecan nuts and small red candies. Flavor icing with small teaspoonful vanilla. Trim the cake plate with holly leaves and berries. If liked, add a cup of seeded layer raisins for plum cake. NO. 31. CHOCOLATE CAKE WITH MARSHMALLOW FILLING AND ICING. Miss Crowe, 1441 Iowa street, Los Angeles--Custard part: Three-fourths cup grated baker's unsweetened chocolate, one cup brown sugar, one-half cup milk, yolk of one egg, one teaspoon vanilla; cook slowly until thick and creamy, then set away to cool. Cake part: One cup brown sugar, two cups flour, one-half cup butter, one small half cup milk, two eggs. Cream butter, sugar and yolks of eggs together; add milk, flour and whites beaten stiff. Beat all together and stir in the custard. Add lastly one teacup soda dissolved in warm water. Marshmallow filling: Boil together one and one-half cups white sugar and one cup hot water until it strings, then pour it over the whites of two eggs. Add one-half pound marshmallows broken in small pieces. Beat all smooth and creamy; flavor with vanilla, then fill and ice cake. NO. 32. CHOCOLATE CREAM CAKE. Mrs. Julia Sheldon Holmes, 122 North Johnston street, Los Angeles-- Whites of four eggs, one large cup of milk, one-half cup butter, two cups sugar, two and one-half cups sifted flour, two heaping teaspoons baking powder. A cup of cornstarch can be used in place of one cup of flour. Flavor with lemon. Ice with chocolate cream icing made as follows: One large cup granulated sugar, one-half cup water; boil until it spins a thread; beat until like cream; flavor with vanilla; spread on top and sides of cake. Steam a quarter of a bar of Baker's chocolate until soft, add one tablespoonful sugar dissolved in hot water; beat in quickly; flavor with vanilla; spread over the white icing. Bake in four layers, or loaf shape or square. CARAMEL FILLING FOR CAKE. Two cups brown sugar (medium grade,) one-half cup sweet cream or milk (use less butter with cream,) butter size of an egg, one teaspoon of vanilla. Stir one tablespoonful of sugar in a small skillit over the fire until it is a rich brown color, then add a little boiling water and pour this into the boiling syrup, stirring often. Boil fifteen minutes, or until thick enough. When done, add vanila and beat well for a few minutes, and spread on cakes while warm. NO. 33. CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE. Mrs. Ernest Ecclestone, Riverside, Cal.--For cake take one cup sugar, two eggs, one-fourth cup butter, one-half cup milk, one and one-half cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder. For icing take two ounces unsweetened chocolate shaved and melted over steam; white of an egg, beaten stiff, and add three tablespoons cream; thicken with powdered sugar and flavor with vanilla. NO. 34. CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE. Mrs. N.S. Alling, Lamanda, Cal.--One cup butter, one-fourth cup white sugar, two eggs, one cup sweet milk, two and one-half cups flour, three teaspoons baking powder, one-half teaspoon vanilla. Cream butter and sugar thoroughly. Then add the eggs which have been thoroughly beaten, and stir all to a rich cream. Put flour and baking powder into sieve and sift a little into the butter,sugar and eggs. Add a little milk and stir well in one direction. Continue in this way until all the flour and milk have been used and you will have a rich creamy substance--one of the secrets of good cake. Now add the vanilla extract. To prevent sticking to tins, sprinkle flour in tins after being greased. Bake to a nice brown, ten or fifteen minutes. For filling take one-fourth cake chocolate, grated; one dessertspoon corn starch, one-half cup sweet milk, one cup whitesugar, one egg. Beat egg thoroughly; moisten cornstarch with milk; add all together and boil until thick; if necessary to thicken, add a little more cornstarch. When cool add one-half teaspoon vanilla. Put mixture on every layer. If you wish top layer shiny, take a heaping tablespoon chocolate, two of white sugar and one tablespoon boiling water, boil a few minutes and flavor with vanilla. Spread it on the cake before it is quite cold. Use a broad-bladed knife dipped in cold water to smooth it; if too thick, thin with hot water. NO. 35. DEVIL CAKE. L.V. Rupe, 1304 West Second street, Los Angeles--Take one cup brown sugar, two-thirds cup milk, two-thirds cup chocolate; put together over fire till melted; then put aside till cold. Then take half cup butter, one cup brown sugar, one-half cup milk, and half a teaspoonful saleratus, two well-beaten eggs or the yolks of two and one whole egg (reserving the remaining whites for filling.) Mix all thoroughly, then add the chocolate mixture and stir briskly a few minutes, and bake in a loaf in a moderate oven three-quarters of an hour, or in layer tins and put together with the plain white filling, for which take one cup white sugar and dissolve in just enough water to moisten; cook till it is clear like candy, then pour over the two whites beaten to a froth, beating well till cold, and spread between the layers and on top of cake. NO. 36. DEVIL CAKE. Mrs. Hartley, Glendale, Cal.--Part I. One cup brown sugar, two-thirds cup Baker's chocolate, (melt over steam;) one-half cup milk. Mix thoroughly together without boiling, and set aside. Part II. One cup brown sugar, one-half cup butter, yolks of three eggs, two cups flour, one cup milk, one teaspoon soda. Stir Part I into Part II, mix thoroughly, bake thirty minutes in loaf form. Frosting: Two cups brown sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup milk. Boil eight minutes and stir until cool; frost all over. NO. 37. ECONOMICAL CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. M. Cameron, 1237 Arapahoe street, Los Angeles--One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup sweet milk, two eggs, beat separate; sift two cups flour, and add two level teaspoons of baking powder; mix well and bake in two layers. For icing, take one cup sugar, one-half cup milk and boil very slowly for twenty minutes. Melt two squares Baker's chocolate and one teaspoon vanilla and add after icing has boiled; beat until cool enough to ice. NO. 38. FIG CAKE. Miss C. Hernstein. 2202 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Two cups sugar, one cup butter, one cup cold water, three cups seeded raisins, one pound figs chopped fine, three cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one egg. Bake slowly. NO. 39. FIG CAKE. M.F.B., 764 Towne avenue, Los Angeles--Take one cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup milk, two eggs, one and one-half cups flour, one teaspoonful baking powder. Bake in layer-cake tin. Frosting and filling; Boil one cup sugar and four tablespoonfuls water until it hairs; pour over beaten whites of two eggs, stirring slowly. Add twelve figs chopped fine. Put between and on top of cake. Cut figs in small pieces and stick into the frosting. NO. 40. FRENCH CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. J.M. Shiner, 317 Douglas street, Los Angeles.--Mix two cups sugar and half cup butter together; add yolks of three eggs well beaten, one-half cup milk, one teaspoonful soda dissolved in warm water, one cup chocolate, dissolved in boiling water, one teaspoon vanilla extract; beat well together and stir in two cups of flour; bake in layers; put frosting between layers. NO. 41. FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. A.J. Grant, 606 South Bonnie Brae street, Los Angeles.--One and a half cups of butter, one and a half cups sugar, three cups flour, three pounds stoned raisins, half pound of citron, half pound of preserved lemon, half pound preserved orange, one pound English nuts, half pound of dates cut in small pieces, one teaspoon soda in one cup coffee, two teaspoons cream tartar in flour, six eggs beaten separately, two teaspoons cinnamon, one teaspoon of cloves, half teaspoon mace, one wineglass brandy or wine. Flour the fruit and line the pan with greased paper. Steam five hours and afterwards put in a range oven for three-quarters of an hour. Let cool in tins before taking out. NO. 42. GOLD CAKE. Mrs. Ernest Ecclestone, Riverside, Cal.--Two cups sugar, three-quarters cup butter, half cup milk, three cups flour, yolks of six eggs, one whole egg, two teaspoons baking powder. Flavor with lemon. NO. 43. GOLDEN SPICE CAKE. Mrs. Ernest Ecclestone, Riverside, Cal.-- Yolks of seven eggs, one whole egg, one cup butter, two cups brown sugar, one cup molasses, one large coffee-cup sour milk, five cups flour, one even teaspoon soda, one teaspoon cloves, two teaspoons cinnamon, one teaspoon nutmeg, two teaspoons ginger. Beat eggs, sugar and butter, then add other ingredients. Bake in deep cake pan with layers of chopped nuts and raisins between layers of batter. NO. 44. HONEY FRUIT CAKE. (Original.) Mrs. L.A. Squires, Claremont, Cal.--Half cup sugar, half cup honey, half cup sour milk, quarter cup shortening.(I use cottolene,) two cups flour, half cup raisins, half cup walnut meats, one egg, one teaspoon soda. Spices to taste. Do not use too much spice or it will spoil the nice honey flavor. This will keep a long time and is very nice. NO. 45. HOT WATER SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. L. Borger, 328 South Olive street, Los Angeles.--Beat two eggs very light; add one cup sugar and beat again; one cup sifted flour, one teaspoon baking powder, a good pinch of salt, one teaspoon of vanilla, beat again thoroughly. Just before putting in the pan (greased and warm) add half cup (scant) hot water; bake from 20 to 30 minutes. For frosting use yolk of egg, one teaspoon black coffee, enough powdered sugar to make quite stiff. NO. 46. ICE CREAM CAKE, WITH NUTS. Helen M. Magee. 122 North Johnston street.--One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one cup sweet milk, one and one-half cups sifted flour, one-half cup cornstarch, two teaspoons baking powder, sifted with the flour. Beat well; add the whites of three eggs beaten stiff, three drops of extract of lemon and rose, mixed. Bake in four layers. Icing: Whites of three eggs, two cups sugar, two-thirds cup boiling water. Boil hard until clear; pour the boiling sugar over the beaten whites of three eggs and beat; add three drops extract of bitter almonds, one pound English walnuts, broken fine. Put on top and between layers of cake. NO. 47. IMPERIAL CAKE. Miss C. Hernstein. 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One pound butter, one pound sugar, one pound flour, juice and rind of one lemon, nine eggs, one pound blanched almonds, one-half pound citron, half pound raisins, one teaspoon baking powder. NO. 48. LAYER CAKE WITH BOILED ICING. Mrs. Emma Kegerreis, Moneta, Cal.-- (Chocolate, lemons, caramel or jelly used as a filling.) Two cups sugar, one half cup butter, three-fourths cup sweet milk, three cups flour, three teaspoons baking powder, whites of six eggs. If a smaller cake is desired use half of various ingredients. NO. 49. LOAF OR LAYER CAKE. Mrs. Emma Kegerreis, Moneta, Cal.--One cup molasses, one cup cold coffee, two cups sugar, one cup butter, five eggs, save whites for icing; flour as in other cakes; one teaspoon each of soda, cinnamon, allspice and cloves; a little grated nutmeg; add fruit if desired. NO. 50. MALAGA CAKE. (Original.) Louise V. Rupe, 1304 West Second street, Los Angeles--Put in a bowl two tablespoons butter, one cup sugar, one whole egg and yolks of two (saving whites for filling,) one-half cup milk, and two of flour, sifted with one heaping teaspoon of baking powder. Beat eggs, sugar and butter to a cream, then add the other ingredients; mix well and flavor with lemon or almond and bake in three layers. Filling: One cup sugar in enough water to melt; cook till clear, then pour over the well-beaten whites and stir till cool and creamy, then have ready two-thirds cup seeded and chopped raisins and two-thirds cup chopped walnut meats. Mix all well together and spread between layers and on top, sprinkling the top thickly with the chopped nut meats or keep out enough of the white frosting for the top layer. NO. 51. MARBLE CHOCOLATE CAKE, Miss G. Smyth, G street, Ontario, Cal.--Half cup butter, one cup sugar, half cup sweet milk, one and a half cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, whites of four eggs or two whole eggs added last. Take one cup of this mixture and add to it five tablespoons grated chocolate wet with a little milk and flavor with vanilla. Ice with chocolate icing and chopped walnuts sprinkled on top. NO. 52. MOCHA CAKES. (Delicious reception cakes,) Miss G. Smyth, G street Ontario, Cal.--Half cup butter, half cup milk, one cup granulated sugar, two eggs, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder. Bake this in flat pan one or two days before icing them. Icing: Beat small half cup of butter to a cream, very light, then put into a cup two tablespoons of milk and one teaspoon vanilla. Stir into the butter two cups of powdered sugar, gradually adding a spoonful of the vanilla and milk, as it becomes a little dry. Blanch half pound of almonds and brown in oven, then roll and chop until very fine. Cut cake in one and one-half by one inch pieces and spread with icing and roll in the nuts. NO. 53. "NEVER FAIL" SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. E.M.W., Anaheim, Cal.--(Can be both made and baked in thirty-five minutes. A good sponge should be yellow as gold, of velvety softness and tender as a marshmallow. If the rule here given is strictly followed, such a cake will be the sure result.) Separate the whites and yolks of four eggs. Beat the whites until stiff enough to remain in bowl if it is inverted, then beat into them one-half cup of sugar, which must be fine granulated. (Powdered sugar makes tough cake and proper beating does away entirely with the grains.) Beat the yolks, add to them one-half cup of sugar, beating for five minutes by the clock--this latter being important, as the delicate texture of the cake depends upon it. Add to the yolks the grated rind and juice of one lemon. Now beat well together the yolks and white. At this stage beating is in order, but must be absolutely avoided after adding one scant cup of flour. The mixture should now look like a puff ball and the flour is to be tossed into it with a light turn of a wooden spoon. Bake for twenty-five minutes in a moderate oven. Just before putting in the oven, sprinkle on top through a sifter one tablespoon granulated sugar. This gives the "crackly" top crust so desirable. NO. 54. NUT CAKE. Miss Crowe, 1441 Iowa street, Los Angeles.--One and one-half cups sugar, one good half-cup butter, two full cups flour, three eggs, two teaspoons cream of tartar, and one teaspoon soda; one large cup of chopped walnuts. Cream butter, sugar and eggs together; add one-half cup milk, then flour and the soda dissolved in hot water. Lastly, add nuts. Bake thirty-five minutes. Ice with yellow icing and decorate with walnuts. NO. 55. NUT CAKE. Miss B. L. Ecclestone, 1512 Maple avenue, Los Angeles.--One-half cup butter, one and one-half cups sugar, two eggs, three-quarters cup milk, two cups flour, vanilla, three-quarters cup chopped walnuts, two teaspoons baking powder. Cream butter and sugar, then add yolks of eggs, milk, flour and vanilla, the nuts and baking powder; when thoroughly mixed, add the whites of the eggs --after they are beaten stiff. Bake three-quarters of an hour in moderate oven. NO. 56. PERFECT BRIDE'S CAKE. Mrs. E.F. Miller, 919 Sunset boulevard.--One and one-half cups of butter, three cups of powdered sugar, whites of eight eggs, three cups of flour, one level teaspoonful of best baking powder, one cup of milk, one teaspoonful of extract of lemon. Rub butter and sugar to a cream, add milk and extract, then flour sifted together with the powder; beat all together thoroughly--the more the better; then gently mix in the eight whites of the eggs, after they have been whipped to a dry froth. When thoroughly mixed, place in paper-lined tin. Bake carefully in steady oven for forty minutes. Use plain white icing. NO. 57. PLAIN CAKE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Dissolve a level teaspoonful of bicarbonate of soda in two tablespoons warm water, add to it half a cup New Orleans molasses, mix and add hastily one cup of thick sour cream, one cup sugar, one tablespoon cinnamon and two and one-half cups pastry flour. Beat for three minutes, then stir in one cup seeded and chopped raisins that have been floured with an extra half cup of flour. Bake slowly for one hour. NO. 58. PLAIN FRUIT CAKE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One cup butter, one of brown sugar, one of molasses, one of sweet milk, three cups flour, four eggs, one and one-half teaspoons cream of tartar, one teaspoon soda, two pounds raisins, seeded, one teaspoon each of Price's extract of rose, cinnamon, nutmeg, one-half teaspoon cloves, and one-half wine glass of brandy. NO. 59. PORK CAKE. L.V. Rupe, 1304 West Second street, Los Angeles.--Take one pound of fat salt pork, rejecting all lean, and chop fine as possible; pour over it two-thirds pint boiling water; add two cups sugar and one of molasses, one cup raisins, one cup currants, one-half pound citron, one tablespoon each of cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg, one teaspoon salt and one of soda. Bake in a slow oven two hours. You will find this an excellent and inexpensive cake, requiring neither butter nor eggs. NO. 60. POTATO CAKE. Mrs. W.H. Rodenburg, 744 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--One cup butter, two cups sugar, two cups flour, two cups mashed potatoes (warm,) one-half cup milk, four eggs, beaten separate; one cup grated chocolate, one cup chopped walnuts, one teaspoon allspice, one teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon nutmeg, two teaspoons baking powder. This makes one large cake; half of recipe makes a very nice-sized cake; This cake is especially fine for lunches, as the potatoes keep it moist and it does not dry out as readily as other cake carried in lunch baskets. NO. 61. PRINCE OF WALES CAKE. Mrs. W.H. Rodenburg, 744 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--One cup butter, two cups brown sugar, six eggs, yolks only; four tablespoons New Orleans molasses, four cups flour, two teaspoons nutmeg, two teaspoons cinnamon, two teaspoons cloves, one pound raisins (dredged in flour,) one-quarter pound citron. This cake makes a good substitute for fruit cake and is not so expensive. NO. 62. QUICK SPONGE CAKE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Three eggs, one and one-half cups sugar, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one-half cup cold water, one teaspoon extract lemon. NO. 63. SPONGE CAKE. (Excellent.) Miss. G. Smyth, G street, Ontario, Cal.--Four eggs, two and one-quarter cups flour, two cups sugar, three-quarters cup cold water, two even teaspoons baking powder, pinch salt, one teaspoon lemon. Beat sugar and eggs together; when light, add water, then flour and baking powder. NO. 64. VELVET SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. M. Cameron, 1237 Arapahoe street, Los Angeles.--Two cups sugar, six eggs, leaving out whites of three, one cup boiling water, two and one-half cups flour, one small tablespoon baking powder. Beat yolks a little, add sugar and beat fifteen minutes; add the three beaten whites and the boiling water; bake in layers. For icing, use remaining three whites and six dessert spoons pulverized sugar. NO. 65. TENDER SPONGE CAKE. Miss Frances B. Welch, San Diego, Cal.--Separate whites and yolks of four eggs, beat yolks very light, adding slowly one and one-half cups sugar, scant measure; two tablespoons lemon juice and one tablespoon water. Fold in lightly, one and one-half cups well-sifted flour, full measure, and whites of eggs beaten stiff (pinch salt helps in beating.) Bake in moderate oven, about forty minutes. If properly beaten and baked, will leave crust like maccaroon. May fall slightly on cooling. That is all right. Do not eat first day. NO. 66. BROWNSTONE FRONT CAKE. Bertha S. Morris, 1016 Georgia street, Los Angeles.--One-half cup ground chocolate, one yolk of egg, two tablespoons sugar, one-half cup milk; mix and boil until thick, then cool and mix with the following: One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, two eggs, one-half cup milk, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, whites of the eggs, well beaten and added last. Filling: Two tablespoons butter, cup and a half of powdered sugar, milk or cream enough to spread easily; beat well and place between the layers when the cake is cool. Use any extract preferred. NO. 67. CHECKERBOARD CAKE. Mrs. William J. Magee, No. 122 North Johnston street, Los Angeles.--One and one-half cups sugar, one half cup butter, one-half cup sweet milk, two cups flour, whites of four eggs, two teaspoonfuls baking powder, flavor with lemon. Dark part: One cup brown sugar, one-quarter cup butter, one-half cup milk, yolks of four eggs, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder; flavor with spices. Mix in separate dishes, put a ring of the light, a ring of the dark batter, a ring of the light, a ring of the dark batter, a ring of the light in two jelly tins, then in two other jelly tins put a ring of the dark, a ring of the light, a ring of the dark; put together in layers alternately, with plain boiled icing; flavor with vanilla. NO. 68. CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--One cup sugar, one egg (two improves it.) one-half cup butter, two cups flour, one-half cup sweet milk, one and one-half teaspoons baking powder. Dark part: One egg, one-half cup sugar, two pieces or sections of a bar, of chocolate, grated. Beat the egg, add sugar and grated chocolate. Put a layer of the white part in the pan, then of the chocolate mixture (same as "marble" cake) until all is used, finishing with the light. Flavor the cake with vanilla. NO. 69. CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE. Lizzie A. Graves, Ontario, Cal.-- Yolk of three eggs, two cups sugar, one cup butter, one cup milk, three cups flour, three teaspoons baking powder, stir well, then lightly add the beaten whites. (Makes four large layers.) Chocolate: Three ounces of chocolate, melted; one-half cup rich milk, two tablespoons butter, one cup sugar. Boil until it forms a soft ball when tried in water; one teaspoon vanilla. Sometimes I use this caramel filling: Two and one-half cups sugar, one cup milk, one-half cup butter, boil until it forms a soft ball when tried in water; then beat until cold; when nearly cold, add one teaspoon vanilla. The cake can be baked in a loaf, with raisins, nuts or flavoring. NO. 70. DEVIL'S FOOD. (Three-layer cake.) Miss Mabelle Vaughn, 231 San Francisco avenue, Pomona, Cal.--Cream very thoroughly a cup and a half of sugar and the yolks of three eggs; add the beaten whites; at this point, place a half cup of milk and a half cup of cocoa on stove to cook--It takes a very few moments for it to thicken--then set aside to cool; add to the creamed mixture a teaspoon of soda dissolved in a half cup of sweet milk; two cups of flour; lastly, the cooked cocoa. Icing: Two cups sugar, and a half cup of cocoa, with milk or cream enough to moisten. While this is cooking, beat the white of an egg thoroughly, adding the yolk gradually so that the whole may be a frothy substance. When the cooked mixture sort of threads, pour it on the egg, stirring enough to mix well. When icing is cool, spread on the layers of cake. NO. 71. FIG CAKE. Mrs. T.N. Coleman, 170 North Daly street, Los Angeles.--One cup butter, two cups sugar, one cup milk, four eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately; three cups sifted flour, three teaspoons baking powder, vanilla flavoring. Take half the batter, pour it into two jelly tins; on each put a layer of split figs, seeds up; bake. To the rest add two tablespoons molasses, one cup seedless raisins, one-half cup currants, one teaspoon each of cinnamon and cloves, a little more flour. Bake in two jelly tins; put the layers together with frosting, having a fig cake on top. NO. 72. FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--(Good cake to make when eggs are 40 cents per dozen.) Will keep for three years (if you can manage to save any that length of time.) Two cups molasses, two cups melted butter, three cups brown sugar, one cup sour milk, three eggs, one teaspoon soda, one tablespoon extract lemon, three tablespoons ground cinnamon, one of cloves, two of allspice, one nutmeg, one gill of brandy. Flour enough to make a good stiff batter. Then add two pounds currants, two pounds seeded raisins, chopped; five quarters of citron. Bake like any fruit cake. Instead of the gill of brandy, one can use strong coffee, if desired. NO. 73. FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. G.W. Wood, 1023 South Olive street, Los Angeles.--Three cups light-risen bread dough that has been kneaded once, two cups sugar, one cup butter, four eggs, one pound seeded raisins, one pound currants, one teaspoon each of ground cloves, allspice and cinnamon, one whole nutmeg, one teaspoon soda. Wash raisins and currants and dry them. Beat whites of eggs to stiff froth; beat yolks well; cream butter and sugar together; add to the dough (except eggs.) Knead and mix all together with the hands thoroughly. Lastly, add the eggs, mixing well, but light. Now turn cake into a milk pan, lined with paper, well buttered, and set in a warm place to rise. When light, cover with another pan and bake in a moderate oven. Frost when cool and you will have an excellent fruit cake, and also an inexpensive one. NO. 74. GILT-EDGE CAKE. Mrs. J.A. Manker, Highland Park, Cal.--One cup sugar, yolks of two well-beaten eggs, one tablespoon of butter, three-fourths cup water, one teaspoon vanilla, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder. Bake in three layers. For filling: Take three-fourths cup sugar, enough water to dissolve sugar; let boil until it threads, then pour in the whites of two well-beaten eggs; beat until stiff; add two large tablespoons of chopped seeded raisins and one of citron. NO. 75. JAM CAKE. Mrs. R.H. Smith, 1827 Reid street, Los Angeles--Six eggs beaten separately, two cups sugar, one cup butter, one cup buttermilk, two cups raspberry jam, four and one-fourth cups flour, one-half pound chopped citron, two teaspoons soda in milk, one teaspoon baking powder in flour, one tablespoon cinnamon one tablespoon nutmeg, one teaspoon each of cloves and allspice. Cream the butter and sugar, and buttermilk and flour, add all other ingredients. Bake in layers. Frosting for cake: Four cups brown sugar, three-fourths cup butter, one-half cup sweet cream; cook until thick and put between layers. NO. 76. JAM CAKE. Mrs. M.A. Collins, Ontario, Cal.--Two cups sugar, five cups flour, one cup sour cream, one cup butter, one cup jelly, one cup jam, two teaspoons soda, one teaspoon baking powder, one tablespoon cloves, one of cinnamon, one of allspice, six eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately. Bake in layers and put together with icing. This is enough for two cakes. NO. 77. JAPANESE CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. R.H. Smith, 1327 Reid street, Los Angeles--One-half cup grated chocolate; one and one-half cups granulated sugar, one-half cup butter, four eggs, one and three-fourths cups flour, one teaspoon soda, one cup sweet milk. Cook one-half cup of the milk with the chocolate until thick as cream; cream butter and sugar, add yolks of eggs beaten light, then add milk, flour and whites of eggs, a little at a time. Last add the chocolate and teaspoon of vanilla. Bake in layers. NO. 78. MOTHER'S FAVORITE CAKE. Mrs. Ida A. Sherman, Chicago, Ill.--One and a half cups sugar, one-half cup butter, one egg, one cup milk, two and a half cups sifted flour, two and a half teaspoons baking powder. Flavor with lemon and vanilla mixed. Bake in four layers. Icing and cocoa-nut: Two cups granulated sugar, two-thirds cup boiling water; boil until thick, pour over white of one egg beaten light; flavor with almond or vanilla. Spread between layers and on top. NO. 79. POTATO CAKE. Miss Minnie Neal. 3711 Wesley avenue, Los Angeles--Two cups granulated sugar, one cup butter, four eggs, one-half cup sweet milk, two and one-fourth cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one cup mashed potatoes, one cup ground chocolate, one cup chopped walnuts, one cup chopped raisins, one and one-half teaspoons cinnamon, one teaspoon allspice, one teaspoon cloves. Beat sugar and butter well together and add the eggs, which should be beaten until light. Stir in the milk and then the flour with the baking powder sifted with it. Next add the potatoes, which should be cooked and well mashed and let stand until cold. Stir in the chocolate and the ground spices, then the nuts and raisins, which must be chopped very fine. Stir the cake a few minutes and bake in a loaf in a moderate oven. NO. 80. POTATO CAKE. Mrs. George Alfred Miller, No. 18 Navy street, Ocean Park, Cal.--One cup of butter, two cups sugar, two cups flour, one cup mashed potatoes, one-half cup sweet milk, four eggs, one cup grated sweet chocolate, one cup chopped walnuts, two teaspoons baking powder, one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon cinnamon, a little nutmeg. Bake in loaf. NO. 81. POUND CAKE. Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--One pound butter, one pound sugar, one pound flour, one pound seeded raisins, whole; large teaspoon essence lemon; half teaspoon extract almond; one and half teaspoons baking powder, eight eggs. NO. 82. RIBBON CAKE. Lizzie A. Graves. Ontario, Cal.--One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, two cups flour, one-half cup milk, three eggs, two teaspoons baking powder. Take out a cup of dough and add to it two tablespoons of molasses, one-third of a teaspoon each of cloves, cinnamon, mace and allspice. Bake in three tins; two light and one dark. Place together immediately after they are done, the dark in the center. NO. 83. SCRIPTURAL CAKE. Harriet Adams-Chambers, Prospect Park, Cal.-- Four and one-half cups of I Kings, iv:22. One cup of Judges, v:25; last clause. Two cups of I Samuel, xxx:12. Two cups of Nahum, iii:12. Two cups of Numbers, xvii:8. Three tablespoons of I Samuel, xiv:26. A pinch of Leviticus, ii:13. Six Jeremiah, xvii:11. Half cup of Judges, iv:19; last clause. Two teaspoons of Amos, iv:5. Season to taste of II Chronicles, ix:9. Key to the above: Four and one-half cups fine flour, one cup butter, two cups sugar, two cups raisins, two cups figs, two cups almonds, three tablespoonfuls honey, a pinch of salt, six eggs, half cup milk, two teaspoonfuls of yeast powder; season to taste with spices. NO. 84. SPANISH CAKE. Mrs. R.B. Watson, Bryson Villa, Sixty-eighth street, Los Angeles.--Two tablespoons melted butter, one cup sugar, half cup milk, yolks of three eggs, one and seven-eighths cups of flour, one and one-half teaspoons baking powder; one-half teaspoon cinnamon; cream the butter, add gradually the sugar, then the egg yolks beaten until light colored; sift together thoroughly the flour, baking powder and cinnamon, and add alternately with the milk to the first mixture. Bake in layers; spread with CARAMEL FROSTING: One and one-half cups brown sugar, three-fourths cup thin cream, one teaspoon butter. Cook until a ball is formed, when the mixture is tried in cold water. Beat until ready to spread. NO. 85. SPONGE CAKE. (A very old recipe.) Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--Five eggs, half pound of sugar, quarter pound flour. Beat yolks well, add sugar. Beat whites fifteen minutes (if egg beater is used less time is required to beat them stiff;) add to yolks and sugar, then add flour gently. NO. 86. WALNUT CAKE. Mrs. R.B. Watson, Bryson Villa, Sixty-eighth street, Los Angeles.--Half cup butter, one cup sugar, yolks of three eggs, and whites of two, well beaten; half cup milk, one and a half cups flour, one and one-half teaspoons baking powder, three-fourths cup walnut meat, broken in pieces. Cream the butter, add gradually the sugar, then the walnut meat, eggs and milk. Sift together thoroughly the flour and baking powder; add and beat vigorously. Bake in a sheet forty-five minutes. Cover with WHITE MOUNTAIN CREAM : One cup sugar, one-third cup water, white of one egg, half teaspoon vanilla. Boil the sugar and water together until it threads. Pour the syrup slowly into the beaten egg white. Beat until cool enough to spread, then add the flavoring. NO. 87. --WATERMELON CAKE. Mrs. George W. Throop, R.R. No. 3, Station K, Los Angeles,--For the white part stir to a cream two cups sugar with one of butter, then stir in one cup sweet milk; mix two teaspoons cream of tartar and one of soda with three and one-half cups flour; then stir in the other ingredients and add the beaten whites of eight eggs. For the red part, take one cup red sugar and one-half cup butter; stir red to a cream, then add one one-third cup sweet milk, two cups flour in which has been mixed one teaspoon cream of tartar, and one-half teaspoon soda; then add the beaten whites of four eggs and a cup of small seedless raisins. Have a round baking pan; put a layer of white dough in the bottom of the pan; then add all the red in the middle, and then the rest of the white dough around the sides and the top. Bake in a moderate oven. NO. 88. WHITE CAKE, with Fondant Icing. Mrs. Wm. J. Magee, 122 N. Johnston st., Los Angeles.--One-half cup butter, one cup sugar, beaten to a cream, two- thirds cup of sweet milk, two cups finely sifted flour, one heaping teaspoon baking powder. Add the whites of three eggs, beaten stiff; flavor with almond, ice with FONDANT ICING: One cup granulated sugar, one-half cup boiling water; boil until it forms a soft ball dripped in ice water. Pour on a cold platter. When nearly cold stir with a wooden spoon, until white and firm; flavor with vanilla. NO. 89. WHITE CAKE, with Pink Strawberry or Raspberry or Raspberry Icing. Nina Bell Sherman, Chicago, Ill.--One cup of sugar, one-half butter, one-half sweet milk, whites of two eggs, one teaspoon cream of tartar, one-half teaspoon soda, two and a half of sifted flour. Bake in a square tin. When cold cover with the icing made as follows: One-half teaspoon of almond or lemon extract to flavor cake, one-half cup juice of strawberry or raspberry, one teaspoon sugar; strain; add powdered sugar to make stiff; spread on top and side. NO. 90. WHITE CAKE, with Yellow Frosting. Lizzie A. Graves, Ontario, Cal.--One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half cup milk, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, whites of three eggs, well beaten. Make three layers. Frosting: Yolks of three eggs, one cup sugar, one-half teaspoon vanilla. Beat fifteen minutes. NO. 91. WHITE CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. L.M. Ealey, Clearwater, Cal.-- Whites of three eggs, one and one-half teacups sugar, two-thirds cup butter, one cup milk, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one-half teaspoon lemon. Filling: One cup white sugar, five tablespoons milk. Boil five minutes. Beat until cold; add one-fourth cake of baker's chocolate. NO. 92. WHITE FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. J.A. Manker, 125 N. ave. 57, Highland Park, Cal.--Two-thirds cup butter, two cups sugar one cup sweet milk, three cups sifted flour, one cup stoned raisins, chopped; two teaspoons baking powder, whites of four eggs, one nutmeg, grated. NO. 93. WORLD'S FAIR CAKE. Mrs. George Alfred Miller, No. 18, Navy st, Ocean Park, Cal.--One-half cup butter, one and one-half cups sugar, rubbed to a cream, three eggs, beaten, whites and yolks separately; one large teaspoon baking powder, two cups flour, one-half cup sweet milk, six tablespoons unsweetened chocolate, three tablespoons granulated sugar dissolved in three tablespoons scalded milk. Add to cake while hot. Bake in a rather shallow pan in a steady oven about forty minutes. CARAMEL: Two cups sugar, three-fourths cup sweet milk, butter size of an egg; boil fifteen minutes or until it threads from a spoon; remove from stove, add one tablespoon vanilla and beat until thick and creamy. Spread on cake while warm. NO. 94. ANGEL FOOD LAYER CAKE. Miss Josephine Muller, San Gabriel, Cal.--One cup of fine granulated sugar, one-fourth cup butter, one and one-half cups flour, two eggs, one-half cup sweet milk, vanilla and one teaspoon baking powder. Filling: Cut into small pieces one-third of a pound of pink angel food or marsh mallows, and dissolve in one pint of sweet cream over night. Next morning whip and spread between layers when cake is cold. NO. 95. FRUIT CAKE. Mrs. Mattie Armstrong, 1442 Sixth street, San Bernardino, Cal.--One pound seeded raisins, one pound cleaned currants, one-half pound pressed figs, one-fourth pound chopped citron, one and one-half cups granulated sugar, one teacup New Orleans molasses, three eggs, one-half cup melted butter, one teacup buttermilk with heaping teaspoon soda beaten into it well until dissolved, one teaspoon, level full, each; ground cinnamon, cloves, ginger, one-half nutmeg, grated, one-fourth teaspoon salt. Wash and flour raisins and currants, chop citron and figs and put all fruit in last thing; flour enough to make real stiff dough; bake very slowly. NO. 98. MARSHMALLOW CAKE. Mrs. J. Harlan Purdy, 2678 Mission street, San Francisco, Cal.--One and one-half cups sugar, two-thirds cup butter, two-thirds cup milk, two and one-half cups flour sifted with two teaspoons of baking powder. The whites of three eggs beaten very stiff and added last. Put this cake together in the usual way and bake in three layers in square tins. Let the cake become cold and then spread with the following icing: Put in a stew pan two cups of sugar and two-thirds cup of hot water, allow this to boil until beginning to rope, then remove from the fire and add one half pound pink marshmallow (the best quality) and stir briskly until a creamy mass, while stirring add one teaspoon of rose flavoring and two of three drops of fruit coloring to give a dainty pink color which is desired. Allow this to become quite cold before spreading on the cake. Should this syrup boil too long, it will be too thick to spread nicely; then a very little hot water may be added while the icing is still hot. The entire cake must be covered with this icing. NO. 97. POTATO CARAMEL CAKE. Miss Josephine Muller, San Gabriel, Cal.--Two-thirds cup butter, two cups granulated sugar, two cups flour, two cups hot mashed (white) potatoes, one-half cup sweet milk, one cup grated chocolate, two cups chopped walnuts, four eggs, two teaspoons baking powder, three-fourths teaspoon ground cloves, one teaspoon sinnamon, three-fourths teaspoon ground nutmeg. Cream butter and sugar and add yolks of eggs beaten light. Add milk, mashed potatoes, spices and chocolate. Sift baking powder well with the flour. Beat the whites of eggs stiff. Put in flour, then whites of eggs, alternately until both are used, one teaspoonful of vanilla, a pinch of salt and lastly nuts. NO. 8. ADIRONDACK SPONGE CAKE. (The best ever.) Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--Five eggs, one and three-quarters cups sugar, one and three-quarters cups flour, sifted three times before measuring; 3 tablespoons lemon juice. Beat yolks of eggs very thoroughly, adding lemon and sugar. Beat whites, not very stiff. Put all together lightly, flour and whites. Cover with brown paper. Bake in pan about 2 1/2x8x3 inches, in moderate oven; time forty minutes. Do not eat until second day. Break, not cut; very tender. NO. 65. CAKE CROQUETTES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Roll fine sufficient stale cake to make one pint of crumbs; cover with one large cup milk and let soak half an hour. Put it in a saucepan over fire and stir until mixture is boiling hot, then add beaten yolks of two eggs. As soon as the eggs are well stirred in remove the pan from fire and flavor with one teaspoonful vanilla. Turn on a shallow dish to cool; when cold make the mixture into balls; dip in beaten eggs and then in bread crumbs; fry in hot fat; drain on brown paper; serve very hot with powdered sugar and sherry. NO. 9. CHOCOLATE CAKE. Mrs. E. A. Stickney, 1028 South Hill street.--One cup butter, two cups sugar, one cup sweet milk, three cups flour, whites of seven eggs, three teaspoons baking powder. Bake in layers, for the filling; Whites of two eggs, one section of chocolate, sufficient sugar for the frosting between and to cover over the top of cake. NO. 10. CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE. Mrs. T.S. Home, 434 Towne Avenue. --Two cups sugar, half cup butter, three eggs, one cup milk, 3 cups flour, two teaspoonfuls baking powder, half teaspoonful vanila esence, half teaspoonful lemon essence. Filling: Half cake chocklate, grated and dissolved in a small cup of milk; let it boil; then add half cup of sugar, small piece of butter, a little salt and flavoring. NO. 11. DEVIL CAKE. Mrs. W.O. Chapman, 1330 West Sixteenth street, Los Angeles.--For the custard part one cup of grated chocolate, one cup of brown sugar, one-half cup of sweet milk, yolk of one egg and a teaspoon vanilla; stir all together in a granite saucepan; cook slowly and set away to cool. For the cake part, one cup brown sugar, two cups flour, one-half cup butter, half cup sweet milk and two eggs. Cream the butter, sugar and yolks of eggs, add milk, sifted flour and whites of eggs beaten stiff, and two teaspoons baking powder; beat all together, then stir in the custard part; bake in jelly tins. FILLING: Two cups white sugar, ten tablespoons hot water, one quarter teaspoon cream tartar; boil until thick like candy. Put thirty-two marshmallows in, boil up again, then stir in beaten whites of three eggs; when almost cool stir in one cup chopped walnuts; beat until cold, then spread between layers. NO. 12. DROP CAKES, OR FIVE O'CLOCK TEA. Mrs. T.F. McFarland, Hueneme, Cal.--One cup granulated sugar, two-thirds cup butter, two cups flour, two eggs, one pound chopped English walnuts, one pound raisins, one small teaspoon cinnamon, one small teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon soda dissolved in about a tablespoon of hot water. Drop by small teaspoonfuls (an inch apart) on buttered tins, and bake. They are almost as rich as fruit cake, and improve with age. NO. 13. --GINGER CAKE. Mrs. T.S. Home, 434 Towne avenue--One cup butter, one and one-half cups brown sugar, three eggs, one and one-half cups New Orleans molasses, three tablespoons ginger, one and one-half cups buttermilk (or sour milk;) three small teaspoonfuls soda sifted with four cups of flour. Bake in a moderate oven. This measure makes three good-sized loaves. (This recipe in use in our family for fifty years.) NO. 14. MINNEHAHA LAYER CAKE. Mrs. T.S. Home, 434 Towne avenue--One cup of sugar, one-half cup butter, two eggs, one-half cup sweet milk, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one-half teaspoon vanilla, one-half teaspoon lemon essence. Filling: One cup sugar and one tablespoonful corn starch mixed thoroughly. Pour over this one cup boiling water. Boil to desired consistency, then add one-half cup raisins, seeded and chopped fine, and one-half cup chopped English walnut meats. NO. 146. SIMNEL CAKE. Gertrude Williams, 525 Cypress avenue, Pasadena, Cal.--Five pounds flour, two pounds currants, three pounds sultana raisins, one and one-half pounds butter, two pounds sugar (brown or white,) three-quarters pound mixed almonds, one-half ounce cinnamon, a little mace, one-half ounce soda, seven eggs, one-half pound candied lemon peel. Mix flour and rub butter well first, then add spice and sugar, then fruit. Let it stand and next morning add the eggs, milk and soda, just a little milk, about a gill; when nearly baked paint them over with two eggs, a little sugar and milk, also a little molasses; then put them into oven again (a cool oven is required.) This makes two or more large cakes. This cake must be rolled about two inches thick, made round, higher in the middle and notched around edges. NO. 150. SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. E.R. Bishop, McKittrick, Cal.--Four eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately till very stiff; add one teaspoon lemon juice or vinegar to the yolks; one cup sugar to the whites; mix all and add one and one-fourth cups flour, flavor with vanilla. As no baking powder is used the success of the cake depends on the thoroughness with which the eggs are beaten. NO. 15. STRIPED CAKE. Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1023 South Hill street--Two cups white sugar, two-thirds cup butter, one cup sweet milk, three cups flour (sifted.) three eggs, salt, one teaspoon cream of tartar, half teaspoon soda, lemon flavoring. Put one-half the above in two square pans and bake; to the remainder add one cup chopped raisins, one tablespoon molasses, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon cloves, one tablespoon flavor, a very little more soda added. Bake in the same pans, put them together alternately with jelly between or any other preparation. (Original.) NO. 18. TANGLEWOOD LAYER CAKE. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.-- Whites of three eggs, one cup sugar, one large tablespoon butter, two-thirds teaspoons baking powder; flavor with lemon and vanilla mixed. Filling: One cup powdered sugar mixed with a little sweet milk, one-half cup chopped raisins, one-half cup chopped nuts of any kind; flavor with vanilla. Frosting: One-half cup of powdered sugar wet with a little sweet milk; cover top with chopped nuts. NO. 16. VELVET SPONGE CAKE. Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1028 South Hill street--(Splendid.) Two cups white sugar, six eggs, yolks and whites to be beaten separately; the whites of three save for the frosting; one cup boiling hot water, two and one-half cups flour, one tablespoon baking powder in the flour. Beat the yolks a little, add the sugar, beat fifteen minutes; add three beaten whites and cup of boiling water just before the flour; lemon flavoring to taste. Bake in two long pans, putting between the icing made of three whites and six spoons of sugar to one white of egg. NO. 17. WHITE LAYER CAKE. E.A. Anthony, 919 West Adams street-- Whites of eight eggs, beaten to a froth; add two cups sugar, beat to a cream; one cup butter creamed. Stir into this three cups sifted flour and one cup sweet milk. After mixing well add the whites of eggs and sugar. Add two teaspoons Royal baking powder in half cup of corn starch. Sift this into the mixture, and flavor with orange extract or rose. This cake is altogether in the mixture. I sometimes take half the quantity and make into two layers, instead of four layers as the above-named quantities make. Be careful not to bake too long, 20 or 25 minutes will do. I sometimes use milk icing between the layers, but I like better to take two tablespoons cold water thickened with confectioner's sugar until stiff enough; flavor and before it gets hard split marshmallows or English walnuts and decorate. I consider this the finest cake I ever made when mixed properly. For milk icing stir one cup granulated sugar and quarter cup milk together over the fire until it comes to a boil; then boil five minutes without stirring, then stir until it becomes creamy. COOKIES AND DOUGHNUTS. NO. 1. ALMOND FINGERS. Mrs. J.M. Reed, 5322 Monte Vista street, Highland Park, Cal.--Cut stale bread into pieces four inches long, one inch wide and half an inch thick; dip them in orange juice, then into minced almonds, then in beaten eggs, then in bread crumbs. Lay these pieces in the frying basket that has been dipped in the hot lard and fry in deep fat; when brown, lift the pieces to drain on paper; arrange on a folded napkin and sift powdered sugar over them. NO. 2. ALMOND JUMBLES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One pound sugar. half pound flour, half pound butter, one teaspoon sour milk, five eggs, two teaspoons extract white rose, three-quarters pound almonds, blanched and chopped fine, and one teaspoon soda. Mix well, adding the whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth last. Drop on buttered paper and bake quietly. NO. 3. APPLE FRITTERS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One cup sweet milk, two cups flour, two eggs, one teaspoon baking powder, one tablespoon sugar, a pinch of salt. Heat the milk and add it slowly to the yolks of the eggs and sugar; add the flour and whites of eggs; stir well; add thin slices of sour apples; drop from spoon into boiling hot lard, or any grease prepared; fry light brown; serve with lemon sauce. Peach and pineapple fritters can be made in the same way. NO. 4. BANBURY'S. Mrs. F.S. Webster, Imperial, Cal.--Rub two-thirds cup lard into two cups flour, small one-half teaspoon salt, nearly one-half cup water. Mix well together. Roll as for pie crust and cut with a quart can cover. Filling: One cup seeded raisins, one cup sugar, seven Smyrna figs, and rind of one lemon. Rich pie crust can be used instead of the above receipt. Chop raisins and figs; mix with the other ingredients and put a good-sized teaspoonful on each round of paste. Cut two rounds, wet and stick together with filling between, so as not to run out. Cut a small hole in the top. NO. 5. CHEESE STRAWS. Mrs. C.C. Hall Hollywood, Cal.--Three tablespoons (heaped) grated cheese, three tablespoons (scant) sifted flour; mix and wet with one tablespoon of melted butter, one tablespoon cold water, one yolk of egg, salt and red pepper to taste. Make dough very stiff; roll as thin as pie crust, cut in one-quarter-inch stripes and bake in a moderate oven for fifteen minutes. NO. 6. CHINESE CAKES. Mrs. T.H. Sullivan, San Jacinto, Cal.--Beat the yolks of six eggs well, and to each yolk add a tablespoon of sugar and one large tablespoon of flour to each spoon of sugar. Flavor with lemon extract and one teaspoon of ground cinnamon. Drop them on a hot pan, well greased, and bake in a quick oven. Make them small. They look pretty with other kinds of cake, and are very nice. NO. 7. COCOANUT PUFFS. Mrs. Ernest Ecclestone, Riverside, Cal.--Beat stiffly the whites of three eggs, adding one cup powdered sugar. Heat the bowl over steam until a slight crust forms on bottom and sides; take from the steam and add one teaspoon of corn starch and two cups of dessicated cocoanut. Drop in small pieces on buttered tins, and bake quickly until light brown. NO. 8. COFFEE CAKE. Mrs. A.R. Schlernitzauer, 1037 Bartlett street, Los Angeles.--In the morning take a compressed yeast cake and three-fourths of a quart of warm water, and set a yeast; when it is raised, take three-fourths of a quart of milk and set a sponge. Set the yeast at 5 and sponge at 8 in the evening. In the morning, put in three-fourths of a teacup of melted lard, a handful of salt, and about four or five handfuls of sugar, two eggs and flour to make it stiff. Let it raise, not too stiff, for about an hour. Then roll it out and put in pans. Let it raise an hour again. Then it is ready to bake. Before putting it in the oven, take a little butter, and render it a little; put in a saucepan; add a handful of sugar and a cooking spoonful of flour and a little cinnamon. Spread on the cake. When baked, sprinkle with powdered sugar. This makes nice doughnuts, too. NO. 9. COFFEE CAKES. Mrs. D. Brooks, 123 West Thirty-second street, Los Angeles.--Sift one tablespoon sugar, one-half teaspoon salt, two teaspoons baking powder, with two cups flour. Work in one and one-half tablespoons butter and add milk to make the consistency of biscuit dough. Roll on floured board three-quarters inch thick, and cut with small biscuit cutter. Put in a greased pan, brush over well with milk and sprinkle with sugar and a little cinnamon. Dot each cake with a tiny piece of butter. Bake in a quick oven. Eat hot. Very nice in morning with coffee. NO. 10. COOKIES. (Original.) Mrs. George F. Rathburn, 779 Kohler street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Two-thirds cup butter, one cup sugar, mixed well together; two eggs, well beaten (or four or five yolks,) one-half cup milk, two teaspoons vanilla, two teaspoons baking powder, flour enough to make a soft dough. Bake in quick oven. NO. 11. COOKIES. Mrs. Emma Kegerreis, Moneta, Cal.--Two cups sugar, one cup butter, four eggs, two heaping teaspoons baking powder, six tablespoons sweet milk, flour to make a soft dough; flavor with lemon and roll thin. (Will keep for weeks if there are no boys or girls around.) NO. 12. COOKIES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Two cups sugar, one cup sour cream, one-half cup butter, one teaspoon soda, one small teaspoon salt, flour to stiffen. NO. 13. CREAM COOKIES. Mrs. Lee R. Matthews, 753 W. Crow Ave., Pomona, Cal.--Cream one cup of butter with two cups sugar, add beaten yolks of two eggs, one cup of sweet milk, next the beaten whites of eggs. Use just enough flour to make a dough that can be handled, in which mix three teaspoons of baking-powder and a teaspoon of nutmeg. Bake in hot oven. Can be varied by adding two tablespoons of strained honey; or for cocoanut cookies, one-half cup of cocoanut. Very fine. NO. 14. DANISH COOKIES. Mrs. S. Moe, 162 W Thirty-eighth street, Los Angeles.--Two cups flour, one-half cup sugar, one-half cup butter and one teaspoon baking powder; rub all together with the hands like for pie crust, then put in the beaten yolks of three eggs and cream enough to make a soft dough. It will take a little over half a cup of cream. Pinch off a piece of dough the size of a walnut and roll it out with the hands until it forms a long strip the thickness of a finger then form a ring of it about the size of common cookies; then put some granulated sugar in a saucer and dip the ring in the sugar and press lightly with the finger tips all around so the sugar will stick on; then put in buttered pans and bake like other cookies. Put in any flavoring desired. NO. 15. LEMON COOKIES. Miss Evelyn Dooly, No. 623 Court street, Los Angeles,--Four eggs, one and one-half cups sugar, one cup butter, salt, one teaspoonful soda, three-eighths cup boiling water, one lemon, using the grated rind and juice. Put together properly, not mixing too stiff, roll out and bake in a hot oven. NO. 16. LEMON COOKIES. Miss C. Hornstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Beat six eggs, whites and yolks separately; one cup of butter, three cups sugar, one teaspoon extract of lemon, flour to make stiff enough to mold. Roll thin, bake in quick oven. NO. 17. OATMEAL COOKIES. (Economical and good.) Mrs. C.M. West, 619 W. Palm avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Four cups dry rolled oats, one cup wheat flour, three-fourths cup sugar, one cup shortening-drippings and lard or butter. Knead the shortening into the dry ingredients as for pie crust and moisten with just barely enough cold water to roll out. Roll very thin and bake in quick oven. This makes a big batch and will take the place of doughnuts and pastry. NO. 18. PEANUT COOKIES. Mrs. Victor A. Costa, 1161 East Eleventh street, Los Angeles.--Cream two tablespoons butter and one cup of sugar; add three beaten eggs, one-fourth teaspoon salt, four tablespoons milk; add two cups chopped peanuts and flour enough to roll thin. Moderate oven to bake light brown. NO. 19. CREAM CAKES. Ada C. Whitman, 3131 Baldwin street, Los Angeles.--Pour one cup boiling water into one-half cup butter, then place it on the stove in a stew pan, and bring it to a boil; add one cup sifted flour and let it boil five minutes; stir all the time. Then add three well-beaten eggs and a little soda. Drop on buttered pan in twelve spoonfuls. Cream for filling: One-half cup sugar, three tablespoons flour, one egg. Stir this into one cup of boiling milk; add pinch of salt and stir until thick. Flavor. NO. 20. CREAM FRITTERS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Stir into one pint of sweet milk one and one-half pints flour which has been previously mixed with two heaping teaspoons baking powder; add six eggs well beaten, one teaspoon of salt and lastly one pint of good sweet rich cream. Drop this mixture from a tablespoon into hot lard and fry same as doughnuts. NO. 21. CUP CAKE. Miss C.L. Pooley, 1826 South Hope street, Los Angeles.--Cream together one cup of butter and two of sugar; when white like hard sauce add the beaten yolks of four eggs, mix all well. Now gradually beat in three cups of sifted flour, in which two teaspoons of baking powder have been mixed; add a very scant cup of milk, using it alternately with the flour till the whole is a stiff batter. Then add the whites of the eggs beaten until they will not slip from the dish; stir lightly in, and the cake mixture is made. NO. 22. DOUGHNUTS. Mrs. J. Hollywood, 230 Henrietta Court, Pasadena, Cal.--One cup sugar, one cup milk, two eggs, three tablespoons of melted butter, three teaspoons baking powder, nutmeg and a little salt, and flour enough to roll nicely. Have your lard hot and cut with a round cutter with a hole in it. Have some powdered sugar in a paper bag and shake them in it. NO. 23. DROP DOUGHNUTS. Mrs. Emma Kegerreis, Moneta, Cal.--One and a half cups sugar, one cup buttermilk, one-half cup thick sour cream, two eggs, level teaspoon soda; dissolve soda in sour milk; stir in flour to make a stiff batter; drop from spoon into hot, rise over night. In the morning roll (do not lard) They are delicious. NO. 24. OLD-FASHIONED DOUGHNUTS. Mrs. A. F. Johnston, Santa Monica, Cal.--The evening before prepare a spone as for light bread using one quart. Beat light two eggs, not separating the parts; add two cups of pulverized sugar and a teaspoon of salt and a slice of butter, one-eighth of a pound in weight. Beat all together as for cake, adding a little nutmeg and cinnamon. Now add a cupful of warm (not hot) milk to the sponge and gently stir. Then add the creamed mixture gradually and beat thoroughly well. Have your flour slightly warm. Stir in it or seive through a teaspoonful (not heaping) of baking soda. Mix flour in lightly and knead well and place where it will keep warm to rise. It will be ready after breakfast to roll out. If not wait till light. It will not sour. When you are ready to cut, put your pan on the stove containing about two pounds of good lard, melt and beat slowly. Try first with a bit of dough. If rises at once and is a pretty brown the fat in right. Do not crowd the pan. As you lift out powder freely with pulverized sugar. NO. 25. RAISED DOUGHNUTS. Mrs. George F. Rathbun, 779 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--One cup sugar and two eggs well beaten together; half pint lard, melted; one-half cup sweet milk, warm; one-half cup water, warm; half yeast cake. Add enough flour to make as thick as bread sponge, and set in a warm place to raise a half a day. Then add a little salt, cinnamon and a half teaspoonful of soda and enough flour to make a soft dough, and let knead) about three-fourths of an inch thick and cut like biscuits (about the size of a silver dollar) and let raise till very light. Fry in equal parts hot lard and beef suet. When cool roll in powdered sugar. NO. 26. GINGERBREAD. Mrs. George Alfred Miller, No. 18 Navy street, Ocean Park, Cal.--One cup sugar, cup N. O. molasses, three cups flour, sifted; half cup lard, half cup butter, one cup boiling water, one teaspoon each of soda, ginger and cinnamon, two eggs. Bake slowly one hour. NO. 27. GINGERBREAD. Mrs. George E. Decker, box 612, Pasadena, Cal.--Two eggs, one cup molasses, two cups flour, half cup brown sugar, one tablespoon butter, one of lard, one teaspoon soda dissolved in one cup of boiling water; one teaspoon of ginger, a little cinnamon and allspice. Melt butter and lard, then add sugar, eggs, molasses and flour, then spices, adding soda the last. Bake in large shallow tin in moderately hot oven. NO. 28. GINGERBREAD. Elizabeth M. Bugbee, 2915 South Figueroa street, Los Angeles.--Half cup butter, half cup lard, mixed to a cream; one cup brown sugar, creamed with above; one cup dark molasses, in which has been mixed half teaspoon soda; one cup sweet milk, ( sour milk may be used;) four eggs beaten separately; three to four cups flour sifted with two teaspoons baking powder; two teaspoons ginger, one even teaspoon cinnamon, one-third even teaspoon each of cloves, allspice and mace; a little nutmeg. Mix thoroughly in the order given, whites of eggs folded in last. Bake either in loaf or gem tins. This recipe makes about two dozen small cakes. NO. 29. HOT WATER GINGERBREAD. Mrs. Clara Moulton, Loara, Cal.--One cup New Orleans molasses, two cups pastry flour, or three-quarters cup of bread flour; half cup brown sugar, one scant teaspoon soda, two tablespoons butter melted, half teaspoon salt, half cup boiling water, one tablespoon ginger, one egg, lightly beaten. Sift dry ingredients all together. Pour molasses into mixing bowl and stir in sugar and melted butter; add dry ingredients and hot water; lastly egg beaten very lightly. Bake in dripping pan in moderate oven thirty minutes. Serve hot with fresh unsalted butter, if so desired. This is excellent. NO. 30. SOFT GINGERBREAD. F. M. F., Monrovia, Cal.--Half cup sugar, half cup butter, one cup molasses, two teaspoons ginger, one teaspoon soda, one cup boiling water on soda, two and half cups flour, two well beaten eggs, put in last. NO. 31. GINGERSNAPS. (Original.) Mrs. George F. Rathbun, 779 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--One cup molasses, one cup lard, mix well together; four tablespoons water, four tablespoons sugar, one teaspoon soda, level; three teaspoons ginger; flour enough to make reasonably stiff. Bake in quick oven. NO. 32. HARRIS CINNAMON ROLL. Mrs. D. Hall, 1369 Alvarado street, Los Angeles.--Roll a piece of pie pastry the size of a saucer, spread generously with butter, sprinkle with cinnamon; also sprinkle generously with moist sugar, roll up, pinch edges and bake light brown. NO. 33. HERMIT. Mrs. J. Hollywood, 280 Henrietta Court, Pasadena, Cal.--Two cups granulated sugar, one scant cup butter, creamed together; two eggs, one cup sour milk, one level teaspoon soda, dissolved; one teaspoon cinnamon; one half teaspoon cloves, one cup of raisins, one cup of currants, nutmeg, four cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder. Grease the tins with lard; drop in large spoonful, do not level; bake in a quick oven. NO. 34. HICKORYNUT MACAROONS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--To hickorynuts pounded fine add mixed ground allspice and nutmeg; make a frosting as for cakes; stir in the meats and spices, putting in enough only to make it convenient to handle. Flour the hands and make the mixture into balls about the size of a nutmeg; lay them on tins well buttered, giving room to spread. Bake in a quick oven. Use washed butter for greasing tins. NO. 35. NO MATTER. M.F.B., 764 Towne avenue, Los Angeles.--Make a baking powder biscuit dough. Divide in three parts and roll thin, each the size of a tea plate. Fry in hot fat. Drain on paper to remove superfluous grease. While yet hot, cover one of the pieces with well-sweetened apple sauce, flavored with nutmeg. On this place the other layers with apple sauce between. Other sauce or fresh berries may be substituted for the apple sauce. This is a delicious, old-fashioned dish. NO. 36. ORANGE CRULLERS. Mrs. S.B. Parish, San Bernardino, Cal.--Beat four eggs until light, then beat in one cup of sugar. Add the grated rind of an orange, and half a nutmeg, grated; half a teaspoon of salt and a gill of sweet milk. Stir in gradually one quart of flour into which two teaspoons of baking powder are sifted. Roll thin, cut with a small round cutter. On one piece put a saltspoon of orange marmalade, cover with another piece of dough cut the same size as the first. Press the edges firmly together; fry in hot lard and when cold roll in powdered sugar. NO. 37. ORANGE ROLL. Mrs. L.A. Squires, Claremont, Cal.--One quart flour, three teaspoons baking powder, one teaspoon salt, two large tablespoons of butter, milk enough to make a dough as for biscuit: Roll out about half an inch in thickness. Have ready four large oranges, pared and taken out in sections, rejecting all the skin possible; add a few bits of butter and half cup of sugar, roll up and pinch the ends well together, and put in a deep baking dish; put bits of butter over it and sprinkle another half cup of sugar on top; add half a teacup of water and bake about one-half hour or less if oven is very hot. (Delicious. A Florida receipt.) NO. 38. PEANUT KISSES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Shell and remove the brown skin from one quart of roasted peanuts; put through a nut grinder, or pound to a paste; add one-half pound powdered sugar and the unbeaten whites of four eggs. Beat all well together; drop by teaspoonfuls on paper; make in moderate oven until a golden brown. NO. 39. POPCORN BALLS. Mrs. A.R. Schlernitzauer, 1037 Bartlet street, Los Angeles.--Take a kettle, put in a tablespoon of lard, render it. Then put in three handfuls of rice popcorn. Put on the lid and shake well over the fire until done. Fill three times this way; it will make twelve balls. Now take two cups granulated sugar, and three cups water, put in a pan, and let come to a candy; put over the corn while hot; butter your hands, mold into balls. NO. 40. SAND TARTS. Mrs. S. Moe, 162 West Thirty-eighth street, Los Angeles--One cup sugar, one cup butter, four tablespoons water, and flour enough to roll out thin; cut out with cookie cutter. Beat the whites of two eggs and stir in two tablespoons of sugar; put a teaspoon of this in the center of each cookie and then sprinkle a little sugar and cinnamon on top of the cookie and the white dot. NO. 41. SAND TARTS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Beat one pound granulated sugar and one-half pound butter together; add the yolks of three eggs beaten to a cream, then the whites of two eggs well beaten. Mix all well together; add enough flour to make a stiff paste; roll out on a baking board; cut with a round cutter and bake in a moderate oven until a light brown. NO. 42. SCOTCH MACAROONS. Mrs. Lincoln, 1050 Lee street, Los Angeles.--Three-fourths cup butter and one cup sugar, one cup of chopped raisins, two eggs, two cups oatmeal flakes (uncooked), half teaspoon salt, one teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon soda sifted with two cups white flour. Drop by teaspoons on greased pan with plenty of space between, and bake in moderate oven. The mixture will be very stiff, but makes delicious lunch trifles. NO. 43. SPONGE DROPS. Miss A. Ferguson, 2637 Severance street, Los Angeles.--Beat together until smooth and light the yolks of three eggs and a cup and a half of powdered sugar. Stir in lightly two cups of flour and two scant teaspoons of baking powder sifted together. Add half a cup of cold water and the juice of half a lemon. Grease tins with washed butter and drop batter in teaspoonfuls about three inches apart. Bake in quick oven. NO. 44. Mrs. A. R. Schlernitzauer, 1037 Bartlett street, Los Angeles.-- Four eggs, one pound of sugar,granulated or pulverized; beat well; one pound of flour, a good point of a knife of hartshorn; make the dough in the evening, roll out about half inch thick and cut out, then bake in the morning. The above recipe did not have a title or purpose listed in the original text. NO. 45. TANGLEWOOD CINNAMON ROLL. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.--When baking bread take one pound of bread dough, roll out thin; then take one-half cup of butter and lard mixed; spread over the bread dough, then spread over this one well-beaten egg, one teaspoon cinnamon, one cup sugar and one-half cup currants. Then roll up in a long loaf and pinch the ends in well, and put into a well-greased tin and bake one-half hour in a quick oven. NO. 46. CHOCOLATE COOKIES. Mrs. M. E. Kloeckner, Pasadena, Cal.--Three-fourths cake baker's chocolate, grated; one scant cup butter, two cups sugar, one-half cup cold water, two eggs or three if frosting is desired, leaving out the white of one; one teaspoon soda dissolved in hot water, one-half teaspoon vanilla; flour to roll as soft as can be handled. Have white of egg beaten stiff with sugar, add little vanilla and frost when warm. Cut rather small for special occasions, and sprinkle finely-chopped English walnuts on top of frosting. NO. 19. BOSTON COOKIES. E.A. Anthony, 819 W. Adams st.--Cream one cup of butter and add gradually one and one-half cups sugar and three eggs well beaten, and one teaspoon soda. Dissolve this in one and one-half tablespoons hot water. Sift together three and three-fourths cups flour, half teaspoon salt and one teaspoon cinnamon and add a cup of chopped English walnuts, one-half cup currants and one-half cup seeded raisins. Drop by teaspoonful on a greased tin and bake in a moderate oven. The mixture will seem thick or stiff, but it must be stiff. NO. 30. EGGLESS DOUGHNUTS. Mrs. Catharine H. Pickett, 1314 Faxon street, Superior, Wis.--One cup sweet milk, one-half cup thick sour cream, one cup sugar, salt and flavoring. Sift one teaspoon baking powder and one-half teaspoon soda into two cups of flour, repeating two or three times. Beat the milk, cream and sugar together, add the flour and seasoning and after mixing well add barely enough more flour to make a soft dough. Cut and fry quickly in very hot lard. When eggs are plenty I often use one or two, but I have known of doughnuts made by this recipe and without eggs to bring first premium at two county fairs. NO. 20. GINGER COOKIES (for family jars.) Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--One and one-half pints New Orleans molasses, one cup brown sugar; three-fourths cup lard or suet and butter, fresh. Beat without melting. Add pinch salt, two eggs, two teaspoons soda in molasses, one-half teaspoon soda in four tablespoons water, one tablespoon ginger. Flour to roll; mix part at time. Bake in moderate oven. (Fine for children.) NO. 21. HAZELNUT COOKIES. Mrs. N.G. Ledgerwood, 1577 W. Twenty-first st.--Three eggs, two cups powdered sugar, one cup of hazelnuts, one-half cup butter, one-half cup water. Add flour enough to roll. Cut in small cakes. Bake in moderate oven. NO. 22. SPICED COOKIES. Mrs. N.G. Ledgerwood, 1577 W. Twenty-first st.--One cup molasses, one cup sugar, one-half cup warm water, one large teaspoon soda, two-thirds cup butter, one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon ginger. Mix soft and roll thin. PIES. NO. 1. APPLE PIE. (Original.) Miss Evelyn Dooly, 622 Court street, Los Angeles--Crust for one pie: Mix thoroughly a cup of flour, a generous pinch of baking powder, sugar and salt; a dessertspoonful each of butter and lard, rubbed through evenly to a crumby consistency. Moisten with a very little water, putting together as dry as possible; flour and roll out thin. Filling: Put a liberal sprinkling of flour and sugar on the bottom crust, with seasoning of nutmeg and butter, and a few grains of salt. Lastly tart apples, sliced very thin. Moisten with three tablespoonfuls of cold water. Cover with top crust rolled thin. This will be found flaky and wholesome, and not antagonistic to Morpheus. NO. 2. BEAN PIE. Mrs. L. Schopper, 156 W. Thirty-third street, Los Angeles--Mash one cup boiled beans fine; mix together two eggs and one-half cup sugar; add milk and beans; season with nutmeg to taste. This makes one pie. NO. 3. CENTENNIAL MARLBORO PIE. (Martha Washington, 1776.) Mrs. Anna B. Rogers-- One cup stewed apples, sifted; one cup cream or rich milk; one cup sugar, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, two eggs beaten stiff; put all together and bake in pie crust, same as for custard pie. When baked pile on top whites of two eggs well beaten, with one tablespoon sugar; return to oven and brown slightly. NO. 4. CHESS PIE. Mrs. M.E. Kloeckner, 709 Locust street, Pasadena, Cal.--For two pies, five eggs, three-quarters cupful butter, one cup sugar, flavoring. Beat the yolks and sugar together till they are a perfect froth. Beat the butter to a creamy froth, also. Quickly add them together, flavoring with a little extract of vanilla. Bake in open crust. It will rise very light. As soon as done, have ready the whites beaten to a stiff froth, sweetened with a little sugar, and a few drops of the extract. Spread over the tops of pies and color a delicate brown in an oven not too hot. The secret of the pies not becoming heavy is in cutting and distributing them on the plates while hot; if they are allowed to cool without cutting them, they will fall. This is strange, but true. NO. 5. CHESS PIE. Mrs. J.C. Wells, Cahuenga, Cal.--Take the yolks of two eggs and the white of one; stir into the eggs one cup of sugar, one-half cup of butter and one-half cup of chopped raisins and stir briskly. Make a rich crust and bake in tart pans, using one tablespoon of the above mixture to each crust. Beat the remaining white of the egg into a stiff froth; add sugar and flavoring and put on top of pies when partly done, letting them brown lightly. NO. 6. CINNAMON PIE. Mrs. C.C. Norton, 1407 Girard street, Los Angeles, Cal.--(Original.) Sift together seven tablespoons of sugar, two level tablespoons of flour, four teaspoons of ground cinnamon and a pinch of salt. Stir into this four cupfuls of sweet milk, butter size of egg> and two eggs beaten well. (Filling for two pies.) NO. 7. CREAM PIE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Three glasses of milk, three tablespoons of cornstarch, yolks of three eggs, two teaspoons extract of lemon, a pinch of salt. Boil until thick, pour into a baked crust. Whip the whites of eggs with one cup of sugar and spread on top. Brown. NO. 8. CREAM PIE. Mrs. William J. Magee, 122 North Johnston street, Los Angeles.--Whip the yolks of five eggs, with one cup sugar until very light; cream three-quarters cup of butter; add lightly to the yolks and sugar; flavor with one-half teaspoon vanilla, and divide between two under crusts. It will rise as light as a feather. Whip the whites of the five eggs with sugar to taste; spread over the top, brown delicately. This will make two pies. NO. 9. CREAM OF STRAWBERRY PIE. (Original.) Mrs. J. Hamilton, 1365 West Thirtieth street, Los Angeles--Make some pie paste, puff paste or plain pie paste will do. Use a deep pie plate and roll the paste to fit the sides; then trim the ends off and roll to about a half-inch thickness and cut into six strips to put on top of the pie when done. Bake the strips separately. Now prepare the filling in the following way: Take a box of ripe red strawberries and wash and hull, then crush them and add half cup of powdered sugar; mix; cover tightly and set aside. Now take half pint of rich sweet whipping cream and whip till it begins to thicken; then slowly add one-half cup of powdered sugar and continue to whip till it is quite thick; now add half a teaspoon of vanilla extract. Mix the crushed strawberries with the cream and fill the pie. Then lay the strips on top. By leaving it stand for about an hour the juice of the strawberries is absorbed by the pie paste. Should one prefer it crisp, it should be eaten immediately. A most delicious pie and easily and quickly prepared. NO. 10. CUSTARD PIE. Miss B.L. Ecclestone, 1512 Maple avenue, Los Angeles.--Beat the yolks of three eggs to a cream, then stir one tablespoon sifted flour into three tablespoons sugar; add this to to the yolks; also add a pinch of salt, vanilla and a little grated nutmeg; then add the whites of the three eggs beaten stiff, and one pint of scalded milk which has been cooled; mix by degrees and cook half hour in moderate oven. PIE CRUST. One cup flour, two heaping tablespoons lard, a little salt; mix well together, using the hands as little as possible; then add about four tablespoons water. NO. 11. HUCKLEBERRY PIE. Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--For two pies, one cup flour, half teaspoon baking powder, two tablespoons shortening; rub together lightly; add water to roll easily (not too soft.) Roll quarter inch thick. Cover two pie tins. Bake in hot oven. In five minutes fill with generous amount of hot huckleberries (canned or fresh) with juice, rather sweet. (Bake until well done. Eat cold with cream. ) NO. 12. HILLICOT CUSTARD PIE. Miss Ruth C. Stocks, aged 13, Somis, Cal.--Line a pie plate with crust; cover the bottom with stewed peaches or apricots. Fill pie with custard made same as cup custard. Bake until set. HILLICOT PIE CRUST. Prepare some flour by putting a quart of flour into a sifter; into the flour put one level teaspoonful each of soda and salt and two of cream tartar. Sift twice. Take enough of the prepared flour for a pie, rub into this three tablespoons olive oil, add water to make a paste. NO. 13. LEMON CREAM PIE. Mrs. J. Munro, Vineland, Cal.--(Original.) Rub together until of an even color one large cupful sifted flour and one-fourth pound butter, then add just enough cold water to make it merely hold together. Roll out and line a pie tin, bake, patting with towel several times to keep crust from puffing. Fill with the following cream filling: Mix together one-half cup sugar with three rounded tablespoons flour and two eggs; beat with spoon until smooth, then add gradually one pint milk. Cook in double boiler until thickened, stirring constantly. Afterward add juice and grated rind of one medium-sized lemon; beat together the whites of two eggs until stiff, add two tablespoons of powdered sugar, beat again and add one-half tablespoon lemon juice, or one-fourth teaspoon vanilla, and put on top of pie; place pie in the oven for few moments to brown. NO. 14. EXCELLENT LEMON PIE. Miss C. Laura Pooley, 1826 South Hope street, Los Angeles.--Peel very thin the rind of one lemon and chop fine in a teaspoonful of granulated sugar; add to this the juice of one lemon, a tablespoonful of syrup (or Log Cabindrips,) a tablespoonful of sugar, two eggs; beat up eggs with a tablespoonful of milk to keep from separating. Put on stove and boil gently till thick enough. Put in deep pie tin, lined with good puff paste, and bake. If preferred, the white of one egg can be used to make a meringue. NO. 15. FINE LEMON PIE. Mrs. M. Cameron, 1237 Arapahoe street, Los Angeles.--Make shell of rich pie crust and bake. For filling mix together one and one-half cups sugar, one large teaspoon of flour; add juice of two good-sized lemons and grated rind or one; one tablespoon butter, two eggs (leaving out the whites for meringue;) add one cup boiling water and cook until thick; beat whites and add tablespoon sugar, and fill the shell and set in oven long enough to brown. NO. 16. PERFECT LEMON PIE. Mrs. F.S. Webster, Imperial, Cal.--One lemon, pulp, juice and grated rind; one cup sugar, yolks of two eggs well beaten, two tablespoonfuls flour, one cup sweet milk, and small piece of butter. Stir these all together in the above stated order; lastly add the whites, beaten to a stiff froth, stirring in lightly, until thoroughly mixed; then pour into a custard plate lined with good pie crust, and bake about forty minutes in not too hot oven, so the top will not burn. It is delicious. NO. 17. LEMON PIE. Mrs. R. N. Lever, University, Los Angeles.--Two medium-sized lemons, one tablespoon butter, four tablespoons milk, one cup sugar, four eggs; grate the rinds of lemon; keep out whites of eggs, beat to a stiff froth and spread on top after baking pie. Mix sugar, lemon and butter together, then add the balance; bake with rich crust. NO. 18. LEMON PIE. Mrs. L. Smock, 1510 Vermont avenue, Los Angeles.--One large lemon, juice and rind, grated; one cup white sugar, half-cup cream or rich, sweet milk; one tablespoon cornstarch mixed with the milk; yolks of three eggs. Bake in rich crust; beat whites to a stiff froth with four tablespoons powdered sugar, spread on top and brown a very little. NO. 19. LEMON PIE. Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1028 South Hill street, Los Angeles. (Original.) Grate one lemon, using only the juice of same; one teacup of sugar, one teacup of water or milk, two eggs, two tablespoons of cornstarch, one tablespoon of butter. Stir all the ingredients into the boiling water or milk, and put this into the crust, having baked that previously. The white of one egg, whipped to a feather with sugar, put on the top and brown a little. NO. 20. LEMON PIE. Mrs. T.H. Sullivan, San Jacinto, Cal.--Line two pie dishes with ordinary paste, and stand them in the cold while you make the filling. Heat one pint of good rich milk in a pan set in a skillet of hot water; three eggs well beaten, one large tablespoon of cornstarch thinned with a little milk; strain the eggs, add the cornstarch and cook until like a thick custard, stirring constantly. Just before removing from the fire add one teaspoon of extract of lemon. Into one cup of sugar mix the juice of one lemon, salt, beat well; fill the pie dishes and bake. Cook slowly so as not to boil, as that spoils it. Evaporated cream is excellent in making lemon pie. NO. 21. LEMON PIE. Elizabeth M. Bugbee, 2915 South Figueroa street, Los Angeles--Crust: Two cups flour, one cup lard, one-half cup cold water, one teaspoon salt, one heaping teaspoon baking powder. Filling: Two tablespoons cornstarch; mix smooth in a little water; add two cups boiling water; when cold the juice and grated rind of two lemons; beaten yolks of two eggs; a tablespoonful of butter and two cups of white sugar, mixed together. Beat the whites of two eggs with two tablespoons powdered sugar. Flavor with vanilla for meringue. NO. 22. LEMON PIE. Mrs. J.J. Broughall, Ocean Park, Cal.--Bake crust first. Juice and grated rind of one or two lemons, as preferred. One full cup sugar, butter size of an egg, one full cup boiling water, pinch salt, yolks of three eggs, well beaten. Boil all together in double boiler, adding lemon just before removing from fire. While boiling stir in two well-rolled soda crackers, and one tablespoon flour, first rubbed smooth with a little cold water. Pour in crust. Beat whites of eggs stiff; add three tablespoons sugar. Spread over cream and brown in oven. NO. 23. RAISIN PIE. (Original.) Mrs. Ward Wacaser, Gardena, Cal.--Crust: Take one and one-half cups flour, add a pinch of salt, and rub in one-half cup lard or cottolene. Mix thoroughly and add enough cold water to make a dough of the right consistency, different flours requiring different amounts. If careful to measure flour and shortening the crust will always be just right. Raisin filling: Take a pound of seeded raisins and cover with water and stew until tender. Have enough water when done to just cover raisins. Take one-half cup sugar and a tablespoon flour and mix together; add to raisins and let cook up good. This will make a nice thick rich juice. If wanted a little tart, add juice of one lemon. A little cinnamon is also nice for a change. Line pan with crust and fill with raisin mixture. Cut strips of crust and twist, laying strips across top of pie so as to form diamonds. This pie is quite economical and just the thing for the husband's lunch box. NO. 1. APPLE PIE. (For children and invalids.) Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--For crust take half cup white flour, pinch salt, half cup whole wheat; sift; two tablespoons butter. Put in mixing bowl; rub together with spoon until flaky, or lightly with cool finger tips. Tablespoon cracked ice or ice water; mix with spoon into ball. Flour cool bread board, roll rather thin; cover two pie tins, flute edge half inch; set on ice or in cool place, longer the better. Pare four tart, quick-cooking apples; quarter; cut each four times; lay close, but not deep; bake in quick oven; when half done sprinkle each with teaspoon butter in tablespoon water. Sugar to suit taste, the less, the better apple flavor. Flavor with cinnamon if one likes. NO. 83. CHOCOLATE PIE. Mrs. M.A. Collins, Ontario, Cal.--Four tablespoons grated chocolate, one pint water, yolks of two eggs, two tablespoons corn starch, six tablespoons sugar. Boil until thick. Whip whites of eggs and spread on top when baked; put into the oven long enough to brown a little. NO. 77. CHOCOLATE PIE. Mrs. F.A. Holbrook, Santa Ana, Cal.--After crust is baked grate one-half teacup of chocolate, and put in a pan with one cupful water, butter the size of an egg, one tablespoonful vanilla, one cup sugar, the beaten yolks of two eggs, and two tablespoonfuls corn starch dissolved in a little water. Mix well and cook on stove until thick, stirring often. Let cool, pour in pie crust and cover with the beaten whites of two eggs in which two tablespoonfuls sugar has been stirred; brown in oven. NO. 124. MINCEMEAT. (Original) Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1028 South Hill street, Los Angeles.--Four pounds lean beef; two pounds beef suet; eight pounds chopped apples; two pounds raisins; two pounds of currants; one teaspoon red pepper; two teaspoons salt; two teaspoons cloves, four tablespoons cinnamon, four nutmegs, grated; use liquor in which beef was boiled for mixing, and one quart good cider vinegar; two quarts molasses; mix well, then heat through; pack in jars or cans. NO. 125. MINCEMEAT. Miss Florence Pownail, Box 441, San Pedro, Cal.--One and three-fourths pounds finely chopped suet, three-fourths pound mixed candied peels, citron,lemon and orange, cut fine; three packets raisins, two packets currants, one and a half pounds brown sugar; grated rind and juice of three lemons, five pounds good hard apples, after they are peeled and cored; ground cinnamon, ground cloves and nutmeg, each about a tablespoon or to taste; about one pint brandy; all to be chopped fine and mixed together good. Will keep a long time in airtight jar. Much improved if when sent to table in pies warm, a lump of sugar with brandy poured on and set alight with match. PUDDINGS. NO. 1. APPLE PUDDING. Mrs. H.A. Paca, 16 Surf street, Ocean Park, Cal.--Sift together thoroughly one and a half cups of flour, two teaspoons of sugar, quarter teaspoon salt, one and a half level teaspoons baking powder. Work in three tablespoons butter with the tips of the fingers, add half a cup of milk. Pare and cut the apples in quarters; butter a quart pudding dish and fill two-thirds with the apples. Sprinkle with enough sugar to sweeten and add half a teaspoon of nutmeg or cinnamon and two teaspoons of lemon juice. Cover and bake until the apples are soft, then pat and roll lightly the dough mixture; place over the apples and bake twenty minutes. Serve with hard sauce. NO. 2. APPLE CRACKER PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Cut and pare about 6 apples; stew them with sugar, just enough to sweeten; add raisins and cinnamon. When tender set away to cool. Now beat the yolks of six eggs and one cup of sugar until thick like a batter; add the grated rind of a lemon and four crackers rolled very fine; last add the stiff-beaten whites, then grease a pudding dish and pour in the apples, then the custard and bake. Eat cold with whipped cream. NO. 3. APPLE TAPIOCA PUDDING. Francelia Holley, Coachella, Cal.--One cup tapioca soaked over night in six cups water; next morning add six large tart apples chopped very fine; add one cup white sugar; bake very slowly four hours. This is delicious eaten warm or coldy with plain or whipped cream. Very desirable for invalids. NO. 4. BAKED INDIAN PUDDING. Mrs. M.F.B., 764 Towne avenue, Los Angeles.--Boil one pint of milk; stir in four tablespoons yellow Indian meal and cook ten minutes. Cool it and add one pint of cold milk, half a cup New Orleans molasses, half a teaspoon each of salt and cinnamon, and two eggs well beaten with half a cup of sugar. Bake in a hot oven two hours; when it has baked half an hour add one cup of cold milk. Do not stir it in. Eat with cream or butter. This is a genuine New England Indian pudding. NO. 5. BAKING POWDER SUET PUDDING. Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--One cup suet, three cups of flour, three small teaspoons baking powder, small teaspoon salt, one cup raisins, half cup sugar. Use water to make a stiff batter; steam two hours. By omitting the sugar and raisins, a very good accompaniment to roast beef can be made with above recipe. NO. 6. CABINET PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.-- One glass claret, eight eggs, one tablespoon of gelatine dissolved in water, half cup granulated sugar, one cup chopped almonds. Line the dish with maccaroni and cherries; let wine come to a boil; add the gelatine; then beaten yolks, sugar and nuts. Let all come to a boil. Add to the well-beaten whites and pour over the maccaroons. Serve with whipped cream. NO. 7. CALIFORNIA TAPIOCA PUDDING. (Original.) Emilia Lundberg, 3400 South Flower street, Los Angeles.--Two tablespoons tapioca, soaked over night in a little water; in the morning add one-half cup sugar, one pint of milk, two eggs. Heat the milk; add the tapioca and boil twenty minutes; beat the yolks of the eggs, sugar, two teaspoons flour and little salt; stir into the milk and boil five minutes. Pour into a pudding pan; beat the whites with three teaspoons sugar; spread over the top and set in the oven to brown. In the bottom of a glass dish have some stemmed strawberries or stoned cherries, or sliced oranges. Sprinkle with sugar and add a few chopped figs, seeded raisins and walnuts. Wet a knife, slip around edge of pudding to loosen, and lay over the fruit. Serve with cream and sugar. NO. 8. CARROT PUDDING. Miss Crowe, 1441 Iowa street, Los Angeles.--One and one-half cups flour, one cup white sugar, one cup suet, one cup raisins, one cup currants, one cup grated potatoes, one cup grated carrots, one teaspoon soda dissolved in hot water, one teaspoon salt; spices to taste. Steam three hours. NO. 9. CARROT PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One pound flour, one pound chopped suet, one pound chopped carrots, one pound chopped potatoes, one pint molasses, one teaspoon soda, one teaspoon cinnamon, one and one-half tablespoons cloves, one pound currants, one pound raisins. Mix thoroughly, pour into a steamer and boil hard for four hours. Serve with hard sauce. NO. 10. CARROT PUDDING. Miss A. Ferguson, 2637 Severance street, Los Angeles.--Quarter cup butter, one cup sugar, one cup grated carrot, one cup grated potato, one level teaspoon soda, mixed with potato, one teaspoon cloves, cinnamon and allspice or mace, three tablespoons whisky, one cup flour, one cup raisins, one cup currants. Steam three and one-half hours. NO. 11. CHERRY PUDDING. Miss C. Laura Pooley, 1826 South Hope street, Los Angeles.--This is easily made and proves as satisfactory as many a more elaborate dessert. Put pitted and sweetened cherries an inch or so deep in the bottom of a buttered pudding dish and cover with the following mixture: One cup sugar, beaten to a cream with two tablespoons butter, one egg, one cup milk, two cups flour, and two teaspoons baking powder. Flavor with a bit of nutmeg or lemon. Bake; turn from the dish and serve with warm sweet sauce. NO. 12. CHERRY PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Line a mold with slices of sponge cake, then put in a layer of canned cherries; put over this a layer of hot custard, then another layer of cake, another of fruit and custard, until the mold is full. Put away to get cold and firm. Turn out of the mold when ready to serve, and make a sauce of the cherry juice. For the custard, bring to the boiling point a pint of milk, add an ounce and a half of gelatine (that has been previously dissolved in cold water, ) the yolks of four eggs and four ounces of sugar. When the custard has thickened, take it off the fire and stir in a half pint of cream and the juice of a lemon. NO. 13. CHOPPED APPLE PUDDING. Mrs. G.G. Watters, 715 Temple street, Los Angeles.--For a small family take two large, tart apples, pare, core and chop fine. Add two eggs well beaten, one-half cup sugar, melted butter size of a large walnut; one teaspoon baking powder, one-half teaspoon cinnamon; stir in flour and make as stiff as for loaf cake. Pour into buttered pan and bake one-half hour in moderate oven. Serve with lemon sauce as follows: Tablespoon or butter, two of sugar, one of flour, thoroughly mixed; moisten with cold water, then pour on boiling water to make quite thick sauce. Flavor with juice of one lemon. Serve hot (Original.) NO. 14. COTTAGE PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One cup milk, half-cup sugar, two cups flour, one egg, one tablespoon melted butter, two tablespoons baking powder, flavor with extract of lemon; bake one-half hour; serve with lemon sauce. NO. 15. CROW'S NEST PUDDING. Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1028 South Hill street, Los Angeles.--One and one-half cups sifted flour, salt, two teaspoons baking powder, three teaspoons lard, the last two things mixed in the flour. Then to this add sweet milk to make just soft enough to spread over a pie pan of sliced tart apples, and bake. When removed from oven, turn over on a plate and make a sugared sauce to put on the top. Sauce: Sugar, flour, nutmeg, or lemon, stirred into boiling water; not too thin, so it will stay on. (Excellent.) NO. 16. CRACKER PUDDING. M.P. de Dorticos, 1253 Westlake avenue, Los Angeles.--One-half cup currants, one-half cup raisins, one-half cup suet, one-half cup molasses, one cup cracker crumbs, three-quarters cup milk, one-quarter cup citron, one-quarter cup brandy, one-half cup sugar, one-half grated nutmeg, two eggs, one-quarter teaspoon soda (dissolved in molasses. ) Steam three hours. NO. 17. DATE PUDDING. S. Alice LaRue, Riverside, Cal.--Remove the seeds from about one-half pound dates and boil one-half hour in three or four pints water. Thicken with graham meal and cook until the meal is done; pour into cups to cool. Sugar may be added to taste, but it is fine without any. Use whipped cream for sauce. This is very simple but makes a delicious dessert. NO. 18. ENGLISH PLUM PUDDING. C. Laura Pooley, 1826 South Hope street, Los Angeles.--One-half pound beef suet, one-half pound currants, one-half pound raisins, one-fourth pound mixed peel, one-half pound bread crumbs, one-half pound flour, one-half pound brown sugar, one-half cup molasses, two tablespoons strawberry jam, juice of one large lemon, four eggs, two ounces extract almonds, teaspoon salt; one-half teaspoon nutmeg, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon cloves, tablespoon brandy. Boil five hours. NO. 19. FARINA PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--To one quart of milk add one-half cup farina; salt and add a small piece of butter; boil in a farina kettle until thick. Beat the yolks of four eggs with four heaping tablespoons of white sugar, and add this just before taking off the fire; stir it thoroughly but do not let it boil any more; flavor with vanilla. Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, with powdered sugar; after the eggs have been whipped, butter a pudding dish, put in part of the custard in which you have mixed the whites, then a layer of canned peaches; cover with the remaining custard and bake. Rum sauce for the above: Boil one cup milk with one cup sugar, wet a teaspoon of before removing from the fire add a teaspoon of rum. Serve hot. NO. 20. FROZEN PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Beat the yolks of six eggs until very light, boil together a pint of water and a pound of sugar for five minutes, add the yolks of the eggs; beat over the fire for just a moment. Take from the fire and beat continuously until the mixture is cold; it should be thick, like sponge-cake batter; add a quart of cream and a teaspoon of vanilla, turn into a freezer and freeze until it is the consistency of soft snow. Have ready half a pint of chopped fruit, which has been soaking for one or two hours in orange juice; add this fruit and turn until the mixture is well frozen. Any fruit can be used. NO. 21. GOLDEN FEATHER PUDDING. (Original.) H.R. Jones, 2317 West Ninth street, Los Angeles.--Cream one-half cup butter with one-half cup brown sugar, add two well-beaten eggs, two cups sifted graham flour, one cup raisins well floured, or raisins and currants, little citron if you like, two teaspoons cinnamon, shake of ginger, nutmeg and salt, three teaspoons baking powder (the batter must be rather stiff, so you can hardly stir it well.) Butter and dust with cornmeal a cake dish with tube in center; steam on quick even fire for two hours, or three-quarters of an hour in cups. Can be made the day before;will keep for two weeks in cool place. Steam half an hour before serving. Sauce for pudding: One cup granulated sugar creamed with one-half cup butter; add one well-beaten egg, grated rind and juice of one lemon, half-teaspoon lemon extract. Keep out one tablespoon butter, mix with one of flour, add carefully one pint warm water and pinch of salt, boil five minutes, pour over cream; just before serving beat well. NO. 22. GRAHAM PUDDING. M.P. de Dorticos, 1253 Westlake avenue, Los Angeles.--One and one-half cups molasses, one and one-quarter cups butter, one and one-half cups milk, one and one-half cups good graham flour, one small cup raisins, one egg, one and one-half teaspoons pure soda, spices to taste. Mix well together; steam four hours and serve with brandy or wine sauce. NO. 23. "HALF-PAY" PUDDING. Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--One cup chopped suet, one and one-half cups bread crumbs, one cup flour, one cup raisins, one cup currants, one cup milk, either sweet or sour, three tablespoons molasses, two tablespoons sugar, one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon soda. Boil or steam two hours. NO. 24. HILLICOT CUP PUDDING. Miss Ruth C. Stocks, Somis, Cal. --Make a custard of three eggs and a quart of milk sugar and cinnamon to taste. Put a spoonful of any kind of fruit in bottom of six common cups, add some cold rice or sago. Fill cups with custard, set cups in pan of hot water and bake, till set, in moderate oven. NO. 25. INDIAN PUDDING. Francelia Holley, Coachella, Cal.--Soak over night two tablespoons tapioca in two cups milk, set a pail in a kettle of water over the fire with one quart sweet milk and four tablespoons corn meal; scald, add one egg, one-half cup molasses, one-half cup brown sugar, salt to taste; add two cups cold milk; bake slowly three hours. NO. 26. INGAM PUDDING. Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1028 South Hill stret, Los Angeles.--One-half cup sugar, one-half cup molasses, one-quarter cup butter, one cup cold water, one cup seeded raisins, three cups sifted flour, one teaspoon soda in the molasses; steam over boiling water, three hours. Sauce: One-quarter cup butter, one-half cup sugar, one tablespoon corn starch; stir the above well mixed into hot water, make thin and flavor to suit the taste. NO. 27. LEMON PUDDING (for five persons.) Mrs. George F. Rathbun, 779 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--Four eggs, four tablespoons sugar, one large lemon, two tablespoons boiling water. Beat the yolk of eggs smooth with two tablespoons granulated sugar; then stir in the juice and grated yellow rind of one large lemon, add two tablespoons boiling water and cook in double boiler, stirring occasionally until thick like cream. Beat the whites of eggs stiff, then beat into them two tablespoons sugar; when this looks like a meringue it is to be beaten into the yellow mixture while hot, which cooks it sufficiently to keep the whites from falling. The whole looks like a yellow puff ball. Serve with cake or crackers. For orange pudding use orange instead of lemon. This is very effective when served in cups made of fresh orange rinds. NO. 28. LOS ANGELES ORANGE AND APPLE PUDDING. Mrs. William J. Magee, 122 North Johnston street, Los Angeles.--Boil two navel oranges and one lemon in three quarts of water until the rind is tender; when cold, put two cups sugar in one-half pint water. When it boils, slice into it six apples, pared and cored; boil five minutes. Line a deep pudding dish with puff paste --lay the fruit in, pour over the syrup, put some strips of pastry across and bake until the fruit is done. Serve with cream. NO. 29. MACAROON PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Line a dish with macaroons and oranges until full. Cream dressing: Six eggs, whites to a foam, yellows with sugar, for each egg one teaspoon of sugar. Grate the skin of one and one-half lemons, juice of two, cook until thick; stir, then mix in whites and pour over pudding. NO. 30. MARMALADE PUDDING. Miss Florence Pownail, box 444, San Pedro, Cal.--One-quarter pound bread crumbs, one-quarter pound marmalade, a little less than one-quarter pound chopped suet, a little less than one-quarter pound brown sugar, two eggs, teaspoonful baking powder. Mix crumbs and marmalade together, add baking powder, add two eggs well beaten; put in a buttered mold and boil one and one-half hours. NO. 31. MARIPOSA PUDDING. (Original.) Miss Gertrude Coberly, Tustin, Cal.--Soak one-half box Knox's gelatine in a cup of cold water a few minutes. Add the juice of a lemon and one and one-half cups sugar. Stir until dissolved, strain and allow to cool and partially stiffen. Then beat the whites of three eggs stiff, and add the gelatine, a spoonful at a time, beating constantly from thirty minutes to an hour. If made in hot weather it should be on ice. When sufficiently beaten, put half of it in another platter, into which thoroughly beat one-half cup chocolate grated very fine or melted over steam. Into a mold put first a layer of chocolate and then of white, making four layers in all and taking care that the layers are even. Set aside to stiffen and when ready to serve, turn out into a large dish and cut in slices like cake and serve with whipped cream. NO. 32. MARSHMALLOW PUDDING. Mrs. A.I. Parsons, Botteravia, Cal.--One tablespoonful of gelatine dissolved in one cup hot water, strain and when cool add one cup of sugar and the whites of three eggs. Add any flavoring desired. Beat all together for fifteen minutes. Four in mold and serve with cream (whipped or plain.) A dainty and delicious dessert. NO. 33. ORANGE PUDDING. M.E.K.-- Six large, sweet oranges, four eggs, two tablespoons corn starch, one quart milk, one cup sugar, pinch of salt. Heat milk to boiling. Beat yolks of eggs very light, dissolve the corn starch in the beaten eggs. Pour on the boiling milk, very little at a time at first, so the egg will not curdle, and if not sufficiently thick, return to the farina kettle to thicken, stirring constantly. Have the orange picked apart, sprinkle over the sugar, pour over the custard. Put on a frosting made of the whites of the eggs, allowing one tablespoonful powdered sugar to each white. Brown a golden brown and serve very cold. I use two dishes that fit silver pudding dish or one for half. NO. 34. ORANGE PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Peel and cut up six oranges into the bottom of a dish, pour over them a custard. Make the frosting of the whites of four eggs and one-third cup of sugar; spread over the top; brown a little and serve cold. NO. 35. PINE LODGE PUDDING. Mary Frances Kneedler. 2417 West Twenty-third street, Los Angeles.--Two tablespoons of sugar, half cup butter, one egg, a little salt, one cup sweet milk; one and one-half cups flour, three teaspoonfuls baking powder, half cup of raisins. Steam three-quarters of an hour. To be eaten with hot sauce. Can be made with or without sugar. LEMON SAUCE : One cup sugar, lump butter size of an egg, juice of one lemon, one teaspoon nutmeg, one cup boiling water, one teaspoon cornstarch. NO. 36. PLUM PUDDING. Hannah Karlson, 1328 Kellam avenue, Los Angeles.--Two cups bread crumbs, two cups raisins, two cups currants, one cup suet, one cup flour, one cup molasses, one cup sweet milk, one teaspoon soda, one and one-fourth teaspoons baking powder. Steam four hours. NO. 37. PLUM PUDDING. Mariane Miller, Los Angeles.--One-quarter cup butter, one cup molasses, one cup milk, one large teaspoon soda in hot water, one teaspoon allspice, three-quarters cup raisins, one-half cup currants, one cup plums, one-half cup citron one-half cup brandy, one lemon, a little salt. Steam three hours. SAUCE: One cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one egg, a few drops almond, lemon or vanilla flavoring. NO. 38. PLUM PUDDING. Helen M. Magee, Los Angeles.--Pour a cupful of hot milk over a cupful bread crumbs. When the milk is cold add three-quarters of a cupful sugar, teaspoonful salt, yolks of four eggs, one-half pound each of raisins and currants, half a cup of chopped almonds, half pound of suet, and spices to taste. Steam six hours. Serve with whipped cream sweetened with maple sugar. Steam in round fluted mold; insert a stem of holly in opening on top. NO. 39. PLUM PUDDING. (Wholesome.) Elizabeth M. Bugbee, 2315 South Figueroa stret, Los Angeles.--One cup grated raw carrot, one cup grated raw potatoes, one cup chopped suet, one cup brown sugar, one cup browned flour, one cup currants, one cup raisins, half pound citron, sliced fine, one teaspoonful ginger, one teaspoonful cinnamon, half teaspoonful cloves, one-third teaspoonful allspice, one-third teaspoonful mace, and a little nutmeg; half teaspoonful soda and one teaspoonful baking powder, one wineglass brandy, one-half glass currant jelly improves. Mix all thoroughly. Steam three hours in a buttered pudding tin. Keeps indefinitely. SAUCE: Whites of two eggs beaten stiff; yolks of two eggs beaten stiff with two cups powdered sugar, half cup melted butter, one teaspoonful vanilla, half wineglass brandy, if desired. Mix the beaten whites of eggs just before serving. NO. 40. PUDDING SAUCES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--HARD SAUCE: One cup butter, three cups sugar; beat to a cream and flavor with extract of lemon or vanilla. HARD BRANDY SAUCE: Two cups powdered sugar, one-half cup butter, beaten to a cream, and add one wineglass brandy and one-half teaspoonful extract of cinnamon. GOOD PUDDING SAUCE: Beat together four tablespoonfuls sugar and four ounces butter. Stir in one cup boiling water; flavor with any desired flavoring. NO. 41. RICE PUDDING. C. McGuire, box 588, Ventura, Cal.--One cup of rice, boiled soft in water, add one pint cold milk, yolks of four eggs rind of lemon grated. Mix and bake one-half hour. Beat the whites of four eggs; stir in one pint of sugar, the juice of one lemon. After pudding is baked and cooled a little, pour this over and brown in oven. Eat cold. NO. 42. RICE PUDDING. Miss Laura Laughlin, 2323 Leoti avenue, Los Angeles.--One-half cup rice, two quarts milk, one cup sugar, one teaspoon salt. Bake in moderate oven three hours. Skim top off at intervals. Serve warm or cold. NO. 43. SPHYNX PUDDING. Mrs. Ella E. Bagnall, 1628 Griffith avenue, Los Angeles.--One cup each of grated carrot, grated potato, chopped suet, raisins, currants, molasses; one-half cup sugar two cups flour, two teaspoonfuls soda; add cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg and salt. Steam three hours. Can be reheated the second day and be better for it. Sauce, Two tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon butter, one tablespoon flour, one cup water; flavor liberally with spices used in the pudding. Is equally good, easier made and not so indigestible as the ordinary plum pudding. NO. 44. STEAMED INDIAN MEAL PUDDING. Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--One and one-half cups Indian meal, one cup chopped suet. Mix these, and scald with boiling water until about as stiff as "hasty pudding," or "cornmeal mush." One teaspoon ground cinnamon, one-half teaspoon salt, one cup molasses, one cup sliced or evaporated apples, which have been soaked in hot water five minutes and one cup sifted flour in which one-half teaspoon soda has been mixed. Steam three hours. Instead of apples, raisins or other dried fruit can be used. NO. 45. STEAMED PUDDING. Miss Beatrice G. Davis, Pomona, Cal.--Four tablespoons butter, one-half cup milk, one egg, one and one-half cups graham flour, one-half teaspoon soda, one cup raisins seeded and chopped, one-half cup molasses, one teaspoon salt. Melt butter, add molasses, milk, well-beaten egg and other ingredients. Turn into buttered mold; cover and steam two and one-half hours. Serve with vanilla sauce. NO. 46. SUET PUDDING. Mrs. H.A. Paca, 16 Surf street, Ocean Park, Cal.--Shred and chop one cup suet, stone one cup raisins, pick, wash and dry one cup currants. Beat the suet, one cup of sugar and the yolks of two eggs together until light; then add one cup milk and three cups flour; beat until smooth, add one tablespoonful cinnamon; a half teaspoonful salt, a half nutmeg, grated, the well-beaten whites of the eggs and a teaspoonful of baking powder. Mix well and add the fruit, well floured. Turn into a greased mold and boil continuously for three hours. Serve hot with hard sauce. This may be varied by adding different kinds of fruit. For fig pudding, omit the raisins and currants and add one pound chopped figs. For date pudding add one pound chopped dates. NO. 47. SUET PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One cup suet, one cup molasses, one cup milk, one cup seeded raisins, two cups graham flour, one cup wheat flour, one teaspoonful baking powder. Steam three hours. NO. 48. SWEET POTATO PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Boil one pound sweet potatoes and let them get perfectly cold before grating them. In the meantime cream a heaping tablespoonful of butter and two tablespoonfuls of sugar; add gradually the yolks of four eggs, the grated rind of a lemon, a teaspoonful of cinnamon, a little grated nutmeg and one cup sweet milk, add the beaten whites. Last grease a pudding dish, line with a rich crust and fill in the custard. To make richer, add a wineglass of brandy to the sweet potatoes. Eat cold, with or without sauce. NO. 49. SWISS PUDDING. Mrs. J. F. Cruickshank, Arlington, Riverside, Cal.--Slice a small sponge cake, cover each slice with strawberry jam or any other preserve, that may be preferred; lay the slices in a glass dish, one on top of the other, then pour over it about two glasses of sherry. As the sherry soaks through the cake to the bottom of the dish; take it up with a spoon again, and pour it over the cake until it is all absorbed. Switch up till very thick and light. About half a pint of good cream and pour over it. Ornament with pink sugar. The cream should set on the top and sides of the cake, as it is poured over it. NO. 50. TAPIOCA FRUIT PUDDING. Miss C. Herstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Soak one cup of tapioca over night, cook soft in water, then add and cook thoroughly one pint preserved raspberries; cool in a mold and serve with sugar and cream. NO. 51. TIPSY PUDDING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Saturate a loaf of sponge cake with wine or brandy. Make a rich boiled custard; place the cake in a deep glass dish and pour the custard over it. Stick the top full of blanched almonds and serve cold. NO. 52. VEGETABLE PUDDING. Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--One cup carrots, one cup potato, one cup sour apples, one cup currants, one cup raisins, one cup bread crumbs, one cup flour, one cup suet, two cups white sugar, one teaspoon soda, one cup walnuts coarsely chopped. Steam three hours. The vegetables and apples can be cut with a cutter. NO. 42. BAKED SUET PUDDING. Beatrice L. Eccleston, 1512 Maple avenue--One cup chopped suet, one cup bread crumbs, one cup flour, one-half cup raisins, two teaspoons baking powder, one teaspoon salt; add one cup sweet milk, mix well and bake one-half hour in hot oven. Serve with hard sauce consisting of piece of butter size of egg, one-half cup powdered sugar, creamed together; add vanilla and the whites of one egg beaten stiff. If soft sauce is preferred, add one cup hot water. (Original.) NO. 73. CHOCOLATE PUDDING. Mrs. E.R. Bishop, McKittrick, Cal.--One egg, one-half cup sugar, one teasponful butter, one-half cup sweet milk, one cup flour to which has been added one and one-half teaspoon baking powder, two tablespoons grated chocolate. Mix, pour into a covered mould, set in boiling water and boil one hour. SAUCE: Three eggs, two cups sugar, one teaspoon vanilla. Separate whites and yolks, beat yolks, add the sugar and stand in boiling water for half an hour. Stir often. Beat whites to a stiff froth and add to the hot yolks and sugar when ready to serve. NO. 41. DATE PUDDING. Mrs. Bertha S. Morris, 1016 Georgia street.--Take two cups of oat flakes, half cup brown sugar and the same quantity of New Orleans molasses; half cup chopped suet; half pound dates chopped fine; three eggs, a pinch of salt and half teaspoon soda, allspice, cloves, cinnamon, mace and ginger; the juice and rind of one lemon. Place the oat flakes in the mixing bowl, then sugar, salt and spices, then chopped dates and suet. Dust the dates with flour, or you will have your fruit all in one place. Put the lemon juice and rind in a cup with the molasses and soda, add to the above mixture then the eggs well beaten. It should be the consistency of cake dough. If too thick, add a little hot water. Grease a pudding mold (a lard pail will do, but must have a tight-fitting lid;) steam for three hours. Serve hot with any desired sauce. NO. 43. DELICATE SUET PUDDING. Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal--One cup molasses, one cup water, one cup dark raisins, seeded; two cups graham flour, one teaspoon salt, one teaspoon soda, one teaspoon cinnamon, one-half teaspoon cloves, two-thirds cup fresh white suet; chop fine, mix well. Steam thoroughly in close mould or covered bucket two hours. Bake one-half hour. Sauce: One tablespoon flour rubbed in one tablespoon butter, salt, sugar to taste. Pour on one pint boiling water; flavor with lemon, orange, or other fruit juice; cook three minutes. NO. 44. TANGLEWOOD PUDDING. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.--Soak overnight one cup of tapioca in six cups of water. Next morning add one cup of sugar, one egg and beat well together. Then cook until clear. And when it is cool enough add six sliced bananas and one-half cup of slightly broken walnut meats. Flavor with lemon and vanilla mixed. Serve cold with sweetened cream, flavored with vanilla. DESSERTS. NO. 1. APPLE CUP CUSTARD. Miss C. Hernstein. 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Pare and core four good-sized apples; steam them until tender; press through a colander; add, while hot, a tablespoonful of butter, yolks of four eggs, four tablespoons sugar, one cup milk. Turn this into baking cups, bake for 20 minutes. Beat the whites of the eggs until stiff; add sugar; beat again; heap over the top of the cups; dust thickly with powdered sugar and brown a moment in the oven. Serve hot. NO. 2. BUSTER BROWN DAINTY. Mrs. Estella Raley, 162 Rubidoux avenue. Riverside, Cal.--Part I. One cup seeded raisins, one cup cocoanut, one cup shelled English walnuts; grind all through a food chopper and add one-half cup powdered sugar. Melt butter size of an egg and mix all together, thoroughly. Put in oven and heat until hot. (Don't brown.) Part II. Take the yolks of three eggs, beat well; then stir in three dessert spoons of sugar and one large coffee cup milk. Put in double boiler and cook to the consistency of float, stirring all the while; flavor to taste when cooked. Part III. Beat the whites of three eggs until stiff and dry; add three tablespoons powdered sugar and flavor to suit taste; beat again. To serve six persons, put in small uniform dishes a portion of Part I, cover with three tablespoons of Part II, and divide Part II equally and spread or drop over the pudding; brown slightly. Serve warm or cold. (This is original, and is a very dainty dessert.) NO. 3. BROWN BETTY. Mrs. A.H. Jasper, 717 San Julian street, Los Angeles--A good way to use up stale bread. Soak enough bread to fill a small basin. Peel and take out cores of five or six good-sized apples; chop fine; put enough bread in basin to cover bottom; add bits of butter, then a layer of chopped apples; sprinkle over with cinnamon and sugar; then another layer of apples and cinnamon and sugar, and so on until basin is full, making last layer of apples. Bake for half or three-quarters of an hour in moderate oven. Serve either warm or cold, with hard sauce or rich cream. NO. 4. CARAMEL CUSTARDS. Miss Beatrice G. Davis, Pomona, Cal.--Take two cups milk, one-fourth cup sugar, three eggs, one-eighth teaspoon salt, one teaspoon vanilla or sprinkle of nutmeg. Beat eggs and sugar together until very light. Add milk and vanilla. Caramel: One-half cup sugar, one-fourth cup boiling water. Place sugar in saucepan; stir over fire until melted. Add water slowly; boil until syrup is thick. Line buttered custard cups with syrup. Pour the above mixture in and bake in a pan of hot water. NO. 5. CHARLOTTE RUSSE. (A perfect recipe.) M.V.G.-- Half ounce of gelatine dissolved in a small teacup of hot milk; one-pint of thick cream whipped light; whites of two eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; one small teacup of powdered sugar. Mix the whipped cream, beaten eggs and sugar, beat in the gelatine (strained) and milk, which must be cool but not begun to harden. Flavor with vanilla or sherry wine, and pour into a mold to harden. NO. 6. CURRANT ICE. Mrs. Helen M. Magee. No. 122 North Johnston street, Los-Angeles--To one pint of currant, or cranberry juice, add one quart of water, and two pounds of sugar; beat to a froth the whites of four eggs; stir into the juice before it is placed in the freezer; beat it in well with the ice-cream beater, and it will freeze in a bright pink froth. Grate a cocoanut, mix it with sugar, and serve in the same saucer with the currant ice. The contrast is attractive, and the taste unequaled by any similar confection. NO. 7. CHOCOLATE CORNSTARCH. Ada C. Whitman, 3131 Baldwin street, Los Angeles--Take one quart of boiling milk, with two tablespoons of grated chocolate well stirred in. Add a half cup of sugar, yolks of two eggs, salt, two tablespoons of cornstarch, stirred smooth in a little milk, and flavor with vanilla. After cooking a few minutes in a double boiler, pour in a dish. Beat the whites of two eggs to a stiff froth, with two tablespoons powdered sugar. Spread on the pudding and set in oven to brown. If preferred, put spots of jelly on the frosting. May be eaten with sugar and cream. NO. 8. EASTER DESSERT. M.E.K., Pasadena, Cal.--Take one package gelatine, soaked in one pint of cold water four hours; two heaping cups sugar, three large cups milk, boiling hot; two tablespoonfuls grated chocolate, yolks two eggs, a little prepared cochineal, bright red syrup or fruit coloring (I use the latter;) twelve or more empty eggshells, from which the contents have been drained through a small hole in the end, and rinsed out thoroughly with cold water; vanilla, rose-water and grated lemon peel. Put sugar and soaked gelatine in a double boiler, pour over the boiling milk. Set over the fire and stir until dissolved. Strain and divide into four parts. Leave one part white; stir into another the chocolate, which has been melted over boiling water; into another the beaten yolks; into the fourth the red coloring. Flavor the chocolate with vanilla; the yellow with the lemon; the white with bitter almond, and the pink with rosewater or extract of rose. Heat the yellow over the fire long enough to cook the egg. Fill the eggshells with the various mixtures, and set upright in a pan of cornmeal or flour, to keep them steady, and leave till next day. Fill a glass dish more than three-quarters full of nice orange jelly, chopped into sparkling fragments. Break away the eggshells, bit by bit, from the blanc-mange. If the shells have been thoroughly rinsed and left wet, there will be no trouble. Pile the eggs upon the bed of jelly, lay shredded preserved orange peel or candied citron about them, and surprise the children and "your other half" with them as an Easter dessert. Cream poured over when serving is an improvement. Blanc-mange that is left after filling the shells may be put into a mold, a layer of each color. This dessert must be kept in a cool place until ready to serve. I begin to save eggshells some time before Easter. The orange jelly can be made on Friday, if it is desirable to do only part of the work on Saturday. It is pleasing to the taste, as well as to the eye, and I always feel amply repaid whenever I have prepared it for my family. NO. 9. FROSTED APPLES. Mrs. J.M. Reed, 5822 Monte Vista street, Highland Park, Cal.--Peel some apples and stew in a thin syrup until they become tender, but be careful that they don't break. Dip in the white of an egg that has been whipped to a stiff froth, and sift powdered sugar over them quickly. Place in a cool oven to candy, and serve. NO. 10. HEAVENLY HASH. Mrs. J.M. Reed, 5822 Monte Vista street, Highland Park, Cal.--Beat yolks of four eggs till very thick; beat into them gradually one cup of powdered sugar, and one-half teaspoon salt; beat until sugar is dissolved. Add juice of two lemons and beat again. Peel and slice thin six bananas and four oranges; put in a deep dish a layer of bananas, then of dressing, then of orange, then again a layer of each, with bananas on top, and pour remainder of dressing over it. Serve cold. NO. 11. FRUIT COMPOTE. Mariane Kathrine Miller, 2323 Leoti street, Los Angeles.--Soak one-half package of gelatine in one-half cup of cold water; let stand one-half hour, then add two cups of boiling water, the grated rind and juice of one lemon, one cup of sugar, a few drops of almond flavoring, and let stand over night. Next day slice and sugar four oranges, four bananas, the juice of one-half grapefruit, one cup sliced pineapple, twelve large strawberries, one cup of shelled walnuts, one-half cup of Marachino cherries; put in alternate layers with the gelatine. In the center, place a cup of whipped cream, sweetened and flavored with vanilla. NO. 12. HILLICOT "PRONTO" DESSERT. Miss Ruth C. Stock (aged 13,) Somis, Cal.--Stir up some prepared buckwheat flour; bake several pancakes size of gridle; when done spread any kind of cooked fruit between. Cut like layer cake and serve with cream. NO. 13. LEMON SPONGE. Mrs. Henry Raley, 162 Rubidoux avenue, Riverside, Cal.--Dissolve one-half ounce gelatine in the juice of two lemons; add grated rind of one lemon. Put over hot water to melt. Separate six eggs. Add to the yolks one-half pound of sugar and one teaspoonful vanilla; stir to a sponge; stand on ice and add melted gelatine; stir five minutes. Lastly, mix in the six whites of eggs, beaten stiff. Serve with whipped cream. NO. 14. PEACH DUMPLINGS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Prepare a biscuit crust with one pint of flour, two tablespoons of butter, a scant half teaspoon of baking powder and sufficient sweet milk to mix to a soft dough. Roll out one-half an inch thick, and out into four-inch squares. Pare the peaches and in the center of each square place three halves, or one whole one; gather and pinch together the edges of the dough. Place the dumplings close together in a well-greased pan; pour over them one-quarter of a cup of cold water; cover closely; put in a hot oven; at the end of one-half hour uncover; let brown for fifteen minutes. Serve with hard sauce, into which has been whipped a few spoonfuls of the pulped fruit. NO. 15. PEACH FOAM. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Pare and cut into halves 6 large peaches; rub them through a sieve and sweeten with half cup of powdered sugar. Beat the whites of three eggs until stiff and add the sweetened pulp and beat until thick and smooth. Turn the mixture into a mold, chill on ice and serve with whipped or plain cream. NO. 16. PEACH AND PLUM CREAM. Mrs. A.R. Sternitzauer, 462 N. Fremont avenue, Los Angeles.--Take half dozen peaches and half dozen plums; cook them as you would for canning. While cooking, cream 2 tablespoons butter; beat in by degrees half cup powdered sugar, two tablespoons each of thick cream and sherry. Beat long and hard. Just before serving stand bowl over hot water and beat sauce until it looks creamy, but is not hot enough to melt the butter. Now take the fruit out of syrup, put into a glass fruit dish, and put the cream over it. NO. 17. PINEAPPLE AND RASPBERRY CREAM. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Cut off the top of a large pineapple then with a strong spoon scoop out the pulp, rejecting the hard core. Sugar the fruit; let it stand some time, then pour off from it a cupful of juice. Trim the pineapple shell at the bottom, so it will stand firm and chill in the refrigerator. Mash well a pint of red raspberries; add a fourth of a cupful of water, half a cup of sugar and the pineapple juice; cook the mixture several minutes. Take from the stove, add the juice of a lemon, more sugar, if liked, and strain through cheese cloth. Beat a quart of cream and a cupful of sugar until light and frothy; flavor with vanilla and freeze as ice cream. When half frozen add the fruit juice and finish freezing. Pack and fill into pineapple shell; set in a deep mold or the freezer can and let it stand packed in salt and ice an hour or longer. To serve it lift the filled pineapple from the mold to a plate covered with a pretty doily. Half this quantity will serve five people. NO. 18. PRUNE WHIP. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--One cup of cooked prunes chopped fine; crack the kernels and chop fine; beat the whites of eleven eggs to a very stiff froth, with one cup of granulated sugar; add the prunes and put in a pudding dish and only let brown. Serve either hot or cold with whipped cream. NO. 19. RED RASPBERRY SHORT CAKE. Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--One quart flour, one level teaspoon soda; sift well; pinch salt, two full tablespoons shortening; rub in thoroughly one pint sour milk and cream or buttermilk. If rich use less shortening. Try, by mixing teaspoon milk with flour into smooth cake. Bake. If light and sweet, right. If it smells sour, add pinch soda to milk. If it smells of soda, add more sour milk, three or four spoons and a little flour. Mix all. Roll half at a time. Lightly butter one, put together; bake in hot oven; letting it rise well; crush red raspberries lightly and sweeten. Put between and on top just before serving. Pour over all whipped cream. NO. 20. SPANISH CREAM. Mrs. R.A. Brown, Rivers, Cal.--Put one-third of a box of gelatine in one and one-half pints of milk and soak one and a half hours; then simmer slowly and add the yolks of three eggs, beaten with one cup of sugar; add a pinch of salt and any flavoring desired. Let the mixture cool a little and add the three well-beaten whites; turn in glasses or custard cups and serve cold. NO. 21. STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE. Mrs. George F. Rathburn, No. 779 Kohler street, Los Angeles.--(Original.) Pick and wash 3 boxes of nice ripe strawberries, add 1 1/2 cups sugar and chop with a knife till each berry is cut about once. Add 1/2 cup water and stir a little and set aside while you mix the cake. Sift together 2 cups flour, 1 1/2 teaspoons baking powder, and 1/2 teaspoon salt and mix into it butter twice the size of an egg. Mix with sweet milk to make a dough as soft as can be rolled. Place it on a well floured board and roll about an inch thick. Put it into a buttered square tin and bake in a quick oven about 10 minutes or till done. Remove from pan, cut in halves lengthwise, place one-half on dish and butter the top; put on as many berries as will stay and put on the other half of cake, butter, and pour the other berries and juice over it and serve immediately. (Delicious.) NO. 22. STRAWBERRY DESSERT. Miss B.L. Ecclestone, 1612 Maple avenue, Los Angeles.--Take 1 cup of strawberries mashed to a pulp, add 1 1/2 cups powdered sugar, then add the well beaten white of one egg; serve in little heaps, then place strawberries all around. This is a nice dessert for a warm day and very simple. NO. 23. STRAWBERRY WHIP. Mrs. J.N. Densham, 949 W. Adams street, Los Angeles.--Take 1 cup sugar, 1 box strawberries, hulled but not mashed; the white of one egg. Put all together in large bowl and whip steadily from twenty minutes to one-half hour, with strong wire egg-beater. Spread between and over two layers of plain cake. NO. 24. VANILLA SAUCE. Miss Beatrice G. Davis, Pomona, Cal.--One cup sugar, 2 tablespoons cornstarch, 2 cups boiling water, 3 tablespoons butter, 2 teaspoons vanilla. Lemon juice may be used instead of vanilla. NO. 25. ALMOND LOB. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Beat yolks of ten eggs, add one and one-half cups granulated sugar, beat to a cream. Add one cup grated almonds, one large tablespoon vanilla, small grated lemon. Grate twelve lady fingers which have been dried in the oven; add this and one-half teaspoon baking powder to the mixture. Finally add the beaten whites of the eggs. Bake in two layers. For the filling, mix well yolks of two eggs, two tablespoons powdered sugar, two teaspoons corn starch and two teaspoons of butter. Add to this two cups boiling milk; stir well on stove and beat until creamy. Add one cup grated almonds, stir a little longer. (This is more than delicious.) NO. 26. APPLE CHARLOTTE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Butter, then flour a pudding dish, line it with thin slices of bread, buttered on both sides. Put a thick layer of apples, cut in thin slices, sugar and a little cinnamon and a few small pieces of butter, another layer of bread and butter, apples, sugar, cinnamon, and pieces of butter last. Bake slowly for two hours, leaving the dish covered until half an hour before serving, then let the apples brown on top. NO. 27. APPLE DUMPLINGS. Mrs. G.M. Wood, 1023 South Olive street, Los Angeles.--Peel, core and chop quite fine six tart apples. Take two cups flour, one heaping teaspoon baking powder, salt and sift all together. Mix one-half cup butter with the hands into the flourand moisten with sweet milk, as for pie crust. Roll out quite thin, cut in squares so each square will hold a large spoonful of the apples, one tablespoon sugar, a sprinkle of cinnamon and piece of butter size of hazelnut. Pinch dough firmly around each dumpling, bake brown in pan half filled with boiling water. Sauce: One-half cup butter, one cup powdered sugar, beat to a cream, add one egg, a small glass of sherry wine; beat in a bowl and set in hot water. Let it remain ten minutes or more, stirring constantly. Then serve. NO. 28. APPLE DUMPLINGS. Mrs. G.M. Wood, 1023 South Olive street, Los Angeles.--Make a nice biscuit dough, roll thinner than for biscuits and cut about five inches square. Pare and halve a large tart apple for each dumpling; fill center with sugar and pinch dough around lightly. Put in deep pan-- milk-pan --with space between. To six dumplings sprinkle between one cup sugar, one-half cup butter, one-half teaspoon cinnamon, one pint hot water. Bake slowly for one hour. Replenish the water as necessary and serve in this sauce. NO. 29. STEAMED APPLE DUMPLING. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Make a good baking powder crust. Peel and core tart apples, fill the cavity in apples with sugar, wrap each in the dough and steam one hour. Serve with butter and sugar sauce. For baked apple dumpling, make as for steamed dumpling, put in pan so as not to touch, bake brown and serve with cream sauce. NO. 30. BANDED APPLES. Mrs. William J. Magee, 122 Johnston street, Los Angeles.--Pare large, firm apples, leaving a half inch band about the middle; place in a pan, fill to the band with hot water. Bake until tender, then place a slice of lemon, on top of each; finish baking, remove the cores, fill the cavities with granulated sugar, a dash of cinnamon; put back the lemon; serve warm with the syrup. NO. 31. BRANDY PEACHES. Mrs. J.S. Rood, Terminal Island, Cal.--Take choice flavored ripe peaches, remove skins with boiling water. To each pound of fruit allow one pound white sugar and one-half pint water to three pounds of sugar. When the syrup is boiling hot, drop in peaches; as fast as they cook, take out and lay on a platter. When cool, put in jars and fill with hot syrup using one-half syrup and one-half best brandy. Seal in jar same as any canned fruit. Will keep any length of time. Very delicious. NO. 32. BURNT CREAM. Miss Laura Laughlin, 2328 Leoti avenue.--Make a rich boiled custard of a pint of cream, a pint of milk, two eggs, one tablespoon flour or corn starch, and three-quarters cup white sugar. Have a clean frying pan real hot, into it pour one cup light brown sugar, let it melt till it bubbles and almost burns. Do not stir with a spoon, but shake pan by the handle to get the sugar evenly done. When browned, stir in the boiled custard. Beat well together and when somewhat cooled, pour into custard cups and set away to cool. Serve cold, with white cake. NO. 33. CHOCOLATE JUNKET CUSTARD. Miss G. Smyth, 4 G street, Ontario, Cal.--One quart milk, one-half cup sugar, one junket tablet, one tablespoon cold water, three teaspoons grated chocolate. Heat milk just warm (not hot,) dissolve the tablet in the cold water, add sugar to milk. Mix the chocolate with a little milk and set in hot water until thoroughly melted. Then stir chocolate into milk and the dissolved tablet, just stirring a few times, and pour into custard glasses. When set, serve with cream or jelly. NO. 34. COFFEE ICE CREAM. M.F.B., 764 Towne avenue, Los Angeles.--One quart cream, one and one-half cups milk, one-third cup coffee, one and one-fourth cups sugar, one-fourth teaspoon salt, yolks of four eggs. Scald the milk with the coffee, add one cup sugar; mix yolks of eggs with one-fourth cup sugar, add salt; combine mixtures. Cook over hot water until thickened, add one cup cream and let stand in warm place twenty-five minutes. Then cool and add remaining cream and strain through cheesecloth. Freeze. When hard enough, take out the dasher and let stand an hour to ripen. NO. 35. COMPOTE OF DATES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--To a pound of stoned dates take one cup of sugar and two cups of water; put water and sugar in a boiler; let cook three minutes; put dates in and set on back of stove for one hour; add a little vanilla, one-half glass of sherry, also some nuts cut up; let cool. Serve cold with whipped cream. (This is very rich and delicious.) NO. 36. CORN MEAL SOUFFLE. Mrs. A.L. Parsons, Betteravia, Cal.--Scald one-quarter pint corn meal or germea with one pint boiling milk. Allow to cook two or three minutes. When cool, add one tablespoonful sugar, one tablespoonful melted butter, one teaspoonful salt and the yolks (well beaten) of four eggs. Lastly, add the stiffly-beaten whites. Bake in a well-buttered pan in a rather quick oven one-half hour. This may be served as a dessert with the addition of a sweet sauce. NO. 37. CRANBERRY SHERBET. Mrs. E.H. Williams, 120 East Fern avenue, Redlands, Cal.--One quart cranberries, one pound sugar, one quart water, juice of one lemon. Cook the berries till soft, strain through a sieve. Place on fire again, adding sugar and juice of lemon; boil fifteen minutes. When cool, put in freezer. NO. 38. CRYSTALLIZED FIGS. Mrs. Nettie B. Stewart, 1417 East Twenty-first street, Los Angeles.--Wash white Pacific or Smyrna figs, put in sauce pan, cover with water and boil until they lose their green color. Have a heavy syrup ready, skim the figs into it, cook slowly until the skin looks clear. Set them away, in the syrup, until the following morning; then put on stove, reheat slowly to boiling point, cook a short time; then allow them to cool in the syrup, leaving them in it until the next morning. Pick out and dry on platters, changing, as the syrup runs out, to dry platters. They can be dried about the stove or in the sun, covered by wire screen cover. It is better to do a few at a time, enough to make only one layer in the pan in which they are scalded--say two or three pounds. To keep them from molding after they are dry, scatter powdered sugar freely over them, shake them in a basin gently and put them in self-sealers. They are excellent minced and put in plain puddings, also in any kind of cake, fruit cake or plain. NO. 39. DIVINITY CANDY. Mrs. C.C. Hall, Hollywood.--One pint golden drip syrup, one pint sweet milk, one cup granulated sugar, butter size of a walnut. Boil until a soft ball can be made. Remove from fire and whip until it is creamy, then pour over one-half pound of shelled California English walnuts. NO. 40. HOLLYWOOD PUNCH (frozen.) Mrs. C.C. Hall, Hollywood, Cal.--Mix one-half pound granulated sugar with the yolks of eight eggs, whip in one quart of cream, one wineglass best brandy, one wineglass Santa Cruz rum, one-half wineglass old whisky. Freeze and serve in glass cups. NO. 41. FROZEN EGGNOG (for one person.) Mrs. C.C. Hall, Hollywood, Cal.--To the well-beaten yolk of one egg add scant tablespoon sugar, two tablespoons brandy, one wineglass rich cream, and lastly the well-beaten white of egg. Freeze. NO. 42. HURRY-UP DESSERT. Mrs. E.M.W., Anaheim, Cal.--One can best blackberries, four soda crackers crushed to a fine powder with rollingpin. Place upon table in separate glass dishes. Serve by putting a dessertspoon of the cracker powder upon a service of the berries with their juice, and pour over all rich cream. It is unexpectedly delicious and is quickly prepared in emergencies. NO. 43. FRUIT PUNCH. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Dissolve a pound and a quarter of sugar in a quart of boiling water, add the grated rind of one lemon and one orange; grate only the yellow rind--the least bit of the white will make it bitter; turn in two tablespoons of gelatine that has soaked for an hour in a half-cup of water; simmer for five minutes, until the gelatine is dissolved. Take from the fire and when cold put in a freezer and stir until frozen; stir slowly and evenly. Color with fruit coloring if desired. NO. 44. ITALIAN TUTTI-FRUTTI. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Take a large form for ice cream; have ready as great a variety of ripe fruit as possible, watermelon included; seed the watermelon, cut it into squares, put a layer of it into the form, sugaring it well with granulated sugar, then a layer of varied fruits; sugar abundantly, and proceed in this way until the form is packed full of fruit. Cover it, set in double boiler just long enough for the sugar to dissolve and the juices to be started, then let it cool. When cold, freeze. NO. 45. JELLIED APPLES. Miss C.L. Pooley, 1826 South Hope street, Los Angeles.-- Butter a quart pudding dish, fill it with layers of thinly sliced sour apples, sprinkling a tablespoon of sugar and a saltspoon of cinnamon, or other flavoring, between every two layers. At the last, pour over the whole a teacup of cold water and cover closely with a buttered plate that fits into the dish and presses the fruit. Set the pudding dish in a pan of hot water in the oven and cook slowly three hours and a half. When cold it can be turned from the dish in a jellied mass. Whipped cream or any cold sauce may be poured round the jelly. Jellied apples will keep well for several days. NO. 46. LEMON HONEY. Miss Florence Pownall, box 444, San Pedro, Ca--Take one-fourth pound of butter, six eggs, the whites of two left out; three lemons, grated yellow rind and juice; one pound granulated sugar. Put into double sauce pan, butter, sugar, lemon rind, eggs and juice, and boil together until thick, stirring all the time. This will keep good for some time, kept in air-tight glass jars. Excellent for small tartlets. NO. 47. LEMON SHERBET. M.F.B., 1764 Towne avenue, Los Angeles.--One quart milk, one and one-half cups sugar, juice of three large or four small lemons. Mix the lemon juice and sugar stirring constantly while slowly adding the milk. Freeze, using about three parts cracked ice to one part rock salt. This makes about two quarts sherbet. NO. 48. MERINGUES. Mrs. C.C. Hall, Hollywood, Cal.--To the whites of three eggs beaten very stiff add nine tablespoonfuls granulated sugar; mix lightly and rapidly. Drop a teaspoonful at a time on heavy brown paper placed on inverted pans, and bake in cool oven for thirty minutes. Larger shells may be made and filled with whipped cream flavored with sugar and vanilla. Meringues cannot be baked in gas ovens. NO. 49. NUT CUSTARD PIES. Miss G. Smyth, Ontario, Cal.--Three eggs, one quart milk, one teaspoon cornstarch, mixed with a little cold milk; a pinch of salt, half cup sugar. Cook this in double boiler and flavor. After it is cool put in two-thirds cup chopped walnuts. Serve with whipped cream. NO. 50. PICKLED FIGS. (Miss) Evelyn Dooly, 623 Court street, Los Angeles.--Three pounds ripe figs, one pound sugar, half pint vinegar, half lemon sliced thin. Season with whole cloves, cinnamon and allspice. Put vinegar, sugar and spices together; let come to a boil, then drop in fruit and cook until tender. Put into stone jar. NO. 51. PUFF PASTE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Three cups flour, one teaspoon baking powder, a pinch of salt, one egg. Mix flour and egg with ice water; roll out and put on butter in small bits; fold over and roll thick. Put on ice for twenty minutes. NO. 52. RICE WITH STRAWBERRY DRESSING. Mrs. E.M.W., Anaheim, Cal.--Put four cups of milk in a double boiler and when boiling hot pour in three-fourths of a cup of rice, one tablespoon butter, one scant teaspoon salt, three tablespoons sugar and cook one hour. STRAWBERRY DRESSING. One cup powdered sugar, one tablespoon of butter, beat to a cream; one large cup fresh ripe strawberries, mashed through a sieve, add to sugar and cream, and lastly stir in a well-beaten white of an egg. In serving, pour the rice hot or cold on a platter, then pour the strawberry around it. NO. 53. RHUBARB JAM. (An old English recipe.) Mrs. C.L. Pooley, 1826 South Hope street, Los Angeles.--To six pounds of rhubarb add six pounds of sugar and six large lemons. Cut the rhubarb in small pieces; slice the lemons very thin. Put the fruit in a large bowl and cover with the sugar and let stand twenty-four hours. Boil for about three-quarters of an hour. Do not stir more than necessary, as it's great beauty is in not being all broken up. Put in glasses and cover with brandy paper. NO. 54. STEWED APPLES WITH MERINGUE AND CURRANT JELLY. Mrs. William F. Magee, 122 Johnston street, Los Angeles. Core and pare some large apples; rub the surface of each one with a cut lemon; cook until tender in a syrup of sugar, water and a little lemon juice; boil the syrup and pour over the apples. When cold, place on the top of each apple meringue and a spoonful of currant jelly. NO. 55. STRAWBERRY ICE CREAM. M.F.B., 764 Towne avenue, Los Angeles.--Two quarts milk, half pint cream, three boxes strawberries, two cups sugar. Wash and hull strawberries and sprinkle with sugar. Add to the milk, cream and sugar, and freeze. NO. 56. STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE. Mrs. Walter Kabisius, 226 East Sixteenth street, Los Angeles.--Take the yolks of three eggs, beaten well with two tablespoons butter and one cup sugar; beat to a cream, then add one cup milk, two cups flour and two teaspoons baking powder; bake in three layers DRESSING. Take the whites of three eggs with half cup sugar; beat to a frosting. Take one box strawberries, wash well before picking stems off, so no water will get inside; spread frosting on layers with strawberries; plain frosting on top; flavor with vanilla. Serve with cream. NO. 57. STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE. (Original.) Mrs. Lula A. Squier. Claremont, Cal.--Make a nice sponge cake as follows: Separate the whites and yolks of four eggs; beat whites until very stiff, then beat in half a cup of granulated sugar; beat the yolks and add to them one-half cup sugar, beating five minutes, this length of time being important as the delicate texture of the cake depends upon it; add to the yolksthe juice and a little of the grated rind of one lemon, or if the acid be not liked, three tablespoons of water will do. Now beat well the yolks and whites. At this stage beating is in order, but must be absolutely avoided after adding the flour, of which take one cup. The mixture now should look like a puff ball, and the flour is to be tossed or stirred into it with a light turn of the spoon. The cup of sugar must be generous, the flour level. Bake twenty-five minutes in moderate oven, but just before putting in the oven sprinkle over it a tablespoon of sugar to obtain the "crackly" top crust which is so desirable, but which is not necessary for the shortcake. When cake is cold, split open and frost with soft icing made of whites of two eggs and one cup sugar; have ready the strawberries cut in half; cover the frosted under half of the cake with berries; put on the top and frost, putting the berries cut as before all over the top in even rows or any fancy shape desired. Tastes as good as it looks. NO. 58. STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE. Mrs. Hartley, Glendale, Cal.--Select three boxes ripe strawberries, wash thoroughly, pick off stems and set aside. For cake take two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, butter size of two eggs, one-half teaspoon salt; mix well; add milk to make soft dough; roll out one-half inch thick in two layers; bake ten or fifteen minutes. While cake is baking, make boiled icing of two cups granulated sugar, one-half cup water; boil until it threads; whip white of one egg until stiff; pour syrup into egg and whip to a cream; flavor with vanilla. Butter each layer of cake, put strawberries and frosting on each and place together like layer cake. NO. 59. STUFFED PEACHES. Mrs. N.S. Alling. Lamanda Park, Cal.--Take large-size ripe peaches, wipe off fuzz, but do not peel; take out pit at top of peach without breaking the fruit; fill from the following: One package of seedless raisins, 10 cents worth almonds, 25 cents worth of dates, pits to be removed. Chop the last three ingredients together; fill peach and tie to prevent falling apart. Then make a syrup of four teacups mild vinegar and six teacups white sugar. Boil peaches in it until tender. Seal tight in cans with syrup. Same as any fruit. This is entirely new in Southern California. NO. 57. ARROW ROOT. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Mix a tablespoon of arrow root with enough cold water to form a smooth paste; pour this slowly into half a pint boiling water and let simmer slowly until it becomes thick like jelly; sweeten and add a little nutmeg or cinnamon. Milk may be used instead of water. NO. 34. LUNCH DAINTY. Beat whites of eggs and powdered sugar, as for a cold icing until stiff. With this mix English walnuts, minced fine (or any preferred nut,) and spread on "Uneeda Biscuits." Place them on a platter and put in oven of stove for a few minutes until icing begins to color brown, very light brown. Let cool and serve. NO. 139. ROCK SNOW. Mrs. J.M. Reed, 6822 Monte Vista street, Highland Park, Los Angeles--Boil a cup of rice in sweet milk until quite soft, sweeten with one-half cup sugar and pile on a fancy dish; lay on it bits of currant jelly. Beat the whites of five eggs with three tablespoons of sugar; when very stiff add a tablespoon of cream and drop over the rice roughly, giving it the form of a rock of snow. Ornamental and delicious. MARMALADES. NO. 1. CALIFORNIA ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. C.M. West, 519 West Palm avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Peel the whole of three medium-sized lemons cut in thin slices, remove seeds, add enough sliced orange to make four pints, add four pints of water. Let it stand twelve hours; boil fast one hour. It will boil away one-third; measure, add the same amount of sugar and boil one hour. NO. 2. DUNDEE ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. C.M. West, 519 West Palm avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Two quarts sliced orange, one pint sliced pomelo, five pints of water; let it stand over night; in the morning boil two hours; when cool measure and add the same amount of sugar and boil one hour. Reject seeds and core of pomelo, slicing very thin, using all the peel. Use half the orange peel and slice thin. NO. 3. GRAPEFRUIT MARMALADE. --Take four large fruits, slice thin and remove seeds; for each pound of fruit add one pint of water. Let stand twenty-four hours; boil twenty minutes till tender; stand again twenty-four hours. For each pound of fruit add one pound of sugar and boil till jellied. NO. 4. OLD DUNDEE SCOTCH MARMALADE. Mrs. John H. Putnam, 676 Echandia street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Wash and wipe dry fourteen large oranges; select seven of the largest and with a sharp knife peel very thin, taking care not to remove any white part; put into a deep kettle and saucepan and add five pints of clear cold water; let it stand thirty-six hours, changing the water twice. The second morning put the soaked peelings with the last water over the fire to cook. Then peel the other seven oranges, throwing away thin skins; slice the whole fourteen and cover with four pounds of loaf or granulated sugar; add the juice of two large lemons and turn all into the boiling peelings and cook two hours or until clear and thick, stirring often to keep from burning. When partly cooled, pour into jars or glasses and you will have a delicious sweetness that will keep for years or until eaten. NO. 5. ORANGE AND GRAPEFRUIT MARMALADE. Mrs. Robert Y. McBride, 342 Westlake avenue, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take six large sized navel oranges, three grapefruit and juice of six lemons. Boil the fruit whole (separately) until soft enough to pierce readily with fork. Let remain over night in water in which it was boiled. In morning cut in halves and from the grapefruit scoop out pulp and press through colander to remove seeds; cut the rind fine with a sharp knife. Do the same with oranges, only these may be cut through pulp and all, as there are no seeds to reject. Save every drop of juice from both fruits. To the shaved skins and pulp add two quarts cold water. Measure and add one and one-half the quantity of sugar, having both sugar and juice hot; add juice of lemons; boil until like thick syrup, pour into glasses and let remain unsealed for a day or so when it will have set into a beautiful amber jelly; seal with paraffine. Do not think that this is a bitter marmalade on account of the grapefruit, on the contrary it is more delicious than plain orange. Avoid making on a cloudy day; it will take longer to thicken and will be darker in color. (This recipe once tried is always used again.) NO. 6. ORANGE MARMALADE OR JELLY. Bessie A. Taylor, 1225 South Los Angeles street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Slice very thin nine oranges and one lemon, the juice of two lemons strained. Weigh, and to each pound of fruit add one quart of cold water. Let this stand over night. In the morning boil fifteen minutes. Let stand until next morning. Weigh and add one pound of sugar to each pound of fruit and juice. Boil rapidly about twenty minutes. Do not stir more than necessary. If these directions are carefully followed the product will be clear and jelly-like, and most delicate and delicious. If at all ropey or syrupy you have failed in some particular and should try again. It is well worth while, for the perfect product is beyond comparison. NO. 7. PEACH AND ORANGE MARMALADE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles, Cal.--Soak two pounds of evaporated peaches over night. In the morning drain and barely cover with cold water; sit in a porcelain sauce pan on the range where they will simmer gently. Grate the yellow rind from six fine oranges; reject all the white skin; cut the sections into pieces and add with the grated rind to the peaches; cook two hours; add a pound of sugar, and cook fifteen minutes longer. Stir occasionally; be careful not to let it scorch. Pack in jelly glasses or small jars. NO. 8. ORANGE MARMALADE. L. Neilson, 1019 East Thirty-fourth street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Peel the required quantity of oranges and a third of the amount of lemons very thinly, taking up as little of the white as possible; place parings in a pan; cover with cold water; boil gently until tender; sqeeze out the juice, put aside; the balance of the oranges cut up and boil until very soft in small quantity of water, as a good deal, of glutinous matter is contained in the white. Press this gently through a colander; add the juice with the water (also strained) from the parings. (This water is retained on account of the bitter flavor found only in a Scotch recipe for marmalade; if not liked it can be discarded and more orange juice substituted.) Cut parings into fine shreds, add to the bulk; boil for an hour before adding sugar, pound for pound, or pint for pint. After sugar is added boil slowly and skim well for three-quarters of an hour. This is an old-fashioned recipe, well tried, and though troublesome, good. NO. 9. ORANGE MARMALADE. Rannie Spurgin, Monrovia, Cal.--Slice oranges very fine, removing seeds. (Do not peel.) To each five oranges use juice of one lemon. To each pound of fruit thus prepared add three pints of water. Let stand twenty-four hours. Boil one hour. Let stand again twenty-four hours. Then to each pound of this mixture add a pound of sugar; add slowly while boiling and boil one hour. Five fair-sized oranges make ten glasses of marmalade. Do not start with too many oranges or your kettle will not hold mixture as you add water. NO. 10. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Mary M. Pettibone, 702 Fern avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Wash well and slice five thin-skinned ripe solid oranges; use the rind to only one-half the fruit; do not use the ends. To each pound of sliced fruit add one quart of cold water; let stand twenty-four hours then tightly cover and set in oven to cook until tender; let stand twenty-four hours more. To each pound of fruit and water add three-fourths pound of cane sugar; boil one hour. Add the juice of one lemon to each quart and boil rapidly until quite clear, and thick enough to jell when cool. NO. 11. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. J.S. Stocks, 250 Avenue 25, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take four cups orange sliced thinly; one cup lemon, sliced thinly. To every cup of fruit put three cups cold water in stone or earthen jar. With water on let stand twenty-four hours. Then cook forty-five minutes. Let stand over night. Then measure and to each cup of fruit and water put one cup sugar and boil again forty-five minutes. If these directions are carefully carried out, you will have a beautiful amber-colored and rich marmalade. NO. 12. ORANGE MARMALADE. Emma Miller, 419 South Bonnie Brae street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take five oranges, sliced very thin; juice of one lemon. To each pound of fruit add three pints cold water and let stand twenty-four hours. Boil forty-five minutes and let stand twenty-four hours. Weigh, and to each pound of fruit add one pound sugar and juice of one lemon. Let boil forty-five minutes and put in glasses. Select ripe oranges and your marmalade will be delicious. NO. 13. ORANGE MARMALADE. Flora Farman, Monrovia, Cal.--Prepare five large oranges, being very particular to remove all the white part. Cut into small pieces; add grated rind of one lemon; also inside part cut fine. To one pint fruit add one pint cold water. Boil rapidly five minutes. Remove from stove, leave uncovered twenty-four hours. Add two-thirds the amount sugar you have fruit. Boil quickly forty-five minutes, or until it thickens. Watch closely and skim well. NO. 14. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. W.H. McFee, 245 Avenue 39, Los Angeles, Cal.--Select fine, nice, firm oranges of uniform size, and two lemons; slice with peeling; soak in one gallon of water twenty-four hours, drain and add a pint of fresh water to every pound of fruit, and boil one hour; add one teacup sugar to one tea-cup of fruit with water in which it has been boiled, and boil quite briskly for twenty minutes. Put in small jars or glasses. NO. 15. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. W.S. Kyle, 266 Center street, Pasadena, Cal.--Take six navel oranges and two good-sized lemons; slice very thin, or cut in dice, as preferred. Then measure the fruit. Add as much water as you have fruit. Now add as much sugar as fruit and water combined. Place over fire and boil from thirty to forty minutes. Put in glasses and when cool cover with paraffine. Age improves this marmalade. NO. 16. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. C.M. Hamilton, 935 South Hill street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take six fine ripe oranges and two lemons; peel four of the oranges and the lemons, and remove all the white skin. Then cut the oranges and lemons in small pieces. Slice the remaining two unpeeled oranges in thin slices and cut into small sections. Place all in large dish; cover with cold water, let stand twenty-four hours, then boil slowly one hour. Again let stand till next day, and slowly boil an hour; then add equal measure or weight of granulated sugar to fruit, and continue boiling half hour. Put into glass jars or jelly glasses; let stand a day or two ere covering. By following these simple rules you will obtain the most delicious marmalade. Grapefruit marmalade made in the same way is something worth living in California for. NO. 17. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Fred Creelman. 3103 Key West street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take six large seedless oranges, wash and slice very thin; add to each pound of fruit three pints of water. Let stand over night, then boil in the same water until tender. Add one and one-quarter pounds of sugar to each pint of fruit and boil slowly one and three-quarters hours, then add juice of four lemons and boil one-quarter hour longer. This recipe makes twenty glasses of marmalade. NO. 18. ORANGE MARMALADE. Ella A. Baum, 412 South Boyle avenue, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take six medium-sized and thin-skinned oranges and cut off the ends where the rind is thick. Slice the oranges very thin, keeping the slices whole. Measure and pour over an equal measure of water. Let stand twenty-four hours; put on stove and bring to boiling point. Let stand another twenty-four hours. Measure again and add an equal amount of sugar. Boil slowly until syrup jellies. Put in glasses and when cold cover with paraffine. NO. 19. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. May T. Johnson, 449 North Belmont avenue, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take seven oranges and three lemons. Cut off all rough bits of peel, and slice very thin. Take out all seeds. To each pound of sliced fruit add three pints of cold water. Let it stand twenty-four hours, then boil three-quarters of an hour, and set away for another twenty-four hours. Then weigh, and to every pound of fruit and water add one and one-eighth pounds of sugar, and boil fifteen minutes longer, or until it jells. NO. 20. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. C.P. Mathison, 133 North Eastlake avenue, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take eight large fresh oranges; wash thoroughly; pare as you would an apple; chop the peel fine with a hash knife, discarding defective parts of the peeling. Extract the juice and pulp from a medium-sized lemon, being careful to remove the seed. Put these ingredients together in a large agate pan; add six quarts of water and let stand in a cool place twenty-four hours; then boil briskly forty-five minutes; let stand another twenty-four hours. Add the juice and pulp of two lemons--no peel or seed of lemons. Measure carefully and add as much granulated sugar by measure as you have of the cooked mixture. Stir until mixed. Place over a brisk fire; skim well when it is almost at the boiling point and boil rapidly forty-five minutes. This recipe takes thirteen or fourteen pounds of sugar and makes between six and seven quarts of thick, amber-colored marmalade, which should be put while hot into glass fruit jars or jelly glasses. It is not necessary to seal it. NO. 21. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. W.H. Glover, 733 South Coronado street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take nine oranges and three lemons; grate the yellow rind from three of the oranges and one lemon; grate lightly, avoiding the white, bitter part of the rind. Then peel all the fruit and tear into small portions, rejecting all tough, stringy pieces and seeds; now weigh fruit and grated rind and boil same for half an hour; then add three-fourths of a pound of sugar to each pound of fruit, and cook two minutes longer, or until it jells. Or take twelve oranges and three lemons sliced very thin, rind and all; cover with one gallon of water and let stand twenty-four hours. Cook one hour; add eight pounds of sugar and continue boiling until it jells. NO. 22. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. G.C. Richwine, 144 East Avenue 53, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take twelve medium-sized oranges and four lemons; slice very thin; add twice as much water as there is fruit; let stand twenty-four hours in vessel you are going to cook fruit in; this avoids breaking rinds. Then boil until tender; skim well to keep from getting bitter; when tender, let stand twenty-four hours. Then use equal parts of sugar and fruit. Let boil until it jells. If more jelly is wanted, use more water. Can or use jelly glasses. NO. 23. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Linda Howard, 265 Henrietta Court, Pasadena, Cal.--Twelve oranges, four lemons; cut all fine; cover with four quarts of cold water; let it stand for thirty hours; boil for two hours; then add eight pounds of white sugar; then boil one hour and stir well. NO. 24. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. E.M. Smith, Hotel Granada, 419 South Grand avenue, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take twelve large navel oranges, peel half of them, shave all up thin; six large lemons, peeled and sliced; cover with eight pints of cold water. Let set twenty-four hours. Boil for one hour; throw in half teaspoon soda after cooking thirty minutes, and take off all the yellow foam. Then add eight pounds of granulated sugar, cooking slowly for two hours. This will keep fine for all time to come. NO. 25. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. M.E. Kloeckner, 709 Locust street, Pasadena, Cal.--Take twelve oranges, eight of them freed from skin and all the white, and four whole oranges, all cut across the orange in very thin slices, especially those with the skin on them; allow one lemon cut same way to twelve oranges and three cups of water to each cup of pulp. Let stand over night; then cook hard, being careful it does not scorch, two or three hours or until quite thick. Measure and allow one cup of sugar to each cup of orange. Boil fifteen or twenty minutes. Put in jars or glasses, thick layer of sugar or wax on top to prevent mold. NO. 26. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. E.M. McKinley, Cahuenga P. O., Los Angeles county, Cal.--Take twelve firm navel oranges, wash clean and cut crosswise in thin slices; put enough cold water to cover them; let stand twenty-four hours; then cook in the water they are soaked in until the peel is tender; then measure all and add the same amount of sugar and cook until the juice becomes jellied, then add the juice of six lemons and cook fifteen minutes more. When cool put in cans or glasses and make air tight. NO. 27. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Mary Boylston, 131 West Twenty-seventh street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Slice one dozen oranges, skins and all, very thin. Weigh the sliced fruit, and to each pound of fruit add one and one-half pints of water and boil for three-quarters of an hour. Then let it stand for twenty-four hours; weigh again and to each pound add one and one-half pounds of sugar and the juice of one lemon, and boil for twenty-five minutes, not longer. You can use common sour oranges taking out the seeds as you slice them. This recipe is delicious and very easy to make. NO. 28. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Nettie V. Hanna, 594 Corner avenue, Riverside, Cal.--Take twelve oranges and six lemons. Peel the fruit and run through a food cutter or chop with a hash knife fine. Seed the lemons; the juice of two oranges additional improves it. Pour over the fruit two quarts of water and let stand over night. In the morning measure the fruit and water, put on the fire and cook until tender. Then add the same measure of sugar and cook until clear. NO. 29. ORANGE MARMALADE. Harriet McPherson, 106 South Lake avenue, Pasadena, Cal.--Select twelve fresh navel oranges and two lemons; pare off the yellow rind; pare off all the white pulp and throw it away. (Use a sharp knife and small board.) Lay four or five rinds together on the board. Cut them into straws. Cut oranges and lemons into small pieces. Mix all together; measure; add as much water or cupful for cupful. Let stand over night. Then boil hard for twenty minutes. Measure again; then add, while hot, cup of pulp to one of sugar. Let boil for thirty minutes in flat pan. Stir constantly with wooden paddle. Pack in small jars; cover with paper. Will keep long time. NO. 30. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Ella C. Veeder, Whittier, Cal. Take twelve oranges (navels or Valencies preferred,) cut off the thick rind at each end and leave that out. Cut the oranges into thin slices; add the pulp only of three lemons. To each pound of fruit add one quart of water. Let stand over night. The next morning boil the mixture forty-five minutes. Let stand over night again. Weigh the mixture and to each pound add, when boiling, one pound sugar; boil one hour. Put into glasses or fruit jars. This makes about eight quarts. NO. 31. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Hattie Charnock, 354 N. Breed St., Los Angeles. Take twelve good large navel oranges and five good lemons; rub with a cloth until perfectly clean; cut off ends of all, then cut in quarters and slice very thin; weigh them, and for every pound of fruit add one quart of cold water; place in a jar (not tin;) let stand over night; then put on stove and boil until skins can be pierced with a straw. Take off and stand away until cool or lukewarm; now weigh again and for every pound put in a pound of sugar; again return to stove and boil until it thickens. It is better to divide this amount into four parts and boil hard about one and one-half hours. This amount makes thirty-six glasses. NO. 32. ORANGE MARMALADE. C.V.W. Halsey. Take thirteen good-sized navel oranges weigh them; remove the peel and shred it very fine. Put with the pulp of the orange which must also be sliced very thin into a large bowl. To one pound of the fruit put three pints of water. Let stand twenty-four hours. Boil until tender. Remove from fire. To one pint of fruit put one and one-fourth pounds of sugar. Boil hard for two hours. Before taking from the fire, add the juice of five lemons. Put in glasses. This recipe fills fifty glasses. To seven oranges take three lemons. NO. 33. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. N.S. Alling. Lamanda, Cal. Take fifteen large ripe sweet oranges; cut up seven of them with the peel and pulp; discard seeds; also take peel of six lemons; add the remaining eight oranges without the peel. To every pound of fruit add one-half pint of cold water. Boil about one-hour, then chop very fine. To every pound of fruit add three-fourths pound sugar. Let it stand over night in a preserving kettle. Then boil until it jells--length of time depends upon the heat you have. When done can same as any fruit. NO. 34. ORANGE MARMALADE. Miss A.C. Wright, Duarte, Cal. Take from ten to twenty bitter oranges. falling these, unripe seedlings or Valencias. Wash well; cut into sections on a board; remove some of the stringy white and a few seeds. Pass the sections through an ordinary meat mincing machine and turn the minced oranges into a large granite preserving pan. To each orange allow one tumblerful of cold water; soak from twelve to thirty-six hours; boil two and one-half or three hours, breaking up the lumps that will have formed (fork does this best.) Stir occasionally and skim well. When the pulp is quite soft add sugar, one-half pound for each orange and one pound extra for the whole quantity. Boil two hours or more, stirring constantly to prevent burning; skim well. When it begins to thicken in patches it is done. Turn into glas jars. It should be quite firm when cold. Put away uncovered in a dark, cool place. (This marmalade has been pronounced the nearest possible approach to Keller's famous Dundee marmalade.) NO. 35. ORANGE MARMALADE. Miss C. Laura Pooley, 1826 South Hope street, Los Angeles. Pare thirty oranges --half the number you propose using--cut the rind into small pieces; place it in cold water and boil until tender, changing the water three times to draw out the bitter oil. Grate the rind of the remaining oranges; take off all the white inner skin, and cut the fruit into pieces, removing the seeds. Weigh the oranges at this point and allow a pound of sugar to each pound of fruit. Pour over the sugar all the juice that has come from cutting the oranges, pressing them slightly to obtain as much juice as possible. Heat slowly to dissolve the sugar, adding a very little water, if there was not quite enough juice. Boil five minutes; skim; add the boiled and sliced rind, and cook ten minutes longer. Then put in the fruit and grated peel, and boil twenty minutes. Put in glass jars while hot, and seal. NO. 36. ORANGE CUSTARD. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong ave., Los Angeles, Cal. Juice of ten oranges, one and one-half teacupfuls of sugar, yolks of ten eggs, one pint cream. Put the juice and sugar on to boil in a double boiler; when boiling, skim it carefully; set aside to cool. Beat the yolks very light and add the juice of oranges; beat the cream also to a froth; then return the orange juice and beaten yolks to the fire and heat slowly, stirring until thick; add cream and pour into cups. Serve cold. NO. 37. ORANGE DESSERT. Mrs. N.S. Alling, Lamanda, Cal. (Very dainty and delicious.) Take large yellow ripe oranges and cut in shape of a basket with handle; remove all the pulp and seeds, leaving the inside clean from any moisture; then soak a small-sized package of gelatine in a pint of cold water; let this stand until you have the syrup made to pour over the gelatine. To make syrup squeeze the juice of ten oranges and two lemons; remove every seed, as it will be bitter. Rub two oranges with lumps of white sugar so as to make each lump very yellow and oily; in this way obtain the flavor of the peel; take two pounds of white sugar and a pint of water and boil three minutes; when a little cool, add juice of oranges and lemons and gelatine; set away to cool until it forms a jelly, then fill your orange baskets with this jelly. Just before serving, put a little whipped cream on top of jelly, or white of egg whipped very stiff; then tie a little bow of pale green baby ribbon on handle of orange and place orange basket in a saucer covered with orange leaves, so the points of the leaves will be at the outer edge of saucer. This makes a beautiful dish for the table. NO. 38. ORANGE FRITTERS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong ave., Los Angeles, Cal. Yolks of four eggs beaten with four tablespoons sugar; stir into this the juice of half a lemon and just enough flour to thicken like a batter; add the beaten whites, and dip in one slice of orange at a time. Take up with a large kitchen spoon and lay in the hot butter and fry a nice brown. Sprinkle pulverized sugar on top. NO. 39. ORANGE PRESERVE. Mrs. W.S. Kyle, 266 Center street, Pasadena, Cal. Peel and separate the sections of oranges, carefully removing the white skin that covers each. When you have the quantity you wish, cover the sections of fruit scantily with water and let it stand overnight. In the morning measure and add same amount of sugar; then boil until clear and place in glasses. (We have lately used a glass preserved in this way eleven years ago, finding it of excellent flavor. NO. 40. PERFECTION ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. W.D. Gard, 1907 East Second street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Eight large, juicy, ripe navel oranges and two large, juicy lemons. Peel six of the oranges and one lemon, rejecting the peel down to the pulp on both ends of remaining oranges and lemon. Cross cut, then slice very thin, making small pieces. Add six quarts of cold water and let stand twenty-four hours; then boil twenty minutes; remove from the fire and let stand twenty-four hours again. To each quart of the liquid add a scant two-thirds of a quart of granulated sugar, and boil in that quantity, boiling rapidly, till a soft jelly is formed when cold. Remove all green scum when boiling the last time, and a perfectly transparent, delicious marmalade is the result. Makes about two dozen common jelly glasses full. Use only agateware to set or make this marmalade in. NO. 41. ORANGE AND COCOANUT. Mrs. George Huckaby, 261 Hilton avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Take glass dish, put in layer of oranges that have been peeled and sliced with as much of the white coating removed as possible, with layer of sugar, then one of cocoanut, then alternate layers of orange, sugar and cocoanut, with cocoanut layer on top. Is pretty and good. NO. 42. ORANGE VINEGAR. Charles C. Goodale, Villa Rosa Orange Ranch, 120 East Fern avenue, Redlands, Cal.--I would add one to your many valuable recipes which I think quite valuable for this section of the State. A year ago, in an attempt to make wine from orange juice, from a Cuban recipe, I found a few months later my keg filled with excellent vinegar, far superior to any from cider and in this section costing a trifle. Formula: One gallon orange juice, two gallons water, three pounds sugar. Keg or barrel must be full, not corked and left where it will get some warmth. NO. 43. ORANGE SHORT CAKE. M.F.H., Redlands, Cal.--Slice two oranges very thin; cover with one and one-third cups sugar and let stand about an hour. Make rich biscuit dough with two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, salt, butter about size of egg; wet with milk and part water to make a soft dough; handle little as possible. Roll in two sheets; spread one lightly with butter, place other on top; bake in quick oven. When done put sweetened oranges between layers and around cake. NO. 44. LEMON CREAM. Mrs. K.M. Phillips, 1235 West Seventh street, Los Angeles, Cal.--(A very delicate, delicious dessert.) Beat yolks of four eggs until light; add four tablespoons granulated sugar, juice and grated rind of one large or two small lemons; add two tablespoons hot water. Put on stove and cook slowly, stirring all the time until thick. Remove from fire and stir in whites which have been beaten stiff and sweetened. Serve as soon as cool. NO. 45. ORANGE MARMALADE.-- Mrs. J.G.A., 1247 W. 30th st., Los Angeles, Cal.--Pare with a sharp knife two dozen oranges, carefully removing all the white part which adheres to the orange after paring; then cut the fruit in thick slices and put in a preserving kettle. Add one pint of pure water; simmer over a slow fire one hour; or until the pulp is tender; press through a coarse colander with a potato masher. Clean the kettle thoroughly; measure the fruit, and put back into kettle. Measure the same quantity of sugar over the fruit; simmer over a slow fire one hour, or until the contents of the kettle are of an amber color. NO. 46. LEMON BUTTER. Mrs. Belmont Perry, 989 East Colorado street, Pasadena--One lemon and a half, a cup of sugar, three eggs, piece of butter size of an egg. Beat the eggs together and stir in the sugar; add the lemon and butter. Put it in a double boiler and cook until creamy. Nice for picnic on bread. NO. 47. LEMON MARMALADE. Mrs. Bell, 274 North Raymond avenue, Pasadena, Cal.--Take two dozen lemons roll until soft, cut in halves, squeeze the juice into one bowl and the pulp into another. Boil the skins till tender in plenty of water, tightly covered; when quite tender, take them out and cut in shreds. Wet a cloth in cold water; strain the juice through and squeeze the pulp, adding a little cold water to the pulp. Measure the water, chips and juice and to every pint put one pound of white sugar. Boil for twenty minutes, or till it begins to jelly. If boiled too much, the skins will be tough. NO. 48. LEMON PICKLE. Mrs. Cruickshank, Arlington, Riverside, Cal.--Cut into quarters and pick out the seeds of six medium-sized lemons; put the quartered lemons into a jar, strew over them two ounces of well beaten bay salt; cover the jar with a cloth and plate and let it stand three days; then put in a few cloves and one-quarter pound mace, beaten fine, one ounce of garlic or shallot, two ounces of mustard seeds and one nutmegsliced or grated. Heat a quart of vinegar to boiling point and pour over other ingredients; cover the jar and in three or four days close it air tight. It will be fit for use in a week, and is an improvement to most sauces, particularly, to fish sauce. NO. 49. LEMON SYRUP. Mrs. Cruickshank, Arlington, Riverside--Squeeze about three dozen lemons, just the juice, into a jar, and add to it one quart of cold water previously acidulated with two and one-half ounces of tartaric acid; add three pounds of sugar and stir occasionally till quite dissolved; pour it through a jelly bag; let it run all night, then bottle it up. Orange syrup is made in the same way, by substituting oranges for lemons. NO. 50. LEMON TOAST. Mrs. W.C. Rayen, Fatherland Ranch, Hemet, Cal.--Cook one cupful of sugar with one of water till it is like a syrup; pour on the beaten white of one egg; after beating a while add the juice of 1 lemon; pour over toasted bread, about six slices, four by four inches in size, which have been buttered. NO. 51. CRYSTALLIZED ORANGES. Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street--Take oranges not quite ripe, cut off the yellow rind; cut a hole where the stem had been, sufficiently large to take out all the inside. Be careful not to change the form of the orange. When they are clean inside and outside, cover them with water and salt for twenty-four hours. Change the water, but omit the salt. Do this for five days or longer until the bitterness has disappeared. Then put them in boiling water and boil for twenty minutes; plunge them immediately in cold water; drain. The syrup is made by putting equal quantities by weight of sugar and fruit in enough water to give the consistency of ordinary syrup. Boil together until the syrup attains the consistency of honey. Take the fruit out with a skimmer and dry. NO. 52. PRESERVED ORANGES. Mrs. Cruickshank, Arlington, Riverside,Cal.--Any number of oranges, with rather more than their weight of sugar; allow rather more than half pint of water to each pound of sugar; slightly grate and score the oranges round and round with a knife, not too deeply. Put them in cold water for three days, changing the water twice a day. Tie them up in a cloth and boil them until they are quite soft--that is, soft enough to be penetrated by the head of a pin. While they are boiling place the sugar on the fire with the water, let it boil for a few minutes; strain through muslin. Put the oranges into the syrup and boil till it jellies and is of a yellow color. Try the syrup by putting some to cool; it should not be too stiff. The syrup need not cover the oranges completely, but must be turned so that each part gets thoroughly done. Place the oranges in pots; cover with syrup and tie down to keep the air out. This is an excellent way of preserving oranges whole, only they should be looked at now and then and boiled up again in fresh syrup, if what they are in has become hard, which, however, if they have been properly done, will not be the case. They form a nice dish for dessert, or for serving, filled with whipped cream or custard, either cold or gently warmed through in the syrup in a stew pan. NO. 53. ORANGE CHIPS. Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Cut the oranges in quarters and carefully squeeze all juice through a sieve. Soak the peel in water, and the next day boil it till tender; drain. Slice the peel, put it to the juice; weigh as much sugar and put all together into a broad earthen dish; place over the fire at a moderate distance, often stirring, till the chips candy; then set them in a cool room to dry. They will not be dry under three weeks. NO. 54. ORANGE JAM. Mrs. A.F.H., Pomona, Cal.--Take any quantity of oranges, (those that are rejected at the packing-houses as being too small, and known as "culls," are as good as any.) Pare and cut, put in granite kettle and thoroughly heat through. Then put through colander, rejecting the white parts. Measure and return to kettle, adding just as much sugar as you have pulp, and boil until it is thick like any jam, stirring well, or it will burn. NO. 55. ORANGE AND LEMON JELLY. Mrs. Helen M. Magee, 132 North Johnston street, Los Angeles, Cal.--One ounce gelatine, one pint water, one-half pound sugar, thin rind of two oranges, juice of eight navel oranges and one lemon; let it gradually come to a boil, and boil one minute; strain through muslin into jelly tumblers. By using one pound of sugar with the thin rind of two lemons, juice of six lemons and juice of one orange you will get an excellent lemon jelly. NO. 56. ORANGE OR LEMON FLOWER PRESERVE. Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take the flowers, wash them, boil them five minutes; change the water and boil them again until they are tender; drain. When the flowers are cool, open them one by one, carefully. Put them in kettle with their weight of sugar and a little musk. Put them over a slow fire until the sugar thickens; spread them on a board, separate the flowers rapidly, and allow to dry. NO. 57. ORANGE SHERBET, in orange cups. (Original.) Mrs. Helen M. Magee, 126 North Johnston street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Make the cups by cutting a slice from the top of each orange, using the pulp and juice for the sherbet. Cut each cup in points; set away on ice. At serving time place the cups on pretty plates; garnish with holly or fern, fill with orange sherbet, placing a star of whipped cream on top of each orange. To make the sherbet, take one quart of orange juice, two cups strained pulp; sweeten to taste; put in freezer, when nearly frozen, add the white of one egg, whipped light, with two tablespoons powdered sugar, beating well; then pack the sherbet until ready to serve. (Use only navel oranges. ) NO. 58. ORANGE AND POMELO (OR GRAPE FRUIT) SHERBET. Mrs. Helen M. Magee, 123 North Johnston street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take one quart of pomelo, or grape-fruit juice, sweetened to taste; add two cups of orange juice to one of sugar, stirring until the latter is dissolved; pour this on the grape fruit juice, and then turn into a freezer; when nearly frozen, remove the dasher, and put in the white of an egg, whipped as light as possible, with two tablespoons powdered sugar, beaten in with a large spoon; after beating in this manner the sherbet is to be packed and put aside to ripen. NO. 59. ORANGE SHORTCAKE. Mrs. Jennie Rothrock, Whittier, Cal.--Peel and slice thin half dozen oranges in a porcelain vessel; sprinkle with one cup of sugar and set on back of range or over a pan of hot water, allowing the sugar to dissolve and make a syrup. Make a rich biscuit dough and divide in two parts and roll to the desired size; spread one portion with butter; place the second on top and bake. When done separate and spread with butter and arrange the sliced oranges, leaving the juice in the pan; to this add the grated rind and juice of one orange, and one teaspoon flour stirred smooth with a little water. Use this as a dressing for the cake. (Original.) NO. 60. ORANGE AND RHUBARB MARMALADE. Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take twelve oranges; divide in sections; remove seeds and tough part of skin; put into a preserving kettle; add five pounds rhubarb, skinned and cut in half-inch pieces. Heat to boiling point, and boil slowly half hour; then add four pounds sugar. Cook gently two hours. Turn into glasses. NO. 61. ORANGE MARMALADE. (Light colored, firm, with little sugar.) Miss Frances B. Welsh, San Diego, Cal.--Take one dozen fine oranges, not too ripe, half dozen well cured lemons; wash well; slice. Do not use thick ends. Soak in one gallon water twenty-four hours. Boil one hour. Dip off one pint of liquid. Next day measure and add half measure sugar. Boil in granite, watch closely. Try on cold dish. When thick enough to jel, put in glasses or jars, cover with paraffine. (Original.) NO. 62. SCOTCH MARMALADE. Mrs. Cruickshank, Arlington, Riverside, Cal.--Take the weight of oranges required and an equal weight of lump or cane sugar; rub the oranges with a clean, rough towel; put them in a pan with cold water and let them boil until tender and easily pierced with a pin, changing the water twice, at the least, during the process of boiling. When ready take out the oranges and keep the water; divide the oranges in quarters, then with a knife scrape out all the white from the inner part of the skins, making them as thin as possible; then cut the skins into very thin strips and lay them aside on a dish. Put the remains of the oranges into the pan containing the water in which they were boiled; let it boil slowly till reduced a little and press through a sieve. Put all on together now, in the pan, that is the chips, sugar, and what has been pressed through the sieve, and let it boil quickly for a few minutes, or till it jellies. Put a few seeds in if wanted a little bitter. NO. 63. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. A.R. Smith, Orange, Cal.--After trying various recipes for making orange marmalade, I have evolved the following: With a small sharp knife peel twelve or thirteen oranges and one lemon very deep, not leaving a particle of white showing. Then cut in gently and lift out each section from its tough white lining, and drop in a preserving kettle, squeezing all the remaining juice into the kettle. Put on the stove over a hot fire. Peel one orange very thin, using only the extreme yellow rind, as thin as can be peeled. Put into a separate granite pan and cook until tender, changing the water twice. Then cut up in small pieces and add to the orange pulp which should have been cooking about half an hour. Add two cups granulated sugar and cook about twenty--It only makes a small quantity, which may five minutes. Test by putting some in small dish in cold water. When sufficiently jellied, pour in jelly glasses. It will not have a trace of bitter taste, and is of a beautiful color, be enlarged in proportion, though a small quantity made at a time will be lighter in color and more delicate. NO. 64. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. L.M. Alliot, 1720 West Eighth street, Los Angeles, Cal.--To six oranges allow equal their weight of sugar. Grate the yellow rind from one of the oranges; cut another, peel and all, into thin chips. Cut the five whole ones in two at the equator, and scoop out the pulp with a spoon; drain off all the juice possible, and put it with the sugar to boil, adding the juice of half a lemon. Let boil slowly for twenty minutes, without stirring, then add the grated rind, chips, and orange pulp, and boil slowly for half an hour, stirring frequently to prevent sticking or scorching. This should make about four large jelly glasses of marmalade. I find it better to make a small quantity at a time, as it is easier to handle properly. NO. 65. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. H.B. Gurley, 483 West Twenty-eighth street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take seven or eight oranges, one pomelo, two lemons. In the evening quarter the fruit, remove pips and slice as thin as possible. To each pound sliced fruit add one quart cold water. Let stand twenty-four hours. Then boil until slices are tender (about forty-five minutes.) Following morning weigh the boiled pulp and for every pound add one pound of sugar. Boil forty-five minutes, removing scum. Try small amount on cold plate and if it jellies, it is done. Properly made will form a firm jelly. Malta Blood oranges produce best results. Month of March is best time. NO. 66. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. J.T. Crampton, 2528 Pennsylvania avenue, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take ten oranges and two lemons; cut them in halves; take out the juice and pulps, and pick out the seeds. Boil the rinds in as much water as will cover them till tender. When cold, shred the peeling fine, then add the juice, pulps, and one pint of water. Weigh all these ingredients, and add one pound of white sugar to each pound of same, and boil till transparent. If you prefer it more bitter, some of the seeds may be boiled with it in a little sack, and then taken out. NO. 67. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Helen M. Magee, No. 122 North Johston street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Wash and wipe the oranges; peel and put the peelings in a kettle with a quart of water; boil two hours. Cut the oranges and squeeze the juice and pulp into a dish; drain the water from the peel, and pound it fine; put with the juice;] add one pound of sugar for every pint of juice; boil one hour, when it should be thick and solid. Seal in jelly glasses, cover with paper. Pare the orange rind very thin; avoid the inner white unless you want bitter marmalade. NO. 68. ORANGE MARMALADE. (Made in one day.) M.A. Hickson, Eagle Rock, R. F. D., Los Angeles, Cal.--Take forty large ripe oranges, two grapefruit, six lemons, ten pounds granulated sugar, one teaspoon salt. Peel very thin so as to remove only the yellow skin, thirty oranges and one grapefruit, Cover peel with cold water, with one teaspoon of salt added and boil until tender. Peel remaining ten oranges and carefully remove the white part of skin from all forty. Peel six lemons the same; also one grapefruit. Cut all in thin slices. When the rind is tender rinse in cold water and drain. Shred very fine and add to sliced fruit; add sugar and boil two hours. Skim thoroughly. NO. 69. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. H.M Warren. 1535 Newton street, Los Angeles. Slice six oranges and three lemons in quarters, then cut opposite way very thin, rejecting the ends. Add same amount of water as you have sliced fruit and boil until the skins are soft. Remove from fire and add one and one-half times as much sugar as you have fruit, then cook until it jells. This is very fine and can be made in about three hours. NO. 70. ORANGE MARMALADE. M.L.H., Redlands, Cal. Allow pound for pound of fruit and sugar. Pare the thin yellow part of the peel from half of the oranges, and cut the yellow rind into shreds; boil this in three waters and set it aside. Grate the yellow rind off of the rest of the oranges, throwing away every bit of the thick white inner skin. Quarter all the oranges and take out the seeds, if any. Chop or cut fruit into small pieces; drain all the juice that will come away without pressing, over the sugar; beat this, stirring until the sugar is dissolved, adding a little water, unless the oranges are quite juicy. Boil and skim five or six minutes; put in the boiled shreds and cook half an hour, stirring enough to keep from burning; when cold put in small jars and press brandied tissue paper down over them, then seal. NO. 71. ORANGE MARMALADE. Charlotte Whytock, 561 Crocker street, Los Angeles. Cut the rind very thin from the oranges; cut in thin strips and cook half an hour in a quart of water. While the rind is cooking separate the white part from the orange; then cut the oranges and press the juice through a cloth to keep the pulp back; add the above to the juice, and measure one cup of juice to a heaping cup of sugar; let this cook for half an hour; skim once in a while. Any quantity of fruit can be used. NO. 72. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. Antony, 154 S. Anderson street, Los Angeles. Take twelve oranges; peel and boil the peel in two waters, then proceed as follows: Squeeze out the juice of the oranges, two cups; add white sugar, two cups; orange peel, previously boiled, one cup. If preferred cut the peel in strips. Boil all together one hour. If this recipe is followed out to the letter you will have the genuine article. Do not skim until it is ready to pour in glasses. NO. 73. ORANGE MARMALADE. B.A. Bullis, Dolgeville, Cal. Slice two oranges and two lemons very thin; add three pints of water; boil three-quarters of an hour hard; then take equal parts of sugar and fruit and cook until it jells. NO. 74. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. F. S., Los Angeles--Fruit will jelly more satisfactorily if made in small quantities. I never make more than the following at one time and I have excellent results: Take three oranges (not quite ripe) and one lemon. Slice very thin, discarding the blossom end, and the thick seed end. Place in a bowl and pour over it three pints of cold water Let stand for twenty-four hours. Then boil in a porcelain kettle until very tender (one and one-half hours.) Let stand for twenty-four hours. Then to every cup of fruit and liquid add one cup of best cane sugar and boil briskly for about one hour. Try a little before removing from fire, and the minute it jells, remove and fill glasses dry and hot. Let stand for 2 days before sealing. This is delicious and of a light amber color. NO. 75. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. I.S. Goldman, 207 East Twenty-Seventh street, Los Angeles, Cal.--Take twelve navel oranges, peel and save half of peelings; add peeling of one lemon; parboil peelings, throwing off water three times. In third water boil until tender, drain and chop fine. Crush fruit fine, removing hard, pulpy substance and add juice of one lemon; place in preserving kettle with peelings; weigh and add double the amount of granulated sugar. Boil half hour. NO. 76. ORANGE MARMALADE. Lizzie A. Graves, Ontario, Cal.--Take fine navel oranges and one lemon, cut off the thick end of oranges, then cut in thin slices. Then to each pound of sliced fruit add three pints of cold water. Let it stand uncovered twenty-four hours; then put over a hot fire and boil rapidly forty-five minutes. Take off and let stand another twenty-four hours. Now again weigh and add to each pound, one and one-half pounds sugar and juice of one lemon; then boil rapidly forty-five minutes, then it is ready to put in glasses. NO. 77. ORANGE MARMALADE. Anna Healton, Covina, Cal.--Take six oranges and one lemon; slice very thin; to each pound sliced fruit add three parts cold water and let stand twenty-four hours. Then boil forty-five minutes briskly. Let stand twenty-four hours longer. Now weigh and to each pound add one and one-half pounds sugar; add juice of one lemon, then boil forty-five minutes very hard. NO. 78. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. George Huckaly, 261 Hilton avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Take one dozen oranges, wash and with a sharp knife slice off and throw away each end of the orange, down to the pulp, so as to have as little peeling as possible. Cut length wise into quarters; cut out white center; remove all seeds; then slice crosswise as thin as possible; be careful to save all the orange juice. Add two lemons treated the same as the oranges, also the sliced pulp of three lemons. To each pound of sliced fruit add two pints of cold water; cover carefully and set away twenty-four hours; then cook all together until tender; set away twenty-four hours. On third day weigh and to each five pounds add three pounds sugar; cook until it jellies; if cooked too long makes fruit dark and stiff. One dozen oranges and five lemons make about six quarts. NO. 79. ORANGE MARMALADE. M.F.H., Redlands, Cal.--Take five oranges and one lemon; remove and chop all peel from oranges and lemon. Slice or cut up fruit. To each pound fruit (chopped peel included,) add three pints water; let stand uncovered twenty-four hours; boil forty-five minutes. Stand again twenty-four hours. Add juice of second lemon; weigh and to each pound of fruit add one and a half pounds sugar. Boil forty-five minutes. (No bitter taste, but delicately jellied.) NO. 80. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mrs. A.P. Ellis, San Dimas, Cal.--Take twelve oranges and two lemons. Slice the fruit very thin with sharp knife, rejecting the ends; to each pint of fruit add one quart of cold water; let it stand twenty-four hours. On second day boil until all is very tender; let it stand another twenty-four hours. On third day to each pint of boiling fruit add one pound sugar; boil until transparent, or three quarters of an hour. NO. 81. ORANGE MARMALADE. S. Alice La Rue, 294 Riverside avenue, Riverside, Cal.--Washington navels are the best for marmalade, and firm fruit of medium size should be selected. Slice six oranges and two lemons, let stand over night in two quarts of water. (The slicing is an important part; use a very sharp knife, slice off the thick ends and discard, then cut in halves longitudinally; by resting the flat side on a plate each half may be held and easily sliced, making half circle pieces which are very pretty in the finished marmalade.) In the morning boil the fruit and water forty minutes, then add five pounds sugar, previously warmed, and boil rapidly twenty minutes longer. A little longer or less time boiled will make it stiff or thin as preferred. When oranges are very ripe an improvement is made by using the juice of two more oranges and that of six lemons. NO. 67. CANNED PEACHES. Mrs. Charles P. Hays, Long Beach, Cal.--Fill clean glass jars with peeled and stoned medium-sized peaches. (They pack to better advantage pit side down.) Put rubbers on jars, then lay an extra half peach on the top. Pack the fruit in tightly to allow for shrinkage. Pour into the jar a syrup made by bringing to the boiling point sugar and water in proportion of two cups water to one cup sugar. Lay the tops on jars; set jars into dry dripping pan and set pan in a moderately warm oven; cook until tiny bubbles are rolling up all around inside the jar. Seal tops on tightly. NO. 71. CHERRY MARMALADE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--To three pounds sweet and one pound sour cherries allow two pounds sugar. Weigh the cherries when stemmed and pitted. Make a syrup of the sugar, add cinnamon bark and cloves; put in the sweet cherries first, adding the sour ones half hour after, boil down thick, cover with brandied paper. NO. 87. CRYSTALLIZED CITRON. Mrs. A.F. Bates, Ontario, Cal.--Pick citron when turning from green to yellow; cut in halves, taking out seeds and pulp; place in strong brine for not less than three weeks, in a stone crock; at the end of this time place in clear water, changing it every day until all salt and bitter taste is removed. Cook in clear water until very tender, then put the citron back in stone crock and pour over it a thin syrup, boiling hot, pouring it off and boiling every day or two, adding sugar each time until citron is thoroughly saturated with heavy syrup. Then place on platters, filling each hollow center with syrup. Stand in the sun until crystallized. Orange peel prepared in the same way is excellent. NO. 36. CURRANT JELLY. Mary S. Welch, San Diego, Cal.--Use currants two-thirds ripe; crush, strain through flannel or thick cotton. Use one pint sugar to pint of juice. Do not cook. Fill glasses, set in sun, cover with netting. Very fine. NO. 97. FIG FARCIE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--(A fascinating idea from the Orient.) Take largest and finest figs to be had; open with small, sharp knife, as skin is generally tough, and fill with halved English walnuts, blanched almonds, Brazil nuts, pistachios, candied cherries, bits of Angelica, pieces of candied ginger and bamboo, the last tit-bit to be had in the Chinese chops. Use small bits of the stuffing. Mass on a glass dish for serving. NO. 106. GUAVA JELLY. Mrs. Charles P. Hays, Long Beach, Cal.--Fill a medium-sized stone jar (about eight quarts) with guavas, not too ripe; set jar and contents into a pan of boiling water; cook until fruit is tender; squeeze all the juice you can through a jelly-bag; boil juice ten minutes; add sugar in the proportion of five cups sugar to six cups juice and boil ten minutes longer. Boil, don't simmer. Makes firm, beautiful and delicious jelly. NO. 118. LIME PRESERVES. L. Shields, Box 355, Los Angeles.--Lay limes in salt and water strong enough to bear an egg, closely covering them until warm weather is over; cut them enough to get out all seeds, and place in cold water for one day, changing the water often, so as to remove all the salt; boil in water in which soda has been added in the proportion of one teaspoonful to six quarts water, till tender enough to put a straw through; then soak again in cold water one day, changing the water often. To each pound of fruit allow two and a half pounds white sugar and three pints water. Boil the syrup fifteen minutes, put the fruit in, cook five minutes, remove, put into jars, let the syrup cook fifteen minutes longer, then pour over fruit. They will keep several years. NO. 37. ORANGE MARMALADE. Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--Twelve fine thin-skinned oranges, not quite ripe; six lemons; wash well; slice thin; throw away thick ends. Soak in one gallon water thirty-six hours. Boil in granite until skin is tender. Add eight pounds white sugar. (Better cook now in two kettles.) Cook rapidly until thick enough to jell when cool. Watch closely toward last. If you like bitter taste, soak seeds and add water. Makes from five to six quarts. NO. 157 WATERMELON AND CITRON PRESERVE. Mrs. H.P. Augustine, Coalinga, Cal.--Pare off green skin of watermelon and outer skin of citron, cut all in pieces; allow two parts of melon to one of citron; soak the fruit in mild salt water over night; in the morning wash well and put on to boil till tender, then take them out with a skimmer and use to each pint of the water a pound and a half of sugar. Add the beaten white of one egg to each quart of syrup, and the juice of one lemon to each quart of syrup; boil the syrup till it is thick enough to hand in a drop from the point of a spoon; fill glasses with the fruit and cover with syrup. These preserves are better after standing a while, and are as clear as crystal. EGGS. NO. 56. APPLE OMELET. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Separate four eggs, beat whites to stiff froth, add the yolks and beat again, adding gradually two tablespoons powdered sugar. Have ready an omelet pan in which you have melted a tablespoon of butter; put in the mixture. When it begins to thicken spread over a layer of apple sauce, fold, turn out and serve at once. NO. 59. BAKED EGGS A LA MARTIN. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Put two tablespoons butter and two of flour in a saucepan; rub together and add a pint of milk; stir until boiling; add a level teaspoon of salt, a saltspoon of pepper. Cover the bottom of a baking dish with one-half this sauce, break into it six or eight raw eggs, cover with the remaining half of the sauce. Dust thickly with grated cheese, place in a pan of water and then in the oven to bake for ten or fifteen minutes. NO. 31. BREAKFAST EGG-NEST. Toast squares of bread quite brown, say four inches square. Beat the whites of eggs (as many as persons to be served, or one for each square of toast) until stiff; place this on the toast, leaving an empty ring center, into which put the unbeaten or whole yolk of an egg. Place toast n oven long enough to cook the egg soft. The white thus stands up stiff as the nest. Serve immediately on garnished dish, or serve each on separate side dish. NO. 91. DIXIE EGG DISH. Mrs. J.M. Reed, 5823 Monte Vista street, Highland Park.--Cut four hard-boiled eggs into thin slices, place in a baking dish with alternate layers of grated cheese, sprinkle with a shake or two of red pepper, a salt-spoonful of salt and a dash of nutmeg, sprinkle the top with grated bread and dot over with butter. Bake till a rich brown. NO. 33. ECONOMICAL OMELETTE-HASH. Cut into squares or bits, all cold meats on hand (beef, veal, mutton or pork, or all.) Beat two eggs well; into this stir a quantity of milk (sufficient to mix nicely the other ingredients;) season; then put in the meats and pieces of stale bread cut into good-sized squares, to prevent becoming too soft; mix all well, put into hot skillet with a little butter; cook until lower side is browned, then turn. If desired, it may be "scrambled" in turning. This we found an excellent way to use what might have been lost, and makes an appetizing breakfast dish. NO. 92. EGGS BAKED IN TOMATO SAUCE. Miss G. Smyth, Ontario, Cal.--Strain one pint tomatoes, add seasoning, pepper, salt and a little onion juice and boil; then pour onto buttered platter. Carefully break six eggs into this and put in oven until eggs are set. NO. 95. EGG CHOPS. Mrs. G. Dambrowski, 339 West Vernon avenue, Los Angeles. (Original.)--Boil five eggs, remove shells, rub yolks through sieve and chop whites, not making them too fine. Put in double boiler over fire one cup milk, rub together one tablespoon butter with two of flour, add a beaten egg, mix a little of the warm milk with the mixture before stirring it into boiling milk; season with salt and pepper and stir until thick. Take from fire and when cold enough to handle mold into chops shapes; roll in a beaten egg and bread crumbs and fry in deep fat. SAUCE: Strain a can of tomatoes through sieve and thicken with corn starch, add butter, pepper and salt, then pour over chops. NO. 98. EGGS IN BLOOM. Mrs. W.D. Gard, 1907 East Second street, Los Angeles--Prepare enough deviled eggs; cut the white through the round way, to cover a plate, then let them stand while the fancy part is being prepared. Take large, medium and small crisp lettuce leaves and form a green rose by placing the large leaves on a plate first, then the medium ones, and last the small ones so that when the eggs are set on, open part up, the center will be higher than the outer edge. For each half of egg take one small, bright red radish and make a flower of it by taking a small, sharp knife and cutting the peel down into sections and carefully separate the peel from the radish, about half way down the radish, and turn back to form petals. Six or eight petals, according to the size of the radish, and place one radish upon each half of egg, which makes a dish both pleasing to the eye and palate. A clear glass plate adds to the attractiveness of this dish. Original. FISH AND FOWL. NO. 60. BAKED SALT MACKEREL IN CREAM. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Freshen a good-sized mackerel for twenty-four hours in water, skin side up, then put it in a baking pan flat, with the skin side down. Pour over it a large cup of cream or milk, bake in a moderately hot oven one-half hour, or until it is a nice brown. Five minutes before serving add more cream. Serve as soon as the cream is heated, pouring it over the mackerel after it is on the platter. NO. 73. CHICKEN CROQUETTES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Chop sufficient cold boiled chicken to make one quart; add to it two level teaspoons salt, two tablespoons chopped parsley, a quarter of a grated nutmeg, a tablespoon of grated onion and a saltspoon of red pepper, mix thoroughly. Put over the fire a pint of milk, add to it rubbed to a smooth paste two tablespoons butter and flour, stir until smooth and thick; add the chicken, mix well and turn out to cool; when cold form into croquettes, dip in egg, roll in breadcrumbs and fry in hot fat, serve plain or with peas. NO. 72. CHICKEN CROQUETTES. Mrs. L. Smock, 1510 Vermont avenue, Los Angeles--Two cups cold boiled chicken chopped fine, two tablespoons butter, one large tablespoon flour, half pint milk, one dozen mushrooms chopped, salt and white pepper to taste. Rub butter and flour together, put them in small saucepan over fire, stir constantly; as soon as they begin to bubble, stir into them slowly the milk previously heated. To this sauce add the chicken, mushrooms, and seasoning. Take from fire and turn out on platter. When cold shape the mixture into small croquettes with the hands, roll them in fine cracker crumbs, then in the beaten yolk of egg, then in crumbs again, fry in deep lard a crisp brown. If followed carefully the centers will be soft and creamy, the outside firm and brown; will keep several days in cool place; put in warm oven a few minutes before serving. NO. 74. CHICKEN IN BASKETS. (Original.) Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles--Cut slices of stale bread one inch thick, cut into rounds with biscuit cutter. With a smaller cutter mark a circle within and remove the bread to the depth of half an inch, dip into beaten eggs, sift powdered cracker over them and boil in deep olive oil, delicately brown; lay them on brown paper to absorb the grease, then arrange upon a hot platter, and fill them with creamed chicken, made of two tablespoons butter, three tablespoons flour, one cup milk, one-half teaspoon salt, a few grains pepper and one and a half cups cold cooked chicken cut in dice. Put butter in sauce pan, stir until melted and bubbling; add flour mixed with seasonings, and stir until thoroughly blended. Pour on gradually the milk, stirring until well mixed, when smooth and glossy add the chicken; cook two minutes. Have the bread baskets hot, fill with the mixture, garnish with parsley and serve at once. The baskets can be prepared also by spreading the bread lightly with butter and browned in the oven. Chicken and turkey are best, but any kind of meat, fish and vegetables can be used. A nice way to use left-overs. NO. 76. CHICKEN POT PIE DUMPLINGS. Mrs. N.S. Alline, Lamanda Park, Cal.--Take a good, fat fowl a year old, joint and boil until tender, season to taste with salt; if fowl is fat no butter will be necessary, if not, make rich with butter. Have sufficient broth to more than cover chicken as the dumplings will absorb broth. Take a quart of best flour, put into sieve with one-half teaspoon salt, three teaspoons baking powder, and sift all together into an earthen bowl. Take butter size of two English walnuts and mix thoroughly. Then add one pint sweet milk and stir with spoon until mixed; if it seems sticky add a little more flour, let the chicken stop boiling, set off the fire a few moments, then return to stove again and drop the dumplings in by the spoonful on top of chicken in the kettle. This will prevent the dumplings from getting heavy. Cover kettle tight and let them boil twenty-five to thirty minutes, briskly, but not hot enough to burn; watch closely; serve immediately when cooked. NO. 34. CHOWDER, FISH OR CLAM. (For six persons.) One-quarter pound clear salt pork; fifty hard-shell clams, or head and shoulders of cod or other fish; six good-sized potatoes, six onions, six tomatoes, half-pound of pilot bread or other hard biscuit, clove of garlic. To prepare, cut pork into dice pieces, slice potatoes not in ice water, slice onions and tomatoes, bread crackers in small pieces; chop clams fine, saving all juice. Fish cut into small pieces, retaining the bones. To prepare for cooking, put the dices of pork into the chowder pot and fry brown, remove them, but allow the fat to remain. Put a layer of crackers in the bottom of the pot, cover with a layer of clams, then one of potatoes, one of onions and one of tomatoes; repeat the layers until ingredients are used up. SEASONING: On each layer add some salt, red pepper or paprika, a pinch of ground cloves, a leaf of mace, pinch of celery seed; on top layer two bay leaves and a mashed clove of garlic --a chile if desired. Fill pot with clam juice to top of ingredients, or with water if fish be used. Place pot on small fire and allow it to only simmer for one or two hours, afterward let it boil slowly, occasionally stirring toward the last. Serve with slice of lemon and glass of sherry. If fish is used, remove all bones before serving. NO. 79. CODFISH CAKES. Mrs. N.S. Alling, Lamanda Park, Cal.--Get sweet, thick, white codfish, take piece about four inches square; take about four good-sized potatoes, peel and cut four times, place in a kettle of boiling water, then lay the fish whole on top cover and when potatoes are tender the fish has cooked sufficiently. Drain water from potatoes and mash; pick codfish fine, free from bones, chop fine, then mix potatoes, fish, butter size of egg, and one well-beaten egg. Mix with hand until it is creamy and light; make in little cakes and dust with flour; now fry in a kettle of hot lard, same as fried cakes, to a rich brown. Serve hot with butter. NO. 88. CUBAN, OR ROYAL PIE. M.P. de D., Los Angeles--One and one-half pounds flour, one-half pound granulated sugar, one pound lard, one-half pound butter, four eggs, one-half glass Madeira wine, one-half teaspoon salt. Mix thoroughly in bowl and place on ice a while. Put flour on pasteboard and roll mixture; put in agate pan not too deep--part of paste in bottom of mold one-half inch thick; brown in oven cool; put raw pasta around mold, then add filling. FILLING: Cut chickens in pieces as for fricassee, boil in salt water until very tender and remove bones. Tomato sauce, hashed onions, bell peppers or pimiento morones, chicken liquor, and mix; let all boil together; add olives, blanched almonds and raisins; cayenne, salt and pepper to taste, then add chicken; boil all together; cool, then fill pie and use rest of pasta to cover pie. NO. 90. DEVILED SHRIMPS. Miss C. HERNSTEIN, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--For each can of shrimps use one tablespoon butter, two tablespoons flour, two cups creamy milk and three hard boiled eggs. Melt butter, add flour and stir till smooth; add milk and when it begins to thicken the eggs put through a sieve. Remove the intestines from shrimps, cut up with a silver knife, add to sauce, season with paprika, a tablespoonful chopped parsley and a few drops of onion juice. Put mixture in ramequins, cover with buttered bread crumbs and brown in quick oven. Serve with water cress. NO. 32. DUCK WITH CRANBERRY JELLY. Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--Wash duck in strong salt and water; stuff with bread crumbs, chopped onion, season well. Do not make too wet; do not pack stuffing. If duck is old, steam until tender, then roast, basting with butter and water. If young, cover in oven until tender, then brown. One quart cranberries, one pint sugar, one-half pint water. Boil; put through granite collander; put away in glasses. Will keep a long time; jells quickly; never fails. NO. 94. ESCALOPED OYSTERS. Miss Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal.--One dozen fresh, medium-sized oysters. Examine for bits of shell. Rinse carefully. If large ones are used cut with sharp knife once across. Butter baking dish, cover bottom with dried bread crumbs. Medium fine layer of oysters next, salt and pepper, melted butter; next layer crumbs, then oysters and season. Finish with crumbs. Use no moistening. Cover, bake ten minutes in hot oven; uncover, brown, very light. Not common. Serve cold slaw with dressing, sugar, lemon, salt. NO. 98. FILET OF HALIBUT. Miss Clara Marx, 1016 Grattan street, Los Angeles--Wipe a slice of halibut, weighing one and one-half pounds, and cut into eight filets. Melt one-fourth cup butter and add one-fourth teaspoon salt, one-eighth teaspoon pepper, two teaspoons lemon juice and a few drops onion juice. Take up each filet separately with a fork, dip in seasoned butter, roll, and fasten with a wooden toothpick. Put in shallow pan, dredge with flour and bake in a hot oven twenty minutes. Remove skewers, arrange on hot serving dish, pour around a chile sauce and garnish with slices of lemon and sprigs of parsley. NO. 99. FISH CUTLETS WITH TOMATO SAUCE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue--Take any large, firm fish; bone, skin and slice into cutlet shape; sprinkle with pepper and salt; dip each cutlet first in grated crackers, then in sweet milk and egg beaten together, and again in the cracker meal. Fry in hot butter. Arrange on a dish and pour tomato sauce around the cutlets. Serve very hot. NO. 102. FRIED CHICKEN. Mrs. Lee R. Matthews, 720 West Crow avenue, Pomona, Cal.--Dress and joint a nice plump, young chicken. Put in frying pan equal parts of either lard or drippings and butter; let get smoking hot and then put in chicken rolled in flour, salt and pepper to taste; cover closely and brown quickly on both sides, then slip to back of range and cook slowly for three-quarters of an hour; remove to hot platter and make a cream gravy as follows: Put two tablespoons of flour in grease and stir till smooth, then add one pint of rich milk and stir until it thickens. NO. 106. GAME PIE. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Boil one cup rice in plenty of water for half an hour, drain and add half a cup of milk, a teaspoon of salt, a saltspoon of pepper and a tablespoon of butter; beat and mix well. Cut the birds in halves or quarters, according to size; put them in a baking dish, season with salt, pepper, chopped onions and chopped parsley; rub together two tablespoons butter and two of flour, add a pint of water or stock, stir until boiling, add a teaspoon Worcestershire sauce and one of salt. Pour this hot over the game; cover with a crust of rice; brush with milk; bake in moderate oven one hour. NO. 27. IMPROVED CLAM CHOWDER. Mrs. Catherine H. Pickett, 1314 Faxon street, Superior, Wis.--Peel and slice four medium-sized potatoes very thin, boil in a very little water with a lump of butter the size of an egg. When the potatoes are almost boiled to pieces, add one finely-minced onion and the liquor from one can of clams. Let boil for five minutes, when the clams and one quart of rich milk should be added and the whole brought to a boil. Set the stewpan back where the milk will not scorch, season with salt and pepper, mixing them well through the chowder. Put on enough large milk crackers to cover the top of the chowder, pressing them down with a spoon so that the milk will moisten them. Serve hot in bowls with one cracker in the center of each helping. This recipe has pleased many who do not wish to eat pork. (Original.) NO. 121. MARBLED CHICKEN. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles. Chop fine cold salt beef tongue, cut the meat from a three-pound boiled chicken, season the tongue with pepper and nutmeg, and the chicken with salt, pepper and celery seed. Select a Boston brown mold or square bread pan; put in a layer of tongue, then a layer of chicken, a thick sprinkling of parsley, a layer of sliced hard-boiled eggs, then another layer of tongue and so on until the ingredients are used. Cover one-half box of gelatine with one-half cup cold water, soak fifteen minutes, add a pint of boiling water, stir until gelatine is dissolved, add the juice of a lemon, a teaspoon salt and a dash of red pepper; pour this over the meat and with a skewer make holes here and there, allowing the gelatine to go to the bottom of mold; stand aside over night and serve on lettuce leaves with mayonnaise dressing. NO. 126. MOLDED CHICKEN AND ASPARAGUS SAUCE. (Original.) Mrs. A.L. Parsons.-- Boil gently one chicken until very tender, adding small onion, salt and bay leaf; take from bones and run through meat grinder; then add one-half cup bread crumbs, dash of cayenne pepper, one-third teaspoon curry powder and one tablespoon minced parsley and lastly the well-beaten yolks of three eggs, with enough chicken broth to make quite moist. Bake fifteen minutes in a good oven in buttered cups set in a pan of hot water. While baking make a plain cream sauce of flour one tablespoon, the same of butter stirred into one-half pint rich milk; to this add the cooked tips of three bunches of asparagus. Unmold chicken in center of large platter and pour sauce around it serving while hot. NO. 134. PRESSED CHICKEN. Maryane Kathrine Miller, 2323 Leoti avenue, Los Angeles--Put two cleansed chickens into boiling water, add a little nutmeg, salt, pepper, one bay leaf, two cloves, one-half onion. Boil down until two cups of stock remain, and chickens are done; then remove skin and bones; soak one-quarter box gelatine in one-half cup cold water. Have a lump of butter in frying pan, add the chicken shredded, and then strain broth and salt, pepper, gelatine, one-half teaspoon sage, a little juice, rind of lemon. Have three h ard-boiled eggs ready and put lengthwise in a small pan, fill in the meats, let stand until hardens. Soup meats will answer. NO. 133. ROAST DUCK. Mariane Kathrine Miller. 2323 Leoti avenue, Los Angeles--Clean thoroughly a duck and stuff with the following: Two cups stale bread crumbs, moistened with one cup of stock, one chopped onion, one cup mixed celery, one and one-half teaspoon salt, one-half small teaspoon cayenne, large lump butter, one-half cup cracker crumbs. Mix thoroughly. Twelve pieces celery three inches in length, sprinkle with cayenne pepper and stuff after dressing. Roast one and one-half hour till done and a crisp yellow. Serve with gravy made of the following: Chop the grizzles and roast in the same pan with the duck, when done thicken the gravy with one tablespoon flour and one-half cup cream. Garnish with parsley. NO. 141. SALMON CROQUETTES. Mrs. C. Norton, 1407 Girard street.--Remove bones from one pound can salmon, mince in small bits with oil; add one-half cup bread crumbs, one egg and dash of pepper. Make in small cakes, fry in butter until brown. Serve hot. NO. 46. SALMON LOAF. Mrs. Catharine H. Pickett, 1314 Faxon street, Superior, Wis.--(Most excellent for picnics or sliced for tea. Lay the slices on a platter, using a garnish of lettuce leaves. ) One-pound can best salmon, four eggs, one cup bread crumbs, one-half cup milk or thin cream, salt and pepper to taste, two tablespoons melted butter. After removing all bones from the salmon, return to it the liquid which covered it when in the can and mix the mass to a smooth paste; add the bread crummbs, milk, well-beaten eggs and seasoning and mix thoroughly and place in a well-buttered tin, pouring the melted butter over the top. An oblong tin such as is used for baking single loaves of bread makes a loaf which will slice to advantage. Bake in a slow oven until the top puffs up. Cool before slicing. (Original.) NO. 47. SALMON LOAF. Madge Cummings, Santa Paula, Cal.--Take one can of salmon, half cup bread crumbs, one well-beaten egg, one cup milk, piece of butter size of egg, salt and pepper to taste. Mix and put in a greased pan and bake in oven about ten minutes. NO. 49. SALMON TURBOT. Mrs. E.A. Franklin, Anaheim, Cal.--One can salmon picked fine, half cup flour mixed to a paste with a littlet cold milk; stir one pint of hot milk into the flour, add two well-beaten eggs. Season with salt and a dash of Cayenne pepper. Put the salmon in a well-buttered dish with a lump of butter the size of a walnut. Bake three-quarters of an hour in a hot oven. Serve with baked potatoes. NO. 143. SARDINES IN BREADSHELLS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Cut inch-thick slices of bread with a round cutter two inches in diameter; scoop out a little cavity on each and fry them a delicate brown in hot butter; melt one round tablespoon of butter in a saucepan, add one level teaspoon of flour and when mixed, add one-half cup of barley water and stir until thick and smooth. Add one teaspoon of essence of anchovy or any favorite table sauce, a little salt and a shake of cayenne; remove the skin and bones from one dozen sardines, mash them to a paste with a fork, adding the sifted yolks of two hard-boiled eggs and lemon juice to taste; fill the breadshells with the mixture, arrange then on a hot dish and pour the hot sauce over and around them. NO. 144. SAUCE FOR ROAST QUAIL, CROQUETTES OR CHICKEN. Mrs. Helen Magee, 122 North Johnston street, Los Angeles--Heaping tablespoon butter, tablespoon sifted flour, rub well together; one-half pint broth or water, two teaspoons mushroom, two teaspoons catsup, two tablespoons cream, two teaspoons lemon juice; put on to boil, stirring well; add yolks of two eggs, beaten light constantly stirring, never allowing to boil (or it will curdle.) When thick enough, serve or place in hot water until wanted. NO. 147. SMOTHERED CHICKEN. Mrs. N.T. Johnston, care L. J. Rose, Oxnard, Cal. Take two chickens from six to ten months old, dress nicely and split down the back; butter well inside and out, and rub salt, pepper and flour thoroughly, also the tiniest bit of ground thyme; put in a baking pan with a pint of water and two slices of bacon. Cover pan closely with another pan, make it tight, then bake slowly for an hour, or until done; take cover off pan and brown quickly in hot oven. Take out chickens, add a pint of cream, or a little flour rubbed in some butter with milk will be almost as good. Serve with beaten biscuit and lettuce salad. MEATS AND STEWS NO. 63. BRUNDRICK'S STEW. Mrs. A.W. Jasper, 717 San Julian street, Los Angeles--Fry ten cents' worth round steak in hot butter and lard; when nicely browned on both sides slice half of good-sized onion into frying pan with steak, browning it; add enough boiling water to cover steak and let stew very slowly for thirty or forty-five minutes; then scrape three or four carrots and cut in two lengthwise; put them in pan with steak, also two or three small potatoes cut into pieces about size of walnut. Let stew until all are tender, leaving sufficient water for nice gravy; thicken with flour, add salt and pepper to taste, and a little Worcestershire sauce if desired. This is sufficient for four or five persons. NO. 75. CHICKEN, MUTTON AND BEEF BROTH. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Place pieces of either in a pan, sprinkle with salt, pour over them a quart of cold water; place on fire, bring water to a simmer, keep it there an hour and a half, add a clove and herbs if palatable, strain through linen cloth. NO. 29. DIGESTIBLE DUMPLINGS. (Original.) Miss Evelyn Dooly, 623 Court street--For chicken or mutton stew or any kind of boiled meat, to serve six to eight persons. One well-beaten egg, pinch of salt, pinch of sugar, small cup sweet milk, dessert spoon of soft butter, two large teaspoons best baking powder, sifted through a pint of flour, adding enough more flour to make a stiff dough. Do not touch with the fingers. Drop in small tablespoonfuls into the kettle of boiling meat eight minutes before ready to serve. Do not allow steam to escape. They will absorb much liquid and require plenty of room to rise. Any "left over" are very nice sliced cold, fried in a little butter and served with a sweet. NO. 96. FAMOUS STEW (original.) Mrs. George Briggs, Needles, Cal.--Put short ribs of beef in stew pan with little butter, allow them to brown nicely on all sides, then add one onion, sliced fine, and one can tomatoes. Put on the back of range and simmer for about two and one-half hours, then add one can French peas and one can mushrooms. As soon as it boils up again add a little flour dissolved in water, and then add salt and pepper. NO. 101. FRICASSEE OF VEAL WITH NOODLES. Mrs. William H. Harmon, 153 North Daly street, Los Angeles. (Original.)--Take about two pounds of veal to stew, and cut into small pieces; roll in a little flour, put a big piece of butter in kettle with a tablespoon of chopped onion; yellow, but do not brown it; then add the veal, turn it in the hot butter; then add boiling water to partly cover, simmer until very tender, add a little milk and thicken gravy with a tablespoon of flour rubbed smooth with a little cold milk. NOODLES: While veal is cooking beat yolks of two eggs into flour to make a very stiff dough, roll into a thin sheet and let partially dry, dust with flour, roll and cut into very thin strips, shake out and let dry; have a kettle of boiling salted water ready, drop noodles into it, cook rapidly for fifteen minutes, drain, sprinkle generously with rolled cracker crumbs and fry a delicate yellow in butter. Dish veal in center of large platter, put the noodles around the edges, pour gravy over all and serve. NO. 108. HASH. (Original.) Mrs. C.C. Norton, 1407 Girard street, Los Angeles.-- Cold beef and one onion chopped fine; place in frying pan with stock to cover meat; let simmer until nearly dry, then add butter size of egg, and season to taste. Have mashed potatoes molded on platter, and pour hash in the center. Serve hot. NO. 109. HASH. Mrs. L.M. Haley, Clearwater, Cal.--One pound boiled beef, chop fine; place in baking dish with lump butter size of egg; crumb two crackers over top; whip two eggs with one-quarter teaspoon salt, put over top of all; pepper to taste; bake until eggs are done. NO. 112. IRISH STEW. (Original.) Mrs. Wm. H. Harmon, 153 N. Daly street, Los Angeles. Cut into very small pieces ten cents worth of salt pork, fry to a nice light brown, peel and slice five medium-sized onions, lay them over the pork, then put a layer of sliced potatoes, about as many as of onions; pour over all enough milk to cover, and cook slowly until tender; salt and pepper to taste. NO. 113. JAMBLE-EYE, or Red Rice, as used on Mississippi River steamboats. Mrs. Clara Moulton, Loara, Cal.--One slice ham, dice it and fry with small onion, diced; pour off part of fat, add one cup boiling water, one-half can tomatoes, one cup rice; let set over night; bake to a delicate brown for breakfast next morning. NO. 123. MARBLED LOAF. (Original.) Emilia Lundberg, 2400 S. Flower street, Los Angeles.--Chop fine one-half pound cold ham or beef tongue; also one pound cold veal or chicken and one pound cold roast beef; season veal and beef with salt, pepper and few gratings of nutmeg; pack this in layers with a dusting of chopped parsley and thin slices of hard-boiled eggs between the layers; when last layer is in mold press the whole well together with a broad-bladed knife; cover half a box of Knox's gelatine with half a cup cold water, allow to soak five minutes, add pint hot water, half a teaspoon best beef extract, dissolved in cup boiling water, seasoning of salt, pepper and the juice of a lemon; baste this over the top of the meat while it is still in the mold. Pierce the meat here and there with a skewer. When the meat has absorbed the gelatine stand it aside for twelve hours. To serve, dip the mold quickly in hot water, turn out the meat, slice, arrange on platter, garnish with cress or lettuce, and pass with mayonnaise dressing and fruit jelly. Before beginning the mayonnaise chill the plate, eggs and oil, even the fork. Put the yolks of two eggs in a deep soup plate, add one-half saltspoon salt, and stir with a silver fork until the yolks are well broken; add the oil drop by drop, being careful to always stir in the same direction. As the emulsion becomes thick, the oil can be added faster, always stirring, not beating, and adding only oil enough to keep the dressing from separating; two eggs will take a pint of oil easily. When finished it should be thick and smooth. Season with salt, red pepper and lemon juice to taste. For the fruit jelly make a lemon jelly following favorite recipt. Put a little in a wet mold and set rest in pan of hot water to keep it liquid. When that in the mold begins to stiffen lay in a few strawberries, with the hulls on, or a few cherries in bunches with the stems. Pour in more jelly and proceed as before. Set away to become firm. Makes a most attractive dish, and tastes even better. NO. 83. MEAT PIE. Mrs. E.A. Franklin, Anaheim, Cal.--Take cold roast beef, put through the chopping machine. Line a dish with slices of stale bread well buttered, then put layers of meat and tomatoes until dish is nearly full; season with salt and cayenne pepper, moisten with the beef gravy, cover with well-buttered slices of bread; bake in a hot oven three-quarters of an hour. Serve baked potatoes with this dish. NO. 137. ROAST BEEF WITH YORKSHIRE PUDDING. Mrs. H.A. Paca, 16 Surf street, Ocean Park, Cal.-- Roast meat upon a meat rest laid in the roasting pan; season with tablespoon salt and half teaspoon pepper; dash a cup of boiling water over meat when it goes into the oven; baste often and see that fat does not scorch. About three-quarters of an hour before it is done, mix the pudding. YORKSHIRE PUDDING: Beat two eggs very light, add one scant teaspoon salt and two-thirds pint of milk : pour half cup of this mixture on one-half cup flour and stir to a smooth paste; add remainder of mixture and beat well; bake in hot gem pans forty-five minutes. Baste with the drippings of the beef. This is more convenient than to bake in the pan under the beef and gives it more crust. Serve as a garnish for roast beef. NO. 145. SHOULDER OF MUTTON WITH PORT. Mrs. G.W. Wood, 1023 South Olive street, Los Angeles--Have the bone of shoulder of mutton removed by butcher; stuff the pocket with a rich dressing and tie or sew up opening; dredge with flour; brown on all sides in drippings or butter, then place in large kettle. Brown a sliced onion in the fat left in the spider and put it in with the meat; add one teaspoon salt, one saltspoon pepper, and one pint boiling water. Stand the pot in oven and cook three hours, tightly covered. Now blend together one scant tablespoonful each of butter and flour, add it to the liquid about the meat, after skimming off the fat, then add one teaspoon chopped parsley and a tumbler of port. Cover the pot and cook another hour. NO. 148. SPICED HASH. Miss K.M. Philips, 1235 West Seventh street, Los Angeles.--Take the remains of cold steak or any roasted or boiled meat, chop fine and mix with well mashed potatoes, and add two eggs; season to taste with salt, pepper, nutmeg, mace and cloves; make into a loaf and bake brown. Good cold or hot. NO. 50. TANGLEWOOD BEEF LOAF. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.--One and a half pounds Hamburg steak, half pound fresh pork, two teaspoons poultry seasoning, three crackers, rolled fine; one-half cup boiling water; season with salt and pepper; then mix all together in a long loaf and sprinkle with flour; put in hot bake tin with a little lard and one-half cup hot water; bake in a quick oven, and baste several times while baking. NO. 154. TRUFFLE SAUCE. Mrs. C.C. Hall, Hollywood, Cal.--Burn very brown in oven one small veal bone and one small ham bone, after which turn same into small pot and add one carrot, one turnip and one onion, butter size of walnut, two tablespoons browned flour, enough good soup stock to reduce all to thick gravy; now heat one-half of a three-pound tin of tomatoes, add to the above, and boil two hours. Strain and season with salt, pepper, one lemon and two glasses sherry wine. Cut truffles very fine, sprinkle into sauce, and serve with thick porterhouse steak. NO. 51. VEAL BALLS. Cut a quantity of raw veal into mince meat and season. Beat one or more eggs (according to quantity of meat) thoroughly, and mix this and meat together. Take sufficient of the mixture to make a small ball; press together, dip it into some of the beaten egg (which has been set aside) until well covered; roll ball in fine bread crumbs or cracker crumbs. Fry in hot lard or butter until nicely browned. Serve with slices of lemon and parsley garnish. NO. 165. VEAL CROQUETTES. Mrs. E.H. Williams, 120 East Fern avenue, Redlands, Cal.--Boil two pounds of veal; when cold chop or grind very fine; stir into one pint boiling milk one good tablespoon corn starch, wet with milk, one tablespoon butter, and half a nutmeg, grated, a little salt; into this stir the veal, then spread on a platter to cool. When cold mold into any shape desired, roll in cracker meal and fry in deep lard, very hot. NO. 166. VEAL POT PIT. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--cook knuckle of veal until tender, cut in small pieces and make a cream gravy, then take two cups of rolled Malta Vita, two eggs, teaspoon salt, two level teaspoons baking powder, enough milk to make batter like biscuit, cut in strips two and a half inches by one-half inch, and drop in with boiling meat, boil fifteen minutes. NO. 167. HAM BAKED IN CIDER. Mrs. G.W. Wood, 1023 South Olive street, Los Angeles--Clean ham nicely, put in pan skin side down; over upper side sprinkle one-half teaspoon each of pepper, cloves and alspice and one-quarter teaspoon mace; sprinkle with onion juice. In bottom of pan put a sprig of celery, two bay leaves and slice of onion; put cup of flour in a bowl, add enough water to make paste, then cover ham with it to the skin portion. Pour into the pan two quarts cider, bake in hot oven three one-half hours, basting every fifteen minutes. When cooked remove crust, turn over and remove skin; put in another pan with the fat uppermost, brush with beaten egg, sprinkle with chopped parsley and bread crumbs and bake one hour. VEGETABLES. NO. 68. ASPARAGUS IN A CROWN OF EGGS. Mrs. William J. Magee, 122 Johnston street. Los Angeles--Cut off the green ends; chop the remainder of the stalks, boil tender, season with salt and pepper, form in a mound, mix equal parts flour and butter, add asparagus water to make a sauce, boil up once, pour over the mound of asparagus, garnish with hard-boiled eggs cut lengthwise; set up on end around the mound to form a crown. BOSTON BAKED BEANS. M.F.B., 704 Towne avenue, Los Angeles--One quart small white beans, soak over night, parboil twice with one-quarter teaspoon soda in first water. Put in covered bean pot with one-half pound salt pork, two teaspoons salt and five of molasses. Bake six hours. NO. 61. BOILED CAULIFLOWER WITH CALIFORNIA SAUCE. Mrs. Ella M. Magee, 122 Johnson street, Los Angeles.--Cook a cauliflower until tender in boiling salted water; pour over it a sauce made by creaming half a cup butter and adding, one by one, the yolks of three eggs and half cup boiling water. Cook over boiling water until slightly thickened; season with salt, pepper and a little lemon juice. NO. 25. CABBAGE, WITH RICE AND NUTS. Mrs. D.F. Murphy, 233 Thorne st.--Select a nice head of cabbage; take off the outer leaves; have a kettle of boiling water with a little salt in it; put the cabbage in whole; partially cook it; take it out; have ready a cup of boiled rice and a cup of blanched English walnuts; take cabbage, turn back a leaf at a time, fill in with rice and nuts; then tie up cabbage in a cloth; put back into a fresh kettle of boiling water and finish cooking; then serve with a cream dressing. NO. 66. CALIFORNIA BAKED BEANS (original). Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street, Los Angeles--Soak over night in cold water one quart navy beans; in the morning drain, add fresh water and cook until beans are very soft; have very little water left when they have finished cooking. Mash and turn beans through a sieve. Season to taste with salt, a pinch of mustard, one tablespoon butter and three tablespoons rich cream, also little molasses if liked. Spread evenly in a large pan. Set on top grate of oven until they have become golden brown on top. Serve in baking dish with a sauce made of the following ingredients: One quart tomatoes, one small clove garlic, one green pepper, one slice ham chopped fine. Let all simmer about twenty minutes, then pass through a colander; thicken with bread crumbs and season with salt and pepper to taste. Wholesome, nourishing and inexpensive. NO. 68. CARROTS. Anonymous-- Peel carrots and slice thin; boil half an hour until dry; fry in butter, salt, pepper and a sprinkle of sugar. Serve with lemon juice. NO. 69. CAULIFLOWER, WITH COOKED MAYONNAISE DRESSING. (Original.) Mrs. S.B. Bagnall, Oxnard, Cal.--Carefully prepare a nice head of cauliflower, boiling in salted water until tender. To make dressing take one tablespoon vinegar, four tablespoons water and put on to boil. Beat together the yolk of one egg and two tablespoons olive oil, adding one saltspoon salt, one saltspoon sugar, dash of cayenne pepper, few drops onion juice, one teaspoon water. Stir the mixture in the boiling =vinegar= and water, and when it begins to thicken take from fire and stir in the juice of half a lemon. To be served hot on cauliflower at table. Also an excellent dressing to serve with string beans. NO. 80. COLD VEGETABLES. (To serve.) Mrs. William J. Magee, 122 Johnston street, Los Angeles.--If any cold vegetables are left over, such as beans, peas, potatoes or carrots, cut into tiny balls, fill them into empty tomatoes, pour over a little French dressing. whip salted cream with chipped chives or lentils until stiff and cover the tomatoes with the cream. NO. 85. CORN DROPS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Pour a pint of boiling water on a pint of corn meal, let cool, beat in an egg and a tablespoon of butter, thin with milk. Cut corn from three ears of corn, mix in and fry in hot lard. NO. 86. CORN OYSTERS. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Mix into a pint of grated corn three tablespoons milk, one teacup flour, a tablespoon butter, one egg, with a little salt and pepper. Drop it by the spoonful into a little hot butter and fry on both sides; serve very hot. NO. 104. GEORGIA POTATOES. Mrs. George Briggs, Needles, Cal.--Take good yellow sweet potatoes and boil until tender; remove skins and slice; put in a stone baking dish, first layer of potatoes, butter, cinnamon and sugar; continue until dish is full, then add about one-half cup sherry and put in oven to brown. NO. 105. GREEN STRING BEANS. H.R. Jones, 2317 West Ninth street, Los Angeles--Shred the beans slanting very fine; let stand several hours in water; drain and put on boiling water and pinch of soda; boil rapidly for half an hour, partly uncovered. Then add just as much sugar as salt; this will make even old beans delicious and tender in about one hour, and when young in half. COOKING: (Original)--Melt one-third cup butter in frying pan, add two-thirds cup rolled bread crumbs; stir until a nice brown, then add beans well drained, mix well and serve. These proportions for four or five persons. NO. 110. HILLICOT STOVERS. (A Scotch supper dish.) Miss Ruth C. Stokes, Somis, Cal. Pare two good-sized onions, six Irish and two sweet potatoes; slice into a frying pan, add salt, pepper and two tablespoons olive oil; cook in enough water to keep from burning, on top of stove for forty minutes. NO. 119. MACARONI AND CHEESE. Mrs. E.K., Pasadena, Cal.--One-half pound macaroni, broken in inch pieces; one-fourth pound mild cheese, grated or cut very thin; one pint white sauce or tomato sauce; cook macaroni in plenty of boiling salter water, about half an hour; when soft turn into colander and run cold water over it to prevent sticking together; drain; put bread crumbs in bottom of buttered dish, then layer of macaroni, sprinkle plentifully with cheese, little salt, a very little cayenne, layer of tomato sauce or white sauce, and continue till dish is full. Put thick layer of breadcrumbs over last layer of sauce and on breadcrumbs three tablespoons cold water. Bake till brown, having crust crisp. NO. 120. MACARONI AU GRATIN. Miss C. Hernstein, 2303 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles.--Break half pound package of macaroni into small pieces; put into boiling salt water; when tender drain well. Put layer of macaroni in buttered baking dish with scraps of butter, and sprinkle Malta Vita and grated cheese over it until ingredients are all used; pour over it one cup of milk, cook twenty minutes. NO. 38. MACARONI WITH CHEESE--A quick way. Mrs. Catharine H. Pickett, 1314 Faxon street, Superior, Wis.--(Original.) Break one-half pound of macaroni into pieces two or three inches in length; throw them into boiling salted water and cook until tender. Heat one quart of rich milk, adding one tablespoon corn starch moistened with cold milk, stirring constantly to prevent scorching. When it has thickened to the consistency of cream, season with salt and add one teacup of grated cheese, letting the mixture come to a boil. Drain the macaroni, slide it carefully into a granite pudding dish and pour the dressing over it. If there is time, cover it and let it stand in a warming oven until ready to serve, as standing for even a few minutes improves it. NO. 137. MUSHROOMS A LA CREOLE. L. Shields, Box 355, Los Angeles.--Put half pint olive oil in flat baking dish, sprinkle dry bread crumbs and finely-chopped parsley in it; lay over some large mushrooms which have been peeled and stemmed, pour more oil over, and sprinkle with bread crumbs and seasoning. Bake in hot oven forty minutes. NO. 188. POTATOES A LA LOS ANGELES. (Original.) Emilia Lundberg, 2400 South Flower street--Some day when you find a panful of tiny potatoes which pairing would reduce to nothing, try this: Scrub potatoes thoroughly with vegetable brush and boil in salted water until done. Skin and pile them in a shallow baking dish. Pour over them a thin cream sauce and toss them lightly with a fork until well coated with the sauce. Sprinkle with grated California cheese and bake until delicately browned. NO. 129 OKRA AND TOMATOES. L. Shields, Box 345, Los Angeles, Cal.--Wash pods of okra and cut them in thin slices, sufficient to fill a quart measure; peel tomatoes to fill a pint cup when sliced; put together in a sauce pan, add a little salt, cover, and let simmer gently for half an hour; add a tablespoonful of butter with pepper and serve. NO. 149. SPINACH IN A "CROWN" OF EGGS. Mrs. Ella Magee, 122 North Johnston street, Los Angeles.--Cook a peck of spinach in boiling salted water until tender, then chop fine; melt two tablespoons butter and cook in it without browning, two tablespoons of flour, add a grating of nutmeg and the spinach, stir, then add half cup of stock or cream. Form into mound, garnish with hard-boiled eggs cut in halves, and set upright to form a border around the mound of spinach; sprinkle powdered egg over the tops. NO. 151. STUFFED CABBAGE. (Original.) Emilia Lundberg, 2400 S. Flower st. Los Angeles.--Take a large, fresh cabbage, and cut out heart, fill vancancy with stuffing made of cooked chicken or veal chopped very fine, highly seasoned and rolled into balls with yolks of eggs; then tie cabbage firmly together, tie a cloth around it and boil in a covered kettle two hours. This is a delicious dish, and is useful in utilizing cold meats. NO. 23. TANGLEWOOD BEANS. Mrs. Kate E. Lee, Tanglewood Ranch, Anaheim, Cal.--Soak over night one quart of brown beans with a little soda in the water. In the morning drain off the water and cover with fresh water. Add one-fourth pound bacon cut in small pieces. Season with salt and pepper and celery-salt; add one large onion, chopped fine, and three tablespoons sugar. Boil with this one large green pepper; take the pepper out when the beans are cooked. NO. 152. TOMATOES AND MACARONI. Mrs. H.A. Paos, 10 Surf street, Ocean Park, Cal.--Open a can of tomatoes, turn them into a granite pan, add salt to taste and pepper, and if liked chop a small onion and add to the tomatoes stew macaroni in water and a speck of salt; when it is tender drain and stir in well with the tomatoes, and add a piece of butter the size of walnut; place in oven and bake until crisp, and brown. NO. 153. TOMATOES FRIED WITH ONIONS. Mrs. T.R. Vaughan, 1056 Hobart boulevard, Los Angeles.--Chop fine three good-sized onions, put in skillet and fry in plenty of butter until a golden brown, being careful not to burn; when done add six large tomatoes, skin removed and mashed, one-third cup vinegar, two-thirds cup sugar, salt and pepper. Fry about forty-five minutes and thicken with cracker dust or bread crumbs. Serve hot as vegetables or cold with meats. MISCELLANEOUS. NO. 24. BEEF TEA CUSTARD FOR INVALIDS (Original.) Mrs. A. Norman Saxton, Orange, Cal.--One and one-half pounds thick round steak, one egg, seasoning ( salt and pepper. ) Remove all fat and skin; cut up in small pieces; place in a double boiler and gradually bring to a boil, then simmer two hours. Strain off liquid and add seasoning to taste. Break egg into a bowl and beat up well; add one-fourth pint beef tea; mix well; pour into a greased cup; tie a buttered paper over top and steam very slowly for fifteen minutes. NO. 70. CHEESE CRAB. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles--Take a large slice of good cheese, mash to a paste, with vinegar, mustard, salt and pepper; cook and serve on toasted crackers. Tastes like crab. NO. 26. CATSUP. Miss Frances B. Welch, Twenty-fourth and F streets, San Diego, Cal.--One-half bushel tomatoes; six large onions; two pounds best brown sugar, one cup salt, 5c worth mixed spices, one teaspoon cayenne, one quart cider vinegar. Wash tomatoes carefully; cut up; boil all except vinegar one hour; strain; add vinegar; cook two hours. NO. 81. COLOGNE. Elizabeth M. Bugbee, 2915 South Figueroa street, Los Angeles--One ounce oil of bergamont, three drachms oil of neroil, one drachm oil of lemon, one drachm oil of orange, one drachm oil rosemary, one-half ounce oil lavender, one gallon perfumer's alcohol. Put alcohol in bowl, pour in perfumes and stir; pour in very slowly about a gill of water, but not enough to cloud it; put all in a demijohn and shake daily for a week before bottling. NO. 28. CUCUMBER PICKLES. (Original.) Mrs. E.A. Stickney, 1023 South Hill street--Boil a salt brine that will bear up an egg, and pour over green cucumbers; let stand twenty-four hours, then wipe them dry. Take one part acetic acid to seven parts of water; boil this with some assorted spices and pour over the pickles. These are most excellent for keeping. NO. 89. CURRIE. L. Neilson, 1019 East 34th street, Los Angeles--Into a stewpan put a piece of butter size of an egg, slice into it an onion cut fine and a tart apple minced; brown thoroughly, stirring frequently; have some veal stock ready, pour in one or two cupfuls, according to quantity required; stir into this a tablespoon or more, according to taste, of the best East Indian currie powder; add half cup tomatoes, salt to taste and small quantity black pepper; thicken with a paste of flour mixed very smoothly and while stirring squeezing in slowly the juice of half a lemon. The principle is the same whether you are currying fish, meat or vegetables. NO. 100. FRENCH MUSTARD. Mrs. T. Carroll, Anaheim, Cal.--Slice an onion in a bowl, and cover with good vinegar; after two days pour off the vinegar, add to it one teaspoon cayenne pepper, one teaspoon salt, one tablespoon sugar and mustard enough to thicken; set on stove until it boils. When cool it is ready for use. NO. 114. KUMYSS (For the Sick.) Emilia Lundberg, 2400 S. Flower street, Los Angeles. Heat two quarts milk to 100 deg. Fahr., add one-third compressed yeast cake, dissolved; boil together two tablespoonfuls of sugar and two of water, add to the milk; stir carefully and put at once into bottles. Cork, tying down the cork and stand in a warm place about 65 deg. Fahr., over night, or for twelve hours. Then turn the bottles carefully on their sides in a cold place, about 50 deg. Fahr., let them remain for twenty-four hours, and the koumyss is ready for use. Open with a champagne tap. Do not attempt to draw the cork, as kumyss is heavily charged with carbon dioxide. It is used in cases of fever, where milk feeding becomes a necessity. The formation of gas, caused by the yeast fermentation, breaks apart the curd and makes the milk more digestible. NO. 116. LEMON SYRUP, for making lemonade on desert or moutain, or wherever you are, "fifty miles from a lemon." (Original.) Mrs. Nellie B. Stewart, 1417 E. 21st street, Los Angeles.--Three cups lemon juice, strained; juice of six oranges. Put into saucepan on stove; when boiling add two cups sugar; let it boil about five minutes, taking off any scum which may arise; pour while hot into screw-top bottles. It can be made entirely of lemon juice if desired. Put some in glass of water and add sugar to suit the taste, as it is not very sweet. One can make a variety by adding a little strawberry or loganberry preserve juice when using the lemonade, or it can be put in while the syrup is cooking. NO. 115. LEMON SYRUP. Mrs. T.H. Sullivan, San Jacinto, Cal.--One pint granulated sugar, browned in the oven, when brown pour in one pint of hot water; cook until no thicker than maple syrup; just before removing from the fire add the juice of one lemon. NO. 128. --NUT LOAF. M.E. Crawford, 41 Chestnut street, Long Beach, Cal.--Grind half a pound of walnuts or any nuts desired, coarsely in a vegetable chopper; grind crackers or toasted bread, carrots and onions; stir in a beaten egg, a dash of cayenne pepper, sufficient milk or water to moisten the crackers or bread, add the nuts and whole wheat flour to make a stiff batter; bake in molds in moderately hot oven about twenty minutes. Serve warm or cold in slices or squares, garnished with parsley and lettuce. NO. 130. OLIVES AND SARDINES. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong ave., Los Angeles. Take some Spanish olives and stone them (the best way to do this is to make a slit with a very sharp knife in the side of the olive and work the point of the knife very gently around the stone until it is loosened;) mince very fine some sardines, before mincing remove the bone and scrape the sardines gently to remove all the skin possible; add to the sardine one-fourth teaspoon of minced onion, a little chopped parsley, and a grain of red pepper; put this mixture into the olive in place of the stone; place the olives on a piece of browned bread; serve with mayonnaise sauce. NO. 131. OYSTER COCKTAIL FOR ONE PERSON, M.V.G. --One-half dozen California oysters, two drops Tabasco sauce, one teaspoon tomato catsup, one teaspoon Worcestershire sauce, one tablespoon lemon juice, one pinch salt. NO. 133. PANADA. Miss C. Hernstein. 2302 Budlong ave., Los Angeles.--Take a slice of wheat bread, break into pieces, sprinkle with a teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, put all in a cup; pour on a pint of boiling milk; boil for a few moments, add sugar and a little grated nutmeg. A piece of butter and some brandy may be added when desirable. These are for the sick. NO. 136. RICE CHEESE MOULD. M.E. Crawford, 41 Chestnutstreet, Long Beach, Cal. Boil the quantity of rice desired in sufficient water to prevent becoming thick, partly cool. Beat an egg and stir into a cup of milk with sufficient whole wheat flour to make a thick batter. Grate an ounce or two of onion and half a pound of mild cheese, stir into the rice, with the flour batter, add a dash of cayenne pepper. Bake in moulds or a deep pan in a moderate oven until slightly brown on top, usually twenty minutes. Serve warm or cold, garnished with lettuce and parsley. NO. 140. SALLY LUNN. Mrs. N.T. Johnston, care L. J. Rose, Oxnard, Cal.--One quart flour, four eggs, one tablespoon pulverized sugar sifted in the dry flour, one large tablespoon butter rubbed into flour with a fork, two tablespoons potato yeast. Take one large potato, boiled, mash with fork until perfectly smooth; into this put teaspoon salt, teaspoon sugar, place butter size of walnut and the yeast; stir until well mixed and put in warm place (over a kettle of hot water ) until it rises; then beat eggs very light, stir in the flour, the risen sponge and enough new (fresh) milk (boil this and cool before using) to make consistency of cake. Put this in a warm place to rise--it will take from eight to nine hours; then beat up, pour in round buttered mold, let rise again about two hours, bake one hour to an hour and a half in moderate oven. Serve hot with butter. NO. 158. WELSH RAREBIT. Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue, Los Angeles. Beat two eggs and add to them a cup of cream or rich milk, one-half of a level teaspoon each of salt and French mustard, and one-half pound of rich American cheese, grated, or cut fine; put two tablespoons of butter in a skillet and when melted add cheese mixture and stir constantly till thick and creamy. Serve on squares of toast. Much more dainty if made in chafing dish. NO. 159. WINE WHEY. (For the sick ones.) Miss C. Hernstein, 2302 Budlong avenue. Put half a pint of sweet milk over the fire, and as soon as it begins to boil pour in slowly a wineglass of sherry mixed with a teaspoonful of sugar; grate in a little nutmeg and as soon as it comes to a boil again remove it from the fire. When cold strain for use. MENU FOR EASTER LUNCHEON. By Mrs. Julia Sheldon Holmes. Pink Cream Soup with Marrow Balls. Crackers, Celery, Olives. Easter Salad, Bread Sticks, Cheese Eggs. Easter Souffle, Gold Cake. Cocoa with Whipped Cream. (Directions.) PINK CREAM SOUP. Put into a saucepan one and a half tablespoons each of butter and flour; stir on the fire until smooth, then add by degrees three pints milk and boil up. Season with a level teaspoonful of salt and a pinch of grated nutmeg. Color pink with one and one-half tablespoons boiled beets run through a sieve. Marrow balls: One tablespoon finely cut marrow, three tablespoons fine bread crumbs, one teaspoon chopped parsley, salt and pepper to taste. Work into a smooth paste, adding a raw egg to help render it smooth; form into a ball size of a filbert; drop into boiling water; cook fifteen minutes. Serve in the soup five balls to the plate. EASTER SALAD WITH CHEESE-EGGS. Arrange on salad plate a nest of lettuce leaves, placed in the shape of the calyx of a flower; cut the whites of hard-boiled eggs into a long-petal-shaped strips; place in flower form upon the lettuce calyx; in the center put halves of yolks of boiled eggs. This makes almost a perfect daisy. Serve with mayonnaise dressing and cheese eggs made with white cream cheese, or Neufchatel cheese, tinted a very pale green with spinach juice. Form the cheese into small balls the shape and size of birds' eggs; speckle with a few grains of red sugar. EASTER SOUFFLE WITH BLANC MANGE EGGS. Fill glass dish two-thirds full of sweet gelatine, flavored, allowing it to set. The n hollow out the center. Soak one box Cox's gelatine in one quart rich milk for one hour; put it over a kettle of boiling water; when it comes to a boil add the beaten whites of four eggs, with five tablespoons sugar, stirring hard a few moments; flavor with vanilla and add a pinch of salt. Fill egg shells, the contents of which have been removed through small hole in one end, with blanc mange mixture; allow to cool; peel off the outside shell; place the eggs in center of gelatine. Place strips of citron over top of gelatine and serve with whipped cream. GOLD CAKE. One and one-half cups sugar, one-half cup butter, one cup sweet milk, one teaspoon cream tartar, one-half teaspoon soda, one teaspoon lemon extract, three cups flour, yolks of six eggs. Bake in round or square shaped cake tins. Use either white or yellow icing. The white icing is made with the white of one egg, with a tablespoon of cream or water lightly beaten together; stir in con-confectioner's sugar until stiff; spread over top and side of cake while warm. Use the yolk of egg to make the yellow icing; flavor with vanilla and lemon mixed. PICNIC LUNCHES. No. 1.-PICNIC LUNCH. Ham and Pickle Sandwiches. Deviled Eggs. Veal Loaf. Plain Butter Sandwiches. Potato Salad. Cheese Straws. Pickes. Angel Food. Cream Puffs. Tea or Coffee. HAM AND PICKLE SANDWICHES. Chop cold, boiled ham quite fine, mix with a little melted butter and made mustard, add some finely-chopped cucumber pickles and spread between thin slices of bread and butter. DEVILED EGGS. Boil eggs 20 minutes, then plunge them into cold water. Remove the shell and cut into halves. Take out the yolks without breaking the whites, and put them in a bowl. Rub to a smooth paste, and season with salt, pepper and a little melted butter and a bit of mustard, stirred up with vinegar, or a small quantity of mayonnaise. Fill each half of egg with this prepared yolk. Serve on crisp lettuce leaves. VEAL LOAF. Three pounds of lean veal, 1/2 pound of salt pork, 1 nutmeg, grated, 1 onion, butter size of an egg, a little red pepper and salt. Chop all very fine and mix them together with 3 eggs, well beaten, and a teacupful of milk; form into a small loaf, pressing it very firmly; cover it with bread crumbs; bake 2 1/2 hours. To be eaten cold. POTATO SALAD. Cut cold, boiled potatoes into dice shape and mix with 1 tablespoonful chopped onion and enough not-to-strong vinegar to moisten; let stand one hour, then mix with mayonnaise dressing, to which has been added the uncooked yolk of 1 egg, beaten with fork in cold bowl. Then add 2 saltspoonfuls of salt and 1 of mustard, and a little sugar, if liked. Then mix in good salad oil, a drop at a time; alternate occasionally with a few drops of lemon. When the egg has absorbed a gill of oil, finish the sauce by adding a little cayenne and 1/2 a tablespoonful of lemon juice. CHEESE STRAWS. Six ounces flour, 2 tablespoonfuls cream, 3 ounces grated cheese, 2 tablespoonfuls butter, salt, pepper and nutmeg. Sift the flour on pastry board; make a hole in the center, and into this put the cream, grated cheese, butter, 1/2 a level teaspoonful of salt, 1/4 teaspoonful pepper, same quantity of grated nutmeg, cayenne as much as you can take up on the point of a small penknife blade. Mix all these ingredients with the tips of the fingers to a firm paste; knead it well, roll it out an eighth of an inch thick, and with a sharp knife cut it in straws 3 inches long and 1/4 inch wide; lay carefully on a buttered tin, and bake a light straw color in a moderate oven. GOOD PICKLES. One peck small cucumbers, 1 quart of button onions, or 3 or 4 large onions sliced; make enough brine to cover pickles, allowing 1 pint of salt to 4 quarts of water; pour it boiling hot over the pickles; let this stand over night, then pour off brine and throw away. Make a new brine and pour over again. The third morning scald the same brine and pour over again. Repeat the fourth morning. The fifth morning rinse the pickles well in cold water and cover them with boiling hot cider vinegar, reduced by adding 1 quart of water to 2 gallons of vinegar. Add a small piece of alum and spices, if you like. ANGEL FOOD. Whites of 10 eggs, 1 1/4 cups of sifted sugar, 1 teaspoonful cream of tartar, a pinch of salt added to the eggs before beating. After sifting flour 5 times, measure and set aside 1 cup. Then sift sugar granulated 5 times; beat whites of eggs about 1/2, and then add cream of tartar; then finish, beating them very stiff; stir in the sugar, then flour, very lightly; bake in a moderate oven 45 to 60 minutes. CREAM PUFFS. One-half cup of butter, melted in 1 cup of hot water; put in a small tin pan on the stove to boil; while boiling stir in 1 cup flour, take off and let cool. When cold stir in 3 eggs, one at a time, without beating. Drop on butter tins and bake in a hot oven 20 or 30 minutes. Filling: One cup of milk, 1 egg, thicken with flour, or corn starch, flavor with vanilla. MRS. F.W. KOCH. Etiwanda, Cal. NO. 2--PICNIC LUNCHEON FOR JOLLY 6. Fried Chicken. Strawberry Rolls. Sardine Salad. Tamale Croquettes. Cucumber Pickles. Lemon Pie. Cheese. Picnic Pudding. Pomelo Beverage. Wooden plates, desert forks or spoons, cups and napkins. FRIED CHICKEN. Prepare in usual way; season and dredge thickly with flour; put into frying pan 1 tablespoonful each of butter and lard; when hot arrange the chicken in pan, thickest pieces in center; fry to golden brown over quick fire; turn and brown; then set in a steady, well-heated part of range, but not to fry fast; turn when necessary. In this way the juice is well retained and the meat tender. The bony portions may be served at home. STRAWBERRY ROLLS. Wash and hull 2 boxes of strawberries, drain and slice them, spread on a platter, sprinkle over them a very little lemon juice and 6 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar. Remove crusts from a dozen thin slices of bread; spread with melted butter, then the berries, roll and tie with baby ribbon at each end. Wring a napkin from cold water, pack the rolls in it, and then fold in a dry napkin. SARDINE SALAD. Dress a pint of sardines (which have been put up in oil, ) with a half pint of good mayonnaise, into which has been stirred 2 tablespoonfuls of minced celery; scoop the centers, all seeds, from 6 medium-sized smooth tomatoes; fill the cavities with the salad mixture, and secure each lid with a couple of toothpicks. TAMALE CROQUETTES. Mix together 1/2 pint each of oysters, sweet corn, chopped boiled eggs and graham bread crumbs, a beaten egg, a generous sprinkling of cayenne pepper and a level teaspoonful of salt; form, roll in cracker crumbs and plunge (in basket) in boiling fat, or brown nicely on buttered tin in the oven. Drain on brown paper. TWO DOZEN SPICED CUCUMBERS, home made, are always best. DOUBLE-CRUSTED LEMON PIE. The grated rind of 1 and chopped pulp of 2 lemons, rejecting seed and white fiber of rind; 1 teacupful of water, 1 tablespoonful (scant) of flour, 6 tablespoonfuls of sugar. Mix the last two, then add water and fruit; make incisions in the upper crust as for other fruit pies. A little baking powder in the crust is an improvement. PICNIC PUDDING. One cupful sugar, 1-3 cup butter, 1/2 cup sweet milk, 1 1-2 cups flour, 1 teaspoonful Royal baking powder, whites of 4 eggs, beaten light and added after the other ingredients have been thoroughly mixed; 1/2 teaspoonful of pistachio or almond extract. Bake in bread pan. Filling: One pint milk, 2 tablespoonfuls each of cornstarch, sugar and grated chocolate, 4 yolks of eggs. Mix as for other boiled custards, dissolve the chocolate in a little of the scalding milk separately. Add a piece of butter the size of a walnut, a generous pinch of salt, and lastly a teaspoonful of vanilla. Chop a pound of dried figs, add 1/2 pint of cold water, bring slowly to boiling point, then stir constantly until a thick jam is formed, add more water, as it cooks down, if required. Cut the cake into 4 equal parts, spread a layer with custard, add another layer, and spread on the fig jam, spread the third layer with remaining custard and add the fourth. Ice thickly with boiled icing to entirely encrust the custard, insuring safe carriage; set thickly with halved pistachio nuts or almonds. BEVERAGE. The juice of 4 grapefruits, when pressing the fruit be careful that the juice does not come in contact with the rind; 1 teacup of sugar; bottle and cork. Add to the spring water. Plain buttered rolls and a few sweet oranges may also find a corner in a capacious lunch basket. MRS. A.R. BROWN. Rivers, Cal. No. 3.--PICNIC LUNCH. VEAL LOAF. Three pounds raw minced veal, 1/2 pound fresh fat pork, chopped or put through grinder, 1 teacup each of rolled crackers and milk, 1 egg, pepper, salt, sage, thyme and celery salt, to taste. Form into loaf; bake until thoroughly done, basting with butter and water. Slice when cold with very sharp, thin knife. CHEESE SANDWICHES. Cut bread very thin and spread with soft butter. Between the pieces place thin slices of cheese] (California or ]Swiss,) spread lightly with mixed mustard. OLIVE SANDWICHES. Stone 1 pint of fine, large olives, chop them or put through grinder, mix with mayonnaise or French salad dressing; spread on crisp lettuce leaves and put between slices of bread. POTATO SALAD. Boil 12 medium-sized potatoes with skins on; when cold peel and cut in small pieces. Add 3 tablespoons each of minced parsley and celery, 2 tablespoons of minced onion; salt and pepper (I use cayenne) to taste. Three hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine. Mix this well, add 1/2 pint mayonnaise or French dressing. Serve on wooden plates. SALAD DRESSING. To be used instead of mayonnaise in the foregoing recipes: Yolks of 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon of butter, beat them well together; 4 tablespoonfuls of vinegar, 1 teaspoon each salt, sugar and mixed mustard. Put all together in bowl; set in boiling water, stir until it thickens well. When cold add 1/2 teacup of cream, either sweet or sour. WAFERS. One cup each of butter and sugar, 2-3 cup of sour milk, 1 teaspoon soda, 2 eggs, 1/2 teaspoon salt, flour enough to make very soft dough. Bake in quick oven. Wrap sandwiches singly in waxed paper, or put number in a damp napkin, with dry cloth outside. Put potato salad in box lined with crisp celery leaves. Add olives, pickles and jelly to basket. The best bread for sandwiches is what is known as the "Pullman loaf." It is browned on all sides and will cut to so much better advantage than the ordinary loaf. MRS. M. DICKERSON. Ontario, Cal. NO. 4.--LUNCH FOR PICNIC. Cut thin slices of bread, butter; lay a leaf of lettuce with a little mustard dressing on it, between, for sandwiches. Cinnamon roll, 1 glass of jelly or jam, cheese, olives; potato salad, with a little onion in it for an appetizer, hard-boiled eggs, dried beef, cold meat or sardines, small cakes or cookies, chocolate cake, oranges> or bananas, lemon juice of 12 lemons, and 3 oranges. Squeeze out the juice the day before; put in good cup of sugar, boil and skim off scum; let cool, bottle. Paper napkins. Going on a picnic one does not care to work all the day before to prepare an elaborate lunch and go feeling so tired they cannot enjoy the outing. It is best to prepare something wholesome and appetizing--not so many dainties. Pies, tarts and custards have a habit of getting spilled or mashed. It is much easier to purchase the thin wooden dishes, which are very inexpensive and light to carry. Put your eatables in them, cover with oil paper, each article. Wrap each sandwich to keep it moist in the paper. Slip your cake onto one of the wooden plates, put another on the top to protect the frosting. Put your salad in one or two, according to the amount you have, of the vegetable-shaped ones; put a piece of oil paper over it, tight; then cover with another dish, and tie it down so the onion in the salad will not penetrate other eatables. Take plenty of sandwiches and less cake. After eating, all wooden dishes can be thrown away, so there will be very little to carry home when one is almost too tired to carry themselves. Small tin cups are light to carry and will last all summer with care. The cinnamon rolls are easily made by rolling out thin some of the bread dough. Spread with butter, sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon, roll the dough, cut off inch pieces, lay close in pan, put on top more butter, sugar and cinnamon. Let rise very light; bake. MRS. M.S. Lamanda Park, Cal. NO. 5.--PLAIN LUNCH UNIVERSALLY LIKED. Take tender, boiled ham, chop fine and season sparingly with mayonnaise sauce. Have nice new home-made bread, cut thin and butter lightly. Spread the seasoned ham< between two slices of bread. To make the sandwich more dainty, cut the crust off from all sides of the slices. Take a napkin and dampen with cold water and fold the sandwiches in it. This will keep them from becoming dry. Hard-boiled eggs. A dish of baked beans, with the usual condiments to season. Plain bread and butter. Sweet or sour pickles. Any kind of cake or pie the fancy dictates. Cheese and fresh fruit. A bottle of cold coffee, seasoned with milk and sugar. if you have the facilities for making hot tea or coffee you will find it a great addition to a cold lunch, even though it be a hot summer day. A suggestion to the inexperienced: How to make coffee. Take Java and Mocha, mixed, freshly ground; allow 1 tablespoonful of coffee for each person and 1 for the pot; beat up 1 egg, and mix with coffee, shell and all; mix with 1/2 cup of cold water, then pour on the boiling water. One cup and a half allowed to 1 tablespoon coffee. Measure in tea cup, as coffee cup would make coffee too weak. Boil 15 minutes. Serve with sweet cream and sugar. This ought to insure a cup of delicious coffee. MRS. N.S. ALLING. Lamanda Park, Cal. NO. 6.--PICNIC LUNCH. CHICKEN SANDWICHES. Cut the meat of one cold, boiled chicken fine, add yolks of 6 hard-boiled eggs, previously mashed with a fork, 1 tablespoon each of minced parsley, vinegar and lemon juice, 1 teaspoon onion juice, salt, pepper, 1/2 teaspoon celery salt, and enough olive oil to moisten sufficiently to spread on bread, which should be thinly sliced and but slightly buttered. CHEESE SANDWICHES. Cut bread very thin and spread with soft butter; between the slices place thin slices of cheese (California or Swiss,) spread with lightly-seasoned mustard. SALAD EGGS. Boil 12 eggs hard, peel carefully and cut in halves, mash the yolks, add salt, pepper, 1/2 teaspoon each of onion juice and celery salt, 1-3 spoon mixed mustard, enough olive oil to moisten; with a knife fill each half of the whites, wipe clean with a damp napkin, wrap each egg in a waxed paper and pack in a box. POTATO SALAD. Boil 12 potatoes with skins on; when cold peel and cut in small pieces; add 3 tablespoons each of minced parsley and celery, 2 tablespoons minced onion, 3 hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine, salt and pepper. Mix thoroughly; add 1/2 pint mayonnaise, serve on wooden plates. VEAL LOAF. Three pounds raw minced veal, 1/2 pound fat fresh pork, 1 teacup each of milk and rolled crackers, 1 egg, pepper, salt, sage, thyme and celery salt. Form into loaf, bake two hours, slice when cold with very sharp, thin knife. WAFERS. One cup each of butter and sugar, 2-3 cup sour milk, 1 teaspoon soda, 2 eggs, 1/2 teaspoon salt, flour enough to roll; bake in quick oven. Wrap sandwiches in damp napkin or wax paper. Add olives, pickles and jelly to lunch. MRS. J.W. SMART. Covina, Cal. NO. 7--PICNIC LUNCH. CAKE--BANANA. One cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 2 cups flour, 1 cup sweet milk, 2 teaspoons baking powder, whites of 3 eggs. Beat eggs stiff. Cream sugar and butter; then add the milk and flour, sifted with baking powder, and toward the last whites of eggs. Bake in five layers. For filling, beat the whites of two eggs stiff, add 1 cup sugar (pulverized is best,) put between layers. Slice ripe bananas and place carefully all over between layers. FOR MEAT. A chicken 4 months old (Light Brahma preferred,) clean, cut up, wash and salt or pepper, roll in flour and fry in hot lard and butter of cotto suet; fry a nice brown. Add cheese, olives, pickles, jelly or good jam, 12 deviled eggs, potato chips, 1 loaf Vienna bread, home-made butter, fruit--apples, bananas, etc. MARY E. PALMER. No. 330 South State Street. NO. 8.--A PICNIC LUNCHEON. DEVILED EGGS. Boil 6 eggs hard, drop them into cold water for a minute, and then carefully remove the shells; cut them in half with a sharp knife, and gently remove the yolks; mash and mix them with a dash of pepper salt, a tablespoonful of olive oil, a teaspoonful of vinegar and a little chopped pickle or parsley. Mold this mixture into balls and replace in the whites. Put the two halves of the egg together and tie with baby ribbon. HAM SANDWICHES. Two pounds cold boiled ham, cut slices of bread quite thin and cut off the crust, butter, and lay a slice of ham on each piece; spread with mustard and lay another slice of bread upon the top. CHICKEN SANDWICHES. Chop cold chicken and celery together, mix with a little salad dressing, and spread on thin, buttered bread. CREAM PUFFS. Boil 1 cupful hot water and 1/2 cupful of butter together, and while boiling stir in 1 cup of dry sifted flour. Take from the fire and stir to a thin paste, and after this cools stir in 3 eggs. Stir 5 minutes. Drop in tablespoonfuls on a buttered tin, and bake in a quick oven 25 minutes. CREAM FOR ABOVE. One cup milk, 1 cup sugar, 1 egg, 3 tablespoonfuls flour, vanilla to flavor; stir the flour in a little of the milk; boil the rest; stir this in, and stir until the whole thickens; when both this and the puffs are cool, open the puffs with a sharp knife, and fill them with the cream. SARATOGA POTATOES. Slice the potatoes very thin into cold water, drain them thoroughly. Drop into boiling lard and fry a few at a time. Drop into boiling lard and fry a few at a time. Drain, salt and put them in a dry place. FRUIT. Oranges, apples, peaches, pears and plums are nice to take on a picnic. PACKING. The basket must be packed very carefully, especially the cream puffs. EDNA S. CHAPIN. No. 418 Dora street. NO. 9--PICNIC LUNCH. ADAPTED TO A FAMILY OF SIX. The first essential is something to eat: besides this, we will need something to carry it in; plenty of paper napkins, paper dishes and drinking utensils. After neatly lining my telescope with a lunch cloth, I place therein my 13 cheese and egg sandwiches. Boil at low temperature 9 or 10 eggs for from 1 to 4 hours; remove to cold water. When thoroughly cold, or the following day, prepare by first removing the yolks. Chop whites as fine as meal, and place with yolks in a bowl; add about 1 teaspoon butter to each yolk, salt, pepper and celery seed to taste, and, if liked, some lemon juice --1 lemon to 3 eggs. Mix and blend all this to a smooth paste. After spreading each slice of bread with softened butter, spread each alternate slice with the egg mixture, and scatter thickly over it finely- grated cheese. Cover with a buttered slice, press together, and cut in size to suit yourself. One egg will cover two slices baker's 5-cent loaf. Now butter half as many slices as before, to eat with. CORN-BEEF SALAD. Chop fine 1 pound corn beef, add 2-3 cup of vinegar, 1 tablespoon sugar, 1 beaten egg, mustard to taste. Beat all well together, place in stew pan and let thoroughly heat, stirring all the while. Pour into dish or mold, let get thoroughly cold, then slice. CRULLERS. Six eggs, 6 tablespoons softened butter, 6 tablespoons sugar, 1 tablespoon milk or water, 2 teaspoons baking powder, little salt and nutmeg, all sifted with flour, made into soft dough; will serve for six persons or more. Beat eggs, butter and sugar together, cold water, stir in flour and kneed but little. Pull enough off at a time to make a twist, not too large, and fry in smoking-hot fat. They will cool quickly, because of amount of eggs. If you will reserve part of the batter--and will after finishing the crullers--stir in with the flour a handful of chopped nuts or raisins or both, you will have a delicious cooky. Or, follow this recipe for GINGER SNAPS. Two cups of New Orleans molasses, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup lard, 1 tablespoon yellow ginger, 1 tablespoon soda, dissolved in a small quantity of hot water; flour to roll thin, little salt; bake quickly. Now add to these a few olives or pickles and a glass of ORANGE MARMALADE. Five oranges, 2 lemons, reserving lemons for second boiling; peel oranges, reserving 1-3 peel, which cut into strips or other designs with scissors. Hold oranges over bowl and tear into irregular pieces, add peel and cover with cold water. Set away for 24 hours uncovered. If water has evaporated, add enough to cover, place over fire and boil rapidly 45 minutes, stirring all the time. Remove and let stand the second 24 hours. Now place over fire, let boil about 30 minutes. Now measure and add lemon juice and sugar equal to pulp. Replace on fire and cook till it forms a clear jelly, and will not run. Pour into jars. Unless you desire hot drinks you will need about two quarts of this LEMONADE. This rule will insure success if making either a gallon or quart. For 1 quart use the juice of 3 lemons and thinly-peeled rind of one. Cut this into pieces, and place with juices and 4 tablespoons of powdered sugar in a closely-covered jug or jar. Now pour a quart of freshly-boiling water over it and cover. Leave to get cold. MRS. M.G. MOORE. NO. 170 East Thirty-sixth street. HOME-MADE CANDIES. Have every article needed convenient before boiling the sugar, as one must work very rapidly after the candy is cool enough to manipulate. Articles needed: A new tin, iron, granite or porcelain boiler, free from grease. The boiler should never be used for other purposes. If possible a confectioner's thermometer, a cloth tied around a fork, best granulated sugar, confectioners' sugar, two silver forks, a silver spoon, a sharp knife, one bar of baker's bitter chocolate, a bar of sweet chocolate, a box of cocoa, glycerine, cream of tartar, various flavoring extracts, vanilla bean, colored pastes, dried figs, chopped walnuts, nuts, blanched almonds, halves of English walnuts, coco butter (not that used for toliet purposes,) seeded raisins and dates, shredded or fresh cocoanut grated, parched peanuts, butter, maple sugar, sliced pineapple, well dried, and a large flat meat dish filled with cold water (a marble slab is preferable,) and a ladle or butter cake turned. PLAIN CREAM OR FONDANT. Four cups of best granulated sugar (white,) to which add 2 cups of boiling water and one-fourth teaspoonful of pure cream of tartar. Stir until dissolved, but do not stir while boiling. Boil until three drops fall slowly, a thread slowly forming from the third drop. Also watch the bubbles break slowly as it boils. If it threads directly from the spoon with the first drop it will revert to sugar. If a thermometer is used, it must reach 40 deg. A little experience without a thermometer will give success. Skim the sugar while boiling, also the sides of the kettle with a wet cloth on a fork as the scum arises. Do not boil too briskly, but moderately. When it threads pour into the flat dish, from which the water has been perfectly drained just before removing the candy from the fire, and add one teaspoonful of glycerine to each cup of sugar, and one teaspoonful of vanilla, or any flavoring desired: If two flavors are desired, divide the candy. Do not scrape the bottom and sides of the boiler when pouring it out. When the finger can be held in the candy with comfort, knead back and forth with a batter cake turner, until it "bucks." This work must be done rapidly and evenly, having the dish level. When impossible to move the mass, use forks to wash it; then knead with hands until smooth. This is called stock fondant, and it will keep a month in a cool place, and can be worked into fancy candies, but I prefer to mold while slightly warm. Do not handle too much. Some of this white stock may be molded into squares, rounds, diamonds, wrapped around a whole almond, or other nuts, rolled in grated cocoanut, dipped into chocolate coating, or made in layers one-fourth inch thick and four inches long; with a layer of dried figs between, and when cold cut into diamonds, etc., or a layer of pineapple may be used. Add a touch of pink paste to white cream, also violet, yellow, green and chocolate to white cream. Make two layers of white with either color between, as fancy dictates, and cut into shapes or make into balls. Trim the sides of the layer before cutting, and the ragged edges can be put together, forming striped blocks of several colors, whereas the layer only showed white and pink, or some other color. Melt chocolate for brown, make into shapes, and place halves of walnuts on top of all colors and whites. Make pink balls and squares, let them get firm, and dip into melted white fondant, which gives a pretty effect. Chop raisins, add spices, and mix in white fondant, place between layers of white or colored fondant or cream. Remove seed from dates and raisins and fill with white and colored cream, roll in granulated sugar. Strips of cocoanuts may be placed on top or worked into cream also. Rose water, pineapple, banana and orange are nice flavorings. Wintergreen is liked by some. MAPLE CREAM. Same as plain cream, except use 1 teaspoonful of cream of tartar to 1 pound of maple sugar. NUT CREAMS. Two cups of white and 1 cup of maple sugar to 1 cup of boiling water. Proceed as for plain cream only, add mixed chopped nuts just before it "bucks." Shape into squares or make a layer between white or colored cream and cut into squares. CHOCOLATE COATING. A-1 cake of Baker's bitter chocolate, 2 ounces of coco butter, melted together--sunshine heat, never over hot water, to which add confectioner's sugar until thick enough. Pound vanilla bean in the sugar before sifting it, and warm the sugar before mixing with chocolate. This mixture can be slowly melted on the back of the stove. Stir it constantly. By means of a hatpin dip the shapes of white and colored creams into this mixture and drop on paper. Hold on pin until it almost ceases to drop. Bars of cream dipped into this coating with a nut on top are nice. Nuts may be inside of the shape also, or it may be rolled in cocoanut while the coating is soft. ANOTHER COATING. Equal parts of sweet and bitter chocolate, melted. This is delicious and less trouble. CHOCOLATE-COATED ALMONDS. Brown blanched almonds and dip into coating. FINER GRADE OF CHOCOLATE CREAMS. Use a tin funnel 7 inches long, 4 1/2 inches across top, and 1/4 inch at bottom, with a stick, similar to a pencil, through the center to close the outlet, and to be raised and lowered to emit a small quantity of melted fondant into small molds. The funnel looks like the letter V. and has a handle on the side. Make impressions with cone-shaped objects, or they may be round or bars, in cornstarch or sugar, and pour in the melted fondant, and when firm dip in chocolate coating. CHOCOLATE CARAMELS. One cup of grated chocolate, 2 cups of light-brown sugar, 1 cup of molasses, 1 cup of milk or cream, butter size of an egg, 1/2 teaspoonful vanilla. Boil until almost brittle, stirring constantly. Cut into squares and wrap in tissue paper. RELIABLE FUDGE. To 1/2 pint of cream add 1 1/2 pounds of granulated sugar (cane, not beet.) Stir while over fire until it boils, then stir in 1/4 teaspoonful of cream of tartar. Continue stirring five minutes, then slowly add another 1/2 pint of cream. When a soft ball can be formed in water remove from the fire and add 1/2 pound of "stock fondant," and 2 tablespoonfuls of vanilla. Stir until thick, and pour on buttered paper and cut into squares. CHOCOLATE AND NUT FUDGE. Is made same way, only when fondant is added, 1/2 pound of chocolate and a little butter must be added, and rolled nuts or cocoanut. This is delicious. FUDGE. Three cups of sugar (white,) 1 cup of milk, 2 tablespoonfuls of cocoa, vanilla, 1 teaspoonful and 1 tablespoonful of butter. Stir while boiling and pour on buttered paper. Cut into squares. PINOCHE. Three cups brown sugar, 1 cup of sweet milk, butter size of a walnut. Boil until it makes a soft ball in water, stirring constantly. Remove from the fire and add chopped walnuts. When cold cut into squares. KISSES. Form a roll of fondant, and with a tiny brush make stripes of pink from Dr. Price's fruit coloring; cut in short lengths, and when dry wrap in fancy papers. Dots may be made with colored paste or it may be colored solid. PEANUT BRITTLE. One cup of white sugar, put in frying pan, stir until melted. Add 1 cupful of parched peanuts, stirring until peanuts separate. Pour on tin platters to cool. There must not be any grease about the frying pan. GRILLED ALMONDS. Boil 1 cup of sugar in 3/4 cup of water until it threads, then throw in almonds, and when sugar changes color remove from fire, stirring until it turns to sugar. Walnuts may be used, also. MOLASSES CANDY. Boil syrup until it forms a firm ball in water, and when sufficiently cool pull until light color. Cut in lengths or twist into fancy shapes. TAFFY CANDY. Boil 2 cups of brown sugar with 1 of boiling water, add 1/2 teaspoonful cream of tartar, cook until it forms a firm ball in water, and, when cool, pull until very light; cut into lengths. In making cream candy if it turns to sugar just before it "bucks," and has a creamy taste, but is hard, add enough pure cream to moisten it, and mash all lumps, and a very nice cream is obtained, but it will not keep very long. When it turns to sugar it can be reboiled, but the cream is not very nice. MRS. D. S. PRATT. San Bernadino, Cal. NO. 2--ANOTHER BATCH. COJETS DE LECHE. Take 6 pints of sweet milk, 1 1/2 pounds brown sugar, 1 tablespoon flour, white 1 egg, 3 cups cold water. Clarify the sugar by dissolving it in 1 cupful of the water; add a cupful into which the white of the egg has been thoroughly beaten. Heat this until a scum appears; remove from fire and skim. Repeat this till no scum appears, then add 3 pints of the milk and the flour made smooth in a little cold milk. Boil, stirring constantly. until the bottom of the sauce pan can be seen. Then add 1/2 the remaining milk, and repeat the cooking till you can see bottom of sauce pan again. Add rest of milk, and repeat cooking. To insure success, stir constantly and never lift the spoon out of the mixture until you have removed it from the fire; then stir briskly until the candy thickens; pour into a buttered plate. Let get cold. COFFEE CREAM CARAMELS. Melt 3 lbs. of sugar by heat, using but little water. When it begins to bubble stir in slowly 1 teacupful of cream and add 2 ounces of butter, and the liquid from 2 ounces of coffee. Keep stirring while it cooks; when brittle turn into buttered tin plates. When nearly cold mark into squares. HICKORY-NUT MACAROONS. To hickory nuts ground fine add mixed ground allspice and nutmeg. Make a frosting as for cakes, stir in the meats and spices, putting in enough only to make it convenient to handle; flour the hands and make into balls size of nutmegs. Lay them on the tins greased with butter. Give room to spread. Bake in quick oven. PEANUT CANDY, CARAMEL. Two cups granulated sugar, 1 cup chopped nuts, no water, slow fire. Put very finely chopped nuts in a greased platter or dish, 1/4 inch thick. Put sugar over slow fire--it melts very slowly; then gets hard in lumps and melts again. When entirely free from lumps or grains, remove and pour over nuts, stirring as you pour. When cool divide in squares. A GOOD GINGER CANDY. Take 1 cup of water to 1 1/2 cups of sugar, and boil until when tested it will roll into a small ball. Flavor with essence of ginger or powdered ginger. Rub some of the syrup against the side of the pan with a wooden spoon until it turns white, then pour into buttered tins and put in a cool place. CREAM WALNUTS. Dissolve 1 pound powdered sugar in 1/2 teacup of water, boil just five minutes; cool slowly, stirring constantly while it cools. Flavor when cool. If not stiff enough to handle, work in a little more sugar, roll into balls and press half a walnut on each side, and drop into granulated sugar. MINT CREAMS. Put 2 cups granulated sugar and 1/2 cup water in a granite sauce pan; stir until sugar is dissolved, but no longer. Remove spoon, and after syrup begins to boil, boil just 8 minutes, remove from fire, add 5 drops of peppermint; stir hard; then drop from tip of spoon on waxed paper. FUDGES. Put into your granite sauce pan 3 tablespoonfuls of butter, 1 cupful light-brown cane sugar, 1/2 cupful of milk, 2 cupfuls New Orleans molasses and 4 squares grated chocolate. Put over fire and stir continually until it will form a rather hard ball when tested in cold water. Add a teaspoon vanilla, turn on greased platter, let cool; then mark into squares. FUDGES No. 2. Take 3 cups granulated sugar, 1 cup of milk, 2 squares of chocolate, a small piece of butter, or not, just as you prefer; let these boil for exactly 11 minutes. Flavoring: If nuts are added they should be chopped and put into the syrup just as it is removed from the fire. Fudges must be stirred constantly, and when removed from the fires be beaten briskly until they begin to harden; then spread on buttered platter; cut into small squares and let get cold. FONDANT. Four pounds granulated sugar, 1 quart water, 1/2 teaspoon cream tartar rounded tablespoon glucose. CREAM CANDY FOR NUTS. Two coffee cups sugar, 1/2 cup boiling water, 1/4 teaspoon cream tartar. Cook until when lifted out it will remain on spoon like jelly. When it is done, remove from fire, stir till it creams, then mold with the hands. A DELICIOUS CHOCOLATE CANDY. Better and cheaper than most. Take 1 cup grated chocolate, 1 cup granulated sugar, 1 cup of hot water, a pinch of salt, butter size of walnuts, 1 teaspoon vanilla. Boil to usual consistency of candy. Stir constantly, and let it boil fifteen or twenty minutes. Try it in a cup of cold water, and as soon as it is as stiff as thick molasses pour into buttered tins; now take a silver knife and stir back and forth till it sugars. When this takes place mark off in small squares and let get cold. THE ENGLISH EVERTON TAFFY. Take 1 pound of butter to 1 pound sugar, put butter into vessels first, and let it melt a little; then add sugar, and boil till it will harden in cold water. By taking some chipped cocoanut, peanuts, almond or walnuts and flinging into the mixture just before removing from the fire, one can make some very fine nut candy. Or cut open figs and pour mixture over them. HONEY CANDY. One pint of white sugar, water sufficient to dissolve it, and 4 tablespoons honey. Boil till brittle, pull while cooling. COCOANUT DROPS. Take 1 pound desiccated cocoanut, 1/2 pound powdered sugar, white of 1 egg, work all together, roll into balls by hand, bake in buttered tins very light brown. MRS. M.G. MOORE. Avalon, Catalina. NO. 3--CARAMELS, PEPPERMINTS AND FUDGES. CHOCOLATE CARAMELS. One-quarter pound chocolate, 2 tablespoonfuls of molasses, 1/2 cup milk, 1 pound of brown sugar, butter the size of an egg, 1 teaspoonful of vanilla. Put the whole in a granite or copper sauce pan. Let it heat slowly, and stir until thoroughly dissolved. Then boil until it hardens. Try by dropping a few drops in a cup of cold water; if it hardens quickly it is done. Turn into a greased square pan, and, when partly cool, mark into squares with a dull knife; stand in a cool, dry place to harden. PEPPERMINTS. Mix 1 cup sugar and 1/2 cup boiling water; let it boil 7 minutes without stirring. Take from fire, add 1/2 teaspoonful essence of peppermint; stir until it begins to thicken; drop with a teaspoon on buttered paper. FUDGE. Two cups of sugar, butter the size of a walnut; 2 tablespoonfuls Baker's cocoa, milk enough to make a thick syrup. Cook without stirring until it will harden (not get brittle,) when dropped in cold water. Remove from fire and beat for several moments. Then pour into a greased pan to harden. KATHARINE WADSWORTH. Pasadena. NO. 4--PEANUT AND CREAMED WALNUT. PEANUT CANDY. To every half pint of shelled and blanched peanuts, use one cupful each of molasses and sugar. Boil the molasses and sugar together until the mixture is brittle when dropped in cold water; then stir in the half pint of peanuts before taking from the fire. Pour into buttered pans and mark off into squares or lengths before it cools. Hickory nuts, English walnuts or almonds may be used in place of peanuts. CREAMED WALNUTS. Beat the white of an egg to a stiff froth, add gradually eight tablespoonfuls of sifted powdered sugar; beat well together and flavor with vanilla. Halve English walnuts and put the cream between them. Press them together, and set away to harden. This amount should cream 50 nuts. MRS. C.L. HILL. Monrovia, Cal. NO. 5--CANDIED PEANUTS AND WALNUT FUDGE. CANDIED PEANUTS. One cup of white sugar, 4 tablespoonsful of water; let this boil until it will harden in a cup of cold water. Take off the stove and stir gently for a minute and have ready a cupful of shelled peanuts and pour this over them in buttered pans. Walnuts may be used in this same way. WALNUT FUDGE. Two cups of white sugar, butter size of an egg; 1 cup of milk, 1 square of chocolate; boil this until it thickens in cold water; then take it off the stove and stir until it becomes thickened, stir in a cupful of chopped walnuts and pour out on greased tins. Flavor with vanilla. MISS MADGE CUMMINGS. Santa Paula, Ventura County, Cal. NO. 6--CREAM NOUGAT AND PEANUT BRITTLE. CREAM NOUGAT. First cook 1 pound of sugar, a little water and 1 pound of glucose, to 250 deg. by the gauge test or by the finger test to a medium hard ball. While this stands in a cool place, prepare and beat as stiff as possible the whites of 6 eggs. Then pour the batch already cooked, in a very small stream, into the beaten eggs, stirring all the time. Now cook 2 1/2 pounds of sugar, a little water, and 3 pounds of glucose, cook to 260 deg. by the gauge, or to a crack by finger test; then pour this into the other batch and stir or beat for about 10 minutes. This grains it. Now add 3 pounds of walnuts and blanched almonds, also 1/2 ounce vanilla flavor. Let it stand about 10 minutes more and mix the nuts well through again before pouring into a box or deep pan, previously lined with waxed paper. Note--This can be flavored or colored to suit. PEANUT BRITTLE. Three pounds of sugar in a little water, 3/4 pound of glucose, 1 1/2 pounds of unroasted peanuts, 4 ounces of best butter, 1/2 cup of molasses, heaping teaspoonful of baking soda, dissolved in 2 teaspoonfuls of vanilla. First prepare the peanuts by rolling them on a table with a small board; this breaks them and loosens the skins or hulls; use unroasted Spanish shelled peanuts. Take them outdoors now and blow out the hulls, and they are ready for the batch. Cook the sugar, water= and glucose to a soft ball, then add the peanuts; stir the batch gently all the time. After the nuts have cooked a few minutes add butter and molasses. When the nuts begin to snap and look brown the batch is done. Now take from the fire, stir in the soda and vanilla previously mixed, and stir it in well. This will make the batch foam. Now pour it on a greased marble slab or large pans, and with your spatula spread it out as thin as possible. MRS. L.A. DUDDEN. Pasadena. NO. 7--FUDGES AND PANOCHA. FUDGES. Two cups granulated sugar, 2 squares Baker's chocolate, 1 tablespoonful butter; cook until it hardens in water, then take off and stir until it grains. PANOCHA. Two cups brown sugar, 1/2 cup milk, butter size of an egg. Cook until it hardens in water, then take off and stir in some nuts; stir them till nearly cold and put in a pan, and when cold cut in squares. MINNIE ANDREWS. Toluca, Cal. NO. 8--CHOCOLATE CREAMS AND CARAMELS. CHOCOLATE CREAM DROPS. One pint of sugar, 2-3 cup of milk, 1-3 cup of water, 1 teaspoonful of vanilla, one scant teaspoonful butter, 3 squares of chocolate; boil sugar, milk, water and butter 20 minutes; add vanilla last; remove and stir constantly until cool; grate chocolate, put in dish over water, form candy in balls and roll in chocolate. BUTTER SCOTCH. Two cups brown sugar, 1 cup butter, 1 tablespoonful water, vinegar to taste; a little soda; boil 1/2 hour; drop in hot water; if crisp, done. CHOCOLATE CARAMELS. One cup of sweet milk, 1 cup of molasses, 1/2 cup sugar, 1/2 cup of chocolate, butter walnut size; stir constantly. MRS. H. W. E. No. 619 West Ninth street. NO. 9--CREAM CANDY. Three cups granulated sugar, 1 cup water, 3 tablespoonfuls of vinegar; thoroughly dissolve sugar before boiling; do not stir after it begins to boil; boil until it hardens in cold water; pour on buttered plates; when cool work over hook; flavor while working over hook. MRS. MAY M. SARVER. No. 327 West Twenty-first NO. 10--SOUTHERN PRANLINES. Three coffee cups dark brown sugar, one coffee cup new milk, 3 coffee cups pecan meat, and 1 tablespoonful of butter with the salt worked out. Put the milk and sugar in a porcelain-lined saucepan and cook until almost candy. Draw the pan back, add the butter and nuts, beat until it grains; turn out on a buttered dish and separate in small pieces. MRS. D.B. JUGLIS. Cuaremont, Cal. NO. 11--PEANUT CANDY. One cup sugar, three-fourths of a cup of peanuts; shell the peanuts and remove the thin brown skin. Place the sugar in a clean frying pan and stir until melted. Be careful not to burn. Add peanuts, pour mixture on plate or platter; mark in squares before it hardens. MISS MABEL JAMES. No. 1361 South Flower street. NO. 12--FUDGES. Two squares of chocolate, 3 cups of sugar, butter size of a small egg, 3 1/2 cups of milk. Boil until it forms a waxy ball when dropped in cold water. Pour on platter, stir vigorously before it cools, till the grain is very fine, and then cut into squares. MRS. J.S. TALCOTT. Tustin, Cal. NO. 13--PANOCHA CANDY. One cup white sugar, 2 cups brown sugar, 1 1/2 cups sweet milk, butter size of egg. Mix in porcelain kettle, cook slowly 15 minutes; stir continually while cooking. Remove from fire, cream contents until quite thick; put in 2 tablespoonfuls vanilla and 1 1/2 cups English walnuts just before turning on platter. Cool, cut in squares. MISS NELLIE JANES. No. 1361 South Flower street. NO. 14--CHOCOLATE FUDGE. Three cups granulated sugar, 1 cup sweet milk, 1 square grated Baker's chocolate, 1 tablespoonful of butter, cook until it will form ball by testing in cold water. Remove from fire and add flavoring; always use vanilla. Chopped walnuts, pecans or crystallized fruits may be added, which makes a delicious candy. Beat until creamy and pour in buttered tins; cut into squares. HAZEL ROOKLIDGE. No. 459 East Twenty-ninth street. NO. 15--PANOCHA. One cup of coarsely-chopped walnuts, 2 cups of light brown sugar, 1 cup of pulverized sugar, 1 cup of sweet milk, 1 tablespoonful butter. Cook until it will form a little ball by testing it in shallow dish of water, then remove from fire and add the walnuts and flavor with teaspoonful of vanilla; beat until it is creamy and turn out in buttered platter; cut in squares. This is a delicious cream candy. HAZEL ROOKLIDGE. No. 459 East Twenty-ninth street. NO. 16--COCOANUT CREAM CANDY. Three cups white sugar, scant half cup water, 1/2 teaspoonful cream of tartar; boil 10 minutes, then add 1 cup grated cocoanut; beat well together and drop on white paper by the spoonful. HAZEL ROOKLIDGE. No. 459 East Twenty-ninth street. NO. 17--ANABEL'S CANDY. Three cups sugar, 1 1/2 cups sweet milk, boil until it will harden in cold water. Then pour on greased plates and cut in sticks. It will cook in about 30 minutes. HAZEL ROOKLIDGE. No. 459 East Twenty-ninth street. NO. 18--MAPLE CARAMELS. One pound maple sugar, melt in a cup of sweet milk, and 1 tablespoonful butter; cook till almost brittle in cold water; turn on to a buttered plate. Mark in squares when cool enough. HAZEL ROOKLIDGE. No. 459 East Twenty-ninth street. NO. 19--OLD-FASHIONED MOLASSES CANDY. One quart molasses and 2 tablespoonful of butter; boil together till it will snap in water. Stir in a pinch of soda to whiten it. Pour on buttered dishes and when cool enough to handle pull until white. HAZEL ROOKLIDGE. No. 459 East Twenty-ninth street. RECIPES THAT WON PRIZES. In the folowing list are the names of the persons to whom prizes were awarded during the progress of the cooking contest, together with the numbers of the recipes in the various classes. Three distinct sets of prizes were awarded in the soup, cake and the salad symposiums; two in marmalades; two in puddings, and one set each under the remaining headings: SOUPS. First prizes--Helen M. Magee, Los Angeles, No. 23; Mrs. E.A. Franklin, Anaheim, Cal., No. 78; Nina Bell Sherman, Los Angeles, No. 96, Second prizes--Mrs. S.B. Bagnall, Oxnard, Cal., No. 21; Miss Evelyn Dooly, Los Angeles, No. 76; Beatrice L. Ecclestone, Los Angeles, No. 93. Third prizes--F. M. Blagg, Los Angeles, No. 1; Alice J. Roche, Pasadena, No. 72; Miss Emilia Lundberg, Los Angeles, No. 98. SALADS. First prizes--Elizabeth M. Bugbee, Los Angeles, No. 8; Mrs. N. G. Ledgerwood, Los Angeles, No. 84; E.M. Magee, Los Angeles, No. 103. Second prizes--L. Shields, Los Angeles, No. 28; Mary Stone Welch, San Diego, Cal., No. 83; Mrs. N. G. Ledgerwood, Los Angeles, No. 122. Third prizes--Miss Emilia Lundberg, Los Angeles, No. 39; Miss Clara Evans McLeod, Riverside, No. 62; Miss C. Hernstein, Los Angeles, No. 129. CAKES. First prizes--Mrs. F. G. Webster, Imperial, Cal., No. 10; Bertha S. Morris, Los Angeles, No. 65; Harriet Adams-Chambers, Pasadena No. 83. Second prizes--Mrs. Anna B. Rogers, Pomona, Cal., No. 8; Mrs. E.M. Walker, Anaheim, Cal, No. 53; Mrs. M.A. Collins Ontario, Cal. No. 76. Third prizes--Mrs. George E. Decker, Pasadena, No. 27; Mrs. L. V. Rupe, Los Angeles, No. 59; Mrs. Josephine Muller, San Gabriel, Cal., No. 94. MARMALADES. First prizes--Miss C. Laura Pooley, Los Angeles, No. 85; Miss Emilia Lundberg, Los Angeles, No. 60; second prize, Mrs. N.S. Alling, Lamanda Park, Cal, No. 37; Mrs. Cruickshank, Riverside, Cal., No. 52; Mrs. Robert Y. McBride, Los Angeles, No. 5; Mrs. Jennie Rothrock, Whittier, Cal., No. 59. COOKIES. First prize--Mrs. Kate E. Leo, Anaheim, Cal., No. 45; second prize, Mrs. C.M. West, Redlands, Cal., No. 17; third prize, Mrs. J. Hollywood, Pasadena, No. 33. PIES. First prize--Mrs. J. Hamilton, Los Angeles, No. 9; second prize, Miss Ruth C. Stocks, Somis, Cal., No. 13; third prize, Mrs. C.C. Norton, Los Angeles, No. 6. PUDDINGS. First prize--Miss Gertrude Coberly, Tustin, Cal., No. 31; second prize, Miss C. Hernstein, Los Angeles, No. 19; third prize, Miss Emilia Lundberg, Los Angeles, No. 7. SPANISH DISHES. First prize--Mrs. R. Y. McBride, Los Angeles, No. 19; second prize, Mrs. J. W. Sowles, Pomona, Cal., No. 22; third prize, Mrs. William H. Harmon, Los Angeles, No. 48. MISCELLANEOUS. First prizes--Mrs. Julia Sheldon Holmes, East Los Angeles, for Easter luncheon menu; Beatrice L. Ecclestone, Los Angeles, for baked suet pudding, No. 42; Second prizes--Mrs. Estelle Raley, Riverside, Cal., for Buster Brown dainty, No. 2; Mrs. E.A. Franklin, Anaheim, Cal., for salmon turbot, No. 49. Third prizes--Mrs. M.E. Kloeckner, Pasadena, for Easter dessert, No. 6; Mrs. N. G. Ledgerwood, Los Angeles, for hazelnut cookies, No. 21.
