It's been a week since we did the lesson on static electricity, so I want to remind students of what they learned about positive and negative charges. I want to make sure they are about to connect this lesson to prior information, which will help them organize the information in their head and make a more accurate scientific model. Without first discussing static electricity and their ideas about lightning, students may be confused about the purpose of the lesson and how to start constructing their scientific models. I think discussing last week's lesson and their ideas about lightning will be a good lead in to the activity today.
The original lesson taught static electricity and lightning in the same lesson. At the very beginning of the lesson, the teacher is supposed to 'review with your students what they know about cloud formation, thunder and lightning storms.' Since I am doing the lightning lesson separate from the static electricity lesson, I also want to review our last lesson and example of static electricity they thought of.
No, the lesson plan does not ask students to make predications – the students actually do very little work with the concept of lightning in the original lesson plan. The teacher is supposed to read a provided explanation of lightning and there is no opportunity for students to discuss how lightning is connected to static electricity before the teacher is supposed to provide them with an explanation. After eliciting students' ideas, we are going to have students draw a diagram of how lightning forms and explain their drawing in sentence form.
Again, no. After students have filled out the predication section of their worksheet, we will have them share with a partner. I will be walking around the room asking students to explain their diagrams and I will also ask a few students to share with the whole class before starting the movie.
I want students to draw conclusions and formulate their own explanations about lightning from watching a video instead of just watching without really processing it. I don't want them to use my language or the language of the video, but language and concepts that they are familiar with and that makes sense to them. However, there are some terms and processes that they need to understand and be able to use (like "electrons" or the charge coming up from the ground) in order to fully explain the formation of lightning.
The explanation provided in the original lesson has the teacher using some of the terminology, but the students don't necessarily use it unless the teacher has students engage in a discussion about the "phases in the life of a lightning bolt." Mandy and I are going to review the terms we covered last week and introduce some important new words. We are also going to have the students collectively decide what elements should be represented in everyone's model, so some of the vocabulary should come up then (electrons, positive discharge from the ground, etc). Students also have to explain their final model in sentence forms, giving them another chance to use the vocabulary.
The original lesson plan provides a list of discussion questions, but doesn't explain how to implement them. One questions states "Examine the development of a lighting bolt... explain the phases in the life of a lightning bolt." I'm not sure how students are supposed to discuss this given the limited information provided to them in the lesson. Also, not all students would have an opportunity to share their explanation. We are having students draw, write and share their explanations. Students will be using ideas presented in the video, but they will have to put them in their own words since they won't have any references (like a text book) to refer to.
I think having an assessment helps students organize their thinking and understand what's important for them to take away from the lesson. If we just watched the video without having students complete some work or an assessment, they probably wouldn't be able to pick out the main points or remember the important facts. The assessment also helps the teacher see what parts of their lesson went well and what parts the students struggled with. I think it increases communication between students and their teacher and gives them something meaningful to discuss.
No, the original lesson doesn't have any assessment regarding lightning. Mandy and I are going to collect students' predications, evaluations and revisions of their scientific models. This will help us assess both their understanding of the science concepts and their inquiry skills, such as making predictions, evaluating predictions based on new information, revising their predications and communicating their ideas. We are also going to have exit slips – the students must write down a question they still have about lightning or static electricity. This will help us see what students might not understand yet about the concept and modify our lesson (if we taught it again).
The lesson doesn't really have an assessment, but it does have a rubric for grading student's writing about static electricity (from the first part of the lesson). The rubric awards points for paragraph construction, grammar, mechanics and spelling. While these things are important in order for students to be able to concisely communicate their ideas, I don't think it should be a focus of the assessment; it takes the focus away from the science and students' understanding. Also, the stated lesson objectives were:
The writing about static electricity does not measure any of these three goals.
Students will develop a scientific model regarding the formation of lightning based on prior information. Each student will draw a diagram showing how they think lightning is formed and explain their drawings in sentences. They will share and discuss their models, and then watch a short video clip on how lightning forms. Based on the information provided in the video, students will evaluate their models and revise them. The class will decide on the elements that should be represented in everyone's model and use their revised models to explain how lightning is formed.
Students will be able to...
The main notion to convey here is that forces can act at a distance. Students should carry out investigations to become familiar with the pushes and pulls of magnets and static electricity... By the end of 5th grade, students should know that: Without touching them, material that has been electrically charged pulls on all other materials and may either push or pull other charged materials. [AAAS: The Physical Setting – Forces of Nature (3-5). Source: http://www.project2061.org/tools/benchol/bolframe.htm]
Develop solutions to problems through reasoning, observation, and investigation. [Michigan Curriculum Framework (Science) I.1.e.2. Source: http://www.michigan.gov/documents/MichiganCurriculumFramework_8172_7.pdf]
Show how science concepts can be illustrated through creative expression such as language arts and fine arts. [Michigan Curriculum Framework (Science) II.1.e.2. Source: http://www.michigan.gov/documents/MichiganCurriculumFramework_8172_7.pdf]
This lesson is part of a unit on electricity and magnetism. This lesson follows a lesson and activity on static electricity. Based on interviews with students, they have had very little instruction on lightning.
Before the lesson, students should understand...
Potential alternative ideas:
1. Which of the following best characterizes how you started planning for this lesson?
2. How explicit was your learning goal before you started developing your lesson?
3. What existing lesson plans, curriculum materials, and other resources did you use to develop your lesson? Please list them here.
I liked how the lesson plan started with experiences with static electricity and moved into lightning so students could relate what they've learned/observed to a larger phenomenon. I think it makes a good connection between the smaller examples of static electricity and lightning. The science is pretty simple and shouldn't be overwhelming to fifth graders (I even learned something!). The lesson basically provided a framework for Mandy and I to work with to develop our lesson – the lesson as is wouldn't have worked for our classes. But the general progression was helpful. We had to elaborate on the lightning parts of the lesson and made it a separate day because there was so much new information to cover. The original lesson plan didn't include any inquiry steps, like predicting or explaining ideas, or a suitable assessment. We also had to consider how this lesson would fit into a unit on magnets and electricity and how to relate it to what students already know.
4. Please think about each of the changes you made to your lesson. List each one and briefly describe it. Then, for each change you made, please answer the following:
5. How inquiry-oriented do you think your lesson is?
Please explain your answer to question #5. Why do you think your lesson was or wasn't inquiry-oriented?
Students are not only investigating a topic, but they are also learning about how they are engaging in inquiry practices. At the beginning of the lesson, we explain that they are going to use scientific models to explain their thinking, like scientists do. Each of the steps is highlighted and explained both in instruction and on the worksheet. Students are given multiple opportunities to work with others, explain their ideas in their own words and use scientific language. Compared to the last lesson, this lesson is less teacher-directed and students are responsible for processing the information in the video and incorporating it into their models. The students develop the list of elements to be included in their models and evaluate their own work. They also have to be thoughtful about their own understanding/confusion to be able to complete their exit slip.
6. Please include any other comments you have about your lesson.
Now you're ready to teach your lesson. On the day of your lesson, be sure you're ready to go, with all the materials (including handouts) prepared. Also, make sure your field instructor knows when you're teaching.
