Citizenship education has historically been, in some shape or form, an overarching goal of public schooling in every society. In multicultural societies, however, this becomes even more of an imperative. Unlike ethnically homogenous societies where a shared genealogical lineage provides a common national anchor, multicultural societies typically rely on what Michael Ignatieff terms "civic nationalism" where national identity is based on the commitment to a set of common institutions and political rights.1 As such, school systems in these societies become even more important, bearing the mantle of bring together children from different backgrounds by developing this commitment.
Amid the current unprecedented global transmigration, the nationalization process of individuals has come into sharp focus, and subsequently, so has this role of the school. Many countries are becoming increasingly multicultural and are wrestling with the tension between ethnic autonomy and national cohesion. By comparing two multicultural societies, Singapore and the United States, my dissertation seeks to understand how schools have been tasked to bring together children from different backgrounds through a commitment to a shared national identity, and the ways in which children in two countries develop an attachment to the nation. In this paper, I justify why a comparative study is important in light of my research focus, and make the argument that understanding how two distinct societies engage schools in the process of national identity development will contribute to a broader understanding of how multicultural nations respond similarly or differently to the critical challenges of a rapidly evolving global demography.
The theoretical framework for my dissertation draws on scholarship in three fields: i) the "new" sociology of childhood in childhood studies, ii) the discursive nature of national identity development in political science, and iii) the nationalizing function of schools in education. First, the fairly recent sociological perspective for studying children considers children as active participants in a variety of social scenarios. These theories contend that children should not be seen as passive receptors of adult instruction but as active agents who effectively negotiate with and evaluate their social world.
Second, this validation of children's individual agency in their identity formation aligns tightly with emerging research in political science that argues for the discursive nature of national identity formation. This paradigm contends that national identity is a narrative we construct to make sense of who we are and therefore not completely stable or immutable; it is a fluid construction generated and expressed differently by different individuals in various contexts.
Third, we know that schools have always been charged with -- among other things -- producing good citizens. What is more controversial, however, is what citizenship and national identity represent in a multicultural society, and the obligations of the public school in this regard. Recent scholarship has highlighted the debate about whether it is possible -- or even desirable -- for schools to advance a single common national identity in the face of a society that is becoming increasingly multicultural.
For the purposes of this paper, the last two paradigms are particularly important. As a consequence of the contextual nature of identity construction, I argue for the need to situate my study in two different countries in order to investigate the extent to which culture plays a special and specific role in identity construction. This becomes even more pertinent when we consider that school systems themselves are a reflection and product of the culture and context of each nation. Notions of citizenship and identity necessarily vary across countries, and if schools are tasked with promulgating these ideas through citizenship education, it is vital that we take into account the unique historical, cultural, political and social traditions of each society, and how these traditions may produce similar or differential patterns of national identifications. This is underlined in a number of comparative studies on citizenship, civics, and education for democracy.2
First, it is important that we clarify the terms, "national identity", "nationalism", "patriotism", "citizenship education" and "civic education". This not only has implications for a general understanding of how each of these terms relate to individual citizens, but more importantly for this paper, it is important for how we view the role of the schools in the process of promoting national identity.
In his seminal work, National Identity, Anthony Smith explicitly lists the fundamental features of national identity as: possessing a historic territory, or homeland; the existence of common myths and historical memories; a common mass public culture; common legal rights and duties for all members; and a common economy with territorial mobility for members.3 In other words, national identity is a way of relating to the nation; it is a feeling of inextricably -- and on different dimensions -- being a part of this larger entity. National identity, then, is primarily a sense of attachment. As Eley and Suny remind us, national identity/identification is a matter of "sensibility":
With regards to nationalism and patriotism on the other hand, in her article on the child's position in discourse about the nation in Norway, Marianne Gullestad notes, "While national identity refers to a sense of belonging to a national community, nationalism refers to ideologies maintaining and defending the existence of a nation, above all its right to self-determination."
The overall consensus of historians and political scientists alike is that nationalism -- as distinguished from national identity -- suggests a motivating impulse towards achieving some kind of political legitimacy.6 While national identity is about attachment as previously established, nationalism is about action. And what of patriotism? I propose that one could perhaps conceive of patriotism as the more affective component of nationalistic impulses. In other words, patriotism is an aspect of nationalism, as opposed to its polar opposite as some have argued.7 There is some agreement on the meaning of patriotism as "a deeply felt affective attachment to the nation" or the "degree of love for and pride in one's nation."
The terms "citizenship education" and "civic education" have typically been used interchangeably to refer to aspects of the school curriculum -- whether formal or informal -- that prepare young people for their roles as citizens. However, I would like to propose that we consider these terms in a more nuanced manner and to think of them as distinct entities. I am not alone in proposing to draw a distinction between citizenship education and civic education. Referring to French educator and sociologist Emile Durkheim, Mark Holmes contends that the former used citizenship education "to refer to the anticipated moral and attitudinal outcomes rather than to the more objective knowledge and understanding of the democratic process."
My conceptualization of the two terms builds on McLaughin's insofar as I agree that civic education is just one component of citizenship education, specifically responsible for educating students about formal political processes such as describing the various branches of government, the importance of voting, and the process of legislation, etc. Similarly, I concur that citizenship education is the broader concept that goes beyond merely teaching and acquiring information about a country. However, what I argue is missing from MacLaughlin's model is an affective component, aspects of schooling that serve to develop an emotional attachment between the students and the nation. Here I draw on William Damon's work on moral education and citizenship that asserts:
This emotive component is important particularly in light of discussions of national identity. Damon's position stems from his work on moral commitment and character formation which argues that consistent moral action requires commitment, and that commitment is vital to identity.12
Underlying these two components of citizenship education is a manner of teaching and learning. It is not enough to say that citizenship education needs to promote both an intellectual understanding and emotional commitment to the nation; it must be done in a way that steers clear of indoctrination and whitewashing. In the words of Diane Ravitch,
In other words, citizenship education must be conveyed thoughtfully, critically if necessary, allowing for active interpretation and interrogation. Only then can we say to have instilled in our students what Walter Feinberg terms "informed allegiance and a reasoned commitment."
I belabor the discussion on citizenship education17 and what I see as its two requisite facets -- civic education and education for patriotism -- as I will suggest in a later part of this paper that the school systems in the United States and Singapore emphasize these two components to different degrees. I demonstrate the extent to which this difference stems from the unique political and social background of each country and how it presents an interesting framework to then investigate the manner in which children from the two countries understand national identity.
One reason why a comparative study is compelling with regards to my research focus is the centrality of culture in the development of identity, national or otherwise. Synthesizing theoretical contributions by Vygotsky, Bakhtin and Bourdieu, Holland and her co-writers refer to the identity-formation process as not static but constantly shifting and evolving; for them, identity is culturally constituted and very much an interaction between the self and the cultural resources at hand: "Identity is a concept that figuratively combines the intimate or personal world with the collective space of cultural forms and social relations."
This argument is bolstered by some empirical evidence from both comparative and non-comparative studies which suggest that national identifications do align along such cultural lines. In their study of national identity formation in middle childhood in Wales, Scourfield, Dicks, Drakeford and Davies demonstrate the extent to which national identity formation can sometimes be a gendered process where girls identify with the nation in ways that are distinct from boys.19 In his comparative study of Turkish, German and British children, Heinz Hengst focuses on the dynamic construction of national identity and the culture of "childhood" in particular. He suggests that while there were differences between the national groups in relation to the importance they assigned to national identity, there was interesting and unexpected evidence of another alignment, where children, in many cases, saw themselves as more similar to other children across nationalities than to adults who shared their nationality.20
Feinberg provides even further support for the necessity of examining identity development across cultural contexts:
Whether the "we" are other minority children, other girls, or other fellow citizens, acknowledging the various potentialities of national identification will allow me a richer understanding of the patterns in which children 1) identify with the nation; and 2) experience the nationalizing project of the school.
Schools are often products of a country's sociopolitical context and are frequently shaped to fulfill or respond to specific societal needs. In a review of the International Review of Curriculum and Assessment Frameworks Archive (INCA) and other literature on citizenship education across 16 countries, David Kerr identified five main contextual factors that influence the definition of and approaches to citizenship education: historical tradition, geographical position, socio-political structure, economic system, and global trends.22 For Singapore and the United States, it came down to one year: 1965. The year was a watershed for the two countries; although separated by fourteen time zones and two oceans, that year, they both individually experienced events that would profoundly change not only the social and political fabric of the nation, but also redefine the role of their school systems.
Sometimes known as The Law That Changed the Face of America, the 1965 Immigration Bill passed by President Lyndon B. Johnson had far more sweeping consequences than was ever envisioned. "This bill that we will sign today is not a revolutionary bill. It does not affect the lives of millions," Johnson said at the signing ceremony, symbolically held at the foot of the Statue of Liberty. "It will not reshape the structure of our daily lives or add importantly to either our wealth or our power."
Rudolph Vecoli questions the extent to which this wave of immigration would redefine American national identity and notes how the definition of an American identity has been stretched again and again to accommodate new peoples.25 And how has this been possible? It lies largely with the institution of the American public school. For many of the nation's schools, the altering immigration patterns resulting from that dramatic change in immigration policy has meant not only an increase in the size of their student bodies, but also represent an enduring shift in the demographic composition of their school communities.26 As a result, till today, schools continue to tackle the challenge of teaching an increasingly diverse student body and dealing with the accompanying issues of how to educate them in a way that will help them grow into active participatory citizens in a democracy governed by a core set of shared values. Although not referring to immigration in particular, it is important to quote at length here a passage from the Introduction of Susan Fuhrmann and Marvin Lazerson's impressive collection of essays on the American public school. It highlights the traditional role undertaken by schools in not only national identity formation in general, but more specifically, identity formation in a historically multicultural nation. It provides compelling support for my argument in this section that it is impossible to divorce the institution of schooling from that of the nation from whence it originates:
In August 1965, barely two months before President Johnson had signed the bill that would forever change the face of the American population, across the world in a small island just off the equator in Southeast Asia, Singapore was experiencing an even more profound upheaval of her sociopolitical structure. She suddenly and against her will, had become an independent state. Singapore was a state born, "despite itself, in crisis and trauma,"
The education system in Singapore was to have two major tasks in the immediate wake of independence: politically, it was to construct a unified nation from the ethnically divided populace; economically, it was to provide a stock base of basic education, skills and attitudes required for industrialization.30 This is characteristic of the developmental state where education serves the process of economic development, state formation and nation building31 and is commonly found in Asia. Subsequently, the PAP initiated a centralized school system in 1973 through policies of integrated schools, bilingualism and meritocracy.32 Since then, the Singapore school system has become highly centralized, tightly controlled, and designed to "be responsive to perceived social and national needs."
In a developmental states such as Singapore, education as an instrument is fundamental and powerful because it straddles both the cultural-symbolic and civic-instrumental dimensions of nation building.34 For the purposes of my research, I highlight the role of the Singapore school system in developing in a diverse population the attitudes and motivations necessary for collective commitment to the common goal of national development. In this regard, education has been harnessed to transform a generation into sharing a common destiny. According to Sim and Print, it is from this perspective that the relationship between education, nation building and citizenship should be understood in Singapore.35
What the brief contextual history of Singapore and the U.S. has shown is how 1965 marked a turning point in the political and educational histories of both countries. As nations, newly independent or otherwise, they were confronted with a populace that would only grow more diverse in the years to come, and shaping a common national identity became of utmost concern. Tasking schools with the responsibility to bring together a multicultural population of students was -- and continues to be -- a constant challenge that the two countries share.
Over the last decade or so, on top of the omnipresent concern about how to build a shared identity in a multicultural student population, there has been a great deal of public debate in both countries about the disengagement of young people from civic participation and the lack of cultural mooring and national identity. In the United States, this is related to falling voting rates and a perceived lack of knowledge about civic processes, while in Singapore, the anxiety is over globalization and how it has allegedly destabilized local culture, values and identity. Accordingly, this has implications on what schools should -- or should not be -- teaching, and what they can do to ameliorate this apparent lack of civic and national commitment.
Robert Putnam's famous argument about Americans increasingly "bowling alone"
In 2000, only 26 percent of freshmen voiced the belief that keeping up with politics is important, compared with 58 percent in 1966. Only 14 percent say they regularly discuss politics -- down from 30 percent.38 Similarly, a Pew Research Centre poll of voters in their late teens and twenties found that fewer than half were thinking "a great deal" about the elections in 2000, compared to two thirds in 1992. Four in ten believed that it does not matter who is president, twice as many as in 1992.39 Specifically with regards to the decline of civil and national identity in American youth, Damon alludes to a recent Department of Education assessment which showed that only 9 percent of U.S. high school students were able to cite two reasons why it is important for citizens to participate in a democracy, and only 6 percent could identify two reasons why having a constitution benefits a country.40
Although these data are not related specifically to national identity per se, I argue that in the U.S., involvement in the civic processes of a constitutional democracy is a large aspect of national identity.41 More importantly, I highlight this public anxiety because it explains to a large degree the increasing pressures on schools to cultivate "good" citizenship and to work harder in order to ensure social and national cohesion. Just as it has been even since the founding of America, the public school is being called on to be the panacea of all social ills, be it exponential immigration or declining test scores in Civics and Government. Says Mark Holmes in his critique on the public school and its ability to provide moral education in a pluralist society, "If the school is to contribute to the reconstruction of social order, to a better and stronger sense of citizenship, then both the content of good citizenship and the mechanisms by which it can be promoted must be established..."
This public concern over young people's commitment to their nation is not America's alone. In Singapore, a similar unease has been apparent. Current government rhetoric in the media is directed at "Generation M", a term used by former Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong to describe the younger generation of Singapore as the generation of the millennium. This generation was born into post-Independence Singapore and during a time when Singapore had already experienced economic wealth and political stability. As such, they are perceived to be either ignorant of or flippant about the history of Singapore. Generation M is seen as disconnected from Singapore's nation-building endeavor that is built around an ideology of survival, discipline and diligence.43 They have been singled out for displaying amnesia of Singapore's history, 44 for professing to prefer a Caucasian identity rather than their own ethnicity,45 and more recently, young Singaporeans have expressed their angst and uncertainty over what constitutes a Singaporean national identity.46
In 1996, former Prime Minister Goh officially and publicly drew attention to this issue by highlighting the "serious gap in knowledge" among the young generation of Singaporeans who knew little the country's history.47 His claim was based on a survey conducted by the Ministry of Education that asked students about Singapore's post-war history. The survey revealed that students had little knowledge of significant post-war historical figures and events. For example, they were generally ignorant about the country's state of Emergency from 1948 to 1960. Some thought the Emergency had to do with water shortage even though in actuality, the Emergency was declared by the colonial government to fight communist subversion and insurgency in the Malayan peninsula and Singapore. Students also had little knowledge about the cause of the Hock Lee Bus riots in the 1950s. Many students guessed that they were caused by a rise in bus fares and poor working conditions, when in fact they were Communist-instigated.
The government perceived this as a critical issue, potentially jeopardizing the nation as young people appeared to take Singapore's existing peace and prosperity for granted. More importantly, he emphasized the notion that it is only with a knowledge of a shared past can there be a common bond of nationhood. In the absence of that knowledge, the very tenets of meritocracy and multiracialism upon which the country was built would be threatened. It was in the context of this threat that schools were subsequently summoned into the limelight. Just as it is in the U.S., the responsibility for ameliorating this perceived threat fell upon the institution of education:
As Taylor, Rizvi, Lingard, and Henry have observed, education policy or any form of educational change is invariably informed by a significant history or prior events that justify and legitimize a policy or curriculum change.49 What I hope to have done in this section is to show that citizenship education in Singapore and the U.S. did not grow out of a vacuum. They are products of a specific context, and must be understood as policy responses to a specific social and political need.
In this section, I present a brief description and discussion of citizenship education as it is implemented in the U.S. and Singapore. This survey highlights the points at which the two systems are similar, but more importantly, their points of departure. I suggest that the interesting ways in which citizenship education in the two countries is differentially conducted present a rich context for my research.
Prime Minister Goh's speech quoted above was the catalyst for the implementation of National Education (NE) in Singapore. NE was conceived as a state-wide curriculum initiative designed specifically to "develop national cohesion, cultivate the instinct for survival as a nation and instill in our students, confidence in our nation's future. It also emphasises cultivating a sense of belonging and emotional rootedness to Singapore."
At its inception, the structure and pedagogy of NE was a novel one for Singapore -- instead of implementing it as a subject in and of itself, NE is infused across the formal curriculum in subjects such as Social Studies, Civics and Moral Education, History, Geography and the General Paper. For the purposes of this paper, I will not delve into the particular details of this citizenship education package except to highlight the six NE messages that are to be infused through the subjects mentioned above:
Two points I would like to draw your attention to is i) the pervasive and systematic nature of this policy initiative, and ii) its emotive and affective quality. First, NE was designed to infuse throughout much of the formal curriculum, and is presented systematically with themes for each educational level, specific pedagogical objectives, outcome measures to be evaluated, and an informal component that schools can implement outside of regular school hours. This is possible only because of the tightly centralized characteristic of Singapore's education system. Like much of other facets of Singapore's social structure such as transportation and housing, education in general, and NE in particular, is "top-down in approach, state initiated and driven by the goal of effective nation-building."
Another characteristic of NE worth mentioning is the deeply emotional nature of its rhetoric and objectives. Returning to my proposed model of citizenship education mentioned earlier, NE reflects an intensely patriotic notion of citizenship, one that places a great degree of emphasis on national loyalty, values and emotional attachment. A brief analysis of policy documents relating to NE's design and implementation, speeches about NE, and the official NE website reveal language steeped heavily in emotion. Terms such as "core values", "will to prevail", "instinct for survival", "emotional attachment" are used liberally. There is little in NE documents that refer to the actual processes of citizenship such as voting or civic and political participation. As noted by Christine Han, "much of the thrust of NE is of an affective nature. The approach taken is very much one of socializing children into a particular set of values and views." (italics mine)(p. 65)53
Interestingly, the picture is very different across the world in the U.S. Not only is the country staunchly decentralized and traditionally wary of any centralizing influence of the federal government, its rhetoric relating to citizenship education has always been careful to steer clear of patriotic language. Educational discussions about citizenship and nationhood in the U.S. more often than not constellate around the teaching of history and social studies. These two subjects have long been the battleground between advocates of a national "historical vocabulary" vs. those who reject any effort to promote just one vision/ version of what it means to be American. As Gary Nash and his associates write in their recounting of the "history wars,"
It is not within the scope of this paper to argue the validity of each argument. Suffice to say that unlike the fairly uncontroversial manner in which NE was implemented in Singapore, citizenship education in the U.S. is much more open to interrogation. In the larger scheme of things, this debate is the America debate, "how should the United States of America be redefined as we approach the next century? It is a debate about what it means to be an American... and the vision of the nation to be passed on to the next generation, both formally by means of the school curricula and informally via popular culture."
In contrast to the language parlayed in Singaporean educational discourse, however, discussions about national identity in the U.S. and the role of schools in its formation is rather free of emotive rhetoric, at least in public discourse. It is instead inextricably tied to the notions of rights, responsibilities and the upholding of certain hallowed ideals such as justice, democracy and equality. A brief look at Social Studies standards reveals an emphasis on the processes of governance and civic duty and practices.56 Unlike the NE website hosted by the Singaporean Ministry of Education, there is no evocative language that mentions loyalty, attachment or patriotism. Returning to my model of citizenship education, it would therefore seem that the American perspective rests more strongly on the side of a civic -- rather than patriotic -- education.
McLaughlin and Palmira Jucevicine suggest, in their study on national identity and education in Lithuania, that this is a feature of public education in a pluralistic liberal democratic societies.57 This form of education cannot assume the truth of, or promote, any particular comprehensive, or all-embracing vision of the good life. Instead it is focused largely on developing the values of basic "social morality" and democratic "civic virtue". Involved here is the notion of an "education adequate to serve the life of a free and equal citizen in any modern democracy."
Furthermore, there seems to be an anxiety in American discourse in general about the idea of patriotism. It is often associated with the subordination of individuals' interests to those of the nation, and with notions of jingoism and chauvinism. Recent controversy surrounding attempts to implement a specifically patriotic form of citizenship education in the U.S. is worth highlighting at this point. In 2002, the federal government announced a new set of history and civic education initiatives aimed squarely at cementing national identity and pride. These initiatives, President Gorge W. Bush declared, would "improve student's knowledge of America history, increase their civic involvement, and deepen their love for our great country." To engender a sense of patriotism in young Americans, we must, President Bush emphasized, teach them that "America is a force of good in the world, bringing hope and freedom to other people."
What is interesting here is the use of the same emotive language harnessed by government officials in Singapore justifying the need for NE -- it is rhetoric designed specifically to stir a sense of national loyalty and emotional commitment. However, unlike the calm reception NE received in Singapore, many educators in America have objected to engaging students in this patriotic pedagogy as initiated by the Bush Administration. They do so on two grounds: i) that this form of patriotism is often monolithic, reflecting an "America-right-or-wrong" stance,61 what philosopher Martha Nussbaum warns is "perilously close to jingoism,"
I acknowledge that in presenting such a distinct dichotomy between the Singaporean and American models of citizenship education, I am painting in broad strokes. Such things can seldom be so plainly defined. In fact, there has been a movement in both countries that suggest a reframing of sorts. A new social studies curriculum in Singapore is showing promising signs of moving away from the more conservative and prescriptive model of citizenship education traditionally practiced in Singapore.63 There is hope that the greater emphasis on critical thinking skills and inquiry will pave the way for more instruction in civic processes and participatory citizenship. In the U.S. recent discussions about the nature of patriotism have argued for its compatibility with the ideals of democratic citizenship education. Joel Westheimer and contributors to his collection of essays on patriotism in the American public school advocate for a pedagogy of constructive, active and democratic patriotism.64 This reframed notion of patriotism involves both an emotional and psychological commitment to the nation, but one that is still very much anchored in democratic principles and practices. However, I suggest nonetheless that my distinction between the American civic form of citizenship education and Singapore's more patriotic perspective is a useful one to employ as I begin to examine the role of schools in developing national identity in young children.
The Singaporean model of citizenship education as represented by the NE initiative is heavily paternalistic and systematic. It is implemented top-down by the Ministry of Education and employs emotionally-laden rhetoric to advocate a very particular and prescribed set of values and knowledge at both the cognitive and affective levels. The American model, like the nation itself, is inimical to any strictly centralizing force. Citizenship education as embodied by social studies and history focuses more on methods of inquiry, critical thinking, and the civic principles and practices related to the functioning of a liberal democratic and participatory culture. Taking into account these differences in what citizenship represents in each country, how do schools go about teaching about the nation and elements of nationhood?
More importantly, how do children receive this knowledge and what do they make of it? It is one thing to describe what each country sees as appropriate citizenship education, it is another to assume that children in both nations accept and adopt these ideas in ways intended. Supported by my theoretical frameworks of the new sociology of childhood and the discursive nature of national identity formation, I argue that it is vital that we listen to what the students have to say with regards to citizenship education and national identity as it is formed through schooling. Advocating for the voice of the student in designing a schooling for patriotism, Paul Goalen, contends that we cannot take for granted that students are patient, passive vessels waiting to be filled with the carefully constructed messages from teachers and textbooks. As Michael Apple and Linda Christian-Smith remind us, "we cannot assume that what is "in" the text actually is taught. Nor can we assume that what is taught is actually learned."
We also cannot automatically assume that patterns of national identification will fall along national lines. As I have discussed, a comparative study that specifically examines children's process of meaning-making allows me to investigate the extent to which children from different cultural groups -- racial, minority, gender, social class -- may construct a sense of national belonging that is more aligned with children in the same cultural group in another country compared to their fellow citizens.
There is a paucity of studies that have empirically investigated the development of national identity formation in young children specifically in light of the role of schooling. Understanding how our youngest citizens acquire values and commitments as part of their national identity formation is critical because these years are most foundational to their development -- cognitively, emotionally, socially, and civically. Further, a comparative study in this regard is important because national responses to global challenges sometimes vary. Singapore and the U.S. are multicultural countries with two different sets of political philosophies and cultural perspectives, and they hold distinct ideas about the individual's position vis-à-vis the larger community and the nation. Consequently, the similarities and differences in children's responses will offer a particularly interesting insight as to whether children's opinions about national identity and the role of school are universal or culture-specific. Also, Singapore's centrally-administered education system differs from the more decentralized model practiced in the U.S. and this difference may have implications for the way in which national identity formation is facilitated in the classroom.
Through a unique multi-disciplinary study across education, childhood studies, and political science, my research will: i) demonstrate how young students make sense of nationalizing projects of which they are often primary objects; ii) provide a description of how two distinct societies engage schools in the process of national identity development, and iii) contribute to a broader understanding of how multicultural nations respond similarly or differently to the critical challenges of a rapidly evolving global demography.
