H. Rider Haggard's fiction, like nineteenth century England itself, contains a complex tangle of feelings toward Jews ancient and modern. The semitic discourse apparent in She, in particular, reflects the wide range of Haggard's attitudes.1 These include a grudging, hostile acknowledgement of the Hebrews as historical, religious, and social precursors of Christianity and English nationalism, as well as attempts to relegate the Jews that were Haggard's contemporaries -- "the Jews whom everybody 'wants' nowadays,"
The discussions surrounding "the Jewish question" in 1870s England can be considered the broad context for Haggard's representations of Jews. As Todd Endelman, a historian of English Jewry, writes, "In the late 1870s ... Public attention became focused on Jews [of England] more frequently and intensely than before."
The meshing and confusion of these varied social, economic, and historical factors produced not only an irreducible complexity of attitudes towards Jews in 1880s England, but also a sense for many English writers that the Jew and "the Jewish question" were productive sites for the working through and out of many vexing questions of race, class, nation, Empire, art, and identity. Part of the usefulness of the figure of the Jew inhered precisely in the ambiguity that resulted from contradictory notions of Jews as rich (merchants and capitalists), poor (destitute immigrants), powerful (in the figures of Disraeli and Rothschild), and powerless (in stereotypes of the Jew as physically weak, feminine, and ineffectual); as Zygmunt Bauman has influentially expressed it, "the Jew had entered modern times as ambivalence incarnate."
Building on Bauman's analysis, Jonathan Freedman argues that "The Jew functions most fully for [Henry] James" -- and a number of late nineteenth century English writers, including Matthew Arnold and George du Maurier -- "not as a concrete figure or even as a stereotyped one but as a receptacle: a figure onto which can be loaded all the sources of his inchoate anxieties and unacknowledged terrors."
Though their writings suggest that Haggard's set of "inchoate anxieties and unacknowledged terrors" would have differed markedly from James's, the figure of the Jew seems to have functioned similarly as a "receptacle" for Haggard's own intense concerns about degeneration and evolution. His tactic in She, which reinforces his support for imperial project and elides the problems of modern Jewry, is to subsume modern Jews into his ideas about ancient Hebrews.
The author's biography suggests he may even have had a personal stake in discussions about the assimilation and conversion of Jews, their racial difference, and their social position. According to a tribute to Haggard written by his daughter Lilias, Haggard's paternal grandmother "Elizabeth Meybohm ... was probably of Jewish blood." Haggard himself is described by family members as having had "a big nose" or "the bold Haggard nose" -- a feature that also seems to be emphasized in the Vanity Fair caricature that appeared around the time of the publication of She. Haggard is further described as, like his siblings, manifesting physical "characteristics" that were "a hint ... at some touch of Slav blood in the past."
Kallikrates, means "The Strong and the Beautiful, or, more accurately, the Beautiful in strength"
Whatever his personal stake in representations of Jews, one major factor in the constitution of Haggard's semitic discourse seems to have been the stark contrast he saw between the classical legacy of the Jews -- as an ancient and once powerful civilization, like those of Egypt and Greece, an ancestor to Christianity and to the English nation -- with modern instantiations of Jews as impoverished immigrants to London's East End, or unpatriotic, scheming capitalists.14
Musing on the question of Jewish nationalism, in 1901 -- four years after the First Zionist Congress was convened in Basel, Switzerland, by Theodor Herzl -- Haggard asserts that Jewish financiers could easily purchase the land of Palestine from the Turkish sultan, and wonders why they do not follow this course of action: "Are they held back by indifference and apathy -- or, perchance, by the mysterious chain of some Divine decree?" True to his imperialist beliefs,15 Haggard implicitly accepts the premise that Jews should desire Palestine as a national homeland. If they wanted to effect such a political change, he continues, "they might drill, buy arms, and make an insurrection. I am informed, however, that they prefer to await the advent of their Messiah, a man of blood and power, a Jewish Napoleon, who when he appears will bring about the glory and temporal advancement of the race."
In She, similar questions of religious and social evolution relating to Christian England and its empire are reflected in the attention to waiting and suspense throughout the text and in the construction of the narrative. The central circumstance of the novel -- Ayesha's "two thousand years of waiting" for the return of her lover Kallikrates18 -- provides Haggard with opportunities to explore the relationship of the ancient past to modern religious and social life, and, in some larger messianic and imperial sense, to ask what it means to wait for deliverance rather than to seek power and salvation aggressively in the present.
Unsurprisingly, Ayesha's millennial patience was read by more than one of Haggard's contemporaries as a religious allegory. Two years after the novel's original publication, in 1889, for example, a writer calling himself Leo Michael -- with a first name suspiciously identical to Haggard's protagonist's -- published the book-length study She, an Allegory of the Church, with a New York press. Michael's slim book is a wonderfully strange hodgepodge of religious philosophy, personal essay, literary criticism, and unbridled appreciation of She. A straightforwardly allegorical reading, Michael's posits Ayesha as an avatar for the Christian Church, loyally awaiting the return of "Intuition" as represented by Leo, who is accompanied by "Science," represented by Holly. 19 Michael meticulously details the relationships between these figures and the Priesthood (as represented by Bellali), Spiritualism (Ustane), Conscience (Leo's father), Religious Enthusiasm (Leo's mother), and "sheer Infidelity" (Mahomed), and describes how the interactions between all of these concepts, as prophetically outlined in the allegory of She, will lead to the Second Coming.20 His reading was likely not unique in the connection it draws between Ayesha's patience and the anticipation of messianic salvation, 21 but it develops this theme with strikingly directness: "The deeper meaning of 'She,' and Leo," Michael writes, is "the Divine Marriage -- the fruit of the tree of life that shall heal the world's sickness -- the second coming of Christ to the world."
Michael's interpretation of why it should take so long for this awaited salvation -- his faithful decoding of the significance of Ayesha's "two thousand years of waiting" -- is suggestive and relevant enough to merit a lengthy quotation. Michael asserts that Ayesha was too much "in love with the outward form of" Kallikrates, and,
Michael argues here that the delay that Ayesha's patience symbolizes -- Christianity's wait for the Messiah's second coming -- is associated with an unhealthy emphasis on "physical passion," with an obsession with "the body, suffering and death." Later in the same passage and consonant with Haggard's attention to Jews both in She and elsewhere, Michael characterizes these regressive or anti-salvation qualities of violence, physicality, and bloodiness as having been first "embodied in Judaism."
According to Deleuze, "Formally speaking, masochism" -- like messianism -- "is a state of waiting."
Conceptual overlaps between masochism and messianism are likewise visible in Deleuze's statement that "Christology [is] an all-pervasive element in the work of Masoch,"
Unless one accepts a comprehensively allegorical reading -- which would seem unfaithful to what is at times a highly self-contradictory novel -- the text of She does not suggest that Haggard shared Michael's negative view of contemporary Christian institutions as weak in their patience for redemption. It is however known that Haggard was interested, like Michael, in spiritualism and in idiosyncratic readings of scripture; as one of Haggard's relatives recalled, he "had his own interpretation of Holy Writ and took it for granted that it was the only interpretation deserving of belief."
Similarly, the notion of spiritual evolution (i.e., the development toward "some greater purpose") as applied to imperialism -- and, specifically, the belief that the British empire is both a continuation and a refinement of great ancient civilizations -- conveniently underwrites and licenses the imperial project in that it bestows the status quo with historical precedents and authority, as well as a sense of inexorability.
Positing England as a continuation of classical empires requires, among other things, that the supposed ancestors of English society remain debased and ruined as is appropriate for their position lower down on the historical and evolutionary scale. Thus it is not surprising to find Holly, Ayesha's informant about the modern world, telling her about the destruction of various ancient civilizations:
These remarks, presented by Holly as incontrovertible history, reinforce the notion of the evolution of civilization by recurring to a natural metaphor for the collapse of previous empires (which fell, like fruit from a branch, "when their time was ripe"), and by ridiculing the suggestion that a once-great civilization might swim against the stream of evolution and in modern times regain its former status through a national independence movement (an opinion regarding the Greek independence of 1829, that Daniel Karlin calls "a Victorian commonplace").36 History marches on, Holly's remarks imply, and the ages of the Egyptians and the Greeks are past.
Holly's evolutionary litany of failed ancient civilizations climaxes, unsurprisingly, with reference to that ancient civilization whose failure was crucial for the justification of a specifically Christian English empire, and the presence of whose descendants was troubling on the home front in 1870s and 1880s England: the Jews. Though Ayesha's remarks on the Jews are hardly favorable, she does acknowledge them as having occupied a somewhat exalted position in the ancient world: she refers to "the Temple that the wise king built," for example. Holly informs Ayesha that no matter their previous position, the Jews -- like the Egyptians and Greeks -- are ruined: "The Jews are broken and gone," he says, "and the fragments of their people strew the world, and Jerusalem is no more."
It is on one level ironic, of course, that Holly, as the character who works hardest to bury the Jews into the past, is the same one whom Ayesha and Leo call an "unbelieving Jew" often enough that in a 1995 essay, Anne McClintock, an otherwise astute late twentieth-century reader of Haggard's fiction, mistakenly reads him as Jewish.39 At the same time, Ayesha's and Leo's references to "unbelieving Jews," as Karlin points out, echo Acts 14:2 -- both from the perspective of a nineteenth-century Englishman, and from Ayesha's ancient viewpoint. That these two characters, despite the millennia separating their experiences, can share the Jew as their primary example of skepticism, produces an erasure of the intervening centuries of Jewish existence. The Jews are unbelievers, irrespective of time. Once again, the present realities of Jewish life are subsumed in ideas about the ancient Hebrews.
Consistently relegating the Jews to the ancient past, Haggard denies them a place in the present and its justifying narratives of religious and political evolution: he ignores the obvious fact -- obvious in late nineteenth century English literature, at least, because of Daniel Deronda -- that many modern Jews were waiting with increasing expectations either for their own Messiah (if they were religious) or for a nationalist movement that would restore them to political power and self-rule (if they were secular). Holly, Leo, and Ayesha relegate the Jews to ancient history; as such they deny that modern Jews have anything, in the future, to wait for. Stripped of any reasonable anticipation of pleasure or salvation, even an indefinitely delayed one, the Jews' position is degraded from one of messianic waiting to that of pure ruin and degeneration. As Holly reflects, "Without Hope we should suffer moral death,"
The Jews thus seem to provide a contrast for Ayesha's own waiting, which is based on a specific expectation of romantic love, as represented by the return of Kallikrates to be her lover. This expectation is figured throughout the text in terms resonant with the formula elaborated above, based on Deleuze and Silverman, for masochistic messianism. Ayesha's awaited pleasure is both indefinite and inevitable: she admits that the timing of her lover's return is unclear, thereby suggesting the potentially indefinite deferral of her pleasure: "it may be when five thousand more years have passed ... or it may be tomorrow," she remarks.41 Yet Ayesha has no doubt of her expectation's eventual fulfillment: "here I tarry till he finds me," she says, "knowing of a surety that hither he will come."
Ayesha furthermore characterizes her state of waiting, if not exactly as physiological pain, definitely as a form of protracted suffering: she describes her existence as "[herding] here with barbarians lower than the beasts,"
It is not, however, solely romance for which Ayesha has been waiting. Her expectations -- as well as Holly's expectation of her -- have, like traditional messianism, explicit spiritual and political dimensions. In some sense, the messiah for which Ayesha waits is herself. Holly certainly sees Ayesha as having the potential to wield messianic political power. If a person possessed "indefinite continuation of life," as he later is convinced Ayesha does, Holly speculates that this person "could no doubt rule the world. He could accumulate all the wealth in the world, and all the power, and all the wisdom that is power."
Yet obviously Ayesha does not, by the conclusion of this novel, become a messiah and change the world.51 Viewed from the perspective of what might otherwise have been -- based on Holly's and her own projections -- Ayesha's waiting and concern for Kallikrates have at best an ambivalent, and at worst a destructive, relationship to her imperial and spiritual potential. As Holly says in retrospect, although she might have "revolutionised society, and even perchance have changed the destiny of Mankind," instead, "Ayesha locked up in her living tomb waiting from age to age for the coming of her lover worked but a small change in the order of the World."
The ultimate absence of value in Ayesha's waiting is exhibited most starkly in the scene of her death. Not only does Ayesha's waiting for Leo prevent her from fulfilling her messianic potential, but her concern for him also finally kills her. It is only to assuage Leo's fear of the pillar of fire that Ayesha once again exposes herself to it -- "if thou seest me stand in the flame and come forth unharmed," she asks Leo, "wilt thou enter also?"
To the extent that we can seek an explanation for Ayesha's demise within the bounds of Haggard's literary universe -- rather than assuming that Haggard, as a savvy author, realized Ayesha would have to die before he could end his book for reasons of narrative economy, and obliged himself with the most convenient method he could think of to bring this about -- Ayesha's downfall is justified in the text by her opposition to what Holly calls "eternal Law." In her potential revolutionary power, Ayesha "opposed herself against the eternal Law, and, strong though she was, by it was swept back to nothingness."
The description of Ayesha's death pointedly reinforces an evolutionary paradigm. After being affected by the fire, she shrinks "till she was no larger than a baboon" and then transforms into a "hideous little monkey frame."
It cannot be denied that Haggard's novel derives much of its energy and impetus from unearthing the past, as can be observed in the archaeological objects and ancient texts with which the book opens, and in the knowledge about antiquity that Haggard flaunts throughout the text. Yet finally Haggard exhumes past societies, and Ayesha herself as an embodiment of the past, only to rebury them according to the dictates of "eternal Law." As Katz suggests about Haggard's belief in a "transcendental force, or intelligence, moving behind the scenes," the existence of this "eternal Law" -- opposed to revolutions whether messianic or political, strictly regulating history, keeping the past safely past -- conveniently sanctions the status quo that Haggard supported. It also, not as a primary goal but then again not quite as "absent-mindedly" as some late nineteenth-century writers, enacts both a methodology and a justification for ignoring the political possibilities opening up to Jews in the last decades of the nineteenth century, both in England and elsewhere. Perhaps a desire to obscure his own Jewish heritage, to bury his racial and blood ties to Jews in an ancient and long forgotten past, played a part -- conscious or unconscious -- in the vigor with which Haggard, in She, insists on relegating the Jews, and the past, to history. Or perhaps it was solely in service to Haggard's conservative, imperialist agenda, that the Jews in She are rendered "broken and gone," and that the potential for messianism, even when specifically not Jewish in character, is explored only to be finally denied.
