A pseudoelastically loaded NiTi wire is capable of large recoverable strains due to a stress induced phase transformation from austenite (A) to martensite (M) during loading and a reverse transformation M→A during unloading (see Figure 1). When a NiTi wire is pulled along its axis and the displacement of the grips is controlled, the extent of the transformation is linked to the grip displacement, and distinct martensite phase transformation fronts can be seen propagating through austenite regions of material (see Figure 2). Although the microstructural mechanisms are quite different, these phase transformation fronts are macroscopically analogous to L¨uders bands (see Figure 3), where plastic regions propagate through elastic regions of material.1
The tensile pseudoelastic behavior of NiTi wire at low to moderate strain rates is relatively well understood,4 but the performance of stress states such as shear, bending, and compression is still an active area of research, not to mention multiaxial loading. These diverse loading conditions are clearly important in the case of stents, guidwires, vena cava filters, and other medical devices which use NiTi . Outside of the biomedical realm, NiTi is being used as vibration dampeners, actuators, tube couplings, eyeglass frames, antennae, and many other areas that deviate from pure uniaxial loading. Design of such devices are either totally iterative or based on models constructed solely on tensile NiTi data. The experiments to date indicate that NiTi 's behavior is highly dependent on the loading scenario,5 and tensile behavior cannot be generalized into 3 dimensions as is commonly done with more traditional metals such as steel and alumninum. NiTi has tension compression asymmetry: a higher stress is required to nucleate martensite under compression than under tension,6 and the A→M transformation is unstable in tension leading to distinct transformation fronts, while the A→M transformation is stable in compression. This suggests the possibility of hydrostatic pressure dependence, consequently it has been specifically studied by Jacobus et. al.7 Jacobus selected several different states of stress, shown via the stress tensor on the right of Figure 4, and ramped up the value of σ to generate an effective stress strain curve for each state of stress. Jacobus defined his effective stress as the Von Mises stress √J2, where J2 is the second invariant of the deviatoric stress tensor, which asserts that the intensity of a 3 dimensional stress state only depends on the deviatoric. If there were no hydrostatic pressure dependence, the 4 curves in Figure 4 would overlap, but clearly they do not. It is interesting to note, however, that the state of zero hydrostatic pressure does overlap at the onset of the transformation with the state of uniaxial tension.
Plasticity has been used in the past as a first approximation for the mechanical behavior of NiTi .1
(1)
was used as an A→M transformation surface in an attempt to capture the pressure dependence described in Section 1. Here J2 is the second invariant of the deviatoric stress
(2)
which reduces to σ11 in uniaxial tension by definition. The total strain increment dǫ is decomposed into an elastic part
(3)
The elastic portion was modeled using isotropic linear elasticity with the elastic strain increments given by
(4)
where νe is the elastic poisson's ratio and E1 is the austenite (elastic) modulus. Utilizing an associated flow rule, the
(5)
All loading scenarios to be considered with this model will be radial (a.k.a. proportional) in nature, so isotropic hardening was assumed for simplicity. This means that the increment in plastic work accrued by an increment in plastic strain in uniaxial tension is equivalent to the increment in plastic work accrued for a general deformation, thus
(6)
where
(7)
The effective stress and effective strains can be used to provide an alternate definition for the increment in plastic strain
(8)
The plasticity model was calibrated by fitting
(9)
where E1, E2, and E3 are the moduli of the trilinear curve (enumerated in the same order that they would be followed when loading a material),
(10)
The moduli
(11)
And
(12)
Next, to select an appropriate α the plasticity model was specialized to uniaxial tension and uniaxial compression. This led to three different relations involving α and the material properties the plastic strain poisson's ratio in tension
(13)
(14)
(15)Figure 5. Stress strain curve for fine grained mild steel (image taken from Shaw1).
No one relation is more relevant than another, so (15) was chosen to ensure that the nucleation stress in compression
matched the experimental data. In addition, (15) matches the relation independently derived by Needleman and Rice. Note that by doing this, we have specified different poisson's ratios in tension and compression. Different poisson's ratios are entirely possible for NiTi since different variants of martensite could be being activated in tension versus compression. On the other hand, the fact that one cannot independently control the poisson's ratios is an inherent limitation of the model. This is often overcome by researchers modeling geomaterials by using a non-associated flow rule to get the correct plastic dilantancy.
Two separate model calibrations were performed. First, the model was calibrated to the experimental data shown in
thin red (tension) and thin blue (compression) in Figure 6, resulting the in the calibration inputs listed in Table 1a. The data in Figure 6 came from tensile and compressive tests on pseudoelastic NiTi tubes with an approximately 10 to 1 diameter to thickness ratio.10 After results were generated, the model was re-calibrated using the data in Figure 8a. The data in Figure 6a came from tensile tests on pseudoelastic NiTi tubes with an approximate 10 to 1 diameter to thickness ratio.5 Since no compression data was available, the value for α calculated in calibration #1 was utilized again for calibration #2.
In analyzing the effectiveness of the plasticity model we will focus on the model's prediction for the plastic poisson's ratio, the compressive A→M transformation, and a shear A→M transformation.
The plastic poisson's ratios are listed in Table 1b. Note that the compressive plastic poisson's ratio is well above 0.5,
meaning the plastic volume actually increases on compression, which does not appear very physically realistic. Martensitic transformations of single crystals in NiTi are nearly isochoric (as can be seen by taking the determinate of a A→M transformation matrix listed on page 55 of Bhattacharya giving a volume ratio of nearly one), thus poisson's ratio should be very near 0.5. One might argue that the total poisson's ratio is not the plastic poisson's ratio, but in the unstable region of the tensile curve the elastic strain actually decreases, so all the strain accrued in that region can be regarded as plastic strain. This means the plastic poisson's ratio is roughly the total poisson's ratio.
Table 1. a) Calibration inputs to plasticity model, b) Calibration outputs
Figure 6. Fit of calibration # 1 to tension data and results in compression.
Turning our attention to Figure 6, which displays the results of calibration #1, it is apparent that the only pieces of data that the model successfully matches are those that it was calibrated to. The strain difference between the austenite modulus and the martensite modulus did not visibly decrease to anywhere near the 0.02 strain experimentally found in compression.
Figure 7. Predicted slope of middle portion of compression curve vs. alpha.
In addition, the slope of the unstable portion in tension actually decreased instead of increasing in compression. The constitutive relations were integrated analytically, allowing us to see how the predicted slope in compression Ec2 depends on the model inputs:
(16)
This function is plotted in Figure 7 for the values listed under calibration # 1 in Table 1a, varying α. Clearly it is not possible to attain a positive slope without selecting an α that corresponds to a compressive nucleation stress that is smaller than the tensile nucleation stress.
Lastly focusing on Figure 8, a) displays the fit of calibration #2 to the tensile data, while b) compares how the model predicts pure shear against torsion data. Sun and Li twisted a tube with a 10 to 1 diameter to thickness ratio (any thinner and they probably would have buckled) and held the axial stress at zero, which resulted in a state close to pure shear. This data, shown in a thin black line in Figure 8b, is compared against the plasticity model in pure shear, plotted in bold green in the same figure. Once again, the unstable portion of the tension curve remains unstable in pure shear, which does not compare well with the Sun and Li's stable experimental results. The predicted elastic shear modulus also appears to be significantly higher. This is probably due to assuming isotropic elasticity, since NiTi tubes are known to be highly textured5 the stiffness in shear could easily be affected by aligning the grains along the axis of the tube. The single success of this model is in correctly predicting the stress at the onset of the A→M transformation in pure shear. This could be just coincidence given the sample size of 1 and the fact that α was assumed to be the same as in calibration #1, but it does suggest that the transformation surface is linearly dependent on the hydrostatic pressure.
On the whole, a Drucker-Prager yield surface with an associated flow rule and isotropic hardening does not capture the isothermal, pseudoelastic response of NiTi . One can select to fit the model to tension, compression, or shear, but this comes at the detriment to the model's prediction in the remaining two stress states. The model appears especially poor at predicting the stress strain response during the phase transformation, which is not surprising given stark difference in the microstructural mechanisms behind martensitic phase transformations and dislocation motion. On the other hand, a Drucker-Prager yield surface does show some promise in predicting the onset of the A→M transition. The pressure dependent yield surface was selected in the first place because of past experimental data, but this work suggests that the Drucker-Prager linear dependence may be sufficient.
