In 2005 a study completed by the Center for Disease Control found that 5,800 people 65 and older died from injuries related to unintentional falls and another 1.8 million received emergency room care. Of those treated, 433,000 were hospitalized for long term care [1]. Seniors who live alone may suffer from an unintentional fall and are often not found for hours or days. Long waits for medical care exacerbate their injuries and increase their risk of death or permanent hospitalization. However, fast emergency response to a fall reduces the risk of hospitalization by 26% and death by 80% [3]. The problem with seniors not receiving immediate attention needs to be addressed.
A National University of Singapore study researched and developed a garment-based 3-axis MEMS accelerometer designed as an alert system for senior citizen falls by recording an impact [2]. The system was to be worn by seniors in a pouch attached to the shoulder which contained the accelerometer. The power supply and blue-tooth wireless system to transmit an alert signal was located in a pouch attached at the waist. The chip itself was designed to record a heavy impact of magnitude consistent with a fall situation. When a fall was detected, the system would transmit a signal to the wearer's cell phone, which would signal an emergency response team and the person's family.
We have found several flaws in the system developed at the University of Singapore. Since the accelerometer measures impact, if it were to break during the fall it would not function properly and emergency response would not be alerted. In addition, a number of daily motion activities could cause g-force readings consistent with that of a fall, which would trigger a false fall alert and cause unnecessary emergency response action. If there were an emergency response unit which measured the fall itself and not the impact, the possible break would not be an issue and false alarms would not occur.
Our objective is to develop an emergency response system to detect unintentional falls of senior citizens. This system would be triggered by a characteristic acceleration response associated only with falling and would be accurate enough to not register false falls. In addition, we aim to use the device as a static orientation system that would be able to correctly measure the wearer's angle from vertical, as well as body orientation (i.e. face down, on left side, etc.) We have completed this work. In this report we will cover:
In order to reach our final goal of characterizing free fall several experiments were performed. The accelerometer ADXL203EB was first calibrated, and then used to record data for static orientation, fixed axis free fall, and daily human activities. Voltage input to the accelerometer was provided by the HP 33120A function generator. Voltage outputs were observed and recorded using the HP 5460213 oscilloscope. From there Microsoft Excel and Matlab were used to analyze data.
In order to interpret readings from the accelerometer we needed to determine a relationship between voltage and acceleration. The accelerometer was rotated to angles and orientations of known acceleration and the voltage output recorded. Using this data we were able to then know the acceleration of the accelerometer given a voltage at any point in time.
To gather experimental data for the orientation of the accelerometer in space we performed experiments holding the accelerometer in static orientations. The accelerometer was placed at the end of a pivot arm as shown in Fig. 1, below, and the arm was held at 0, 30, 45, 60 and 90 degrees from vertical. Output voltages were recorded at each angle. From there the accelerometer was rotated about its z-axis, which is depicted in Figure 2 on page 4. The accelerometer was rotated to 45, 90 and 135 degrees while the pivot arm was moved through the previously described static positions. Data was recorded at every orientation.
Once static orientation had been performed we experimented with free fall in a two dimensional plane. The accelerometer was reattached to the end of the pivot arm as shown in Figure 1, page 3, so that the accelerometer recorded data in the plane of motion. This meant that that analysis was only done in two dimensions to ensure that we were able to accurately measure the radial and tangential acceleration. The orientation of the accelerometer can be seen in Figure 3, below. The pivot arm was then dropped from vertical and data was recorded.
In order to compare data collected for fixed axis free fall motion to other motions we recorded data performing a variety of activities. The accelerometer was attached to the experimenters' waist and the subject walked, jumped, sat down and laid down. Data was recorded for every action.
During testing we were able to accurately calibrate the accelerometer and predict static orientation. In addition, we developed a theoretical model for falling, and gathered data for fixed axis falling and other daily activities.
During the calibration, numerous voltages were recorded for known accelerations and plotted against each other. This can be seen in Figure 4 on page 3. We found that there was a positive linear trend between the measured voltage and known acceleration. This relationship was used to calculate the acceleration of the accelerometer given the output voltages for the rest of the lab.
Logic was derived to use both the x and y axis data in conjunctions with the calibration data to determine the orientation of the chip which could be located on a person. It was able to accurately predict the angle from vertical within an error of ±2 degrees as described in Figure 5 below. It was also able to predict the rotation about the vertical axis of a person within an error of ±3 degrees as described in Figure 6 below. Combining these two angular outputs the orientation of a stable fallen person can be accurately determined.
In order to analyze a fall situation a theoretical model first needed to be derived as a comparison to real world data. A schematic of the setup can be seen in Figure 7 below. The chip was oriented so that the y-axis of the chip read the radial acceleration and the x-axis read the tangential acceleration. We simplified the problem assuming a frictionless pivot at the base of the arm and the force of gravity acting at the center of the arm. The shaft also had length l. By performing static and kinematic analysis we were able to predict both the theoretical x and y-axis acceleration and they can be seen in Figure 8 below. More information on the calculation for the theoretical model can be seen in Appendix A.
To verify our theoretical model it was compared to experimental data from the fixed axis free fall experiment. Our experimental data can be seen in Figure 9 below. There are results from three free fall tests plotted together in Figure 9, and the results are extremely similar from one test to another. The experimental data had results that were expected.
Other daily activities needed to be investigated to ensure that their results were not similar to those seen in the free fall situation data. Walking, jumping, sitting and lying down were investigated and their results can be seen in Figures 10-11 below and 12-13 on page 8 respectively.
To further investigate free falling we must compare the theoretical model to the experimentally collected data for free fall. Radial and tangential acceleration for three trials as compared to our theoretical model are shown in Figure 14 below. Note that experimental data does not exactly follow the theoretical model. The tangential acceleration has a very similar output but the radial acceleration seems to have a time delay. This could be due to a delay in the response of the accelerometer or a delay in the data collection of the electrical system. Further investigation of this discrepancy needs to be completed.
Assuming that the time delay can be identified and then predicted we can accurately model fixed axis free fall. Using the validated model we can define parameters to analyze data and sense if a fall situation occurs. One method of doing this would be to create bands around the validated theoretical model and detect if a majority of the data being collected was within the bands on both channels. If the data did fall within both channel margins it would signal a fall and actuate an alarm. The theoretical model with bands is shown in Figure 15 below.
In addition to investigating free fall situations we had to determine if the falling model was similar to any other daily activities. To have an accurate system, we had to ensure that there would be no false falling alarms. After comparing our theoretical model to typical daily motion activities in Figures 10-13 on pages 7 and 8 previously, it is clear that falling is not consistent with any of these plots. Therefore, the system will be able to distinguish between falls and any other daily motion activity and there will be no false falls.
We were able to use a MEMS accelerometer to characterize a free fall response and observe body orientation. Through this, we were able to develop a theoretical model consistent only with falling and not any other daily motion activity. This model could be used as trigger parameters for an emergency response system for senior citizens who experience unintentional falls. If widely used, this system could greatly decrease hospitalization and death as a result of slow emergency response and better many lives.
After completing the calibration we were able to accurately determine the static orientation of a person. Using our logic we could accurately determine someone's angle from vertical within 2 degrees as described by Figure 5 page 5 and rotation about the vertical axis within 3 degrees as described by Figure 6 on page 5.
Next we were able to create a theoretical model using kinematic analysis to predict what the free fall acceleration response would be shown in Figure 8 on page 6. This was then validated using experimental data and the only discrepancy was a time shift, which is shown in Figure 14 on page 8. Using the theoretical model we were able to design parameters to sense a fall as described in Figure 15 on page 9. We then were able to determine that there would be no false alarms due to other daily activities by comparing normal daily activities including walking, jumping, sitting, and lying down to the parameters used to sense falling.
Through this analysis we were able to use a MEMS accelerometer device to sense motion of the human body specifically in a free fall situation. This has many benefits to an elderly user. Even if the chip is damaged on impact, a fall is still recorded by the system and emergency response is alerted. Voltage characteristics consistent only with a fall situation eliminate false fall alerts that were present in the impact-based system. As discussed earlier in this report, faster emergency response leads to decrease in hospitalization by 26% and death by 80%. Therefore, we hope to drastically reduce the emergency response time through the use of this system and greatly improve countless lives.
We recommend further testing be conducted with a 3-axis MEMS accelerometer in order to have a better 3-dimensioanl analysis of human motion. Such analysis would be more advantageous than using the 2-dimensional analysis conducted in our experimentation. Also we believe that more full scale testing should be conducted. We also recommend generating models for other modes of falling. Since falling is not always likely to occur in a fixed axis position there are many different ways in which a person may fall. Further testing could analyze and characterize many falling different falling scenarios.
The next step includes development of a computer program that has the ability to recognize the data response consistent with falling. Such a program would then trigger an alert for emergency response to hospitals or family members. Also it is necessary to design the device with the accelerometer to be worn by the individual. Such a device would ideally be small so it would not disrupt normal activities. We recommend the device be attached to a garment on the individual's shoulder. The device must also be capable to wirelessly transmit data to a central computer in the home that would monitor for falling.
