There are approximately 35 million people living in the U.S. who are over the age of 65 years (U.S. Census Bureau 2003). An injurious fall in an elderly individual can be devastating. Indeed, more elderly die from falls than die from motor vehicle accidents each year (CDC 1999). More than one-third of adults ages 65 years and older fall each year (Hornbrook 1994; Hausdorff 2001). Older adults are hospitalized for fall-related injuries five times more often than they are for injuries from other causes (Alexander 1992). The most costly fall-related injury is a hip fracture because it carries the risk for serious sequelae, including bone infection and pneumonia, both of which can be fatal. Other sequelae include loss of strength and self confidence, which can limit mobility and willingness to take part in social activities outside the home. A rise in serious head injuries resulting from elderly who fall has also been noted (Kannus et al. 1999). Not every fall results in injury. Roughly 5% of falls result in serious injury requiring medical attention (CDC 2003; U.S. Census Bureau 2003).
Common sense informs us that one can reduce the number of fall-related injuries in two ways: (a) reduce the number of falls by intervening on the risk factors for falls (for example, Weerdestyn et al. 2006), and (b) when a fall happens, reduce the risk of injury from that fall (for example, DeGoede & Ashton-Miller 2002 & 2003, Groen et al. 2005, Lo 2006). As far as the first approach is concerned, many extrinsic and intrinsic risk factors for falls have been identified (for example, Tinetti et al. 1994) and several types of interventions have been developed to address the most important of these factors. However, the number of falls each year remains high and the probability of ever reducing the number of falls to zero is non-existent. Furthermore, sooner or later everyone falls unintentionally, regardless of their age. So, the second approach leads us to want to find out what people need to know a priori and what they need to do during a fall so that they can avoid injury when they do suffer the inevitable fall.
It is known that when a fall results in the greater trochanter directly impacting the ground, then the risk of hip injury is 30 times higher that when the greater trochanter does not strike the ground (Nevitt et al. 1993, Hayes et al. 1993, Schwartz et al. 1998). The underlying message from these studies is that if an elderly person falls, "don't, ever, land on your greater trochanter".
The objective of this study was to estimate whether it is feasible for individuals to twist their pelvis during the ongoing fall in order to avoid landing on their greater trochanter. Do they have the hip external rotator strength that is needed to rotate the hip within the time it takes their pelvis to hit the ground? How do factors like age, gender, body mass, and obesity affect this calculation. Because, actual falls carry a risk for injury, we instead used literature values for muscle strength, our own experimental measurements of hip muscle strength in two individuals, and computer simulations to answer the question.
The technical question we wanted to answer is how long (in msec) it takes a healthy person to volitionally twist their pelvis through a set angle (in order to present the posterolateral part of their thigh/buttocks, rather than the greater trochanter, to the landing surface). In Feldman and Robinovitch (2007) the average axial rotation of the pelvis/hip upon impact from an unexpected lateral fall was 8 degrees in a posterolateral direction. However, from their Figure 2b, Appendix A, we see that an axial rotation angle of 20 degrees would suffice (a) to land on the maxim depth of muscular "padding" over the bony pelvis, and (b) to land on the aspect of the pelvis that does not include the greater trochanter. In other words, subjects need to axially rotate their pelvis at least 12 degree more than normal and ideally 22 degrees more than normal. We also chose to find out how long it takes to twist the pelvis through more than enough rotational angle, i.e., 30 degrees, given unilateral stance and full foot-floor frictional contact conditions. Finally, we need to find out how much this latency is affected by advancing age, increasing body mass, and decreasing hip muscle strength, and obesity.
A rough calculation for this time can be made by knowing the reaction time for the onset of muscle activity (~60-166 msec) (Ashton-Miller, Thelen 1996) and then adding the time required for muscle to develop enough contractile force and torque to rotate the hip externally 30 degrees, as well as counter rotate what was the stance leg in an internal hip rotation direction through 30 degrees in the opposite direction, thereby rotating the greater trochanter away from the impact site. This second rotation would require the hips to rotate 3° in the opposite direction relative to the first turn, and the leg to rotate 30°. If this time is less than the mean 626 ms (SD =40) (Feldman, et al. 2007) showed that it takes to fall sideways, then this calculation provides the theoretical basis for expecting that there is time for both young and elderly to present the "correct" posterolateral part of the pelvis (i.e., buttock) for impact with the ground in a sideways fall.
Two male subjects-A: 21 years old, 180 cm tall, and 72 kg, and B: 60 years old, 190 cm tall, and 84 kg, participated in the study. Each subject wore a belt around the top portion of their iliac crest (waist). A set of three infrared light-emitting diode markers was attached to the belt. Using an Optotrak Cetrus system each marker location could be measured in 3-D space and the change in hip angle during the course of a volitional axial turn of the pelvis could be calculated. The experiment began with the subject having one foot planted on top of an AMTI OR-6 force plate and the other foot lifted off the ground behind the individual. The subject would then twist their pelvis as quickly and as far as possible three times in either a clockwise or counterclockwise direction of rotation, while keeping their planted foot stationary. The peak torques, degree of turns, and time to turn was then calculated and descriptive statistics calculated.
The isometric torque values were recorded by having one foot planted on the force plate while the subject held a stationary ladder in front of them. The subject would then apply a torque to their foot while keeping their hips and foot stationary.
A model was created in Adams to simulate the motion of the hip, thigh, shank, and foot (Appendix K). One model, "fixed", was created which had the foot and leg had fixed to the ground which only allowed rotational motion of the hips via a torque source at the "hip". The angle of turn between the pelvis and ground, and the hip torque input was computed. For simplicity, a second model, "free", was created which represents the second part of the fall-when the foot has lost contact with the ground and a counter torque reaction is required at the hip. This counter torque moves the greater trochanter "away" from the impact area so that the posterior buttock becomes exposed to the impact. The values of inertia and dimensional values used for the hip, thigh, and shank were taken from Anthropometric Source Book (NASA, 1978).
The moment of inertia for the whole body was based on the results of David Carrier's article, 'Influence of Increased Rotational Inertia on the Turning Performance of Humans', for varying whole-body masses (Appendix B). These were extrapolated from the range of body masses of the subjects were used to the average masses of males and females for the young adults (age 20-29 years), heaviest age bracket, mid age, (age 40-49 years), and the old (age 60-74 years) (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). The decrease in external hip muscle torque between 20 and 70 years was scaled from the maximum voluntary ankle dorsiflexor strength data reported by Darryl G. Thelen et al. in their article 'Effects of Age on Rapid Ankle Torque Development", Table 2 (Appendix D, E). We made the assumption that the hip internal and external hip rotator muscles have identical maximum torque-time characteristics to the ankle dorsiflexors. We made this assumption because we could find no data in the literature on age and gender effects on hip internal and external rotator muscle strengths, and because the volume of muscle is approximately similar.
Sample plots of the experimental results showing the angle of turn, torque, and angular velocity against time can be seen in Appendices F-J. The "best" hip rotator strength test results came from the trials which involved turning clockwise for both the right and left foot planted-which correlated to the internal and external rotation muscles respectively. The peak torque values were taken at the second peak, at which point the angle had the largest magnitude. The change in time for the angle was taken as the time for the angle to reach 90% of its maximum value from 10% of its baseline value at rest. Table 1 below, shows the averaged results of these trials with precision error.
Table 1: Maximum volitional internal and external hip rotator muscle strength and turn test results
These results were input into the Adams simulation along with the extrapolated values from the methods section. The results of these trials can be seen in Appendix N. All trials that did not complete the second rotation of turning the leg 30° could also not complete the internal hip rotation of 3° either. It was found that for the average inertia, 1.12 kgm2, if the time was 100 ms for the free leg, subject A at 50% of its strength and subject B did not complete the required angle of 30°, as seen in Figure 1 below. For the fixed leg simulation, only subject A at 50% of his strength was under the 30° for 400 ms. When running the simulation with subject A and B's experimentally determined torque and extrapolated inertias respectively, Figures 2 and 3 below, subject A met all requirements while subject B did not meet the internal goal at 100 ms and external requirement at 350 ms. When looking at the results for the extrapolated inertias and torques based on the averaged weights and loss of muscle strength for the young, middle aged, and old males and females, no females were able to make the required 30° external rotation at 100 ms while all males succeeded. For the internal rotation, all males could meet the requirements at 350 ms and above, while middle-aged females could not meet it at 350 ms, and old females could not meet it at 400 ms. In the extreme case for males and females 45 years old and above, who are of the upper 95 percentile of their weight bracket, none could meet the internal rotation requirement at 100 ms as seen in Figure 6. As for the external rotation, no male could meet the angle requirement by 400 ms, middle aged female by 450 ms, and old female by 500 ms.
The minimum required torques to complete a 3° turn for the internal rotation of the hip and 30° turn for the external rotation for different times can be seen in Table 2, below. The inertia values were extrapolated based on the average weight for males and females of ages 45 (mid) and 65 (old). In Table 3 the maximum allowable inertia and extrapolated mass was calculated for set average maximal torque values to complete the same turn angles. The average torque values came from the extrapolated average strength loss based on age and gender found by Thelen et al.
Table 2: Minimum torques to reach set angle of turn for average weighted people
Table 3: Maximum Inertia values to reach set angle of turn for average strength people
Based on the results, one can conclude that an individual's inertia and strength has a marked effect on their ability to rotate their pelvis and protect their hip from impact in a fall. Assuming that an angle of 30° is needed for the initial external rotation, 3° for the second internal rotation of the hip, 30° for the second rotation of the leg, a response time of 100 ms, and a time to fall of around 626 ms, those most at risk of not being able to exercise the proper fall technique would be elderly females, while the middle aged female would also be at a risk. This is due to the lower available strength in women in comparison to men. For the extreme case of having a weight in the upper 95% percentile, all are at risk of not being able to complete a fall with the correct technique. However due to increasing obesity in the population, one would have to look further into a scan of the pelvis region to see if an angle of 30° is required, or if there is enough excess tissue to supply enough cushion for the greater trochanter in a fall if one rotates the pelvis less.
The second turn completed by using the internal rotator muscles, was completed by all tests in less than 150 ms and therefore is not a bottleneck for the fall process. This is due to the leg having significantly smaller rotational inertia than the torso. The initial phase of external pelvic rotation holds the most significance. Based on the experimental results for maximal angular pelvic velocity (approximately 100 degrees/sec) and the knowledge that the normalized torque occurs at the same time no matter an individual's age or strength (Thelen), all turns seem feasible to complete in the required time. However, not all turns in the experiment were completed past 30°. This could be a flexibility issue which is a separate issue. Women would be expected to be more flexible than men, so lack of flexibility may not be a problem for them.
Limitations of the study are the assumption that maximum voluntary hip external and internal rotator muscle torques are similar to maximum voluntary ankle dorsiflexor muscle torques. In addition, our estimates of single leg rotational inertia were only approximate and need to be improved. The experimental hip torque data was measured with one foot planted on the ground while the subject anticipated the turn and started from a balanced stance. In a real life situation a loss/lack of friction under an individual's feet would cause an imbalance by surprise. In addition, when looking at the graphs for the experimental torque, there was often a high torque value in the opposite direction before the maximum angle of turn. This suggests a preparatory muscle tension in the experimental trials which would not be available in a surprise fall. This makes the experimental values an upper limit and with a short reaction time. This can also be seen when comparing the isometric torque values, Appendix O, with the experimental ones -- which are higher. Finally, we measured hip isometric strength and rotational performance data on only two males. More data are needed on men as well as women of different ages.
1) These calculations suggest that all healthy individuals should be capable of axially rotating the pelvis through an angle of 20° in order to avoid presenting the greater trochanter to the ground in a fall.
2) If a full 30° turn angle is required to be completed, then older individuals, and particularly females and obese individuals, over the ages of 45 years may not have sufficient strength to achieve the avoidance maneuver.
3) To avoid injury it is important to retain hip internal and external rotation flexibility, and for those at risk for hip fractures to increase their hip rotator muscle strength.
4) Further hip muscle strength and performance testing should be completed in order to obtain a better representation of the capacities of both genders of different weights and ages.
5) Further research should involve actual fall tests to see if the required neuromuscular coordination for the greater trochanter impact avoidance maneuver is in fact available during an actual fall to the side.
