On January 9, 2007 President George W. Bush signed a memorandum making it possible for the Minerals Management Service (MMS), a bureau within the Department of Interior (hereinafter Interior), to consider leasing for oil and gas exploration federally-managed portions of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) in Bristol Bay near Alaska's Aleutian islands.1 Prior to January 9 the area had been among those protected by an executive withdrawal signed in 1998 by then-President Bill Clinton,2 a withdrawal that President Bush retained for areas around much of America's coastline3 (see Appendix A). Subsequent to President Bush's actions, on June 29, 2007, Interior Secretary Dirk Kempthorne approved MMS' 5-year leasing program for 2007-2012 which includes a proposed lease sale in 2011 for a designated portion of what is defined by MMS as the North Aleutian Basin planning area, an area that includes Bristol Bay and adjacent waters connected to the Bering Sea (see Appendix B).4
Today the question of whether plans will be halted for oil and gas exploration in Bristol Bay will depend on the effectiveness of actions undertaken by those actors positioned to be the most influential on this issue – the Alaska Marine Conservation Council (AMCC); borough governments; Alaska Natives; MMS, the Interior, and President Bush; Alaska's federal legislators Ted Stevens, Lisa Murkowski, and Don Young; and Governor Sarah Palin.
AMCC's interests extend beyond environmental and local and state concerns. AMCC's message against development in Bristol Bay includes economic concerns, reflecting the organization's interest in both sustainable fisheries and fishing communities. AMCC also emphasizes Bristol Bay's value to both Alaskans and non-Alaskans, such as its support of a $2 billion a year commercial fisheries, a way of life in remote Alaskan Native villages, and exceptional biodiversity.8
The three boroughs, especially Aleutians East Borough, have strong economic interests in encouraging OCS development although they also have an equally important interest in protecting their fisheries resources. The borough governments anticipate they will benefit from oil and gas development through necessary infrastructure development on local lands, job creation especially for youth, and local taxes.11 The financial reality is also that borough governments themselves will receive much of the revenue from development rather than local citizens,12 which may explain why no borough has spoken in opposition of development.
AMCC views potential federal legislation to either permanently protect Bristol Bay, or at a minimum restore the annually-renewed Congressional moratorium on leasing in the North Aleutians Basin planning area, as the most important action channel. AMCC plans to target Alaska legislators, especially Representative Young as ranking member of the House Committee on Natural Resource, and West coast legislators whose states rely on Alaska fisheries, as potential leaders to either pass the current Bristol Bay Protection Act (H.R. 1957) or to draft a more detailed bill for next session. AMCC is also hopeful that the incoming 2009 president can be persuaded to re-instate the executive leasing withdrawal, especially with this election cycle's focus on environmental issues.30 These legislative and executive action channels can be used by nationally-recognized groups like AMCC as well as local organizations like Alaska Native corporations; however, the reputation and broader member-base of national groups will give them more influence over non-Alaskan federal legislators and the President.
Gaining Governor Palin's support is also a main action channel, although she will be most interested in her constituents' views. Under the OCS Lands Act, a state governor has the authority to recommend to the Secretary of the Interior the size, timing, and location for lease sales.31 AMCC believes that MMS would be unlikely to complete a lease sale in a state where the governor is in opposition, especially since multiple state permits will be required. The organization is currently asking its members to write to Governor Palin.32
Should the 2011 lease sale approach, opportunities for public comment to MMS and Alaska governmental agencies involved with permitting will present another action channel. Any interested actor can attempt to influence MMS' and Alaska's decisions although the agencies will have little reason to respond unless a significant majority of locals are against leasing. Additionally, during governmental actions that require compliance with environmental statutes, such as the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) and Endangered Species Act (ESA), litigation will provide an action channel. AMCC is well-connected to seek a lawsuit in conjunction with Bristol Bay-area groups but views this tactic as a last resort.33
