With growing world population and globalization, religions are finding themselves in closer and closer contact, forced to face issues of integration and differentiation like never before. Conflicts seem to occur most often when one religion does not allow the presence of its neighbor religion and so seeks to alter their presence or activities, even the religion itself. The precursors to intolerant stances toward interaction with other religions cause difficulty for working toward a society of peaceful coexistence. Thus, several philosophers have attempted to provide arguments which encourage the religious and nonreligious alike to engage with their society in a tolerant manner regarding religion. These proposals range from appealing to human fallibility to epistemic certainty, from truth to trust to autonomous individuality. Ultimately, these arguments seem to fall short when they reach religious groups or individuals which claim to know absolute truths and cannot be convinced otherwise.
T.M. Scanlon first discusses the difficulties of the mere mechanics of being tolerant by asking about the clash which occurs between the tolerant and the intolerant. Certainly in advocating tolerance, one would like to spread its adoption throughout all strata of society. Yet how does one spread the adoption of tolerance to the intolerant ones? If the tolerant ones allow intolerance because the intolerant ones are entitled to their beliefs and actions also, then it seems the tolerant ones are not dedicated to their ideal. However, if the tolerant ones disallow intolerance because it is contrary to the ideal of tolerance, then it seems the tolerant ones betray their ideal through their methods. Here arises a sort of paradox. Scanlon himself addresses precisely this issue, asking whether it is "intolerant to enforce tolerance in behavior and prevent the intolerant from acting on their beliefs."
To begin this discussion, Scanlon addresses the difficulty with even considering a basic question of tolerance. He first asks "why should I want to interfere with other people's religious practice, provided that they are not able to impose that practice on me?"
Scanlon poses this problem, for those who find fault with the beliefs or practices of others and the others' influence on their common society must be persuaded that there is an ideal more valuable than the one being violated. Yet the negative judgment among religious groups stems from a conviction that one's own beliefs and practices are the most correct or most important. In a sense, then, convincing such resolved religious groups or individuals requires altering either their self assessment of their beliefs or their actual beliefs themselves. Many philosophers have adopted varied strategies for approaching this problem, and Scanlon himself proposes an argument.
Scanlon advocates tolerance in spite of the drawbacks of allowing doctrines and practices which one may abhor. He notes that "tolerance involves a more attractive and appealing relation between opposing groups within a society."
Dees proposes a new criterion upon which he feels both proponents and opponents of tolerance can agree in order to resolve the dispute. He considers rationality the ideal target for such a common ground, but then asserts that toleration finally "requires a minimal level of trust."
Building on Scanlon's implicit suggestion, Williams supports the ideal of tolerance upon the basis of what he calls "liberal pluralism." He describes this as "a supposedly impartial state, which affirms the rights of all citizens to equal consideration, including an equal right to form and express their convictions."
Megone fortifies the appeal to individual autonomy by first clarifying two essential terms. First, he uses Peter Nicholson's definition of toleration: an individual or group exhibits this trait if an opposing individual or group "acts or expresses a thought which he, or it, takes to be not merely incorrect but harmfully wrong; he or it had the power to try to suppress or prevent that act or thought; but the tolerator allows the act to be performed or the thought to be expressed."
Megone then appeals to the idea of individualism, a position which states that "the justification for the existence of a social condition or a social institution is to be given in terms of the value derived from the individuals involved in that condition or institution."
To better explicate Megone's implications here, it might help to add that he considers the ability to form and act upon one's own decisions as an essential trait of a "good human being." Furthermore, the development of the individual depends both on Aristotle's definition of the human being as a "rational animal" and also thus on his deliberate inner decision.20 According to Megone, to be good one must choose according to one's own rational deliberation. This goes beyond what he considers Mill's position of individualism and adds to Kant's individualist requirement of rational will by including the actual ability to enact one's own decision. Also, it is clear from Megone's premises that he supposes the only way to a "good society" can only be through allowing its individuals to engage in rational and autonomous decision making.
Megone finally argues that "the possibility of agents fully developing their potential for choice requires toleration of at least some (believed) harmful ways of life."
Megone supplements this consideration for individual autonomy with the value of truth, as the philosophers thus far have neglected to do. It is important not only for individuals to have the privilege of coming to their own beliefs, but it is also important for individuals to form true beliefs. It seems highly likely that all prospective believers, regardless of their beliefs, aim to have true ones, and Megone asserts that everyone "has the potential both to know true facts and to understand those facts."
Karl Popper continues to examine this new issue of truth by discussing the pressures of intellectual responsibility, the possibility of fallibilism, and the issue of tolerance according to potential intolerant individuals. He quotes Voltaire in the beginning of his essay "Toleration and Intellectual Responsibility," introducing his own subject of interest:
Although Popper agrees with Scanlon that tolerance is not hypocritical when it attempts to repress intolerance and does not attempt to defend his position on those grounds, he does however present a positive case for tolerance, along the lines of Voltaire's quote. Popper steps further than Megone with his appeal to fallibility by warning against the equivocation of fallibilism with relativism. He recognizes that not all assertions are equal, that we should not behave as though "there is something [valuable] in totalitarianism...and in teaching children to be cruel."
Popper continues his argument by offering three principles by which we should always conduct ourselves in relation to the "religious alien," so to speak. His first principle generally conforms to the worry of fallibility as previously mentioned, stating that "I may be wrong and you may be right."
He quickly moves on to the next of three principles, which states that "by talking things over rationally we may be able to correct some of our mistakes."
However, assuming Popper is right about fallibilism, he offers a third principle which states "if we talk thing over rationally, we may both get nearer to the truth."
Yet the issues of truth and epistemic certainty remain, for if the religious insider considers their beliefs epistemically sound or plainly true then there seems to be inadequate basis for attempting to tolerate on the basis that they have anything to gain by it. Unlike the scientific arts, religious truth and epistemic certainty remain much more elusive and evade the scrutiny of fallibility. To help address these issues, Paul Griffiths examines truth and epistemic certainty in "Problems of Religious Diversity".
Griffiths begins the exploration of religious truth by noting that "it is precisely religious claims that are potentially possessors of the interesting property of being true."
Griffiths attempts to reconcile this inevitability with the various convictions by presenting two styles of parity with respect to religious truth: a Kantian view and a Wittgensteinean view. According to Griffiths, Kant asserts that the "fundamental religious claim is...discoverable and justifiable by reason alone, unaided by revelation, scripture, authoritative church teachings, or any other extraordinary means available only to a few."
Wittgenstein, on the other hand, treats religious claims as epistemically different from any other claim to truth. Griffiths provides an example of Wittgenstein's gist:
The difference between the two examples of beliefs in Wittgenstein's quote shows the difference in the believers' attitudes. Religious claims, according to Wittgenstein, have a special status with respect to epistemic certainty and the realm of truth. Griffiths says of Wittgenstein's view of parity that:
This offer suggests that religious claims cannot be examined in the same way that other truth claims can be, and thus evidence provided for and against such claims becomes seemingly worthless. However, Griffiths contests Wittgenstein by denying that all religious groups and individuals actually treat their claims in this way. With these two views, Griffiths seems to present a fully rational approach and a fully non-rational approach to religious truth, and finds both lacking.
Griffiths finally contests the psychological core of religious claims to truth, as he questions epistemic confidence. He states that "clearly, the fact that you think some claim is true won't usually be enough by itself to give you epistemic confidence in your assent to it."
Thus, the various philosophers' proposals seem to offer great insight into the issue of tolerance. Scanlon's peaceful coexistence, Dees' appeal to trust, Williams' liberal pluralism and autonomous individuality, Megone's individualism and autonomous individuality, and Popper's appeals to fallibility all provide convincing arguments for some individuals, but Griffiths' worries about religious truth and epistemic certainty can still ultimately undermine all current attempts. A closer look at the religious insiders' views may better elucidate how to provide a universally convincing argument favoring religious tolerance, for the religious and non-religious alike.
