Our group is examining stimulated Raman adiabatic passage (STIRAP), its applications, and its variants. STIRAP is an effective method of population transfer; it depends on the existence of a dark state, one that cannot radiatively decay. In a three-level system, where state 2 can decay to states 1 and 3, STIRAP uses a counter-intuitive pulse ordering to transfer the population from an initially populated state 1 into a target state 3. State 2 is surprisingly never populated, and therefore allows efficient transfer when the decay properties of state 2 would otherwise prohibit transfer. STIRAP has many applications including coherent control in molecular reactions and quantum information.
While rapid and complete population transfer is useful in an of itself, we may also want to create coherent superpositions of states for use in quantum information systems. Techniques such as the _-pulse method do allow us to create these superpositions; however it requires precise knowledge of the transition moment and exact control of the pulse area. Tripod-STIRAP allows us to create coherent populations in a much more robust matter, one that is relatively insensitive to fluctuations in the pulse amplitude and one that does not depend on previous knowledge of the transition dipole. Like STIRAP, its four-level variant also does not depend on the decay characteristics of the excited state.
The underlying theory behind tripod-STIRAP is that of a simple four-level system: three degenerate energy levels, and a fourth, excited energy level. Three laser pulses separately couple each one of the degenerate atomic states to the excited state, as shown in Figure 1. This section follows the work of Unanyan et al. and recreates their results for a given pulse sequence [3]. Starting with a system in its ground state, we desire to find a pulse sequence such that we end up in an arbitrary superposition of states given by a mixing angle
Ideally, we would also be able to reverse the process as well, such that we could measure the coherence of the superposition. When we first consider the bare atomic states, the evolution is governed by the Schrodinger equation: where C(t) is a column vector containing the probability amplitudes, andW(t) is an evolution matrix, where P(t),Q(t) and S(t) are the pump, control and Stokes Rabi frequencies:
As we can see from the evolution matrix, the lasers provide the only coupling between any of the atomic states, and we ignore the radiative decay from state 2. This simplification is valid for tripod-STIRAP sequences since, throughout the interaction, the population of the excited state is negligible. For a given pulse sequence, we numerically solve these differential equations to determine the final populations of the atomic states, where the population in state n is given by |Cn|2. By varying the delay of the control pulse, we can create an arbitrary superposition of states 1 and 3.
Much as in the standard STIRAP scheme, we can form a new basis of dressed states from these atomic states. In the tripod scheme, however, we will have two dark states that are immune to radiative decay; that is, they contain no portion of the atomic state 2.
where the angles are given in relation to the applied pulses:
The two dark states,
The Schrodinger equation transforms in this basis to:
where
We can see from this new evolution matrix that the dark states couple to each other. When we consider only the dark states, we can find the general solution to be:
where
To calculate the mixing angle, we simply need to calculate
Unanyan et al. show that the mixing angle is insensitive to the amplitude of the control pulse, and they claim that similar insensitivity holds for the pump and Stokes pulses as well [3], which I show in Figure 4.
Even when techniques work well in theory, it can still be difficult to put them into practice. In the case of tripod-STIRAP, one first needs to find an atom with suitable energy levels. Three states should be metastable and degenerate (or nearly so), with an excited state that can easily and individually couple to each of the ground states. Vewinger et al. chose 20Ne; the couplings between the 3P0,1,2 levels fit the criteria well, as shown in Figure 5 [5]. This section considers their experimental tripod-STIRAP scheme, and briefly discusses how they measured the superposition they created.
Since the tripod-STIRAP scheme is so robust and insensitive to small variations in many of the parameters, this scheme can be used with atomic beams passing through transverse laser beams. The velocity distribution in the atomic beam will only result in a rescaling of the time axis, which does not affect the mixing angle [3].
In Vewinger et al.'s experiment, the
Due to the different pulses needed to create the superposition between the
where
In practice, however, it does little good to create this coherent superposition of states without a way to measure it. To that end, after the beam is prepared in the superposition, it travels through a filter laser that is polarized at an angle
where
For a coherent superposition, we see a modulation of the signal as we vary
The ability to create and measure a coherent superposition has clear applications in quantum information, especially in areas where the precise coupling strength isn't known and the
However, quantum information is not the only application. Theuer et al. demonstrated a method to use tripod-STIRAP to act as an atomic beam splitter [2]. They use an experimental setup very similar to that of Vewinger et al., and they also use an atomic beam of 20Ne [5]. In this setup, however, the
Figure 10: The results from using tripod-STIRAP as an atomic beam splitter, as depicted in [2]. The two peaks correspond to the M = ±1 states, and the multiple graphs show the variation in the peaks as the
As I have demonstrated, tripod-STIRAP is a useful scheme for creating an arbitrary coherent superposition of states in a four-level system. It has been demonstrated experimentally with 20Ne, and techniques for measuring the superposition have also been shown. This technique is quite robust and insensitive to slight variations in the pulse parameters. Since it also does not depend on precise knowledge of the transition dipoles, it can be used in applications where the couplings are unknown and the
-pulse method is not feasible. Tripod-STIRAP is also useful in a host of applications, from creating and rotating qubits, with a potential extension to other quantum logic. It can also be used as an atomic beam splitter.
