You recently requested that our department conduct a series of tests on a soil found at the proposed site of a new 100' long masonry dam, as well as tests on a coarse soil to be used as a filter material. You are concerned with the classification of the soils, their suitability for this construction, and the resulting seepage loss under the dam. Our results show the coarse sand is suitable for filter material, classified by ASTM as SP-Poorly Graded Sand. The foundation soil is classified by ASTM as SC-Clayey Sand. The use of the Hazen equation to find permeability was found to be significantly inaccurate. However, using our test data for permeability, Design #1 will have seepage of 0.274 ft3/day while Design #2 will have seepage of 0.164 ft3/day. We recommend lowering these seepage values in both designs by incorporating a 75' clay blanket on the water bed of the head end of the dam.
Your letter, sent on January 25, 2006, asked for us to test two soils to be used in the construction of a new masonry dam at your Glacier Way site. You are concerned with ASTM soil classification, suitability of the coarse soil as a filter material, and the effective seepage underneath the two different dam designs, both 100' in length. It's apparent that a series of tests must be conducted to find the gradation curves and permeability of each soil. The appropriate testing has been completed, and we submit our findings in this report.
Tests were performed on two different soil samples. Both were a dry and brown sand common to this area of Michigan. The first was very fine and was found locally in the excavation site of the new dam. The second was an external sand brought in to be used as a filter, being similar to the first, however more coarse in nature. Further tests were performed on each sample to find their ASTM classifications, gradation analysis, and respective permeability.
The following tests were performed on the soil samples:
Test-422 uses the shaking sieve method well known among engineers to analyze the gradation of soils. The-422 hydrometer test uses a standard hydrometer setup and data points are taken over a 18 hour period to determine the size gradation of finer soils.
Test-2434 uses an apparatus that keeps a constant head of water while allowing water to flow through a sample of soil. Time and the volume of water flowing are used to get flow rate, and thus the coefficient of permeability for the soil.
Test-5856 is similar to-2434 and the same data is recorded, however it allows the head of the water to fall over time. Likewise, the method of calculating the coefficient of permeability varies slightly.
All procedures were followed generally, and can be referenced in the CEE 445 laboratory course pack.
Shown below in Figure 2.1 is the graph of the grain size distribution curve of each soil, with the coarse sand on the left and the fine on the right. Full data sheets of the sieve analysis can be seen in Appendix A and the data for the hydrometer test can be seen in Appendix B.
Using the sieve analysis results, Table 3.1 below shows each soil classified according to standards set by ASTM. Calculations to determine classifications can be found in Appendix D.
The US Army Corps of Engineers sets criteria on soils used as filter material:
The permeability of the fine soil can be estimated using the Hazen's Equation:
Shown below in Table 3.2 are the calculated values for the soils' permeability. Full data sheets can be referenced in Appendix C.
The calculated value of the permeability using the Hazen's Equation is shown to be pretty inaccurate compared to that of the test results. The Hazen's Equation gives a value almost 3 times larger than the actual tested value. The main reason for this being that Hazen designed the equation to be generally accurate with uniform soils in a relatively loose condition, and our soil is graded well and is far from a uniform state. Moreover, it is merely an empirical formula and can not be accurate in all cases.
Given your attached masonry dam designs with drawn flownets, we were able to compute the seepage underneath each dam design. Calculations can be found in Appendix D.
Our results indicate that both dam designs will have to large of a resulting seepage. We recommend that a 75' clay blanket be introduced on the water bed at the head of the dam. This in turn will increase the travel distance of the flow channels for water, thus lowering effective seepage of the dam.
Design #1 was found to have a higher seepage of 0.274 ft3/day than Design #2, which had a seepage of 0.164 ft3/day. The foundation soil of the dam is classified as SC-Clayey Sand. The soil proposed in Design #1 as a berm is classified as SP-Poorly Graded Sand, and meets all Army Corps of Engineers criteria of soils to be used as filter material. In conclusion, both dams are adequate for construction with the addition of a clay blanket, and all soils meet criteria set forth by the Army Corps of Engineers and ASTM.
