The lesson plan lists the needed materials but does not explain how materials will be distributed. Because the classroom space is limited and the number of students is quite large, the teacher will distribute the materials to groups as students work on predicting. Many adult helpers will be present during the time of instruction, so they can help distribute materials to pairs and groups of threes.
The lesson plan omits how the teacher should transition between whole-class and small group learning. This is a transition that occurs frequently in science classrooms! To best facilitate this transition, I would use musical instruments to get the students attention. These instruments (bells, horns, squeaky toys, songs, etc.) are easily heard above student chatter and do not require the teacher to yell. (My students already know that these instruments are used to get their attention and respond almost immediately.)
The lesson plan does not mention how students will be monitored in their groups. It is important for the teacher to walk around the classroom and observe groups as they work. Proximity is a wonderful tool for keeping students on task! Also, the other adult helpers in the room will monitor students and their work, helping to keep the students on task and the pepper off the floor.
Students must understand why they are performing the demonstrations included in the lesson. This will make the work more relevant to their lives, interesting, and engaging.
The lesson does a nice job of explaining to the students that they are conducting demonstrations to learn about what causes a lightning strike. I would further explain that the students are learning about static electricity in preparation for a follow-up lesson about electricity in the weather. The students should be looking forward to the next lesson!
The subject of static electricity is meaningful to students because students encounter this phenomena on a daily basis in the forms of shocks from the McDonald's Playland slides, the wrappers of their juice box straws "sticking" to their hands, and many others. The purpose given in the lesson plan (learning information to later explain the occurrence of electricity in weather) directly relates to their personal experiences with thunderstorms. The subject of lightning is anchored in students' lives and is interesting to students because it is a powerful force in nature. Learning about what causes the large and dangerous flashes of lightning they see during thunderstorms will be "cool" and engaging.
The lesson plan says to review with students what they know about cloud formation, thunder, and lightning storms. This connects the purpose of the activities to a unit on weather. However, my students are learning about magnetism, not weather, and are transitioning into learning about electricity. I would connect the activities to the force of attraction between two objects students have observed when playing with magnets, especially the knowledge that like charges repel and opposite charges attract. This would connect the lesson to what students have been studying in their electricity and magnetism unit.
Understanding what students know at the beginning of the lesson is necessary so the teacher can adapt the lesson during instruction and essential when assessing what students learned.
The lesson plan does not enable the teacher to elicit students' ideas at the beginning of the lesson but jumps right into the demonstrations. I would alter the lesson to include a point where students are asked to predict what will happen in the demonstration. By recording their predictions in words and/or pictures, students and teachers will be able to observe a record of what they knew before the lesson and use the records to judge the extent of learning that occurred during the lesson.
The lesson plan does not ask for explanations for ideas and predictions uncovered before the lesson because it does not elicit student ideas! On my prediction worksheet that students are to fill out before performing the demonstration, I would include a "Why?" question to get students to explain their predictions. I would also announce to the class as they write their predictions that I want them to explain why they predicted as they did.
The lesson plan also fails to have students record and share their predictions. I would ask students to record their predictions and explanations for their predictions on the prediction worksheets. I would then have students share their predictions in pairs or threes before they explore their particular demonstration.
Students will explore what happens when they run a plastic spoon through their hair and hold it above ground pepper sprinkled on the table. Individuals will predict what will happen in the demonstration and share their predictions in pairs or groups of three. Pairs/threes will then perform the demonstration and hypothesize why the spoon picked up the pepper. The class will watch a short video about static electricity and the teacher will demonstrate how to draw a diagram of the phenomena in the video. Individual students will then draw diagrams of and explain the demonstration they explored.
At the end of the lesson, students will be able to...
The main notion to convey here is that forces can act at a distance. Students should carry out investigations to become familiar with the pushes and pulls of magnets and static electricity... By the end of 5th grade, students should know that: Without touching them, material that has been electrically charged pulls on all other materials and may either push or pull other charged materials. [AAAS: The Physical Setting -- Forces of Nature (3-5). Source: http://www.project2061.org/tools/benchol/bolframe.htm]
Develop solutions to problems through reasoning, observation, and investigation. [Michigan Curriculum Framework (Science) I.1.e.2. Source: http://www.michigan.gov/documents/MichiganCurriculumFramework_8172_7.pdf]
Show how science concepts can be illustrated through creative expression such as language arts and fine arts. [Michigan Curriculum Framework (Science) II.1.e.2. Source: http://www.michigan.gov/documents/MichiganCurriculumFramework_8172_7.pdf]
This lesson is part of a unit on electricity and magnetism. Students have been working with magnets and the forces produced by magnets and are transitioning into electricity. This lesson is in preparation of a lesson on electricity in the weather, namely the causes and formation of lightning.
Before the lesson, students should understand...
After predicting, pairs/threes will be given the materials needed to perform the demonstration and will follow the instructions on the handout. The adult helper at each table will assist and monitor students. The teacher will walk around to each of the groups and observe their work, ask questions, and maintain on-task behavior.
After exploring what happens in the demonstration, pairs/threes should hypothesize why they observed what they did. What caused the pepper to be attracted to and stick to the spoon? As students are hypothesizing, collect materials to limit distractions during the rest of the lesson.
3. What existing lesson plans, curriculum materials, and other resources did you use to develop your lesson? Please list them here.
I liked the demonstrations included in the lesson. The demonstrations are hands-on activities students can use to observe static electricity. They require few materials and the materials needed are easily accessible and inexpensive.
I liked the explicit objectives stated in the lesson. This helped me to understand what is most important to understand about lightning and static electricity.
I did not like that the lesson targeted middle school students. I needed to adapt much of the lesson to make it appropriate for my fifth graders. They needed explicit instruction about static electricity before we could even begin to explain how lightning occurs during a thunderstorm.
I did not like that two of the demonstrations did not work! Both Laura and I tried to get Demonstrations #2 and #3 to create sparks, but failed. We then needed to rework the entire lesson so that all students would be asked to try a demonstration that would produce results.
This initial lesson plan was a good choice for developing an inquiry-oriented lesson because it was centered on student demonstrations and explorations. It also asks students to explain what they observed in their demonstrations. I simply needed to simplify the lesson and take these inquiry ideas a step farther to make it a great inquiry-oriented lesson for my class.
The video was an excellent choice to use in my inquiry-oriented lesson. I could use the video demonstration as a model and draw a diagram of what happened. I could also refer to and expound upon the explanation given in the video. Then, I could ask the students to draw a similar diagram for the demonstration they performed.
The lesson plan did not offer a concise definition or explanation of static electricity. I had to look up an explanation in other resources, namely the How Van de Graaff Generators Work article. I needed to do outside research to supplement the material in the lesson plan.
I divided the lesson into two distinct lessons -- one about static electricity and the other about static electricity in the weather (lightning).
I had the class do one demonstration in pairs instead of having four groups do four different demonstrations.
I added an investigation question: "Why does the plastic spoon pick up pepper off the table?"
I created a worksheet for students to use during the lesson. This included instructions for the demonstration and boxes for predictions (and explanations), observations, hypotheses, and explanations of the science behind the phenomena.
I added predicting and hypothesizing to the lesson and gave the students time to share their ideas with others before completing the experiment.
I added a short video to the lesson that showed another static electricity demonstration and explained the science behind the results.
I changed the assessment from writing a paragraph to simply turning in the worksheet on which the students recorded their ideas and explanations.
Please explain your answer to question #5. Why do you think your lesson was or wasn't inquiry-oriented?
Although largely teacher-directed, my lesson was very inquiry-oriented. I provided my students a scientific question to explore and the materials, evidence, and language to construct explanations of the science behind what they observed. Students were asked to predict, record observations, hypothesize, and explain the science of static electricity. They were also asked to share these ideas in writing and verbally with their classmates. A key component of this sharing was justifying their explanations.
I completely revamped the initial lesson plan to fit with the unit my students are studying. As a result, the learning goals, connections to standards/benchmarks/curriculum, context, and assessment are all different from the initial lesson plan. These changes were made so the lesson would be appropriate for fifth grade students and would guide them through scientific discovery and explanation.
