The origins of the saying, "the road to hell is paved with good intentions" are unknown, but its meaning -- that the desire for and attempt to do good can actually result in poor outcomes -- still applies. This is especially true in the case of educational reform, where yesterday's new innovation becomes today's problem to be solved, often by another new innovation. As I have argued in previous journals, we cannot know reformers' intentions from their actions, or the result of those actions. However, regardless of whether or not those intentions were good -- and I personally am inclined to believe that they were -- the results of their innovations have not always been good for the students whom they impacted. This paper will explore the controversy surrounding three educational programs that were once considered wonderful innovations but are now problematic in ways that their framers never intended: intelligence testing, tracking, and the platoon system.
In 1904, Alfred Binet was asked by the French Ministry of Education to "develop techniques for identifying those children whose lack of success in normal classrooms suggested the need for some form of special education."
This program of intelligence testing, intended to simplify education, has instead created problems in schools. When Alfred Binet first devised his intelligence test, he noted that intelligence was more complex than could be measured with one test, and worried that his intelligence test "could be perverted and used as an indelible label, rather than as a guide for identifying children who needed help"
Another program, closely tied to intelligence testing, which was instigated to improve education but has instead led to more problems than it has solved is the system of tracking students. Tracking was encouraged by the same advocates who pushed for intelligence testing, who felt that testing should be used to "segregate students by ability, to aid in vocational guidance, to detect unusually able or retarded students, and to diagnose learning problems."
In the current system, students continue to be tracked, despite the conclusions of many researchers who have determined that tracking is harmful to the children who are shunted into lower tracks. Furthermore, many note that it is not helpful to those children placed in the upper tracks either.11 Efforts to reform tracking to take into account differential abilities -- a student might take upper level English while remaining in general mathematics, for example -- have not changed the overall effects of tracking. In his study based on data collected in the High School and Beyond study, Samuel Lucas found that in some ways this change in tracking methodology (a reform attempting to make the impact of tracking more positive for students) had actually children with low social economic status:
Tracking, therefore, was a reform implemented to improve the prospects and education of all children, by supplying each child with a curriculum suited to his or her needs. In execution, however, tracking has served to reinforce ethnic and racial stereotypes, and to deny students the opportunity to use education to climb the economic ladder. Furthermore, attempts to reform this reform have actually resulted in even further disadvantages for those children whom the changes were purported to help.
The platoon system was another idea that was implemented in response to an issue that faced schools in the beginning of the twentieth century. Also known as the Gary plan, this system made full use of the school facilities, and students spent half of their day in the classroom, and the other half in the playground, workshops, the auditorium or community facilities.13 The platoon system solved overcrowding problems, but came with a good deal of controversy. In Detroit, for example, opponents such as Andrew B. White complained that students spent too much time on the arts and physical education, and not enough on academics. Others complained that the change of classes was hard on the students, who were unable to bond with their teachers.14 In New York City, although championed by Mayor John Purroy Mitchel, the platoon system was disliked by parent groups and neighborhood associations, who banded together to form Anti-Gary Leagues.15 Nonetheless, the platoon system had, and continues to have, a good deal of influence on public schools. Many districts continue to be overcrowded; New York, for example, still has high schools that run three or four overlapping sessions per day, making the most use of their facilities in order to serve the most children. Students continue to take time from academic subjects in order to take subjects such as art, music, physical education, computer skills, or even drama. This is not necessarily negative in terms of overall knowledge -- students do benefit from these subjects, but they do not contribute to the students' academic knowledge, although they enable administrators to make the most use of school facilities, and provide teachers with release time to work on lesson plans or other preparation or professional development activities. Perhaps more important to this argument, however, is that lack of knowledge of the origins and history of this system blinds educators to the possibilities that might be inherent in a different system -- the current system is how it has always been, and always should be.
These three topics are only a sampling of educational reforms that have had unintended consequences (corproratization of schools, high stakes testing and teacher quality standards are others that deserve attention, to name just a few). They are enough, however, to illustrate the point that innovations can have unintended consequences. The possibility of reforms going awry does not mean that we should not innovate at all. It does mean, however, that we should be a good deal more cautious about when and how we innovate -- educators need to research more, and to strengthen the links between research and practice so that the research is actually used to drive practice, rather than practitioners implementing things that seem logical, but might not actually have any evidence behind them. Moreover, we need to be aware of programs implemented by previous reformers in order to (a) avoid recreating an unproductive program, and (b) be aware of the forces that created the current system. We cannot expect to avoid every pitfall, but we can attempt to look at our own preconceptions and the system that helped to form them with a clear eye, so that the reforms that we implement have a greater chance at success.
