As a student teacher at Romulus High School, I am responsible for the instruction of three Spanish II classes and work in collaboration with my mentor teacher, Mrs. Kathy Balcom. For this assignment, I have selected my second hour class of Spanish II students to discuss and share pertinent information. The students in this class are generally tenth graders, with a few eleventh and twelfth graders who decided to continue their study of the foreign language.
Since Spanish II is the second level of Spanish instruction at Romulus High School, my students have the prior knowledge acquired from last year's enrollment in Spanish I. As a result, they are familiar with the fundamental aspects of the language, such as letters, numbers, introductions, and the conjugation of verbs in the present verb tense. In addition, this particular class of Spanish II students contains a large number of high achievers, as demonstrated by the number of students that consistently receive an "A" as their card marking grade. Furthermore, in comparison to my other Spanish II classes, the students in my second hour demonstrate a strong understanding of the content I instruct. As a result, I must increase my overall pacing to correspond to their accelerated learning style.
In relation to my general instructional philosophy as it relates to issues of lesson design and instructional strategies, I am an adamant believer that students of a foreign language must be challenged in the development of their skills in the target language. As a result, I design lessons and implement instructional strategies that force students to develop their reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills in Spanish in order to gain a richer understanding of the language. Moreover, my philosophy includes the notion that students of a foreign language must receive a well-rounded study (of Spanish) that introspectively examines the area's history, culture, and language. Therefore, instead of only focusing on grammar and vocabulary of the Spanish language, I constantly design lessons and include activities where students learn about the history and culture of Spanish-speaking countries in an interactive manner.
Moreover, the target lesson that I created, incorporated in my class, and had the opportunity to adapt for the target student (whom I will discuss later) in advance of implementation is appropriately titled "The Spanish Conquistadors -- their History and Influences in the New World" (see pages 10-16).
The lesson establishes meaning for the students by providing a historical context for Spanish exploration and colonization and demonstrating the cultural impact of the Spanish conquistadors on the native ethnic groups of the New World. Moreover, this particular lesson establishes connections to other lessons within the thematic unit of "Traveling and the Customs of the Hispanic Countries". It provides students with a solid historical foundation for Spanish influence on the Hispanic world and gives students the background knowledge to further examine cultural similarities among Hispanic countries later in the unit.
In addition, the goals for this lesson include that students will gain a greater understanding of the history of Spanish exploration and colonization in the New World and learn about the contributions of several famous Spanish conquistadors to our contemporary world. Moreover, I hope for students to connect the history learned during the target lesson with cultural aspects of the Hispanic world. Furthermore, students will learn about Spanish influences on the New World in the context of European conquest and utilize their prior knowledge of colonization from history or other Spanish classes to understand the target lesson.
Furthermore, the activities for the target lesson include that students will briefly review the Spanish imperfect tense (a verb tense to describe actions that continuously occur in the past) in order to understand written texts and the historical contexts surrounding the Spanish conquistadors. To motivate and capture students' attention at the onset of the lesson, I will present a brief video clip on Spanish exploration from Youtube.com titled The Conquistadors -- The Beginning. This video clip will engage students since it is a virtual animation perspective on Spanish exploration from the eyes of both a conquistador and a native Indian.
After learning the history behind several famous Spanish explorers, students will read in-depth biographies about the individuals during class and later write a journal entry to assess their historical, cultural, and grammatical understanding of the content. Specifically, this journal entry titled Diario de un conquistador (Diary of a Conquistador) reinforces student understanding of the motivations for exploring the New World as a Spanish conquistador and the various new and exciting things he/she might see during the journeys (see journal guidelines, page 17).
In relation to the target student for whom I adapted a lesson to accommodate his/her special needs, I selected a new student that entered my second hour Spanish II class at the onset of the new semester. Keisha*1, a tenth grader, moved to Romulus High School from the Wayne-Westland School District and enrolled in Spanish II to continue her study of the foreign language. Upon her arrival, the special education department at Romulus High School contacted my mentor and I to discuss her IEP and accompanied learning needs. Keisha was tested by members of the special education staff and was officially identified as having a learning disability -- dyslexia.
During her first weeks of Spanish II, I carefully took note of Keisha's academic performance, social relationships with her peers, general attitude toward the class, and if she struggled with any aspect of the foreign language. As to be expected from her identified learning disability, Keisha displayed problems reading and writing in the foreign language. Her dyslexia prevented her from writing the correct conjugation of verbs in any given tense and often misspelled words on homework assignments, quizzes, and tests. Moreover, when asked to read a passage from the textbook or her answer to a question, she frequently inverted the placement of words and took additional time to read the paragraph aloud to the class.
While these weaknesses affected her academic performance in the classroom, Keisha displayed strengths to compensate for her dyslexia. Her abilities to speak Spanish and listen in the target language were advanced and surpassed the average student's ability concerning these two language skills in my classroom. Keisha could verbally construct sentences that were grammatically correct and included a diverse vocabulary. Also, when I gave directions to her in Spanish -- something that I do not usually incorporate, as my students tend to need multiple repetitions of the given phrase -- Keisha understood what I asked of her the first time and completed the given task.
Furthermore, additional characteristics of dyslexia might have implications for the design and enactment of instructional activities that I will create for Keisha. According to the website LD Online
In terms of the generic lesson plan (pages 10-16), I modified its content and activities in various instances to accommodate the learning needs of Keisha. First of all, I adapted the task of reading several short biographies of Spanish conquistadors (page 14) to accommodate Keisha's dyslexia by asking for her to listen to audio recordings of myself narrating the historical accomplishments (in Spanish) of each conquistador. To supplement this audio activity, I will have Keisha view a PowerPoint presentation that includes pictures of the Spanish conquistadors and maps of places they discovered and later conquered as she listens to the cassette tapes. As I previously cited, LD Online believes that academic activities for dyslexics should involve more than one sense being utilized at the same time. As a result, I modified the original classroom activity of reading to now include a task that combines listening to the historical accomplishments of Spanish conquistadors with a visual connection that is established by pictures and maps on a PowerPoint presentation.
Another activity in the lesson plan that I modified to accommodate the learning needs of Keisha involves the El Pretérito vs. El Imperfecto worksheet (page 18). Originally assigned as homework for the previous night, my objective for the assignment was to ensure that students understood how to conjugate a verb in the imperfect tense and to determine which instances require the use of the preterite (past) tense or the imperfect tense. As students review their answers for this fill-in-the-blank exercise and reinforce their abilities to correctly conjugate verbs in the preterite or imperfect verb tenses, I will accommodate Keisha's learning needs by presenting her with an alterative activity to accomplish the same objective.
In order to conjugate verbs and add the correct verb ending according to the subject of a sentence, I will give her a bag of flashcards that contains subjects, verbs, and verb endings in the preterite and imperfect tenses from the worksheet. As answers are read aloud in class from the homework, Keisha will follow along and conjugate each verb by physically adding the correct verb with the corresponding verb ending. Moreover, this technique allows Keisha to practice aspects of grammar and vocabulary through tangibly creating words from the given flashcards after listening to a spoken sentence rather than requiring for her to mentally conjugate verbs. As recommended by the professionals from LD Online, a dyslexic student's automatic word recognition skills are utilized through this activity, as verbs are stated aloud and Keisha automatically uses her flashcards to construct the conjugated form of the verb in the proper tense.
Furthermore, the last activity of the lesson plan that I modified to accommodate Keisha's learning needs is the assigned journal entry titled "Diario de un conquistador" (Diary of a Conquistador). While the purpose of this activity was to reinforce student understanding of the motivations for exploring the New World as a Spanish conquistador and the various new and exciting things he/she might see during the journeys, the writing aspect of the assignment needed to be altered for Keisha. As a result, I created an alternative activity for her -- she was to create an album of pictures and relevant images to represent the journey traveled by a Spanish conquistador to the New World and their subsequent effects on the indigenous peoples. Specifically, Keisha would create this album from the perspective of any Spanish conquistador that we studied in class, such as Ponce de Leon or Ferdinand Magellan, and represent their explorations through a sequential collage of images. She would be able to utilize images from various sources -- such as the Internet, magazines, books, etc -- to represent her knowledge of Spanish exploration and conquest. As a result, this album would tell a visual story of her selected Spanish conquistador and his historical impact on the empires of the New World.
Moreover, this activity allows Keisha to express her historical and cultural knowledge of Spanish exploration learned in class through a visual display of events. The special education teachers from LD Online suggest that classroom activities for dyslexic students should incorporate skills from areas that do not require strong language skills, such as art and design. Furthermore, this activity gives Keisha the freedom to interpret Spanish exploration and colonization in a creative and interactive manner while reinforcing her knowledge of the content.
In relation to the success of the lesson, my Spanish II students were very receptive to its historical and cultural content, as the standard curriculum for Spanish at Romulus High School emphasizes the grammar and vocabulary of the language. The students provided me with positive verbal feedback concerning the journal entry assignment, as it was an opportunity for them to exercise their creativity and imagination from the perspective of a Spanish conquistador. In addition, the lesson presented students with a historical context for Spanish influence in the Western hemisphere and its contributions to the culture and language of contemporary nations.
Concerning the modifications of the original lesson plan for Keisha and its implementation in my classroom, I was pleased with Keisha's engagement in the content and activities. She enjoyed listening to my narration of the history of Spanish conquistadors and connecting the facts learned in an auditory manner with pictures and maps on the computer screen. In addition, she was excited to create an album containing pictures and images to represent her perspective of a conquistador's journey to the New World and her discoveries.
While these two aspects of the modified lesson were successful, the implementation of the flashcards activity during the class review of the worksheet was not as successful. It was difficult for Keisha to maintain a comfortable pace and keep up with the rest of the class as she created the correct forms of conjugated verbs in the past and imperfect verb tenses. Frequently, Keisha became frustrated when she could not find the correct verb endings in time before the class moved onto the next question. I believe that this activity would be more effective for Keisha to complete independently and in an empty classroom or a setting that would allow her to concentrate and work at her own pace.
Lastly, concerning the instructional adaptations for dyslexic students in a Spanish classroom, I suggest for teachers to create activities that establish visual and auditory connections to the content in order for dyslexic students to learn more effectively. Since Spanish is such a rich content area, teachers can easily modify lesson plans and corresponding activities by substituting a writing or reading assignment with a visual or listening activity. As a result, dyslexic students will be able to interpret the language and utilize several senses simultaneously to accomplish a given task. In addition, I suggest for teachers to be flexible with the deadlines of assignments created for the dyslexic student, as many of the components require that he/she utilize outside resources such as the Internet and library.
