Anacreon once wrote a lyric which included the lines, " I love Cleobulus, I am mad for Cleobulus, I gaze at Cleobulus."
In fact, considerations of anatomical sex (male or female) differences do not seem to have entered into the minds of the Greeks at all. Though they realized that a man and woman paired were required to propagate the species, Diotima-via-Socrates-via-Plato claims that it is an equally salubrious fate to focus instead on the birthing of beautiful, good ideas between friends. Furthermore, "the beauty exhibited in all bodies is one and the same."
For example, in Pindar's Olympian ode, the poet mentions a reworked history of Pelops, the ivory-shouldered man who so captured Poseidon's fancy. Though he ostensibly played the penetrated role in the subsequent relationship, the fact that it was to the god of the seas made it an unnatural coupling to be foreborn. What makes Pelops a strong, respectable masculine figure is that he confronts Poseidon with a bold proposition -- that if the god appreciated his sexual services, Poseidon will help him win Hippodameia, "the glorious daughter of a king in Pisa," as his wife. The god consents, and the princess bears Pelops six sons to become "lords of the people."
The wisdom of sex for personal gain is a fickle one, though. As a tool for social mobility, sexual nature may be called into question when, like Timarchos, the personal gain is deemd to be waste and unnecessary excess. Such a man, Aeschines (read: the Greeks) reason, who would sell his body for money when he has squandered his own inheritance, could easily sell the nation in a position of higher power. Note, however, that the judgement again falls not because of Timarchos' sexual objects (men), but because of the social interactions through which he becomes acquainted with them.7
With these various textual examples, then, we have arrived at the conclusion that sexuality did not exist in its current dichotomy of homosexual-heterosexual in ancient Greece. Rather than anatomical differentiation, people were arranged into genders of "masculine" or "feminine", terms dependent upon much older stereotypes of dominant social behavior and independent of an individual's biological sex. Because it is the "masculine, penetrative" form that was seen to be the most fit to govern, sexual choices ultimately pointed to desires for personal, social, and/or political gain rather than any innate inclinations. For the ancient Greeks, "sexual identity does not organize the person but is peripheral to the central goals and worries which are focused on survival."
