In her essay "Nuance and the Novella," one of the first (and few) substantive readings of Maud Martha, Barbara Christian considers the work as "in-between," looking back toward the social protest novels of the 30s and 40s (such as Native Son), and prefiguring some of the themes and modes that were to develop in the novels by Black women writers in the 70s, and she offers a reading of how Brooks's use of nuance, as Christian interprets it, allows her to achieve her political and literary goals. I find the question of "nuance" a troubled one, however: criticism on the novel is split between discussions of its understatement, fragmented nature, "limited" viewpoint and subject matter1, and arguments for reading these as symptoms of a suppressed rage.2 Interestingly, there are many passages in the novel which seem to suggest irony, ambivalence, or a sort of layering3 of innocent sincerity with valenced protest -- in which I'm not convinced we're supposed to read Maud Martha's silence, restraint, or good nature simply as such in the first place, symptomatically or otherwise. Hortense Spillers is the only other critic so far to venture into exploring this ambiguity, and although she does not pursue it in-depth, nor provide many examples, she does remark that "[t]he often sardonic quality of the writing and its persistently ironical force save the narrative from pathos" (Spillers 234).
At the same time, while reading Gwendolyn Brooks's letters in the archives and "marginalia" in her first autobiography, I was struck by the multivalent, and/or dubiously "reliable," nature of her statements about her own life and writing. To begin with, she has said, " "
The first instance in which this "layered" sort of narrative struck me was in Maud Martha's thoughts, upon attempting to resist Paul's will to choose an unbearably cheap apartment for them:
There are many different threads of meaning interwoven here. To begin with, the initial two questions do sound potentially sardonic, particularly since we have just been told a few lines prior that Maud Martha had "resolved to hold out firmly against stove-heated flats. [...] And no basements. You got T.B. in basements" (58). This context seems to suggest that these first two questions are aimed rather at the reader, in a challenging tone, and to discourage their reading as earnest questions directed inwardly -- and yet, this latter reading is not altogether precluded. As the narrative rolls on, it is possible to imagine that Maud Martha becomes overwhelmed with the images of female self-sacrifice she has seen extolled, and begins to yield herself to them; and yet, this reading does not sit comfortably for at least two reasons. First, the word choice of " "
The critical message underlying "innocent" interactions, minimalistically portrayed, becomes more pronounced in " "
Meanwhile, Paul's lack of curiosity in the arts reappear in " "
In this model, Maud Martha's uncomplaining nature is a key factor, and therefore it must be preserved even while she serves as the vehicle of criticism. Accordingly, Maud Martha's extremely magnanimous responses to the questionable behavior of others is even more striking in " "
In this passage, it seems that the innocent, "sweet" framing of Maud Martha's response allows her to communicate to the reader two less-than-rosy observations without seeming critical: that Mrs. Barksdale, who has just answered Maud Martha's triumphant account of her strength by contradicting it, did not try to help her during her labor, and that her neighbors' sudden appearance might possibly have as much to do with nosiness as with altruism. But by conveying this information in the manner Brooks chose, she allows us to be annoyed at Mrs. Barksdale and to appreciate what might yet be an earnest sunniness in Maud Martha's character, without forcing one to contradict the other.
Before leaving " "
One of the most-discussed chapters in the novel is " "
In " "
As Frazier points out, Maud Martha "anthropomorphizes" the chicken much as she had the mouse (139), and, particularly in her ruminations about the antithesis between violence and awareness of another's reality, for the chicken "[w]e can substitute the disenfranchised woman (or even minority group), thus establishing that only when men can empathize with the plight of women will they discontinue the destruction of women's existential selves as perpetuated through the domestication of females" (139). Indeed, although this reading might also be possible, I believe the passage in context suggests African Americans in the 1950s as the primary subject of the metaphor -- especially when one considers Native Son. In any case, Brooks reinforces the compassionate piece of this chapter in her later comments on it in Report from Part One
What we have established by now, at the very least, is that Brooks has widely demonstrated a tendency to insinuate multiple meanings at once, and it is with this point in mind that I would like to reconsider " "
I would like to expand this valuable reading to engage more explicitly the way Brooks implicates the responsibility of the author to her or his protagonist as parallel to that of the protagonist to her or his surroundings.
To develop the latter element in this equation, that of the manner in which the protagonist engages the world, we must return to an earlier metaphor: that of the rat or mouse to the African American subject white racism, as discussed above. Bernard Bell concurs and adds that "the deadly confrontation is a metaphor for Bigger's relationship to white society in much the same manner that Wright's vision of the Afro-American is a metaphor for American and modern man" (157). Furthermore, "for the rat and Bigger, fear evokes increasing aggression, and only murderous violence overcomes the fear" (Bell 157). While the adrenaline-intensive account of the battle does not include much portrayal of Bigger's thoughts or feelings, we are told, "The rat's belly pulsed with fear. Bigger advanced a step and the rat emitted a long thin song of defiance, its black beady eyes glittering, its tiny forefeet pawing the air restlessly" (6). The mutual fear and aggression of which Bell speaks certainly do pervade Wright's account. Yet, in a version no less suggestive of social parallels, Brooks tells us of the mouse, "Its bright black eyes contained no appeal -- the little creature seemed to understand that there was no hope of mercy from the eternal enemy, no hope of reprieve or postponement -- but a fine small dignity" (69-70). Finally, in considering the mouse's perspective, imagining the mouse's family, and empathizing with it, "Maud Martha could not bear the little look" (70). Although Brooks undeniably does make the animal more appealing by casting it as a mouse instead of an aggressive rat "over a foot long" (indeed, Brooks hints at this just a few pages earlier, when Maud Martha thinks, in her aversion to roaches, "She had rather see a rat -- well, she had rather see a mouse" (63)), she does not necessarily moderate the portrayal of its basic opposition to "the eternal enemy." What she does do is allow it to "seem to understand" its situation, thereby preserving its "fine small dignity," just as she proposes that Maud Martha's understanding of it might open up the option of responding with compassion instead of violence.
In the case of both options, however, the protagonists' responses to the intruder in their apartments bring them a measure of satisfaction, self-definition, and creation (or its prefiguring, in Bigger's case). Bigger's first smile in the novel appears when he sees that he has killed the rat (6), and suggests Wright's account of creation, when Bigger is eating breakfast with his family just after having accidentally killed, and then beheaded and incinerated, Mary Dalton: "The thought of what he had done, the awful horror of it, the daring associated with such actions, formed for him for the first time in his fear-ridden life a barrier of protection between him and a world he feared. He had murdered and had created a new life for himself" (Wright 105). If Bigger "create[s] a new life for himself" by doing something even more fearsome than the world he fears, Maud Martha does accomplishes the same (self-)creation through defying, counteracting, the fearsomeness of the world, defining herself as an exception to, rather than an excess of, that fearsomeness: "Suddenly, she was conscious of a new cleanness in her. A wide air walked in her. A life had blundered its way into her power and it had been hers to preserve or destroy. She had not destroyed. In the center of that simple restraint was -- creation. She had created a piece of life. It was wonderful" (70-1). Maud Martha feels a giddy new sense of responsibility for -- even credit for -- the life of the mouse, just as Bigger's "elation" (107) comes largely from his rapidly decreasing sense of responsibility for, or ties to, the lives around him. Moreover, this new sense of life is reinforced in both protagonists by their own conscious affirmation of their act and its implications for their respective self-definitions. For Maud Martha, the climax of the scene is her realization:
On the other hand, in a parallel passage, "There was in [Bigger] a kind of terrified pride in feeling and thinking that some day he would be able to say publicly that he had done it" (Wright 106). Whether becoming a powerful murderer or a "good,"
In Brooks's case, perhaps especially since her novel is roughly autobiographical, I think we can see her self-conscious implication of the creative role of the novelist in her discussion of the "creation" that her protagonist chooses. If, as Patricia and Vernon Lattin posit, "Brooks suggests a positive way of life that can help one maintain one's self respect and creativity in the face of the racism and death which surround one. One can create in spite of the deadening realities of life" (142, italics mine), I would argue that this exhortation might apply to the novelist herself as well as her protagonist and readership. Perhaps, for Brooks, the "life" that "had blundered its way into her power" had been that of her protagonist, "hers to preserve or destroy" (70-1); perhaps she sees her treatment of her protagonist as a moral and an artistic choice at the same time.7 As Maud Martha " "
At the time he wrote Native Son, Wright was heavily invested in a naturalism largely inspired by the "Chicago School" of sociology (Bell 151). After Bigger's murder of Mary Dalton, he tells us, "His crime seemed natural; he felt that all of this life had been leading to something like this" (106). Bell observes that "those [novels] influenced by the example of Native Son are informed by the belief that the character and history of man can be completely explained by biological and socioeconomic facts. The Wright paradigm of naturalism stresses the violence and pathological personalities that result from racial oppression and economic exploitation" (167). Wright's goals in pursuing the types of characterizations he employs in Native Son may be said to involve alerting the white establishment to the chaos that certainly would ensue from the racism they were perpetuating; the inevitability of these dire consequences, in this view, helped to drive the need to emphasize sociological inevitability, rather than individual agency or exceptionalism, in his rendering of the novel. Yet, Bell points out, "Wright sacrifices verisimilitude and the intellectual integrity of his protagonist in his effort to universalize the psychological and sociological message of the book" (158). In order to conform to this message, and the naturalism the views people as "animals in the natural world, responding to environmental forces and internal stresses and drives, none of which they can control or understand" (Holman et al. 309), we are shown a protagonist who "is controlled by social and psychological forces" (Bell 157), and "we understand more than Bigger does" (Bell 158).
The protagonist's capacity for understanding, however, is the key to survival in the case of Maud Martha, and what gives her character its depth.8 The emphasis of the novel on Maud Martha's ruminations and imagination is important, as Spillers argues in this sterling passage, drawing from " "
It seems, then, that Maud Martha's understanding of her situation does a triple work: it offers her the option of distinguishing herself from, rather than being determined by, her circumstances; it frees her thereby from naturalism; and it thus allows us as readers to understand Maud Martha as a full individual9 distinct from her oppression. Moreover, Maud Martha's understanding, her ability to contemplate intellectually and empathetically the individuals and society around her, allow her some measure of mental freedom -- or at least independence; some measure of self-determination despite it all. In stark contrast, a naturalistic precursor to understanding, "consciousness," is precisely what threatens Bigger: "The full consciousness of the shame and misery of the way they are forces to live threatens to engulf the protagonist in fear and despair. 'He knew that the moment he allowed what his life meant to enter fully into his consciousness,' says the limited omniscient narrator, 'he would either kill himself or someone else' (p. 14)10 "
D. H. Melhem, Brooks's student and critic, maintains that "the novel reveals an archetypal, postwar, bourgeois concern with home and family, and an aversion to politics" (87). Although this characterization is helpful for understanding the literary milieu in which the novel was written, and although its reference to class does register as significant, I'm not sure that the political engagement is avoided in Maud Martha as much as it is presented in intricately woven layers of meaning throughout the novel. Politics are not, in fact, absent even from the surface -- multiple encounters with racist whites and Black people who discriminate against the darker-skinned appear throughout, and the reference to lynching (179) in the last chapter is nothing to be taken lightly. Nevertheless, Brooks focuses on Maud Martha's inner life, as this is an aspect of existence -- and even of revolution -- that she takes seriously: in her interview with Gloria T. Hull, she spoke of "times when women are really rousing themselves and doing some fiery things, and even more than that, thinking fiery things" ("Update" 101, italics mine). If the modern "elevates the individual and the inward over the social and the outward" (Holman et al. 298), Brooks did write primarily from the perspective of the former two, but was interested in the interplay between all of the above.
Maud Martha is "not at all disappointing," Brooks says in the 1984 self-interview referenced at the beginning of this essay, "even though my heroine was never raped, did not become a lady of the evening, did not entire the world of welfare mothers ([...]), did not murder the woman who stepped on her toe in the bus" ("Self-interview" 114, italics in original). Making tongue-in-cheek reference to contemporary expectations of representations of the "Black Woman," Brooks defends the space she has carved for Maud Martha in her own right. Just as Maud Martha "has developed her own standards, her own concept of the valuable" (Christian 140), so does Brooks maintain the value of her novel, which enshrines, in an "unheroic ordinary black girl from Chicago, a value that is almost always celebrated in the heroic, the extraordinary, the male" (Christian 140): the power of self-definition and, thereby, world-definition. In doing so, Brooks avoids the "sense of alienation, loss, and despair" (Holman et al. 298) usually associated with the modernism in whose poetic style and emphasis on interiority her novel participates, instead "choosing to defy with grace" the many depressing elements around her (Lattin and Lattin 140), while nonetheless protesting them through her layered prose. Due to his sense of political urgency, Wright presumably felt that he could not afford to present his readership with a novel whose messages were ambiguous; yet, in her departure from naturalism and her emphatic investment in the significance of her protagonist's self-understanding, Brooks found a way to make ambiguity work for her, even while registering various forms of social protest. Her dear friend, Haki Madhubuti, wrote for Brooks's funeral, "you've always been your own clock and as the seasons disappear and rise you know exactly what time it is, beating the beat in storms not of your own making." In the same way, the protagonist of her autobiographical novel defied her oppressive circumstances without finally allowing herself to be defined by them.
