On the cover of the December 1994 issue of the Russian literary journal Molodaia gvardiia [The Young Guard], we find an outline of the former Soviet Union, spread out and alone on the earth. A heavily used and chipped hammer is lying on the West side and a dull sickle is in the East. On roughly the territory of the present-day Russian Federation (RF), there is a collage of American dollars. A huge strand of wheat, taller than the width of the RF itself, is ripping through a one-dollar bill in the Northern Krasnoiarsk region in Siberia. The rest of the territory is blank, except for flames in Tajikistan and Chechnya. Behind the earth is a sun, either rising or setting.3 In short, the image is ridiculous, but also compelling for a number of reasons. The issue was released perhaps only days after the November 25 bombardment of the Chechen capital, when thousands of residents of this mid-sized city were either killed or left homeless as a military force consisting of tanks, helicopters, and combat aircraft attempted to oust the separatist leader, Dzhokhar Dudaev, from power in the Chechen Republic. The journal's cover art shows the entire North Caucasus region, which the Russian Empire first controlled in the mid nineteenth century, and which continued to be a part of the Soviet Union and now the RF, already blank like the rest of the former Soviet Republics. According to the artist, Sergei Luginin, it seems Moscow has already lost Chechnya.
The image on the cover of Molodaia gvardiia illustrates some of the problems associated with imagining the RF as the Russian nation. With the image of the wheat, Luginin evokes many of the agrarian themes of Romantic anti-capitalism, which one ubiquitously encounters in the ideas of nineteenth and twentieth century Russian artists and intellectuals.4 But in showing a struggle between the de-nationalizing forces of global capital and a more traditional economy based on the land, he no longer includes parts of the historical Russian state, which the RF inherited, in the imagined victory of the strand of wheat over the immense sea of dollars. The exclusion of Chechnya in the image not only admits the ultimate failure of nineteenth-century Russian imperial expansion in the region, but also rejects the state's role in maintaining contemporary international boundaries. The picture seems to tell the reader of the periodical to just let it burn. Thus, the cover art of this issue of Molodaia gvardiia, a journal primarily associated with the right wing of the Russian Writers' Union, was at once anti-imperial and, consequently, against military action in Chechnya.
RF President Boris Yeltsin told a correspondent for the newspaper Izvestiia in February 1992 that the fledgling state must get beyond the "great power" notions of Soviet foreign policy. Furthermore, he argued that the RF must conceive of a new idea of "state interest in post-Imperial Russia." Yeltsin seemed especially fixated with contrasting notions of empire and nation and said that "the influence of imperial thinking [in Russia] is strong," which seemed to imply that Russians as a cultural or ethnic group could only conceive of themselves in an imperial context, and that this consciousness was a primary obstacle to post-Soviet nation-building.5 The president's statement might have puzzled the reader, however, because of its anachronistic reference to "Imperial Russia," the political entity that ceased to exist when tsar Nicholas II abdicated the throne in February 1917. Despite this seventy-five year gap between Imperial and post-Imperial Russia, Yeltsin nonetheless voiced his opposition to empire as a valid means of imagining a nation after the Soviet Union disbanded.6 Further complicating the matter, he implicated Russians as the primary actors in the imperialist state, all the while specifically charging them to forge a nation.
Yelstin's statement about empire and its identification with ethnic Russians is an interesting problem in post-Soviet society because of the lack of clearly identifiable metropole, from which the imperial project historically originated.7 The idea of "Russia", rather, is a kind of placeless imaginary, whereby intellectuals, artists, and politicians attached more significance to the community's relationship with a cultural tradition than to physically bounded space. The impact of the war in Chechnya (1994-1996) on these debates about the meaningfulness of a placeless imaginary is immense because the participants envisioned the recent conflict in terms of the literary representation of imperial expansion in the Caucasus in the nineteenth century.8 While both fictional accounts of the conflict and attempts to present a scholarly debate about it very obviously allude to these earlier sources, I argue that the contemporary setting of the war serves to deconstruct the placeless imaginary of literary and cultural myths. Both nationalists and liberals were interested in what the conflict meant in terms of a perceived imperial legacy, but recognized that their opinions about Chechnya existed within a general atmosphere of ideological indifference to ideas of Russian nationhood.
The historical relationship of intellectuals and artists (and the society they engendered) with the state provided a framework for defining Russian imperialism, and the place of ethnic Russians within the empire. In the post-Soviet RF, these same intellectuals and artists were dealing with a loss of their traditional bases of cultural power. In so doing, they sought to explore the inadequacies of mythic or literary models defining the relationship between the state and society. In some cases, they expressed means of getting beyond these models. But this perceived need to formulate a cohesive national idea based on cultural myths, combined with the recognition that there is an absence of enthusiasm for such an idea, informs us as to the nature of participation during a period, in which many analysts in the RF, and in the West, saw bleak prospects for genuine democracy in the area.
Much of the literature on post-Soviet "identity formation" addresses the issue of the ambivalent impact of empire upon ethnic Russians.9 According to Richard Pipes, the historian who shaped whole generations of American scholars of the Soviet Union in the fifties and sixties, wrote in 1995 that ethnic Russians suffer from a profound "confusion of nationhood, statehood, and empire." He furthermore claimed that this confusion caused many of the economic failures after the collapse of the Soviet Union.10 Within the RF itself, scholars writing in the most prestigious academic and literary journals followed Yeltsin's line about imperial thinking, and debated what "Russia" meant under and after a communist-imperialist state [sic]. Articles such as Valerii Tishkov's "What is Russia [Chto est' Rossiia]," and the many roundtable discussions published in Voprosy filosofii [Questions on Philosophy] and Novyi mir [The New World] tackled the problem of defining "Russia" without empire.11 What especially gave "Russia" its national character, many wondered, if the Russian state had always been imperial? Many of them relied on the literary and philosophical traditions in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to answer this question. They contended that "Russia" primarily existed, historically, as an idea of high culture. The history of the Russian state, however, could not provide a model for an idea of a new democratic Russian nation. Therefore, while "Russia" might exist as a cultural idea, a clearly demarcated space representing the ethnic Russian people, the likes of which Luginin conceived on the cover of Molodaia gvardiia, was beyond imagining. When politicians and journalists attempted to justify the RF's boundaries, they did so with the logic of pragmatism, and not the rhetoric of nationhood.12
The conflict in Chechnya during Yeltsin's presidency was directly related to the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and the regional independence movements that came out of opposition to the 1992 Federation Treaty, which stipulated the relationship between the Autonomous regions within the RF and the central government in Moscow.13 Most of the history of the Chechen independence movement in the nineties is connected with the figure of Dzhokhar (pronounced "ja-KAR") Dudaev, a Soviet general, who was the highest-ranking military officer of Chechen descent in Soviet history.
In October 1991, Dudaev returned to Grozny, the Chechen-Ingush capital, to lead a coup against the Soviet government and proclaimed independence for the Republic.14 In December, the Soviet Union formally disbanded. Two and a half months later, Chechnya (without Ingushetia), along with Tatarstan, refused to sign the Federation Treaty (Tatarstan later relinquished, signing in 1994). During the next few years, the Dudaev-led government in Chechnya managed to maintain control over the region with little overt pressure from Moscow. Nonetheless, Yeltsin gave substantial aid to the Chechen Provisional Council, an anti-Dudaev militia led by Umar Avturkhanov. In November 1994, Yeltsin ordered the first full-scale military invasion of Chechnya. In the second half of December, Russian planes and helicopters intensively bombed Grozny, reducing most of the city to rubble.
During this time, Dudaev's forces begin taking Russian hostages from the civilian population in Chechnya and nearby provinces, exchanging them for money, arms, or Chechen fighters in Russian captivity. By January 1995, news of the Grozny bombardment hit Russian and Western media, which by and large strongly condemned the attacks for their seemingly pointless destruction and violence. But Russian media were also firmly critical of the Dudaev government, which was represented as a mafia organization with criminal ties to many parts of the Russian Federation. Nonetheless, the conflict began to isolate Russia from the West and, in February 1995, the European Union refused to initiate new trade relations until Russia found a peaceful solution in Chechnya.
Throughout the first half of 1995, fighting continued without serious possibility of a peaceful resolution. Finally, after Chechen field marshal Shamil Busaev captured a hospital in the Stavropol region north of Chechnya and took 2000 people hostage, RF Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin agreed to negotiate with Dudaev. From July until the end of the year, the federal government and Chechnya conducted marginally successful peace negotiations, while skirmishes continued in the smaller cities and villages of the Republic. In concert with the RF parliamentary elections, residents of Chechnya elected Doku Zavgaev as their president in December in an uncontested race. Much of the media in the RF, however, believed the former communist leader, against whom Dudaev led the coup in 1991, to be nothing more than Yeltsin's puppet.15
Peace talks broke down again in the beginning of 1996, and fighting escalated, with a Chechen force retaking Grozny in early March. When peace talks broke down again during the next month, Yeltsin appointed General Aleksandr Lebed National Security Adviser and Security Council Secretary, and asked him to take charge of the peace negotiations. Nonetheless, fighting continued until early September, and the last Russian troops did not leave until 3 October. General Lebed estimated that 100,000 people died in Chechnya, although that figure is still disputed.
In the few works published in English on the conflict, scholars have written on its role in constructing a "post-Soviet Russia." Pontus Sirén, for example, argues that the events, "which began as a minor regional conflict in the periphery of the Russian Federation, has turned into a watershed in the development of modern Russia. It has crystallized the problems Russia faces as it tries to redefine its political and cultural identity in the post-Soviet era."
Although the conflict provides a centerpiece for discussions about nationhood and categories of identity (and especially the critique of these categories), specific events in Chechnya like hostage crisis in Budennovsk became more the territory of media spectacle and less the topics of intellectual debate. The historical and cultural meanings of the conflict in its entirety figure more prominently in the literature, film, and journals of high culture during the period. In contrast to the many eyewitnesses who wrote about their experiences during the war, the many interested and vocal intellectuals, who were securely sheltered from the violence in the Caucasus, believed that the conflict was worth discussing in the context of moral and cultural life in the RF.
Much of artists' and intellectuals' understanding of the more recent conflict in Chechnya is based on their understanding of imperial expansion into the Caucasus in the nineteenth century. This understanding was, furthermore, grounded in literary expression of the period and in the culture of the so-called Golden Age of Russian literature.19 This literary legacy concerning the conquest of the Caucasus provided politicians, journalists, and artists with a potential means for exploring the more recent conflict in terms of the RF's imperial legacy.20 Fundamentally, then, many segments of elite society in the RF imagined imperialism as part of a Russian literary history. For these elites, a fundamental question in the mid-nineties was, to what extent, if any, can we connect events of the present day to those of a previous historical period?
Mark Beissinger argues that, despite the fact that empires no longer exist (i.e., those states calling themselves empires), we nonetheless discover the ubiquitous claim that states are engaging in imperialism, which leaves scholars who study empires at a particular loss as to how to define such a state. Beissinger traces the origin of this new context of empire to Western critics of the Soviet Union, which filtered into a discourse within the Soviet republics themselves concerning, first, the Soviet Union's inheritance of the Russian Empire as a political project, and now, the Russian Federation's inheritance of a Soviet legacy of empire. But Beissinger points out, quite correctly, that in a previous context, the state used the term "empire" as a positive definition of its own polity, while today the claim is unambiguously critical of a state, which no longer calls itself an empire. Thus, social scientists and historians talking about such "empires" risk reifying this newly constructed concept, just as we risk doing so with concepts such as "the nation-state," or "identity." As Beissinger points out, "The truth or falsity of such claims is often difficult to establish. However, the claims themselves and the discourse that they engender have a remarkable capacity for shaping reality."
Although we find continual references to Western sources in the criticism of the War in Chechnya in terms of "Russia's imperial legacy" in the RF,22 Beissinger does not address the domestic origins of how intellectuals were imagining imperialism and its legacy as part of a literary trope. In the nineteenth century, an entire genre of prose and poetry about imperial expansion into the Caucasus emerged from some of Imperial Russia's most famous names in literature. Susan Layton argues that literature's characterization of the military campaign in the region, and its description of the peoples of the Caucasus, expressed for the first time a tension between notions of empire and nation, even though many of the writers themselves were initially supportive of the imperial project.23 The tsarist state envisioned the Caucasus as "Russia's own Orient," complete with its own civilizing mission, which worked to define itself as a Western imperial power. The contrast between Imperial Russia and the Caucasus was a way of bringing Russia closer to Europe by attempting to emulate the characteristics of Western imperialism, and its conceptions of the colonial Other.24
Writers of the period, however, many of whom served in the region as military officers, presented a more ambiguous picture of the imperial project and ethnic Russians' development as a people in relation to the non-Russians (nerusskii) they encountered in the empire. While the state generally viewed expansion into the Caucasus as necessary to its imperial development, and the peoples of the region as hopelessly backward, Layton argues that, "[Aleksandr] Pushkin [and other writers] exposed the abyss [of us and them] by dissolving boundaries between Russia and Asia, for better or worse."
But in this paradoxical association, Harsha Ram claims that a whole series of cultural generalization were fixed in the imaginations of Chechens and ethnic Russians alike, which "has lingered on in the discourses of today" about the conflict.28 At the base of the Caucasian literary myth is a transference of values, whereby the idea of Chechen customary law "initially establishes a negative contrast that allows for the identification of Russian and even Soviet culture with Europe." Yet, by highlighting the organicism of such a legal system, the writers, its reading public, and future intellectuals were able to reverse this connotation to one, in which the people of the Caucasus are "more capable of guaranteeing elementary justice to its people" than formal law is capable of doing so to Russians.29 Ram states that the alienation arising from such identification with Chechen customary law creates a second opposition (the first is, as I mentioned, between Russian civilization and the savagery of the Caucasus), which is "situated within Russian culture itself, between the Russian state and the creative intelligentsia."
In comparing nineteenth-century literary myths about the Caucasus with representations of the recent Chechen conflict in the RF press, Ram argues that while political and historical actors on both sides of the present conflict are all too aware of the literary myths, the media have nonetheless taken the place of literature as giving the region its current connotative significance. "Perhaps for the first time in Russian culture, literature has been eclipsed by the popular media as a source of cultural critique, aesthetic symbols, and alternative truths."
No less important, however, are the ways, in which members of high culture viewed the transference of power from themselves to the popular media. While this dichotomy between literary high culture and popular media is not explicit in the discourse about the Chechen War, the declining importance of the placeless imaginary in this context is undoubtedly the result of this transference of power, and the perceived need to engage a public that the independent press created.
In approaching the placeless imaginary of literary and cultural myths, the participants in the debates about the War in Chechnya expressed three primary concerns. The first is the liberal or nationalistic expression of Russian victimization and the state's role in this victimization, or at least the state's inability to prevent it. The second and third categories, however, are directed inward and are attempts at self-criticism. Here, by self-criticism, I mean either the expression of a self-conscious shift from one ideological perspective to another (or personal liberation from ideology in general), due to a perceived inadequacy in the first position, or the attribution of an ideological position, which is usually associated with the author or journal, for which the author writes, onto another party, in order to criticize them. The latter of these is still clearly self-criticism, albeit without an admission of guilt. I identify the second concern in questions of Russian imperialism and the history of empire in the Caucasus, which is self-criticism in the author's relation to the state. Finally, in discussing the conflict, writers expressed the problems of representing Russian cultural identity, which is self-criticism in the author's relation to the people.
In late 1995, the "Center for Social Connections" of the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs released in cooperation with the FSK (Russian Intelligence Service) a pamphlet entitled Kriminal´nyi rezhim: Chechnia, 1991-1995 g.g.: fakty, dokumenty, svidetel´stva [The Criminal Regime, Chechnya 1991-1995: Facts, Documents, and Evidence], which gives the standard line that Dudaev's regime undermined the integrity of the Russian state. On the cover of the blood-red pamphlet is a drawing of a swarthy youth with a headband and a machine gun, which he appears to be firing with animalistic zeal (he is juxtaposed with a large, roaring animal of some type, so that this point is not lost on the reader).
The contents of the publication are, as the title states, a collection of "documents," primarily taken from letters written to the Russian army's newspaper, Krasnaia zvezda [The Red Star], in addition to press releases from politicians, and supportive statements from academics and other public intellectuals. Also, we find an uninformative correspondence between Yeltsin, Chernomyrdin, and General Grachev,33 probably included only to give the pamphlet legitimacy as a primary source of documentation about the war. The pamphlet and its contents are important to consider, however, as a document calling itself a document, especially since the use of documents was extremely polemical in the late eighties and early nineties. The "fat journals"
In the introduction, editor Aleksandr Gorlov, a member of the centrist pro-government political faction the Stable Russia Movement and Duma candidate during the 1995 elections, wrote about the Dudaev regime in Chechnya as undermining the Russian nation-building project. He writes of Russia trying to create a "normal" country in the aftermath of communism. In contrast to Russia's efforts, Dudaev represents the fanaticism of revolution, from which the country has only recently been liberated. In another document, posing as an historical essay, the author writes that, while we should not condone the past wrongs done to the Chechen people, which included the imperialist war in the nineteenth century, and the deportation to Kazakhstan in 1944,35 this should not provoke distrust of the Russian state.
Other items in the book include a list of atrocities that "bandits" in Chechnya have committed against Russians, and letters from Russian pensioners in Chechnya, explaining the horrible treatment they received at the hands of the Chechens. These letters are interesting because they are so formulaic. The daily lives of older women and men, who subsist on meager pensions, is disrupted by armed youth, much like the one on the cover of Kriminal'nyi rezhim. With nowhere else to go, the helpless pensioners appeal to the newly formed Union of Cossacks, who in turn appeal to the federal government for action in the region. The two volumes of Belaia kniga, Chechnia, 1991-1995: fakts, dokumenty, svidetel'stva [The White Book],36 released by the same organization, predictable tells a very similar story (albeit without the provocative cover art: it is plain white, as you might guess). Here, the historian who gives an account of the region argues that the present military operation was not imperialist because Russians in Chechnya were an oppressed group who were kicked out of the territory where they had lived for hundreds of years, and so forced into a position of indefinite homelessness. The editors once again employ letters from Russian pensioners to document the truth of the historian's claim. Also included are charts of industrial and agricultural production from Chechnya, which demonstrate the complete failure of the economy since Dudaev took power.
The rhetoric employed by the Russian Intelligence Service and Ministry of Defense is especially enlightening when we consider alongside it an article in the liberal journal, Zvezda, the organ of the Russian Writers' Union in Petersburg. Predictably, the editorial staff of the journal took a strong stance against military involvement in the North Caucasus and ran a series of three articles over the course of 1995 and 1996. Historians wrote the first and third installations, in which they contextualized the "imperialist" wars of the nineteenth century as implicit forerunners of the present conflict. The debate about history is very clear when we consider this alongside the government-released pamphlets. The North Caucasus region has existed as a particular challenge to Russian imperial expansion and now, as empires fall because they are empires, the Russian state futilely attempts to maintain its imperial boundaries. This assumption about imperial legacy is unquestioned within the articles about history. At the beginning of the articles, we find a note from the editor, which discusses the "psychological effect on Russian society" of the nineteenth-century imperialist wars. The editor essentially agrees with Yeltsin in his statement about "imperial thinking," and the notion of an ethno-imperial character of the Russian people, handed down from an earlier generation.37 But we need to keep in mind the structure of this debate between official sources and the liberal literary establishment. At the center of both arguments is the notion of imperialism, and how Russians are victimized, either in the absence of a strong Russian state (the claim that these actions are anti-imperial), or because of imperialism itself (the liberal argument, which condemns so-called imperial activity).
In the second article, published in Zvezda, "Nabliudeniia i razmyshleniia ochevidtsa [A Witness's Observations and Thoughts]," in December 1995, we find our quintessential victim and citizen, whom we have already met in the government-issued publications above. Zvezda published the diary of Georgii Passarar, a retired artist and former Russian resident of Grozny, and a pensioner with a sick wife.38 When the air raid began in November, his home was immediately destroyed, and he had to seek refuge with his Chechen neighbor. Eventually, he escaped with his family to southern Russia. G. Lisitsyna, an academic at the European University in Petersburg, tells us in the introduction to Passarar's diary that the artist and his Chechen savior met again in a Petersburg train station, where they were both homeless refugees.39 In both the government-issued pamphlets and in the highbrow liberal media, we find the same type of victim, with perhaps the same basic audience in mind.
I find Passarar's designation as an "artist" significant, however, because it is the only feature that places him recognizably in the context of a literary journal. His role as an "artist" attaches him to a discourse about the importance of high culture in defining a specific community. Passarar's fate as a homeless refugee along with his Chechen savior in St. Petersburg reinforces the notion that the state, while represented by the fixed space of the traditional imperial center, exists in opposition to the more organic union that the two victims cultivated. The state's enmity with the nation's representatives of high culture actually causes the cultured individual to identify with the state's supposed enemy.
Apart from the placeless victim theme present in both the official publications and journal articles, the question of Russia's imperial legacy also establishes common ground in the debate. Lisitsyna and Gorlov accept the idea of imperialism, and to a certain extent, Russia's past, as something that is unwise to emulate in the new nation-building project. Both individuals accept this project as self-evidently a factor in the "normalization" of the RF, and its integration into Europe. This integration would include the participation of citizens, which implies that this term is nationally understood as participation in both the private and public spheres, with the former the most prominent of the two (everyday life, and its subsequent disruption, is emphasized in both accounts of the victim). The space of Chechnya, in relation to "Russia," represents an element of the past that makes Russia and the Russian people very different from what they should be in the modern world. The quintessential victim in this discourse is an allusion to the placeless imaginary of cultural myth in that the artist and pensioner exist in opposition to the idea of an unchanging state. While this opposition does not serve as an ideal community in the text, primarily because its creation is predicated on the actions of an imperialist state, the authors nonetheless assign historically and culturally recognizable identities onto the victims. The authors' idealization of citizenship is at odds with their deliberate manipulation of these identities, which indicates their difficulty with reconciling historical problems with contemporary issues.
Yegor Gaidar, the deputy Prime Minister and acting Prime Minister under the early Yeltsin administration, was keenly aware of the problems of Russian history in establishing a normal state.40 In the final chapter of his memoir, written as a grim conclusion to an era filled with hope for democratic change, Gaidar states that, "Ever since that time [1991], development in that republic [Chechnya] had been closely intertwined with the fate of reforms and democracy in Russia. At first, when Chechnya was still only on the periphery of public attention, this link was less obvious, but later it became even more visible and alarming."
Perhaps less ambiguous is Mikhail Leontev's44 column in the 15 December 1994 issue of the daily newspaper Segodnia, entitled "What the Hell is Chechnya to Us? [Na khrena nam eta Chechnia]," in which he writes,
When attempting to deal with the question of who is to be included into an idea of the new Russian state, the previous authors all deal with the problems of history as they relate to the everyday life of the present. If history represents a fundamental problem in the construction of a national identity of the Russian Federation, due to general opposition to the idea of imperialism and totalitarian communism, then Western models of citizenship also present a problem because of its lack of historical development in a Russian context. What Gaidar points out, as did many liberals during this period, is the irreconcilability of public apathy with a meaningful concept of citizenship. At the same time, Gaidar, Lisitsyna, and Gorlov did not reconcile this position with their consistent allusion to an allegory of everyday life as the building blocks of the same nation-building, or normalization, project. Thus, if this allegory is inconsistent with history, and both are inconsistent with their own ideas about citizenship, the authors are actually dealing with the problem of viewing themselves as different, without necessarily being able to articulate a normative standard to answer the question: Different from what or whom? Of course, we find numerous attempts to find this elusive standard, from the liberal idea of American or Western European democracy, to "Eurasianism," or Russian ethno-nationalism on the other side of the political spectrum.
But outside of this debate about standards, from which to construct a national idea, we find another series of responses to the debate about empire and nation during the Chechen War. These critiques of the dominant ideology, which were present in the polemics of literary journals, in addition to the cinema, admit the problems of finding such a standard, and in certain cases attempted to discover an alternative means of articulating the public's relationship to the state than through questions of national or ethnic identities.
Eduard Volodin's article "Russo-Chechen Syndrome," published in the June 1995 issue of Molodaia gvardiia, is a strange and ambiguous addition to the debate about imperialism in the RF during the war in Chechnya.46 The article in question, which is blatantly anti-war for many of the same reasons Mikhail Leontev gives in the article quoted above, is striking for its simultaneous expression of statist nationalism.47 Volodin argues that the conflict, which he refers to as "Yeltsin's war," is merely an exercise of raw power, which has never benefited anyone: "This war is equally anti-national for Russia as for Chechnya. Neither Russians nor Chechens gain anything from it, except the death of their sons, bitterness, and descent into poverty."
Volodin initially expresses his critique of empire through association of the term with Dudaev. He sees the Chechen leader essentially as a colonizing force in the region. According to Volodin, Dudaev took power from a local and independent government in the autonomous republic. Thus, in form, Volodin predictably accepts the pseudo-federal structure of the Soviet Union and, we assume, the attempts to make these principles a reality in the Russian Federation.49 Later we find the term "melkotravchatyi" nationalism, a term the author apparently coined himself that literally means "fine grass," but which we might interpret as "light-weight" with additional connotations of provincialism or a lack of sophistication.50 Volodin uses the term to describe not only ideologists of regional separatism like Dudaev, but also politicians in Yeltsin's government. Finally, in his own position as co-founder of the "patriotic opposition" movement, he attempts to denounce the Yeltsin government as a group of "blind-patriots." He argues that these politicians tried to justify the war under the auspices of "national interests of the Russian Federation," but they had no political vision, and the Yeltsin government was responsible for merely "supporting those people who want to bring misery to Russia [i.e., separatist leaders, neo-Bolsheviks, the mafia, etc.]."
Volodin asks, "Will a [another] standard be set?"
One could argue that the author is merely establishing common ground with opponents of the Dudaev regime, which additionally predicates opposition to the current political elite. The implications of such a rhetorical gesture, however, deliberately questions the author's ability to represent any public whatsoever, because he still couches his argument in pro-imperial and pro-nationalist sentiments. It is virtually impossible to pull from this article a consistent political or social idea, since the author identifies his opponents as patriots, nationalists, and imperialists, which are all categories with which he himself identifies. Thus, "The Russo-Chechen Syndrome," which Volodin never once addresses in the body of the article, is ultimately self-reflexive and indicative of an intellectual malaise, the victims of which suffer from an inability to communicate with a public living in new social and political circumstances. The author finds it difficult to sort out the contradictions of his own ideological message because the ideas with which he seemingly agrees are also those he transfers to the state in the form of critique.52
While Volodin's simultaneous conflation and disintegration of categories of nation and empire attempted to dispute the historical idea of high culture as an oppositionary power to the state, Sergei Bodrov most explicitly approached this idea as a self-conscious myth in his award-winning film, Kavkazskii plennik [Prisoner of the Caucasus; English title: Prisoner of the Mountains] (1996).53 The allusion to the placeless imaginary of cultural and literary myth is obvious when we consider that the title itself is identical to three works of nineteenth-century Russian literature: First, to the Pushkin and Lermontov poems, written in 1822 and 1828, respectively, and then to Tolstoy's short story published in 1870. In these earlier works of poetry and short fiction, the nobleman, serving in the military during the conquest of the Caucasus, is the model of the Russian victim. While traveling through the mountains, the natives capture him and hold him for ransom. In the course of his captivity, however, the Russian makes friends with a village girl, who helps him escape, after which the story ends. Although the basic plot points remain consistent, the authors' feelings about imperial expansion differ slightly in each literary work. Nonetheless, throughout the course of these works, the writers position the Russian protagonist as more a victim of circumstance than of the savagery of the native peoples. Thus, while not overtly critical of the state, the writers entered into a dialogue with the state in the literary works about the meaning and viability of imperialism.
Bodrov's film is an interesting comment on literary history and the issues of imperialism that previous writers were dealing with, while self-consciously remaining outside an attachment to the thematic content of any of the works specifically. Nonetheless, Bodrov most closely follows the plot line of the Tolstoy story, using the same character Zhilin as the protagonist, in addition to Dina as the Chechen girl, whom he befriends, and Kostylin as the other soldier in captivity in the village. Consequently, Bodrov's Prisoner of the Caucasus literally invites comparison with the earlier works, and all that they continued to represent in the late Soviet and post-Soviet periods.
Due to its apparent anti-war message, and sleek Hollywood style, the film received extremely positive international recognition. Kavkazskii plennik was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Foreign Film in 1997, and won Best Film at the San Diego International Film Festival. In addition, the three writers of the screenplay, Bodrov, Arif Aliev, and Boris Giller, won the Outstanding Single Achievement Award at the European Film Awards in 1996, and despite the negative response from critics in the major Moscow dailies for overuse of tired literary allusions and Hollywood clichés, Kavkazskii plennik won Best Film at both of the domestic film festivals, Sochi, and Nika.
Thus, apart from the literary trope of the "Prisoner of the Caucasus" itself, we must also consider how it functions as a canonical reference in the Soviet period, in addition to the mid-nineties. Very soon after Socialist Realism was officially adopted in literature (during the 1934 Writers' Congress), Pushkin, Tolstoy, and Lermontov were all heralded as models for contemporary prose (despite the fact that Pushkin and Lermontov were primarily known for poetry), and their works were taught in every elementary school throughout the USSR. The state issued enormous print runs of their collected works, rivaling Lenin, and they became part of official Soviet culture, alongside contemporary Socialist Realist writers. Due to their official status, the literary underground in the seventies and eighties took a particularly hostile attitude toward these writers, either trying to ignore them, or parodying the romanticism of Pushkin and Lermontov, in addition to the Realism of Tolstoy and his imitators in the Soviet Writers' Union. The nationalist and liberal writers, meanwhile, attempted to "re-"appropriate them, according to their own ideological platforms.
During the more recent conflict in Chechnya, it was once again the government who attempted to use the "Prisoner" theme, in order to contextualize the war and give it meaning. For example, an article appeared in Krasnaia zvezda [The Red Star], just prior to the Grozny air raid with the headline, "Russian is not a 'Prisoner of the Caucasus.' She [Russia] is obliged to look after her own interests." A month later, the same newspaper published a Lermontov commemoration, highlighting his numerous works of fiction and poetry about the Caucasus.54 And, as Susan Layton points out in Russian Literature and Empire, this extensive literary tradition concerning the Caucasus remains the primary source of knowledge for Russians about the region and Russian imperial expansion in the nineteenth century, regardless of the position taken on it.55
Harsha Ram interprets Bodrov's Kavkazskii plennik as embodying similar themes as the earlier works of literature, and thus implies that the filmmaker too succumbed to a banal national expression of the placeless imaginary. She explains the plot in terms of the traditional opposition between ideas of nation, represented by the quintessential victim, and the imperial center: "Disavowed by the political center yet unwelcome in the colonial periphery, the Russian body seeks a homecoming, in order to dwell within the national memory. Abandoned by the empire, it must achieve its repatriation by other means."
Whether he is entirely serious or not, Pritulenko fails to account for such a deliberate and self-conscious connection to the earlier text, and takes for granted the hidden layers of Bodrov's own Russian psychology. But Pritulenko's statement is nonetheless informative about the playful nature of the younger generation of the literary elite in their contribution to the debate about imperialism. For Pritulenko, the accusation of imperial consciousness is an empty signifier, only indicating the discourse itself, in the same way that Bodrov does in the film. Andrei Plakhov, who attempts to dispel the harsh criticism of Kavkazskii plennik for its dual reference to the classics and imitation of Hollywood conventions, argues that Bodrov only begins with literary myths, but ends by dispelling them: "The cleverness of the film lies in the fact that it shows this meta-historical magma as if it were a still-living exotica but by the same token, it throws the bridge over on this archaic cultural myth."
The debate about imperialism, or more specifically, opposition to imperialism, becomes a way of explaining the state in relation to an imagined Russian nation. But what we see emerging during the conflict in Chechnya is the inability of this debate to make sense of the war. We see the contradictions in this debate most clearly in Volodin's article about an unstated "Russo-Chechen Syndrome," and then Bodrov's film is a plea to get beyond narcissistically-conceived identities (whether through self-love or self-hatred) by pointing out their superficialities in post-Soviet space.
If the national "we" is an ineffective post-Soviet response to the idea of imperialism, then Bodrov also implicates the idea of Russian culture as it is conceived in the literary/historical framework. This was not a new idea in the mid-nineties, however, as intellectuals and writers like Nikolai Rachkov had written extensively about the extreme pessimism in Russian society during the late Gorbachev era and the early nineties. Rachkov was especially aware of and frightened by Russians' indifference to the cultural past. He argues that Russians need to begin to love themselves again and start to value their land and cultural traditions. The difference between Rachkov's officious statement and the message in Bodrov's film is that the poet is still looking toward cultural mythologies for the rebirth of an imagined Russian nation. At the same time, the filmmaker has already decided that these expressions have been entirely ineffective in accomplishing anything for Russians of the past, and seem unlikely to do so in the present, and is certainly no model for the future.
The other important contribution to the "Prisoner of the Caucasus" trope during the recent conflict in Chechnya is Vladimir Makanin's "Kavkazskii plennyi," a short story published in the September 1994 issue of the liberal journal Novyi mir. The story is set in the period before the full-scale invasion of Grozny in November. Although keeping the same title,60 the story is quite different topically and thematically from both the "Prisoner" tradition of the nineteenth century and Bodrov's film. Makinin nonetheless comments more directly and extensively on the mythologies that comprise the placeless imaginary than the filmmaker. Once again, the narrative concerns two soldiers in the North Caucasus, whose primary mission in the region is not entirely clear. In this story, however, the question of captivity is initially reversed, as it is the Russian soldiers who capture a Chechen rebel. But this reversal is strictly topical, as the basic theme of the story is an allegory of Russian captivity, and the limitations of politics and ideology that manifest themselves in the daily lives of the soldiers. In many ways, Makanin's story is more of a comment on the ways the Soviet state appropriated the literary tradition and subsumed it under the rubric of socialist realism. "Kavkazskii plennyi" is thus an acknowledgement that literature must contend with its complicity with the state, rather than attach itself to a grand tradition of opposition, which many liberal intellectuals imagined themselves doing in the mid-nineties.61
The story initially plays on the literary conventions and clichés of nineteenth century representations of the region, which first positions the protagonists in opposition to the state's enemy (i.e., the Chechen rebel), but later identifies the protagonists with the enemy, and opposition is transferred to the state. Thus, the standard interpretation of the literary myth of the Caucasus is that the conflict problematizes the citizen's (who always appears as a victim without a fixed home) identification with the state and, in so doing, the myth establishes an alternative category, in which participants of the cultural elite could identify themselves as Russian. Here, however, the state appears from the beginning as a shadowy organization, simultaneously selling arms to the Chechen rebels, and then ordering the soldiers to disarm them. The protagonists never identify themselves with the state, and consequently never shift their identification to the noble savage of mountains. As an allegory, then, Makanin's "Kavkazskii plennyi" questions the existence of civil society because the victim does not gain self-consciousness of his condition, and cannot participate in a dialogue with the state. Instead, the author uses cultural identities as pieces of de-contextualized phatic conversation. Thus, the reader enters Makanin's story with the expectations of the "prisoner" myth, but which is shattered for its inability to explain the recent conflict.
"Kavkazskii plennyi begins with the protagonists, Rubakhin62 and the rifleman Vovka, returning from a failed mission to retrieve military personnel, which had previously lodged in a gorge. Upon reporting to their commanding officer at his lavish home in the Chechen countryside, the Russian soldiers are ordered to help his wife with gardening. While Rubakhin proceeds to the Colonel's immaculately manicured lawn to plant flowers, Vovka sneak off to the home of a neighboring Chechen girl.
Eventually he returns to Rubakhin with information that a Lieutenant Savkin is organizing a disarmament operation, and the two escape Colonel Gurov's garden to join the group, in anticipation that they will be able to capture a Chechen prisoner. The irony is that while they leave for this mission, Gurov is having tea with a leader of the Russian-supported Chechen opposition, Alibekov, and discussing an arms deal. Alibekov tells Gurov that all Russians are "prisoners of the Caucasus," provoking Gurov to reminisce about his past and the romantic associations that the East used to conjure in his mind. In between singing verses from a popular Russian folk song from the seventies, Alibekov comments off-handedly that Chechens needed to emigrate to the West like the Russians. The intertextuality in this passage is fairly striking because it is the Chechen who draws the Russian's attention to not only the "Prisoner of the Caucasus" theme in Russian literature, but also the nineteenth-century trope of pilgrimage to the West (Alibekov uses the verb "khodit'," which means to go by foot), while referencing popular culture of the recent past. Gurov, meanwhile, can only consider the loss of a meaningful context in which to place these experiences.
The story itself begins with another deconstructed textual reference, this time to the famous line in Dostoevskii's The Idiot, "Beauty saves the world." In Dostoevskii's novel, we never see the original context of the utterance, only the atheist Ippolit's question to Prince Myshkin, the Christ-like figure, concerning whether or not he truly believed that beauty would save the world. Ippolit claims that Myshkin only said this because he was in love with a woman, while the Prince himself declines to respond either to the validity of the accusation or to the statement in general. Makanin, then, introduces his "Kavkazskii plennyi" with the line, "The soldiers did not know that 'beauty saves the world,' but in general they knew that there was such a thing as beauty."
During the disarmament operation (in which only Rubakhin is allowed to participate, while Vovka is weeded out for not looking tough enough), the Russian soldiers ambush a group of Chechen rebels, and Rubakhin captures an unarmed teenager, whom he intends to bring to Gurov and thus redeem himself. But instead of his masculinity affirmed in military service, the prisoner narrative unfolds as an ambiguous homosexual encounter. The prisoner is constantly revealed through Rubakhin's eyes as a female equivalent. He gets closer and closer to the boy, almost nursing him. At the same time, Rubakhin becomes intensely attracted to him sexually, but is not consciously aware of this happening to him. He repeatedly reassures his Chechen prisoner that he will not be kept in prison. The Russian military merely want him for an as yet undetermined exchange with the rebel fighters. Eventually, two small groups of Chechen rebels walk by the path that Rubakhin, Vovka, and the prisoner are traveling. They manage to hide in the bushes, while a Russian arms shipment arrives in trucks from the other direction. A confrontation ensues, during which the rebels ambush the Russian trucks, while the Russian commander claims that they are empty. Rubakhin tries to silence the prisoner, but fears he will yell out and finds no other option than to strangle the boy to death. He subsequently falls sleeps and dreams about the prisoner he has just killed. But the specific nature of his beauty leaves him and he is left with a general and non-descript image in his head, while nonetheless waking up sexually aroused.
While the theme of unavoidable, but nonetheless senseless, violence in the final confrontation between Rubakhin and the Chechen boy is a thinly-veiled allegory for the macro-conflict, the idea of beauty in Makanin's "Kavkazskii plennyi" and its reference to identifiable literary and historical tropes explains how this critique of aggression works in a broader post-Soviet context. The statement, "Beauty saves the world" implies that something transcendent will justify the ordinary of everyday life. In the story, however, beauty itself becomes ordinary and fleeting. There is nothing of the noble savage in the character of the Chechen boy; he is merely week and fairly unintelligent, while possessing an empty outward beauty. Makanin evokes the beauty and foreignness of the Chechen landscape, so familiar to the literary tradition, but de-nationalizes the comparison between Russian and Caucasian space. In the end, the landscape is either nothing more than incomprehensible, or the elusive battlefield of the Chechen rebels. Makanin does not accuse the soldiers of not understanding beauty, but merely makes beauty a part of the everyday.
Iurii Arabov, the Moscow screenwriter, apparently arrived at this conclusion independently of Makanin in his critique of the liberal position on the war. He reverses the Dostoevskian statement of "Beauty will save the world" to "The world will save beauty,"
Arabov also details the ways in which Dudaev himself manipulated these categories. His own wife, Alla, was a lyrical poet and painter, who created romantic scenes of the Chechen countryside and wrote poems about her first love. During the war, she began to paint Dudaev against the backdrop of the Caucasus Mountains, which Arabov argues was provided for the liberal intelligentsia to reinforce their own self-perceptions. He claims that the intelligentsia will fail in their ability to change politics because of their misguided moralism, based on a "literary consciousness." Ultimately, Arabov unquestionably supports independence for Chechnya because "their ambition need not stretch out all across Russia. But the matter [he states] is not only in the ambitions of the Caucasus peoples, but also in our Russian guilt in relation to them."
Arabov's article is interesting for its comment on how a peculiar national consciousness is created in a simultaneous identification with, and opposition to, the state. After all, the intellectuals who eagerly awaited their time as Prisoners of the Caucasus were themselves members of the Council of Peoples' Deputies. Their actions illustrated a particular form of participation in the political system, based on a fetishized idea of national consciousness. Arabov concludes, however, with another literary allusion, stating that the "simple people were ready for independence" in a way that the intelligentsia was not.68 The reason he gives for this solution to the problem of national consciousness based on the placeless imaginary of literary and cultural myth is that the "simple people" were engaged with "everyday life [byt]." While his prediction that the RF was leading down the road to democracy might have been premature, especially when we consider the second war in the Caucasus, which began in 2000 under Vladimir Putin's administration, Arabov's argument positions everyday life in opposition to national consciousness, and interestingly privileges the former as the building blocks for participatory democracy. We might justifiably interpret this statement, along with many of the anxieties that characterized the attitudes of politicians like Gaidar about questions of citizenship, as an attempt to get beyond grand categories of nation and empire in order to establish new channels of participation in government and social life.
