Travelling along the path of the "new social history" blazed by E.P. Thompson,1 Thomas Holt, Ronald Grigor Suny, and Joao Jose Reis advocate an enhanced sensitivity to the fundamental historicity of professedly eternal themes: namely, race, politics, economics, and religion. Like Thompson, all three historians use the example of culture to demonstrate the very alterability of the long-standing structures that have come to define the "social" approach to historical inquiry, in turn reinvigorating the role of human agency. Thus, these historians perform an admirable task: one of reconciling the social history of the 1960s and 70s with the dominant cultural history of the 80s and 90s, placing the historical discipline on the threshold of a new era.
Thomas C. Holt's essay, "Marking: Race, Race-making, and the Writing of History," takes up the task of historicizing the seemingly timeless phenomenon of racism.2 In doing so, Holt identifies two energizing mechanisms of racist attitudes, both of which involve what he calls "marking". First, marking entails "the act of representation that is the marking of race," or in other words, an acknowledgement of racial difference, of the Other.3 Secondly, and perhaps more significantly, marking occasions "the act of inscription that is the marking of history."
Having laid out the problem, Holt goes on to entertain possible solutions. The first step involves laying bare the origins of racist attitudes. Seeking out theoretical models with which to explain racism, Holt immediately rejects the main premises of the Freudian "psychological paradigm" as exceedingly essentialist. Once again, the problem lies with the normalization of racism: "Those who take Freudian theory most literally are especially prone to naturalize racist behavior; that is, generalized over time and space, the presumably innate processes of child development come to function must like biological explanations."
Holt attempts to solve this long-standing historiographical problem by locating the nexus of individual behavior and collective ethos at the level of the "everyday."
To illustrate his point, Holt refers to two historical examples of global racist ideology propagated at the level of the everyday. The first example has already been studied in detail: the complicity of average Germans in the crimes of Nazism. Here, Holt seems to be making a silent affirmative nod to Hannah Arendt's notion of the "banality of evil," particularly when he writes that "the more profound aspect of [German workers'] moral irresponsibility is the fact that in the small gestures of everyday life they reenacted and sustained a vision of the world that made mass extermination ordinary, perhaps even possible. What is most chilling is the routineness of their culpability."
Whereas Holt's work historicizes racism, Ronald Grigor Suny's discussion of late-twentieth-century historical trends historicizes politics.15 Like Holt, Suny adopts a vocational approach to the practice of history, seeing himself not as a passive observer of events, but as an active participant in altering the course of history. If the purpose of Holt's work is to help create a world free of racial prejudice, Suny's goal is to help install a viable alternative to capitalism. Also like Holt, Suny's meta-historical article attempts to reconcile social and cultural methodologies.
To begin, Suny sketches out a genealogy of cultural turn historiography, locating the genesis of the turn toward the cultural in the work of E.P. Thompson. For Suny, Thompson's emphasis on the human element in labor history, rather than obliterating the subject (as Althusserian Marxists tended to do), made history into an "arena in which humans transmute structure into processes."
Next, Suny neatly enumerates the central tenets of cultural turn historiography. Following Suny's summary, the hallmarks of the cultural turn are a suspicion of social naturalism, the autonomous subject, grand narratives, and objectivity coupled with a tendency to problematize culture, emphasize the symbolic aspects of culture, and expose the power dynamics that govern social relations.17 Although these themes and sentiments have undeniably maintained their standing in the historical profession, on the eve of the new millenium historians were eager move "beyond the cultural turn"
Interweaving social and cultural approaches to history, Suny isolates what he perceives to be the most fruitful contributions of each trend in order to formulate a utopian political vision. In the work of Thompson and Geertz, Suny admires the opening of many possible futures, the "recovery of alternative worlds that held up visions not of why we had arrived at where we were but of where we might have gone."
Although Joao Jose Reis' study of "a particular, extraordinary episode"
Reis begins by contrasting his interpretation of the rebellion with that of earlier historians. Specifically, he laments that past historiography of the event has revolved excessively around material motivations and a misguided civilization versus barbarism trope: "Historians who have mentioned the Cemiterada believe it was motivated by a combination of economic reasons and a backward expression of religious fervor."
In 1836, Bahia was primed for rebellion. As Reis describes, "[t]he city's growing population -- mainly people of African descent -- faced a severe economic crisis. This state of affairs, together with social injustice, racial prejudice, and contemporary religious, liberal, and nativist ideologies, explains the civil unrest that gripped Bahia in the 1820s and 30s."
Likewise, the question of economic motives in the rebellion was not as unidimensional as traditional historiographical treatment of the subject has suggested. Just as two conceptions of religion were counterpoised in the Cemiterada rebellion, so were two mutually opposed economies. The elaborate funerary rituals that coincided with popular (Baroque) Catholicism provided myriad economic opportunities for people from various strata of Bahian society (e.g. poor women wailed, Franciscan friars sewed shrouds, etc), but the lower orders and the brotherhoods benefited particularly. Hence, when the ruling elite banned churchyard burials and granted three entrepreneurs a monopoly on the financial rewards of death, the brotherhoods erupted in protest.28 But even here, Reis is careful to note, economic and religious interests were intertwined in the same thread. For instance, Dominican monks, who sympathized with the plight of the brotherhoods, anticipated that "the decline of worship, the closing of churches, the abandonment of faith, the rebellion of the faithful, and even the destruction of the state" would result as a result of the switch to cemetery burials.29 All told, the negative economic ramifications of the cemetery monopoly certainly played a role in inciting the Bahian brotherhoods to rebellion, but these material concerns were only instrumental insofar as economic ruin necessarily entailed spiritual decline. Again, social structures are inseparable from the cultural vagaries that undergird them.
