The University Preparatory Science and Math (UPSM) Middle School is a new science and math focused middle school scheduled to open in 2009 at the Detroit Science Center. It will be part of the University Prep Academy (UPA) group of chartered schools that are devoted to preparing students for college. The middle school will open and operate for one year at the Compuware headquarters in downtown Detroit. The urban location of the temporary Middle School has led to several unique logistics issues that must be addressed. These include the location and procedures to follow for the drop-off and pick-up of students and the procedures for routing students to, from, and within the Compuware building. The location has not yet been furnished or fully designed to meet the current needs of the school.
The University Preparatory Academy also hopes to eventually expand and add a UPSM High School at a permanent location. As part of their devotion to continuous improvement, student and parent satisfaction, and their reputation for being state-of-the-art, UPA hopes to use their current high school as a foundation on which to improve. University Prep wishes to provide students with a more campus-like environment at both high schools in order to better prepare their students for college life. University Prep is also hoping to learn what improvements may be made on the current parking situation at the UPA High School and how they can use this information in the design of the future UPSM High School.
FTM Consultants has been asked to provide a variety of logistics solutions regarding the drop-off and pick-up of students at the temporary UPSM Middle School location. FTM has also been asked to survey students at the already established UPA High School in order to identify factors that would enhance the students' academic experience and parking situation. FTM will also develop a workspace usage plan for the temporary middle school facility at the Compuware headquarters. This involves selecting technology, equipment, and furnishings that can eventually be transferred to their permanent facilities.
The purpose of this document is to report the progress of the project to UPSM faculty and to provide details regarding accomplishments to date and our action plan for the remainder of the project, which is to be completed by April 21, 2008.
UPSM currently faces a myriad of planning and logistics problems that can be categorized into three key groups: the planning for and usage of the temporary location (including logistics and equipment selection), the transition from their temporary location to their permanent facility, and the expansion of their school system to include a UPSM high school.
This project focuses on the logistics planning for the pick-up and drop-off of students at the temporary Compuware location. This aspect of the problem is the most critical and urgent to UPSM Middle School's operations before it opens in September 2008. The logistics plan must also accomodate UPSM's plans to relocate the middle school to their permanent location, as well as their plans to create a UPSM High School.
University Prep representatives have also requested that FTM survey the students of the current UPA High School. These surveys will address student parking and transportation preferences, as well as possible methods for enhancing the campus atmosphere. University Prep would like to gauge the student response to the proposed addition of a student lounge and various school programs.
The following are the goals to be achieved throughout the project:
FTM Consultants will measure the success of the project by the safety, efficiency, and reliability of the proposed drop-off/pick-up system at the Compuware headquarters. A model of the student transportation process will be created using ProModel so that a simulation study can be performed. The results of the simulation will be used to recommend a logistics plan for student transportation. FTM Consultants will also strive to obtain both statistically and practically significant data from the surveys, which can in turn be used to recommend improvements to the UPA High School.
The scope of the project includes providing logistic solutions for the drop-off and pick-up of students at the temporary Compuware facilities. FTM will also provide procedures to be used to safely and efficiently transport the students from the drop-off/pick-up location to the 11th floor of the Compuware building. In addition to the logistics plan for the middle school, FTM will survey students at the current UPA High School and provide recommendations to enhance the student academic and campus experience. The results from this survey will also be used to make recommendations on the design of the future UPSM High School's campus.
FTM Consultants will not address any issues other than those stated above. FTM will stay within UPSM's budget constraints and will not recommend budget modifications.
Since most of the layout and furniture at the temporary location at the Compuware headquarters has already been analyzed and decided, less emphasis will be given to this objective. Further modification of the project scope may include eliminating this part of the project altogether. The logistics planning and surveying of high school students will be the main focus of the project. The project scope may be further adjusted later on if University Prep has difficulty providing necessary contacts and information.
Overall the project is behind the proposed schedule due to delays in gaining access to the Compuware facilities and personnel. The information needed from these contacts is crucial to developing feasible solutions to the logistics problems that UPSM faces.
FTM has developed three surveys, two of which are to be distributed to UPA High School students, and another which will be distributed to the parents of enrolled students for the UPSM Middle School. The high school surveys deal with student transportation and campus preferences (please see Appendices C and D, respectively) while the middle school survey addresses parent preferences for student transportation (Appendix E).
FTM plans to continue working with Compuware personnel to develop solutions to the various logistics problems. A contact has been recently established with Compuware, with whom FTM plans to work cooperatively and constructively. Additionally, FTM will continue working with University Prep personnel to distribute the surveys and obtain the data needed for analysis.
A summary of the project accomplishments to date follows.
To date, FTM has completed work related to both the University Prep Middle School at the Compuware headquarters and the future University Prep High School. FTM's primary task is to develop a solution for student transportation at the University Prep Middle School, although University Prep has also requested that FTM aid them in designing the campus layout for their future high school. FTM has been collecting data for both schools, although the primary focus is on the middle school.
Thus far, FTM has been obtaining the data necessary for analyzing the student transportation situation at the Compuware headquarters. Specifically, FTM is concerned with the process of dropping off and picking up students from the Compuware building. FTM recently met with representatives from Compuware, including Steve Marquardt, the executive handling the account with University Prep. Data has also been collected to help the team develop solutions for student pick-up and drop-off operations. Photographs of several locations inside the adjacent parking structure were taken. FTM has proposed that one or more of these locations be used as a staging area to facilitate student transportation. Representatives from both Compuware and Metropolitan Parking Services (MPS, the management company for the parking structure) have tentatively approved this proposal. Meetings with Steve Marquardt and Thomas Biondo (Facility Manager for the parking structure) have been scheduled for Tuesday, March 11 to continue discussing the feasibility of this proposed solution.
In addition to the meetings with Compuware and MPS, a formal request for information has been submitted to MPS. The request provides details relating to the data FTM requires for conducting a simulation of the parking structure's operations. Specific data requested include arrival and departure times for cars entering and leaving the parking structure, duration of stays, and capacity utilization. FTM has requested that data be provided for morning and afternoon time periods, dating back one full year. The request has been submitted to the appropriate personnel and FTM expects to receive the requested data within two weeks.
To supplement the data from MPS, FTM will be collecting data on parent arrival rates and service times for both drop-offs and pick-ups at the current University Prep Middle School. These data will be a necessary part of the simulation model that FTM will construct. FTM is scheduled to collect arrival rate and service time data for drop-offs at the current middle school between 6:30 and 8:00 AM on Tuesday, March 11.
In addition to the data collected on-site at the current middle school, FTM has written a survey that will be distributed to the parents of enrolled students. The survey will ask parents about their preferred drop-off and pick-up locations, preferred arrival times, and their interest in a web-based tracking and scheduling solution. The survey results will be compiled and used to identify patterns in parent arrivals. A draft of the survey was submitted to University Prep officials, who requested that the survey be revised such that the information is collected through several surveys rather than just one. FTM has agreed to revise the current draft and to produce two follow-up surveys. The data from these surveys will be combined with data that FTM collects on-site at University Prep's current middle school to formulate a simulation model for the parking structure.
The data collected from MPS, parent surveys, and FTM's on-site work will be used to develop a pick-up and drop-off schedule and management plan. FTM will use the parking structure data on arrival rates, lengths of stay, and capacity utilization to create a simulation of our proposed process designs. The key outputs from these simulations will be the wait times and queue lengths for pick-ups and drop-offs. These metrics will be used to determine and recommend the most efficient process.
The data collection efforts made so far have been necessary because both FTM and University Prep recognize the importance of establishing a complete logistics plan for using the temporary space at the Compuware headquarters. Without this logistics plan, the school will be unable to open for operations in September. At the very least, the key issue of student transportation must be addressed and a solution needs to be in place before the school can open.
To address these issues, FTM has developed several preliminary solutions that involve using Compuware's existing infrastructure within the parking structure, including their pod-based entry and exit system. FTM has met with MPS and Compuware representatives to determine the best method for granting parents access to the parking structure. Possible solutions include using the existing pod-based entry and exit system. This system tracks the entry and exit of cars using a small pod that is attached to the windshield of each car. The cost of implementing this system will be $35 per car.
Other possible solutions include issuing parking vouchers to parents and providing on-site parking validation. These topics will be discussed in further detail at our next meeting with Compuware and MPS.
FTM is also considering a sophisticated web-based Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking system for parents that will allow parents to provide up-to-date information on their schedules each day. This information will be accessible to University Prep staff via the Internet. This system will combine manual data entry – scheduling updates provided by the parents – with the automated tracking system to provide a complete overview of each day's transportation schedule. Parents will be able to register blocks of time during which they can pick-up and drop-off students. Changes can be made at anytime and will be reflected on the schedule immediately. Additionally, a Google Maps display will allow real-time tracking of parents during pick-up and drop-off hours.
FTM has introduced the idea of a web-based tracking and scheduling system to the University Prep and Compuware personnel. FTM's initial research indicates that the system will cost between $50-100 per installation. Further data must be collected, especially with regards to the cost of implementing the system and the likelihood of parents using it. These topics will be discussed at the next meeting with University Prep and Compuware.
FTM has also written two surveys for the future University Prep High School's campus design and student transportation preferences. The purpose of the surveys is to determine which aspects of a school's campus give it a collegiate atmosphere and to determine student preferences for arriving to and leaving from campus. These surveys will be used to make recommendations for the design of the future high school's campus. The surveys have been submitted to University Prep and FTM is awaiting final approval for distribution. FTM will distribute surveys to each junior and senior enrolled in University Prep's current high school, and to at least half of the currently enrolled underclassmen. Once the surveys have been distributed and collected, FTM will analyze the results to provide University Prep with input and recommendations on the design of their future high school.
In order to complete the data collection process, FTM will need to have several more meetings with the Compuware, MPS, and University Prep representatives. Additional data will be collected through a series of interviews. As mentioned, FTM is awaiting data from MPS and is also waiting for final approval of the surveys so that distribution can begin.
From the research and data collected thus far, FTM has proposed several possible approaches for student transportation at the Compuware headquarters.
From the first visit to the Compuware headquarters and the adjacent parking structure, FTM was able to identify that the key limitation in designing a solution for student transportation is the lack of usable space near Compuware. Student safety is a primary concern, so the drop-off and pick-up areas must allow for safe transportation of students to Compuware. FTM determined that some sort of staging area will be necessary to facilitate student pick-ups and drop-offs, and the first task was to identify locations that can be used as a staging area. Figures 1 through 4 below show the streets around the Compuware building.
Figures 1-3 show the streets adjacent to the Compuware building. The white tent in the images is the setup and staging area that was being used for Winterblast, an annual event held in downtown Detroit. For the times leading up to and during Winterblast, two of the large surface streets adjacent to Compuware (Woodward Ave. and Monroe St.) are made inaccessible to motor vehicle traffic. FTM first examined solutions that did not use the surface streets, as they are prone to traffic and other barriers such as Winterblast, Tigers baseball games, and other events. FTM also concluded that avoiding the surface streets would reduce both the safety risks in transporting students and the amount of variability due to traffic fluctuations. These were deemed as significant risks due to the school's need to ensure the safety of its students, as well as the need to minimize fluctuations in scheduling. As shown in Image 4, the surface streets around the Compuware building are large enough for only one lane of traffic in either direction. Therefore, a staging area along any of the surface streets would be largely infeasible and should be avoided if possible.
FTM's preliminary recommendation is to explore the possibility of using the adjacent parking structure as a staging area. Image 4 above shows the street where the public entrance to the parking structure is located. This street is primarily used for entering and exiting the parking structure and does not experience significant traffic otherwise. Within the parking structure, FTM identified several alcoves on the 3rd and 4th floors that would be suitable for use as a staging area. These locations are shown below in Figures 5-8.
As the images show, these locations are adjacent to the elevators and walkway leading to the main Compuware building. Proximity to the elevators and walkway will reduce the amount of walking necessary and promote efficiency. Additionally, these locations have been chosen because of the minimal number of parking spaces that would have to be sacrificed to use the area for staging. Each location would require the removal of fewer than 10 spaces. Since the proposed locations are all located within a corner of the parking structure, each location will provide between 1500-2000 square feet of usable space. Our estimates indicate that this space will allow for a total of 10-15 cars to be queued around the staging area with room enough for cars to navigate out of the staging area once the pick-up or drop-off has been accomplished.
FTM presented this proposed solution to the University Prep officials and they agreed with the findings and conclusions made. University Prep has given FTM the go ahead to continue exploring this option in greater depth. The next steps will be to meet with the Compuware and parking structure representatives to explore the feasibility of this plan from their perspectives. This meeting is scheduled for Tuesday, March 10.
Due to the limited amount of space that is available for staging, FTM has also determined that it will be beneficial to establish a means for parents to communicate with the school on a daily basis. FTM's objective is to allow parents to provide updates throughout the day as to when they will be arriving to pick-up and drop-off their children. This communication will help to streamline the pick-up and drop-off operations by allowing the school's faculty to know when parents are arriving.
In examining possible communication methods, FTM concluded that any type of direct communication, such as cell phone calls and text messaging, would be infeasible as it requires University Prep to devote full time staff members to handling communication and scheduling. It also introduces several risks, including parent safety while driving and the risk that parents will be unwilling to maintain constant communication with the school. To address these issues, FTM is exploring the possibility of an automated tracking system that will work in conjunction with a web-based scheduling system where the parents can provide scheduling information when necessary.
FTM has proposed that University Prep make use of a Global Positioning Satellite (GPS) tracking system that can be monitored through the Internet via the Google Maps Application Programming Interface. Parents would receive a unique identifiable GPS tracking device to place in their vehicles. Upon entering a certain radius around Compuware, a signal would be sent to the monitoring system, alerting the school that a particular parent is about to arrive. The parent's student can then be prepared for pick-up so that waiting time for both parents and students at the pick-up location is minimized.
FTM is continuing to examine the feasibility of implementing such a system, whether it will be based on GPS, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), or some other sort of wireless technology. Our key limitations will be costs, timeframes, and compliance between the involved parties. FTM has begun contacting manufacturers and distributors of such equipment and found that in most cases, the software package included in the cost of hardware will range between $50-100 per installation. University Prep has advised FTM that cost will be the primary factor in determining feasibility. FTM will continue to explore this proposed solution and will look for quantity discounts and other possible ways to reduce the cost.
Multiple criteria will be used to determine FTM's final recommendations. For the student pick-up/drop-off situation, FTM will combine location feasibility with computer simulation results to determine the optimal solution. Using metrics such as expected average wait times and degree of traffic congestion, FTM will select the pick-up/drop-off recommendation plan from a variety of proposed options. In addition, FTM will determine the available project resources and develop a system that is cost-effective and within the budget.
FTM will also provide information relating to student transportation at the future high school. The data collection method for this will be a short survey that will be distributed to students at the current high school. The recommendation will be based solely on area feasibility and the survey results about parking preferences. FTM will also collect and analyze survey data in order to create a 'campus atmosphere' at the new school. This will allow us to provide UPSM with creative suggestions for student activities.
The project is currently behind schedule due to several obstacles that have hindered FTM's efforts to complete its goals and provide UPSM with the deliverables they have requested. The project was delayed for several weeks due to scheduling issues between relevant parties and difficulty in gaining access to Compuware facilities and personnel.
Progress was halted until the sponsor was able to provide the team with access to the Compuware facility and feedback on the draft proposals. FTM now has direct access to Compuware personnel and has gained limited access to the site. FTM will work at an increased pace to make up for lost time.
