This paper reviews Cole & Hermon 1998, The typology of wh- movement: wh- questions in Malay. In this paper, Cole & Hermon advance an analysis, within the framework of Minimalist Program, of the three types of wh- questions attested in Malay. As empirical support for their analysis, they rely on two kinds of facts: the presence or absence of island effects and the distribution of the morpheme meng- .
In Section 2., following a brief summary of Cole & Hermon's proposal, I will consider in greater detail the implications of two of the chief theoretical assumptions they make: that Q is universally strong, and that all instances of wh- in situ are licensed according to the Principle of Unselective Binding. In Section 3., I will examine the second of their two empirical diagnostics, the distribution of meng- . In Section 4., Given a proposed clause structure (Postman 2002), I argue that their analysis of meng- is incorrect, and that this failing casts doubt on the explanatory adequacy of their proposal generally. In Section 5., I evaluate the predictions Cole & Hermon's analysis makes with respect to the distribution of the types of wh- questions in Malay. Section 6. contains a brief conclusion.
Cole & Hermon show that there are three types of wh- questions attested in Malay: wh- in situ, as in 1; partial overt wh- movement (to an embedded [Spec, CP]), as in 2; and full overt wh- movement (to matrix [Spec, CP]), as in 3. 1
These three examples illustrate the possible placements of wh- nominals, such as siapa
Finally, multiple wh- questions are also attested in Malay, as shown in 5.
Cole & Hermon claim that these three types of wh- questions attested in Malay are derived very differently. wh- in situ, as in 1, does not involve movement at any level – either overt or covert – and involves a principle of Unselective Binding, in the sense of Heim 1982, whereby a wh- operator, which is merged separately at the root [Spec, CP], is able to bind any and all wh- words (assumed to be variables) in its scope (Cole & Hermon 1998: 240). 2The principle of Unselective Binding will be discussed in more detail below.
On the other hand, both 2 and 3 do clearly involve movement. Partial overt wh- movement, as shown in 2, is followed by covert movement of the wh- operator (OP) to the matrix [Spec, CP], replacing a null wh- expletive in this position. Alternatively, as in 3, the wh- word may move overtly all the way to the matrix [Spec, CP]. Movement in 2 and 3 is driven by the need to check the strong Q feature in C, which Cole & Hermon assume is universally strong (p. 241). wh- in situ is not an available option for wh- adverbials, as in (4), because wh- adverbials cannot be bound by unselective binding, and hence are forced to move (Cole & Hermon 1998: 240).
Cole & Hermon assume the Variable Binding Condition (VBC), a corollary of the principle of Full Interpretation (FI), which specifies that the representation of an expression at the interfaces must contain all and only those elements that are relevant to the interpretation of that expression (Chomsky 1995). According to Cole & Hermon, FI requires that a wh- question must have an operator/variable structure, in accordance with the semantics of questions; they posit that OP is a question operator which binds a variable, x (p. 222). This structure may be schematized as in 6.
The VBC is a bare output condition, hence sufficient to motivate movement, in this case of the question operator to [Spec, CP] (Cole & Hermon 1998: 222). The VBC, therefore, drives covert movement of the wh- operator to matrix [Spec, CP] in instances of partial wh- movement, as in (2), as well as overt movement of the wh- word to matrix [Spec, CP] in instances of full wh- movement, as in (3). Recall that in the case of wh- in situ, OP is merged separately into the matrix [Spec, CP], so that the VBC is met without requiring movement.
To summarize, the properties of the various types of wh- questions attested in Malay according to Cole & Hermon's proposal are schematized in the following table (Cole & Hermon 1998: 242, 243, 249).
TABLE 1. PROPERTIES OF wh- QUESTIONS INMALAY.
In this table, [OP+VAR] indicates that both OP and the variable it binds are a single lexical item; [OP...VAR] indicates that they are separate lexical items. The nature of the fusion of [OP+VAR] into a single lexical item has been questioned, but based on Cole & Hermon, it is not entirely clear. They merely write, "languages... differ with respect to whether or not the operator and the variable are koined in the lexicon into a single word. While in English the OP and the variable are lexicalized as a single word, in Chinese, for instance, the question word is a variable that can be bound by a phonologically null question operator" (p. 238). As a reviewer points out, there are two possibilities for combining [OP] and [VAR] into a unique lexical item: either the two items are combined in the lexicon, or they are combined as they enter the numeration. Cole & Hermon provide no way to evaluate the validity of each of these possibilities.
They later write, "the fact that wh- words in Malay can undergo overt movement constitutes ipso facto evidence that OP and the wh- word can be combined into a single word in Malay. Empirical support for the claim that in Malay wh- words can also be variables separate from the question operator is provided by the fact that wh- words can be used as variables bound by non-wh- operators" (p. 239). In () below, the wh- word apa functions as a variable bound by the existential quantifier pun "also".
However, in a footnote, they later say, "we do not claim that the wh- is a pure variable in every language in which a word can be related to an indefinite" (p. 240, fn 26).
In the next two sections, I will consider the rationale behind, and the viability of, two of Cole & Hermon's theoretical assumptions: that the Q feature is universally strong, and that the Principle of Unselective Binding handles all cases of wh- in situ.
As Cole & Hermon make the assumption that the Q feature is universally strong, apparent variation in wh- question formation must have its origin elsewhere than in variation in the strength of Q. Consequently, Cole & Hermon assume that OP is universally generated as a phonetically null operator and the wh- form is universally a variable; however, languages differ according to whether OP and the variable are joined in the lexicon as a single word (Cole & Hermon 1998: 238). In languages like English, OP and the variable are lexicalized as a single word; in languages like Chinese, they are not. Malay, then, is merely unusual in that both options are made available in the lexicon (Cole & Hermon 1998: 239). In examples such as (2) and (3), OP and the variable are fused into a single lexical item, forcing movement of the wh- word with OP. Conversely, in examples such as (1), where the wh- word remains in situ, the OP is generated separately, and binds the wh- word as a variable.
According to Cole & Hermon, the main advantage of their analysis is that it demonstrates that there is no need to posit variation in the strength of the Q feature; this feature can be assumed to be universally strong if the locus of variation in the lexicon is placed on the wh- elements themselves. However, it is not immediately clear why it would be undesirable to posit variation in the strength of the Q feature. In the Minimalist Program, variation in feature strength is omnipresent; the difference between strong and weak features is assumed to drive the difference in overt and covert movement, which the theory is not otherwise presently able to explain. To add to the mystery, Cole & Hermon write, "we can thus maintain (following Chomsky 1995) that Q-features are universally strong" (p. 256). However, my copy of Chomsky 1995 has the opposite to say: "As is well known, languages differ in strength of Q" (p. 289). Cole & Hermon do not provide any other reasons, other than following Chomsky, for why they believe it is undesirable to posit variation in the strength of Q.
However, Chomsky provides evidence to motivate that there is variation in the strength of Q. As both Q and wh- features are semantically Interpretable and need not be checked for convergence, it must be strong Q that forces overt wh- movement to [Spec, CP] in some cases; if Q is weak, overt wh- movement does not take place (Chomsky 1995: 291). In other words, the only reason to posit that Q is ever strong is to explain the contrast between overt and covert wh- movement. If, as Cole & Hermon suggest, variation in Q strength is not needed to drive this particular distinction (between overt and covert wh- movement), it's not clear what its purpose in the grammar would be. As such, the question of whether Q strength is still needed should be considered. (Of course, the semantic features of Q would still be needed.)
Given the variety of types of wh- questions in Malay alone, if they did not posit that Q is universally strong, Cole & Hermon argue that they'd be forced to posit that Malay has "optionally strong" Q features (p. 246). They see such a proposal as contradicting one of the central theoretical assumptions of the Minimalist Program, namely that "there is no optionality in syntactic principles" (p. 222). However, the flip side of this assumption is that all apparent optionality results from differences in lexical items and morphemes. Hence, Malay's "optionally strong Q features" could easily be accounted for in this way: Malay merely has two C heads which bear Q features, one bearing a strong Q feature and the other bearing a weak Q feature. This, too, would place the locus of Malay's variation in the lexicon; consequently, Cole & Hermon's argumentation about the undesirability of positing variation in the strength of Q fails to hold.
In evaluating Cole & Hermon's proposal, it is important to consider whether it is viable to assume that all instances of wh- in situ are controlled by an operator. In his 1987 article " "
D-linked wh- phrases, then, by virtue of being connected to previous discourse context, are able to take scope without LF movement; this is accomplished by being unselectively bound by a variable in Spec, CP]. On the other hand, Non-D-linked wh- phrases must move at LF, and this movement must obey Subjacency. Empirical evidence for this distinction comes from Superiority effects, which Chomsky 1995 attributes to the Minimal Link Condition, which may be formulated as follows.
Non-D-linked wh- phrases in English, as in 9 below, show Superiority effects, while D-linked wh- phrases, as in 9, do not display Superiority effects. If LF movement occurred with D-linked wh- phrases, Pesetsky argued, we'd expect them to obey the Minimal Link Condition and display Superiority effects as well; that they do not indicates that LF movement does not occur.
In order to test his hypothesis, Pesetsky created contexts in which a normally D-linked wh- phrase is "aggressively non D-linked". As expected, such aggressively non D-linked wh- phrases, which were now forced to move at LF, showed Subjacency effects.
However, contra Pesetsky's proposal, it is not clear that D-linking has any effect on the behavior of wh- phrases in Malay; even with non-D-linked wh- phrases, Malay does not appear to display superiority effects. In 11a, di mana
Cole & Hermon do not refer to Pesetsky's analysis about the relationship between D-linked whphrases and LF movement. However, I've shown that the facts about Malay multiple wh- questions actually support their proposal that all instances of wh- in situ are controlled by an operator and do not undergo movement. Contra Pesetsky's proposal, even non-D-linked wh- phrases in Malay do not appear to move at LF. However, this support for their proposal is specific only to Malay, which could present a problem if Cole & Hermon wish to extend their analysis of wh- in situ to other languages.
More problematically for Cole & Hermon's proposal, it remains unclear why wh- adverbials in Malay cannot be bound by unselective binding, and instead are forced to move overtly, as 12 (repeated from above) shows. If all wh- nominals in Malay can be unselectively bound, it is unfortunately stipulative to say that wh- adverbials cannot.
In the next section, I set Cole & Hermon's theoretical assumptions to one side and consider the viability empirical support they advance in favor of their proposal.
As empirical support for their analysis, Cole & Hermon consider, as diagnostics for movement, two types of properties: the sensitivity of the three types of wh- questions to syntactic islands, and the possible occurrence of the verbal prefix meng- with each of the question types. For the precise distribution of these properties, please refer to the "Consequences" column in Table 1 above.
The first diagnostic appears to be relatively straightforward. Cole & Hermon provide ample empirical evidence that wh- questions which exhibit overt and partial wh- movement obey island constraints and wh- questions where the wh- word remains in situ do not. If wh- in situ involved covert wh- operator movement, they argue, as partial wh- movement does, these structures should also be sensitive to island effects; the fact that they are not indicates that no covert wh- operator movement takes place (p. 229).
The second diagnostic is, however, rather worrisome. Specifically, Cole & Hermon claim that "the obligatory omission of meng- with verbs that normally take this prefix is indicative of movement" (p. 226); namely, wh- movement over the verb in question. In Section 3., I will consider the assumptions inherent in this diagnostic, whether these assumptions are problematic, and what possible implications these assumptions have, not only for the analysis of wh- questions advanced by Cole & Hermon, but more broadly for an analysis of sentence structure in Malay. In Section 4., I will look closely at Postman 2002's proposal of Indonesian clause structure and see how Cole & Hermon's view of the distribution of meng- comports with it.
Despite the importance of this diagnostic to their analysis, Cole & Hermon dwell little on the nature of the prefix meng- , and cite no other work on the topic. They merely write (p. 231-2):
Many questions – which Cole & Hermon regrettably fail to address – immediately arise, although I will focus on only three here, summarized in the bulleted list below.
I will further demonstrate that, in order for Cole & Hermon's proposal to achieve explanatory adequacy, the goal of the Minimalist Program, each of these questions must first be satisfactorily addressed. In the following sections, I will consider each of these questions in turn. 3
The first question is not merely one of terminology, but reflective of a much deeper property of the proposed analysis. What are Cole & Hermon referring to, exactly, when they speak of "the loss" of the prefix meng- ? Is this to be understood as some sort of deletion or ellipsis process? If so, how is "deletion" or "ellipsis" of a morpheme (i.e., part of a word) to be understood, or theoretically implemented, in the Minimalist Program?
Cole & Hermon's discussion about on this topic is, at best, somewhat misleading, and at worst, completely inconsistent. They alternatively refer to this phenomenon as "loss" (which implies deletion of meng- ) and as "obligatory omission" (which implies meng- was never in the derivation to begin with). Descriptively, they wish to say that the meng- form of a transitive verb is not permitted in certain environments, namely, where a wh- word or an object NP has moved over it, as shown in 13. Although meng- may not appear on the matrix verb, buktikan
However, it is not clear how to account for this, given the assumptions of the Minimalist Program. If – as seems to be implied – the presence of a certain type of chain precludes the existence of meng- , what technological devices (or worse, stipulations) do we need in order to ensure that the meng- ful derivation is ruled out in favor of the meng- less one?
There are two logical possibilities about the absence of meng- : either meng- was in the representation and later deleted, or meng- was never in the representation at all. Previous analyses (e.g. Postman 2002, which will be discussed in some detail below) of Indonesian clause structure have suggested that meng- is introduced into the derivation separate from the verb which hosts it; for Postman, for example, meng- is in the head of PrP. Assuming this to be meng- 's correct structural position, the question remains whether meng- is introduced into the derivation, and later rendered phonologically null or deleted, or whether a null Pr0 is instead merged into the derivation.
The next obvious question is as follows: if, as Cole & Hermon claim above, meng- is not "a marker of transitivity", what is it? The analysis they suggest might be interpreted as implicitly assuming that the presence of meng- requires the checking of some sort of feature, and that this feature, somehow, is prevented from being checked if wh- or NP-movement occurs over it. What is this feature? Before considering this question in more detail, we will take a look at Sneddon 1996's description of meng- in Standard Indonesian. 4
Sneddon (1996), in his grammar of Standard Indonesian, describes the verbal affix meng- as having two distinct functions, one with intransitive verbs and another with transitive verbs.
Note that, other than this small set of intransitive verbs with which meng- is mandatory, meng- is never used to mark an intransitive verb.
meng- WITH TRANSITIVE VERBS: meng- on a transitive verb marks active voice, di- marks passive voice (Sneddon 1996: 67; Voskuil 2000: 198). Others disagree with this characterization of meng- on transitive verbs; for example, Willett (1993) claims that meng- and di- are agreement markers. Others (e.g. Chung 1976) say that meng- marks transitivity or agentivity. For Postman (2002), meng- and di- are generated in the head of PredP, and meng- occurs "when the argument in subject position is the most prominent argument at every stage in the derivation of a sentence" (p. 282). For Guilfoyle, Hung & Travis (1992), meng- is a lexical head inserted directly in V, while di- is a functional head (a determiner) which originates in a DP. Furthermore, meng- is directly associated with the licensing of a direct object, as meng- Case-marks the direct object. At any rate, descriptively speaking, meng- is seen on transitive verbs when the external argument is the subject of the clause; di- is seen on transitive verbs when the internal argument is the subject of the clause.
Note that the "transitivity" required of a verb to be marked with meng- is really a semantic transitivity (Fortin 2001). Although most transitive verbs require that their object be syntactically expressed, there are quite a few verbs whose object can be omitted when it is "obvious" or "unimportant" (Sneddon 1996: 242). In such cases, as in 16 below, the verb is nonetheless marked with meng- . This would not be expected if meng- was instead dependant on syntactic transitivity, if we follow Chomsky's 1995 assumption that "verbs with optional objects will have distinct lexical entries, one with and one without the Case feature" (p. 308).
However, there are reasons to believe that the meng- seen on a small set of intransitive verbs is not the same meng- that is used to mark active voice on transitive verbs. With intransitive verbs, meng- seems to have a derivational property that is not reflected on the transitive verbs meng- marks. Additionally, the prefix meng- on transitive verbs is completely productive, while the appearance of meng- on intransitive verbs is quite limited and rather unpredictable. Finally, while the presence of meng- on transitive verbs is generally optional (it is normally omitted in less formal speech), meng- on this set of intransitive verbs is never optional, as 17 shows.
Recall that Cole & Hermon claim that meng- is not "a marker of transitivity", although the analysis they suggest might be interpreted as implicitly assuming that the presence of meng- requires the checking of some sort of feature, which is crucially prevented from being checked if wh- or NP-movement occurs over it. However, given Sneddon's description, it is arguably the case that meng- is not inflection, per se. It does not reflect agreement, tense, aspect, mood, person, number, or any of the categories typically associated with "inflection", and which are accounted for within the structure of the clause motivated in Chomsky 1995. In fact, none of these categories in Malay/Indonesian are marked on the verb; overt person and number agreement is non-existent, and tense/aspect/mood – which need not be overt unless it is contrastive – is indicated with a free-standing auxiliary or adverbial. Nonetheless, Postman (2002) makes the claim that meng- is an inflectional element and that the relevant feature is [+active] (p. 284). There is a further complication, however: the appearance of meng- is almost always optional. In active voice clauses, meng- can be omitted from any transitive verb without triggering a change in meaning, and in less formal registers it generally is omitted. 5 In active voice clauses that do not contain meng- , then, there must be some other way of checking the [+active] feature on the verb; presumably, this would have to be done by means of a phonetically null prefix, which apart from its phonology would need to have the same exact set of properties as meng- .
Consequently, given that meng- optionally appears on all transitive verbs in active voice clauses without triggering any change in meaning, it might be most logical to treat meng- as a derivational prefix, one that does not have any requirements with respect to feature checking. If this idea is adopted, though, it is not clear how to understand Cole & Hermon's analysis of meng- . What we do know is that meng- , together with word order, distinguishes the active voice from the passive voice construction in Malay/Indonesian. In an active construction, the NP bearing the agent/external theta role is the "subject", while in passive constructions, an NP bearing a theme/internal theta role is the "subject". Crucially, meng- can only appear when the agent NP is the subject.
In the next brief section, I described basic sentence structure in Indonesian with respect to the passive/active voice distinction. Oddly, Cole & Hermon fail to note this distinction in their paper. However, it is relevant for evaluating their proposal.
The basic paradigm is shown below in 18-20.
In sum, meng- and di- are in complementary distribution, in active and canonical passive voice constructions respectively. However, unlike meng- , the presence of di- in canonical passives is not optional. This indicates that meng- and di- likely have quite different sets of properties, although both are considered voice markers.
In Section 4., I will take a close look at a proposed clause structure for Indonesian, in order to understand how, and when, NP movement actually occurs, and what the implications are for Cole & Hermon's view of the distribution of meng- .
Postman proposes a basic clause structure for Indonesian which follows that of Bowers (2001).
The prefix meng- is generated in Pr0 (as is the prefix di- ); Postman suggests that both are inflectional elements. For meng- , there is a [+active] feature that is checked when the verb cium
If V-to-I movement is overt, then, in every active voice clause containing meng- the subject DP will cross over the verb while it hosts meng- . However, movement of some DP over meng- is precisely the environment that Cole & Hermon suggest to force the obligatory deletion of meng- . If their claim is true, we would expect meng- to be deleted in every active voice clause, and this is not the case. In fact, Guilfoyle, Hung & Travis 1992 does contain arguments that V-to-I movement occurs in the overt syntax. Under their analysis, both meng- and the verb root are inserted in V; the subject NP raises to [Spec, IP] for Case assignment under spec-head agreement with the meng- verb complex in I, as shown in 27 below. 7
In order to save their analysis, Cole & Hermon would need to make a distinction between the kinds of movement that result in deletion of meng- and the kinds of movement that do not. We've already seen that movement of an adverbial over meng- does not force the morpheme's deletion. However, Cole & Hermon wish to maintain that both A movement and A' movement over meng- have the effect of deleting it; as support for their analysis of wh- movement, they claim that object preposing (which appears to be equivalent to what Guilfoyle, Hung & Travis call subjective passive) results in the loss of meng- , as shown in 28.
If their analysis of object preposing constructions is accurate, and if verb movement is overt, Cole & Hermon would then need to explain why movement of the subject DP Nando over meng- in 24 above does not result in its deletion while movement of the clefted object DP Ali does. In the next section, tests for overt verb raising in Indonesian will be discussed.
The question is, now, how to test for overt verb raising in Indonesian. Guilfoyle, Hung & Travis admit, "while the existence of verb movement to INFL is not evident in the active construction, it will be necessary to assume that it takes place in the formation of the passive" (p. 397). This is because in the "subjective passive" construction, verb movement to INFL is necessary to create a Case-marking relationship between the agent, which surfaces as a proclitic on the verb, and the verb. In 30 below, the agent pronoun ku moves into I0 and is Case-marked there by the verb pukul it adjoins to.
Based on their proposal of the structure of the subjective passive, then, Guilfoyle, Hung & Travis claim that V-to-I movement takes place overtly in the active clause construction as well. However, since their rationale here is internal to their particular proposal, it is useful to consider other diagnostics for V-to-I movement, such as considering the position of the verb with respect to negation, as in 31 and 32. 8
If we assume that NegP is located below the IP, it appears that the verb does not raise to I overtly in either active or subjective passive sentences, as in 31 and 32 respectively. Perhaps it is the case that NegP is located instead above the IP in Indonesian; the fact that auxiliaries also appear under the scope of negation, as in 33, suggests that this might be the case.
On the other hand, VP adverbs generally seem to appear pre-verbally, as in 34. If such VP adverbs are base-generated in a position above the VP, this would indicate that the verb has not raised to I overtly in such cases.
To fully test this hypothesis, we need to consider the relative ordering of a VP adverb and negation. The two possibilities are illustrated in 35, but I do not yet know which is correct.
In sum, it is not clear at this point whether V-to-I movement occurs in the overt or covert component of the syntax, as the evidence with respect to negation and VP adverbs is somewhat inconclusive. Consequently, until more revealing diagnostics for V-to-I movement in Indonesian are uncovered, it is not clear whether Postman's proposed clause structure ultimately presents a real challenge to Cole and Hermon's view of the licensing of meng- . (For example, it is not possible to test the behavior of meng- with raising verbs, because Indonesian/Malay doesn't have them.)
A more substantive challenge to Cole & Hermon's analysis comes from wh- adverbials. Cole & Hermon provide data indicating that when wh- adverbial moves over the verb, the omission of meng- is not obligatory (p. 231), as shown in 36.
Even if we presume that V-to-I movement is covert (and the argumentation in the previous section failed), This observation gives rise to an obvious question: why should movement of a wh- adverbial not give rise to the same consequences as movement of a wh- NP? If we continue to adopt Postman's proposal, 36 will have the structure in 37.
If the "loss" of meng- obligatorily results from movement over it, the type of object that heads the chain – either adverbial or nominal – should not be relevant. However, Cole & Hermon argue that this is, in fact, the relevant distinction: "the loss of meng- is determined by whether the wh- form is an NP, and not by whether it is an argument or an adjunct" (p. 232). For them, the distinction between A-movement and A'-movement is not relevant, in that both NP movement and wh- NP movement are presumed to result in deletion of meng- . The landing site of the moved element cannot be a relevant distinction, either, if all wh- phrases move to [Spec, CP], and the landing site for A-movement (i.e. of the object NP in the canonical passive) is [Spec, IP].
In order for their analysis to be saved, we would need to propose how chains headed by NPs and wh- NPs differ from chains headed by wh- adverbials in such a way that the first trigger meng- deletion and the second does not. For example, all three of these types of chains meet the uniformity condition. And although Cole & Hermon point out that wh- adverbials, unlike wh- NPs, cannot be bound by unselective binding. Therefore, wh- adverbials cannot remain in situ and hence must move overtly. However, it's not obvious how this fact could be capitalized on.
In this section, I will consider the predictions that Cole & Hermon's analysis, as well as their reliance on the meng- diagnostic, make with respect to the distribution of the different types of wh- questions in Malay. Are the three types of wh- movement in strict complementary distribution? The analysis appears to predict that full and partial wh- movement should be in complementary distribution with each other, while wh- in situ need not be. This is because a derivation involving wh- in situ will involve a different numeration (one where OP and the variable it binds are merged separately) than a derivation involving full or partial wh- movement, where OP and the variable are merged as a single lexical item. Derivations with different numerations do not compete with each other for economy purposes, so we should not observe any competition between wh- in situ and overt wh- movement.
However, Cole & Hermon indicate that full and partial wh- movement are, to the contrary, not in complementary distribution: "we leave unanswered in this paper the more general question of why partial wh- movement should occur at all, given a Minimalist conception of grammar, in which wh- movement in the syntax is motivated by the need to satisfy the checking requirements of strong Q-features" which, crucially, reside in the matrix CP (p. 238: fn25). The existence of partial wh- movement is unexpected, if the numeration of a derivation resulting in partial wh- movement is the same as that of a derivation resulting in full wh- movement, and these two derivations are thus in competition with each other.
However, as Cole & Hermon point out, there exists a discrepancy between their two key diagnostics, the distribution of meng- and the islandhood facts. This discrepancy can be observed in questions displaying partial wh- movement, such as 38:
The issue in 38 is that meng- can appear on the matrix verb, memberitahu, while islandhood facts indicate that the partially moved wh- word, apa, covertly moves to matrix [Spec, CP], predicting that meng- will be obligatorily omitted from the matrix verb as well. They claim that this apparent discrepancy can be accounted for, however, once we consider the difference between overt null operator movement and covert operator movement: "since post-spell-out movement cannot, be definition, be reflected in pronunciation, it is... expected that meng- will not be omitted between the surface position of wh and the scopal Q" (Cole & Hermon 1998: 250).
This discrepancy could also be accounted for if we consider an alternate possibility, that the presence of meng- somehow blocks NP movement over it (Voskuil 2000: 202). 9 Voskuil's proposal takes the opposite tack of Cole & Hermon's, which says that it is instead meng- that is blocked by NP movement over it. While it is clear that meng- and NP movement cannot coexist, it is not clear why; Cole & Hermon's proposal does not seem to be adequate for many reasons, as sketched above. While Voskuil's proposal cannot be lengthily evaluated here, on the surface (i.e. leaving aside questions about the nature of meng- ) it can provide an explanation as for why, in 38 above, meng- appears above the wh- word's landing site in embedded [Spec, CP]: the meng- in the matrix clause prevents the wh- word from moving overtly to matrix [Spec, CP]. Voskuil's proposal might also be able to account for the fact that partial wh- movement and full wh- movement are not in complementary distribution. Compare 39 below, which displays full wh- movement, to 37 above, which displays partial wh- movement.
It is a possibility that 38 and 39 would have different numerations. In 38, if the matrix verb is memberitahu, the derivation in 38 would have a different numeration that the derivation in 39, which instead contains beritahu. Again, in the case of different numerations, the derivations are not in competition for purposes of economy, and we would not expect to see blocking effects. (However, this argument fails if, in 38, the matrix verb is also beritahu; according to e.g. Postman's proposal, meng- is introduced into the derivation separately.)
More promisingly, however, Voskuil's proposal – which is more restricted than Cole & Hermon's with respect to the kinds of movement that are relevant to the presence or absence of meng- – is not challenged by the fact that movement of wh- adverbials does not conflict with the presence of meng- , as discussed above. This is illustrated in 40.
Again, however, no certain conclusions about Voskuil's proposal can be drawn at this point; I am just mentioning it here as a possible alternative to Cole & Hermon's.
Cole & Hermon 1998 has much to offer in advancing our understanding of the typology of whmovement. They propose that languages vary in the way that wh- operators and variables are generated in the lexicon (either separately, or combined into a single lexical item), and that this lexical difference is the locus of all apparent wh- variation. Languages such as Chinese or Japanese, which demonstrate wh- in situ, possess wh- operators and variables which are generated separately; the variable is then subject to Unselective Binding by the wh- operator, and, as such, wh- movement (overt or covert) fails to occur. (Compare this analysis to the canonical one proposed in Huang 1981/2, wherein even in the case of wh- in
situ, covert movement of the wh- operator occurs.) Conversely, in languages such as English, which display wh- movement, wh- operators and variables are lexicalized into a single item. wh- movement follows from the need to check the Q feature of C, which is proposed to be universally strong. Finally, languages such of Malay make use of both possibilities.
However, I have pointed out some of the problems with the assumptions behind the analysis. Most of these problems revolve around the following question: why should it be the case that "the obligatory omission of meng- with verbs that would otherwise permit meng- indicates the movement of an NP argument over the meng- + verb" (Cole & Hermon 1998: 233)? I have argued that, without an understanding of what meng- is, and why, when, and how it is "omitted" in the case of overt wh- or NPmovement over the verb that would have hosted it, this analysis lacks explanatory adequacy. Postman (2002) claims that meng- is an inflectional element, because it is "connected with the appearance" of the agent NP as the external argument; di- is likewise an inflectional element (p. 284). Furthermore, meng- only appears when "the argument in subject position is the most prominent argument at every stage in the derivation of a sentence" (p. 282). In passives, then, in which the argument in subject position began as an internal argument – that is, not the least prominent argument – meng- cannot appear. However, while Postman's suggestion may be descriptively adequate, it does not explain why meng- cannot appear in passives.
Cole & Hermon attempt to explain the distribution of meng- by proposing that meng- is deleted by NP movement over it. However, if it can be demonstrated that Postman's proposed clause structure is correct and that V-to-I raising in Malay/Indonesian is overt, Cole & Hermon's assumption about the distribution of meng- will be proven incorrect. Unfortunately for their analysis of wh- movement, the distribution of meng- is one of only two types of empirical evidence that Cole & Hermon are able to advance in support of it.
