In the average internal combustion engine-driven automobile, only 25% of the energy generated from combustion can be used by the vehicle for mobility and accessories. The rest of the combustion energy is wasted, including 40% that is lost to exhaust gas [1]. Various methods have been developed to try to recover some of this lost energy, including turbogenerators, Rankine Cycle recovery systems, thermochemical recuperation, and thermoelectric generators (TEGs) [2]. Additionally, some hybrid cars including the Toyota Prius use regenerative braking to recover some of the kinetic energy lost when stopping the vehicle [3].
Thermoelectric generators are attractive potential waste heat recovery systems because they are relatively inexpensive, have no moving parts (and thus produce no noise and no vibrations), and are highly reliable [4]. Previous studies have attempted to develop TEG systems for waste energy recovery in light trucks [5][6][7], but these studies have not considered lighter cars with hybrid engines such as the Prius. In addition, previous researchers have not specifically taken into account the driving habits of university students.
In this study, we investigated the possibility of developing a waste heat recovery system mounted on the exhaust system of the Toyota Prius as driven by college students using TEGs coupled with heat sinks mounted on the exhaust system of the vehicle. Specifically our goals for this study were as follows:
All variables used throughout this report have been defined in Table 1, below.
We considered the effects of heat sink size, pin shape, pin height, and pin density on the voltage output of a thermoelectric generator. In order to determine the effects of these factors with a minimal number of experiments, we used a fractional factorial DOE methodology and analyzed the results with an analysis of variance (ANOVA). We then predicted the optimum heat sink configuration for our application based on the ANOVA and design considerations. This configuration was then tested under various wind speeds and temperatures to extrapolate the
TEG's performance at typical driving conditions as determined from a survey of college students.
The results of the fractional factorial analysis were used to determine the significant factors in TEG voltage output using an ANOVA statistical analysis. The ANOVA and power data from the initial tests were used to determine the best heat sink geometry.
A fan was placed to flow across the heat sink to simulate the air flow under a moving car. The fan was approximately 15cm from the TEG and was placed at approximately the same height as the base of the heat sink. The fan speed was kept constant at 2.7 ± 0.5 m/s for the initial set of tests.
For each test defined in the DOE table, we placed the corresponding heat sink on top of the TEG, turned on the hotplate, and recorded the temperatures and voltage as the hotplate temperature increased to steady state. For our tests the steady state temperature was approximately
190±10°C. However, this was difficult to control due to high uncertainty and uneven temperature distribution produced by the hotplate.
The thermoelectric figure of merit, ZT, under our test conditions was found using the following plots illustrated in Fig. 2, below. We evaluated the ZT value for a Bismuth Telluride (Bi2Te3) material, taking the average of the pand n-type values, at a temperature equal to the mean temperature of the test (~140°C). The resulting ZT value was approximately 0.7 for this case.
We then used the mechanical efficiency defined as the ratio of the electrical power generated to the thermal power into the device, given by Eqs. (2) and (3). This allowed us to determine the constant K for the TEG, which we assumed to be independent of temperature.
In these equations, the constant K (W/K) represents the lumped thermal conductivity of the TEG device, assuming it to be a semi-infinite slab according to heat transfer analysis. This constant incorporates the thermal conductivity, k, cross-sectional area, A, and height, L, of the TEG. The Voltage is given by V and the resistance is defined by R, assuming a value of 4.0 Ohms according to manufacturer specifications [1].
Since a gradient of temperature exists between the base of the heat sink, TL (where we measured), and the cold side of the TEG, we used the thermal conductivity of the TEG to predict the actual value by solving for TC using Eq. 4, below, which was determined by combining Eq. 2 and 3:
A heat transfer analysis using a conservation of energy approach for this setup resulted in Eq. 5 below. In this equation, the heat flux QH into the system is balanced by the convective heat transfer Q-convected out of the system and the power generated by the device. Equation 6, below, defines the convective heat transfer, where hA (W/K) is a measure of the convective heat transfer to the ambient.
Using the results of the optimal heat sink tests, we determined a relationship between the convective heat transfer coefficient, hA and the air velocity.
We used the survey results to estimate TH at various points in the exhaust system (Fig. 7 on page 10). Combining equations (2) – (6) yielded Eq. (7), below. This equation was solved explicitly in terms of TC to estimate the cold side temperature of the TEG for the estimated TH, taking into account the higher convective heat transfer with a moving automobile.
We estimated the ambient temperature as 10˚C, which was determined to be an estimate for the average yearly temperature in Ann Arbor, MI [9]. We used an iterative process to estimate the ZT value for various TE materials optimized for the calculated mean temperature and find Tc. This Tc value is then used in Eq. 4 to determine the output power. Since the TEG material we tested cannot withstand sustained temperatures greater than 250˚C [1], Fig. 4, on page 8, was used to estimate the figure of merit for various TE materials.
where ∆FE is the fuel efficiency increase in mpg, P is the electrical power generated in Watts and W is the additional weight of the system in lbs. Additionally, assuming a gas a price of $3.20/gallon and a car lifetime of 150,000 miles, the amount of money saved in fuel consumption over the lifetime of the car is given in terms of P, W, and the original fuel economy FE0 by Eq. 9. The EPA's estimate for the average fuel economy of the 2007 Toyota Prius is 46 mpg [11].
For an electrical generation system to be practical to implement, it should save the consumer more money in gas than it costs in additional vehicle price. Similarly, since one gallon of gas produces 9 kg of CO2 gas in the average car [12], and the Prius' CO2 emissions are about half of that [13], the reduction of CO2 emissions (in kg) over the lifetime of the car is given by:
We used the conducted survey to approximate the exhaust temperatures of the Toyota Prius at various component locations under the car. Using the dimensions of the exhaust, we then approximated the useable area for TEG implementation. Thorough analysis of the tested heat sinks yielded an optimal configuration taking into account power, cost, and added weight of the system. We predicted the thermal constants associated with the TEG and optimal heat sink at design temperatures. An Estimation of the performance and cost of the proposed system with current technology is then presented.
Table 3 on page 10 shows that the average time per trip is about 15 minutes and the average driving time per day is about 25 minutes. Additionally, the average time spent towing a trailer, letting the car idle, and driving on dirt or poorly paved roads is negligible for the purpose of this analysis. Finally, 27.7% of college students' driving time is spent on the highway, and college drivers drive aggressively 17.9% of the time. Both of these activities significantly increase the load experienced by the car.
Since the average student drives about 25.4 minutes per day, 72.3% city driving (approximately 30 mph) and 27.7% highway driving (approximately 70 mph), the average distance driven per day is 17 miles/day, so the average college student's car is driven about 6000 miles/year.
Figure 7 shows the exhaust system component temperatures at partial and full loads for a BMW 318i sedan.
Assuming that the Prius has a similar exhaust system, we determined the typical component temperatures for city and highway driving. City driving is approximated as driving at 30mph, and the component temperatures are approximated as the temperature partial load plus 25% of the difference between the full and partial loads. This estimate takes into account the transient behavior of the car as it warms up, driver aggressiveness, and the temperature fluctuation due to the unique engine behavior of the Prius (see Discussion Section). Highway driving is
approximated as the partial load plus 75% of the difference between the full and partial loads. This estimate takes into account vehicle transient behavior and driver aggressiveness. Table 4, below, summarizes these exhaust system temperatures with the corresponding useable area for mounting the TEGs.
Table 6, below, summarizes the results of our ANOVA analysis. The full ANOVA results outputted from MATLAB can be found in Appendix B. We examined the effect of various factors related to the heat sink geometry on both the power output of the TEG and the temperature difference across the device, ignoring interactions between the factors. Using a 90% confidence interval, we determined the only significant factor was pin height.
Using the ANOVA analysis and the power per cost ratio from Table 5, p.11, we determined that the best heat sink for this application is the Alpha Novatech PN S153020W.
Figure 8 shows that there is a linear relationship between the convective heat transfer coefficient, hA, and air velocity.
The hA values for city and highway driving were determined from the relationship shown in Fig.
8. For city driving (30mph), hA=0.28 W/K, and for highway driving (70mph), hA=0.62.
To maximize the power output of the system, the TEGs placed on the exhaust manifold and the exhaust pipe are filled skutterudite TEGs while the TEGs on the catalyst, the center muffler, and the rear muffler are Bi2Te3 TEGs (see Fig. 9). This configuration was chosen to maximize the ZT value at each component based on Fig. 4, p.8. It should be noted that HiZ 2 TEGs that we tested in the laboratory would not be acceptable for this application, as they cannot be exposed to sustained temperature of more than 250˚C, however more robust Bi2Te3 TEGs could be used. The performance of this system is summarized in Table 8, below. The filled skutterudite TEGs are assumed to have similar geometrical, mass, conductivity properties, and costs as the Bi2Te3 TEGs. The system weight is estimated as the weight of the TEGs and heat sinks, plus approximately 5lbs (2.3kg) for installation hardware.
Table 7. Summary of performance of TEG heat recovery system using current technology.
In order to draw conclusions about our data, we needed to assess the validity and implications of our results. We then also further investigated the characteristics of the Toyota Prius, and current and future TEG technologies.
While a small fan mounted on top of the heat sink may have increased the convective heat transfer from the heat sink, we chose not to propose the use of a fan for several reasons. The fans would take power from the system, add weight to the car, and add a degree of complexity to the system due to moving parts. Since the fans were only able to generate a maximum of about 3 m/s (6.7mph) while using about 1 watt of power, the increased convection due to the fan would not outweigh the energy cost of using the fan.
First, the hotplate had a very uneven temperature distribution. If the thermocouple used to measure the hotplate temperature was moved even slightly, the temperature reading would change by up to 20°C. In addition, the set point of the hotplate was not consistent. Setting the hotplate to 260°C resulted in hotplate temperatures of between 150°C and 210°C, varying from test to test. While we attempted to compensate for these problems by changing the set point to achieve a consistent temperature, and trying to place the thermocouple in a consistent spot, the temporal and spatial fluctuations made the hotplate temperature extremely difficult to measure accurately. A more precise heating element would have greatly improved our temperature reading accuracy, and thus improve our performance predictions.
Second, the contact resistance of the setup did not seem to be consistent. While we tried to use a consistent amount of thermal grease at each contact, other factors may have affected this resistance. For example, contact resistance decreases with increasing contact pressure [18]. However, we used heat sinks of different weights, so the contact pressure was never consistent. Additionally, to measure the heat sink surface temperature, we had to put some pressure on the heat sink with the thermocouple. While we attempted to keep this pressure consistent, we had to hold the thermocouple by hand, and the pressure may have changed from test to test. Our results would be more accurate if the contact pressure could be kept constant by using a clamp to hold down the heat sink and take temperature measurements. Additionally, the thermal grease seemed to clump over time and create air pockets that would increase the contact resistance. This could be remedied by using a different kind of thermal grease or by reapplying thermal grease between each test.
Finally, the resistor used to simulate a load across the TEG was attached very close to the TEG, so the resistor heated up during the tests. This temperature change may have changed the resistance, which would affect our voltage measurements. If the resistor had been placed in parallel with the TEG with longer wires, the resistor could have been kept closer to the ambient temperature, and thus maintained a more consistent resistance.
These laboratory testing problems probably affected our results for our ANOVA analysis and our extrapolation to real-world driving conditions. However, since the results of our system analysis show that the necessary TEG technology is an order of magnitude higher than that which is available today, our recommendations are not highly affected by our laboratory problems.
The Prius also uses fuel-saving technology other than the hybrid engine. The Prius' fuel efficiency is increased by the car's aerodynamic shape, which is due in part to its flat underside designed at for smoother air flow beneath the car (see Fig. 11, below). The Prius also uses a weight-saving design, using lightweight components as much as possible [3]. Any proposed changes to the Prius design should be made with these factors in mind. In our air-cooled system the TEGs and heat sinks would add both weight and drag beneath the car.
Figure 11. The underside of the Prius is flat to make the underbody air flow smoother and reduce drag. [3].
Fig. 4, p.8. These materials have lower ZT values than the materials listed in Table 8, so they were not considered for this application.Table 8. Comparison of characteristics for recommended TEG Materials.
The goal of several US Department of Energy programs investigating waste heat recovery is a fuel economy increase of 10% [14]. In the Prius, this corresponds to a fuel economy increase of
4.6 mpg. Neglecting the TEG system weight, Eq. 8, p.8 implies that this could be achieved with a TEG power generation of 1150 W. In order for this to be possible with the system proposed in the Results Section above, our models show that TEGs with a ZT near 3 would need to be developed. However, the cost of the system would still be a major hurdle before implementation could be realistic.
In order to estimate the requirements for a TEG system to be feasible on the Toyota Prius, an economic evaluation was performed to determine the point at which a TEG system could pay for itself over the lifetime of the car (the break-even point). One way to reduce cost would be to reduce the number of TEGs needed. By only mounting TEGs on the three highest-temperature elements (the exhaust manifold, exhaust pipe, and catalyst), the number of TEGs could be reduced to 155.
Figure 12 p. 18 shows the amount of fuel economy savings with respect to time and the figure of merit ZT. The plot shows that with a TEG cost reduction of 85% and a ZT of 4, the system will exactly pay for itself at the end of the car's life cycle (150,000 miles and 25 years). Figure 12 also shows the break-even points for other combinations of cost reduction and figure of merit ZT.
In order to increase the savings achieved with a TEG without increasing the number of TEGs, the figure of merit of the individual TEGs must be increased. Figure 13 illustrates that increasing ZT would lead to increased fuel efficiency. The figure also shows that there is a limit to how much the ZT can be increased before it does not significantly affect the fuel economy. This occurs around a ZT value of 20. For high ZT values, the factor limiting power output shifts from the material properties to the Carnot efficiency.
than that of the Bi2Te3 TEGs. Development of technology for automated fabrication should further decrease the cost of quantum well TEGs. In addition, quantum well TEGs are predicted to have very high efficiencies compared to the TEGs available today and can also be utilized in higher temperature ranges [8]. Figure 14 shows the relationship between efficiency and cost of future TEG modules with respect to temperature.
The temperature of the gas that flows through the exhaust system is higher than the temperature on the outer shell of the exhaust system. Since the TEG is mounted on this outer shell, maximizing this temperature would increase the TEG power output. To achieve this, the exhaust system could be constructed with a less thermally resistive material, or the exhaust gas could be forced to have turbulent flow with the help of spiraled fins inside the exhaust system [17].
In addition, a reduction in thermal resistance of the insulating wafer that is placed between the exhaust system and the TEG and also between the TEG and heat sink could also improve the performance [17]. Similarly, an increased thermal conductivity of the thermal paste would increase heat flux through the TEG system and thus improve performance.
Many studies of waste heat recovery systems in automobiles have used coolant from the car's engine to cool the cold side of the TEG instead of flowing ambient air [5][6][7][17]. Use of such a coolant system would increase the temperature difference across the TEG and thus increase our power output.
We have investigated the possibility of implementing an air-cooled TEG waste heat recovery system mounted on the exhaust system of a Toyota Prius driven by college students. Our conclusions are as follows:
While our laboratory tests had a high level of uncertainty, it is clear that the current TEG technology is far below the necessary level to be feasibly implemented. Assuming gas prices of $3.20/gallon, an average ZT of 4 and an 85% reduction in TEG system price would be necessary for the system to pay for itself in saved fuel costs over the lifetime of the car.
While the implementation of a TEG waste heat recovery system in the Toyota Prius is not practical using today's technology, future TEG materials may make such a system a viable option. Specifically, when ZT values approach 4 and TEG costs are reduced by 85% (a realistic target based on the prediction of quantum well TEG technologies), the system should be reconsidered.
The following recommendations should be considered when investigating a TEG waste heat recovery system in the future:
