Atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gasses (GHGs) have been steadily rising since the start of the Industrial Revolution due to anthropogenic emissions. This has caused global mean temperature to rise by an estimated .5 degrees Celsius, with some regions experiencing much higher increases than the average (Agarwal, 2008). Higher temperatures have ushered in rising sea levels, more erratic weather patterns, and adverse human health impacts. This trend is difficult to reverse because human emissions are a net addition to the carbon cycle; they represent an additional input to the global carbon balance which has led to ever-increasing net storage. Furthermore, GHGs persist in the atmosphere for long periods of time. In order to reduce atmospheric concentrations of GHGs, either the inputs (primarily emissions) must be lowered or the outputs (primarily carbon sequestration in forests) must be raised. This paper looks at the relative efficacy of different approaches to reducing the concentration of carbon dioxide, and concludes that a combination of measures, including both emissions reduction and sequestration, is needed to achieve stability.
I first performed background research using lecture notes and existing literature to determine how climate change works, what the impacts of climate change are, how carbon dioxide is cycled through the oceans and atmosphere, and how carbon dioxide concentrations have changed over time. Next, I modeled these flows using the upwelling-diffusion climate model from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Harvey et. al., 1997). This model is shown in Figure 1. There are three "storage" compartments for carbon dioxide: the atmosphere, land and shallow oceans, and deep oceans. The IPCC model identifies the input rates and output rates from each of these storage boxes. For example, the outputs from land and shallow oceans are downwelling into deep oceans, at a rate of .11S gigatons per year, and respiration up into the atmosphere, at .27S per year.
Using this model, I simulated future scenarios using IS92 data as my baseline. In these scenarios, I demonstrated the impact of halving and doubling each of the six flows (emissions, fixation, respiration, downwelling, upwelling, and deposition), while holding the other flows constant. The model produced future projections for atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations based on these parameters for the year 2200 and the maximum level. The output from this scenario modeling allowed me to determine the impact of each "lever" on achieving carbon reductions. In my analysis, I assumed that sequestration is equivalent to fixation (as it represents the earth's ability to sequester carbon in vegetation). However, one could also consider man-made carbon sequestration and storage (CCS) techniques in devising a practical, comprehensive strategy to reduce GHG concentrations (for instance, the possibility of trapping emissions from coal-fired power plants and burying them underground). I also applied learnings from my literature review to assess which levers could in fact be altered and by how much.
The results of the scenario modeling show that the most effective lever in altering atmospheric carbon dioxide levels is emissions: the range in carbon dioxide concentrations that result from halving or doubling emissions is the highest, at 1,229.9 ppm in year 2200 or 2,072.5 ppm maximum. Fixation is a close second, with a range of 1,028.2 ppm in year 2200 or 1,684.6 ppm maximum. Respiration is still somewhat effective, while downwelling, upwelling, and deposition yield smaller and smaller changes in storage. However, note than even a halving of current emissions still leads to atmospheric concentrations of 702.9 ppm CO2 by the year 2200 – this is twice the level deemed "safe" by Hansen and his team of scientists! Doubling fixation also does not achieve our goal, reaching only 653.2 ppm CO2.
Furthermore, this simple model omits several complicating variables that would have to be considered in crafting a realistic response to climate change. Scientists still don't fully understand the whole suite of "interactions between the terrestrial biosphere and climate"( Harvey et. al., 1997). For instance, what will the impact of melting permafrost be on methane emissions? Additionally, cooling mechanisms such as aerosols and cloud cover are poorly understood and not reflected in the model above. Indeed, earth scientists are still struggling to create and run models which incorporate the true complexities of climate change.
Carbon sequestration and reduced emissions are the most viable strategies for reducing atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. But while changes in emissions have a slightly greater effect on carbon dioxide storage than fixation, neither one alone can reduce atmospheric concentrations to a level low enough to avoid runaway temperature increases resulting from the initiation of positive feedback loops. Earth scientists have yet to derive completely accurate models, but it is clear that a multi-pronged strategy is needed to curb – and hopefully reverse – the accumulation of these gasses in the atmosphere. Intensive reforestation measures must be coupled with rigorous efforts to reduce anthropogenic emissions of GHGs.
