Asthma is a chronic respiratory disease that is characterized by three equally causative components (Berger, 2004). The first component is chronic inflammation of the lining of the airways (Bernstein, 2000). This inflammation can develop over a period of time due to the presence of chronic stimulation by asthma triggers and untreated or under-treated bronchospasm (Bernstein). Constriction or spasm of the muscles that surround the breathing tubes, commonly called bronchospasm or bronchoconstriction, is the second component of asthma (Berger). This constriction usually occurs due to acute exposure to triggers such as allergens or cold viruses and may also occur in response to exercise (Bernstein). The third component of asthma is the tendency of the lungs of an asthmatic to produce thick, tenacious mucus when over-stimulated (Berger).
Asthma, as briefly described above, is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality among school aged children in the United States (Doull, Williams, Freezer & Holgate, 1996). Childhood asthma is a disease entity that has a significant impact on pediatric patients as young as kindergarteners in terms of limitation on activity, missed days of school and emergency medical treatment (Grant et al, 1999). Pediatric asthma also has a significant impact on society due to the demand for healthcare resources, and the impaired quality of life of children with poorly managed asthma and their families (Clayton, 2005).
Unlike some other childhood health conditions, asthma is highly treatable and its long-term sequelae highly preventable (Creer, 2001). Children with previously undiagnosed or currently under-treated asthma are being identified in vast numbers due to a plethora of in-school asthma screening programs springing up as of late. In spite of these programs, asthma remains the leading cause of pediatric hospitalization and school absenteeism in this country (Clayton, 2005). In addition to the discussion of programs for school-based screening of children for asthma that may have been previously undetected or under-treated, recent literature has also discussed many asthma education and self management programs, frequently incorporated into the regular school curriculum of asthmatic children (Velsor-Friedrich & Srof, 2000). Most pediatric asthma assessment tools published to date focus on quality of life issues or rely on partial parental input for completion.
This pilot study will test a pre and post educational intervention assessment tool designed to aid the asthma educator in gauging the effectiveness of a given intervention program. It may also be useful in an office setting to gauge the effectiveness of educational information provided during an evaluation. This will involve revision of an existing assessment tool for adults with asthma, the KASE-AQ, to be appropriate to a pediatric population. The proposed tool is intended to be completed solely by the pediatric patient with asthma. Continued efforts in the detection and management of asthma with school based programs nationwide, may significantly decrease school absentee rates, activity limitations, hospitalizations and emergency room treatment required by children as a result of asthma (Christiansen & Zuraw, 2002). These improvements in pediatric management would contribute to meeting the objectives of Healthy People 2010 that relate to asthma and decrease the financial burden on the healthcare system that is caused by asthma related expenditures; however, a tool to assess the effectiveness of such programs is indicated. Such a tool must be developmentally appropriate in content, pertinent to the everyday life experiences of children with asthma and broad enough in scope of material covered and questions asked in order to be applicable and useful with various asthma education programs.
A review of recent literature reveals varied questionnaires and surveys designed to assess assorted aspects of asthma in children. Many published pediatric asthma assessment tools to date examine only one aspect of this chronic condition, typically quality of life (QOL). While quality of life is a very important aspect of any chronic condition, assessing the knowledge of a child regarding his or her asthma is not addressed. Many asthma assessment tools rely on input from a parent or completion of the survey entirely by the parent. One might argue that a survey tool completed by the child would better determine his or her own attitude regarding his or her asthma and the level of self-efficacy of symptom management.
The Paediatric Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire, the Feeling Thermometer (Juniper, Guyatt, Feeny, Ferrie, Griffith & Townsend, 1996) was one of the first questionnaires published in recent literature that deals primarily with evaluating asthma in children. This 23 item tool uses a Likert-type scale to assess different aspects of everyday life that a child with asthma might find troublesome. To use this questionnaire, a trained interviewer would administer it one on one with a child at a clinic visit. The interviewer asks a question and the child responds by choosing an answer from color-coded flash cards. By incorporating changes in the questionnaire over time, coupled with objective data such as pulmonary function test results and physical assessment, the authors suggest that a more complete picture of a child's health might be evaluated. Clinical testing of this tool noted that it had valid measurement properties in children from age 7 to age 17. The limitation of the questionnaire identified by the authors at the time of original publication is the small sample size, 52 children, used to test it. Strengths, as discussed by the authors are that it "is simple and easy to use and is applicable to children as young as seven" (Juniper et al).
Bursch, Schwankovsky, Gilbert, and Zeiger (1999) reviewed four health belief measures constructed for children with asthma and their parents. The Parent Barriers to Managing Asthma scale measures perceived barriers such as lack of access to medical care, transportation difficulties, side effects of prescribed medications, cost, time constraints, child care burdens, difficulty understanding medical devices and problems getting the child to take the asthma medication. The Parent Asthma Self-Efficacy scale measures self efficacy of the parent with regard to prevention and management of asthma attacks in the child. The Parent Treatment Scale measures the parents' beliefs about whether various asthma treatments will be effective in preventing or managing asthma symptoms. The Child Asthma Self-Efficacy scale measures the self-efficacy of the child with regard to prevention and management of asthma attacks. One limitation of these assessment tools explained by the authors is that they were tested only among families enrolled in the Kaiser Permanente Health System. Because this is a pre-paid health plan, member's perceived barriers may differ from those of families with an asthmatic child who is enrolled in other health care plans. They suggested future research with a broader population to examine the relationships between these scales.
Bukstein, McGrath, Buchner, Landgraf and Goss (2000) described a parent-completed asthma quality of life questionnaire. For evaluation of this tool, a parent of an asthmatic child completed a general questionnaire and an asthma specific questionnaire during an office visit. Parent responses to the survey questions were compared to pulmonary function test results and physical assessment finding in order to gauge changes over time. The final result was an eight item, asthma specific questionnaire, the Integrated Therapeutics Group Child Asthma Short Form. A limitation of this tool is that the parent assesses the quality of life of the child without input from the child. Though this may be applicable and likely necessary with younger children, one might surmise that health-related quality of life of adolescents and teens might be more accurately assessed by patient completed questionnaires. One strength of the tool is that its brevity makes it practical for use in clinical and office settings.
Santanello (2001) contends that asthma medications may not be adequately tested in children because of the unique challenges inherent in pediatric clinical trials. In attempting to address these challenges, she discusses the validation of two symptom diaries, conducted by researcher in the pharmaceutical industry and used for pediatric asthma assessment specifically in clinical trials. The Pediatric Asthma Diary is a patient completed tool designed to evaluate daytime and nighttime asthma symptoms in children ages 6 to 14. The Pediatric Asthma Caregiver Diary is a parent completed survey to assess asthma symptoms in two to five year old children. Responses to the diary questions by either the parent or child were compared with objective assessments of health and asthma symptoms made by health care professionals. Results of both diaries correlated accurately with physical findings of a health care provider over the course of the pilot project. Santanello concluded that diaries such as these can provide a reasonable assessment of pediatric participants in asthma trials but that because varied aspects of the asthma disease state are measured, accuracy increases when diaries are used in conjunction with physical examination and pulmonary function testing.
Hall, Wakefield, Rowe, Carlisle and Cloutier (2001) validated a questionnaire designed to aid primary care providers in diagnosing pediatric asthma. The Easy Breathing Survey, as it is called, was administered to all new pediatric patients seen at six primary care clinics in Hartford, Connecticut. The finished product is a four question survey that can be used in children ages 6 months to 18 years. It can be completed by parents of children who are too young to read or by the children themselves. A combination of the responses on the survey, additional verbal questioning and history from a child's medical record was used to determine if the child had asthma. Major strengths of this survey are that it can be completed rapidly and that it demonstrates high sensitivity for picking up severe levels of asthma. One weakness is that it is not as accurate in diagnosing milder asthma in patients being seen for the first time.
Redline, Larkin, Kercsmar, Berger, and Siminoff (2003) conducted a school-based asthma and allergy screening project utilizing survey instruments completed by parents and children. The Parent Symptom Questionnaire included five questions regarding asthma symptoms, four questions that deal with allergic rhinitis symptoms and one question that pertains to symptoms of atopic dermatitis. The Student Symptom Questionnaire contained 25 questions assessing asthma, allergic rhinitis and atopic dermatitis symptoms. The authors commented that their validation sample was rather small but that the surveys were accurate in recognizing previously undiagnosed asthma and allergy type conditions in the participating children. The major drawbacks of any school based program, such as this one, are the expense involved and the need for repeated attempts to collect data due to initial low response rates.
Gorelick, Scribano, Stevens and Schultz (2003) discussed a tool designed to predict response to intervention in children treated for acute asthma. The Child Health Questionnaire was administered at the time of treatment for an acute exacerbation of asthma and then at a 14 day interval following emergency room treatment. The majority of the patients enrolled did not have regular access to health care and tended to use emergency services as primary care. While this is not an ideal situation for long term asthma management, it worked well for this project as the majority of the patients returned to the emergency department for the recommended 14 day follow up. Overall, changes in the perceptions of the children with regard to asthma symptom status correlated with objective findings. A weakness of this study is that physiologic measures, such as peak flow values or pulmonary function testing were not used as comparative measures at the follow up visit.
Varni, Burwinkle, Paroff, Kamps and Olson (2004) designed and tested a modular instrument to measure quality of life in asthmatic children ages 2 to 18. They explained the benefits of incorporating disease specific language and assessment parameters into a generic quality of life survey. They noted that the cross information obtained from surveying both the pediatric participants and their children supported the need to measure both perspectives in order to fully understand the impact of asthma symptoms on quality of life. They also explained that the correlation between the responses of the younger children and the responses of their parents was important in that the parental perspective can be utilized at times when children are unable or unwilling to answer questions.
Chan, Mangione-Smith, Burwinkle, Rosen, and Varni (2005) used a shortened version of the same pediatric quality of life tool in a later project. For the purpose of this project, children without asthma, termed "healthy" by the authors, and asthmatic children were surveyed with the same instrument in order to determine if the instrument could distinguish between the different clinical statuses of the groups. They determined that the shorter version of the survey should be useful in assessing treatment effectiveness and quality of life changes in clinical research studies of children with asthma. One module of this survey deals with activity limitations in the form of missed school days. A weakness of this tool is that the missed school days are not qualified as pertaining to asthma symptoms or to other, un-related illnesses or reasons.
While all of the reviewed pediatric asthma assessment tools report accurate measurement of quality of life and related changes, whether completed by the pediatric asthma patient or by the parent of the patient, none assess concrete knowledge about asthma symptoms or how the child feels about his or her asthma. The KASE-AQ measures three aspects of chronic disease management that contribute to quality of life. Attitude, the first variable of the KASE-AQ, is an important variable in the success or failure of treatment. Self-efficacy, or the confidence that a patient has in successfully implementing his or her treatment plan is a second variable measured by the KASE-AQ and not specifically addressed in a quality of life tool. Knowledge of asthma physiology and symptom recognition is the third variable specifically addressed by the KASE-AQ. If a patient exhibits a positive attitude, he or she will be more likely to be compliant with medication and to devote time and effort toward symptom management. A high level of self-efficacy, coupled with a positive attitude and a working knowledge of asthma symptoms, triggers and self-management techniques may not only increase treatment compliance and allow for recognition of early warning signs of asthma destabilization, but also increase the persistence of a patient in attaining control of symptoms during periods of symptom exacerbation.
The Knowledge, Attitude and Self Efficacy Asthma Questionnaire (see Appendix A) was originally designed as a pre and post adult asthma intervention tool to aid in determining the effectiveness of a program about asthma management (Wigal, Stout, Brandon, Winder, McConnaughy, Creer & Kotses, 1993). The authors created a questionnaire designed to assess three domains: knowledge of asthma, attitude toward one's asthma and self-efficacy of asthma management. Each domain has 20 questions for a total of 60 questions that comprise the entire questionnaire. Each question is presented in a multiple choice format with a total of five possible answers supplied. Only one answer for each of the knowledge questions is correct. Rather than a correct answer, the attitude and self-efficacy scales are used to assess the effectiveness of an intervention by demonstrating a positive shift in answers between the pre test and the post test.
The knowledge domain considers factual information that an adult may have regarding asthma. A patient, in conjunction with his or her health care provider, may work better to manage the symptoms of a chronic condition if he or she posses a working knowledge of the disorder. In the case of asthma, a patient who recognizes early warning signs of an asthma exacerbation may better manage the increased symptoms by knowing the appropriate steps to take. An example of a question from the knowledge domain would be one asking what part of the body is not a component of the respiratory system.
Which one of the following is not a component of the respiratory system?
The attitude domain is the second component of the KASE-AQ. This domain is used to evaluate a patient's outlook on his or her illness or condition. If a patient exhibits a positive attitude with regard to his or her asthma, he or she will probably be more compliant with prescribed medication and other interventions suggested by the given health care provider. In the pre and post intervention test scenario, a change in attitude, ideally a shift toward the positive, would be exhibited as a result of a successful intervention program. An example of a question dealing with a patient's attitude toward asthma would be one that uses a five point Likert-type scale, from "True" to "False" to assess the patient's attitude at that time. Since these questions deal with the patient's attitude toward his or her own asthma, there are no correct or incorrect responses. A higher score suggests a patient has a more positive attitude toward his or her asthma and would likely be more willing and eager to work in cooperation with the physician to manage asthma symptoms. A lower score is suggestive of a more pessimistic and uncooperative attitude.
My physician can handle my asthma without my having to become involved.
The self-efficacy component of the KASE-AQ aids in assessing an individual's confidence in his or her ability to contribute to the management of his or her asthma. It has been hypothesized by asthma researchers that when a patient is non-compliant with a prescribed medication or treatment plan, health care providers frequently do not know if the subject is simply not cooperative or if he or she may lack the confidence in his or her skills with regard to asthma management (Creer & Levstek, 1996). An example of a question from the self efficacy domain would be one that is answered on a five-point Likert-type scale, from "True" to "False" and asks what a patient thinks about self-management techniques. Since these questions deal with the patient's self-efficacy regarding his or her asthma, there are no correct or incorrect responses. The higher the score, the more confident the individual would be in his or her ability to manage and control the asthma. The lower the score, the less confident the individual would be in his or her ability to manage and control any asthma symptoms.
I can take the necessary steps to avoid or to manage an asthma attack effectively.
In order to determine initial usefulness of the proposed tool in the pediatric population, approximately ten subjects, ages 9 to 12 inclusive, were recruited by means of flyers posted in the office of an asthma specialist. Criteria for inclusion into the pilot test group were boys and girls, ages 9 to 12 inclusive at the time of the project, who carried a diagnosis of asthma. The subjects had to be taking at least one daily controller medication to manage asthma symptoms. Subjects also needed to read and understand English. No specific exclusion criteria, other than not satisfying any of the inclusion criteria were employed. Subjects were recruited from a single asthma practice so as to produce a more homogenous knowledge base regarding asthma terminology and asthma symptom management, prior to the pilot testing project.
The instrument tested was based upon the Knowledge, Attitude and Self-Efficacy Asthma Questionnaire (KASE-AQ). This tool was designed in the early 1990's for use as a pre-post asthma intervention assessment in adults (Wigal et al). The KASE-AQ looks at three variables, as described previously, which the authors of the adult questionnaire explain successful medical regimens, for any disease process, are dependent upon (Wigal et al).
For the purpose of this project, the KASE-AQ was re-written in a language that might be more conducive to use in an early adolescent population (see Appendix B). All of the proposed revisions were reviewed by one of the primary authors (see Appendix C). The nature and order of the original questions was not altered in order to preserve the integrity of the scoring system. Because asthma treatment has undergone major changes since the publication of the KASE-AQ (NAEPP Expert Panel Report Guidelines for The Diagnosis and Management of Asthma-Update on Selected Topics 2002), some questions were no longer appropriate. For example, question 58 in the adult version refers for possible side effects of theophylline, a medication commonly used to treat asthma at the time the original tool was developed. Since theophylline is rarely used by asthma specialists at the present time, the population being tested has no knowledge of the side effects. This question was changed to refer to side effects of bronchodilators, the rescue medication prescribed for each of the ten participants selected and commonly used for asthma treatment today. Other changes included terminology substitutions as children in this age group think in concrete terms rather than abstractly. Question number 23 in the adult version assesses the person's confidence in managing exercise induced symptoms. For the purpose of the pediatric questionnaire, the question was altered to ask about gym class rather than exercise, thereby making an abstract idea, namely exercise into a concrete condition, that of gym class, so as to be more easily understood by children. Permission of the authors was sought prior to revision and use of the tool. The proposed questionnaire, an assent form and a consent form, and a recruitment flyer were approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board (see Appendix D).
Flyers were posted in the office of an asthma specialist in Northwestern Ohio who is also one of the authors of the adult version of this assessment tool. Children and parents who were interested in participating in this project filled out a form and were contacted, via telephone, by the primary investigator to determine eligibility. The first ten children who satisfied the aforementioned inclusion criteria were scheduled to come to the physician's office for one appointment.
At the time of the appointment, the research project was explained to the child and his or her accompanying parent and any questions they had were answered. Each was given time to read the consent and/or assent forms and again asked if they had questions or did not understand any of the material provided. Each was asked questions, by the primary investigator, in order to determine that all of the material was understood. Informed consent was sought from each parent (see Appendix E). Assent was acquired from each child (see Appendix F).
Verbal directions consisting of "please read each question thoroughly and circle the best answer" were provided to each child by the primary investigator. The children were further instructed that in addition to assessing their ability to choose the correct answer, the project would also attempt to assess their ability to understand the language of the questions. Hence, they would not be allowed to ask questions of or request assistance from the parent who accompanied them to the appointment. The children were told that if they had a question, they would be able to ask the primary investigator only. All of the children verbalized understanding of the directions as presented. The only questions asked were regarding clarifying a word that likely would have directed the child to the correct response. In each instance, three in total, the child was reminded that part of the project was to assess their understanding of the tool. Each was encouraged to choose the best answer as well as they could and save the question until they were finished with the project. All verbalized agreement.
The only potential risk to any of the subjects that was identified by the investigator or the asthma specialist was that reading the questions of the tool might trigger some negative or undesirable feelings about asthma exacerbations or related instances that may have occurred in the past. The children and their parents were told that if any concerns or ill feeling arose as a result of reading the questions, they could feel free to speak with the primary investigator, the physician or any of the office staff regarding these matters. None of the children verbalized concern or ill feelings during the completion of the questionnaire or upon the conclusion. When each child finished the questionnaire, they were verbally asked to write those thoughts about it on the last page of the questionnaire. No mediations were administered and no changes were made to any of the participating subjects' current asthma therapy as a part of this project. Upon completion of the questionnaire, each child was given twenty dollars as a thank you for their time and participation.
The first ten potential subjects who responded to the posted flyer each met the aforementioned inclusion criteria and completed the project. Of these ten, six respondents were boys and four were girls. Four of the subjects were age nine, three boys and one girl. Three of the subjects were ten years old, two boys and one girl. Three of the subjects were 11 years of age, one boy and two girls.
As this project was conducted during the summer, the children were asked to provide the grade of school that they would be entering for the coming school year. Five subjects, four boys and one girl reported they would be entering the fourth grade. Two subjects, one boy and one girl, indicated they would be entering the fifth grade. Two subjects, one boy and one girl documented they would be entering the sixth grade. One subject, a girl, denoted she would be entering the seventh grade. The sample breakdown is provided in the following table. For the purposes of this pilot project, no special attention was paid to creating an even ratio among the variables of gender, age and grade in school. The following table denotes the sample breakdown.
Table 1 Sample Descriptors
There were no missing items on the ten questionnaires completed. It took the participants between 20 and 40 minutes each to read and respond to the entire survey. All were told prior to beginning the exercise that they could take breaks if they got tired. None of the respondent requested a break. Questions asked of the primary investigator revealed a rather large span of vocabulary knowledge, or lack thereof, among the children who participated. For example, several of the younger children were unfamiliar with the organs of the respiratory system, the words "resent" and "manage" and the meaning of the phrase "get the upper hand." The older children did not ask questions about these items.
Internal consistency coefficients were determined for the attitude and self-efficacy domains individually and in combination. A Cronbach's alpha value of .800 was demonstrated for the attitude and self-efficacy scales in combination, 40 items in the entirety. Seven of the items of these domains utilize reverse scoring, such that a response of "false" might indicate the most desired answer and "true" the least desired. These items are numbers 22, 28, 37, 40 and 50 of the attitude scale and 52 and 55 of the self-efficacy scale. Removal of the seven items of the attitude and self-efficacy scales from the analysis demonstrates a Cronbach's alpha of .892. Cronbach's alpha values for the individual scales were: attitude .843 and self-efficacy .767.
The results of the knowledge domain responses from the ten participants demonstrate a ceiling effect on one question, meaning that all of the children answered the question correctly. Ninety-percent of the children gave correct responses for one additional question. Of the remaining items pertaining to the knowledge domain, three items had eight correct responses and four had seven correct responses. The responses to the remaining ten questions were varied with no predictable pattern. There were no statistically significant correlations between correct responses and age of the child or grade in school. No statistically significant correlations were found between self-efficacy or attitude scores and age of the child and/or grade in school.
Each item of the knowledge domain was scored based on one point for the correct answer and zero points for any incorrect answer. There were 20 questions in the knowledge section for a total of 20 point s if all items were answered correctly. The mean response of the ten children who participated in this pilot project was 10.4 with a range of 7 to 15 points. A ceiling effect, meaning every child gave the correct response, was noted on question number 30, a question asking about things that could make an asthma attack worse. None of the children correctly answered question number 33, which dealt with side effects of rescue medication.
The attitude domain was made up of 20 questions, each with five responses. The responses were scored on a scale of one to five with a "perfect" score being 100. The mean score of the ten participants was 80.2 with a range of 55 to 94 points noted.
The self-efficacy domain of the tool was also comprised of 20 questions using the same five point scale for scoring. The range of scores for the pilot testing was 59 to 97. The mean of the ten children's scores was 80.5.
Additionally, a final page was included with each child's questionnaire asking for feedback about the instrument. The participants were given a list of descriptors that might be pertinent and asked to circle all that they thought applied. From the list provided, three children thought the exercise was fun while four felt it was not fun. One thought it was short, versus six responding that it was long. Six children chose interesting from the list while two chose boring. Seven indicated that it was easy to read. None of the children chose hard to read as a descriptive term. Lastly, six circled easy to understand and two circled hard to understand from the list of terms provided. Comments are displayed in the following table.
Table 2 Children's Feedback on the questionnaire
In addition to the list, the children were also afforded space in which to write any thoughts or comments they had about the tool. Of the ten participants, one chose not to write any thoughts about the survey in the space that was provided. The responses collected ranged from "some of the questions were strange" to different variations of it was fun and would help people. Two of the children commented that it didn't take as long as they had thought it would to complete the questionnaire. One said it seemed long because he "mostly knew most of the stuff." Actual comments given are listed in the following table.
Table 3 Subject Comments
Absence of missing items suggests that children of the age group employed were both willing and able to provide quality data of this nature. Most of the children indicated that the instrument was easy to read, though most said it was long. On average, it took approximately 30 minutes to complete, perhaps making it a bit lengthy to be used in its entirety during a clinic visit. In general, the instrument was understood by these children. The questions asked by the children were few and were mainly related to a wide variation in vocabulary knowledge among this age range.
The children who participated in this project came to the situation with much the same knowledge base regarding asthma and symptom recognition or management, having all been treated by the same physician and educated by nurses with similar training. The question with the ceiling effect dealt with situations that might make an asthma attack get worse. It stands to reason that the population examined would know the correct response since they had specific and repeated education about this during clinic visits. As expected, nine of the children responded correctly to a question about peak flow meters. This can be attributed to the fact that most of them have used a peak flow meter at some time. This information is also regularly reviewed during clinic appointments. None of the children knew the answer to a question regarding exercise-induced asthma. It is likely that these children were educated about how to prevent such symptoms rather than the physiologic processes that caused it making this finding understandable. It may also indicate an area where clinicians need to put a greater emphasis.
The attitude and self-efficacy scores showed a positive skew for most of the children. Even the lowest score among the ten was above the 50th percentile. One would expect scores of this nature, given the strong educational input and clinical support these children have received as part of their care at this specialty practice. It would be useful to compare these scores to those of children who are followed for asthma in a primary care practice.
The reliabilities for the attitude and self-efficacy scales combined and as individual scales were good. According to Nunnally (1978), in early stages of development, reliabilities of .70 or higher are sufficient. If significant correlations are found, further refinement of the instrument is warranted. A Cronbach's alpha of .800 for the attitude and self-efficacy scales combined indicate high reliability. Removal of the reversely scored items strengthens the reliability further to .892. Separate reliabilities of .843 for attitude and .767 for self-efficacy were also good. This suggests that the scales could be used separately or combined depending on the purpose of the research or clinical encounter.
In examining the items utilizing reverse scoring, the responses provided by many of the children are not consistent with their responses to other items of the same nature and topic. The fact that the combined reliability improved with removal of these items calls into question the effectiveness of such questions in this population. It is possible that asking a question in negative terms that expects a positive answer is more abstract than these children were able to comprehend. Further examination is needed to determine if some items could be deleted or modified. The tool is long and the possibility of reduction of some items warrants further consideration. This may increase its practicality and usefulness.
There are several weaknesses of the KASE-QA with pediatric revisions as demonstrated by this pilot testing. One weakness is the lack of clarity regarding the use of negatively worded questions or questions that seem to require a negative response in the early adolescent population. Further exploration of this area may reveal that more concrete questioning would better serve the need this tool aims to meet.
Another weakness is the length of the tool if used in its entirety. Though none of the children declined to complete the questionnaire, a majority did comment that it was long. This could be a limiting factor in usefulness in a clinic setting unless the time needed to complete the survey was calculated into the appointment. The reliabilities for the individual scales suggest that it would be possible to use the individual scales separately.
Another weakness to be discussed is the small sample size used for this project. The instrument needs to be administered to a much larger sample in order to do more advance statistical testing of its psychometric properties.
A final weakness of note is the relative homogeneity of the pilot sample. The ten children who participated in this project are all treated for asthma by the same specialist hence their knowledge of asthma and attitude toward asthma is consistent with the knowledge and attitude demonstrated by the staff of this office. Testing this instrument with children who are newly diagnosed with asthma or who are followed for asthma in a primary care setting is also needed.
More diversity in the sample demographics would also be useful. A majority of the ten participants come from families that enjoy higher socioeconomic status than that of average Americans. Many of these ten children come from homes that enjoy a two-parent household with a stay-at-home mother. The majority of the children have other family members, either a parent or sibling who are also patients of he same asthma specialist. A tool such as this might not reflect the same findings if used in a general population of asthmatic children.
Future work with this questionnaire should encompass a much larger sample size with special attention to an even ratio of boys and girls, ages nine, ten, eleven and twelve, and the grades in school representative of this span of ages. Testing in a population of asthmatic children from a more diverse background, both socioeconomic in nature and in the access they have had to health care professionals is also indicated to determine if the aforementioned findings hold true. Some items in the knowledge domain could be simplified to better represent the vocabulary range of the intended population. A comparison between the attitude and self-efficacy domains with and without items that utilize reverse scoring is also indicated. Consideration of this tool for use as two or three separate measures may also be of value.
Overall, the findings suggest that further testing and evaluation of the KASE-AQ with pediatric revisions is warranted and would be valuable. An instrument of this nature could be helpful to both researchers seeking to understand the mechanisms children use to cope with asthma and to clinicians working with these children in office or school based settings.
