We complain when we deem ourselves disadvantaged, and when we deem this disadvantage wrong. The untalented poor1 may consider themselves, as a matter of fact, to be at a disadvantage under a theory of justice that gives lexicographical priority to fair equality of opportunity (FEO) over the difference principle (DP)2, and they may think, as a matter of justification, that this ought not to be the case. I shall assume that, as a matter of fact, the lexicographical priority does disadvantage the poor untalented3, and I shall enquire what, if any, justification can be made for this disadvantage. I shall assume then that the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP causes disadvantage to the untalented poor in one of two ways: either they enjoy less investment in their education4 than they would have enjoyed in the absence of the lexicographical priority, or they enjoy less income and wealth5 than they would otherwise have enjoyed.
I take it that if a justification cannot be found for the disadvantage suffered by the untalented poor thanks to the lexicographical priority, then the untalented poor have a just complaint against the talented poor that benefit from that priority. The justice of the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP might be grounded in one of three hierarchies: first, in a hierarchy of contingencies that are a morally irrelevant basis for the distribution of social primary goods; second, in a hierarchy of social primary goods necessary for the exercise of the two moral powers in the two fundamental cases6; or, third, in a hierarchy of paradigms of justice, i.e. of the relational over distributive justice. I shall reject the first two accounts, and show that the third is promising. However, I shall raise separate problems for the third account. Thus, I shall conclude that the untalented poor have a just complaint if the third account is unable to deal with the problems I raise for it.
One might try to justify the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP by grounding it in a hierarchy of contingencies that are a morally irrelevant basis for the distribution of social primary goods. This assumes that the two principles differ in the effect of which morally irrelevant contingencies each is supposed to regulate. The thesis would be that "eliminating social inequalities (i.e. those arising from family and class privilege) is infinitely more important than counteracting natural inequalities (i.e. those arising from differences in ability and ambition)" (Taylor 2004: 346). Mason (2006: 86) thinks this impossible to defend, but Taylor adduces the premise that "social but not natural inequalities prevent us from being full and equal participants in the basic structure of a well-ordered society or cause special injury to the self-respect of those denied fair opportunities, owing to the fact that social inequalities seem more a product of conscious human action and even human design than natural inequalities". However, Pogge rightly objects that this line of thought holds for natural contingencies as much as for social ones: "Would not one's sense of self-worth be gravely damaged if one realized all along that one's limited natural talents give one no chance at being admitted to higher education (because admitting the less talented would reduce the lowest index position)?" (Pogge 2007: 131). The reason for this is that the distinction between natural and social contingencies is a false one. "Natural talents" are just another type of social contingency: they are a function from contingent natural abilities, and contingent social evaluations of those natural abilities. Furthermore, just as natural talents are held back by social contingencies, such as class, they are similarly held back by so-called "natural" contingencies, such as race and gender (cf. Pogge 1989: 164).7
Alternatively, one might try to justify the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP by grounding it in a hierarchy of social primary goods necessary for the exercise of the two moral powers in the two fundamental cases. This assumes that the two principles differ in the social primary goods whose distribution each regulates. Rawls offers a thought experiment designed to show that the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP secures a social primary good more important than income and wealth. He argues that, in the absence of FEO, the DP would fail to secure this more important social primary good. The DP would obtain in the absence of FEO in a caste society where the homogeneity of the upper-caste-dominated work-force led to greater productivity, and where redistributive taxation returned this surplus to the lower caste.8 Rawls claims that those denied FEO in such a society would not only be "excluded from certain external rewards of office" but also (scil. more importantly) "debarred from experiencing the realization of the self which comes from a skilful and devoted exercise of social duties. They would be deprived of one of the main forms of human good" (Rawls1999: 73). Thus, the basic thesis of this second attempt at justifying the lexicographical priority is that FEO regulates the distribution of opportunities for self-realization through the "skilful and devoted exercise of social duties", while the DP regulates the distribution of income and wealth. However, the argument would need to be supported by three auxiliary theses (cf. Clayton 2001: 255): first, that opportunities for self-realization through the skilful performance of social duties is one of the main forms of human good; second, that opportunities for such self-realization are axiologically prior to the goods of income and wealth; and, third, that among opportunities for self-realization, we should privilege those for self-realization through the "skilful and devoted exercise of social duties" that attach to "offices and positions". Until these three auxiliary theses about the good of opportunities for self-realization are secured, the conclusion Rawls draws from his thought experiment seems precocious.
First is the thesis that opportunities for self-realization through the "skilful and devoted exercise of social duties" is one of the main forms of human good. Insofar as self-realization arises from " "
Second is the thesis that opportunities for such self-realization are axiologically prior to the goods of income and wealth. The thought would be that we have a higher order interest in opportunities for self-realization.10 This is highly likely (cf. Taylor 2004: 339) if self-realization is a basis of self-respect, if self-respect is "perhaps the most important primary good" (Rawls 1999: 386), and if the parties in the original position have only a limited interest in income and wealth ("the person choosing has a conception of the good such that he cares very little, if anything, for what he might gain above the minimum stipend that he can, in fact, be sure of by following the maximin rule" (Rawls 1999: 134)). However, it is unlikely that the parties in the original position, by whom the rule of maximin would be chosen, would recognize an interest in opportunities for self-realization as being of a higher order than their interest in income and wealth. "The maximin rule tells us to rank alternatives by their worst possible outcomes: we are to adopt the alternative the worst outcome of which is superior to the worst outcomes of the others" (Rawls 1999: 132-3). Recognizing such a higher-order interest would conflict with the goal of maximizing the minimum index in two ways. First, it would prioritize equalizing -- even at the margin -- opportunities for self-realization between the talented rich and the talented super-rich at the cost of income gains to the LAG under the DP (Arneson 1999: 82). Second, it would postpone concern for the uniquely untalented poor man who is peerless in his lack of talent. FEO, for him, would be vacuously satisfied (his opportunities for self-realization would be equal to those of his peers in talent, of whom there are none), so he would not even receive education under FEO (Arneson 1999: 82-3). Indeed, the parties in the original position would object that "fairness to talent trumps fairness to the worst off in Rawls's system" (Arneson 1999: 86; cf. Barry 1974: 85; Alexander 1986: 199-200).
Third is the thesis that, among opportunities for self-realization, we should privilege those for self-realization "through the skilful and devoted exercise of social duties" that attach to "offices and positions" (Rawls 1999: 266) of "authority and responsibility" (Rawls 1999: 53). Such "offices and positions" are but one sort of social duty one might exercise. Why think that we should privilege the opportunities for self-realization of those who desire to realize themselves in "offices and positions" of "authority and responsibility" in the basic structure -- e.g. in the exercise of the social duties involved in "governments, private and public corporations, universities, NGOs" (Taylor 2004: 341) -- over the opportunities for self-realization of those that desire to realize themselves in the exercise of other social duties -- e.g. in "friendships, chess clubs, art associations, churches" (Taylor 2004: 341)? Taylor argues that we have to specialize11, and that we all benefit from the fact that we each specialize.12 He claims further that "offices and positions associated with [social unions that are part of the basic structure are distinctive in that they] require a major and usually dominant commitment of time and energy and act as the primary sources of livelihood for those who hold them" (Taylor 2004: 341). He concludes that in order to reap vicarious benefit from the exercise of such "offices and positions", we need to grant a special privilege to opportunities for self-realization through the exercise of the social duties attached to them. However, Taylor has not identified a property unique to "offices and positions" -- running a church or running a chess club can be one's all-consuming livelihood -- nor has he identified a property common to "offices and positions" -- non-executive board memberships consume little time and are invariably not sources of livelihood. More generally, it seems that the project of establishing this third thesis must fail because our interests in opportunities for self-realization are equally strong, regardless of which social duty or within which social union we choose to realize ourselves (cf. Mason 2006: 85; Arneson 1999: 99).13
So, this second attempt to justify the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP is unable to establish three key theses about the opportunity for self-realization -- theses that it requires for the justification. Can we nevertheless motivate the justification by reflecting upon Rawls's thought experiment? If the absence of FEO accounts for our intuition that the caste society fulfilling the DP is an unjust society14, perhaps we can retain the intuition that FEO is a requirement of justice, but look elsewhere for a justification of the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP. However, it seems that we can agree with the intuition, but cite the absence of an anti-discrimination norm as a better account of the intuitive injustice. The caste society fulfilling the DP is unjust because it allows for discrimination "motivated by hatred and loathing for a type of person" (Arneson 1999: 88) or which "expresses unwarranted contempt" (Cavanagh 2001: 166). To cite the absence of FEO, by contrast, is to overshoot the mark by forbidding innocent forms of discrimination, and to give a merely instrumental justification for anti-discrimination norms. For instance, a gay business hiring only gay employees would not be expressing unwarranted contempt in its discrimination against heterosexuals, yet would be declared unjust by FEO. More generally, "the implication of appealing to equality is that discriminating on the basis of race or sex turns out to be no worse than any other way of behaving which leaves different kinds of people with unequal chances...this does not quite seem right: it does not seem to capture what is distinctly wrong with discrimination" (Cavanagh 2004: 155; cf. Shiffrin 2004: 1650, 1655-6).15
The third alternative for justifying the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP would be to ground it in a hierarchy of paradigms of justice. The thought would be either that relational justice is more important than distributive justice, or else that only relational justice is important. On the distributive paradigm, egalitarian justice aims at an equal distribution of goods, whereas, on the relational paradigm, egalitarian justice aims at equal social relations. If FEO aims at securing equal social relations, whereas the DP aims at securing an equal distribution of goods, then the lexicographical priority will be justified (and trivially so, if only relational justice is in fact of importance). One might argue that FEO aims at securing equal social relations as follows. Since, even in a well-ordered society, some social hierarchies are necessary for complex social cooperation, the elites at the top of such necessary hierarchies require to be integrated. An integrated elite will be less of a threat to relational equality, since it will include people with first-person knowledge of these groups in society of which an unintegrated elite would otherwise be ignorant (cf. Anderson 2007: 596). FEO represents a tool for integrating the elite. This third account of the justification of the lexicographical priority appeals to interests of all citizens, not just to the interests of the talented poor. So, if indeed the untalented poor enjoy less investment in their education, or less income and wealth than they would have enjoyed in the absence of the lexicographical priority, this will be offset by the benefit concomitant with living in a society run by an integrated elite. A loss today for some is a gain tomorrow for all: the untalented poor do not have a just complaint.
However, it may be that this account of the justification does not fully appreciate the "losses today" that FEO requires. FEO will cause disadvantage to the untalented poor not merely in requiring less investment in their education, or less income and wealth for them. It is a plausible hypothesis that the loss of children that are a good influence on their peers from non-selective schools will reduce the absolute value of the education received by the child that remains in the non-selective school (vide footnote 4). The empirical conjecture here is that there is a critical mass of good eggs that, with its infectious work-ethic, can single-handedly make a group successful. This loss of cultural investment in the education of the untalented poor might be more devastating than the loss of financial investment in their education, or the loss of cash in their hands.
On the other hand, it may also be that this account of the justification of the lexicographical priority over-estimates the "gains tomorrow" that FEO can bring. Suppose that the benefit to the democratic community of an integrated elite, when it is achieved, will offset the earlier disadvantage, noted above, for the untalented poor. A significant amount of time will pass while we educate a member of the talented poor from the moment she is identified as talented by a selective (secondary) school to the moment she obtains her university degree, and while from that moment she develops her career until the even more remote moment when her career in an "office" or "position" of "authority and responsibility" may be described as established. For this reason, the compensatory gains of living under an integrated elite will not be enjoyed until a significant time-lag has passed. It is quite plausible that, while waiting expectantly for their elite of Messiahs, the untalented poor will experience irreversible changes in their lives -- changes that preclude their enjoyment of the compensatory gains. For example, in the absence of their more motivated peers, they might develop a fixed disposition that is not conducive to human flourishing, or, to take another example, they might die. It seems that the untalented poor have a just complaint if they themselves are unlikely to see the Promised Land.
Yet, suppose instead that the expectations of the talented poor and those of the untalented poor are not close-knit.16 This would be the case where attempts to create an integrated elite by heavy investment in the education of the talented poor does not in fact lead to an integrated elite. Why might this occur? On the one hand, the talented poor that benefit from FEO might not be admitted to the elite. For instance, they might gain university degrees, but face discrimination on the job market. On the other hand, they might excuse themselves from the elite. For instance, they might gain university degrees, but decide not to exercise a social duty attached to one of the "offices and positions" of "authority and responsibility" that are part of the basic structure. They might, for instance, forgo joining the ranks of the "managers, consultants, professionals, politicians, [and] policy makers" in society (Anderson 2007: 596), and decide instead to paint watercolors in the South of France or, God forbid, become a philosopher. It would seem that, according to the third justification of the lexicographical priority, the untalented poor have a just complaint against the talented poor who do not "give back", as it were. Yet to concede such a complaint would be to deny the talented poor a liberty of occupation that is enjoyed with impunity by the talented rich. Why is it just that fewer social demands may be made upon the rich talented with respect to their liberty of occupation than upon the equally talented poor beneficiaries of FEO with respect to theirs? This consideration urges the conclusion that, with its novel rationale for FEO, the third justification treats not FEO but rather the talented poor themselves as tools for the achievement of relational justice.
Of the three possible justifications for the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP that have been entertained in the foregoing: the first was found to rely upon a false distinction between natural and social contingencies; the second was found able to establish neither that opportunities for self-realization are axiologically prior to the goods of income and wealth, nor that, among opportunities for self-realization, we should privilege those for self-realization through the exercise "offices and positions"; the third was found to over-estimate whether and how soon FEO can bring about the compensatory benefit concomitant with an integrated elite. In reasoning about such a justification, we should try to come to a reflective equilibrium between our considered intuitions and the contractualist conclusions we can deduce from the definitions of the original position and of the well-ordered society. In the present case, our considered intuition seems to be that it is unjust if one is excluded from a position of authority on the grounds of one's social class. However, we remarked in discussion of the second attempt at justification "a tension between our considered judgments and the thought experiment of the original position: We regard fair equality of opportunity as an important component of socioeconomic justice even while the parties [in the original position] would rationally agree that this demand [for fair equality of opportunity] should not detract from the demands of the difference principle" (Pogge 2007: 131). In the absence of an independent argument justifying our considered intuition, we cannot conclude "so much the worse for what would be chosen in the original position". However, we can conclude "so much the worse for the considered intuition". For "This shared sense of justice is surely shared in a large part by the more intelligent and better educated citizens, who sympathize more readily with intelligent persons who are excluded from higher education by their poverty, gender, or skin color than they do with individuals who, despite high motivation, are excluded by their lack of native intelligence and other natural talents" (Pogge 2007: 132).17 However, we could both have our cake and eat it. We could, that is, salvage the considered intuition, by accepting of Pogge's explanation of it and giving it a novel rationale drawn from the third account of the justification. We could then aim to bring this "re-considered" intuition into equilibrium with the contractualist conclusion of the well-ordered society, which would prefer the elites atop of any unavoidable social hierarchies to be integrated. So the third justification is the most promising way to justify the lexicographical priority of FEO over the DP, and so lop off any talk of just complaints on the part of the untalented poor. However, whether the justification achieves this only for another potentially just complaint -- this time from the talented poor -- to rise from the Hydra's decapitated neck, is yet to be determined.
