Aristotle has a pair of representational states in his theory of cognition. The first he calls doxa (δόξα). We often translate this as "belief." The second he calls phantasia (φαντασία). An almost universal translation for this is "imagination." Such a translation is tempting; given our own division of representational states into (among others) belief and imagination, it is easy to think that phantasia for Aristotle is largely what imagination is for us.2 I'm suspicious of this, though, for three reasons. First, Aristotle distributes phantasia and belief across the animal kingdoms in very different ways than we distribute belief and imagination. A large portion of the animal kingdom has phantasia, but only humans have beliefs.3 It is controversial, on the other hand, whether other animals have imagination, though we have no trouble attributing beliefs to them. Also, for Aristotle, belief is parasitic on phantasia, not vice versa.
What I mean by this: Aristotle seems to think not that phantasia is belief minus some characteristic (behavior-guidance, etc.) but that belief is phantasia plus some characteristic. We, on the other hand, tend to characterize imagination as "belief-like," as belief minus the part where you take it seriously. In fact, it would be rather odd if, asked what belief was, someone were to respond ">it's like imagination, but for real." Lastly, Aristotle gives phantasia a central place in his theory of cognition. It is a necessary precondition for rational thought.4 It accounts, on some readings, for cognitive error.5 It explains dreams and hallucinations.6 It provides animals with an analog to belief for the purposes of behavior guidance and predicting the future.7 Inshort, it has a far broader range of application than anything captured by our word "imagination."
One can see why fewer people have been tempted to deal with these arguments; they are condensed and bizarre. Everything Aristotle says here seems to contradict something he says elsewhere.9 Even if we take them on their own, they are rife with textual and philosophical problems.10 One can easily read the first one, for instance, as advancing a false dichotomy. There seems to be no reason why some mental state cannot be "up to us," in the sense of its initiation and content being under our control, and also have a truth value which depends on external circumstances. This is two different senses of "up to us," and Aristotle seems at first to be equivocating between the two.
A similar problem plagues argument (2). For one, it relies on an unexplicated simile, which will not do any helpful work in distinguishing belief from phantasia without some interpretation. One plausible way to read (2) is as a claim that the content of phantasia (Aristotle calls such content a phantasma) does not cause an emotional response, while the content of a belief does.11 To be blunt, that just can't be right. For there are many suggestions elsewhere in Aristotle that we can respond emotionally to fictional representations, and we do not really believe that the events depicted in the fiction are happening.12
Despite these difficulties, I think that the two arguments reward our attention. Formally, they are direct parallels. Both assert that phantasia has some characteristic that belief lacks, or vice versa. This serves to show that they are not the same kind of mental state. He also employs interesting and frustratingly underanalyzed notions to distinguish the two states. The first is the notion of a psychological state being "up to us." The second is the notion of ">immediately being moved in accordance" with the content of some psychological state. So the arguments, condensed as they are, can tell us what characteristics belief and phantasia have, as well give us some insight into those tantalizing notions on which his arguments turn. Of particular interest are the thesis that we cannot form beliefs at will, his ideas about how humans contemplate and respond emotionally to fiction, and his views on the difference between human and animal phantasia in terms of their role in an animal's cognitive economy.
A brief summary of my findings. In the first argument, the distinction between belief and phantasia is that the former is sensitive to reasons in a way that the latter is not. This is due to the content of the state purporting to represent an external state of affairs taken as actual and which the content can more or less accurately conform. Belief, then, is by definition subject to a kind of scrutiny, and the agent can be rationally compelled to adopt or discard a belief. Phantasia, on the other hand, is under no such constraints, since it is not part of the definition of the state that its content purport to represent any actual state of affairs. My analysis will show that a psychological state is "up to us" just in case it is not subject to this kind of scrutiny.
In the second argument, the distinction between belief and phantasia is that the former is sufficient t provoke responses to the content that it represents. When one forms a belief that something in one's presence is fearsome, nothing more need happen in order for one to feel fear. Phantasia, on the other hand, lacks this sufficiency condition. This section will also discuss how this claim is compatible with Aristotle's views about animal motivation. In particular, if response requires belief, but not phantasia, then it is a question how animals can take the representation of phantasia as action-guiding, as they clearly do.
Here's passage (1) again, for reference:
The argument purports to distinguish phantasia from belief by saying that, while phantasia is up to us, belief is not. Aristotle supports each of the two claims by a clause which contains the reason (premise indicator γάρ) for the claim. I have rendered the last sentence in the broadest possible way. Much will turn on how we should read Aristotle's condensed and elliptic formulation. I will discuss issues of translation as they become relevant.
In order for passage (1) to contain a valid argument, Aristotle must have a univocal reading of "up to us." That is, he needs the term to pick out the same characteristic each time he uses it in passage (1). If "up to us" picks out one characteristic for phantasia and a different one for belief, then we have no guarantee that it has not picked out two properties that a single mental state could possess simultaneously. If this is the case, then no matter whether both of them are, intuitively, characteristics that make a mental state "up to us," the argument does not successfully distinguish phantasia and belief.
We have prima facie reason to think that this is what's going on, because the reasons Aristotle gives for thinking that phantasia differs from belief with respect to being up to us do not seem mutually exclusive. He claims that phantasia is up to us because we can initiate it when we want to. He then claims that belief is not up to us because there is something about it that is not under our control, namely whether it is true or false. Both of these are, I think, natural ways of reading the term, given the reasons that Aristotle gives for applying or withholding the term from certain mental states. They also seem totally compatible. Some mental states have characteristics that are not under our control, and yet their initiation is under our control in exactly the way Aristotle suggests. Take, for example, the English notion of supposition. Suppositions have truth values: one can suppose truly or falsely. So a property of the state (namely its truth value) is not under my control, but rather depends on the way the world is. But that does not mean that we cannot suppose what we want, when we want.
I think, however, that Aristotle has a univocal reading of "up to us" that both makes his argument valid and tells us something important about the nature both of belief and phantasia. It is just a matter of interpreting the passage correctly. In what follows, I consider a highly intuitive reading of the passage.13 It ultimately fails, I think, but does so in a way that points toward the correct reading. I then give my own proposal for how to read the passage.
So suppose we take "up to us" in a sense that makes it very natural and intuitive to apply to phantasia. Aristotle gives us an example of someone who is putting together a mnemonic system. This involves calling up a mental picture for the purposes of association.14 This calling-up is an occurence of phantasia, and it happens when we want it to happen15So initiation of the state, at least, seems to be under our mental command. We need to say more about this in order for it to make sense. Phantasia, like belief, is a state with representational content.16 To imagine is to imagine something, whether a state of affairs (such as "that grass is blue") or just an object by itself (e.g. an albino tiger). So when this reading says that phantasia is under our mental command, it must mean, not only that we can initiate phantasia when we want, but also that we can initiate phantasia involving particular phantasmata, or mental pictures. What is distinctive about phantasia is that I can initiate an experience of a particular content whenever I want. Given this description, it is easy to see why phantasia is often rendered as "imagination."
The hard work for this reading lies in explaining how belief is not under our command in this sense. In order to do this, I must highlight an issue with Aristotle's Greek. The reason he gives that belief is not up to us, which I translated above as "it must be either true or false," is really much more ambiguous:
Aristotle does not specify a subject for the second sentence, and there are two plausible options about which subject to supply. One view (my own) is that the subject is "believing," the mental state itself. The reading under discussion takes the grammatical subject to be the psychological subject, i.e. the person who forms the belief.18Hence, someone defending this reading would render the last two clauses of argument (1) like this:
Grammatically, this reading is entirely plausible. The subject, had Aristotle made it explicit, would be hêmas, which is anaphoric with hêmin in the preceding clause. The two verbs rendered as ">hit upon the truth" and ">fall into error" also very naturally take persons as their subjects and have their natural senses.
It remains, then, to make philosophical sense of the reading. Since it turns on the idea that phantasia is under our mental command, a univocal reading of "up to us" requires that Aristotle deny that belief is similarly under our command. Above, we said that "mental command" amounts to the ability to initiate a state with a certain content. This is difficult to spell out precisely, but we might put the condition like this:
Here and throughout my discussion, A stands for an agent, t for a time, and p for the content of a mental state. "⃟" here means psychological possibility. That is, given the agent's past experience and current psychological states, it is possible for A to ψ.19 The bi-conditional is meant to capture the flexibility of content that these kinds of states have. If the agent's current state is such that she can ψ that p, then it should also be such that she can ψ that not-p, and vice versa. If this were not so, then A would not be able to ψ whenever she wanted, contrary to Aristotle's claim in passage (1). This reading, then, proposes that a psychological state is up to us just in case it satisfies MENTAL COMMAND.
In order for belief not to be up to us, then, it must fail to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND. Someone who defends this kind of reading would argue as follows: We are not free to have a belief with a certain content anytime we want. Rather, we can only believe that p if p is not evidently false to us.20 Belief that p implies a commitment on the part of the believer to the idea that the world is such that p. Hence, the range of content for belief is constrained by the way we take the world to be.21
This reading has some appeal and preserves a univocal sense of "up to us," but I think it falls apart under close scrutinty. There are two problems with the reading that I find insuperable. The first is that, contrary to the intuitive-sounding gloss given above, this reading–depending on how one fleshes it out–is either trivial, textually insensitive, or fails altogether to distinguish belief from phantasia. That is, it fails to explicate why exactly belief fails to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND in a way that does not make phantasia fail to satisfy it as well. The second problem is that the reading runs into indissoluble textual difficulties. It makes Aristotle contradict himself within 14 lines of text. A proposed fix for this problem merely causes contradiction with yet another passage. These two problems together will be more than enough to reject the reading.
I will take the philosophical difficulties first. Insofar as the reading supplies a basis for distinguishing belief from phantasia, it cannot give a sustainable interpretation.22 The difference is supposed to be that one is under mental command and the other is not. More precisely, MENTAL COMMAND is true when ψ-ing is phantasia and false when it is belief. But it is hard to come up with a reason why belief fails to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND that does not also apply to phantasia. One might try to say that, if A believes at t that p, and forms a belief at t that not-p, then A must abandon their belief that not-p. It is psychologically impossible, then, to believe contradictions.23 Aristotle does seem to think that one cannot hold contradictory beliefs.24 But this cannot be the right account of why belief is not up to us. Belief can be as I just described it and yet satisfy MENTAL COMMAND. We can still form a belief of a certain content whenever we want, according to this interpretation. That we must abandon certain other beliefs to do so is irrelevant. This analysis also causes phantasia not to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND. Notice that the same condition will apply to phantasia. If one experiences a mental image with content p, then one is not experiencing an image with content not-p, because content cannot be contradictory, for Aristotle.25 A state cannot even represent content that is contradictory, let alone be a state that represents how we actually take the world to be. It seems, then, that we have to revise the formulation to restrict the contents of new beliefs, not merely the contents of an agent's representational states taken as a whole. This may give us an analysis that excludes belief from MENTAL COMMAND but does not also exclude phantasia.
One plausible way to do this is to say that we cannot form beliefs that contradict what we know, or at least what we already firmly believe.26 Anyone who claims to do so is not actually forming a belief, but rather something else, such as a supposition. This puts a restriction on our ability to form beliefs with certain contents, and so belief will fail to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND. And the same condition does not hold for phantasia, because we are free to form mental representations that go against what we know is true. We do this every time we consider alternate possibilities. But this rendering is still not satisfactory, because we have evidence that Aristotle does not think that recalcitrance of certain states implies that the state is not up to us. Our inability to be in a given mental state exactly when we want to (such as believing that p when we know that not-p) is not, by itself, evidence that the state is not up to us. In Book III of the Nichomachean Ethics, Aristotle claims that our settled states of character are up to us:
We form character only gradually through our actions. We do not become just by flipping a switch or performing a single just action, but rather through a process of habituation.27 Habits, once acquired, are very difficult to change, since they are settled states. Yet they are still up to us. Therefore, one's being unable to form a certain belief at any time t because of some other psychological state (namely, knowledge or belief that p) does not imply that belief is not up to us. That cannot, therefore, be what Aristotle means when he says that belief is not up to us. And I think Aristotle has the right idea. Something can be under our command without being under our immediate and fail-safe command.
A third way to go is to appeal to how the world can, in a certain sense, force beliefs upon us.28 We cannot help but believe certain things. There is a certain class of evidence that it is psychologically impossible to doubt, and certain states of affairs present themselves as so obviously p that we cannot, rationally or psychologically, believe that not-p. Thus, those beliefs fail to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND, and so belief is not up to us. This reading would, presumably, claim that phantasia cannot be compelling in the same way. I think that this reading gets something right. I am going to forestall a full discussion of it until I introduce my own view, because I think we can only understand what is going on here with some additional machinery that it would be awkward to introduce here.
What I can do now, however, is draw attention to how much more than MENTAL COMMAND this way of taking the passage requires. In fact, it all but abandons the idea that failure to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND provides an analysis of why belief is not up to us. Rather, it explains it in terms of the strength of various kinds of evidence. So the purported sufficient condition for a state's not being up to us becomes an epiphenomenon of some deeper explanation. I aim to provide such an explanation, and it will come out sounding something like what I said in the last paragraph. But insofar as the current MENTAL COMMAND reading must appeal to my reading in order to make sense, it does not offer an alternate view.
So an analysis of "up to us" in terms of MENTAL COMMAND encounters its share of philosophical difficulty. It also, by virtue of the way it has to read the Greek, makes Aristotle contradict something he says 14 lines after passage (1). Since the reading takes Aristotle's claim to be that agents are under certain constraints as to when they form a belief, and about what, it must read the implicit subject of alêtheuein ê pseudesthai as the agent. With our beliefs, we either get at the truth or we fall into error. Since this is what distinguishes belief from phantasia, one would expect that getting at the truth or falling into error is not something that phantasia lets us do. But Aristotle claims exactly this:
Phantasia is the kind of state that makes us either hit on the truth or fall into error. The last clause of the sentence in Greek is ἢ ἀληθεύομεν ἢ ψευδόμεθα, which is exactly what the last clause of passage (1) (i.e., ἢ ψεύδεσθαι ἢ ἀληθεύειν) says if one takes the grammatical subject to be the believer. Since that is supposed to be the reason why belief is not up to us, and phantasia is up to us, it would not be a valid argument if we say that phantasia has the same characteristic. So on this reading of passage (1), Aristotle contradicts himself within half a page.30
Someone who defends this reading will respond that, in argument (1), Aristotle says that the believer necessarily either hits on the truth or falls into error. In passage (3), quoted above, there is no such modal qualification. Additionally, in passage (3) Aristotle only commits himself to saying that we hit on the truth or fall into error in accordance with, or perhaps in virtue of (the preposition he uses, kata, can mean all these and more) phantasia. This can mean all sorts of things, and so we need not read it as in conflict with argument (1).
The second response is easier to address, so I will take it up first. It purports to find a difference between the way Aristotle says we go right or wrong when we form beliefs, and the way that we go right or wrong when we experience phantasia. But the difference is an illusion, for the following reason. When Aristotle says in argument (1) that we either go right or wrong, he must mean that we do so in virtue of forming some belief. The sentence must make this clear in order to make any sense, either by a participle or a prepositional phrase.31 When one takes this into account, the purported difference between the two formulations vanishes, because the plausible readings of a participle in this circumstance all give a meaning indistinguishable from that of the prepositional phrase in passage (3). So that is no way out.
The first response has more going for it. Since argument (1) says that we necessarily either go right or wrong with respect to belief, and passage (3) leaves the possibility open with respect to phantasia, the two passages do not in fact conflict.32 In his de Memoria (450b20-1a2), Aristotle argues that we can consider any given mental image both in itself, and as a representation of something else. Here is the crucial part of the passage where he discusses this:
The content of phantasia, then, can play two roles. The second role is intuitive: we can consider phantasia as a representation of an external object or state of affairs. The first role that Aristotle mentions is harder to frame. It seems that, even when we just consider a phantasma in and of itself, it must still have representational content.33 We do not, in this case, consider the phantasma as meaningless patches of color, or inarticulate sound, or anything like that. It is meaningful, but not taken to represent anything in the external world.34 Call this "non-intentional phantasia," because the content of the state is not an intentional object, i.e. content which is "about" an external state of affairs. Only when we consider the phantasma as a likeness (i.e. an intentional object) does the state of phantasia become the sort of thing that can be truth or false. Call this "intentional phantasia." It is in virtue of intentional phantasia that agents hit on the truth or fall into error.35 This reading, if correct, will dissolve the worry about Aristotle's contradicting himself. If belief is necessarily the kind of state by which agents go right or wrong, while phantasia is only possibly that kind of state (since it can be either intentional or non-intentional), then Aristotle he can say that belief is not up to us because it necessarily has this characteristic, while phantasia does not necessarily have it.
There are two problems with this solution. First, the solution cannot make good sense of Aristotle's text, even if we grant that it is the right way to read passage (4) from the de Memoria. Second, it requires what I think is a mistaken reading of said passage. I'll start with the first problem. On this reading, intentional phantasia is not up to us. This is because it is a state in virtue of which we necessarily go right or wrong. Any state that is a) phantasia and b) not a state by which we go right or wrong will be non-intentional phantasia, by definition. Since it is the necessity that makes belief not up to us, and intentional phantasia also satisfies this condition, it follows that intentional phantasia is not up to us. So Aristotle must be talking about non-intentional phantasia in the first half of passage (1), when he says that phantasia is up to us. At least, he must be if the reading under discussion even has a chance of working. But Aristotle seems to be talking about intentional phantasia in passage (1). Here is his support for the claim that phantasia is up to us:
Aristotle's example is about putting images into mnemonic systems, not constructing the systems themselves. The latter could involve non-intentional phantasia; the association system, which one uses as an aid to memory, need not utilize intentional objects. The objects which one wishes to remember, however, are certainly external, and any phantasia with content that represents them will be intentional phantasia. So passage (1) claims that intentional phantasia is up to us, which contradicts the proposed reading.
Onto the second problem: the solution is based on a misinterpretation of the "de Memoria" passage from which it purportedly draws its evidence. The reading assumes, without argument, that Aristotle is here contrasting two different kinds of phantasia. The states under discussion certainly involve phantasia, since he talks about various attitudes that we can take towards mental pictures, and you can't have mental pictures without phantasia. But it does not follow that the distinction is one between types of phantasiai, or that phantasia as such is Aristotle's concern in the passage. Since this passage occurs in a discussion of how one can remember what is not present, he is probably drawing a distinction between genuine memory and pseudo-memory.36 Aristotle talks of "grasping" (λάβειν__________) a "phantasma " in two different ways and taking a certain attitude toward it. This implies mental operations beyond simple phantasia, and hence that the discussion is about a different mental state. It does not, therefore, provide evidence that Aristotle has two different conceptions of phantasia.
This has been a lengthy discussion, so a summary will do us good. The reading under discussion proposes that what prevents belief from being "up to us"is that it requires a commital attitude on the part of the agent, which entails a restriction on range of content about which an agent can form a belief. This reading requires taking the psychological subject as the grammatical subject at the end of passage (1). In order to avoid a contradiction with passage (3), where Aristotle uses the same language to describe phantasia as he uses to describe belief in passage (1), this reading must posit two distinct forms of phantasia: intentional and non-intentional. It must then assume that Aristotle is only saying that nonintentional phantasia is up to us, in order to avoid a contradiction with passage (3). But the text suggests that Aristotle has intentional phantasia in mind during that passage.
So the reading dissolves one problem by telling a complicated story that only ends up causing another problem. This is only natural, because there is reason to believe that the story it tells is based on a misreading of the passage in "de Memoria". The reading also encounters philosophical trouble, because it cannot cash out the restriction on content in a way that serves Aristotle's primary purpose in passage (1), which is to distinguish belief from phantasia. All of this gives us good reason to look for another way to understand the passage.
That said, the reading does point us in the right direction. The criterion that it proposes for a certain state's being "up to us"captures something important. I repeat the criterion here for reference:
MENTAL COMMAND: A psychological state ψ is under mental command iff 􀃅A􀃅t􀃅p (⃟A ψ's at t that p iff ⃟A ψ's at t that not-p). "⃟," again, is psychological possibility.
This is as clear a notion of a state's being under our mental command as we are likely to find. As vague as notion as "up to us"is, it seems that any satisfactory account of the term will explain of how the state is under our mental command. The reading I propose, then, should explain why phantasia is such a state in virtue of its being "up to us." What I reject is the idea that MENTAL COMMAND is what makes a given state "up to us"or not. The former reading took MENTAL COMMAND to be a necessary condition for a state to be "up to us." I propose that it is, at most, a sufficient one, and the result of a deeper explanation for why mental states are up to us.
Enough critique: onto my positive view. I take a different tack from the former reading. Defenders of the former reading seek an analysis of "up to us"that makes intuitive sense when applied to phantasia, and then look for a way to extend that sense to belief. I, on the other hand, will propose an analysis of "up to us"that makes it easy to see why we would withhold it from belief, and then see if it makes sense to apply it to phantasia. My reading will also a) explain why MENTAL COMMAND is true of phantasia b) explain why Aristotle makes the kind of argument he does in passage (1) and c) avoid contradiction with other passages.
I propose that we take the fought-over grammatical subject in passage (1) to be the formation of the belief, i.e. the mental state itself. In Greek, this is τὸ δοξάζειν (to doxazein). This very word occurs in the preceding clause, so the reading is anaphoric, and requires no sudden transition in thought. The two verbs in the last clause (ψεύδεσθαι and ἀληθεύειν), though they often take personal subjects, also take mental states and contents as subjects, especially in Aristotle.37 So supplying the state itself as the grammatical subject is every bit as plausible as supplying the psychological subject. My proposal gives up nothing in that regard.
It also solves the textual problem that plagues the first reading. In passage (3), Aristotle explicitly makes the psychological subject of phantasia the subject of the two verbs. Since, on my reading, the psychological subject is not the grammatical subject in passage (1), the two passages are consistent. It is plausible that agents can go right or wrong in virtue of experiencing a state of phantasia. This is because phantasia is a constitutive part of many other mental states, including desire and memory.38 That is, it supplies the content for many other cognitive states. If the agent goes right or wrong by having these cognitive states, then there is a sense in which the agent has gone right or wrong due to phantasia. But since Aristotle does not assert that the phantasia itself goes right or wrong, there is no conflict with passage (1).
We now need to see if we can give an analysis of "up to us"that makes it natural to withhold from belief, and also makes it plausible to ascribe to phantasia. As my reading of the Greek suggests, I think this is a characteristic of the state itself, rather than a characteristic of an agent's ability to initiate the state. And it must be a characteristic that follows obviously from Aristotle's claim that belief must either hit on the truth or not. I say "obviously" because Aristotle takes the implication as clear enough to require no elaboration.
My proposal is that part of what makes a mental state a belief is that it answers rationally to evidence about the world, and such evidence is often outside the agent's control to change.39 The reason that Aristotle gives for belief not being up to us is that it must either be true or false. A belief is true or false according as the content of the belief represents some state of affairs accurately (or accurately enough). Belief just is a state directed at the actual world (as opposed to how we want the world to be):
In order for a state to count as a belief, then, it must answer to some standard of evaluation. Aristotle goes on to say that belief requires a process of rational persuasion:
For any content p, there are reasons that count for and against believing that p. This evidence can vary widely in kind and strength, from manifest perceptual evidence41 to reasoning about probability. What is important is that, for any given belief, there is some justificatory account, some reasons to adopt it or not. When the evidence is manifest enough, we cannot help but form the belief that p when the evidence confronts us.42
This observation alone is sufficient to deny that MENTAL COMMAND applies to belief in general. A person walking down the street who sees a bus hurtling toward her simply does not have the option of believing that there is no bus hurtling towards her. That the bus is hurtling toward her is too evident to allow refusal. That is, at least, if she is in good psychological health. This is an important qualification; the compulsion operating here is rational compulsion. If a person purports to believe that p, and persists in light of evidence (acknowledged as such) that not-p, then either a) she believes p irrationally or b) she does not really believe that p, but rather is in some other psychological state. The point is that a psychological state cannot be a belief and yet answer to no standard of assessment.
One might try to take the bus example as support for the first, discredited reading of passage (1).43 That is, it sounds like a restriction on the possible times when we can form a belief with a certain content. It does indeed involve such a restriction, and that is why MENTAL COMMAND fails for belief. That kind of restriction alone, however, does not distinguish belief from phantasia. For just as beliefs can force themselves on us, so too can mental pictures. Some situation or thought might prompt me to imagine something, perhaps something I would rather not imagine. It is, in fact, quite natural to speak of intrusive phantasia.44 But that does not make phantasia any less up to us, and so the possibility of intrusion cannot be the reason why belief is not up to us. Belief is no more up to us in situations where the evidence is less literally compelling than it is in the bus case. It will still not be up to us because, even in a less obvious evidential situation, the belief must submit to a standard of evaluation in order to count as a belief. There must be reasons which would prompt us, on pain of irrationality, to adopt, abandon, weaken or strengthen the belief.
Taking this tack allows us to see why phantasia is up to us in spite of intrusion, while belief is not up to us even when it is not intrusive. Consider some intrusive phantasia with content p. There is nothing irrational about conjuring up a mental image of not-p in order to dispel the intrusive content. In fact, there are circumstances when doing so makes total sense. For instance, an alcoholic may fight off some "phantasma " of a stiff scotch (which will prepare his desire for one, a desire he cannot resist), by concentrating on a "phantasma" of a hangover headache. The point is that we need not look for evidence that not-p and stoically accept the intrusive content if we don't find any. Given sufficient psychological strength, we can simply wish the content away. We cannot do this with belief, at least not insofar as we are rational. This suggests the following analysis to replace MENTAL COMMAND. Call it REASON-SENSITIVITY:
REASON-SENSITIVITY: A psychological state ψ is reason-sensitive iff [R is evidence that p & (If A has access to R at t, then ⃥[A ψ's at t that p])].45
My proposal is that a psychological state is up to us just in case it is not reason-sensitive. The schema for REASON-SENSITIVITY leaves several questions open, such as what constitutes evidence and what having "access" to evidence amounts to. This vagueness is not, however, a point against the proposal. For one, I doubt that we could answer the question of what constitutes evidence for belief through conceptual analysis of the notion of evidence (or belief). Rather, it will vary according to the belief itself and our canons of inquiry. Similar remarks apply to the notion of access.46
If a state satisfies REASON-SENSITIVITY, it follows that it fails to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND. Here's how: consider a psychologically-normal agent A who has access at time t to some evidence R that p is the case. Assume for simplicity that there is no evidence to the contrary. By REASON-SENSITIVITY, A must believe that p. It is also psychologically possible for her to believe that p. So she satisfies one wing of the biconditional in MENTAL COMMAND. However, since she is rationally compelled to believe that p, it is not psychologically possible for A to believe that not-p.47 So A fails to satisfy the second wing of the biconditional in MENTAL COMMAND. If follows that MENTAL COMMAND fails for belief, on the assumption that it satisfies REASON-SENSITIVITY.
My proposal, then, makes sense of why Aristotle appeals to MENTAL COMMAND when he tells us why phantasia is up to us and to REASON-SENSITIVITY when he tells us why belief is not up to us. Since REASONSENSITIVITY implies failure of MENTAL COMMAND, MENTAL COMMAND implies failure of REASON-SENSITIVITY. A psychological state, on my proposal, is up to us just in case it fails to satisfy REASON-SENSITIVITY. So when Aristotle claims that phantasia satisfies MENTAL COMMAND, it follows that it fails to satisfy REASONSENSITIVITY. MENTAL COMMAND is a far more intuitive characteristic for trying to show that phantasia is up to us, because there is an obvious and compelling example to which he can appeal, namely mnemonic systems. Explaining why phantasia is up to us by appealing to REASON-SENSITIVITY would make for a clunky and counter-intuitive argument. In contrast, REASON-SENSITIVTY is the perfect principle to appeal to when explaining why belief is not up to us. Since MENTAL COMMAND implies failure of REASON-SENSITIVITY, which in turn implies that the state is not up to us, Aristotle commits no equivocation in his argument. Both clauses rely on an analysis of "up to us"according to which a state is up to us just in case it fails to satisfy REASON-SENSITIVITY. Aristotle's variation is purely presentational.
One may object to my proposal in at least two ways. I have appealed to the notion of a "standard of evaluation," and used that notion to distinguish belief from phantasia. But it seems implausible to say that phantasia is not subject to a standard of evaluation, for two reasons. First, Aristotle says in numerous places that states of phantasia have truth values.48Nor can I wriggle out of these attributions the way I wriggle out of his seeming attribution in passage (3). Second, it does not seem plausible to say that phantasia is not liable to any standard of evaluation. Aristotle says in De Motu Animalium (702a17-19) that phantasia
My response to these objections will be brief and omit some details. They will not, however, omit details relevant to the responses. First things first: Aristotle does give truth values to phantasia. But it does not follow from this that they are subject to evaluation in virtue of their truth value. This is the way it is with belief. Whether we should hold a certain belief has a great deal to do with whether or not it is true. But there is no evidence whatsoever that Aristotle thinks that we should experience phantasia with certain content for the same reason. For some states, such as memory, it will be very important that the mental picture correspond to something in the real world and represent it accurately. But when it comes to desire, quite the opposite is true. I take it that the way phantasia
This leads us into the second objection, that phantasia is indeed subject to evaluation. There seems to be a sense in which it can be right or wrong, or perhaps good or bad, to experience phantasia of a certain content. Two pieces of evidence for this. First, Aristotle thinks that experiencing certain representations, even ones that do not purport to represent the real world, can provoke evaluateive responses in us, such as disgust or pity. This will become very important in the next section. Second, phantasia is a constitutive part of desire. Aristotle clearly thinks that desire is evaluable, since he speaks of "right desire."
When we evaluate belief, we look for whether it is true or false. When we evaluate desires, we look for whether it is for the right kind of object and pursued in the right way. This explains why Aristotle ends passage (1)–"for believing necessarily is either true or false"–the way he does. This premise points out that belief is not up to us in virtue of the kind of evaluative standard to which we hold it, not simply because it is subject to some standard. Because belief satisfies REASON-SENSITIVITY, what we care about is whether the state is true or false. Aristotle puts the necessity in there because any state, in order to be a belief, must be held to the standard expressed in REASON-SENSITIVITY. If we accept this objection's claim that phantasia is liable to the same kind of evaluation as the state for which it serves as a constitutive part– and I find this claim a little dubious–then we see that phantasia will sometimes be evaluated in terms of its truth, as when it contributes to memory or rational thought. But not always, for we will evaluate it terms of rightness or fittingness when it contributes to desire, or when we experience phantasia in virtue of artistic representation. We could no doubt say more about all of these points, but our discussion shows that it does no damage to my proposal if Aristotle thinks that phantasia is subject to evaluation. In fact, this assumption shows how my proposal explains why Aristotle argues the way he does in passage (1).
Just to sum up before we move on: my proposal explains the form of Aristotle's argument and provides an analysis of his use of "up to us"with no textual contradiction or complicated extra-textual machinery. a psychological state is up to us just in case it is not reason-sensitive. If a state fails to satisfy REASON-SENSITIVITY, then it also fails to satisfy MENTAL COMMAND. This allows Aristotle to present the case of phantasia differently from the case of belief. His doing so does not signal two different senses of "up to us," and so his argument succeeds in distinguishing belief from phantasia. 
III. Second Argument: Phantasia and Being Moved-Along 
I think we have said enough about passage (1) and the various issues that come up as we try to make sense of it. We should move on to Aristotle's second argument. Here is passage (2) again, for reference: 
The argument in passage (2) purports to distinguish belief from phantasia by the different roles that each plays in the cognitive economy (for lack of a better word) of the agent. While the argument in passage (1) points out that belief is beholden to a standard of evaluation with respect to truth, while phantasia is not (at least not by virtue of being phantasia), the argument in passage (2) points out that belief and phantasia stand in different relations to an agent's motivational states.
We can start to unpack the argument by noticing that Aristotle is talking about a specific class of beliefs in passage (2). All of the examples he cites predicate something of a particular object. So Aristotle is talking about beliefs with content of the form "x is F." He also seems to have a specific kind of property in mind. His three examples are something impressive, fearsome and encouraging. These properties are all response-dependent. That is, part of what it means for an object to be fearsome is that people tend to be afraid of it. A response-dependent property is defined (at least partially) by the fact that it has a disposition to cause certain responses in certain observers.
But this cannot be exactly what Aristotle has in mind. His claim is that, when we form a belief of some x, that it is F, we are immediately affected accordingly.53This statement is too strong if all he thinks is that x is disposed to cause some response (call it R). For example, an Epicurean can think that death is the kind of thing that tends to make people afraid. It does not follow that she thinks that death is fearsome. In order for his claim to make sense, then, Aristotle must have something slightly different in mind. He must be presupposing that, in order for someone to believe that x is F, x must be disposed to cause the response in them. To see that this is so, consider someone who says: "That movie was pretty terrifying, but it didn't scare me." It is not contradictory, as statements of the form "p, but I don't believe that p" plausibly are, but it has an air of paradox nonetheless. We assume the speaker is being ironic, or is using the term as shorthand for "terrifying for people besides myself." But that interpretation is a fallback, a device of charity we resort to because the utterance puzzles us at first. This suggests the following necessary condition for response-dependent content:
RESPONSE: For any agent A, representational state ψ, object x and response-dependent quality F, A ψ᾽s that x is F only if R(R is a characteristic response to F-objects and A feels R toward x).54
RESPONSE, we should note, offers only a necessary condition for an agent to experience a psychological state with a certain content. But it seems to be exactly what Aristotle is claiming about belief in the first half of passage (2). If we form a belief that x is F, when F is response-dependent, then that is sufficient for us to feel the associated response.55 Aristotle is trying to distinguish belief from phantasia in this passage. We can therefore expect him to deny that a phantasia that represents x as F will have the same conditions. That is, phantasia simply fails to satisfy RESPONSE, so it is not the case that A has a phantasia that represents x as F only if A feels the characteristic F-response. As it happens, most interpreters of this passage, when they actually explicate the passage, take a much stronger view.56 Most take Aristotle to be saying that experiencing phantasia that x is F is sufficient for us not to have the associated response.57 Call this the "feel-nothing reading."
I find the feel-nothing reading bizarre, since the distinction that Aristotle is trying to draw here seems to require nothing that strong. But the interpretation does not come out of nowhere. Aristotle makes several remarks elsewhere in the De Anima which help motivate the view that phantasia cancels the emotional response a subject would feel if they experienced the content as part of a different kind of mental state (e.g. belief). Here are the passages I have in mind:
Let's take a moment to unpack these texts and see whether they support the feel-nothing reading of passage (2). Passage (5) likens pursuit and avoidance behavior to assertion and denial. This establishes an analogy between affective response and belief. As we have seen, part of what distinguishes belief from other psychological states is that it makes a commitment about the world's being a certain way, which is to say that it asserts something. Passage (6) claims that thought never happens without some "phantasma ". Phantasia supplies the content for the thought, so thought cannot take place without it. Passage (7) claims that we can think that some x is F without having the characteristic F-response. So one might reason as follows. Thought requires phantasia, and F-thoughts do not cause F-responses. Therefore, a phantasia that represents x as F does not cause F-response. Since pursuit and avoidance require assertion, and assertion does not characteristically accompany phantasia, it seems that phantasia with a certain content does not provoke responses of this kind.
This argument does not establish that we never have an F-response when we experience phantasia of x as F. Rather, it shows that there is some psychological state of which phantasia is a constitutive part, and which need not cause emotional response. So the argument, it seems, commits a scope error. That is, rather than putting the negation out in front of RESPONSE (wide scope), this reading negates the consequent (narrow scope), and says that, if we have a phantasia that represents x as F, then we do no feel the response. Passages (5) through (7) do not provide evidence for such a reading, nor does Aristotle's argument require it.
One may object that this misses the point of the feel-nothing reading. We might give a stronger argument in its favor: in passage (6), Aristotle says that the soul asserts and denies. This cannot be taken literally, and comes with the standard Aristotelian warning against metonymy.59 He means rather that the agent asserts and denies. The important point is that this differs from his way of speaking in passage (5), where he compares pursuit and avoidance metaphorically to assertion and denial. In (6), Aristotle is talking about the act of taking some content to represent the actual world. He is talking, in short, about belief-formation, since this is what it is to come to believe something. Belief is action-guiding; since the believer takes the content of the belief to represent the actual world, she uses it to navigate her environment (provided she is rational). In passage (4), however, Aristotle distinguishes phantasia from belief. He does not even mention any other state of which phantasia is a constitutive part. All he says is "in a similar case, except due to phantasia." What he is emphasizing is a state that is non-commital, as opposed to a belief, which involves commitment.60 
So the claim is that, if the agent does not take the content of some representation as actual, she will not have the characteristic response to it. This vindicates the narrow scope negation that the feel-nothing reading commits to. If the agent does not have a belief such that x is F (for some response-dependent F), then it hardly makes sense that she would have some response toward x. After all, she does not think x is even real.61 The narrow-scope reading, therefore, is justified.
I think this reading, though more reasonable than it seems at first, is mistaken. It commits Aristotle to the claim that we cannot respond emotionally to content which we do not take to be actual. This implies that we do not respond emotionally to fictional representations unless we mistake them as factual. I am reluctant to condemn Aristotle to such an implausible view. We should, then, look for positive evidence that Aristotle thinks an agent can respond emotionally to content which she does not take as actual. This will repudiate the feel-nothing reading. Once that is out of the way, we can finish up with my own proposal.
Evidence that Aristotle believes that we can respond emotionally to fiction comes from the Poetics. In that work, Aristotle develops a theory of tragedy that presupposes our ability to respond emotionally to depictions of events that we know are fictional. He does not develop a full psychology of fiction. That is, he does not explain the psychological differences between responding to a fiction and responding to a fact. All my objection requires, however, is that Aristotle allow for emotional response to fiction. Our first piece of evidence is Aristotle's definition of tragedy. It is a kind of representation, intimately connected with certain emotional responses:
Tragedy is the representation of a sequence of events that brings about a certain psychological process "by means of pity and fear." He calls this process katharsis , and what exactly is supposed to happen during katharsis is puzzling. My analysis, however, requires no substantive view of the nature of katharsis . I grant that passage (8) does not say explicitly that the representation arouses pity and fear. But the process of katharsis is brought about by means of such emotions, and such a claim could mean little else but that the emotions are actually aroused. Aristotle might mean "by representations of situations that normally evoke pity or fear," but such a reading is a terribly strain on the Greek. Far more likely, he means that katharsis takes place through arousal of the emotions themselves. It follows that tragic representations (and therefore fictions) can be the object of emotional response.
A question remains, however, about how exactly fictional representation causes the emotional response. Passage (8) has nothing to say about the role of phantasia in our experience of artistic representation. If Aristotle does not say that phantasia plays an essential role in our response to tragedy, then the feel-nothing reading remains credible. If our response to tragedy involves forming various beliefs, then it is plausible that phantasia, in and of itself, does not bring about emotional response. The answer is that the emotional arousal does involve belief, but not in a way that confirms the feel-nothing reading. To see why, consider this passage from the Poetics. Here, Aristotle claims that artistic representations can bring about emotional arousal simply in virtue of their content:
A tragic representation can move us by virtue of how it is presented, literally by the sight (opsis) of it. But it can also -- and this is much better -- move us just by our hearing about it. A proper tragic plot is so constituted as to arouse pity and fear if someone so much as hears about it. That is, what moves the subject is the content of the representation, and not any of the external trappings.62 The emotional response is not due to the intonation of the speaker's voice, or some other presentational aspect of communication.63 Therefore, the agent must process the aural information and interpret it in order to be moved. To do this, the agent must represent the states of affairs to herself. My support for this is Aristotle's view that all contemplation and thought require a representation of the contents of the thought, i.e. a "phantasma ".64 
At this point, a defender of the feel-nothing reading will object and say that the emotional arousal does come about due to belief. Indeed, it must, because Aristotle thinks that the content of an artistic representation is not something that the agent can comprehend through a faculty like phantasia:
(10) It's clear from what's been said that the work of the poet is not to say things that happened, but to say the kinds of things that might happen, and what is possible in virtue of probability or necessity. [...] For poetry speaks more of universals, and history of particulars. A universal is whatever falls to whatever sort of man to say or do... (Poetics 1451a36-8, b6-9).
Fictional representations, on Aristotle's view, represent what people of a certain kind say or do, not what particular people said or did. If emotional response to fiction is emotional response to content, as passage (9) indicates, then the response is to events of certain kinds, and not particular events. Phantasia cannot represent universals, but only particulars. Therefore, whatever cognitive process results in emotional arousal from contemplating fictional representations, it is not phantasia. The only likely candidate left that can cause the emotional response is belief. So belief -- namely belief that a certain type of situation is fearful or pitiful -- still has a role to play in our emotional response to fiction. So goes the objection. My response is that, though this is true, and is something which any positive account must make room for, it does no good for the feel-nothing reading. In fact, if anything, it provides more evidence for the view that phantasia evokes an emotional response.
To see why, let's work passage (10) into the interpretation. The idea from passage (10) is supposed to be that our response to fiction involves beliefs about kinds of events. When we contemplate some fiction, then, we form a belief that events of the kind depicted have some response-dependent quality F. By RESPONSE, forming the belief that events of a certain sort are F is sufficient to have the associated F-response toward events of that sort. This, again, is all true, but it is not enough. For this belief cannot, by itself, bring about any emotional response. The person contemplating the fiction has a certain belief, namely a belief that all events of type G are also F, where F is some response-dependent quality. So anytime this person recognizes some event as a G-event, she will immediately believe it to be F, and so feel the associated response. But if she does not witness any events that strike her as G, then she will never feel the F-response, regardless of the relation that she believes holds between the kinds G and F.65So forming this belief about kinds will not by itself explain the emotional response to fiction.
As we saw in our previous discussion, contemplation of fictional content requires phantasia of the depicted events. The content of the phantasia, then, represents an instance of a G event, which then evokes the F-response.66 This seems to me to be the right thing to say, but it also repudiates the feelnothing reading. It is not enough for the feel-nothing reading that belief is involved at some step in the process of response to the content of the fiction. The comparison in passage (2) (De An. 425b20-25) is between having a belief with a certain content (that x is F) and having a phantasia with that same content. In order for the feel-nothing reading to justify its narrow-scope denial of RESPONSE, it must commit to the view that, if an agent does not take the content of a state to represent the actual world, then she will not feel any associated response. Yet someone contemplating fictional content does respond emotionally on occasion, even though she does not take the content of the fiction as representing the actual world. Whether this response involves some more general belief seems to me irrelevant to the argument. This discussion is enough, I think, to put the feel-nothing reading beyond repair, consensus or no.
So we know what Aristotle is not saying. All well and good. We still, though, need to figure out what he is saying. I think the proposal I outlined at the beginning of our discussion stands. Belief satisfies RESPONSE. That is, forming a belief with representational content that x is F is sufficient to have the characteristic F-response toward x. I noted that, if Aristotle's purpose is to distinguish belief from phantasia, it would be sufficient for him to deny that phantasia satisfies RESPONSE. That is, it is not the case that A has a phantasia that represents x as F only if A feels a characteristic F-response toward x. So my positive proposal is, in essence, a wide-scope negation of RESPONSE with respect to phantasia. This proposal makes sense given the kind of argument Aristotle is trying to make. Passage (2) is a further attempt to distinguish belief from phantasia, so it is natural that he would deny that phantasia has a characteristic that he attributes to belief.
Let's walk through this proposal to see its moving parts. The interpretation of the passage, I think, is going to turn on the adverb that Aristotle uses to qualify the first half of passage (2). He does not just say that we are affected when we form the right kind of belief, but that we are affected immediately:
Getting the right reading on this adverb (euthus in Greek) is key to understanding the passage. Its most intuitive meaning is temporal. Taken in this sense, the claim would be that there is no relevant intervening event between our forming the belief and having the characteristic response. But this cannot be the right way to take it. On this interpretation, the difference between belief and phantasia is that phantasia brings an emotional response about more slowly than belief does. For one, this claim is almost too bizarre to make any sense of. Also, it conflicts with passages (6) and (7), for the following reason. Passage (6), we recall, claims that thought requires phantasia to supply its content. Passage (7) observes that we can think of something F without feeling an F-response. It follows from this that it is possible for someone to experience phantasia that x is F without feeling an F-response at all. So if we try to read Aristotle as claiming in passage (2) that the response is merely slower coming with respect to phantasia, we seem to miss the point.
But that is not the only way to take the adverb euthus. There are many instances where Aristotle uses the phrase in much broader sense, of which the temporal sense can be seen as a specific interpretation. I will give a few examples, and then unpack them:
1) Cat. 9b35-6: Aristotle says that "qualities" are those things present in birth immediately (euthus) from certain affections or states of the person.
2) An. Pr. 63b15-8: Aristotle offers a proof that the probative method of deduction reduces to the ad impossibile form of deduction. His proof rests on the claim that, if one takes the negation of the conclusion as a premise, the form of the deduction immediately (euthus) becomes identical to the ad impossibile form.
3) Mot. An., 701a12-5: Aristotle talks about how the conclusions of syllogisms can be actions. Coming to believe the propositions "All agents in situation S should do x" and "I am in situation S" causes agents immediately (euthus), on Aristotle's view, to do x.
In example (1), a person need only be in the states or affections in order to have the quality. In example (2), performing the logical transformation is all one needs to do to obtain the different form of deduction. In example (3), forming those two beliefs are all that one needs to perform the action: no other ingredient is necessary. Euthus, then, seems to be a sufficiency relation. It signifies that the group of conditions from which the qualified outcome emerges constitute a set of sufficient conditions for the outcome. The several different interpretations of the adverb -- causal, logical, temporal -- are all specific applications of this general sense of the term.
If we apply this conclusion to passage (2), we get the following reading. If we form a belief that some object x has some response-dependent quality F, then that is all we need to have the associated emotional response. But if we are in an analogous state (hôsautôs, literally "likewise") except that the state with the representational content is phantasia rather than belief, then it is unclear whether we will have the associated emotional response or not. In short, belief is a sufficient condition to have an emotional response to some content, whereas phantasia is not. This is, more or less, the claim that phantasia, on its own, fails to satisfy RESPONSE. This does not commit Aristotle to the claim that phantasia does not cause emotional response. It simply claims that phantasia with a certain representational content does not by itself (euthus) lead to the response.
This reading makes sense of why Aristotle uses the simile that he does in the second half of passage (2). He claims that experiencing content by phantasia is like looking at something frightening or encouraging in a picture. Merely witnessing a certain content will not, by itself, move us in any particular way. There are situations where we contemplate some response-dependent content and do not feel the associated response. Aristotle discusses such a case in passage (7). We can contemplate something fearful in thought, and yet feel no fear (though we may have associated physiological reactions). But we can also, as per passage (9), contemplate something fearful and actually feel afraid, as when we have an emotional response to some fictional content. Each of these exercises involve a complex mental state of which phantasia is some part.67 But it is not phantasia which does the motivational work; what makes the difference is the rest of the mental ingredients.
My reading faces a seeming difficulty when we try to integrate it the numerous roles that Aristotle gives to phantasia in his psychology and zoology. My reading seems committed to the claim that something other than phantasia must be present in the psychology of an agent in order for the agent to be put into various motivational states as a result of certain stimuli. It is not enough that some fearful content get presented; the agent must take a certain attitude toward it, accept it as actual. Animals cannot form beliefs, and so are incapable of doing this.68 It would seem to follow that animals are not capable of being put into motivational states by the content of their mental states. But this is absurd; animals can get  around with their perception and phantasia as well as we can with our beliefs.69 If my reading says that they can't, or cannot make sense of how they can, then so much the worse for my reading.
The objection, I think, fails due to irrelevance. In passage (2), Aristotle contrasts belief with an instance of phantasia which, in and of itself, is non-committal: looking at a picture. But if animals have only the faculties of perception and phantasia to get around their environment, then it follows that they are incapable of taking a non-committal attitude to the content of their mental states. Being able to do this would require some other faculty that "monitors" the content of the states and commits to them or not. Animals have no such faculty.70 So passage (2) is restricted to discussion of humans. It says nothing about the roles that phantasia does and does not play in animal motion and motivation.
We need to say more about this. For the phantasia which humans have is not radically different in kind from the phantasia which animals have. Aristotle uses the fact that animals have phantasia and not belief in a later argument (De An. 428a17-24) to show that those two are distinct kinds of mental state. If human phantasia were something completely different from animal phantasia, this would be a bad move on his part. But I do not mean to say that human phantasia is something sui generis, and therefore nothing that Aristotle says about animals matters in our consideration of passage (2). I mean rather that the argument in passage (2) seems to presuppose that there is an extra faculty humans have which allow them to take a non-committal stance toward the content of certain mental states. Animals do not have this additional faculty. But it does not follow from this that animals are incapable of taking the contents of their mental states as actual and therefore action-guiding. Rather, it means that they are incapable of taking the contents of their representational states as non-actual. There are no skeptical animals.
If this response is true to Aristotle's views on animal psychology, then we would expect him to draw attention to interaction between the two human faculties, and to do some thinking about what happens when one of them goes awry. And so he does. He often mentions that, when a human's reasoning capacity breaks down, he acts on phantasia:
In these passages, we have discussion of a "ruling principle," or some faculty that evaluates content and decides whether to consider it actual or not. This faculty is prey to various affections and illness: in passages (11) and (12), Aristotle describes scenarios wherein the faculty stops functioning properly. In passage (11), he compares this behavior explicitly to what animals do all the time. When the committing faculty breaks down, there is nothing to do but take all presentations at face value. This is the situation that animals and the crazy/sick find themselves in.
Passages (11)-(13) have an important implication for the objection to my reading, and my response to it. They suggest, I think, that the discussion Aristotle conducts in passage (2) occur in the context of a cognitive economy that includes a faculty of commitment. As I said before, the presence of this faculty in an animal's cognition does not allow for commitment, in the sense that, without it, the animal does not take anything as actual. The passages I just quoted demonstrate that this is not what Aristotle has in mind. Rather, the faculty allows the animal to refrain from committing to some experience of phantasia. So the objection does indeed fail due to irrelevance, as I said before. Passage (2) is implicitly restricted to a context dealing with animals that can refrain from taking certain mental contents as representing the actual world. That is, he is talking about humans. The fact that mere phantasia is not sufficient to evoke a response from a normally-functioning human says nothing about whether it is sufficient to evoke a response from an animal. The two cases are importantly different.
This discussion allows us to explicate Aristotle's picture-gazing simile even further. When we look at a pictorial representation of something with a response-dependent quality, several things might happen: we might have the response, if we are contemplating it as a fiction. We might have no full-blown response, as when we are considering it in the abstract. We might also, if our committing faculty is out of whack, react as if it were something real, because the faculty that lets us tell the difference is not working right. Aristotle thinks that people whose committing faculty is malfunctioning react to unreal representations as if they were real. So we have reason to think that he has cases like this in mind during passage (2). In comparison, when we form a belief that something has some response-dependent quality, we have only one option: be affected accordingly. So Aristotle's comparison, while condensed and mysterious at first, allows him to pack a whole lot of doctrine into very little space.
I don't think I have too much more to say. I hope to have shown that the arguments contained in passage (1) and (2), though hard to approach, turn out to yield rich veins of information about Aristotle's characterization of belief, phantasia, and what makes them differ from each other. One cannot form beliefs at will, because a state must be answerable to a standard of evaluation in order to count as a belief. Phantasia is under our mental command, which entails that it is not reason-sensitive. Belief is also sufficient to cause emotional response to content, for certain qualities. But it is not, as most interpreters have assumed, necessary. Rather, phantasia is capable of evoking a response, as when we appreciate fiction. Aristotle's important point is that we cannot tell from the mere presence of phantasia whether the agent's mental state can motivate such a response. The substantive results that emerge from my reading point to an interesting conclusion, namely that assent (sunkatathêsis), though not a part of Aristotle's philosophical vocabulary, nevertheless plays a large role in his theory of cognition. Recall that the notion of taking some content to represent the actual world accounted both for the REASON-SENSITIVITY of belief and for its role in evoking emotional response.
I also hope to have shown that careful attention to various aspects of the arguments, both their content and the strategy they exemplify, allows us to make sense of them in light of Aristotle's other express views on the relevant subjects. The interpretive tradition surrounding these short passages has been one of puzzlement and harsh judgment. When scholars condemn Aristotle to an inconsistent view of phantasia, these passages inevitably come up. My readings, however, make sense of the arguments both on their own merits and in the larger context of Aristotle's philosophical psychology. This is a much better outcome, both for Aristotle as a thinker and for future inquiry into this tightly-knit family of concepts.
