Supersymmetric theories have long provided a theoretical framework which can overcome many of the shortfalls of the Standard Model. The major shortfall of Supersymmetry (SUSY), however, has been a complete lack of direct experimental measurements, to date. Many of the present limits for SUSY particles have been set by the CDF experiment, which looks at pp collisions at ps = 1.96 TeV. The CDF detector is further described here []. Many SUSY particle decay chains end in leptons. Since lepton events are relatively rare at hadron colliders, lepton signatures are a favorable channel in which to look for new phenomena.
The dilepton sample is also an interesting sample to search for new phenomena due to several curiosities. First, there is the number of events that was observed in the top dilepton sample at CDF during Run I. The predicted number of tt events in the dilepton channel
The large Yukawa coupling of the top quark (due to its high mass) has the consequence that its supersymmetric partner, the stop quark, could be the lightest of the SUSY quarks. From an experimental point of view, writing the SUSY Lagrangian in terms of mass eigenstates rather than the more customary weak eigenstates (˜tL and ˜tR) is useful. A compact form of the SUSY Lagrangian containing all quadratic terms with two stops is:
where the vector
It is useful to know the possible mass ranges of the stop for its search. In the framework of mSUGRA (minimal Supergravity), we can calculate the parameters of (2) at the EWK scale and then diagonalize (2). Given the large top quark mass (mt 175 GeV) the ˜tL and ˜tR mixing leads to significant mass splitting between the two mass states (˜t1, ˜t2), allowing us to consider ˜t1 as being the lightest squark and thus the one upon which experimental searches at CDF will focus on. From hereon, ˜t1 will be referred to as ˜t.
Leading order calculations for the production cross sections of ˜t˜t via qq annihilation and gluon-gluon fusion are given by:
Since elementary particles (such as quarks or gluons) are not what are collided at hadron colliders, (3) does not give a complete picture of the production cross-section. Instead, the parton distribution functions of the proton and anti-proton must be taken into account. As a result, cross section falls exponentially with the stop mass. In the mass region of interest to this search (m˜t = 80 − 140 GeV), the cross section drops from 44 pb to 1 pb. The lower limit for this region of interest is set by limits established at LEP II.
Assuming R-parity conserving SUSY insures the stability of the lightest supersymmetric particle (LSP). As a result, all supersymmetric particles will eventually decay into the LSP which is undetectable and thus shows up as 6ET in the detector. The ˜t ! b˜±1 (analogous to the top quark decay t ! Wb) has only a small search window remaining at the Tevatron due to the high ˜±1 mass limit from LEP2. Other possible decay modes are the flavor-changing ˜t ! c˜0, which is highly suppressed, and the 3-body decay of ˜t ! ˜lb, which is mostly closed due to the slepton mass limit placed by LEP2. A fourth decay mode of ˜t ! l˜b still remains open due to the present sneutrino mass limit of m˜ 45 GeV. The sneutrino is expected to decay to e, μ and with equal branching ratios. This decay mode will yield two opposite sign leptons, and two hadronic jets (from the b-quarks) and a considerable amount of 6ET -- a signal basically identical to that of dileptonic top quark decay.
Again, a compelling reason to use the dilepton channel for SUSY searches is their relatively low SM backgrounds:
The dilepton cuts used in the stop search are as follows:
After the above cuts are used, the remaining SM background is almost entirely tt. In the case of top decay, the leptons come from W decay and are thus very energetic. In the case of stop decay, the available energy in the decay depends on the difference in mass of the stop and the sneutrino, or, m˜t−˜. The possible signal regions are separated into small m˜t−˜ and large m˜t−˜.
For small m˜t−˜, the leptons and jets are soft. The energy that escapes detections is quite large, but since the sneutrinos should tend to be back-to-back, the measured 6ET is effectively reduced. Thus, we require the dilepton pT , pl1,l2 T 30 GeV and ET,jet+6ET 160 GeV, where ET,jet is the transverse energy of the most energetic jet.
For large m˜t−˜, the leptons should be more energetic, so we require pl1,l2 T 55 GeV while requiring the same jet ET and 6ET cut.
A summary of events that pass each cut is shown in Table 2. Since no events were observed, we can place a 95% C.L. limit on the mass of the stop quark of m˜t 135 GeV. A plot showing the stop and sneutrino mass plane and regions that have been excluded is shown in Figure
Another promising SUSY channel to search for in the dilepton sample is a chargino (˜±1 ) and neutralino (˜02) decay to three leptons and missing energy. The specific decay chain considered in this search is:
Figure 1: Stop and neutrino mass plane showing 1 regions excluded by CDF and D0 Run I and LEP II
The result would be the famous "trilepton" signature of three isolated leptons and 6ET . The ˜01 is the LSP which would escape the detector undetected. Since the neutral particles do not come in the same direction, the 6ET spectrum is broad.
The backgrounds and cuts for this search are very similar to those in the stop quark search in the dilepton channel. The presence of large 6ET in this signature makes it relatively easy to eliminate the larges background, Drell-Yan processes, which do not have significant 6ET . The signature for trileptons does not suffer from irreducible SM backgrounds. is even "cleaner" than that for other SUSY signatures in the dilepton sample
For the Run II analysis (which does not have blessed results yet), a further set of cuts are madeaAfter selecting events that pass a basic dilepton trigger cut (as described in section 2) to further clean up the sample. The desire to have further "clean-up" cuts was motivated by the lessons learned in Run I and are based off of a 100k monte carlo sample. (Table 3).
After all cuts are made, no events are seen. In particular, none of the candidate events pass the 6ET cut (see Table 4). Since no events are seen, limits can be placed on the available parameter space (a particular point in parameter space is excluded if the predicted number of events exceeds the number of events expected at the 95% confidence limit given that zero events are observed).
The limits set by CDF for Run I are:
A detailed breakdown of the number of events that pass each cut is shown in Table 3.3 and a plot of ·BR(˜±1 ˜02 ! 3l + X) vs. ˜±1 mass with the limits set by the search is shown in Figure 2.
Table 4: Summary of chargino/neutralino to trilepton findings in Run I of CDF
In Winter 2003, analysis on the first 100 pb−1 of data was completed for CDF. A prominent channel for top quark production is the dilepton channel, where tt ! WbWb ! llllbb. It became apparent that the pT distribution for leptons in the top dilepton sample was softer than would be expected for mostly tt decay (see Figure 3). While this certainly could be due to statistical fluctuations, it is also an exciting possibility for observing non-SM physics. Certainly, within a MSSM framework, such a signature is a possibility.
The basic cuts used in the top dilepton sample are:
These cuts yielded a total of 10 candidate, opposite-sign, dilepton events (2 ee, 3 μμ and 5 eμ). We will look at two scenarios that would contribute to creating a soft pT distribution as seen in this data set. There are two SUSY scenarios which we will consider that could lead to such a soft lepton pT distribution [7]
Assuming a specific SUSY model of (M1, M2, M3, μ, tan , m˜lR , m˜lL, m˜q) = (70 GeV, 145 GeV, 300 GeV, 500 GeV, 10, 110 GeV, 300 GeV, 800 GeV) and assuming the following mass relation:
The dominant decay mode of ˜02 is ˜02 ! l˜l R ! l˜l ˜01 and for ˜+ 1 is ˜+ 1 ! W+ ˜01 ! l+ ˜01 or qq0 ˜01. Thus, production of ˜02˜±1 can result a signature nearly identical to that of tt decaying in the dilepton mode.
Another scenario which could result in the soft pT distribution is that of a light stop decaying. Assuming the mass relation of:
The gluino will decay to a top and stop quark 100% of the time. In this case, analogously to a top quark decaying, the stop will decay to a chargino and a b-quark. The decay chain of the stop will end in a lepton and 6ET . If the ˜t1 is light, then it can be pair-produced, resulting in this decay chain:
The dilepton channel continues to be an interesting place to look for experimental evidence of supersymmetry. Certainly some of the Run I measurements that were discussed can be improved upon in Run II. Also, it will be interesting to see whether the soft pT distribution in the top dilepton sample for Run II will persist through the additional 100 pb−1 that has been collected since. Even if SUSY particles are not directly detected at the Tevatron, better limits can be placed such that discovery will be an easier task at the LHC.
