Countermajoritarianism, depending on who you ask, is either the justification for judical supremacy or its disease. Detractors of the Supreme Court can hardly comprehend how a body with such apparently little democratic legitimacy can wield such power in the American political system. Granting coequal status to the electorally unaccountable judicial branch, these critics argue, most certainly runs afoul of the principles of a government President Lincoln famously summarized as being "of the people, by the people, for the people." Yet to its supporters, the Judiciary's independence from elective politics is exactly what necessitates its existence. Without a powerful Court, proponents argue, the rights of minorities will be sacrificed at the altar of popular sovreignty. To them it is the words of another former president that define our government, "to the end it may be a government of laws and not of men."
Not surprisingly, the authority of the Court becomes interposed between what Michael Klarman calls the "heroic countermajoritarian function," that is, the "common wisdom that a fundamental purpose of judicial review is to protect minority rights from majoritarian overreach" and a "countermajoritarian dilemma," which he defines as "the notion that invalidation of statutes by an unelected, remotely accountable federal judiciary is inconsistent with basic premises of democratic government."
The first part of this paper intends to establish the legitimacy of the Court's ability to represent the People by highlighting its democratic foundations. It assumes acceptance of the fundamental concept that in a democracy elected representatives do, by and large, represent the prevailing attitudes of the electorate.
Certain institutional and political constraints exist that prevent the Court from pursuing a course radically out of step with general preference. One such constraint is the Judiciary's dependence on other political actors for legitimacy. As the American concept of judicial review is not enshrined in the text of the Constitution but rather justified by the Court's own pronouncements in Marbury v. Madison, "it is the purest bootstrapping," explains Keith Whittington, "to imagine [Marbury] establishes judicial supremacy as a political practice."
Desires to advance strong countermajoritarian programs are largely checked by institutional constraints. Yet, the Constitutional appointment process, and particularly its usage of late, makes it unlikely that a majority of the Court's membership would hold views demonstrably out of step with popular will in the first place. Justices are, after all, nominated by the democratically elected President before they are subjected to a confirmation hearing by the electorally accountable Senate. Robert Dahl's experience monitoring the selection procedure led him to point out the obvious reality that "Presidents are not famous for appointing justices hostile to their own views on public policy nor could they expect to secure confirmation of a man whose stance on key questions was flagrantly at odds with that of the dominant majority in the Senate."
In the intervening fifty years since Dahl observed the democratic demands of the confirmation process, political scrutiny of would be Justices has only increased. Lawrence Baum argues that, in fact, we have entered an entirely new era of intensified examination of judicial nominees, focused on strict expectations of ideological congruence and ajudicative qualifications. Indeed, while the half-century preceding Dahl's article saw three of thirty-six Presidential Supreme Court nominations fail to obtain Senate confirmation, seven out of twenty-seven nominations have fallen short since.
Political constraints upon the Court's composition and jurisdictional latitude have translated into a judicial renderings that accord with national sentiment. While the High Court commands the authority of Congressional review, it reserves its exercise for extreme circumstances. In one hundred and sixty-seven years of Supreme Court existence leading up to Dahl's case study only twenty-four pieces of federal legislation were deemed by the Court impermissible within the first two years of enactment. The Court's caution in striking down legislative agendas immediately means the presumable legal manifestations of the People's will remain safeguarded. Similarly, withholding invalidation with the two-year election cycle reflects a deference to constituents and their opportunity to react at the polls. Just as the Court has shown itself to be largely unwilling to defy Congressional action in the short term, it has even more rarely impeded sustained legislative efforts throughout the long term. Only six times, in Dahl's history, has the Court remained recalcitrant to continued Congressional attempts at passing specific reform. These figures lead Dahl to the conclusion that "The elaborate 'democratic' rationalizations of the Court's defenders and the hostility of its 'democratic' critics are largely irrelevant, for lawmaking majorities generally have had their way."
Up to this point an effort has been made to establish the Supreme Court as rooted within a sufficient democratic framework upon which, assuming fundamental principles of democratic representation are accepted, the Court may act as a proxy for the general public. Now that the Court's democratic credentials have been propounded, it is appropriate to show the judiciary's utility to the body politic whose interests it seeks to defend. The primary benefit the Supreme Court provides in its fiduciary duty to the People is the universalization of communal principles. This paper makes the normative claim that protection of national doctrine, and not deference to state and local autonomy, offers the most utility to the People. The Civil War marked the high point of debates over federalism and ultimately settled the question in favor of preservation of national principle. The Reconstruction Amendments, particularly the Fourteenth, established that state sovereignty is and should be constrained by a binding conception of American liberty.
When other governing authorities fail to ensure that nationally recognized substantive protections are extended throughout the land, the Supreme Court is in the unique position to act on behalf of the principled majority. If the Court rarely challenges federal legislation, which is after all presumptively usually in accord with that principled majority, it has shown an exceeding willingness to intervene in State action. Michael Klarman highlights the landmark case and cause celebre of rights foundationalists Griswold v. Connecticut as evidence of what he perceives as an overblown perception of the Court as a gallant defender of minority rights. Klarman reminds readers that when Justice Douglas issued his famous opinion invalidating a Connecticut statute banning the use of birth control by married couples, only two states still had such laws on the books. "This is hardly the heroic countermajoritarian role claimed for judicial review by proponents," he argues. Furthermore, Griswold, Klarman charges, evidences the broader truth that "the court identifies and protects minority rights only when a majority or near majority of the community has come to deem those rights worthy of protection."
To the countermajoritarian ideologues who Klarman is addressing this might be a sad reality, yet the Court's flair for enshrining commonly acknowledged liberty has intrinsic value to those Americans who share a faith in democratic principles and a commitment to rights protection. If one abandons positive or negative expectations of countermajoritarianism and instead accepts Thomas Grey's definition of the Court as "the expounder of basic national ideals... even when the content of these ideals is not expressed as a matter of positive law," than Griswold was a remarkable success.10 The 1965 ruling was a famous example of a common Court practice in which, in Klarman's words, it "takes a strong national consensus and imposes it on... outliers."
The Court is particularly effective in isolating and smoking out forces of reaction largely because other political actors neglect to do so. Gideon v. Wainright, like Griswold, is another celebrated instance when the Court formalized a right, which the nation had considered a norm. Had Clarence Earl Gideon been tried in one of forty-five other states, he would have been provided a lawyer. Yet Florida remained a Constitutional holdout until the Court's intercession. Because Florida's failure to protect Gideon's right to counsel was so anomalous, Klarman remains unmoved by the Court's intervention. "Congress," rationalizes Klarman, "can force local outliers to abide by national norms as well as the Court can."
Of course the ultimate evidence of the Court's powerful ability to enshrine national principles in the face of inactive political actors is Brown v. Board of Education. Polls have shown that before the Court's decision a majority of the American public favored integration and after the decision a majority of the American public supported the Court's rendering. And, indeed, Topkea, Kansas was no outlier. Yet as Ronald Dworkin points out, even if "the only people who wanted de jure segregation were white Southerners...the fact remains that the national Congress had not in fact checked segregation, either because it believed it did not have the legal power to do so or because it not want to."
Klarman charges that a decision of Brown's physical scope is the exception, rather than the rule and that Country was on its way to destroying Jim Crow organically anyway. The Court's modesty in wielding this judicial power in expanse, reveals a deference to the elected bodies that is admirable. Indeed, the Court is only willing to interpose itself when it is necessary and this should provide comfort to those who remain fearful of a judicial tyranny. That national trends were setting wheels in motion against segregation only highlights the urgency of the Congressional paralysis and the Court's agency of the populace. Furthermore, acknowledging the relative infrequency of cases of Brown's expanse, which also include the likes of Roe v. Wade and Lawrence v. Texas, ought not undermine their importance. They remain evidentiary of flaws in traditional democratic institutions that can, at times, leave them too self-constrained to advance majoritarian demands and reveal the ability of the Court to fill the void. That the Court has shown a readiness but not an overzeal to issue these decisions is a reminder both of its commitment to the People and their principles as well as the judicary's ability to serve them within a democratic framework.
