Today the Supreme Court is often seen as wielding a substantial amount of power by definitively determining the constitutionality of laws made by our government and striking them down if they do not believe them to be in like with the Constitution. Though it appears to be a considerable oddity that an unelected tribunal of eight would have almost unchecked power to determine what laws are ok and what laws are not, in today's current political and judicial culture it often seems to be the case. An apprehension that might arise in the mind of someone concerned with adhering to the democratic process at least procedurally then might be, so how much power does the Supreme Court really have? The answer is a two-pronged response that concerns direct and indirect affects of the Court. Gerald Rosenberg makes an excellent argument for the lack of direct affects the Court is capable of unless under very particular, fortuitous circumstances. He then also makes a case against the indirect affects that the court is capable of and proposes several arguments against many of the indirect affects of the Courts. Rosenberg seems to underestimate two potential indirect affects of the Court though; their value in creating backlash that can eventually help a cause, and working with grass roots organization in order to sustain social movements that could otherwise be squelched without the help of the law.
As Rosenberg says in the first chapter of The Hollow Hope, as far as focusing on the court being an effective producer of significant social reform, there are "claims about frequency" and claims about "conditions". Rosenberg describes that "to fully understand the role of the courts in producing significant social reform, we must focus on the latter,"
The second restraint is that "courts are wary of stepping too far out of the political mainstream."
Many, even if they don't agree with some of the particulars of Rosenberg's positivist reasoning, still concede that it is at least much more difficult to make direct changes based on court rulings when the constrictions are in place. It is in fact "widely acknowledged that Brown's direct impact on school desegregation was limited,"
Rosenberg also makes that case that not only can the courts not have a direct affect under these constraints, but the court won't have any indirect affects either.
Both he and Michael Klarman utilize positivist methods to determine the indirect affects of court decisions. They both determine that though the Brown decision might have forced the idea of civil rights onto the national agenda, in reality only 17% of northern whites were aware of the decision after it was made. 60% of southern whites were aware of the decision, but unfortunately instead of goading civil rights progress it resulted instead in a tremendous backlash against the decision. They consider how the decision could have "pricked the consciousness of northern whites by placing the moral authority of the Court and the Constitution behind the black demand for desegregation"
McCann, agrees with the fact that "legal tactics narrowed in effectiveness as courts narrowed constructions of civil rights later in the decade", and therefore that the courts effectiveness can be constrained as a defender of civil rights, but still maintains that the court can have affective indirect affects regardless. He attributes the inability of researchers like Rosenberg to produce results that corroborate McCann's findings because of the positivist, causal method employed as opposed to a more complex, probing research methods that "treats contexts as complex webs of multiple dynamically interactive, contingent 'social relations' that both constrain and facilitate the reflexive actions of research subjects,"
Though McCann believes even during the era of wage reform that "federal Courts generally have lacked both the will and the capacity to correct discriminatory wage practices" but that "nevertheless...legal norms...shaped the terrain of struggle over wage equality"
There are though, two indirect affects of Court cases in particular that Rosenberg seems to dismiss or not really address, that have the ability to contribute substantially to social change. The first affect is interesting because it is probably the most indirect way the Court can bring about change; that is the Court is capable of bringing about change because of the backlash generated by their decisions, against their decisions. As Klarman describes, the backlash in Brown, "crystallized southern resistance to racial change...temporarily destroyed southern racial moderation" and thus generated "nationally televised scenes of southern law enforcement officers using police dogs, high-pressure fire houses... which converted millions of previously indifferent northern whites into enthusiastic proponents of civil rights legislation,"
The second way in which the Court appears to be able to help bring about social change is that sometimes its decisions, or lack of decisions, have the capability of sustaining a social movement. As Robert Glennon says, "prolonged human effort, no matter how righteous the case, does not inevitably result in favorable political change,"
This is not to say that the "Supreme Court decisions may have inspired the Montgomery black community to challenge segregation,"
Our society tends to idolize certain court decisions like Brown v. Bored of Ed., as well as certain social movements such as the Montgomery bus boycott. More often than not though, it is simply impossible for any single one of these events to have the cataclysmic affect that our society at large, as well as certain scholars, attribute to them. It is not necessarily true that "the existence and strength of pro-civil-rights forces at least suggest that change would have occurred"
