Students of environmental conservation are well aware of the canon, "Think Globally, Act Locally," but to what extent is the global aspect actually realized? People should be more inclined to act locally more than globally, but what causes an individual to think globally? In other words, how far (literally) do our own environmental values span? Using and adding to research on the psychology of choice, and the effects of framing and protected values, this experiment tests the scope of people's environmental concerns. Here, I test how international versus national environmental issues effect people's choices.
Tversky and Kahneman (1981: 453) argue that rational decision-makers will prefer prospects that offer the "highest expected utility." However, this rationality may be thwarted when prospects are framed differentially, in terms of gains and losses. When prospects are framed in terms of gains, the chosen option is more likely to be risk averse. In contrast, when prospects are framed in terms of losses, the chosen option is more likely to be risk-taking. Tversky and Kahneman (1981) argue that people do not simply become irrational, but rather they make bounded decisions based on the most readily available, although limited, information.
Protected values may confound these framing effects. Protected values are firmly held ethical beliefs about one's duties and rights as a human being. Such values shape individual behavior because people are concerned not only with the consequences of the action, but also with the very nature of their own participation (Baron & Spranca, 1997). People with protected values cannot trade their personal values for others, and if they do, they are unhappy with their decision. Baron and Spranca (1997) suggest that protected values prohibit certain actions. Tanner and Medin (2004), in contrast, argue that protected values influence people to act, out of moral obligation; active moral obligation is stronger than moral prohibition of actions.
Tanner and Medin qualify their argument by suggesting that, at least in terms of environmental values and behavior, "prohibitions against action may be salient when the act can be seen as causing harm. In contrast, obligation to act may be more salient when the act can be seen as promoting something good" (in press: 4). Thus, there may be a relationship between the framing of the action prospects/options, such that harm (negativity) induces omission, while good actions (positivity) induces action. This argument holds, however, only when protected values are present and strong. Tanner and Medin suggest that when protected values are lacking, or even weakly present, tendencies are, as Tversky and Kahneman (1981) argue, malleable such that the way a prospect is framed may sway one's answer.
This experiment, then, will test an individual's reaction to different types of framed national and international environmental conservation situations. Several predictions are made, based on the above research.
1) If protected values do not exist, participant choices will be influenced by the way in which the scenario prospects are framed:
2) If protected values do exist, participant choices will be less influenced by the way in which the scenario prospects are framed:
This experiment was conducted through the use of e-mail surveys. The surveys were not anonymous, as respondents sent their responses to my e-mail address. I received 236 responses from people of various backgrounds and educational interests/career paths, and from across the United States.
To establish the presence/absence and intensity of protected values, participants were given a set of three national environmental statements and three international environmental statements. For each statement they chose one of three opinions:
Selecting option c is evidence of an environmental protected value. The statements were
as follows:
Immediately after selecting their opinions about the environmental statements, respondents proceeded to the environmental scenario section. Half of the participants (Group A) received scenarios with only negatively-framed prospects, and half of the participants (Group B) received scenarios with only positively-framed prospects. All participants received the same 3 international scenarios and 3 national scenarios. Both types had one scenario based on each of the following environmental issues: non charismatic endangered species, charismatic endangered species, and forest resources. To reduce bias, the actual survey did not denote the framing, scope, or categorical nature of the question (e.g. "international, forest resources, positive frame" will not be mentioned).
For this experiment, the framing (positive/negative), scope (national/international) and category (environmental issue) of each scenario are the independent variables, and the choice made by the respondent -- the effect of the framing, scope and category -- is the independent variable. This paper describes only the results of framing and scope, but addresses environmental issues in the discussion.
You were born and raised in the Midwest. It rains a lot in there, and most people have lush lawns and gardens that almost take care of themselves. Your fondest childhood memories are of you and your friends rolling down the grassy hill in your back yard, picking cherries and plums from your fruits trees, and smelling the roses and lilies that bloomed for months right outside your front door. Upon getting a new job, you move to Arizona, where the climate is a bit different from where you grew up. People have rocks instead of lawns and cacti instead of roses! You long for the beauty and comfort of a grassy landscape in front of your home, but you know that Arizona is very arid and grass is not a natural landscape there.
As a member of the city council, you must decide whether or not to begin constructing a new business plaza in town. The site slated for development, and you know that the businesses will bring in more employment and much needed revenue for the city.  However, is a remnant forest grove, with both historical and ecological value. The city is voting on which construction agency to hire.
After 35 years on the job, you have finally retired. You and your spouse are planning on moving to your mountain cabin to enjoy canoeing, bird-watching, and watching movies on your big screen television. Since you bought the cabin 10 years ago, however, the road leading up to your cabin is becoming more and more congested. Elk, moose, and grizzly bears are not only being hit by cars, but they are also losing their breeding and migratory habitat to new cabin and road construction. The county is considering have the inner-mountain roads removed so that forest habitat can re-grow. There are two plans from which the county is choosing from to solve this problem.
While on a kayaking trip in Baja California, Mexico, your tour group unexpectedly comes upon a school of endangered fish. The fish are endemic, sensitive to water fluctuation, and do not migrate out of the peninsula to spawn, or for any other reason, for that matter. The fish are small and barely visible from the top of the water, but your guide tells you that they are spawning all over the area. You and your group must decide which way to go in order to minimize disrupting the fish with the boats and paddles. Which path do you decide to take?
Although you have been diligently saving money for an upcoming backpacking trip through Europe, after watching a documentary on PBS about chimpanzees, you have begun looking for an organization to donate money to for the species' cause. You talk to a friend, who recommends 2 organizations, each with varying degrees of reputation.
You have just moved in to your new home and are shopping for new furniture. You find a store that is having a sale on beautiful wooden dining room set from Asia. The colors and style match your kitchenware perfectly. The price is far below what you want to spend, but you know that the wood is endangered and comes from threatened habitat, home to many endangered plants and animals.
After the scenarios are completed, participants will be asked to justify their decisions, through a single explanatory question: Why did you choose the option you chose?
Table 1 shows the percentage of respondents holding protected values which are national in scope, and those which are international in scope. The average percent of respondents which held at least one national protected value was 33%; the average for international protected values was 47%. This suggests that the scope of protected values can expand well beyond national borders. While not tested against actual behavior, it is likely that protected values are higher for international environmental issues simply because it is easier to "care" about issues which are remote from one's one life.
Table 2 shows the percentage of respondents, independent of protected values who selected option 1, 2, or 0 (zero signifies surveys where respondents refused to choose an option; this will be discussed in the justifications section). For 5 of the 6 positively framed scenarios, and 4 of the 6 negatively framed scenarios, respondents chose the predicted options, 1 (risk averse)and 2(risk taking), respectively.
In the analysis of the data, I categorized protected values into three groups:
For respondents with no or low protected values, results were the same for all three categories (TABLE 3):
As predicted, a framing effect was found for respondents with low or no protected values: for 4 out of 6 negatively framed scenarios, there were more respondents who chose option 2, the risk-taking choice. The framing effect was absent for scenario 3 (national) and scenario 5 (international). The framing effect was not stronger in national scenarios than in international scenarios, as was predicted.
Also as predicted, for 5 out of 6 positively framed scenarios, there were more respondents who chose option 1, the risk-averse choice. The framing effect was absent for scenario 3 (national). The framing affect was much stronger in the positively framed group than the negatively framed group, however, the framing effect was not stronger in national scenarios than in international scenarios, as was predicted
Table 4 shows that, as predicted, when protected values are high, there is no framing affect (although a slight effect is seen in scenario 2). In fact, scenarios 3, 4, 5, and 6 show an effect in the opposite direction; more people chose option 1.
For respondents with high national protected values, a framing effect is seen only in scenario 2 (which, interestingly, is a national scenario). (TABLE 5) Scenarios 1, 3, and 5 show a tendency to select option 1 rather than option 2, and scenarios 4 and 5 resulted in an equal selection of option 1 and 2.
For respondents with high international protected values, negatively framed scenarios did not produce a framing effect. In fact, in scenarios 3, 4, 5, and 6, respondents selected option 1. There was a weak framing effect towards option 2 in scenario 1 and 2. This illustrates that the presence of high international protected values severely decreases the framing effect for international, but not national, scenarios.
For total protected values, all positively framed scenarios tended to show the same framing effect; That is, option 1 was chosen more than option 2 (TABLE 7). Thus, protected values did not seem to lessen the framing effect for positively framed scenarios.
For international protected values, again there continued to be a framing effect for all scenarios; that is, option 1 was chosen more than option 2. For scenarios 2 and 6 the framing effect was even stronger; that is, a larger percentage of respondents with international protected values selected option 1 than the percentage of respondents without international protected values (TABLE 8). The table illustrates that the presence of high international protected values decreases the framing effect for both international and national scenarios.
For national protected values, positive scenarios 1, 4, and 5 showed the same framing effect; that is, option 1 was chosen more than option 2. For scenarios 2 and 3 an equal number of respondents chose option 1 and option 2. For scenario 6, more respondents chose option 2 than chose option 1 (TABLE 9).
Baron and Spranca (1997) suggest that people with protected values often will not even consider scenarios that conflict with their values. People can exhibit anger, bewilderment, and indignation, and subsequently choose neither of the options and (Tanner and Medin,1997). Table 10 shows that only a few (no more than 4% of respondents for any one scenario, positively or negatively framed; also shown in Table 2) refused to select an option. Protected values, however, were not always high for these individuals. This was particularly true for the respondents with positively framed surveys, where the majority of had low protected values (granted, this ranges from 2-4 individuals).
Respondents who refused to select an option to the scenarios stated one of two justifications: Either there was not enough information given in the scenario to justify selecting an option, or they simply could not justify selecting an option where there was a risk of ending the life of a living organism (the latter response was particularly true for the negatively framed options).
This paper did not address the three types of environmental scenarios; non charismatic endangered species, charismatic endangered species, and forest resources. There are, however, some potential predictions about how people choose to answer the scenarios based on the specific environmental issue.
The intensity of the framing effect will highest for charismatic endangered species scenarios, lower for non-charismatic endangered species scenarios, and lowest for forest remnant scenarios. Similar to analysis conducted on national/international protected values and how they correlate with national/international scenarios, I could run an analysis that tests whether or not specific protected values linearly match scenario choices. For example will a protected value about non-charismatic wildlife result in lower or absent framing effect for non-charismatic wildlife scenario, but not the other two options? What is the scope of an issue-specific environmental protected value?
Framing effects and deeply engrained protected values are rarely considered in environmental conservation education and research, yet acknowledging that people respond differently to the way in which a question is framed is obviously important. This research showed that positively framed scenarios were much more resilient to the presence of protected values than were negatively framed scenarios, and thus suggests that survey question design can be biased if questions are framed in particular ways. Specifically, if environmental surveys use close-ended questions where respondents are forced to choose from the given options, results can falsely illustrate overwhelming support or overwhelming opposition.
