Depression is a psychological disorder which has detrimental effects on not only the individual, but also the individual's family and society as a whole. Research indicates that in any given year, approximately 18.8 million American adults will suffer from a depressive disorder (Robins & Regier, 1990). Further, according to Kessler (2002), one in six adults in the United States will meet criteria for major depression in their lifetime, while one in four will be diagnosable with either major depression, minor depression or recurrent brief depression. Though depression is often underestimated as simply a blue mood or a state of intense sadness, this assessment is far from accurate. According to the National Institute of Mental Health (2007), depression is a disorder effecting not only mood, but also the physical health and thoughts of the individual.
Symptoms of a depressive disorder are serious. The diagnosis of major depression requires that an individual have experienced a depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, or a complete loss of pleasure in all or most of the activities the individual used to find pleasurable for al least two months. Beyond these detrimental requirements for the diagnosis of depression, further symptomology can range from sleep and weight loss to thoughts and attempts of suicide (APA, 1994). Depression lasts for weeks, months or even years (NIMH, 2007), and has in recent research been shown to be a disorder of high chronicity. According to Kessler (2002), more than 80% of individuals experiencing a past episode of major depression will have recurrent episodes. This evidence of high chronicity is one of a few variables which lead to the shocking ranking of depression as the world's number one most burdensome disease according to the World Health Organization Global Burden of Disease study (Murray & Lopez, 1996).
The burdensome nature of this disease warrants further investigation into the possible correlates of depression, which may consequently provide avenues for intervention research to target. One such correlate involves family relationships. There is an abundance of research that suggests that unhealthy family relationships are related to depression. Some of the domains that have been extensively studied include family conflict, support, and cohesion. A two-year longitudinal study on peer and parental support mechanisms in adolescent girls by Stice, Ragan, and Randall (2004) found that poor support from parents was associated with greater levels of depression. Another longitudinal study on support and conflict found that lower levels of support, and greater levels of conflict were related to depression both concurrently and one year later (Sheeber, Hops, Alpert, Davis, & Andrews, 1996). A third study on Turkish university students found low family cohesion to be a significant correlate of suicide probability among college students, even after a multitude of variables such as mood and academic performance were controlled for (Gencoz & Or, 2006). Higher levels of family support and cohesion were also found to be related to lower levels of depression and suicide ideation in a study of African Americans attending a historically black college (Harris & Molock, 2000).
Other constructs similar to conflict and cohesion, such as perceptions of parental alienation and trust, have also been shown to be associated with depression. A study by Pavlidis and McCauley (2001) assessing the differences in mother-child interactions between clinically depressed and non depressed adolescents found that a main difference between depressed and non depressed groups was the lower perception of trust and higher perception of alienation in the adolescent-mother relationship for the clinically depressed group. These results correlated well with observational recordings for individuals without externalizing behavior problems, but did not correlate well for individuals with externalizing behavior problems. This study was useful in that it used different methodologies for assessing parent-child interactions, including survey and observational research, thereby increasing the scope of the findings. Another study by Essau (2004) which looked at 1035 adolescents randomly selected from 36 schools in Germany found similar results, where scores on parental alienation were significantly higher, and scores on parental trust were significantly lower for depressed adolescents compared to non-depressed adolescents.
Papini and Roggman (1992) studied parental trust, alienation, and communication in terms of attachment theory in middle school children. Attachment theory suggests that a healthy emotional relationship between the parent and child could provide a supportive framework within which a child can develop and master new challenges associated with developmental and environmental transitions (Papini & Roggman, 1992). The study by Papini and Roggman (1992) focused on the transition from elementary to middle school, and found that students with higher levels of parental attachment (corresponding to higher trust and communication levels and lower alienation levels), experienced lower levels of depression.
In accordance with attachment theory, the present study seeks to determine the relationship of two parental attachment variables, trust and alienation, to depressed mood among college students. The transition to college constitutes a significant change in environmental conditions, and requires a great deal of emotional maturation, where, according to attachment theory, a supportive parental relationship may help ease the transition. Accordingly, higher levels of parental attachment may be related to lower levels of depressed mood. In addition to attachment, this study seeks to address the relationship between how academically successful parents perceive their children to be, and the level of depressed mood in college students. The constructs of self-competence and self worth and their relation to academics have been widely researched, where an individual's own perceptions of their performance has been correlated with motivational and academic achievement variables (Wong, Wiest & Cusick, 2002). In addition, student perceptions of parental attachment have been correlated with academic achievement variables (Wong, Wiest & Cusick, 2002). However, few studies have correlated parental perceptions of academic achievement with depressed mood. As such, this study will provide a good next step in understanding the correlates of depression by extending the current literature to include parental perceptions of the academic competency of their children in addition to attachment variables.
All in all, I will be testing the following 3 hypotheses in order to determine the relationship between parental attachment variables and academic perceptions, and depressed mood in college students.
H1: Perceived alienation in the parent-child relationship will be positively correlated with depressed mood.
H2: Perceived trust in the parent-child relationship will be negatively correlated with depressed mood.
H3: Higher levels of perceived parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments will be correlated with lower levels of depressed mood in college students.
In this study, participants were obtained through non random convenience sampling and snowballing methods. Initially, researchers contacted their friends and acquaintances who lived in close proximity to them either in person or through email, and requested their participation in the study. Additional participants were obtained by asking participants to provide the name and email address of one or more of their friends who matched the criteria of the study and would be willing to complete the survey. These individuals were later contacted by email to request participation. In this way, purposive sampling techniques were used in order to specifically target certain sub-populations that were required by members of the research team.
The research team conducted power analyses using G-Power, an internet based statistical software, to determine the number of participants that would be required for the study, and determined that for each independent samples t test hypothesis with a medium effects size of d=0.5, a sample of n=102 (n=51 per group) would be required for an alpha level at α = 0.05 and statistical power (1-β) of 0.80. For each correlation hypothesis with a medium correlation coefficient of r=.3, a sample of n=82 would be required for an alpha level at α = 0.05 and statistical power (1-β) of 0.80. The alpha level of 0.05 that was used in this study indicates the probability of detecting a Type 1 error, which occurs when an effect is found where none really exists. The statistical power of 0.80 indicates the probability of detecting an effect that is actually present. It is defined as 1-β, where β refers to the Type 2 error, which occurs when a significant effect is not found when it is actually present.
In order to obtain representative samples to evaluate the hypotheses of the entire research team, which included the subgroups of Christians, Jewish individuals, Caucasians, Minorities, on campus residents, and off campus students, a total sample size of approximately n=350 was estimated to be required. In order to test the three correlational hypotheses presented in this paper, a sample of n = 82 was necessary according to the power analysis. However, due to the convenience sampling method and the absence of an incentive for participation, researchers were ultimately able to obtain a sample of n = 65 participants from the target population of college students.
Tables 1.1-1.7 show the demographic characteristics of the sample obtained by this study. The sample consisted largely of Juniors (20%) and Seniors (47.7%) in college, with the remaining 21.5% of participants being underclassmen, and 10.8% graduate school students (see Table 1.1). In terms of the racial distribution, almost half (47.7%) of the sample was Caucasian, while 12.3% was African American, 15.4% Asian American, 4.6% Asian, 1.5% Bi-racial, and 18.5% other (see Table1.2). The majority of participants who classified themselves as "other" were of Arab descent. In this sample, 98.5% of the participants were single, while only 1.5% were married (See Table 1.3). The sample was female-biased, where 66.2% of the respondents were female, and only 33.8% were male (see Table 1.4). The grade point averages (GPA) of the respondents were skewed towards the upper end of the spectrum, with the lowest reported GPA being a C, and the vast majority of GPAs (83.2%) fell in the A+ to B range (see Table 1.5). In terms of a family history of depression, 78.5% of the participants did not report any family history of depression, while 20% did (see Table 1.6). Lastly, in terms of actual depressed status based on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) cutoff scores, the vast majority of participants (73.8%) fell into the "not depressed" range, while 21.5% of participants fell into the mild to moderate depression range, and 4.6% fell into the moderate to severe depression range (see Table 1.7).
In order to measure depression in college students, the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) was used. The BDI is a measure created to assess the severity of depression among both clinical and normal samples. The measure contains 21 items specifically designed to relate the experience of depression to 6 of the required symptoms for DSM-IV-TR diagnosis. Each item contains four statements that indicate increasing severity of an individual symptom of depression. The 21 items are measured on a 4 point scale ranging from 0 to 3. The range of scores possible is from 0 to 63, where higher scores indicate a greater severity of depression. For details on scoring, see appendix C. The clinical cutoff points can vary depending on the base characteristics of the individuals tested, but a general classification considers a total score of 0-9 to indicate no depression, 10-18 to indicate mild to moderate depression, 19-29 to indicate moderate to severe depression, and 30-63 to indicate severe depression. The BDI has been found to be reliable with internal consistency estimates ranging from .73 to .92 with a mean of .86 (Beck, Steer, & Garbin, 1988). The BDI has also been found to exhibit concurrent validity, and has been correlated with other measures of depression including the Hamilton Psychiatric Rating Scale for Depression (.73) and the MMPI Depression Scale (.76) (Groth-Marnat, 1990).
Perceived alienation and trust was measured by the Inventory of Parent and Peer Attachment (see appendix B), a scale that uses 28 parent items to measure the constructs of trust, alienation, and communication in parent-child relationships. The alienation subscale asks questions about anger and interpersonal isolation (ex. I don't get much attention at home), while the trust subscale seeks to find out about understanding and respect in the parent-child relationship (ex. My parents respect my feelings). In total, there are 12 items that correspond to parental trust and 12 items that correspond to parental alienation in the IPPA, with 3 items inversely overlapping between the two. The IPPA uses a 5 point Likert scale that ranges from almost never or never true to almost always or always true with corresponding numerical values ranging from 0 to 4. The 12 items on parental alienation yield a possible range of scores from 0 to 48, where a higher score indicates higher levels of perceived parental alienation. The 12 items that are included in the alienation subscale are items 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, and 24 on the IPPA (edited) measure used in this study (see appendix B). The 12 items on parental trust also yield a possible range of scores from 0 to 48, where higher scores indicate higher levels of perceived parental trust. Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 21, and 22 on the IPPA (edited) measure in the appendix were used to test perceived parental trust. For details on scoring, see appendix C. The test retest reliability for the IPPA has been found to be high, ranging from .86 to .93 over a three week period. The IPPA has also been found to correlate with measures of related constructs such as the cohesion subscale of the Family Environment Scale (a relationship of .56 was found), demonstrating high concurrent validity (Essau, 2004).
The next construct, perceived parental approval and pride in academic accomplishments, was measured by 4 self-designed, non-validated questions that were measured on a five point scale that corresponded to the scale used by the IPPA. These four items were embedded within the IPPA (edited), and were included as items 5, 8, 14, and 25 (see appendix). The items aimed to measure how much students believed that their parents were proud of them in terms of academics (ex. My parents are proud of my academic performance in college). The possible range of scores for parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments was 0 to 20, with higher scores indicating higher levels of perceived parental pride and approval in academics.
In order to recruit participants for this study, each of the five researchers, who were enrolled in an advanced psychology research lab at the University of Michigan, approached a minimum of twenty college students over the age of 18. Some of the participants were previously known to the researchers, while others lived or worked in close proximity to them. Due to the time limitations, the length of the questionnaire, and the lack of resources to pay for participant recruitment or incentives, the researchers decided to use a convenience sample. This sample was chosen based on proximity and affiliation, so as to allow participants ample time to complete the questionnaire while ensuring its timely return back to the researcher. Additional participants were obtained thorough snowballing, where the researchers requested the names and contact information of other individuals known to the initial participants who matched the criteria of the study and who would be willing to participate.
When recruiting participants, each researcher approached the participant either in person or through e-mail and asked if they were willing to fill out a 45 minute questionnaire on depression and associated characteristics. The researcher also told them that they would have 24 hours to complete the questionnaire and could return the completed questionnaire to the researcher at a convenient location or by e-mail.
For in-person recruitment, agreeable participants were given a brief introduction to the study, revealing the general areas that would be covered in the questionnaire. Participants' questions and concerns were then answered, after which the researcher asked the participants to read and sign the consent form (see appendix A). After the consent form was signed and collected, the researcher requested that the participant honestly answer the questions in a comfortable setting. Researchers then made an arrangement for the collection of the completed questionnaire. Questionnaire collection was done by arranging a time and place convenient to the participant to meet either later that day or the following day. The researcher then thanked the participant for his/her participation.
For e-mail recruitment, all initial introductory information was included in the email, along with additional reassurances on confidentiality, where participants were told not to write their names on the participant consent forms if they were going to be returned through email, and that their emails would be deleted immediately after their questionnaires were printed. Participants were instructed to either highlight or underline their responses and to email the questionnaire back to the researcher who contacted them within 24 hours. Participants were also notified that by replying to the email with an attached completed questionnaire, they were agreeing to all the terms put forth by the informed consent document, including voluntary participation and the confidentiality of the responses.
This study presented three main hypotheses. The first hypothesis, that perceived parental alienation would be positively correlated with depressed mood was supported by the data. This finding is largely consistent with previous literature which shows that perceived alienation scores on the IPPA are significantly higher for depressed individuals compared to non-depressed individuals (Essau, 2004; Pavlidis & McCauley, 2001). The present study used a correlation rather than an independent samples t test design (which was often used by previous studies) because the researchers had limited access to clinically depressed individuals. In this sample, only 17 individuals had scores which ranged in the mild to severe depression range according to the cutoff scores of the BDI, and 14 of these individuals were experiencing only mild depression. The small available sample would have likely made an independent samples t test design analysis produce statistically insignificant results. However, by using a Pearson correlation, the results were highly significant, with a correlation coefficient of r = 0.697. In terms of the percentage of variance, in this study, perceived parental alienation helps explain nearly 48.6% of the variance in respondent's scores on the Beck Depression Inventory.
The second hypothesis, that perceived parental trust would be negatively correlated with depressed mood was also strongly supported by the data. This finding is also consistent with the previous literature, which found that perceived parental trust scores were higher in individuals who were not depressed compared to those that were depressed (Essau, 2004; Pavlidis & McCauley, 2001). The correlation coefficient of r =-0.541 results in a percentage variance of 29.2%. This means that perceived parental trust helps explain 29.2% of the variance in responses on the BDI. Perceived parental alienation and trust were measured by the same instrument, the Inventory of Parent and Peer Attachment developed by Armsden and Greenberg (1987). The IPPA Parent Attachment score includes three subscales, parental alienation, parental trust, and parental communication. The former two were assessed in this study. Some previous literature has correlated overall attachment scores, including all three subscales, and found that higher parental attachment levels were associated with lower levels of depression. This finding is also consistent with the findings of the present study, even though the communication subscale was not used.
The final hypothesis, that perceived parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments would be negatively correlated with depressed mood was also supported, though to a lesser extent. The correlation coefficient of r =-0 .319 shows a medium rather than a large correlation. This is also evident when comparing Figures 1 and 2, which show the correlations of BDI score to parental alienation and trust respectively to Figure 3, which shows the correlation of BDI score to parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments. The points n Figure 3 are far more dispersed, and the pattern and direction of correlation are much more difficult to see than those in Figures 1 and 2. In terms of the percentage of variance, parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments only helps explain 10.1% of the variance in responses on the BDI. There is little prior research that has correlated these two variables directly, but conceptually, the relationship makes sense. Parents of college students are likely to place a moderate to heavy emphasis on academics, particularly in a reputable institution such as the University of Michigan. Not living up to parental expectations may then be related to experiencing higher levels of depressed mood.
Overall, this study contributes to the literature on parental attachment and depression by providing additional support for the relationship between the two variables. In addition, this study makes a theoretical contribution by analyzing the relationship between parental pride and approval in academics and depressed mood. It shows that, for college students, how parents perceive their academic competence may be important to their psychological health. However, the theoretical contributions of this study need to be discussed with caution. There were a great many limitations to the present study that largely reduce the validity and generalizability of the findings to any other population. These limitations span the entire research process, from conception to completion. The first limitation of the study involves the hypotheses. Barker, Pistrang and Elliott (2002) point out that research should be able to teach the researcher something new, not merely confirm relationships already known to the researcher. The hypotheses presented in this study were largely based on previous research or had strong conceptual and logical grounding. Thus, from the very start, the findings were already known, thereby violating the very intention of research -- to discover something new. Another major limitation of the hypotheses is that they were all correlational in nature, which means that causality could not be established from the study. In fact, in terms of the variables used in the study, the directionality of influence is a major area under question. It is possible that low parental attachment would lead to depression, and it is equally possible that depression could lead to low parental attachment as a result of emotional withdrawal (Essau, 2004). As such, the fact that directionality cannot be assessed by this study is a major limitation of the research.
In addition, another limitation of the study involved the sampling procedures and participants. Participants were obtained through non random convenience sampling and snowballing, which led to a biased sample. The sample was female biased, and included more upperclassmen than underclassmen. In addition, the racial distribution was largely unrepresentative as almost half the sample was Caucasian. Not only was the sample unrepresentative, the final sample obtained was also very small (n=65) due to limited time for data collection. Thus, due to the small, unrepresentative sample, the findings of this study have very low generalizability to any population other than the sample studied.
The measures used in this study were also somewhat flawed. The BDI is an established measure of depression, but has limitations in how well it corresponds to the DSM criteria for diagnosing depression. For example, the BDI only covers six of the nine criteria put forth by the DSM to diagnose depression (Groth-Marnat, 1990). The IPPA, which was used to measure parental trust and alienation, has been found to be a valid and reliable measure of attachment. However, in this study, only two of the three subscales were used, thereby calling the validity of the items used into question. In terms of the measure for parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments, the four self designed questions had no established validity or reliability, and no internal consistency analyses were conducted within the study. Consequently, the measure may not be reliable. In terms of validity, the items used appear to have face validity, but may not have content or construct validity. The issues that may diminish the validity of the self-constructed questions include not having adequate coverage of the construct being measured, poor, unspecific, or confusing question wording, and implicit premises guiding the construction of the questions.
Other limitations involved participant response issues, including acquiescence, where participants may have had a tendency to agree more than disagree with statements. This was partially combated by using a few item reversals. A more pressing concern may have been social desirability, where participants may not have wanted to seem depressed, or may not have wanted to reveal unhealthy family circumstances. Other participant response issues included participants not finishing the questionnaire, indicating the same answer for all items on a scale, and not reading the instructions. Not reading the instructions may have invalidated the results as some participants may not have used the correct time frame for responses which were mentioned in the instructions. A final limitation of the study was the lack of methodological pluralism, as only one scale was used to measure each construct. Ultimately, in spite of the limitations, the relationship between family and depression is important to understand as family is a central part of almost every individual's life. Knowing what interaction patterns are associated with depressed mood can help provide avenues for intervention research to target which may help improve the quality of life for many individuals.
