Debate on the possible causes behind poverty has been a hot topic for over a century now within the discipline of sociology. Predictably, the arguments fought over within this realm of academia have spawned similar controversies in the worlds of politics and policy change. Because the subject matter is so controversial, it seems that an agreement among the "experts" is nowhere close to being decided, and will probably remain that way for a long time. Is it the individual's fault, or society's? Is the poor's plight a purposeful result of others' actions or just an accidental consequence of progress? Eric Olin Wright, a contemporary Marxist, argues in his article The Class Analysis of Poverty1 that the reasons behind large-scale poverty may be a combination of all these possibilities, but that the evolution of capitalist society has been the most influential and knowing contributor to the widespread nature of poverty today. While his analysis of the basis behind destitution is quite plausible, Wright wrongly assumes that this problem can be positively solved while maintaining the efficiently competitive nature of American capitalism.
Wright begins his article by explaining each of the four popular arguments within the poverty discourse today. He asserts that each line of reasoning revolves around two issues: whether the fault lies with the individual or his society, and whether poverty is an inherent attribute or just an unfortunate by-product of the social structure. The first combination of these traits is known as the genetic inferiority approach (individual/inherent). This belief revolves around the idea that an individual's poverty status is due to inherited biological factors that make him unskilled, unintelligent, or possibly lazy, unreliable, etc. These inherent characteristics make it hard for a person to advance to higher-paying jobs that will keep him or her out of poverty.
The second trait combination is known as the culture of poverty approach (individual/by-product). This controversial viewpoint argues that a person in poverty has a weak work-ethic, disinterest in work, or deviant behavior, etc. due to the culture in which he or she was raised. It is believed if an individual is raised in poverty, with very few or no good role models to model behavior after, it is almost inevitable that this person will repeat these actions as an adult.
The ravages of social change approach (societal/by-product) is a third possible trait combination. This line of reasoning claims that people in poverty cannot get quality jobs because the social system is holding them back. For instance, if the economy is poor, it will be harder for lower-skilled individuals to find higher-paying jobs because of more competition from higher-skilled or more highly educated people. Another possible scenario (although they are unlimited in possibility) is that a person in poverty had a good job in manufacturing, for example, but their company decided to outsource their product's production to countries where labor would be cheaper. This person lost his job and because of his old age, he could not find a new one.
The final trait combination is that of the class exploitation approach (societal/inherent). Most closely associated with Marxism, this argument places the blame for poverty squarely on the shoulders of capitalists (in American society) because they purposefully exploit the working class for their labor in order to make a profit. Having low wages is one way to keep costs low in U.S. business society. Because the capitalists have a huge amount of power in our culture, it is argued that these conditions will not change until these elite are forced to cut back on their profit margin. Wright will elaborate on this premise for the rest of his article.
Wright then begins to discuss the case of the cartoon shmoo. A shmoo is a small creature that could turn itself into any necessity a human could want (such as simple foods or clothes) because they got satisfaction out of making people happy (but it could not turn itself into anything extravagant or unnecessary). The best part about the shmoo is that it could multiply on a whim. The result is that rich capitalists didn't have any need for a shmoo because the amount of money they already make made free "necessities" inconsequential to them. Plus, rich people were used to having expensive and luxurious things, which the shmoo could not provide. On the other hand, if a person in poverty got a hold of one, it changed their life and made working for a wage no longer necessary for them. Because they had been working arduously for a small, inadequate wage before, having a shmoo to provide the everyday materials of everyday life made life much better for them than it ever had been before, and for that reason they did not need anything else more lavish.
In the cartoon depicted, a wealthy capitalist was trying to find cheap, hard-working people to labor in his new factory, which would make him even richer than he already was. He went to a small town where he did not know had just been introduced to the wonders of the shmoo. While he expected that these people would be glad to work long hours for him at a below-average wage, he found that they no longer wanted to work at all because they had everything provided for them by the shmoo. The capitalist realized that he had to stop the shmoo before it spread to every town in America, so that he could still find cheap, exploitable labor to hire for his factories.
Wright uses this example to show the "deeply antagonistic" (7) interests of the potential workers and the employer. He says that this is also the case in real life. He likens workers' ownership of the shmoo to reverting living conditions to that of the Garden of Eden (39), when people were much happier because they did not have to labor for their food. Wright shows employers acting selfishly to prevent the workers from achieving this contentment at any cost, just so their labor supply is not limited. Without enough eager and hard-working laborers, capitalists' profits would be minimized. The crux of Wright's shmoo argument is that his fictional workers would not care if every person had a shmoo as long as their lower class had them, while the capitalists would prefer that no one get the benefit of the shmoo if it meant smaller profits.
Wright continues with his line of reasoning by contending that the shmoo example proves that exploitation is a necessary condition for capitalists to have profits. He defines exploitation as an occurrence consisting of three parts (10): first, the poor must have less in order for the rich to have more, and vice versa. Both classes cannot be well off if the capitalists are to have their large profits. The second condition is that there must be an unequal access to resources such as land or the means for production, which enable one to get rich. This means that not everyone can become rich because the poor have a lack of capital. The final stipulation for the existence of exploitation is that the "exclusion" necessary for the second requirement enables the rich to demand labor from the poor, for a small wage. This means that the capitalists are actually dependent upon their workers to do the manual labor of their businesses. The existence of these three conditions in much of American society proves Wright's point that exploitation is not just a matter of status, but a binding
However, it is in the best interests of employers to keep the wages of their employees as low as possible: lower wages mean larger profits for the business and its owners and managers. As a result, the plight of the "working poor" is due to the greed of the capitalists, which has become an inherent part of American culture. Wright says that poverty is therefore due to the "inherent features of the social system" (49). He suggests that some reform could be made if there was a stronger labor movement present in the U.S. that would lobby for higher minimum wages to keep people out of poverty, like there presently is in some European countries like Sweden. He also muses that the only way the social structure could be permanently altered for the better is if the people holding all the power (capitalists) are challenged by a stronger movement. This will be difficult as it is, because currently the American elite use their power to maintain their power.
The United States was founded on the idea of free-market capitalism. Referring to private property ownership, Alexis de Tocqueville wrote, "In no other country in the world is the love of property keener and more alert than in the United States, and nowhere else does the majority display less inclination toward doctrines which in any way threaten the way property is owned"
No matter how advanced any "modern" society is -- no matter how strong its bureaucratic dependency, how fast-paced the city life is, or how clever its politicians, businessmen, and inventors are -- it still needs manual laborers working at the bottom to support the infrastructure everyone else depends on. No matter how much they are paid, every building will still need a janitor and every city will still need a garbage man. Without these people, the bureaucracy, city, and politicians, businessmen, and inventors would cease to operate successfully.
This is apparent. However, Wright's own example of the shmoo illustrates what would happen if the people on the bottom were given too much without requiring any work or self-improvement. Once the shmoo arrived in the small town, none of its inhabitants had the motivation to work anymore, even though they believed the opportunity given to them by the capitalist (although comparatively worse than many other people's) was a good one. In his example, the greedy capitalists were the only people who were motivated to work for work's sake. Granted, they had another motivation in the promise of a lot of money, but they were already rich and did not even have to open the factory they were trying to find labor for, to live comfortably for the rest of their lives. If the people qualified only to perform unskilled labor are not willing to work, they cannot contribute to society in any beneficial way. If enough of them decide not to work, the society is doomed to regress to times when options were more limited, both in the things one can buy and in the professions one can work.
Therefore, poverty is necessary for American society to "work," just as Wright argues. In an ideal world, one's encounter with it would be for a short time until the individual gained enough capital and experience to move onto better jobs with better pay. Sometimes this is how it works, but quite often Americans get "stuck" in a cycle of poverty, which was described in Wright's "culture of poverty" argument. What an advanced capitalist country like the United States needs is not higher minimum wages for unskilled laborers, as Wright advocates, but social programs that show people how to lift themselves out of poverty. Walter Williams, a renowned contemporary economist, states that "Those who earn low wages tend to have low skills and education. Our challenge is how can we make these people more productive? Raising minimum wages will not raise worker productivity; however, it can sabotage worker potential to acquire higher productivity"
Writing this article critique re-clarified to me that I like thinking critically about social issues. It also made me aware that I have become even more conservative in my four years at this liberal university than I was when I came here.
Sometimes I worry that my conservative upbringing makes me blind to the true reality of society and life in general. I guess on the other hand, though, others' liberal upbringings may have blinded them to a more conservative "true" reality. These thoughts remind me of the very first articles we read about what social theory is and what it aims to accomplish. While some theorists believe that sociology can be completely objective in its analysis of culture, I have come to realize through assignments such as this that no theorist can avoid the bias of their own views. This only makes me wonder if an impartial view of society can ever be agreed upon, or if we are just fated to each see our own society in the light that we grow up in.
