Like many good works of creative nonfiction, The Devil's Highway opens in-scene. Our first experience as readers is drawn from the end of the story, when five of the illegal entrants are found and rescued by the Border Patrol. By telling what these immigrants saw and felt, Urrea paints a descriptive picture of the setting. By the end of the first several pages, we are left with the dizzying feeling of being in the dry, dusty, scorching hot desert and yearning for water. Next, we are given a description of the Wellton Police Station and develop an understanding of those whose job it is to patrol the area and prevent the entrance of the illegal immigrants. The conclusion of the first of the four parts of the book, Cutting The Drag, is an illustration of the process of identifying and returning the deceased voyagers to Mexico for burial or burying them in Arizona if they are not claimed or identified.
In Part III: In Desolation, the author tells the story of the remainder of the trip, describes the illegal entrants, explains their motivations for making the expedition, and tells the story of their discovery and rescue by the Border Patrol. Urrea paints the picture of a confused group of exhausted men who aimlessly followed Mendez as he led them in zigzags and arcs away from their destination. He shows that the situation became so desperate that some members left the group in order to retrace their tracks, while others followed Mendez until he left them. The book concludes with Part IV: Aftermath, a 44-page conclusion that addresses the legal ramifications for Mendez, rants about other subjects with little relation, and ends in-scene once again. Part IV is clearly the weakest part of the book. The true story of the Wellton 26 (or 14, depending on one's perspective) is the impetus for this book's potential impact. The tragedy of these 26 human beings speaks for itself; Urrea detracts from its impact by including his personal thoughts on illegal immigrants being found dead in the trunk of cars waiting to be towed, the construction of life-saving light towers with emergency buttons, and whether illegal immigration has a positive or negative effect on the United States of America. If he found it so worth mentioning, his thoughts should have at least been labeled as an epilogue, not Part IV: Aftermath.
The structure of this book is of four parts, with each part containing multiple chapters and numerous parts in each chapter. Urrea uses this structure in order to talk about many topics without confusing the reader. The author jumps between topics repeatedly and spends much time in-scene. He uses a very casual style, with swear words, derogatory terms, and sentences that read easily. For example, on page 68 Urrea describes the guides by stating, "They didn't have proper plumbing, but they had da hook-up." He assumes no knowledge and explains almost all of the native terms that he uses, especially when using Spanish words. In this way, Urrea caters to a wide audience and is able to affect the attitudes of many different people toward Mexican illegal immigrants.
This book is very valuable because it develops compassion in the reader for people that might not otherwise receive it. Especially in this era, where the United States is fighting not only terrorism, but also financial instability and imminent recession, it is easy for many Americans to develop a hatred for illegal immigrants from Mexico. While I will not concede a personal hatred for these immigrants before reading this book, I can admit that this book has had personal significance in that it increased my compassion and understanding of illegal entrants. While I personally support the deportation of illegal immigrants as a matter of law and principle, I now have a desire to aid the humanitarian efforts to rescue illegal entrants who find themselves in danger. Many Americans believe that efforts to build rescue towers and leave water in the desert simply encourage illegal immigration, but this book shows the reader that these people are human beings in an unfortunate situation. The Devil's Highway shows the misery that they will encounter if dehydration and hyperthermia set in -- a misery that no one should ever know.
This book is also effective because it portrays the crime families, recruiters, and guides as the blame-worthy actors in this grim horror film of life. It is hard for me to maintain animosity toward illegal entrants when I see how criminals duped them and then abandoned them in their time of need. As Officer Friendly points out on page 33, "Nobody wanted them [the 14 dead of 26] when they were alive, and now look -- everybody wants to own them." Because of the tragedy that the entrants befell, they now receive concern -- a large part of that tragedy is the commercial society that tried to make money off of their quest, and it is important that Urrea points this out. This book is valuable because it prevents the "don't care" attitude that Americans often develop.
Urrea suffered his greatest loss of credibility, however, through his perspective. He describes the events, thoughts, and emotions as if he has personally experienced them, but as readers we know that he has not. He makes a point of telling the reader what the immigrants must have felt, even though he can only speculate in the same way the reader can. In fact, it would be more powerful if he allowed the reader to speculate on his or her own and come to his or her own understanding of the misery of the desert. As a reader I want to believe that the narrator was there and experienced this, but I simply cannot.
My final critique is that Urrea said too much during his conclusion. He did not allow the reader to think for his or her self and then he tried to spread his own views on the humanitarian efforts and economic impact of illegal Mexican immigration. Instead of allowing the impact of death to set in and make his point, he distracts the reader with anecdotes about illegal immigrants being found dead in car trunks, emergency tower construction, and an economic analysis of whether illegal immigration from Mexico has a negative effect on the United States. For this reason, I recommend having future students read only the first three parts of this book. This book is worthwhile, as it truly does increase the reader's understanding and compassion for illegal entrants, but the experience would make a larger impact if it left the reader to his or her own thoughts after the rescue of some of the immigrants. Nothing was more powerful than finding out that several died as they were being rescued, and no other scene could leave a more lasting image in the reader's head. The most tragic part of the story was that many came so far just to die a little too soon. The Devil's Highway is an important read, but could be even more significant if it ended with Part III.
