This program was revised based on the beam-column program. After the modification, it can solve any 2-D structure assembled by any number of rectangles (Figure 1). In this revised program, lots of effort was put on the preprocessor modification, such as structural assembly and mesh generator. The 4-node rectangular C0 element was used in this FEA program. In this program, it is assumed that the applied loads are only applied at the nodes. In other words, this program does not consider consistent nodal loads due to body or surface loads.
The program has the following structure:
In the preprocessor, it allows user to assemble any number of rectangles to form a structure and gives the degree of freedom to assign different material properties (Young's modulus, e, and Poisson's ratio, v), element types (plan stress and plan strain), and thickness (t) in different rectangle (however, elements within the same rectangle have the same properties). Another feature within this program is the mesh generator. This function allows user to create specific mesh in each rectangle. The preprocessor has the following structure:
In plotting the "Meshing result for the first rectangle", nodal number is also plotted aside each node (Figure 2). This information makes it easier to assign the boundary conditions and nodal loads in the following procedure.
The algorithm in the "Insert another rectangle" can be shown as follow,
Figure 3 to 6 show the ability of this preprocessor by displaying the assembling process of a frame-like structure.
As shown in figure 9, a 4-node rectangular C0 element has 8 degree of freedoms. The displacement field within the element can be interpolated by the shape function as follow.
(1)
where
The stiffness matrix can be calculated through
(2)
To check the correction of this program, a square plate (2 inch in thickness) stretched by a uniform force was analyzed (Figure 10). It is expected that the convergence problem in this simplest loading configuration is limited. Hence, this configuration was computed using FEA by only one 4-node rectangular C0 element to check the correction of this FEA program. The simulated geometry, meshing, and boundary and loading conditions are shown in figure 11. The support conditions are fixed in x-and y-directions in node 1 and fixed in x-direction and free in y-direction in node 3.
Table 1 and 2 give the comparison between computational and theoretical results. As can be seen, the results are almost identical except some truncation error. Figure 12 shows the deformed shape (dot line, 2000 times) of this problem.
A cantilever beam problem was conducted in this section to do the convergence studies. This cantilever beam problem is identical with homework 2 and 3 (Figure 13) with 35 inches in length, 10 inches in depth, and 2 inches in thickness. The material is isotropic and linear elastic. Poisson's ratio is 0.3. Enforce plane stress condition.
Table 3 shows the computational result of nodal displacement in the y-direction for the right-bottom corner (dy of the black dot in figure 13) calculated with different number of elements. This result is compared to the theoretical values and the value calculated from ANSYS (The element type used in ANSYS analysis was chosen to be the 8Node-82 quad element).
Two theoretical theories were used to calculate the theo. deformation and give comparisons with computational results. The first one is the Classical beam theory, in which the shear deformation is not considered.
The second theoretical calculation considered the shear deformation in the cantilever beam; however, it still assumes that plan remains plan in this calculation. This consideration is probably important for this case because the Depth to Length ratio is 3.5, which is kind of a deep beam rather a slim one.
Figure 14 plots the results in table 3. As can be seen, the computational results (both FEA program and ANSYS) converge to the theoretical value (shear consideration) as more and more elements were used. Second, the convergence speed of deformation is faster in ANSYS than in FEA program. This result can be attributed to different element type used in FEA program (4-Node rectangular C0 element) and ANSYS (8Node-82 quad element). Third, shear consideration is necessary in this analysis (deep beam). Forth, a careful examination of the FEA result shows that the convergence speed of deformation is faster when more elements are created along the horizontal direction than along vertical direction. For example, dy increases from 0.022 to 0.023 when mesh number increases from 4*1 to 4*2. However, dy increases from 0.023 to 0.028 when mesh number increases from 4*2 to 8*2. This is because the geometry, boundary, and loading configuration make the deformation more sensitive to the meshing density along horizontal direction. Figure 15 displays the sequence of deformation with different number of elements (100 times magnitude).
After checking the correction (section 4) and the convergence study (section 5), we have more confidence to use this FEA program. In this section, two complicated structures were computed to demonstrate the ability of this FEA program.
