The Enlightenment dramatically impacted the way Europeans thought about themselves and the world around them. Scientific and philosophic discoveries led many to question the legacy of aristocratic, religious, and hierarchical institutions. The Enlighteners believed that, through the free exercise of Man's Reason, one could institute an egalitarian form of government and gain rational insight into the rules and processes governing society and nature. Yet, after the calamitous French Revolution and the subsequent expansion of the market economy, modernization instead led to extreme poverty, pollution, and wealth inequality. On the one hand, both Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations (1776) and Thomas Malthus's An Essay on the Principle of Population (1798) belong to the Enlightenment tradition, exhibiting a belief in the power of Reason to gain insight into natural laws. On the other hand, both arrive at seemingly irreconcilable conclusions about the perfectibility of man and society: whereas Smith sees society as continuously improving as a result of the division of labor and increased productivity, Malthus sees a future of conflict, misery, and vice as a result of the antagonism between reproduction and subsistence. Thus, while the ideas of the Enlightenment play a crucial role in uniting both texts, the genesis of modernization led to two very different attitudes about man and society.
In The Wealth of Nations and An Essay on the Principle of Population, Adam Smith and Thomas Malthus share certain presuppositions about the way society operates. Both thinkers believe that certain natural rules and historical processes govern man and society and that, through Reason, one can gain insight into them. At the same time, both Smith and Malthus understand man to be essentially split between natural needs and social obligations, between individual self-interests and society as a whole. For Smith, labor and money are the essential processes underlying society: on the one hand, this involves the division of labor, of social stratification and class; on the other hand, it involves the transition from barter to coinage. In the case of labor, Smith argues against the notion that a nation's wealth derives from its national resources. He instead formulates an axiom that places labor at the heart of social processes:
Here Smith emphasizes the universal character of labor using words such as "every,"
In the case of money, Smith again emphasizes the importance of universal rules and processes. He writes that, "It is the necessary, though very slow and gradual consequence of a certain propensity in human nature which has in view no such extensive utility; the propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one thing for another."
Similarly, Malthus, too, emphasizes the importance of rules and processes governing nature and society. For Malthus, subsistence and reproduction are the two fundamental laws that, "ever since we have had any knowledge of mankind, appear to have been fixed laws of our nature; and, as we have not hitherto seen any alteration in them, we have no right to conclude that they will ever cease to be what they now are..."
Although Smith and Malthus share certain presuppositions about how society operates, they are seemingly at odds on the perfectibility of man and society due to their contrasting visions of modernity. Whereas Smith believes that the division of labor has led to and will continue to lead towards the improvement of society, Malthus believes that the conflict between population and subsistence in industrialized society will lead to further misery and vice. Despite their ostensible differences, however, both ultimately offer visions of the "ideal" subject. For Smith, the division of labor leads to a significant increase in the productive powers of labor thanks to an increase in the dexterity and skill of workers and in the level of employment ("useful labor"). Because of this development, Smith argues that
Here Smith emphasizes not only how society has transitioned from "savage" to "civilized," but how this transition is marked by "abundance,"
For Malthus, however, society is irreducibly marked by inequality, conflict, misery, and vice due to human nature. As Malthus writes:
Here Malthus reacts to the utopian visions of Godwin, Condorcet, and others who believed in the perfectibility of man. A few pages later he writes, "Consequently, if the premises are just, the argument is conclusive against the perfectibility of the mass of mankind," describing the powers of population and production as a "natural inequality."
Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations and Thomas Malthus's An Essay on the Principle of Population both share similar presuppositions about how society operates, conceiving of it in the vein of Enlightenment thought as guided by rational processes and natural rules. Yet the two strongly disagree on the outcome of these processes as a result of the development of modernization and its subsequent transformation of society: whereas Smith sees society as moving towards an ideal due to the division of labor, Malthus sees society as inherently unequal and leading towards misery and vice. Despite these differences, however, both offer their own conceptions of the ideal man and society, one as a complex, harmonious, and rational machine and the other as a self-interested Protestant morality.
