The purpose of this study is to describe Pakistani women's perspectives on strategies and their effectiveness in the self-management of their recurrent depression. Consequently, this study will describe the (1) self-management strategies of Pakistani women with recurrent depression, (2) factors which influence self-management strategies, and (3) perceived effectiveness of self-management strategies. This research protocol consists of seven sections: (a) research design, (b) sample, (c) measures, (d) procedure, (e) human subject protection, (f) minority/gender/children, and (g) data analysis.
This qualitative study will use content analysis to describe Pakistani women's perspectives on strategies, factors influencing those strategies, and their perceived effectiveness in the self-management of their recurrent depression. Content analysis is a qualitative analysis procedure for methodically making sense of the transcriptions of open-ended interviews using three basic techniques: (a) deciding what the unit of analysis will be, (b) borrowing or developing the set of categories, and (c) developing the rationale and illustrations to guide the coding of data into categories (Wilson, 1989).
The study sample will be recruited from the outpatient psychiatric clinics of the Aga Khan University Hospital (AKUH). Data for the study will be obtained from Pakistani women with depression. Any woman can participate who meets the following inclusion criteria: (a) born in Pakistan, (b) 18 years of age or older, (c) had two or more episodes of major depression, (d) is a follow-up patient in the outpatient psychiatric clinics of the AKUH, (e) is aware that she has depression, (f) can speak Urdu and/or English, (g) gives permission to access medical files to validate diagnosis and history of two or more depressive episodes; and validates the absence of bipolar disorder, or current substance abuse and (h) is willing to participate in the study. The exclusion criteria for a Pakistani woman with depression are: (a) has a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, (b) is currently abusing a substance, and c) is currently admitted to the in-patient psychiatric unit of the AKUH. Since there is a possibility that medical files may not have information regarding current abuse of substance; hence, each subject will be specifically asked about it.
Purposeful sampling will be used. The reason for using purposeful sampling is to achieve analytic generalizability, an aim of qualitative research. "Analytic generalizability refers to the utility of the concepts/constructs to explain a given situation" (Hutchinson, 1993, p. 190). Using purposeful sampling, a sample of 12 to 15 Pakistani women with depression will be selected. The reason for providing a sample range is that at the start of a qualitative study, it is difficult to determine the ideal extensiveness of the sample size until the study is in progress. In a qualitative study, sample size is determined when data collection achieves saturation. In short, in this proposed study, the exact sample size will depend on "saturation".
Saturation has two important meanings in qualitative research. First, when a set of data captures the range of possible responses, data collection process achieves saturation. Second, when additional interviews do not produce information which is substantially different from that already collected, information redundancy (Lincoln & Guba, 1985), data collection achieves saturation (Safman & Sobal, 2004).
The measure that will be used in this study is an interview using an interview guide (Appendix A). The interview is used as a method of data collection to meet the purpose of a qualitative study. The interview is appropriate for the proposed study because the research questions require elicitation of information from the participants about the strategies they use to self-manage their recurrent depression, factors influencing those strategies, and the perceived effectiveness of those strategies. The interview will be semi-structured so as not to limit the field of inquiry i.e., self-management strategies, and will allow the investigator to word and sequence open-ended questions to respond to individual differences (Waltz, Strickland, & Lenz, 1991).
The interview guide consists of a participant information sheet and interview questions. The participant information sheet will include (a) participant code #, (b) participant interview #, (c) gender, (d) place of birth, (e) age, (f) years of formal schooling, (g) marital status, (h) numbers of years married, (i) number of and type of relation with people living in the household, (j) number of children, (k) ethnicity (l) religion, (m) employment status, (n) monthly household income, (o) age of onset of initial depressive episode, and (p) number of previous major depressive episodes.
Interview questions help the investigator generate data to understand phenomena identified in the research questions (Maxwell, 1998). In this study, the interview questions are purposefully open-ended. Open-ended questions permit participants to answer questions the way they want to (Patton, 1990). Before data collection, both Urdu and English versions of the interview questions will be evaluated by at least two non-depressed Pakistani women to get their feedback on clarity, understandability, meaning, usefulness, and simplicity of the interview questions.
The broad overarching interview question is "let us talk about your experience of depression". The specific interview question is "what is a depressive episode like for you?" Samples of the broad interview questions to address some of the research questions are as follows. An interview question ascertaining self-management strategies is "what kinds of things do you do for your symptoms of depression?" An interview question ascertaining influencing factors is "what makes you use (name of the particular strategy) it?" An interview question ascertaining perceived effectiveness of self-management strategies is "how does it (name of the particular strategy) work for you?" In addition to the broad open-ended interview questions, the investigator will develop a list of specific interview questions, probes, and clarifying questions to be used as needed during the interview.
Following the approval of the IRB review board at the University of Michigan and the Ethical Review Committee of the Aga Khan University (AKU), permission to conduct the study will be obtained from the Director of the AKUH and the Dean of the Aga Khan University School of Nursing (AKUSON). A meeting will be arranged with the head of the psychiatric department and the psychiatric clinicians (psychiatrists and psychologists) of the AKUH to explain the study and to ask for their cooperation in identifying potential participants for the study. Next, the head nurse of the outpatient department, charge nurse and other nurses working in the psychiatric outpatient clinics of AKUH will be educated about the study and will be asked for their cooperation in facilitating contact with potential participants with the investigator and identifying an interview room where interviews can be conducted.
Two approaches have been devised to recruit potential participants for the study. First, on outpatient psychiatric clinic days at AKUH, the psychiatric clinicians will be given a two page handout (Appendix B) that has both a checklist of inclusion and exclusion criteria (page one) and a written proof of interest (form) in participating in the study (page two). The clinician will first approach their patients and will briefly introduce the study and assess their eligibility by filling out a checklist of the inclusion and exclusion criteria provided by the investigator. The clinician will verbally provide information to potential participants who are eligible to participate in the study, as well as give them a handout. For potential participants who cannot read and write the clinician will write their names and telephone numbers on the handout; potential participants will then make a check mark at the end of the handout to demonstrate interest in participating in the study. The potential participant will submit the handout [both filled checklist and a written proof of interest (form) in participating in the study] directly to the investigator if available on site or place it in a locked box kept at the outpatient psychiatric clinic reception/information desk of the AKUH. In other words, the psychiatric clinician will refer the potential participants to the investigator. In situations where potential participants have made a check mark on page two of Appendix B to demonstrate an interest in participating in the study but the psychiatric clinician has not filled out the checklist of inclusion or exclusion criteria, page one of Appendix B, or the checklist is not completely filled out, the investigator will consider that the submission of the handout with a check mark by the potential participants represent their permission to participate in the study. The investigator will contact those potential participants either on site or by telephone and will complete the checklist to ensure that the potential participants meet all the inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Second, a flyer (both in English and Urdu) describing the study (Appendix C, page one) and copies of the proof of interest (form) in participating in the study (Appendix B, page two) will be posted in the outpatient psychiatric clinic of AKUH to recruit self-referred potential participants. A self-referred participant can fill out the necessary information which include name, telephone number, and a check mark to give permission to be contacted for participating in the study and submit it directly to the investigator if available on site or place it in a locked box kept at the outpatient psychiatric clinic reception/information desk. The submission of a handout (Appendix B, page two) with a check mark by a potential participant will be considered to be her permission to be contacted for the study. The investigator will contact each potential participant either on site or by telephone and will assess their qualifications to be a part of the proposed study by using the inclusion and exclusion criteria on a checklist (Appendix B, page one). The limitations of this method of recruiting participants are that only those who can read and write and have telephone numbers will be able to self-refer to participate. Therefore, the use of both methods, referral by psychiatric clinician and self-referral, will be helpful in achieving the desired sample size.
Participants identified through one of the above two methods but who do not meet the criteria will be thanked and will not be included in the study. Those participants who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria and are willing to participate, an interview date, time and venue (interview room in the outpatient psychiatric clinic at AKUH) will be arranged. Participants will have a choice of interview dates from any week day or at their next outpatient clinic appointment date. Special attention will be given to those participants who would like to be interviewed in the clinic on the day they have an appointment with their psychiatric clinicians so that the interview time does not clash with their appointment time. Moreover, enough time (1-1 1/2 hours) will be given for each interview so that the investigator and the participant do not feel rushed to complete the interview. It is possible that some participants would like to be interviewed soon after their first meeting with the investigator. For those potential participants the same study procedures and human subject protection protocols will be used; they are explained below. It is, however, important to note that on any give day no more than two subjects will be interviewed.
On the day of the interview, the investigator will explain the study purpose and the study procedure again. In the briefing about the study procedure, the participants will be specifically informed that the interviews will be audio taped. In addition, the participants will be informed that the investigator will also take some notes during the interview. The participants will be asked to sign the consent form to participate in the study. Although all the participants will receive a written consent form, it is possible that some Pakistani women might not feel comfortable signing their name on the consent form or that some Pakistani women might not be literate. In such situations if participants say that they want to participant in the study, their verbal acceptance will be documented by the investigator on the consent form and this will be considered their consent.
The interview will be conducted using the interview guide. During the interview, participants will have a choice to speak in Urdu or English or both and to take a break at any time if they feel fatigued. Following the interview, participants' contributions to the study will be acknowledged. Since this study has a time commitment, participants will be paid Pakistani Rupees 300, approximately US $5.17 (US $1 = 58 Pakistani Rupees), at the end of the first interview for their involvement and contribution in the study. If the participant withdraws from participation before the first interview, they will not be paid 300 Pakistani Rupees.
Study participants will be requested to acknowledge the receipt of money by signing the proof of payment form and/or making a check mark on a proof of payment form (Appendix D) which will be immediately co-signed and dated by the investigator. Depending on how much is accomplished in the first interview, the participants may be asked to perhaps participate in the second interview for completion of data collection. The third interview may be arranged if the investigator would like to seek clarification and understanding of the data so far provided by the study participant. Hence, each participant will have the total time commitment of between 3 to 41/2 hours. Those study participants with whom follow-up interview(s) will be conducted will be verbally thanked for their time both at the beginning and end of the interview(s). There will be no monetary compensation for study participants who participate in the follow-up interviews. In other words, every study participant will get a maximum of 300 Pakistani Rupees (approximately US $5.17) for their participation in the study. Data collection will take place in August, September, October, November, and December, 2005. In other words, data collection will take approximately five months to complete.
To ensure protection of human subjects, approval of both the Institutional Review Board at the University of Michigan and the Ethical Review Committee of the AKU will be obtained before starting data collection. Participants will be informed through both written and verbal descriptions about what they can expect as participants. Participants can expect the following. First, participation in this study is voluntary and participants have a right to refuse or withdraw from the study at any time in the data collection process. The participants will be told that they can ask any questions they might have about the study or procedures related to the study.
Second, the study may not have any specific direct benefit to the participants; except for some participants, it might be a chance for them to reflect on how they manage their depression and its treatment. In addition, the participant will have a choice to ask for a one-page summary of the research findings either in Urdu or English languages which the investigator will provide after the completion of writing of the research findings. For this the participants have to provide their complete home or work mailing address. In addition, for some the 300 Rupees may cover part of their cost of psychiatric outpatient clinic visit or travel cost. Nonetheless, results of this study will generate important information to help health care providers in Pakistan to better understand what the depression experience is like for some Pakistani women. Moreover, knowledge generated on strategies may help health care providers incorporate them to care for other Pakistani women with depression, and may help some Pakistani women self-manage their depression. This would assist Pakistani women with depression to improve their day to day functioning, minimize the effects of depression in their lives, and reduce the risks of future episodes of depression.
Third, study participants will be informed that there is minimal identified risk or harm to the participant for participating in this study, i.e., the discussion of experiences of depression and its management could be emotional. The investigator is an experienced psychiatric nurse who has worked with women with depression, and will make clinical judgments about whether or not it is appropriate to continue the interview.
Fourth, study participants will be told how their confidentiality will be maintained throughout the data collection and reporting:
Participants, however, will be informed that confidentiality will not be maintained if the participant is at risk of harming herself or others. If a participant exhibits behavior that indicates suicidal ideation or increased suicidal ideation, or suicide planning, the investigator who has experience in psychiatric nursing care will conduct a suicide assessment with the participant. If there is: (a) increased frequency, duration or severity of suicidal ideation with no plan or imminent intent, the participant will be asked to contact her psychiatric clinician before leaving for home, (b) indication of suicidal planning, intent, and substance use, the investigator will, with the participant, contact her psychiatric clinician, family member, or friend, and (c) an imminent suicide intent, the investigator will ensure that the psychiatric clinician at the psychiatric outpatient clinic of the AKUH be informed immediately for a complete psychiatric evaluation of the participant, including suicide intent. The participant will bear the cost of psychiatric evaluation.
Fifth, the role of researcher versus clinician will be clarified. For example, as a researcher, the investigator is interested in understanding the participants perspectives of what do they do to manage their depression. Information provided by the participants in response to interview questions will not be recorded in participants' medical files; hence, it will not be used for treatment purposes. As a researcher the investigator is not responsible for changing or modifying any treatment plans such as prescribing medications or changing the dose of current medications if any.
Finally, the participant will be asked if they have any questions about the study or procedures related to the study. Data will only be collected once the participant gives either written or verbal consent including making a check mark on the consent form (Appendix E).
The focus of the study is to understand Pakistani women's perspectives on strategies, factors influencing those strategies, and their perceived effectiveness in the self-management of their recurrent depression; it requires the inclusion of females, and, therefore, excludes males. After learning more about strategies women use to self-manage their recurrent depression, research can later be extended to study strategies men use to self-manage their recurrent depression. The reason children are not included in the study is that this study focuses on strategies that are used in recurrent depression. In order to qualify as having recurrent depression, an individual has to have two or more episodes of major depression; this makes it difficult for children to qualify as study participants. In addition, the depth and the complexity of data the investigator is interested in obtaining are not likely to be provided by children. The aim of the qualitative research is to achieve analytic generalizability which can only be achieved if participants are experts about the phenomenon under investigation. So any Pakistani woman who belongs to any ethnic group and who meets the inclusion criteria will be able to participate in the study.
The investigator will listen to the audio taped interviews soon after each interview. In qualitative research, data collection and data analysis occur simultaneously. Since the interview will probably be conducted in Urdu, the investigator will transcribe the interview into Urdu. The transcribed interviews will then be given to an expert (yet to be identified in Pakistan) in both Urdu and English in Pakistan to translate the interviews into English. The investigator will check the translated version of the interview to identify any discrepancies between the Urdu and English versions of the interview.
The study data will then be analyzed using content analysis (Bernard, 1988). Content analysis is a qualitative data analysis method used to make inferences from text data collected from open-ended questions asked in interviews. The goal is to understand and describe Pakistani women's perspectives on strategies, factors influencing those strategies, and their perceived effectiveness in the self-management of their recurrent depression. The text used for content analysis will be the transcribed audio taped interviews.
Wilson (1989) established three basic elements of content analysis: (1) deciding on the unit of analysis, (2) borrowing or developing the set of categories, and (3) developing the rationale and illustrations to guide coding of data into categories. Deciding on the unit of analysis means that a decision needs to be made whether the whole response or a breakdown of responses into separate words, phrases, or sentences will be used (Wilson, 1989). In this study the unit of analysis will be the sentences derived by breaking down the responses to the interview questions.
Content analysis is a rigorous procedure; however, it is prone to problems of validity and reliability. In quantitative research, validity refers to what is being measured and how well it is measured (Mishel, 1998). In qualitative research, in contrast, validity refers to "gaining knowledge and understanding of the true nature, essence, meanings, attributes, and characteristics of a particular phenomenon under study. Measurement is not the goal; rather, knowing and understanding the phenomenon is the goal." (Leininger, 1985, p. 68). In other words, the validity in qualitative research refers to whether the investigator is getting what she is trying to get or what she thinks she is getting. In qualitative research there are several ways to prevent threats to validity such as searching for discrepant evidence and negative cases, triangulation, feedback, member checks and rich data (Maxwell, 1998). In this proposed study, the validity of the findings will derive from the data collection process and from feedback from a panel of experts to increase the credibility of the findings. "Soliciting feedback from others is an extremely useful strategy for identifying validity threats, your own biases and assumptions, and flaws in your logic or methods" (Maxwell, 1998, p. 26). Hence, in this study, feedback will be solicited and discussion of the findings will be done with a panel of experts on self-management strategies such as Dr. Bonnie Hagerty (chair, investigator's dissertation committee) and Dr. Lynch-Sauer (member, investigator's dissertation committee), faculty at the School of Nursing, University of Michigan.
In quantitative research, reliability refers to repeatedly obtaining the same results (Mishel, 1998). Since this proposed study aims at developing understanding and knowledge about the self-management strategies used by Pakistani women with recurrent depression, the issue of reliability is not a major concern. In qualitative research, reliability "focuses on identifying and documenting recurrent, accurate, and consistent (homogeneous) or inconsistent (heterogeneous) features, as patterns, themes, values, world views, experiences, and other phenomenon confirmed in similar or different context." (Leininger, 1985, p. 69). In this proposed study, the investigator will pay special attention to the reliability of the coding such as ensuring that the emergent categories are mutually exclusive, the categories are separate and independent. If responses (unit of analysis) can be reasonably coded into more than one category, the reliability of the coding is suspect (Wilson, 1989).
Besides mutual exclusiveness, the investigator will ensure that other necessary criteria of the emergent categories are met such as homogeneity, inclusiveness, usefulness, clarity and specificity (Wilson, 1989). Homogeneity means that the identified categories are a variation of the same phenomenon under study and have the same level of abstraction. For example, the category "types of strategies" which addresses the research question "what types of strategies do Pakistani women use to self-manage their recurrent depression" will have all the sub-categories as a variation of types of strategies (e.g., cognitive strategies and behavioral strategies) and are expressed at the same level of abstraction (e.g., cognitive strategies and behavioral strategies, and not as cognitive strategies and taking medications).
In this protocol, the methodology of this study was described. This chapter covered: (a) research design, (b) sample, (c) measures, (d) procedure, (e) human subject protection, (f) minority/gender/children, and (g) data analysis.
This qualitative study will use content analysis to describe Pakistani women's perspectives on strategies, factors influencing those strategies, and their perceived effectiveness in the self-management of their recurrent depression. Using purposeful sampling, a sample of 12 to 15 Pakistani women will be recruited from the outpatient psychiatric clinics of AKUH who meet the specified inclusion and exclusion criteria. Data will be collected through semi-structured interviews using an interview guide. The study procedure and human subjects protection protocol was described in detail. Finally, a plan for data analysis was presented with exemplars where appropriate.
