The recent achievement of an ultracold fermionic gas of neutral atoms in an optical lattice (OL) has spurred a tremendous surge of interest in the proper description of this system under various experimental manipulations [1, 2]. In fact, there is a wealth of physics in such a system because of all the experimentally accessible parameters: The OL affords control of the spatial distribution of the atoms, as well as the tunneling. The average number of atoms per site loaded into the OL is well controlled, as is the population imbalance if the atomic gas comprises two different species. Even the interaction between atoms in different hyperfine states can be fully controlled by introducing an external magnetic field tuned near a Feshbach resonance, providing a crossover between real-space (BEC) and reciprocal-space (BCS) pairing.
A major thrust of current research is to study key models of condensed matter physics in the clean and controlled environment of ultracold atoms in an OL. Recently, there have been several papers on creating an effective magnetic field for trapped neutral atoms in order to realize analogs of the quantum Hall effect (QHE) [12, 15]. We shall focus on those proposals. In the following section, though, we first present a brief review of the QHE as a motivation for the introduction of effective gauge fields.
In this section we give a heuristic, and almost correct, review of the quantum Hall effect. We have drawn heavily on Refs. [3, 4, 6].
Recall the classical Hall effect from elementary electrodynamics: As charges of number density n forming a current density j in the x-direction pass through a constant magnetic field pointing along the z-axis, the Lorentz force deflects the charges to the edge of the sample, creating a voltage in the y-direction. In steadystate, the force from the transverse Hall field precisely cancels the transverse Lorentz force, Ey = Bj/ne, and the sample carries current without any change in its resistivity. Another way to say this is that the resistivity tensor, defined by
Considering the situation quantum mechanically, we begin, as always, with a Hamiltonian. Here we take the bare-bones model of a noninteracting, spinless electron gas in a two-dimensional rectangular sample with area Lx × Ly, subject to a constant magnetic field in the zdirection. Then
But on the right-hand side of the equation, we recognize an effective Hamiltonian for our old pal, the harmonic oscillator in y, albeit shifted by an amount which depends on the plane-wave state in x.
From this result we can immediately see two things. Firstly, the energy levels of the system will be of the form
If the magnetic field is tuned such that the Fermi energy lies exactly at the top of a Landau level, i.e., the filling factor,
Roughly speaking, the disorder alters the level structure by introducing localized states in between Landau levels where a charge carrier is bound to an imperfection. As a result, the Fermi energy does not jump abruptly from level to level, but instead populates the localized states in the gaps as the magnetic field is increased. These localized states do not contribute to the transport properties of the system, so if the Fermi energy is in a gap of the clean energy level structure, as far as the conduction electrons are concerned, nothing has changed. The Landau level filling factor is still an integer and the Hall resistivity will remain constant. Thus the combination of energy quantization and disorder has led to the surprising plateaus. In this treatment, we have glossed over the fact that the presence of the localized states decreases the occupancy of the Landau levels, but one can use some slick gauge invariance arguments to show that the remaining conduction electrons in fact make up for the loss of their compatriots by increasing their own velocity [5]. The end result, then, is independent of these details.
We have taken the simplest scenario imaginable above. Although a detailed treatment would take us too far afield, we now mention the effect of a periodic potential on the electron gas, since the point of this section is to provide motivation and background for current proposals on accessing quantum Hall regimes with atoms in optical lattices. Briefly, the periodic potential has the effect of opening up gaps inside the Landau levels. By the same reasoning as for the simple case, one expects to see plateaus at the fractional fillings where the intraband gaps appear. This is in fact observed experimentally. However, although it is not obvious without a more careful inspection, the values of the Hall resistivity at the plateaus still correspond to integer multiples of h/e2.
Finally, what we have discussed above is the integer quantum Hall effect (IQHE). There is also a fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE), where the Hall resistivity has plateaus at fractional multiples of h/e2 for certain fractional values of the filling factor. This is due to the electron-electron interactions opening additional energy gaps inside the Landau levels. This is a many-body effect resulting in fractionally charged, possibly anyonic, quasiparticles. Much has been made of the ramifications of such a system for condensed matter physics, quantum computation, and even high-energy physics. However, the topic lies well outside the scope of this paper. For our purposes, it is sufficient to note that the FQHE is of considerable interest and that a realization of this effect in an atomic system would have great value. Furthermore, a periodic potential has the effect of enhancing many-body interactions and increasing the intraband gaps, thereby enhancing the effect and stabilizing it against thermal fluctuations.
We have discussed in the Introduction the allure of simulating condensed matter systems with ultracold atomic systems. One can simulate the two-dimensional periodic structures of interest in condensed matter systems by confining an ultracold gas of neutral fermionic atoms in a three-dimensional magnetic trap (which we assume to be approximately harmonic) and turning on a twodimensional optical lattice (OL) in the x-y plane. The gas then is effectively two-dimensional if we assume that the trap frequency is much greater in the z-direction than in the radial direction and that the atoms are cold enough that the dynamics along the z-axis are frozen out. The type of lattice in the x-y plane can be altered by adjusting the number of lasers and their geometry. Then one can access physics such as the quantum Hall effect if one can create an effective magnetic field for the atoms.
The simplest way to generate such a field is to get the atomic cloud rotating. This is typically done by either introducing a rotating deformation to the symmetric radial trap [8], or stirring the gas with a blue-detuned laser [9]. Then, in the rotating reference frame, the Coriolis force plays the role of the magnetic field [7]. To see this, let us consider the Hamiltonian of the rotating system, neglecting for now the lattice potential,
where
In order to study fractional quantum Hall effects, we want to incorporate a periodic potential to enhance the atom-atom interactions along with the effective magnetic field. Clearly though, if we realize the magnetic field by going to the rotating frame, the periodic potential should be stationary in the rotating frame. So we need to be able to create a rotating optical lattice in the lab frame. This can be done by either a) splitting a laser beam into three beams with a rotating mask and focusing the beams onto the atomic cloud to create a rotating interference pattern [10] as shown in Fig. 2, or b) focusing a red-detuned laser with a rotating array of microlenses [11] as shown in Fig. 3.
There are several technical difficulties with the procedure outlined above. First of all, the rotation frequency of the atomic cloud must be carefully tuned close to the trapping frequency so that the unwanted term in the Hamiltonian is negligible compared to the interaction energy scale. Controlling the rotation is no easy feat in itself, but aside from that, this limitation severely restricts the accessible range of effective magnetic field strengths. In order to study the FQHE, the goal is to attain the regime where all atoms are in the lowest Landau level, i.e., the number of magnetic flux quanta approaches the number of atoms. With the above limitation on the field strength, very low atomic densities on the order of
To make things worse, even if one could precisely control the rotation frequency, one must keep it less than the radial frequency. Otherwise, the radial trapping would be negated and the gas would rapidly expand out of the experiment due to its thermal energy and repulsive interactions. On top of that, the rotation frequency of the mask or microlens array must be matched with the rotation frequency of the gas. Frequency jitter due to mechanical vibration or optical aberrations result in heating.
In summary, this type of procedure works if the atomic gas is very dilute and the energy scale of the various deviations from our model Hamiltonian are small compared to the energy scale of the interactions we are trying to enhance. For weakly interacting atoms, we would do well to consider our alternatives.
Following Ref. [12], we now consider an atomic gas of three-level atoms in a
We shall work in the field-interaction picture,
Diagonalization p yields eigenvalues
Here |D) denotes the "dark state" and is completely decoupled from the other states. Note that these states are generally spatially dependent through their dependence on the fields.
Writing the wavefunction in terms of these semiclassical dressed states,
and inserting the identity for the internal degree of freedom all over the place, Schrödinger's equation becomes
(Note that the arguments are implied.) It is instructive to rewrite this in matrix form,
where we have defined the column vector
If we now assume the atoms are initially in the dark state, c = (1, 0, 0)T , we know that they will stay there adiabatically, since the dark state is impervious to the applied fields. We can also discourage nonadiabatic excitation by taking
where we have introduced the ratio of the fields
where
Assume the atoms are tightly confined in the zdirection so that
Now we should be honest about what we have swept under the rug. We have, after all, neglected spontaneous emission, collisional dephasing, and thermal effects. Since we have taken a
Another issue we have neglected is atom-atom interactions. If we are interested in realizing the FQHE, then the interactions are essential. Above we have pretended they were negligible. In order to treat an interacting gas, one could include two-body contact potentials for interactions between each possible pair of internal states. Then we would have a set of coupled nonlinear Gross-Pitaevskii equations instead of the uncoupled linear Schrödinger equations in Eq. (7). Presumably one could proceed as before to find some effective vector potential under the proper conditions, but it is not at all clear what the result would be. So although one should be able to observe FQHE-type physics with this procedure, the theoretical formalism to describe it quantitatively has not yet been developed.
Finally, recall from our review of the quantum Hall effect that besides a magnetic field, we also needed one other main ingredient: disorder. So, we should mention that one can easily generate a disordered optical potential with a speckle field [7], generated by scattering a laser off a rough surface or passing it through a diffusive element. In contrast to condensed matter systems, the amount of disorder is well controlled, providing yet another incentive to do the experiments in an atomic analog system.
Let us follow Ref. [15] in extending the above formalism to encompass some interesting non-FQHE physics. In this scheme we do not take the detuning to zero in order to isolate the dark state energetically. Instead we take the detuning to be very large in order to adiabatically eliminate the upper state,
In the case
where we have defined the mixing angle tan
The new wrinkle is that we also get a similar equation for
So we see that in this case, not only does the effective magnetic field depend on the internal state, but it acts equally and oppositely for the two states, which is particularly nice for the spin-1/2 analogy.
Now that we have demonstrated a technique for creating artificial magnetic fields, we can play with different spatial profiles of the lasers to obtain different spatial dependences of the magnetic field. In fact, since these magnetic fields are completely phony, we can even engineer effective fields which do not satisfy Maxwell's equations. However, we can even do better by generalizing this procedure to obtain non-Abelian gauge fields [16]. We give a flavor for the main idea below.
Recall that ordinary Abelian gauge fields, such as real magnetic fields, stem from imposing the local U(1) phase symmetry
If we have a two-component spinor field, imposing the local SU (2) rotational symmetry
We have a similar situation in an atomic system if we have two degenerate dressed states (
where the 2 × 2 matrices (of vectors)
Notice that since the subspace is degenerate, we could just as well choose a different basis set connected to our original basis by a local unitary transformation, G(x). But if we make the transformation
In summary, we have reviewed the main ideas of the quantum Hall effect to motivate the realization of an analogous regime in an ultracold atomic gas, which is eminently more controllable than a condensed matter system. The key ingredient is the presence of a strong effective magnetic field. Such a field can be introduced via physical rotation of the gas, with a co-rotating optical lattice potential to bolster atom-atom interactions, although there are often technical difficulties with this approach. For a gas of three-level atoms, the magnetic field can also be introduced in a STIRAP-type experiment through the formation of decoupled semi-classical dressed states that evolve in an effective vector potential. We have also identified a possible avenue of future research in the inclusion of atom-atom interactions in a similar formalism. Finally, we have briefly sketched how one might create light-induced effective non-Abelian gauge fields in an atomic system.
