On Friday afternoon, the 26 th of November, I conducted my ethnographic observation in an urban setting in the centre of Leamington. My first intention was to observe activity and interaction in a second hand book shop, paying special attention to variables such as gender and age, and their potential relation to areas of interest. This, as we will see, proved to be difficult. Also, I intended to record noteworthy or unusual behaviour that might be caused by social circumstances particular to the shop.
Around 1.45 pm I entered the shop, and at that moment there were about three customers around, apart from the two shopkeepers. The shop, called Portland Books has an authentic and old-fashioned atmosphere, with its wooden floor, narrow space and antique, hardback books on old wooden shelves. Besides old and new books, the shop also sells postcards and old placard photos. The counter is situated downstairs, in the middle of the shop. A small staircase leads to a first floor, where a small room with academic literature and a big room with novels and poetry can be found. I decided to stay upstairs for a while. In the big room, there were two customers, besides me and a friend that I had brought along. The upstairs area creates a lesser degree of constraint, as there is no shopkeeper around and the street can not be seen. This might create a more closed-off environment. Still, the customers whispered, as would have been the case in a library.
After a while, the low number of customers made it pointless to stay in the shop for very long because of the absence of interaction to observe. At 2.15 pm I decided to change my approach and find another shop with more people in it.
I found a better case study in another book store called Waterstone 's, a bigger shop that sells more mainstream literature and does not offer second-hand books. Additionally, Waterstone 's is situation more centrally at the entrance of a shopping centre and near to the Parade. Here I spent around two hours observing the shopping public. Although also not very busy, Waterstone 's is a quite big store, like the first shop with two floors, and there was interesting material for observation. Most of the interaction was situated around the counter, where there was constant conversation between customers and one of the many members of the shop 's personnel. The atmosphere in the shop is of the style of a 'walk-in shopping centre'. Many people come in to look around briefly, and nearly everybody does this by themselves. The counter downstairs is placed in the middle of the shop, presumably to make it easier for the personnel to make sure no theft takes place. Classical music sounds throughout the store; not the type of sensitive piano music, but rather dynamic orchestra music. However, the music is played quite softly, so that I observed no noticeable response to the music of customers or personnel.
A large stairway leads the way the store 's first floor. This floor is even larger than the ground floor. Differently from the first shop I visited, this floor also has a counter which is located centrally. Although there appears to be less constraint (which might be due to the size of the store, and to the music, creating a more 'informal' atmosphere) customers among each other still spoke in a lowered tone. Again, only around the counter people spoke aloud.
It is striking that, although there was a considerable number of people on this floor (around 30 of more), by far the greatest number of them seemed to have come alone, or at least went around very individually. The customers also spread out quite evenly over the available sections of books (categorised in sections such as 'history', 'pets', 'linguistics', 'biography' etc.), most of the time seemingly avoiding sections where other people were looking for books. Sometimes two people entered the shop together, although throughout the whole period of observation I did not see a larger group of customers entering the shop. Upon entering, a pair usually split to find the books of their own interest, and hardly interacted until the shop visit was ending. As such, it can be said that I observed a fairly static social atmosphere in the shop. It appeared that people were trying to pretend that others were not around them, or influencing their preferred method of going around the shop.
When I observed this aspect, I decided to test to what extent a reaction could be caused among customers by intruding their private sphere. I went to stand next to a woman in a corner of the shop, to see if this would disturb her private sphere, and thus change her course of activity, or behaviour. But, although I stood next to her for a while (pretending to look for books), and took books from the shelf she was looking at, she did not react to my presence at all. Even if my presence did irritate her or created some form of discomfort, she was able to conceal this. In another instance, I approached a shelf where two people stood in search for books, without speaking. Although I stood behind them for a while, looking at the shelves they stood in front of, they did not react to this. Whether it happens consciously or not, most of the customers conform to seclusion of each individual. I would even argue that a quiet consensus exists to uphold a sort of polite distance, seemingly dependent on consciously avoiding each other, after which the customer does not have to assess constantly the situation in which it is appropriate to react to others. This, of course, creates the somewhat silent and static atmosphere of which I spoke earlier.
About the type of people, I can say the following. On the first floor, there was a majority of women among the customers. Most of them I guessed were over forty years of age. Interestingly, between the two floors there seemed to be something of a difference between the types of customers. Generally, customers downstairs were younger of age, and they spent less time in the shop. Moreover, the customers downstairs seemed to be more reactive to other customers. They seemed, perhaps, less accustomed to the unwritten rules of the 'bookshop etiquette'. What underlines this mode of thinking, also, is the method of classifying the books it offers. Children 's books, bestsellers, as well as popular scientific books, are all on offer on the ground floor, while some books were displayed on tables on the ground floor, as well as on shelves at the top floor. Although at first it may appear inefficient and chaotic to place one book in two places in the store, we must look for an explanation to it.
It may be presumed that Waterstone 's has deliberately implemented a categorisation of books that suits its customers and therefore works effectively as the most profitable way of advertising its books. Whereas regular bookshop visitors have certain sections of books they might be most interested in (particularly specialist literature qualifies for this, as people interested in one type of book are likely to buy more books of that type), others might be on the outlook for a particular book they have been recommended, or in search of a suitable gift. An average customer at Waterstone 's is therefore likely to come to the store with an idea of what to buy. The store then tries to cater for any type of customer, so that they might easily find what they are looking for if they have no idea what to buy, or in the second case, may look around undisturbed for books of their interest.
It is furthermore interesting to note that the store succeeds to a high degree to create an optimal consumer atmosphere. There is little talking, people who intend to stay for a longer period easily find their way in search for their category of books, and the first floor, by concealing the street and placing the salon tables and couch, create an atmosphere where people can stay longer without being disturbed. It is likely that the customers recognise and reinforce aspects of this way of thinking. This is shown by the fact that people search for books by themselves, even if they enter the shop as part of a group. Other evidence is the maintenance of the 'polite distance' of which I spoke earlier. It is evident that consumerism decides to a high degree what forms of social interaction are accepted, and which not. In this, there is no great difference of interest between personnel and customer.
