In this dissertation it is argued that the development of critical realism by Roy Bhaskar is a positive development for sociology. By successfully critiquing empiricism Bhaskar has developed an approach that can be used to highlight the deficiencies that have been associated with the traditional ontologies available in sociology. It will be shown that Margaret Archer effectively launched an immanent critique of the said sociological ontologies by using the realist ontology. It is also argued that she has constructed a worthwhile methodological complement to the realist ontology. The dissertation then attempts to prove these claims through a discussion of three of the most famous expositions of the concept of power. However, it is through these discussions that it is revealed that sociology will not have to sacrifice its critical character by adopting the realist ontology in toto. This is because there will inevitably be disagreement over the 'essentially contested' nature of our familiar concepts. In conclusion, the view will be advanced that the ascendancy of realism within sociology would provide us with a strong foundation from which to develop a body of theories and empirical evidence which would allow us to make a worthwhile contribution to the developments in society, and not just in the academe.
The rich diversity of theoretical positions and their concomitant practical investigations within sociology are a reflection not only of the complexity of our subject matter, but also of the ongoing critical discussions between sociologists who have different ontological and conceptual commitments. With this in mind, it can be argued that sociology is inherently partial, and that this inherent partiality is one of the discipline 's main strengths due to the breadth and depth of theoretical and methodological perspectives it has generated.
However, it has been argued recently that the development of critical realism represents a threat to the continual development of sociological theory (through the process of critical discussion), because "critical realists are engaged in an hegemonic project which seeks to conceptually re-tool the natural and social sciences" (Cruickshank, 2004; 567). Cruickshank is arguing that critical realists refuse to contribute to the ongoing critical dialogue about reality, and consequently if the critical realist ontology is accepted as the 'infallible' definition of reality, then sociology must necessarily sacrifice its inherently partial character and the diversity of sociological theories contingent upon it.
It will be the dual argument of this dissertation that critical realism has developed a valid ontological position through an immanent critique of the alternative ontologies which have traditionally framed sociological theorising, yet this development in no way threatens the proliferation of the multitude of theoretical ideas and contestations which give sociology its critical character. It takes as its core text Archer 's Realist Social Theory: The Morphogenetic Approach (1995), henceforth TMGA, in which an immanent critique of individualism, collectivism, and structuration theory has been developed, and in which the 'morphogenetic methodology' (which seeks to, "bridge the gap between the realist ontology and practical social theorising") has been constructed (Archer, 1995; 192). The arguments of this dissertation will be pursued through applying the main contentions asserted in TMGA to three expositions of the concept of power, namely C. Wright Mills' conception of 'The Power Elite', Parsons' 'power as the symbolic medium of the goal attainment subsystem' and Lukes' 'Three-Dimensional view of power'.
The decision to specifically assess conceptions of power from the ontologically realist and methodologically morphogenetic positions was not an arbitrary one. It will be the contention of this dissertation that power is part of a corpus of familiar concepts that permeate sociological theorising and are implicitly or explicitly present to a lesser or greater extent in sociological theories of any description; other familiar concepts include  'society', 'values', 'interests' etc. It will be shown how an ontological commitment is implied in the usage of these concepts, and consequently how most sociological theories can be reassessed and ontologically corrected in realist terms. However, it will also be shown that ontological commitment is not the only basis which furnishes critical dialogue. Therefore it will also be argued that the disagreement over the definition and practical application of concepts like power (and the interrelations and interdependencies between the familiar concepts themselves) is not solely determined (although undeniably influenced) by the specific analyst 's ontology, and consequently the critical dialogue from which sociology benefits will always be preserved.
Chapter one will outline the main ontological and epistemological tenets of the critical realist philosophy as presented by its principle exponent Roy Bhaskar. Archer 's immanent critique of individualism, collectivism, and structuration theory (or 'elisionist' theorising) shall then be shown to be successful, and therefore justifying this dissertation 's adoption and defence of the realist ontology. Chapter two will describe the morphogenetic methodological framework that informs the subsequent discussion of power.
Chapter three will be devoted to an exposition and then criticism of the theories of power proffered by Mills and Parsons from an ontologically realist perspective, whilst an alternative morphogenetic approach to studying the substantive problems identified by Mills and Parsons will be provisionally sketched. Chapter four will assess Lukes' 'Three-Dimensional' (3-D) view of power from the realist perspective, yet will also seek to show how much of the critical dialogue regarding Lukes' view derives from the way he inappropriately subsumes many of the different applications of the concept of 'power' in to his 3-D view, and not from his ontological misconceptualisations.
The final chapter will be devoted to a direct critique of Cruickshank 's recent article A tale of two ontologies: an immanent critique of critical realism (The Sociological Review (54), 2004). The dissertation will conclude by opposing Cruickshank 's claims that there is a logical contradiction at the core of realism because of its insistence on two distinct domains of reality (the intransitive and the transitive) in addition to his insistence that realism should engage in a 'dialogic' immanent critique of ontology. The discussion of Cruickshank 's article will draw upon the main arguments presented throughout the dissertation in order to show the validity of the basic realist argument that there are two distinct realms of reality.
Therefore, in order to arrive at the point where a discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of the criticisms of critical realism is possible, one must first understand the argument that critical realism is positing, and so it is to chapter one that we presently turn.
In order to argue that critical realism has provided sociology with a superior ontological perspective of social reality to the individualist and collectivist ontologies, it will be necessary to show that the deficiencies of both of these traditional ontologies stem from their grounding in empiricism, whilst the impulse behind the establishment of the realist philosophy was the necessity for science to break free from the conceptual shackles imposed by empiricism.
In 1975 Roy Bhaskar published A Realist Theory of Science (henceforth RTS), and this was the inaugural text in the establishment of transcendental realism (later to be reconceptualised as critical realism). Bhaskar has described his approach in RTS as "an immanent critique of empiricism" (Bhaskar, 1989 [1979]; 169). By this he meant that he was focussing on the, "theoretical, explanatorily significant or 'fundamentally' experimental aspects of science" as these were perceived to be the strengths of the empirical approach (and this is what is entailed in an immanent critique, criticising another philosophy or perspective based on its own standpoints). Therefore, Bhaskar developed a philosophy of science which attempted to argue against the assertion that all knowledge is derived from sense data, by developing a scientific approach that would reconceptualise the nature of causality, the role of experimental activity, and ultimately the constituent features of reality.
Bhaskar argued that whilst laboratory experiments may produce observable regularities (or 'constant conjunctions'), these regularities cannot be taken to be causal laws (Bhaskar, 1975; 16). Bhaskar 's justification for this assertion was his differentiation between 'open and closed systems'. 'Closed systems' are not naturally occurring in nature and require human intervention to exist (such as laboratory experiments); in a 'closed system' any intervening causes which may prevent a causal mechanism from having its normal effect are excluded (Bhaskar, 1986; 27). Bhaskar showed that the extrapolation of causal laws from observable regularities is predicated upon viewing reality as a 'closed system'. In contrast to this Bhaskar advanced the view that reality is an 'open system' in which causal mechanisms (like gravity) interact with other causal mechanisms and can interrupt their causal effects, therefore the manifestation of effects at the empirical level is contingent upon the interaction between unobservable entities.
This view of reality as an 'open system' implies that reality is itself stratified; Bhaskar describes how ontology is layered into three levels: the real; the actual; and the empirical (Bhaskar, 1975; 19). The real consists of mechanisms that generate phenomena at the level of the actual, which may or may not be observed at the level of the empirical (Bhaskar, 1986; 27). More generally however, Bhaskar 's use of the term  'stratification' refers to the simultaneous causal efficacy of the different emergent levels. Bhaskar uses the concept of 'emergence' to show how the different levels 'emerge' from the level below, but once they have emerged they have their own causal autonomy and are therefore irreducible to that from which they emerged (Bhaskar, 1986; 104). This implies a diachronic (as opposed to a synchronic) causal account of how the emergent entity develops from a pre-emergent level of the world (Bhaskar, 1986; 113). Bhaskar extends this seemingly exclusively ontological perspective to his view of epistemology, as he shows how a "piece of knowledge is emergent from the cognitive structures which generate knowledge by transforming anterior knowledges" (Bhaskar, 1986; 60).
Ontology and epistemology in the realist philosophy of science correspond (roughly) to what Bhaskar terms the 'intransitive' domain and the 'transitive' domain respectively (Bhaskar, 1986; 24-25). Bhaskar claims that that stratum of 'the real' belongs to an 'intransitive' domain comprised of real phenomena that exist independently of our knowledge of them, whilst the hypothetical interpretations we have of these intransitive objects (which are inevitably historically contingent and socially constructed) belong to the 'transitive' domain (Bhaskar, 1986; 51-52). It should be kept in mind that the transitive/intransitive distinction applies both to reality and to our knowledge of reality. Within reality there is a distinction between intransitive features of reality and the transitive production of knowledge, which is a component of reality. Within that part of reality comprising the transitive production of knowledge, one can find the realist philosophy of science (with its distinction between the intransitive dimension and the transitive dimension). So the conceptualisation of 'intransitive' and 'transitive' dimensions is found within the transitive process of knowledge construction (Bhaskar, 1986; 24-25). All this states is that realism "possesses the virtue of reflexive self-consistency" in which it acknowledges that realism itself is transitively produced knowledge, and "may be adequate to only one historically specific mode of science" (Bhaskar, 1989 [1979]; 170).
In summary, Bhaskar developed his realist approach to the philosophy of science because the dominant perspective of empiricism precluded the acknowledgment of the causal mechanisms that existed independently of the observable regularities produced in the artificially closed system environment of the laboratory. Realist philosophy views reality as robustly stratified into the three levels of the real, the actual and the empirical, all of which have their own emergent properties of causal autonomy that makes them irreducible to the stratum from which they emerged, whilst the philosophy also acknowledges two dimensions that are independent of each other, the intransitive and the transitive (within which the realist philosophy, like all human argument, is situated).
In The Possibility of Naturalism (1979) Bhaskar argued that "an essential unity of method between the natural and the social sciences" was possible, based on the realist philosophy of science developed in RST (Bhaskar, 1989 [1979]; 2). It was here that Bhaskar developed the idea that social structures are emergent properties (as they 'emerge' from the actions of agents but then have causal autonomy and are therefore irreducible to the agents from whose activities they emerged) and that they exist in the 'open system' of society, which means that (when combined with the free will of agents who have the causal power to alter social structures) there are no 'observable regularities' in society (Bhaskar, 1989 [1979]; 45). However, Bhaskar does maintain that there are limits to his conception of the naturalism between the sciences, as he claims social structures (unlike natural structures) are not independent of the activities they govern or the conceptions that agents have of what they are doing, and that social structures are only relatively enduring (Bhaskar, 1989 [1979]; 38). Therefore, through his immanent critique of empiricism Bhaskar has developed an ontology that is applicable to the social sciences.
However, it is not sufficient to explicate the realist ontology for social reality and declare it to be appropriate without substantiation. In TMGA Margaret Archer also undertakes an immanent critique in the same manner as Bhaskar did in RST; she critiques individualism and collectivism as she argues they were both deficient because of their adherence to empiricism, whilst structuration theory is criticised for sinking structure and agency together, instead of acknowledging their separability, which is the precondition for "explaining why things are so and not otherwise" in society (Archer, 1995; 64). Archer 's critique is immanent as she shows exactly how both individualism and collectivism failed to respond to the mutually regulative function of "the tri-partite link between ontology, methodology, and practical social theorising" (Archer, 1995; 3).
Archer critiques individualism because it starts from the empirically secure position that the ultimate constituents of society are people, yet has to incorporate non-human features into its conception of the individual when its ontology is challenged. Individualism 's principle that social structures and phenomena must be reduced to statements about the interrelations of individuals (because the individual is the ultimate constituent part of society) leaves it susceptible to criticism from psychologists who state that people themselves can be reduced further still into their underlying psychological features (Archer, 1995; 39). Due to their belief in reductionism it becomes difficult for individualists to deny the psychologists' claim that society is the reflection of the combined psyches of the population (Archer, 1995; 40). However, to defend their position from psychologists Individualists invoke the realist (and collectivist) notion of emergence. They claim that their concept of the individual is unique because it is defined by the individual 's participation in relationships that pre-date them, for example "English speakers do require other English speakers to become such themselves" (Archer, 1995; 40). This recognition of an emergent structure (such as the English language) contradicts individualism 's premise that everything in society is reducible to an individual 's dispositions. The response of individualism to this criticism is to incorporate all non-individual and non-dispositional factors into their concept of the individual, such as a person 's 'physical resources and environment' (Watkins, 1971, in Archer, 1995; 39). This again reveals a contradiction, as these aspects of social reality are not about individuals or dispositions (the exclusive focus of individualism) yet are central to the its concept of the individual. Individualism 's inability to discredit realism 's (and collectivism 's) conception of social structure provides further evidence of its inability to uphold 'the tri-partite link'.
Individualism cannot successfully prove that social structures are not, "autonomous from, pre-existent to, and do not exert a causal influence over individuals" (as both realism and collectivism state) (Archer, 1995; 42). Individualism posits that social structure is not independent from individuals because the social structure is constituted of interpersonal relations (Archer, 1995; 43). However, this does not take into account that social structures condition behaviour, for example in the form of role fulfilment. Individualism refutes the validity of this criticism by denying the pre-existence of social structure; it claims that features such as 'roles' only exist because the individuals concerned lack the desire or the knowledge to change them (Archer, 1995; 44). Archer disproves this claim by discussing the resistance shown by structures (such as the rate of recruitment into the police force) to the concerted efforts of individuals trying to change them; this proves that structures pre-exist and outlive specific individuals and their attempts to alter them by showing that they possess properties independent of the individual 's influence (Archer would also add that the process of 'role fulfilment' by actors is structurally conditioned, as opposed to structurally determined, nor is it contingent which actors are eligible for certain roles) (Archer, 1995; 44, 277). Additionally, it can be argued that the dispositions which are so important to individualism are shaped and restricted by their historical context (Gellner, 1971, in Archer, 1995; 42). Consequently, individualism cannot maintain that structures do not have a causal influence (such as a low level of recruitment into the police force being causal of a high crime rate in urban areas). Although collectivism is not susceptible to the criticisms of individualism 's methodological approach, it does not offer a significant counter-ontology, and is therefore inferior to the realist approach.
Archer shows that the flaws of collectivism stem from its inability to transcend empiricist concepts. Collectivism did not define the exact ontological status of  'societal properties' (as defined by Mendelbaum) (Archer, 1995; 49). This is because a societal property cannot be empirically proven as it does not have a tangible existence which can be directly detected by an individual 's senses (Archer, 1995; 49). In addition to this, the empiricist concept of causation (whereby a phenomenon only has causal power if it produces constant conjunctions at an empirical level) denies social structures causal power, because they are neither observable nor causal in their effect (based upon this definition) (Archer, 1995; 52). Realism solves this problem as it recognises that society is an open system in which events are influenced by other contingencies, so the causal influence of emergent properties is not to consistently produce observable effects (Archer, 1995; 53). Therefore, collectivism could only challenge individualism methodologically (by showing that some features of society cannot be reduced to statements about individuals) but could not advance a counter-ontology (because of the dominance of empiricism) stating the existence of non-observable properties (Archer, 1995; 54). Realism, however, does not recognise the validity of the empiricist notion that all things which are held to exist must be detected through human sensory experience. The basic tenet of the realism advanced by Bhaskar and Archer is that society is stratified into individuals and the emergent, non-observable, social structure, and that these two non-reducible strata interact and influence each other (Archer, 1995; 61). After immanently critiquing individualism and collectivism, Archer then turned her attention towards refuting the ontology presented by 'elisionary theorising', represented by Giddens'  'structuration theory'.
Although both 'elisionism' and 'emergentism' have rejected the 'terms of the old debate' between individualism and collectivism, they denote entirely different approaches because, "they are based upon different ontological conceptions, related to disparate methodological injunctions and thus have quite distinct implications for practical social theorising" (Archer, 1995; 60-61). The key difference between the two approaches turns on their "ontological parting of the ways" with regards to the issue as to whether structure and agency are separable or inseparable (Archer, 1995; 63). Elisionism states that social structures can not be examined unless the examination is in conjunction with the actors who 'instantiate' them, as structures only possess a virtual existence until they are 'instantiated' by actors (Archer, 1995; 63). This insistence upon inseparability of structure and agency precludes an examination of their interplay, and it is this examination that Archer stresses is essential to practical social theorising. In eliding structure and agency, Archer contends that elisionists are left with 'the remainders' of the material element of social structures, and the autonomous psychological properties of individuals, as these are distinct emergent strata that cannot be compressed into an 'ontology of praxis' (Archer, 1995; 133).
Therefore in TMGA Archer provides an immanent critique of the alternative ontologies that are available in sociology that are all guilty of 'conflationary theorising'. By this Archer means individualism is guilty of 'upwards conflation', in which the social structure is seen to be inert and wholly dependent upon agents for its configuration (thus rendering structure as epiphenomenal), whilst collectivism is guilty of 'downwards conflation' whereby individuals do not possess causal autonomy and are entirely determined by a super-ordinate social structure (in this instance agency becomes the epiphenomenon). On the other hand, elisionism should also be dismissed as it commits 'central conflation' in which structure and agency are collapsed into an indistinguishable whole, which disallows the possibility of examining their interplay.
It is hoped that this chapter has outlined how the development of Bhaskar 's philosophical realism successfully provided an antidote to the ontological and epistemological misconceptualisations inherent in empiricism, whilst also showing that Bhaskar was correct to attempt to establish a naturalism between the natural and social sciences based upon realism. It has also been argued that Archer has provided an immanent critique of the alternative ontologies available in sociology, and that this critique has provided us with the appropriate focus for our study: namely, examining the interplay between structure and agency. It is therefore incumbent upon Archer to provide us with the methodological tools necessary to undertake such an endeavour, and the next chapter will illuminate how she has done this.
In TMGA Archer develops a methodology that seeks to examine the interplay between structure and agency over time in order to account for 'why things are so and not otherwise' in society. Her approach represents an elaboration of the realist principles outlined by Bhaskar, as some of his conclusions are challenged or reformulated. This chapter will attempt to outline the main features of the morphogenetic approach through an exposition of its three generic phases (structural conditioning, social interaction, structural elaboration) and its underlying ontology (analytical dualism).
The morphogenetic methodology is "based four-square on analytical dualism" (Archer, 1995; 167). By this Archer means that 'the people' and 'the parts' of society have to be analytically discrete in order to examine their interplay. Like Bhaskar, Archer utilises a diachronic conception of emergence in order to construct 'analytical histories of emergence'. However, she contests the qualification that Bhaskar makes about the possibility of naturalism, in which he stated that social structures differ from natural structures because they are activity and concept dependent. Bhaskar 's formulation of this qualification brings him too close to 'elisionary theorising' as it opens up the space in which society can be conceptualised as "taking the form it does because of these people here present, and the conceptions they have" of what they are doing (Archer, 1995; 149). In order to overcome this Archer incorporates a different conception of time when constructing the morphogenetic approach, as she argues that "it must be identified on whose activities structures are dependent, and when" (Archer, 1995; 60). Consequently, not only are structure and agency irreducible to one another, they are also temporally distinguishable, and it is the combination of these two conceptions that allows the interplay between them to be examined over time. Therefore, the two basic theorems of the morphogenetic approach are that "a) structure necessarily pre-dates the action(s) which transform it, and b) that structural elaboration necessarily postdates those actions" (Archer 1995; 168).
Archer argues that there are three types of morphogenetic (or morphostatic) cycles occurring in society simultaneously, and that these cycles intersect in the middle phase (the interaction phase, as interaction is the efficient cause of structural and cultural elaboration); the three types of cycles are structural, cultural, and agential (Archer, 1995; 265). The cultural system is seen as the ideational equivalent of the material set of social structures, whilst social interaction (in which the negotiation of new structural elaboration takes place within the prior structural context) is seen as the parallel of socio-cultural interaction (in which the negotiation of new ideational elaboration takes place within the context of already emergent ideas/theories) (Archer, 1995; 257). It must also be noted, however, that agency itself undergoes new elaboration whilst elaborating new structural and cultural configurations, through the process of 'double morphogenesis'.
In order to clarify the above description, each stage of the morphogenetic cycle will be discussed. Structural and cultural conditioning should be conceptualised as matters of mediation, as "the causal power of social forms is mediated through social agency" (Bhaskar 1989 [1979], in Archer, 1995; 195). Consequently, agents are the only 'efficient' causes in social life yet material and ideational emergent properties have causal powers. In order to resolve this apparent contradiction Archer shows that it is the creative powers of human beings that allows society to be conceptualised as an open system, which means they are able to "resist, repudiate, suspend or circumvent structural and cultural tendencies", therefore the effect of socio-cultural powers is never direct, but mediated (Archer, 1995; 195). However, it is equally the case that the exercise of agential powers can be "suspended, modified and re-directed by the social forms in which they are developed or deployed" (Archer, 1995; 196). Therefore, the morphogenetic perspective maintains that all structural influences "are mediated to people by shaping the situations in which they find themselves" (Archer, 1995; 196 original italics).
The structural and cultural system  'shapes the situations we find ourselves in' in five ways. 'Involuntaristic placement' refers to how "we are quite literally born into life chances which are defined by prior distributions of material resources" (Archer, 1995; 202). This is an objective feature of social life which refers to the fact that the world exists before we arrive into it, and we arrive into it in a certain location due to our background; however it also refers to the fact that we are never free from an involuntaristic involvement in structures and their situational conditioning. It follows on from this that different sections of society are endowed with different 'vested interests' because "vested interests are embedded in all socially constructed positions" (Archer, 1995; 203 original italics). Consequently there are different 'opportunity costs' involved in not acting in a manner that promotes one 's vested interests; however, it is not only action that is conditioned but also 'the degrees of interpretative freedom' whereby the interpretation of a situation by an agent is conditioned by the placement of prices and premiums upon certain interpretations of it (Archer, 1995; 208-209). Finally, 'directional guidance' for a strategic course of action in which the promotion of vested interests is conditioned by the configuration of  'second order' structural and cultural emergent properties (systemic properties that are the 'results of the results' of social interaction), whereby certain courses of action can be pursued (or prevented) if social structures (or ideas) are in 'compatible or incongruent' relationships to one another respectively (Archer, 1995; 215).
The middle phase of the morphogenetic cycle refers to the process of social interaction in which the new structural formations are elaborated but also in which agency itself is elaborated. Archer 's conception of the elaboration of agency is derived from her stratified model of people. People are stratified into "persons, agents, and actors" (Archer, 1995; 254). Each stratum is emergent from the one immediately below it. A concept of 'personal identity' is necessary if an individual is to develop a concept of their  'social identity'; this is because human beings have to have a sense of self in order to identify the interests of a group with their own interests, and this is possible through the human being 's capacity to retain a sense of themselves as being the same person who is passing through time (i.e. the capacity to narrate their own history and future) (Archer, 1995; 282). This personal identity then "fathers agency", as agents are "the agents of the socio-cultural system into which they are born"; however, this involves a distinction between 'corporate agents' and 'primary agents' (Archer, 1995; 255). 'Primary agents' do not express interests or organise for their strategic pursuit, yet everyone can be considered an agent as "the similarities of response from those similarly placed can generate powerful, though unintended, aggregate effects" (Archer, 1995; 259). 'Corporate agents' on the other hand are those who have articulated their interests and have organised in order to attain them, therefore they are the ones who are involved in a concerted effort to re-shape the structural or cultural feature that affects their interests (Archer, 1995; 258). In turn, the kind of actors we can become is largely influenced by the kind of agents we are involuntarily placed as, this is because "certain opportunities and information are open to the privileged and closed to the non-privileged" (Archer, 1995; 277).
The final phase of an 'analytical history of emergence' concerns the form that new structural elaboration takes, and whether or not it is new elaboration (morphogenesis) or reproduction (morphostasis). The way that new social elaboration occurs is "through exchange transactions and power relations" (Archer, 1995; 296). Archer employs a quasi-weberian understanding of social stratification in her discussion of social change, as all processes of exchange and power necessarily "involve the use of resources, namely political sanctions, liquid assets and expertise" (Archer, 1995; 297). The 'raw bargaining power' of primary agents depends upon their access to resources as conditioned by their involuntaristic placement in the social structure; essentially those with a higher access to the resources outlined above will have more bargaining power (Archer, 1995; 300). However, Archer emphasises that the crucial relationship is between the distribution of interest groups and the availability of the resources; if the concentration of resources is high then there will be fewer groups in society who have access to them and therefore less groups who are in a strong bargaining position (meaning a "steeper gradient between elites and masses") (Archer, 1995; 298).
Raw bargaining power alone is insufficient to describe why some corporate agents successfully pursue their vested interests whilst others are impeded. The concept of bargaining power has to be supplemented with the relational notion of 'negotiating strength' (Archer, 1995; 300). Negotiating strength refers to the relationships between and amongst corporate agents in situations of power and exchange; a corporate agent has more negotiating strength relative to the corporate agent it is dealing with if it supplies a resource that the other cannot either, "a) reciprocate, b) acquire from an alternative source, c) coerce the other party into supplying, and d) cannot reconcile itself to dispensing with" (Archer, 1995; 302). Therefore the effect of bargaining power is to define what resources a corporate agent can bring to bear in the struggle to promote vested interests when confronted by the (second order) constraints and enablements arising from cultural emergent properties and structural emergent properties (Archer, 1995; 302).
Ultimately societal morphogenesis or morphostasis is the result of the interaction between third order emergent properties (the results of the results of the results of social interaction) (Archer, 1995; 327). However, this is not to imply that third order systemic properties are hypostatised entities; Archer insists that the cultural realm and structural domain are distinct from one another and the influence of one or the other on societal morphogenesis or morphostasis depends upon the relationship between the four different configurations possible if culture and structure can be perceived to interact in a state of either internal morphogenesis or morphostasis (Archer, 1995; 323). Archer maintains throughout that the linkages between the structural and cultural realms are situated in the process of interaction, therefore the elaboration proceeds in terms of exchange and power between agents (which protects against the criticism that structures are reified entities in the morphogenetic approach).
It therefore follows from the evidence presented here that the morphogenetic approach successfully provides the methodological accompaniment to Bhaskar 's critical realist ontology as it utilises the concepts of stratification and emergence in order to chart 'analytical histories of emergence' of particular social configurations. This means that the speculation as to the "tendential powers of generative mechanisms" is complemented by "an historical analysis of the concrete contingencies which intervened to produce particular outcomes" (Archer, 1995; 327). In the subsequent chapters the morphogenetic approach will be used to critique three famous sociological conceptions of power in order to illustrate the utility of both the realist ontology and the morphogenetic methodology.
The famous debate between C Wright Mills and Talcott Parsons regarding the 'correct' conceptualisation of power provides the quintessential example of the benefits to sociology of ongoing critical discussion. However, it shall presently be argued that the deficiencies of their approaches can be traced back to their ontological underpinnings. Both views will be explicated and then subjected to a realist critique, whilst the morphogenetic approach will be used to show that the substantive problems identified by Mills and Parsons are worthy of investigation.
In The Power Elite (1956) Mills developed the notion that in the first fifty years of the 20 th Century American society underwent a dramatic structural change, which resulted in the concentration of power in the hands of a minority whom he called 'the power elite'. Mills draws the historical comparison between the richest and most politically influential members of US society (and the economy and polity within which they operated) from different eras of US history, in order to show how the structures of power had become "centralised and enlarged and interlocking in the present era [1950s USA]" (Mills, 1956; 4). Mills goes on to describe how these enlarged and centralised structures of the economy, the political directorate, and the military have come to penetrate all the other institutions of US society, and consequently influencing the lives of all members of 'the mass population' (those who are not members of the elite) (Mills, 1956; 275).
His view of a power elite stems from his belief that these enlarged structures of 'the big three' have come to form an interlocking whole, and that the members of each of the elites are interchangeable; this has fostered the development of one 'power elite': a self-conscious social class whose interests are intertwined with those of the other members of the elite (Mills, 1956; 210). The elite reproduces itself through a process of recruitment that begins at 'the right' schools (Mills gives the examples of the appropriate private schools for elite membership), and carries on through Ivy league colleges and results in the eventual careers of men destined for elite membership, in which they characteristically hold positions in more than one of the structures that comprise the interlocking elite (Mills, 1956; 188). The members of the elite tend to have a common social background as this is crucial to the "easy intermingling" which characterises the interaction between members of the elite, and it is in these small scale social milieux that the common psychology of the elite is passed on to new members who learn the art of impersonal decision making and the intimate sensibilities of elite membership (Mills, 1956; 178).
It was in response to these claims by Mills that Parsons began to reveal his own concept of power, which marked a break from his conceptualisation of it in his early works (such as The Structure of Social Action in which he accepted the 'traditional' view of power). In his essay 'The Distribution of Power in American Society' (published originally in 1960) Parsons develops a critique of Mills' The Power Elite, in which Mills is criticised for viewing power as a "zero-sum concept" whereby there is a fixed 'amount' of power to be 'held' by an individual or a group, which necessarily means that one group holds power to the extent that another group ("the outs") does not (Parsons, 1968; 219). Parsons declares that conceptualising power in this way confines Mills to exclusively discussing instances where one individual or group "has power over other" (Parsons, 1968; 219 original italics).
Parsons on the other hand, wanted to argue that the concept of power should refer to instances where actors had the "power to make authoritative decisions" (Parsons, 1968; 220 my italics). It is useful to quote Parsons at length here:
In this oft quoted passage Parsons shows how he has situated power within his wider conceptual framework termed 'normative functionalism' and tied it to the conceptions of generalisation and legitimation. By 'generalisation' it is meant that he conceptualised power as a symbolic medium through which authoritative decisions made by those who occupy position of power are implemented in order to further collective goals (Parsons, 1968; 362). Decisions are deemed 'legitimate' because they are 'authoritative'; for Parsons, power resides in positions within the political system that have legitimate authority (Parsons, 1968; 372). By this he meant that power is the facility for the achievement of collective goals because the members of a society 'agree' to legitimise leadership positions; they do this by giving such positions a mandate to develop and implement policies to further the goals of the system (or society) as a whole (Parsons, 1968; 373). Therefore, power is directly derivative of authority (as this is the institutionalised legitimation which underlines power). Consequently, for Parsons what is important is not the amount of power 'possessed' by individuals, but the amount of power 'generated' by the system which would ultimately be beneficial to all, as the more power that leaders have at their disposal, the greater their mandate for implementing changes that would further society 's collective goals; of course for Parsons society 's collective goals depended upon the common value system, and in America he conceptualised this as 'instrumental activism', in which the main goal was the furtherance of society 's economic productivity (Giddens, 1992 [1968]; 179).
In spite of the manifest differences of these two conceptions of power, both contain features that are consistent with the realist perspective and the morphogenetic methodology. Mills' use of an historical approach to assessing how a group substantively changes over time reveals he has an understanding of the diachronic nature of emergence, and that he resists falling into the trap of nomenclature, in which groups who have the same name (such as 'the working class') are considered to be qualitatively the same (despite the clear differences between 'the working class' of the early 18 th Century and the 21 st Century) (Archer, 1995; 74). Parsons, on the other hand, did acknowledge the existential intransitivity of social structures (as the political system of Parsons' conception existed independently of the human knowledge of the system).
However, these consistencies with realism are only partial, and it is the argument of this chapter that the deficiencies of these two conceptions of power are essentially ontological in nature. Neither Mills nor Parsons adopted the ontology of 'analytical dualism' (in which the 'people' and the 'parts' of society are conceptualised as distinct strata, which allows their interplay over time to be examined). For Mills, this means that he essentially denies causal efficacy to the social structures of the three domains of the power elite; as Parsons insightfully points out, "the power elite is free from the 'checks and balances' associated with our political system.... and has been freed from the historic restraints of our society" (Parsons, 1969; 205 my italics). Although Mills contends that the ability of the elite to wield power is dependent upon their "occupation of the command posts of society" once they are the incumbents of these posts the elite is free to act as they choose (Mills, 1956; 3); consequently, Mills offers no discussion of how the structural and cultural context conditions their actions, whilst their actions again contribute to the elaboration of new structures.
This points to the key criticism of Mills, and why the similarity between his conception and that of realism outlined above remains only partial. Mills' conception of the diachronic emergence of the power elite ends with the emergence of the power elite. Again, Parsons offers an insightful contribution as to why this is; he describes how Mills has a prior commitment to a "utopian conception of an ideal society in which power plays no part at all" and a fundamental mistrust of capitalism which means for him "the power elite is bringing the capitalist evil to a climax" (Parsons, 1969; 224 my italics). Throughout The Power Elite there is a tone of finality to Mills' discussion of the development of American society, and the only consideration of what new structural elaboration and social configurations may arise are implicit in the continued consolidation of the power elite, meaning that there will be no new elaboration (and this is consistent with Parsons appraisal with Mills' value commitments). For the realist, the actual form society takes is an unintended consequence because it is the combined product of different outcomes pursued simultaneously by different groups (Archer, 1995; 91). The implication of this for Mills is that he over-emphasises the ability of one group in society to shape society in its entirety, as he argues "elites have the unique ability to smash one structure and set up another in which they enact quite different roles" (Mills, 1956; 24-25). Therefore, Mills' position is untenable from the realist perspective as he makes no attempt to link up cycles of development with posterior developments (although he does discuss the anterior social context) and he denies the causal efficacy of all 'primary' agents, and any 'corporate' agents who are not members of the elite, in addition to denying the relative autonomy and causal efficacy of social structures.
Many of the criticisms that can be made of Parsons' conception of power are consistent with the criticisms of collectivism outlined earlier, in which agency is reduced to the status of the epiphenomenal. Parsons is guilty of "making present-tense distinctions between roles and incumbents" which reveals how he does not conceptualise the 'parts' and the 'people' of society as analytically separable; this is so because analysing their interplay over time is only possible if they are separate entities, and Parsons makes no allowance for the fact that many roles (such as those in the political system) pre-condition who is eligible to fulfil them (Archer, 1995; 71). The Parsonian conception of power precludes the notion that different groups of agents have different vested interests to pursue because of their involuntaristic placement within the social system (or of the vested interests they acquire with roles that they come to fulfil) because it refers only to the  'societal goal', and this is predicated upon viewing society as essentially stable. Therefore Parsons makes no allowance for the way that social reality is stratified and that agents and structure interact over time and are both reformulated through this interaction; what Parsons presents is an essentially static view of societal development. Although the purpose of power is presented as dynamic (as it allows the furtherance of collective goals) Parsons' conception ultimately precludes the possibility of new social and structural elaboration as agents are denied the causal power to elaborate new social forms (societal development proceeds harmoniously under the direction of cultural values, yet Parsons offers no explanation as to why these cultural values develop). Giddens captures this deficiency in Parsons' conception when he describes how Parsons offers no explanation of how "legitimacy is achieved, and therefore consensus is assumed, despite the historical evidence that power can grow out of the barrel of a gun" (Giddens, 1992 [1968]; 187 original italics).
Therefore a similar criticism can be made of Parsons' conception of power as can be made of Mills', namely that neither successfully incorporates a conception of the causal interdependency of structure and agency as revealed by examining their interplay over time. However, this realist critique of the ontological foundations of these two conceptions of power can (and should) be supplemented by a discussion of the criticisms launched from within the ongoing debate about the concept of 'power' in the social sciences itself; unfortunately for the purposes of brevity these shall not be covered in the present work (although the reader is referred to Giddens (1968) for a discussion of Parsons, whilst Parsons' own discussion of Mills (1960) is still as insightful today as ever).
All that remains for this chapter to do is sketch a possible approach to the substantive problems raised by Mills and Parsons from the morphogenetic approach (as this is the ultimate function of a methodology, to provide a framework with which to analyse substantive sociological issues). The substantive problems identified by Mills was that a monopoly was developing between the most prominent figures within the economic, political and military domains over the access to decisions which had consequences on a national scale. The morphogenetic approach describes this kind of situation as one in which both the cultural and structural domains are in a state of morphostasis; therefore a sociologist who is using analytical histories of emergence would seek to empirically reveal the contingencies that contributed to the lack of articulation of an alternative set of ideas, or of an articulated interest group within a society. They would therefore have to chart the progression from the initial social context confronting the agents who have become dominant, through the process of interaction that grouped the agents into the groups that became dominant and elaborated the structure that reinforced their dominance.
The substantive area implied by Parsons' conception would be how a particular political structure came to embody the legitimate authority that is representative of the ideal workings of western democracy. However, an analytical history of emergence of these structures would discuss how individuals as active social agents come to develop their own vested interests in the positions of the political system, and would therefore have to discuss whose activities the particular form of structure were dependent upon, and when. Therefore the results would most likely yield conclusions that are incongruent with Parsons' implication that the political structure is a direct reflection of society 's underlying collective goals, as the particular form a structure takes is the result of interaction between competing interest groups.
The above critique was intended to show how two expositions of one of the most familiar concepts within the social sciences were susceptible to criticism based upon their misconceptualisations of ontology. If the matter was left here then one could appreciate Cruickshank 's concern that sociology is in danger of losing its critical nature, as the only clarification of concepts would be to align them with the principles of realism. However, the matter does not end here, and it shall presently be argued that sociology is, and always shall be, a necessarily critical endeavour.
In order to argue that the critical discussions inherent in sociology are not threatened by the ascendancy of the critical realist ontology one must show that these discussions are not entirely derivative of ontological differences. It is the argument of this chapter that the familiar concepts already existing in social science can be ontologically corrected, yet critical discussions will also take the form of contesting the parameters of such far reaching concepts, and debates will continue over which phenomena should be conceptualised in these terms. This argument will take the form of an exposition of Lukes' 3-D view of power, a critique of his concept from the realist perspective, and then finally a consideration of the other kinds of critical discussion that his concept has generated.
In his short book Power: A Radical View (1974) Lukes developed his 3-D concept of power. Essentially, the 3-D view of power is concerned with establishing that one agent, A, (whether they are an individual or a collectivity) affects another agent, B, in a manner contrary to B 's interests (Lukes, 1974; 24). Politics is crucial for Lukes' argument as he believes A does n't exercise power over B simply through having the greater ability to effect their own will in a conflict situation, but by being able to shape B 's very wants, presumably through ideological distortion (Lukes, 1974; 23). Consequently, the political sphere is of central importance to this abstract conception as it is the key site in the decision making process of society, which means agents who can wield political power will have the greater ability to disseminate an ideology than an agent in any other sphere. In light of this, political power (or power in the political sphere) is the only form of power discussed throughout Lukes' work.
It is fundamental to Lukes' conception that one agent possesses power and has 'power over' another agent who does not posses power (Lukes, 1974; 31). This shows that he gives primacy to the agential potential of agents, as instances where power is exercised are the result of choices made by A (the possessor of power) which are in their own interests and which facilitate B acting in a manner that is contrary to B 's own interests. This notion of choice is crucial to Lukes' perception, as he believes instances where power is exercised are derived from an agents 's decision and not because the instances are structurally determined; he elaborates this by arguing that the instances where power is exercised can only be identified (and therefore differentiated from instances of structural determinism) when "it is in the exerciser 's or exercisers' power to act differently" (Lukes, 1974; 55, original italics). Therefore, this shows that Lukes argues power rests solely in agency because power itself is a commodity that can be exercised (or not exercised) in a manner that is dependent upon the exerciser 's or exercisers' will. For Lukes power should be understood as the latent conflict of interests between the interests of those who exercise power and the "real interests of those they exclude" (Lukes, 1974; 25 original italics). Consequently, instances where power is exercised are constructed by the discrepancy between the interests of A and the 'real interests' of B, meaning that the relation is defined by A 's concealing of B 's 'real interests' (Lukes, 1974; 25). Therefore, B is invariably disadvantaged whenever power is exercised, even if B is unaware of it.
The concept of 'intentionality' is also central to the realist position; in fact Bhaskar went as far as to describe it as the "sine qua non" of the potential problem of naturalism (Bhaskar, 1989; 173). However, in realist terms Lukes emphasises the agential character of instances where power is exercised at the expense of a detailed understanding of the influence of structure. It is insufficient merely to state that 'the political sphere' is the key decision making site for society, and is therefore central to the exercise of power. This in no way accounts for the processes in which different agents come to occupy the positions within the political sphere, and consequently what is lost in Lukes' conception is how A becomes A in the first place; or why the political sphere has developed in such a way that it has come to embody the 'real interests' of those agents who have become A. Additionally, realism takes issue with Lukes' conceptualisation of agents as agents of the cultural system. Lukes gives no account of the processes of interaction that generate a situation in which 'ideological distortion' is possible. Lukes' conception of B denotes only one configuration of the cultural system, and that is morphostasis where there is no articulated alternative to the ideology of the cultural elite, whose vested interests are represented by the cultural system.
Therefore, Lukes' conception is open to ontological revision as it focuses exclusively on the influence of agency in instances where power is exercised, and cannot give any description of the way that structure and agency interact to condition who the interest groups represented by A and B are, or why the political system is structured to reflect the interests of A, or even if agents who comprise A actually acquire their interests due to their embodiment of the roles within the political sphere. Although these realist criticisms are pertinent, it would be misleading to contend that ontological grounds are the only grounds upon which a concept can be contested.
In the second edition of Power: A Radical View (2005) Lukes admits that many of the valid criticisms of his conception of power stem from the way that he subsumes all of the possible applications of the concept of 'power' into his totalising 3-D view (Lukes, 2005; 109). He acknowledged that power should be conceptualised as a dispositional concept (which means it may or may not be exercised); he takes on board the valid assumptions of Parsons' conception, in which 'power over' (or as Parsons' would describe it, 'power to') others may be productive for all and authoritative, and actually compatible with dignity (Lukes, 2005; 109). Consequently, Lukes is led to redefine his conception with a higher degree of analytical specificity; instead of using the generic term 'power' he argues that the 3-D view should be defined as "securing the consent to domination of willing subjects" (Lukes, 2005; 108). Therefore, in the time between the publications of Power: A Radical View 1 st edition and 2 nd edition there emerged an extensive body of critical discussions regarding the correct definition of Lukes' concept of power, which thus aided in the development of other conceptions of power as the different facets of social reality that it could be applied to were delineated. These contributions to the critical dialogue of power were not derived from the ontological misconceptualisations outlined above.
The critical dialogue of Lukes' 3-D concept of power essentially turned on the issue that drives much of the critical dialogue in sociology: the explanatory purchase of a concept. It has been shown above that this is both an ontological matter, but also a conceptual one. Bhaskar has shown that there are "rational criteria for judging some theories and concepts as better and more explanatory than others" by which he means that if one concept can explain more on its terms than another can on its own terms then the first concept has greater explanatory power and is therefore superior (Bhaskar, 1986; 43). Consequently, if the concepts of sociology were subjected to a realist critique and were then re-stated in realist terms, there would still be critical dialogue that was beyond mere definitional squabbles; the very explanatory power of the concepts we employ is at stake, and given the nature of our subject matter these debates cannot help but be ongoing, as social reality is unpredictable and ever changing.
The discussion of power concludes with a statement that reaffirms that the critical dialogue of power is not merely an ontological issue: power is (as Lukes describes) an 'essentially contested concept' (Lukes, 1974; 20). By this he means that a conception of power is necessarily tied to further background assumptions that are not only ontological and epistemological but also moral and political. A concept of power necessarily relates to contested and political features of social life as it invariably involves the disadvantage (in one form or another) of an individual or group. As Giddens points out, "power has a necessarily hierarchical character" (Giddens, 1992 [1968]; 184). The final word on power of this dissertation is to boldly state that the critical discussions of the concept of power cannot be entirely reduced to matters of ontology as a concept of power is always related to a concept of interests. The 'interests' of the agents involved are either explicitly declared or implied in any concept of power advanced in sociology to date. It is the contention of this dissertation that discussing 'interests' necessarily precludes the reduction of discussions of power to solely ontological issues as there is an element of moral judgment in determining how 'interests' are to be calculated or conceptualised.
This dissertation concludes with a critique of the main points of the recent article 'A Tale of Two Ontologies: an Immanent Critique of Critical Realism' by Justin Cruickshank. It will be argued that Cruickshank depicts sociology as in danger of losing its critical character if the 'hegemonic' project of critical realism to conceptually re-tool the sciences is successful, and that ontological debate should continue in terms of 'critical discussion' because there can never be a 'one true' definition of social reality. It will also be shown how Cruickshank has argued that Realism has developed two mutually-exclusive ontologies in order to dodge the 'epistemic fallacy'. The above assertions by Cruickshank will be criticised through a defence of the realist ontology and in terms of the certainty of the continuity of critical dialogue within sociology.
Cruickshank 's main reservation with realism is the perceived "tension concerning the definition of ontology" it employs (Cruickshank, 2004; 567). He states that the realist ontology refers to both the transitive and intransitive domains. However, in order to avoid the epistemic fallacy (in which statements about ontology (reality) are transposed into questions about epistemology (knowing reality)) one would "have to step outside of transitivity....... and assume a God 's eye view in order to know the essential features of reality beyond our knowledge" (Cruickshank, 2004; 568). However, he argues that the possibility of this is tantamount to 'metaphysical dogmatism' in which it is claimed that it is possible to know a realm of ultimate reality which is beyond knowledge, hence "the aporia that is generated by the realist project" (Cruickshank, 2004; 581). Therefore, realism fails in its 'hegemonic project' of re-tooling the sciences as its contention to "provide the definitively correct definition of an ultimate stratum of reality" must fail, as this is intrinsically impossible (Cruickshank, 2004; 581). However, Cruickshank refuses to dismiss realism altogether, and claims that it should be conceptualised as contributing to the ongoing debate regarding the status of ontology, as "ontological definitions are fallible and situated in the transitive domain" (Cruickshank, 2004; 582). Therefore, critical realism should not be conceptualised as an 'infallible' ontology, but rather as one perspective among others that constitute the transitive domain.
Cruickshank 's conclusions will be criticised as they are predicated upon the way he collapses the entire realist philosophy into a conception of 'ontology', and because it is in the nature of theorising about ontology that there can be no critical discussions based upon 'dialogic immanent critiques'. It was shown in chapter one that Bhaskar does insist that realism is located within the transitive domain, because realism is a human argument and therefore fallible. Bhaskar does not deny that philosophical knowledge (as a human argument) is necessarily historically contingent, essentially transformable, and fallible. With this in mind, realism is free to speculate as to the nature of reality, and in realist terms there are two domains, the intransitive and the transitive. It is from within the transitive domain of the production of knowledge and philosophy that realism has declared that the existence of an intransitive domain is the necessary precondition for scientific enquiry. Bhaskar successfully claims (through his immanent critique of empiricism) that realism is "uniquely consistent with the historical emergence, practical presuppositions and substantive content of the sciences" (Bhaskar, 1989; 170). Therefore, the validity of the realist approach is contingent upon "the belief-worthiness or credibility of science" and, at this point in time, "most of us are inclined to tip our hand with science" yet Bhaskar acknowledges that science itself "may come to be replaced by some other cognition" (Bhaskar, 1989; 171). The implications of this for Cruickshank 's misgivings about the realist 'ontologies' is that he confuses the realist ontology with its epistemology, and therefore realism is not guilty of committing its own epistemic fallacy.
It therefore follows from this that realism is right to declare that its ontology is the correct definition of reality whilst science is the accepted form of cognition. This has implications for Cruickshank 's argument that there can be no one true ontology, and therefore realism should only contribute to the critical discussion of ontology in the form of a dialogic immanent critique (as this would facilitate the ongoing critical and constructive dialogue about ontology). It would appear that Cruickshank does not accept the mutual constitution of description and explanation in science; Archer has shown us in her immanent critique of the alternative ontologies available in social science that "what social reality is held to be also is that which we seek to explain" (Archer, 1995; 17 original italics). Therefore, it must be asked, if realism has provided a successful immanent critique of the alternative ontologies, what is to be gained from entering into a dialogic immanent critique of those ontologies? Due to the direct link between explanation and description it is hard to see how immanent critiques regarding ontology can be anything but 'monologic', in which they pull apart the theory that they are critiquing because of the inherent internal inconsistencies. Ontologies conceptualise reality in a certain way that necessarily excludes and contradicts alternative ontologies, if this was not so then there could be no consistency between description and explanation, or theoretical underpinnings and social analysis, in short, the tri-partite link between ontology, methodology and practical social analysis would be unsustainable if the ontology lacked the conviction that its conceptualisation of reality was correct. Therefore, as Archer has shown that the alternative ontologies of individualism, collectivism and elisionary theorising are incorrect as they cannot maintain this link, it must be concluded that realism is correct in pursuing its 'hegemonic' project of re-tooling the social sciences with a correct ontology.
However, as has been stressed throughout this dissertation, this will not result in the loss of sociology 's critical character as sociology will continue to be 'essentially contested' and the correct conceptualisation of social phenomena will be fought over vigorously by sociologists with different political and moral convictions (even if they do accept the realist ontology as correct!) for many years to come.
The aim of this dissertation was to describe how realism has offered sociology a logically coherent ontological perspective from which to begin its theoretical and empirical studies. The alternative ontologies traditionally available in sociology have been assessed and dismissed through a process of immanent critique, as each was revealed as unable to uphold the tri-partite like between ontology, methodology, and practical social analysis. Through a discussion of three famous expositions of the concept of power it was shown that sociological concepts would benefit from being reconceptualised in terms compatible with the realist ontology. However, it was also shown how 're-tooling' the social sciences does not represent a threat to the critical character that has generated the rich diversity of concepts, studies and theories. This is because there are relationships between the concepts themselves that cannot be reduced to issues of ontology, whilst sociologists themselves will never be 'programmed' by their ontological understanding and will always have the scope to explore their own moral and political convictions.
In light of the convictions of this dissertation it can legitimately be asked, what would a realist sociology look like? If sociology accepted the realist ontology in toto, then it would certainly have to cede any claims to possess predictive powers. Sociology would be a discipline solely concerned with the emergence of the phenomena which generate the substantive problems we have become accustomed to theorising: the consistent prevalence of discrimination, the structurally conditioned disadvantages of minority groups etc. Although sociology is concerned with these issues already, the comprehensive understanding of the interplay between structure and agency provided by the realist ontology would allow sociologists to make firm recommendations for modifications of institutions, or of group formation, which would ultimately contribute to the project of 'emancipation' which is for Bhaskar at the heart of the sociological endeavour.
It is also the contention of this dissertation that the production of knowledge about social phenomena (however corrigible and transitive it is) should not be without some purpose other than for its own sake. Sociology no longer occupies a strategic position in relation to governmental social policy, as it has been replaced with focus groups and quasi-academic 'think tanks'. This relegation of sociology to the margins of actual social life is a trend that should be fought vehemently from within the discipline; sociologists must have the conviction that they have a useful contribution to make to the actual constitution of the societies within which they are located. Therefore, the final word on the idea that realism can conceptually re-tool the social sciences, is that it would allow us 'to get our house in order', and consequently provide us with a solid platform from which to develop the contribution to society (and not simply the academe) that it is incumbent upon us to make.
