The manufacturing of motor vehicle industry in the England can be considered to be in a rising star stage with respect to the market adoption graph. Market adoption of motor vehicle is still increasing. According to sales figures from EIU (2004) the production of non commercial cars have been rising steadily since the 1980, except for a slight slump at the year 1992 that could be attributed to external factor such as high pricing or interest rates.
Peugeot is listed with the primary code under the UK SIC (2003), 3410 - Manufacture of motor vehicles (VL - Very Large Company), and other code 5010 Sales of motor vehicles. Its primary activity is to assemble and distribute motor vehicles, parts and accessories.
According to the FAME database (2004), there are a total of 505 companies that is competing under the SIC code 3410 in the UK and Ireland. Ford Motor Company Limited is the market leader in the industry in terms of turnover. Its latest turnover is GBP7443000 followed by VAUXHALL Motor Limited at GBP3574800. Peugeot Motor Company PLC has a latest turnover of GBP2071400 which place it 5th in the market. The firms that are competing in this industry consist of 24 very large firms, and the rest are medium to small size firms.
Ford has a market share of 15.6%. This can be considered a near monopoly by UK government standards.
Peugeot on the other hand has 8.2% market share.
The concentration factor of the industry based on the 2003 figures is C7 of 60%.
The 7 firms in decreasing market share are the Ford Group, GM Group, Peugeot, Renault, Volkswagen AG Group, Citreon and BMW group. 7 very large firms dominate the market. They account for more than 75% of the industry. They can be said to be in a oligopoly competition. Peugeot 's main competitor is Ford, GM and Renault. They are more likely to go for non-price competition like advertising and product differentiation to avoid price war.
However competitive pricing is the key to strengthening sales in this industry. According to the report by Mintel International Group Limited (2004), Consumers spending on cars grew in year 2001 excess of 10% due to the drop in prices as a result of pressure from the government. This means that the industry do compete on pricing among other things.
Firms also compete on Product 's Features such as:
Function.
Based on a survey of 25000 adults conducted by Mintel (2004), 25% of them agree that a car is only used as a mean of transportation. Thus this gives us a huge market for low cost, fuel-efficient cars.
Looks.
Consumers tend to expect high performance and other features in additional to looks.
Safety.
More than 57% of people agree that they want the latest safety technology incorporated into the car.
There appear to be no observable collusion amongst the firms in the industry to keep new entrants from coming in. However there might be collaborative effort among firms to develop new standards such as alternative fuels to power future automotive.
Peugeot produce reliable, economical and aesthetically pleasing cars. This appeals them to the consumers.
The order winner for Peugeot 's car is it 's established brand name and bold looks. Their involvement in "sustainable development", not forgetting new technologies such as HDI engine.
Barrier of entry and exit in this industry is large. There 's a large amount of sunk cost involved when entering and leaving the industry. Examples are highlighted in the next page:
Economics of Scale.
Being a new set up, we will not have the advantage of economics of scale. Our production cost will be much higher. It will take a significant amount of time before we iron out all the problems in our manufacturing process and start producing at maximum capacity. This might affect our ability to compete in term of pricing.
Patents.
By assuming that we currently do not hold any patents, funds need to be allocated to purchase such patents from the owner. This is essential in order to incorporate technology such as airbags, automatic braking system, traction control, drive by wire system and so on into our products.
Advertising and Branding.
Brand image plays an important role in selling our products. Therefore if a new firm is to be set up to compete in the industry, a healthy budget must be allocated for a strong advertising campaign. In 2001 Peugeot spent 46.5 million pounds in advisement alone. (GMID 2004).
Initial Capital Costs to Start Up.
Cost for Research and Development.
To remain competitive in the industry, a continuous effort must be made in further research and development to improve our product.
Plant and machinery.
An estimated cost for setting up a new car manufacturing plant in the UK is 100 million pounds. (autointell news 2004).
Distribution network.
We also need to set up a distribution network in order to market our products to the masses. This takes time and expertise.
Nature of the product for Peugeot is mainstream cars that appeal to middle class consumers. The product life cycle for Peugeot typically last between 5 to 10 years during this time they will provide services and parts. Revision to design of cars is generally done on a yearly basis. Based on this fact, Peugeot will only have a certain degree of control over the price of their new cars, and it will also depend heavily on competitor 's reaction. They however do have a high level of control over the price of replacement parts and services.
The majority demand in this industry is elastic depending on the reaction of competitors but can be inelastic depending on which firm that we are talking about. For firms like Ferrari and Porsche, the demand for their products are inelastic because they cater for the high-end luxury market, and focuses on differentiation.
Peugeot tend to cater for low to medium end of the market, which is saturated with similar products from competitor. According to report by Minitel (2004), price drop in the automotive industry in 2003 sparked interest in consumers and stimulated increase sales. This means that demand to their products is elastic and somewhat depends on the real price.
According to data above Peugeot is doing quite well relative to other competitors of similar size. They manage an average 20.85% of ROTA and 4.4% of Return of Capital Employed over the course of 5 years.
There is a Normal Level of Profit in the UK automotive industry. This can be seen on the average profit margin of the product. Which is at 1.058% across the industry.
The profit margin for a monopoly product such as Microsoft 's Windows is as high as 10%. (Fame: 2004).
Peugeot 's 2.2% of Profit margin can be considered relatively high.
This industry has a dynamic efficiency. Not only competitors compete on price, but most important of all they also need to constantly deliver new innovation and design to satisfy the customer 's increasing needs, and derive manufacturing process that maximizes stock turnover and lower costs.
Based on the barrier of entries, market performance and market conduct this is the suggestion for a new entrant.
Based on the report on Minitel (2004), customers demands low cost and high quality vehicle, and less on brand name.
Therefore a new entrant should consider investing heavily in an efficient production system in order to minimize cost and maximize production. They should also play attention to incorporating practical functions into their products, together with all the safety features to suit current customer demands.
To cut out on the middleman cost, aim for direct sales either through the Internet or phone/fax. This will be our competitor 's main disadvantage, due to the fact that they will be anxious to main a good relationship with their franchise dealers. We need to do what Dell did in to automotive industry.
The growth in small cars market is strong. They account for 33.9% of all new car registration. We should focus on tapping on this segment of the market because it is not only cheaper to produce small cars but also it is not dominated by any of the very large firms. This means that we will not be competing head on in terms of branding.
We should keep in view Diesel and other technology in order not to lag behind our competitors. This mean spending in research and development that will help differentiate our product. (Minitel 2004).
In conclusion I would recommend acquiring the Peugeot. This will give us a competitive start to compete with the rest of the firms in the industry. This is based on the fact that the barrier of entry into the market is too huge for a new startup. As the market is already saturated with more than 500 automobile companies, consumers tend to look for established brands to base their purchases on.
To further satisfy the market needs, we can instead create a sub branding under Peugeot to cater for new product line such as minis. This gives consumers confidents on the new product, and does not distort the current Peugeot 's product lineup and focus.
On the other hand Peugeot has already established itself as one of the leading car brand in UK. They have the knowledge and technology to produce high quality cars.
They have implemented a good manufacturing plant in UK and established vital relationship with distribution network.
Peugeot 's heavy involvement in the rally scene not only gives them market awareness, but also let them transfer technology that is developed for their rally team into their products. Technology such as suspension and torsional rigidity differentiate their products from others.
Peugeot as a company is also doing very well. It has one of the highest ROTA and Return in Capital employed. Their profit margin is also increasing throughout the years. It is a healthy and growing company based on the high return in shareholder 's fund of 120%.
Source: Peugeot.com [2004].
