Transformation as a process of genetic exchange is widely used for producing transgenetic plants. Like many bacteria Agrobacterium possess DNA in the form of a plasmid in addition to its main genome. Under normal circumstances this plasmid contains the vir genes which causes part of the plasmid to self-replicate and insert itself into the genome of the plant host cells. This then alters hormone production and causes the development of galls or tumours in the plants. The bacterial T-DNA i.e. the portion of the plasmid that becomes integrated in the plant genome can be modified such that its incorporation does not cause tumour formation, but instead confers foreign genes (such as those for antibiotic resistance) upon the plants phenotype.
In our investigation we aimed to transform Arabidopsis plants with a genetic construct that allowed selection of transformed plants due to Kanamycin resistance and in addition allowed the uptake of the plasmid DNA to be visualised using the fluorescent reporter gene green fluorescent protein (GFP). As the uptake and incorporation of the plasmid DNA is a rare event we aimed to screen the progeny of plants subjected to the floral dip and select for stable transformants and hence calculate a value for transformation frequency.
The method for this investigation is described on pages five and six of the laboratory manual. There were no alterations to this method.
For the first part of our investigation i.e. the identification of plants transformed by floral dipping we used a UV lamp to determine that the control plant i.e. the plants that had not been transformed showed only red fluorescence characteristic of chlorophyll and in addition yellow spots in dying tissues where no chlorophyll was present. In contrast the transformed plants showed green fluorescence in parts of the stems and leaves, and in some cases the parts of the flowers were also green.
The fact that only the transformed plants fluoresced green enabled us to determine that the activity of GFP was as a result of transformation. In addition, by using the viral promoter 35S we were able to ensure that expression of the reporter gene could have occurred in any cell in the plant and therefore again the expression of GFP was dependant only upon successful transformation. In most cases it is probable that the uptake of the plasmid was only transient i.e. the GFP reporter gene did not incorporate into the host cells genome and therefore would be lost after cell division. However as we detected some green fluorescence in parts of the flowers there was the chance that the plants germ cells had been infected and therefore any progeny may carry GFP in their genomes.
The use of promoter traps in genetics has been greatly exploited in recent years. This technique involves transformation and random integration of reporter gene sequences that lack cis-acting sequences required for expression. Once inserted in the genome if the reporter gene has landed downstream of a promoter for another gene, this promoter can act upon the reporter gene to allow its expression. If during transposition the reporter gene lands within another gene hence disrupting and replacing its expression, then patterns of reporter gene expression can be used to identify which gene has been disrupted, where this gene is located within the genome and more importantly where this gene is expressed and how it affects the plants phenotype.
In this investigation we aimed to use the reporter gene Gus in a promoter trap to identify and characterise mutant plant phenotypes generated by transformation.
The method for this investigation is described on pages seven and eight of the laboratory handbook, we made no alterations to this method.
The three positive controls we used for this investigation were LAX2:Gus GL2:Gus and CHS:Gus in which we expected to find blue staining in the auxin transport tissues, trichome cells in the root and in all tissues respectively. As the seedlings we used for the investigation were so small, when we looked at our LAX2:Gus plants there was no staining as no germination had occurred. In the case of the GL2:Gus plants only a small part of the seed coat had stained blue, and for the CHS:Gus plants there was no obvious root staining however the hypocotyls and cotyledons had stained deep blue.
Similarly to the LAX2:Gus control plants, no germination had occurred in any of the plants in our three promoter trap lines (N4567, N4568 and N4554) and therefore no staining was observed.
The fact that the seedlings used in this investigation were so premature was a major limiting factor and therefore we would need to repeat this investigation using more developed plants before any staining of our promoter traps could be observed. The three positive controls (with the exception of LAX2:gus) although premature in their development showed the expected patterns of Gus expression. The reporter gene Gus had been inserted downstream of each of the specified promoters and therefore had been expressed in the same tissues as the native gene. It was because of this that Gus staining was observed only in the hypocotyls and cotyledons in our CHS:Gus plants, as CHS drives expression of chalcone synthase, an enzyme involved in protecting the plant from light damage, and this protein is expressed only in the tissues of the plant which are in contact with light (i.e. the hypocotyls and cotyledons). If we had used more developed LAX2:Gus controls then we would have expected to find staining in the auxin transport tissues as the presence of Gus downstream of the LAX2 promoter would have allowed expression of Gus in those tissues where the native gene is normally expressed. Our final control promoter GL2 drives expression of factors needed for trichome morphogenesis such as cell expansion and maturation of the cell. As the plants we studied were so small and lacked any roots, our results showed that only part of the seed coat was stained, most probably the cells which would later develop into the roots, as this is where trichome cells are found.
If any of our promoter trap plants had been developed enough to observe staining, then we would have been able to locate those tissues where Gus was being expressed. As a result we would then have been able to identify possible genes disrupted by the transposition and insertion of the reporter gene, and in addition we could have analysed the patterns of gus expression to determine the expression patterns of the disrupted gene. As we did not obtain any data for this investigation we would need to repeat the method set out on pages seven and eight using larger and more developed seedlings.
The protein luciferase is an enzyme which produces light in the presence of luciferin, ATP and oxygen. In our investigation transgenetic plants were produced which contained the reporter gene luciferin under the control of four different promoters, chs from which chalcone synthase is transcribed, the chlorophyll a/b binding protein promoter cab, phyA from which phytochrome A is transcribed and 35S, a viral promoter. As luciferase activity can be measured with great accuracy (due to the use of highly sensitive light-detectors), we aimed to quantify and compare the expression of luciferase in the roots and leaves of Arabidopsis when driven by the four different promoters.
One of the advantages of using luciferase as a reporter gene is that it is unstable and hence as the levels of active protein change over time, it can be used to study the dynamic changes of induction of transcription from a specific promoter. As previously mentioned the chlorophyll a/b binding protein is transcribed from the promoter cab, therefore using luciferase as a reporter gene transcribed from this promoter, we aimed to study the changing expression of the chlorophyll a/b binding protein over time after exposure to red light for five minutes.
The method for this investigation is described on pages nine and ten of the laboratory manual. There were no changes made to this method.
The first part of our investigation was to quantify the expression levels of luciferase driven from four different promoters in the roots and leaves of Arabidopsis plants that were either grown under constant light or adapted to the darkness for 48 hours. This data is shown in Figure 1.
The data in Figure 1 shows that the different promoters allowed different patterns of expression under the different conditions. When luciferase was transcribed from the CHS promoter, there was little expression in the roots or the leaves of plants grown in the light and no expression at all when the plants were grown in the dark. As shown in Figure 1, we only studied PHYA plants that had been grown in the dark and found that the level of luciferase activity was the highest of all the different constructs in the leaves of these plants. When transcribed from the promoter CAB the data in Figure 1 shows that there was no expression of luciferase in the roots of either the light or dark plants, however expression in the leaves occurred in both the light and dark grown plants with a greater pixel intensity generated in the light grown plants. Our final promoter 35S allowed similar expression of luciferase in the light and the dark, however the pixel intensity from the leaves was slightly higher than from the roots.
The second part of our investigation was to use the dynamic change in luciferase expression to study the response of the CAB promoter to light. We firstly studied the changing patterns of expression in wild type dark and light grown plants. This data is shown in Figure 2.
As shown in Figure 2, the plants grown in the dark did not show any change in luciferase expression (and hence luciferase activity) when there was no light stimulus applied. In contrast the plants which had been given a light stimulus at time zero showed a sharp increase in photon emission followed by a gradual decline back to the start level after sixteen hours.
Before we could screen for plants that were potentially mutant in their ability to respond to a light stimulus we had to investigate the range of responses in the wild type light plant. This data is shown in Figure 3.
The data presented in Figure 3 show that all the wild type plants were able to respond to light in a similar manner i.e. they all showed an increase in luciferase activity after the light stimulus at time zero, after which time the level of luciferase activity gradually declined over a period of between five and sixteen hours to the same level of activity as at time minus six hours. There was however variation between the twenty-four plants screened for example plant C6 produced the highest response but also had the highest starting photon emission.
Figures 4 and 5 show the mutagenised plants that we selected as being potentially defective in their ability to sense and respond to the light stimulus.
There are three potential light mutants shown in Figure 4, plants E6, G11 and F11. In comparison to the average wild type plant, plant E6 emitted a much greater number of photons at the start of the experiment. This value then declined steeply before rising again at time zero. Between five and sixteen hours the photons emitted gradually declined, such that by the end of the experiment their levels were approximately the same as at time zero. Plant G11 showed the same pattern in its response to light as the average wild type, however there was a much shorter decline in photon emission (between about three and five hours) after which time emission gradually increased again. Finally plant F11. This plant also showed a similar pattern in response to the light as did the wild type plant however similarly to plant G11 the decline in photon emission was shorter than that of the wild type (between about one and eleven hours), and after about eleven hours emission increased once again.
As shown in Figure 5, the amount of photons emitted by plant H12 was much higher than those emitted by the wild type plant. In addition whereas the emissions by the wild type plant only occurred after the light stimulus at time zero and then gradually declined back to the initial level, the amount of photons emitted by plant H12 gradually increased from the start of the investigation before declining between four and ten hours and then gradually increasing again.
As shown in Figure 1, the expression patterns of the reporter gene luciferase varied dependent upon the promoter from which it was transcribed. The viral promoter 35S was selected to allow constitutive expression of the reporter gene in all areas of the plant. However as viruses are obligate intracellular parasites and use the host machinery for protein synthesis, transcription from this promoter would have required items such as transcription factors which may not have been ubiquitous throughout the plant and in both light and dark situations. This may therefore account for why luciferase expression was higher in the leaves than the roots.
Our second promoter CAB is normally drives expression of the chlorophyll a/b binding protein, a component of photosystem II in the chloroplasts. As such, expression of this protein only occurs in the leaves of Arabidopsis i.e. where the light absorbing and photosynthetic apparatus of the plants are located and hence where this protein is needed. This is shown in our findings as when luciferase was transcribed from this promoter there was no expression at all in the roots. Our data also showed that there was more expression of luciferase in the leaves of plants grown in the light than those grown in the dark. This is because the chlorophyll binding protein is only needed when the plant is in light environments and therefore the plant has sensory mechanisms to ensure that when this is the case, greater expression of the binding protein or in our case the reporter gene luciferase occurs. There was however still a significant amount of expression from this promoter of the plants that were dark-adapted. Although our investigation did n't' allow us to determine why this occurred; however it may have been a result of the normal circadian rhythm of the plant. This process controls the plants 24 hour clock and so even when the plant was adapted to a dark environment, if the circadian clock was telling it that it was daytime and that there was the chance of a light environment developing then expression of this protein would still occur, however at reduced levels. This is shown in our findings in Figure 1.
The third promoter we studied was phyA from which phytochrome A, a red light photoreceptor is transcribed in wild type plants. This protein is part of the plants machinery to detect and integrate light signals into pathways that initiate and regulate plant growth and development. As a result, phytochrome A is predominantly found in the leaves, as these are the parts of the plant which will be able to detect the light if it is present. This is shown in our results as we found that when luciferase was transcribed from the phyA promoter this expression occurred at much greater levels in the leaves than in the roots. In addition, although we did not study the expression of luciferase when transcribed from phyA light-grown plants, we would expect to find that the levels of luciferase would have been much lower than in the dark-grown plant. This would have been because once in light, the expression of the natural phytochrome A protein is down regulated at both the transcriptional and post-translational levels, as there is no longer a need to detect whether or not light is present in the growth environment.
The final promoter we studied was chs. The data we obtained (as shown in Figure 1) showed that there was no expression of luciferase from chs in plants that had been grown in the dark, and in those grown in the light, there was higher expression in the leaves than in the roots. This is because the protein product normally transcribed from this promoter (chalcone synthase) is involved in the production of photoprotective pigments i.e. pigments that protect the plant from light damage. As a result, the plant only produces chalcone synthase in conditions where light damage may occur i.e. in light grown conditions and in addition modifies the expression of this enzyme such that tissues with a lesser chance of being exposed to light e.g. the roots express lower levels of chalcone synthase. As our reporter gene was being expressed in place of chalcone synthase, the data we obtained for this construct can be understood in this way.
The first part of our study surrounding the dynamic changes of luciferase expression after a given light stimulus Figure 2 shows that, as there was no change in light emission in the dark plant in comparison to the light plant, the changes luciferase activity occurred as a direct consequence of the light stimulus. The data in Figure 3 allowed us to determine the range over which the wild type plants responded to the light stimulus and as a result helped us to identify four potential CAB: luc mutants as their response differed from that of the wild type.
As described in the results section we identified four mutagenised plants which showed different patterns (from the wild type plants) in their response to a given light stimulus. It may be the case that these plants are mutant in their ability to respond to light and therefore they should be kept for further analysis. Plant H12 did n't show any light response and therefore may be a possible det mutant. There was also evidence that expression of luciferase from the CAB promoter in plant H12 was subject to regulation by circadian rhythms as the photons emitted declined and then increased again in the absence of a light stimulus. Plants G11 and F11 showed very similar patterns of luciferase expression, however the amount expressed from F11 was slightly higher. Similarly to plant H12, both G11 and F11 showed evidence that luciferase expression was being modulated by the plants normal circadian rhythms as although both plants responded to the light stimulus, the expression of luciferase increased again in the absence of a second light stimulus. Our final possible mutant, plant E6 showed evidence of a light response as the expression of luciferase increased after the light stimulus however it also showed evidence of circadian regulation as expression at the start of the investigation i.e. before the light stimulus was high.
Reporter genes are genes with easily assayable products for example lacZ which encodes for   -galactosidase. These exogenous genes can be inserted into different genetic constructs to allow the activity of different genetic factors such as promoters, repressors etc. to be studied. The expression of the gene product is measured to give an accurate representation of the activity of the factors influencing expression. In our investigation we used three different reporter genes, green fluorescent protein (GFP),   -glucoronidase (GUS) and luciferase (luc). There are advantages and disadvantages for using each reporter gene and it is essential that each factor is taken into consideration when planning an experiment and deciding which gene to use.
Firstly in comparison to many reporter genes, using GFP is relatively cheap. This is because there is no substrate needed and no specialised equipment is needed to observe the expression of the gene (only a UV lamp is needed). In addition the expression of GFP is easily observed under UV light and the visualisation of GFP is vivo allows changes in expression to be studied over time. On the other hand, as expression patterns are observed using UV light, specialist photographic equipment is needed to record these findings. In addition the red fluorescence of chlorophyll may interfere with the expression patterns of GFP.
Secondly unlike GFP, when using GUS patterns of expression can be observed using the naked eye and standard photographic equipment can be used to record this finding. On the down side however, the substrate needed to observe GUS expression is very expensive, the method needed to carry out this procedure is time consuming and there is no scope to analyse expression in vivo as the plants need to be killed before expression patterns can be observed.
Finally in contrast to both GUS and GFP using luciferase as a reporter gene requires using both an expensive substrate and expensive equipment. The use of this reporter gene does however have more positive aspects than the other two as it can be used to give a quantitative measure of gene expression and can also be carried out in vivo so any mutant plants can be used for further research. In addition the equipment used to measure luciferase activity is very sensitive and therefore even the expression from very weak promoters can be detected. Finally and most importantly, the enzyme luciferase is unstable and therefore it loses activity with a half-life of around thirty minutes. This therefore makes luciferase useful for studying dynamic changes in gene expression over time.
