High levels of avoidance coping have consistently been found to be predictive of problem drinking, which is highest among young adults. Students in particular have greatly elevated levels of drinking in comparison to the general population. One hundred undergraduates were asked about the way they cope with a high academic workload. Alcohol consumption was found to correlate positively with avoidance coping and negatively with seeking social support. Thus students who attempt to disengage and forget about their problems, and those who do not like to seek help or confide in others, are typically those with higher levels of alcohol consumption. Further research could investigate whether high levels of alcohol consumption avoidance coping significantly impact academic achievement.
When confronted by a stressful situation, an individual may react in any one of a variety of ways, ranging from attempting to actively address the problem and tackle it 'head-on', to merely forgetting about it and hoping it will disappear. These strategies, and many more in between, are encompassed under the broad heading 'coping', which can be defined as a person 's constantly changing cognitive and behavioural efforts to manage, in the sense of mastering, reducing, or tolerating, a troubled person-environment relationship (Folkman & Lazarus, 1986). There is a growing conviction that the ways in which people cope with stress affect their psychological, physical, and social well-being (Pearlin & Schooler, 1978), and it is for this reason that there has been an explosion of research into coping in the past few decades. Coping is typically regarded as a shifting process, influenced, to some extent, by personality characteristics, but largely determined by situation variables or role demands (Aldwin & Revenson, 1987). It is widely accepted that as the dynamics of a stressful encounter change, so do the particular types of coping strategy employed by an individual (Folkman & Lazarus, 1980), and thus modern coping research is characterised by an interest in the actual coping processes that people use to manage the demands of particular stressful events.
The cognitive theory of stress and coping defines stress as a particular relationship between the person and the environment (Folkman, 1984), and sees a person 's reaction to a stressful event as being largely influenced by their cognitive appraisal of the situation (Parkes, 1986). Cognitive appraisal is a process through which the person assesses whether a particular encounter with the environment is relevant to his or her well being, and subsequently evaluates various coping resources that can be used in response to a stressful appraisal of harm, loss, threat or challenge, such as altering the situation, accepting it, seeking more information, or holding back from acting impulsively and in a counterproductive way (McCrae, 1984). Coping is largely seen as having two major functions: regulating stressful emotions, (emotion-focused coping), and altering the troubled person-environment relation causing the distress, (problem-focused coping). The problem-focused coping dimension involves strategies that attempt to solve, reconceptualise, or minimise the effects of a stressful situation. The emotion-focused coping dimension, on the other hand, includes strategies that involve self-preoccupation, fantasy, or other conscious activities related to affect regulation, which allow the person not to focus on the troubling situation (Parker & Endler, 1996). Problem-focused forms of coping are thus used more often in encounters that are appraised as changeable, and emotion-focused coping in encounters appraised as unchangeable (Folkman, Lazarus, Dunkel-Schetter, DeLongis & Gruen, 1986). On the whole it has also been found that problem-focused coping strategies are more adaptive than are emotion-focused strategies. People who rely more on problem-focused, direct coping strategies tend to adapt better to life stressors and experience fewer psychological symptoms, since techniques such as problem solving and seeking information can moderate the potential adverse influence of both negative life change and enduring role stressors on psychological functioning (Holahan, Moos & Schaefer, 1996). In contrast, emotion-focused coping, and in particular the use of avoidant strategies, which involve denial and withdrawal and divert attention away from the realities at hand, is generally associated with psychological stress, maladjustment and behavioural and social dysfunction (Felton & Revenson, 1984). Coyne, Aldwin & Lazarus (1981), and Billings and Moos (1984), for example, both report results that indicate that reliance on emotional discharge and avoidance coping is associated with higher levels of depression.
However, the distinction between problem-focused and emotion-focused coping may not necessarily be this clear cut; not all instances of avoidant coping have negative health implications, and emotion-focused coping may have its benefits. For example, it can facilitate problem-focused coping by removing some of the distress that can hamper problem-focused efforts, and can also be used to alter the meaning of a situation, thereby enhancing the individual 's sense of control over his or her distress (Carver & Scheier, 1994; Scheier, Weintraub & Carver, 1986). In addition, a problem-solving approach, which focuses attention on the problem and exacerbates negative effect, is arguably an inappropriate approach to uncontrollable stressors, where strategies which involve avoidance, distance and cognitive distortion of the situation may in fact be more adaptive (Stone, Schwartz, Neale, Shiffman, Marco, Hickcox, Paty, Porter & Cruise, 1998; Felton, Revenson & Hinrichsen, 1984).
An area of growing interest which does indicate the potential negative implications of emotion-focused avoidance coping, however, is that of alcohol consumption and abuse, and it is within this area that the present study is focused. It is a widespread belief that alcohol serves to reduce tension and anxiety in an individual, with this theory being formalised in Conger 's tension-reduction hypothesis (1956, cited in Erickson, 2004). The tension-reduction hypothesis is supported by physiological evidence which indicates that alcohol functions to depress central nervous activity and leads to decreased cortical arousal, resulting in a decrease in tension anxiety (Schwarz, Burkhart & Green, 1978), and by other numerous studies that have shown that alcohol reduces both physiological and psychological responsivity to stressful situations (Stasiewicz & Lisman, 1995; Hull & Young, 1983; Levenson, Sher, Grossman, Newman & Newlin, 1980). However, it remains unclear whether the effect is a function of alcohol 's impact on tension per se or cognisance of the stressor (Hull, 1981), and some studies have found that alcohol actually serves to increase self-reported anxiety. Evidence for the model is therefore mixed.
Nonetheless, the suggestion that alcohol reduces cognisance of a source of tension and causes impairment of perception, thought, and nearly all aspects of information processing (Steele & Josephs, 1990) led to the investigation of a possible relationship between alcohol consumption and coping style. Substance use is posited to assist coping by providing distraction from problems, and diverting attention temporarily from unpleasant self awareness (Hull, 1981), and since alcohol is widely believed to possess a range of properties that facilitate problem avoidance (e.g. helping to forget one 's problems, decreasing negative mood), drinking seems especially likely to be used as a problem avoidance strategy and thus to be positively related to other avoidant coping strategies (Moos, Brennan, Fondacaro & Moos, 1990). Social learning theory proposes that people who exhibit abusive patterns of drinking differ from 'healthy' drinkers in their ability to cope with the demands of everyday life, and that deficiencies in more adaptive coping skills may predict the use of drinking as a coping mechanism (Cooper, Russell & George, 1988). People who display dispositions to deny and disengage from stressful problems (those who demonstrate avoidance coping) are thus hypothesised to be especially vulnerable to hazardous levels of alcohol use and alcohol related problems (Cantanzaro & Laurent, 2004). In accordance with this theory, a number of studies have found a positive correlation between an individual 's levels of avoidance coping and the amount of alcohol they consume. Fromme & Rivet (1994), for example, report that levels of avoidant coping resources were predictive of both increased frequency of alcohol consumption and increased volume of alcohol consumed, whilst Moos and his colleagues (Moos, Finney & Chan, 1981; Moos, Finney, & Gamble, 1982) found that individuals who relied on avoidant coping strategies that served to discharge or deny emotion were more likely to drink in response to stressful events. However, in contrast to these results Armeli, Carney, Tennen, Affleck and O'Neil (2000) found no relationship between avoidant coping style and alcohol consumption.
In the present study we were particularly concerned with the relationship between avoidance coping and alcohol consumption with respect to how university students cope with a high academic workload. It is widely acknowledged that university students represent a group of individuals who have unique drinking patterns (O'Hare, 1997). Drinking is a large part of university culture, and heavy or problematic drinking among students represents a major public health concern (Ham & Hope, 2003), with young adults aged 18-24 showing the highest rates of alcohol use and having the greatest percentage of problem drinkers in the population (Rabow & Duncan-Schill, 1995). However, at the same time university students are frequently confronted by stressful periods when they have a large amount of work to do, with assignments to complete, deadlines to meet and exams to prepare for. This poses a potential problem since their generally high levels of drinking suggest that university students may be particularly likely to exhibit avoidance coping in stressful situations, and thus, if alcohol fosters the use of avoidant coping to such an extent that more adaptive coping strategies such as active problem solving are excluded, it may lead to maladaptive functioning in important life domains such as academic achievement (Windle & Windle, 1996). A positive correlation between levels of avoidance coping and alcohol consumption may therefore suggest that individuals who drink more at university are more likely to deny the importance of work they have to do, perhaps leave it until the last minute, and subsequently exhibit lower grades than those who drink less and are subsequently more able to employ more successful problem-focused strategies.
Our study establishes new data in the area of coping because, to our knowledge, there have been no other studies focusing on avoidance coping and alcohol consumption specifically within the student population. Furthermore, our study differs from many others in the fact that we focus purely on one area - that of academic workload - when the vast majority of coping studies ask participants to specify a particular event of their choice that they found stressful, and analyse responses and coping strategies used in terms of whether the situation was appraised as changeable or unchangeable. We decided to structure our study in this manner because a general link between alcohol consumption and the use of avoidant coping strategies has already been established, and we therefore wanted to see if this general conclusion would apply to one specific situation with which all students are familiar. We feel this issue is of particular relevance since drinking alcohol and working are arguably the two main activities that dominate the lives of many students, and our results may provide preliminary evidence indicating that excessive alcohol consumption may be detrimental to the attitudes of students towards academic work.
In our study participants were provided with questionnaires comprising two sections. The first section contained 35 items selected from Folkman and Lazarus' (1985) Ways of Coping Questionnaire, commonly regarded as the standard measure for assessing coping strategies by psychologists in this field (Schwarzer & Schwarzer, 1996). Both problem-focused and emotion-focused items were included, with items from seven of the eight sub-scales identified by Folkman and Lazarus (1985). Several of the statements were rephrased in a manner more applicable to the specific study context. In the second section participants' drinking habits were assessed using the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT). Developed by Saunders, Aasland, Babor, de la Fuente and Grant (1993), the AUDIT is a 10-item self-report questionnaire measuring alcohol consumption and drinking behaviour. It is used as both a clinical and research screening instrument for hazardous alcohol consumption. The AUDIT has a maximum score of 40 with higher scores indicating more hazardous drinking, and has previously been used in a non-clinical population to discriminate heavy and light drinkers (Sharma, Albery, & Cook, 2001). In accordance with previous studies, we expected that heavy drinkers would exhibit more emotion-focused coping strategies, whilst problem-focused coping would be more prominent amongst lighter drinkers. Our experimental hypothesis was that higher levels of alcohol consumption would be correlated in particular with the greater use of avoidant coping strategies.
One hundred second year undergraduates from the University of participated in the study. Participants were aged between 19 and 21 and were both male and female. They were obtained by means of an opportunity sample.
Questionnaires were given out to each of the participants. The questionnaire consisted of two sections. The first section comprised 35 items extracted from the standard Ways of Coping Questionnaire (WCQ), with items from seven of the eight subscales identified in Folkman and Lazarus' 1985 study. These were: 1. Planful Problem Solving (e.g. try to analyse the problem in order to understand it better); 2. Seeking Social Support (e.g. seek sympathy and understanding from others); 3. Distancing (e.g. ignore it and turn to another activity to take my mind off things); 4. Wishful Thinking (e.g. hope a miracle will happen); 5. Self-blame (e.g. realise I brought the problem on myself); 6. Tension-reduction (e.g. jog or exercise); and 7. Self-isolation (e.g. avoid being with people in general). The 'planful problem solving' scale contains purely problem-focused coping items, the  'seeking social support' scale contains a mixture of both problem-focused and emotion-focused coping items, and the remaining five scales contain purely emotion-focused coping items.
Items were selected on the basis of relevance to the issue under investigation; no items from the 'positive reappraisal' subscale were therefore selected, since we did not feel this particular coping strategy was particularly applicable. The phrasing of some items was also changed slightly to ensure a close match between the stressful experience identified and the coping statements. The response format was a five point Likert rating scale ranging from 1, "strongly disagree" to 5, "strongly agree". Since some of the scales had more items than the others, the maximum scores for each scale differed, for example the 'distancing' scale had a maximum score of 55, whilst the 'tension reduction scale' had a maximum score of 15. Participants were asked to indicate the extent of their agreement with each statement as an action they typically undertake in a situation when they are faced with a high academic workload.
The second section of the questionnaire consisted of the standard, 10-item Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), a measure which aims to identify persons with hazardous or harmful alcohol consumption through asking questions relating to alcohol consumption, abnormal drinking behaviour, adverse psychological reactions to alcohol, and alcohol related problems.
A within subjects design was used in which participants all filled in the same questionnaire. Participants were initially provided with a consent form which detailed the nature of the task and made it clear that they were not obliged to take part in the questionnaire or complete any questions that they were uncomfortable with. Participants were provided with the experimenters' contact details in case they later wanted to withdraw their information. The experimenters were also equipped with the telephone numbers of relevant help lines and care organisations to give to participants in the unlikely event that the alcohol related questions subjected them to undue stress.
On completion of the consent form, participants were asked to think back to a time when they had a high academic workload and think about the feelings they may have and actions they may take in such a situation. They were given the phrase "When I feel under pressure from the amount of work I have to do I..." and the separate items from the Ways of Coping Questionnaire were then listed, with participants circling the most appropriate response to each statement. In the second section of the questionnaire participants were asked to complete AUDIT, by answering 10 questions regarding their typical drinking habits and behaviour. The resulting scores for each participant were then obtained by adding up the value of their responses to each sub-scale of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire, to obtain seven different scores, and calculating their overall AUDIT score.
Initial data screening using a boxplot indicated that there were four outliers in the raw data. One had a particularly low score on the 'planful problem solving scale', one on the  'seeking social support' scale, and the other two particularly high scores on the  'self isolation' scale. The data from these subjects was subsequently removed from the study due to the potential disproportionate influence they may have had on results obtained. All analysis was carried out with these outliers removed. There was no missing data in the data set.
The original Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test recommends a cut-off score of 11 as an indicator of hazardous alcohol consumption, so those scoring 10 and under are classified as 'light drinkers', whilst those scoring 11 and over are classified as 'heavy drinkers' (Saunders et al, 1993). Descriptive statistics for the mean scores on each sub-scale of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire using this cut-off score to identify heavy and light drinkers are therefore shown in Table 1.
Table 1 illustrates that heavy drinkers scored more highly on each of the sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire than light drinkers, with the exception of 'planful problem solving' and  'seeking social support'. This was the pattern of results that was expected, and fits the experimental hypothesis, since the five scales on which heavy drinkers scored more highly all contain purely emotion-focused coping items, whilst 'planful problem solving' and  'seeking social support' contain purely problem-focused coping items, and a mixture of problem and emotion-focused items, respectively. In some cases the difference in mean scores is marginal, for example in the 'tension reduction' scale, where the mean for heavy drinkers is only 0.04 higher than the mean for light drinkers; but in others it is quite noticeable, for example the 'distancing' sub-scale, which contains purely avoidance coping items, and where the difference in mean scores between heavy and light drinkers is 3.03, providing preliminary support for the hypothesis that heavy drinkers engage in significantly more avoidance coping than light drinkers.
The standard deviations are, with the exception of 'planful problem solving' and 'tension reduction', higher for heavy drinkers than light drinkers; however, for the most part the difference in standard deviations between the two groups is not large. Heavier drinkers thus simply appear to be slightly more variable in the extent to which they use particular coping strategies.
A correlation matrix indicating the inter-correlation between each of the sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire, and, most importantly, the correlation between scores on each sub-scale with the corresponding AUDIT score is shown in Table 2:
Table 2 illustrates that there are a number of significant correlations in the results obtained, consisting of both inter-correlations between sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire and correlations between scores on particular sub-scale with AUDIT scores.
Of particular interest to this study are the relationships between the 'planful problem solving', 'distancing' and  'seeking social support' sub-scales, where significant inter-correlations were obtained. Firstly, there is a significant negative correlation between the 'planful problem solving' and 'distancing' sub-scales; r (94) = -0.297; p   0.01, and a significant positive correlation between the 'planful problem solving' and  'seeking social support' sub-scales; r (94) = 0.205; p   0.05. Both of these correlations are as would be expected. The highly significant negative correlation between the distancing and planful problem solving scales, for instance, reflects the distinct nature of these scales in terms of their problem-focused and emotion-focused coping items. It would generally be expected that participants scoring highly on problem-focused coping would be unlikely to also score highly on emotion-focused coping, which is what the results indicate; as planful problem solving score goes up, distancing score goes down. The significant correlation between seeking social support and planful problem solving also demonstrates the fact that the items of the seeking social support scale can be regarded as having problem solving functions and thus these scales may be considered to be inter-related. Secondly, a further point of interest is the negative correlation between the 'distancing' and  'seeking social support' sub-scales; r (94) = -0.278; p   0.01, which indicates that those who are prone to avoidance coping are quite unlikely to seek support and help from others in an attempt to cope with the problems they are faced with. This again illustrates the dissociation between problem-focused and emotion-focused coping strategies.
However, the main area of interest in this investigation is the correlations between sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire and AUDIT scores, and Table 2 illustrates two such significant correlations. The first is a significant positive correlation between the 'distancing' sub-scale and AUDIT; r (94) = 0.268; p   0.01, which demonstrates that those who score highly on this scale, which measures avoidance coping in particular, tend to have higher scores on AUDIT and thus be heavier drinkers. In contrast, there is a significant negative correlation between the  'seeking social support' sub-scale and AUDIT; r (94) = 0.242; p   0.05. This demonstrates that those who are more inclined to seek social support in an attempt to help them cope with stressful situations are less likely to be heavy drinkers.
Scattergraphs demonstrating the correlation between AUDIT score and score on the 'distancing' and  'seeking social support' coping sub-scales are shown in Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1 depicts the positive correlation between AUDIT score and distancing score. Whilst there is quite a large amount of scatter on the graph, it is nonetheless possible to see quite clearly the trend for higher scorers on AUDIT, and thus heavier drinkers, to also score more highly on the use of 'distancing', or avoidance coping, strategies. The relationship between these two variables therefore appears to be quite strong, as well as having been revealed by the Pearson correlation co-efficient test to be highly significant.
Figure 2 depicts the negative correlation between AUDIT score and seeking social support score. Again, there is a considerable amount of scatter on the graph and it is arguably harder to detect the presence of a significant negative relationship between the two variables from the graph alone. This may be due to the fact that the maximum score on this sub-scale is only 15, resulting in less possible variation between participants in terms of their score and thus less potential for such a strong negative correlation to emerge. Whilst still significant therefore, this correlation does not appear to be as strong as that between AUDIT and distancing score, a fact which is confirmed by their respective co-efficient values.
The results obtained support the hypothesis posited at the beginning of the study, which stated that those with higher levels of alcohol consumption would exhibit more avoidance coping. A significant positive correlation was obtained between participants' scores on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test and their scores on the 'distancing' sub-scale of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire, the scale which is indicative of avoidance coping. In addition, a further significant result that was not originally hypothesised was obtained; that of a negative correlation between AUDIT score and score on the  'seeking social support' sub-scale. Finally, the heavy drinkers obtained higher mean scores on all of the sub-scales of 'emotion-focused coping' than the light drinkers, who in turn obtained higher mean scores on the 'problem-focused coping' sub-scales, demonstrating that heavier drinkers use more emotion-focused and less problem-focused coping strategies. The results therefore imply that, when considered in relation to academic workload in particular, a higher level of alcohol consumption is associated with a tendency to exhibit more avoidant coping strategies, and a smaller likelihood of going to others for help, whether this is emotional help in the form of seeking sympathy and understanding, or practical help in the form of asking a lecturer or tutor for guidance with work. This particular result replicates Karwacki and Bradley 's (1996) finding that greater social support seeking was related to lower alcohol consumption in women who had experienced interpersonal stressors, whilst the finding that greater alcohol consumption is associated with higher levels of avoidance coping is consistent with many other research findings which indicate that avoidant coping is associated with greater affective, behavioural and social dysfunction, and with alcohol and drug use behaviours (e.g. Cooper et al, 1988; Windle & Windle, 1996; Williams & Clark, 1998).
The fact that higher levels of alcohol consumption are associated with a greater prevalence of avoidant coping can, in part, be explained by the stressor-vulnerability model of alcohol use. The primary hypothesis of the stressor-vulnerability model is that individuals learn to use drinking as a coping response when they believe healthier means of coping are unavailable. Thus, individuals who have a tendency to exhibit high levels of maladaptive avoidant coping strategies and who are deficient in more active, problem-focused strategies are more likely to turn to 'drinking to cope' since they believe that healthier means of coping are unavailable to them (Cantanzaro & Laurent, 2004). These individuals are unable to confront the problem and deal with it directly by using problem-focused coping strategies; however, their high levels of avoidant coping strategies alone are not enough to take their minds off the problem, and so they will turn to alcohol as a further means of coping. This relationship is strengthened by positive expectancies about alcohol 's stress-relieving effects (Hasking & Oei, 2002).
However, it is admittedly difficult to determine the direction of the relationship between avoidance coping and alcohol consumption, particularly within a student population. Undoubtedly, some students may rely on avoidant coping strategies and the use of alcohol as a means of coping because they have deficits in other coping strategies; however, others - who are perfectly normal in terms of adaptive problem-focused coping strategies - may begin to use alcohol primarily because their peers are doing so, and this excessive alcohol consumption may itself lead to consequences such as the development of deficits in more adaptive coping. It is conceivable that the relationship between alcohol consumption and deficits in coping is therefore bi-directional (Britton, 2004). Increasing deficits in adaptive coping may increase reliance on the use of alcohol as a means of lowering drive level and reducing internal tension; however, even if alcohol is consumed primarily for social reasons, an increasing frequency and level of alcohol consumption may itself cause deficits in adaptive coping which previously did not exist. There is thus a theoretical paradox in trying to decide on the direction of causality in this relationship; substance use may itself be construed as a coping mechanism, but may also be a product of deficits in other coping mechanisms (McKee, Hinson, Wall & Spriel, 1996).
Nonetheless, both theory and research suggest that a reliance on avoidant coping can increase risk for heavy alcohol consumption. Avoidance types of coping are predicted to increase risk because the individual is not disposed to deal with problematic situations but rather to seek the path of least resistance toward restoring affective balance (Wills & Hirky, 1996). To the extent that a person tends to cope by denying the existence of problems, seeking distraction from unpleasant self awareness, and withdrawing from engagement with normative sources of reinforcement, then the path to substance use as a coping mechanism would be more likely, primarily due to alcohol 's proven ability to interfere with cognitive processes fundamental to self-awareness and to reduce negative self-evaluation following failure (Hull, Levenson, Young & Sher, 1983). Thus for individuals who typically try to cope with negative emotions through avoidance, alcohol 's mood-altering properties (e.g. its analgesic effects) may offer an attractive antidote for dysphoria (Cooper, Russell, Skinner, Frone & Mudar, 1992). It is therefore conceivable that the students in our study who had higher levels of alcohol consumption exhibit this pattern of behaviour primarily due to deficits in adaptive coping strategies, a resulting high level of avoidant coping, and a subsequent desire to escape from uncomfortable, troubling, or stressful events as and when they arise.
A potential explanation can also be offered for the observed negative correlation between level of alcohol consumption and the use of seeking social support as a coping strategy. Whilst there has by no means been as much research into this area as there has been into the area of avoidance coping, Karwacki and Bradley (1996) report that social support seeking may act as a possible protective factor against harmful levels of alcohol consumption or drinking-related problems. Theories of social support suggest that individuals are less likely to experience negative consequences from social stressors if they receive continued support from non-disrupted aspects of their social networks (Husson, 2003), and this is illustrated in a study by Snow, Swan, Raghavan, Connell and Klein (2003) who found that greater social support served a protective function by contributing to lower levels of stress and fostering greater use of active, problem-focused coping. Therefore, those individuals who do not like to go to others for support and are less inclined to share the negative feelings they are experiencing have less to buffer them against various environmental stressors, and subsequently at stressful times may be more likely to use avoidant coping strategies and furthermore turn to alcohol as a primary way of coping. This is highlighted by the significant negative correlation obtained in the results between the 'distancing' and  'seeking social support' sub-scales, illustrating that individuals who are high in social support seeking are low in avoidant coping strategies, and resultantly less likely to show high levels of alcohol consumption.
Overall, therefore, our results support the experimental hypothesis and indicate that there is a significant positive correlation between alcohol consumption and levels of avoidance coping; specifically, heavier drinkers exhibit more avoidant coping strategies than light drinkers. This general result has been reported in much previous research; however, what is of particular interest in our study is that it holds even when all participants were asked to consider the same specific situation, that of a heavy academic workload. This suggests that the relationship observed may be stable across many stressful situations that are familiar to all people, and in particular raises questions regarding the possible detrimental effect that a heavily avoidant coping strategy may have on academic achievement. While we did not investigate this in our study, it may have been interesting to ask participants to indicate the marks they received for all pieces of assessed work in the academic year up to the point of the study, and determine whether a high level of avoidance coping and related alcohol consumption leads to a poorer level of academic functioning; primarily due to the tendency to try and forget about work and put off doing it, combined with the negative impact that alcohol can have on one 's ability to concentrate and process perceptual information. Furthermore, it may also be of relevance to obtain data from other years within the university population. Our study focused on second year students for whom most work is quite important, contributing to their overall degree mark. In contrast, for many students the first year does not count, and is often the year of heaviest drinking and socialising, and thus it may be interesting to discover whether the same pattern of results is obtained for such students. It may simply be the case that overall alcohol consumption is higher among all first years, irrespective of whether they employ mainly problem-focused or avoidant coping strategies. Therefore the same pattern of results may not be obtained with first-year students.
Another area into which our study could be further extended is the realm of alcohol expectancies, which is another possible predictor of problem drinking. An outcome expectancy is a person 's estimate that a given behaviour will lead to certain outcomes (Bandura, 1977) and recently the role of expectancies in predicting alcohol consumption has received increasing attention. Grounded in social learning theory, expectancy argues that a person 's alcohol consumption will depend on the outcomes they expect to gain from drinking, for example relaxation, improved confidence, or improved sexual functioning (Hasking & Oei, 2002). Cantanzaro and Laurent (2004) for example, found that positive alcohol expectancies interacted with avoidant coping dispositions to an increased frequency of drinking to cope, increased alcohol use and greater alcohol related problems while Cooper et al (1992) reported that avoidance coping was related to problematic alcohol use among high- but not among low-expectancy individuals in their sample. The relationship between alcohol consumption and prevalence of avoidance coping may therefore be further mediated by such alcohol expectancies. This area may be of particular interest to study in a student population, since for many, university is the first time that they will engage in frequent, heavy drinking behaviours, and thus their alcohol expectancies may be different from older adults who are accustomed to particular patterns of drinking and are well aware of the effects that alcohol can have.
Finally, there are a few methodological issues that could be mentioned in the light of our study. Firstly, the fact that only one episode was analysed for each subject - that of a period of a high academic workload - meant that the extent to which the types of coping that participants employ are stable over different episodes could not be investigated. Thus the observed relationship between avoidant coping and alcohol consumption may have applied only to this one particular episode. However, the fact that many previous studies have uncovered a general relationship between alcohol consumption and avoidance coping suggests that this criticism is not particularly damaging to our study. Furthermore, the information was collected retrospectively, and all the data were self-reported, and it is common for the perceived importance of a particular episode and the way it is appraised to change over time (Parkes, 1984). Therefore, participants' responses and the extent to which they reported using particular coping strategies may not have been entirely accurate. However, for the most part we encountered few problems in carrying out the study and have confidence in the results we obtained.
The main implication of our study is, we believe, that concerns about the binge drinking culture that are now so heavily expressed within the media may be well justified. The relationship between alcohol consumption and avoidance coping is a complex one, with the direction of causality currently unknown. However, these is undoubtedly a significant relationship, and this may be of particular concern within the university population, where drinking is so often excessive. Many students are placed under great stress in their second and third years of university life in particular, and this stress, combined with deficits in adaptive coping strategies and the tendency to drink large amounts, even for purely social reasons, suggests that students may enter a vicious cycle where they become so heavily dependent on avoidance coping that they cannot confront their workload and fall further and further behind. This confirms that students need to be encouraged to use more efficient, problem-focused coping strategies, and perhaps be trained on skills such as time management and dealing with a heavy workload, especially when first entering university, since there is a large transition, both in terms of work and social relationships, from the secondary school or sixth-form college environments. Students should also be educated about the effects of drinking, and encouraged to view drinking perhaps as a primarily social activity, rather than an effective means of dealing with their problems.
A number of conclusions can therefore be drawn from this investigation. Firstly, in accordance with many previous studies, we can conclude that there is a significant relationship between increased level of alcohol consumption and greater use of avoidance coping strategies. Our results indicate that the general relationship between alcohol consumption and avoidance coping which has previously been reported can also be applied to more specific events, where participants are asked to think of a situation which has undoubtedly been present in all of their lives at some recent time, that of a high academic workload. The fact that this relationship was obtained even within a university population, where the vast majority of students have elevated levels of alcohol consumption when compared with the general public, implies that it may be a particularly strong one. Furthermore, we suggest that a greater level of alcohol consumption is related to a smaller likelihood of seeking support from or sharing negative feelings with others in times of stress. Those who use seeking social support as a coping strategy are subsequently more likely to use avoidance forms of coping. Our results therefore confirm the experimental hypotheses made at the beginning of the study and suggest that future research which investigates the potential relationship between students' academic achievement in relation to their levels of avoidance coping and alcohol consumption may be of particular interest.
