Previous research has more than adequately shown that the presence of others affects our behaviour (most influentially Allport, 1920; Zajonc, 1965). Specifically, studies have concluded that the competitive nature of human beings is provoked when in the company of other people (Triplett, 1898). This experiment aims to investigate how much of an increase in group size is necessary to make a difference to an individual 's performance. In this experiment, 60 participants took part in a task where they were asked to put eight sets of four words in alphabetical order. They did this either alone, in the presence of one other person, or in the presence of four other people, who also performed the task. A significant decrease in the amount of time taken between each of the three conditions as the group size increases was predicted, as well as a decrease in accuracy as response times decreased. The results were analysed using one way ANOVA, and showed a significant effect of speed but not accuracy as a function of group size. These findings could affect performances in a variety of capacities, including in professional roles and home and academic life.
The effect of the presence of others on individual performance, decision making and behaviour has been a major focus of research since the pioneering study of Norman Triplett in 1898. Substantial evidence since has illustrated that individuals behave differently when they are in the company of others than when they are alone (most notably Zajonc, 1965; Allport, 1920). This change in behaviour can be positive, yielding more productive results from the individual (Triplett, 1898; Zajonc, 1965) or negative, fostering apathy and using the members of the group to defer personal responsibility, or social loafing (Latane and Bibb, 1975). The presence of others on competitiveness and task performance in individual behaviour is the most extensively researched topic, and has been definitively traced back to the work of Triplett (1898). In one of his most quoted studies, he found that cyclists raced faster when they raced against other people than when they were alone. This gave rise to his dynamogenic theory, which proposes that the presence of others gives rise to competitive instincts. These studies held major implications for competition and competitive behaviour, and encouraged extensive further research on the topic (Aiello and Douthitt, 2001). Research on the effects of the presence of others surged after the work of Triplett (1898), as for decades, researchers tried to explain this phenomenon.
This began in 1920, when Floyd Allport coined the term social facilitation. He conducted an experiment based on one of Triplett 's earlier studies, and noted that children reeled in a fishing line more quickly when they were in a pairs condition than in an individual condition. Social facilitation focuses on the impact of social presence on individual performance (Aiello and Douthitt, 2001), and is one of the most effects most expounded when such effects occur in an individuals behaviour. Allport (1920) hypothesised that competition between people energises and improves performance, especially in motor tasks. Since then, Zajonc 's drive theory (1965) has emerged as one of the most popular explanations for behaviour, second only to the work of Allport (1920) and Triplett (1898). The theory suggests that the mere presence of others gives rise to instinctive arousal, which motivates performance and behaviour (Zajonc, 1965). This influential theory proposed that other people increase the general drive and activation level of the actor (Strauss, 2002). The concept of a mere presence effect was studied further, suggesting that individuals are affected even when an audience is only physically present, and is passive and unresponsive (Robinson-Staveley and Cooper, 1990; Schmitt, Gilovich, Goore and Joseph, 1986), and that the effect is more pronounced if the audience turns out to be incidental rather than if the participants are aware of its presence (Markus, 1978). The research of Guerin (1986), proposes that an element of self-presentation is involved when the individual is placed in a social context. He cites this as the main concern in individual performance. Evidence from Geen and Gange (1977), Zajonc, Wolosin, Wolosin and Loh, (1970) and Seta, Paulus, and Schkade (1976), shows that conservation of risk taking increased when participants perceived themselves to be in small groups than when they were alone. This illustrates the natural inhibition which arises from contact with others.
Later in 1978, Sanders, Baron and Moore put forward distraction-conflict theory, which suggests the provocation of attentional conflict, as both the activity at hand and the presence of co-actors compete for the person 's attention. This theory works on the assumption that others are distracting, so they are placed in a state of conflict which elevates drive. While this is not widely recognised as a drive theory, it still supports Zajonc 's basic contention. Baron (1986) developed distraction conflict theory further. He suggested that attentional conflict between the task at hand and the presence of others is a partial cause of effect on performance, but that distraction can occur for other reasons as well. He highlights the variability of the social facilitation effect, and states that while evaluative or competitive pressure can heighten social facilitation, mere presence effects can produce social facilitation effects even in the absence of such evaluative and competitive pressure. However, he does not believe that processes involved with social facilitation such as distraction and attentional conflict will invariably be influential and lead to drive like behaviour.
Such variability has lead to social facilitation research being questioned. Researchers have argued that social facilitation effects are firstly, not always produced, and secondly do not always occur as a function of people present. Blascovich, Mendes, Hunter and Salomon (1999) suggest it is the ease of the task that affects performance, not being in the presence of an audience. Their biopsychosocial model indicates that performance is only affected when a goal related challenge is threatened, whether this is real or perceived, regardless of whether other people are present. Henchy and Glass (1968), criticise Zajonc 's drive theory, and state that performance does not automatically change in the presence of co-actors, it only changes if the person is worried about being evaluated, that is they suffer from evaluation apprehension (Hogg and Vaughan, 2002). Laughlin and Jaccard (1975), have refuted social facilitation theory. They instead state that participants perform better when in pairs than in isolation, based on research on participation in a concept attainment task. Performance has also been explained in terms of non-drive theories by Carver and Sheier (1981). Measuring the Palmar Sweat Index (PSI) of participants, they found that values decreased from baseline values on performance and presentation of the task, as compared to when the participants actually do the task. They believe this to be due to the activation of inwardly directed attention, which occurs when the person has a task to complete. They believe this to be a normal part of task concentration. This negates the presence of others as an influential factor, and instead proposes extreme attention on oneself and ones performance. Duval and Wickland (1972) state that the involvement in a task automatically leads to a comparison between the actual self, how one is performing, and the ideal self, how one would like to perform. This research postulates that the competitive feelings which are experienced may occur as a result of competition with oneself rather than with other people. Geen and Gange (1977) suggest that tasks can inspire an intense preoccupation with oneself, to the extent that other stimuli are ignored, including other people. They too propose an intense, inward direction of attention, rather than a social facilitation and mere presence effects.
Despite these concerns, research on social facilitation has been extremely extensive and well supported. It is the pioneering work on the topic, as well as research on evaluation apprehension and mere presence effects that has given impetus to this study. One element of this phenomenon has received surprisingly little empirical attention - how many people are required to make a difference on the individual 's performance. Though it is known an effect is definitely produced, the aim of this research was to uncover what actually makes performance change. Triplett 's studies on competition may have yielded different results if the children were paired not only with one other child, but with three, four or five more children. This experiment aims to investigate the effects of social facilitation on three different group sizes in order to determine how many people are necessary for social facilitation to have an effect. Much research on the mere presence effect has suggested that the presence of another is all that is needed in order to affect performance. We wanted to examine the very crux of social facilitation theories, specifically at which point the element of competition and the influence of others arises, how this varies as a function of group size, and what exactly is involved in asserting the affects that are asserted. The aim of this study is to attend more specifically to the phenomenon of competitiveness via theories of social facilitation, and to discover how many people are necessary to produce such effects.
In order to investigate our hypothesis, a cognitive task would be used rather than the physical tasks that were used by Triplett (1898) and Allport (1920). This study has two basic hypotheses. The main hypothesis was that there would be a significant difference in time taken to complete the task as a function of group size. In accordance with drive theory and the mere presence effect and non-drive theories, the more people present, the faster the task should be completed. The second hypothesis is that there will be a significant difference in how accurately the task was completed as a function of group size. This aspect has, in the past, seldom been tested. In light of previous research, we hypothesised that accuracy would decrease as the audience and speed of completion increase. Social facilitation has indeed provided much scope for thought and further research. It is hoped that this study will provide some insights into whether the effects of social facilitation vary in terms of group size, and that it will support the wealth of research that already exists on this phenomenon. 60 participants volunteered to take part in this experiment. They were taken as a random sample of the population, and predominantly consisted of undergraduates at the University of , aged between 18 and 21. There were some exceptions.
Participants filled out a consent form, and then completed the task on a typed sheet which contained instructions, the eight sets of four neutral words to categorise alphabetically, and spaces for their answers. Stopwatches were used to measure their response times, and these scores as well as the accuracy of the responses were recorded on a separate sheet of paper. Accuracy was measured by totalling the number of correct responses out of eight. The computer programme SPSS for Windows 11.0 was used to analyse results.
This was a between subjects experiment - different participants were used for each condition. The independent variable was the condition, whether the subject was alone, with one other person or with four other people. Conditions are named in terms of the amount of people they contain, so in this case Conditions 1, 2 and 5. The dependent variable was the response time and the level of accuracy on completion of the test. The conditions were kept quiet in order to prevent distraction.
Participants were allocated at random to one of the three conditions. They were given the consent form to sign, which included instructions and informed them of their right to withdraw. They were all asked to read the instructions which told them that they were to place the eight sets of four words in alphabetical order. They were asked to write down their answers on this same sheet of paper. The experimenters timed them as they completed the task. They were then debriefed, and thanked for their participation. The experimenters recorded which condition they were in, their response times and their accuracy scores.
The data was screened to uncover any outliers and to verify that it conformed to ANOVA test assumptions. A histogram illustrated that speed violated the homogeneity of variance assumption, and box plots showed any outliers in the speed and accuracy data. A one way ANOVA on the untransformed data yielded F(2,57) = 6.51; p 0.05 (ns). The Kruskal Wallis Test was carried out and verified that speed yielded a significant result (X (2) = 2.57; p 0.05), and that there was no relationship between the two. However, Tukey and Bonferroni tests showed significant differences were found between conditions 1 and 2, (t = 0.09) and conditions 1 and 5 ( t = 0.03), but not between conditions 2 and 5 ( t = 0.95, ns).
The results partially confirm the original hypothesis - there was a significant main effect of speed. The results illustrate a decrease in time taken to complete the experiment between conditions 1, 2 and 5. There are significant differences between conditions 1 and 2 and 1 and 5. However the non-significant difference between conditions 2 and 5 does not follow the traditional trend of social facilitation theory, though the difference in means between the two conditions is still notable. While there is an increase in time taken to complete the task, the result is not significant. This means that the presence of one other person has more of an effect on participants, as can be seen by the significant difference between conditions 1 and 2, than the presence of three other people when participants are in pairs, as can be seen by the insignificant difference between conditions 2 and 5. The accuracy mean being the lowest in condition 2 also supports this. Such results confirmed our hypothesis, which stated that the time taken to complete the task would be significantly different as a function of group size. There was a main effect of speed despite the non-significant difference between conditions 2 and 5. The second hypothesis was not confirmed however, as results show no significant effects of accuracy, or a relationship between accuracy and speed (Appendix, figure 7). The results broadly support previous research. As a whole, they can be explained in terms of traditional drive theories, (Zajonc, 1965; Guerin, 1982; Geen and Gange, 1977; Zajonc, Wolosin, Wolosin and Loh 1970) research on mere presence effects (Guerin and Innes, 1982; Bond, 1982; Seta, Paulus, and Schkade (1976), and research on competitiveness (Triplett, 1898, Allport, 1920).
The results remain within the general framework of social facilitation theories, namely drive theories, (Zajonc, 1965; Geen and Gange, 1977; Zajonc, Wolosin, Wolosin and Loh, 1970), and has shown a quicker response time in completing the task as a function of group size. The quickest response times occurred in condition 5, as well as the highest mean of accuracy. The non-significant difference between conditions 2 and 5 is inconsistent with traditional social facilitation theories. Furthermore, there was no main effect of accuracy, despite our predictions, and a non-significant correlation between speed and accuracy. This could have been for several reasons. Firstly, the questions may have been too easy. A large percentage of participants got 7 and 8 points for accuracy, which is perhaps indicative of the fact that a task involving arranging words in alphabetical order was too simple to test what needed to be tested. If the questions were at an acceptable level of difficulty, one would expect longer response times to accompany the high accuracy scores that were produced. In fact, the highest means of speed and accuracy co-occurred in condition 5. The results show little correlation between speed and accuracy (Appendix, figure 7), and it may be for this reason that that is so. Another way to explain it is in terms of research which proposes that the presence of others leads to the activation of extreme inward direction of attention (Blank, Staff and Shaver, 1976; Carver and Sheier, 1981; Innes, 1972). This overpowers the influence of the presence of others, and therefore an inward direction of attention would not compromise accuracy scores. Blank, Staff and Shaver (1976) also purport that the presence of an audience makes the subject inhibit themselves, in order to present themselves in the best light. They argue that a potentially threatening social sting may enhance conservative tendencies, so this would therefore preserve the accuracy of the participant. Accuracy would not be affected, as the participants would be anxious about achieving an impressive final score in order to avoid looking inferior. In this case, the presence of others would actually lead to an improvement in performance. Baron (1981) and Guerin (1986) also propose that maintenance of social approval is an important concern when performing a task in front of others. Given the eagerness of participants to compare and correct their answers on completion, it is possible that social approval is a prominent concern. Fear of negative evaluation would explain the high accuracy scores.
There are other experimental concerns that may account both for the non-significant main effect of accuracy, and the lack of a significant difference between conditions 2 and 5. One concern is the small sample size, at twenty participants per condition. A larger sample may have given rise to a significant difference between conditions 2 and 5. As both of these conditions contained more than one person, the effects of the presence of the other participants may have not have been as clearly defined as the difference between conditions 1 and 5 and 1 and 2, where a contrast between individual and group performance is more obvious. It may have been wise to test more people, as the disparity between conditions may not be as pronounced. The significant difference between conditions 1 and 2 shows the onset of the mere presence effect, and testing a larger sample size may have done the same between conditions 2 and 5. Another concern is that the majority of participants were undergraduates from the University of , an intensely competitive environment. This reflects a competitive selection of the population, as undergraduates accepted are often ambitious, driven people. This aspect could have affected the results. It may be that people who do not work in such environments may produce different results. Lastly, research on social facilitation uncovers a circularity problem with validity - one can not test the effects of social facilitation without being present. Therefore, all experiments will suffer from this confounding variable. In this study, the experimenters were present and active, as they were timing the participants. Evaluation apprehension and mere presence effects could thusly have affected the results.
There are other ways to explain the non-significant main effect of accuracy. Social facilitation research in the past, including the inaugural Triplett study, involved physical tasks. For example, Martens and Landers (1968) and Carment (1970), found that in a muscle endurance task performed alone, in pairs or in groups of four, greater endurance was shown in the pairs or groups of 4 than in the individual performance. Physical tasks have no need to be measured in terms of their accuracy, so it could be that social facilitation only involves an increase in speed, not in the quality of the task. This is perhaps why sporting events are so successful, and work so well - participants are able to directly view the calibre of their competition. The non-significant accuracy result can, therefore, still be supported by research. This experiment involved a written task, but may have provided different results if answers were made more public, for example if participants had to call out their answers, or if they had to respond to an audio stimulus. One could object, however, that performance in a very simple task such as the one used in this experiment can not possibly be a predictor of people 's complex and varied behaviour in real life. Equally, though, this can be countered, as one could argue that if the effects of social facilitation demonstrate themselves at such a simple level, the repercussions for more complex behaviour could be far greater. Something to consider may be to enlarge the differences between the group sizes in order to obtain a more pronounced effect. Instead of one, two and five people in each condition, perhaps doubling the number each time, for example testing five, ten and twenty people would demonstrate a more definite relationship between response times as an effect of group size. It is possible that after a certain level is reached, social facilitation and mere presence effects no longer have influence behaviour.
The research also has practical implications. If an inward direction of attention is the case, group work could prove effective in academic and working life. Group work can intensify people 's contributions and lead to healthy competition which could ultimately produce better results. Competitive approaches tend to produce a better result from people, whether their motivation is social preservation, positive appraisal or purely the desire to perform better than their co-actors. What this experiment ultimately illustrates is a fast and accurate performance when in the presence of other people. This simple finding alone can have far reaching implications for relationships, professions, businesses, the military, school and university life and sectors of life generally which centre around the production of a successful output. While we still may not know what exactly produces the effects of social facilitation, it does seem that in this case the effects have a positive outcome, which can be applied to many sections of life.
There is still much debate surrounding the phenomena of social facilitation, despite the wealth of research on the topic. This research has demonstrated that the simple number of people that are present when the task is being performed is not the only thing which has an effect on how the person will perform in a task. The theme that previous research has illustrated is that many processes are activated when people are put in even the mildest of competitive situations. Some research suggests that the processes involved are highly contingent on personal attributes. For example, Staveley and Cooper (1990) placed subjects alone or with a stranger and instructed them to play and comment on a computer game. It was found that 'high computer experience' subjects generally performed better and viewed computers positively. Performance anxiety and general reactions to computers of subjects high in computer experience did not vary as function of gender or mere presence. This only occurred for 'low computer experience' subjects. This, therefore, gives diminished importance to the effects exerted by the presence of others. Guerin (1986), in a review of 85 empirical studies on social facilitation, concludes that we are still uncertain about what mediates social facilitation and mere presence effects at a physiological level, but that there is definite evidence for the effects of the passive presence of another, even if they do not watch or evaluate. He believes that other people pose an inherent threat, leading to social facilitation effects. He however believes that research on mere presence should be conducted without evaluating the performed task, despite his concurrence with the claim that being watched and being evaluated gives rise to social facilitation effects. He states that the omission of task evaluation will make social facilitation research more accurate. Further, Blascovich, Mendes, Hunter and Saloman (1999) found that the presence of others during a well learned task was associated with a challenge pattern of cardiovascular activity, but the presence of others during unlearned task is associated with a threat pattern of physiological reactivity, suggesting that it is individual skill and confidence levels which affect performance, not the company of co-actors. Innes (1972), found that the presence of a co-actor inhibits performance, but that co-action and feedback facilitate it, in contrast to traditional research. He also hypothesises that evaluation apprehension could be nothing more than anxiety related to a test situation which has been misconstrued.
In conclusion, it seems that explaining variance of performance as a function of group size is not sufficient. Many other factors and theories which have been discussed throughout must be taken into account. Overall, it does seem that the presence of more people improves performance with minimal detriment, but the generalisability of this finding is limited, given the wealth of research which implicates other factors and indeed other theories as the cause of accelerated performance. As the topic is so well investigated, it is difficult to suggest many more ways of developing and extending research besides the few that have already been mentioned. Indeed, a crucial question is why the presence of others does have such a large effect on us even though we are around other people for most of our lives. It seems that mere presence effects will always be an issue; it is simply not feasible for an individual to go about life solitarily. Sometimes groups are necessary, even imperative, so there seems good reason to continue the study of social facilitation. The answer is perhaps not to conduct more research, but to adopt a more integral approach, incorporating different elements of research in order to more accurately predict the effects other people have on an individual. Therefore, explaining social facilitation in terms of group size is useful, but is by no means comprehensive enough to be the sole, attributable cause of this phenomenon.
