Nick Mills runs a small hydroelectric scheme in a Welsh valley. His present set-up uses a turgo turbine which drives a 230v AC output alternator. The voltage is stepped up to 400v AC to limit current losses along the 650m route up to the house, where it is stepped down again to 230v AC.
The turbine is driven by water travelling down the valley in a pipe, from a damn 40 meters vertically upstream. The current pipe is 365 metres long, comprising 45 metres of 6-inch (152mm) diameter pipe near the damn, and 320 metres of 4-inch (104mm) diameter pipe.
Nick now wishes to upgrade the pipe to 6 inch all the way down the penstock. This is to improve performance and try to keep flow consistent.
Although a hydro-scheme is installed at the site, the stream that is used by Nick Mills has not had flow rate measurements taken on it. Therefore one must develop an idea of the flow characteristics of the stream by looking at characteristics of a nearby river, i.e. the Ystwyth. Using the same exceedance data from here (Figure 1), one can scale it down by the difference in rainfall between the two rivers' catchment areas, and the different catchment area sizes (Appendix 1). This produces the data shown in Graph 1, which shows the exceeded flow rate for a given percentage time of the year.
From survey results of the valley, it is estimated the pipe is 365 metres long, with a static head of 39.02 metres. Using this, and estimations of the inlet and outlet areas, an estimate of the head losses in the pipe can be reached, as shown in Table 1, for both the 4-inch and 6 inch pipe at different pipe flow rates. This can be combined with data for the exceedance curve into Table 2, which looks up the exceedance for a given maximum flow rate from the data in Graph 1. Unfortunately, since there can be no controlled measurements taken for the pipeline at different flow rates, some presumptions have been made. The presumptions made for Tables 1 and 2 are:
Increasing the effective cross-sectional area of the pipe (from 4 to 5 inch) will increase its flow rate by a factor of 0.4.
The pipeline will be able to draw more of flow at a given river flow rate if it was replaced with 6-inch pipe.
The pipeline is able to draw more of the flow of the river at low river flow rates, as there will likely be excess capacity in the pipe.
Other losses (i.e. air in the pipe) will influence the flow rate of the water in the pipe (Table 1), which cannot be accurately accounted for.
The run-off ratio of Nicks stream is the same as for the Ystwyth (0.4).
At some points in the year, i.e. the summer months, the pipe will collect nearly all the river flow.
Transformer efficiency,    = 95%.
There are 24 million households - the average hourly energy use represents Nick 's use.
Electricity can be sold to the grid for 2p per kWh at any time.
We take a constant percentage of river flow down pipe.
The data that is known for the current layout is:
The flow rate of the river was worked out (Figure 2) to be 0.0455m  /s when the pipe was flowing at 0.0109m  /s, i.e. the system was drawing ~25%.
Renewable Obligation Certificates (ROCs) are worth roughly   30.51 per MWh. You do not have to be connected to the grid to earn ROCs.
The dynamic pressure loss in the pipe is 10m, based on 2.8 bar reading at the turbine, and 3.83 bar measured static pressure ().
Exceedance curve ratio calculated using data from the Ystwyth, see Appendix 1.
All these variables and presumptions go into creating Table 1 and 2. A glossary of the column headings can be found in Appendix 4. This model can then be used to predict the performance increase due to the increased pipe diameter. Using the assumptions I've made here, it is estimated that the installation of the new pipe, with Grid connection, will only become more profitable than the current system after 24 years (Graph 2).
ROCs can be earned in 1MWh chunks, and are given to the generator by the electricity regulator OfGEM. They can then be traded for cash on the open market with other generating companies, for example, those without the resources to produces renewable energy to meet their renewable obligation requirements. An explanation of the use of ROCs can be found in Appendix 5.
The metering of the electricity generated by the turbine would have to be carried out, and the readings recorded each month and sent to the regulator.
One way to maximise the accumulation of ROCs would be to implement a dump load system into the mains, so that under low or no-load conditions, the power available in the turbine is fed into an immersion heater for the house heating and hot water systems.
Connection to the National Grid would cost an extra ~  5000 pounds as a one-off payment, and a special two-way meter would have to be installed to count the power flowing in and out of the Grid. The additional cost of this installation has not been taken into account in the model, however it assumes that in both instances the house is Grid connected. Problems arise with Grid connection however, including:
The power output to the grid would be unreliable, National Grid would be looking for a service which could be guaranteed for certain parts of the day, otherwise fines may be endorsed.
The peak output power would only be at off-peak times anyway, when electricity is not needed in Nick 's home such as in the middle of the night or office hours, therefore the profit per unit of electricity will be low.
Fluctuations in the turbines frequency would mean the unit has to be electronically controlled when switching on or off, either by gradually introducing it to the Grid at each switch-on to synchronise the generator, using pulse-width modulation, or rectifying the AC, variable-frequency current to DC and then inverting it to AC at 50Hz.
The cost of new turbines would be too great for what is planned here. A new turgo turbine would cost in the region of   5000. A fully installed turbine would cost in the region of   10000. One option would be to run a centrifugal pump as a turbine. This would involve running a normal water pump at roughly 50rpm above its rated speed, with a maximum power output of 0.7 of the rated power consumption. For a pump that can produce up to 2kW as a turbine, this would cost roughly   300. This will be increased to take account of electronics involved in controlling the frequency of the power output, as it would now be higher than 50Hz.
There are two pipe materials that are under consideration, PVC soil pipe, and MDPE, a high-pressure pipe primarily used in underground mains water and gas supply systems. Each one has its advantages and disadvantages:
All factors seem to cancel each other out apart from the cost difference, as the ease to join the PVC pipe is overshadowed by the number of joins and directing their would be compared to MDPE pipe. For ease of installation alone, MDPE would be recommended over PVC pipe.
As far as routing the pipe is concerned, the old penstock route is pretty much as best the pipe could be routed. The alternative would be to hang it over the river on the valley cliff the other side, but this would mean diverting the pipe over to that side and back again when it arrives at the turbine house. Both time consuming and hence uneconomical.
The possibility of a grant to aid in the installation costs of a small hydro scheme is a reality, however it would not be possible to get one in this situation as the turbine and damn are already installed, as the grant is only possible for new installations using materials and contractors approved by the granting authority.
From a component-by component point of view, the item that will need upgrading/replacing sooner than the rest will be the turbine and generator. There is already significant leakage from the seal joining the two halves of the turbine, and any repair is compromised by the substantial corrosion of the studding and bolts. The state of the turbine blades inside will be compromised by debris flowing down the pipe. While this has been addressed at the damn end, the snifter valve has been left open for debris to fall into it. The MDPE pipe should last out for 50 years, should it not suffer any significant damage, which is unlikely given that logging in that area was only recent.
From the model of Table 2, it can be shown that Nick would produce, on average, 2700kWh more energy per annum, an increase of around 29%. This increases the amount of time that the largest modelled flow rate is available for, from 48% to 72% of the time, with values under that exceedance taking up the remaining time percentage. The cost of this upgrade will be ~  4500, which includes pipe costs and labour, for a 6" MDPE pipeline. This extra energy throughout the year does not mean that the old turbine will be insufficient. While the turbine only has a calculated efficiency of 30-40%, it is still running normally, and required little maintenance, therefore there is little need to replace it.
This is a pricey option which may not be recommended, though it would depend on the users' needs and how much power is required. Connection to the National Grid would be an option, but would be pricey, as one cannot connect to the grid direct (costing ~  5000) without purchasing additional equipment for synchronising the hydroelectric generator with the mains. However, this has been modelled for both the 4" and 6" pipe, and shows that even with the extra costs involved, the 6" pipe will not pay itself back until after 30 years. Nick must also consider whether the pipeline will last this long, if decides on PVC pipe, it may need to be replaced a lot sooner. He should also consider the longevity of the turbine, which is subject to external corrosion and data from debris passing into the snifter valve.
The option of registering for ROCs should definitely be considered. This would allow Nick to earn revenue from his turbine power output without having to connect to the Grid. The dump load system which keeps the turbine output at it 's maximum ensures revenue earned will be optimum. Nick should contact OfGEM for more information and read Appendix 5.
Overall it is hard to predict the behaviour of the pipe if it was replaced with a 6" without a full understanding of the flow properties of the pipe throughout the year, i.e. the air to water content of the fluid. But using models with the best guestimation for yearly flow, it is shown that the upgrade of pipe would produce a 29% performance increase, however this benefit will only be shown at high (winter) flow rates.
