Wagner 's Gesamtkunstwerk or, Total Work of Art, is usually explained at the simplest level as his view to recreate the combined expressive elements of ancient drama in order to conceive the artwork of the future. Total Art would contain all those elements apparent in Ancient Greek drama - those of dance, costume, drama and music framed in the event of a festival. Wagner 's view was that, since the Renaissance, art had lost this quality and music drama had become debased. This increased his frustration. In dramatic art, the highest level of poetry had been achieved (by Shakespeare) as had music 's ultimate expression (in Beethoven). It was necessary therefore, to combine these two forms to create a new Music Drama.
However, a closer description of the Total Work of Art would be to say that it is not merely an art form combining all the arts but one which combines Wagner 's many talents.
Magee, Bryan, Aspects of Wagner, P84.
However, Wagner 's vision of this new Total Art, for him became a dream impossible to realise.
It is difficult to imagine how frustrating it must have been for Wagner, that even after he had created the Festpielhaus at Bayreuth, a theatre supposedly containing all those elements necessary to realise the Gesamtkunstwerk, the staging of his work failed to meet the demands of his emotional capacity.
Beacham, Richard, Adolph Appia, Artist and Visionary of The Theatre, P11.
For this essay, I am discussing my favourite of Wagner 's works, Tristan Und Isolde. This is an opera considered by many to be the perfect medium for Wagner 's theories on synthesis- i.e. his Gesamtkunstwerk. The relatively simple plot allows for the maximum degree of dynamic expressivities from the music.
Stein, Jack M, Richard Wagner and The Synthesis of The Arts, P.
I want to discuss three parts of the work which I find the most interesting to listen to, both in terms of their role within the opera and how each stand alone as individual pieces of music. These are the Prelude to Act One, the Lovers' Duet in Act Two and the closing Liebestod. I will explore the relationship between the music and the libretto and how the three pieces, despite appearing in completely different parts of the score, connect together musically.
Two things interest me when listening to a Prelude or Overture. The first is how an opening piece of music acts as an anticipation of all that is to happen throughout the score. This is usually achieved by the composing of a Prelude after the rest of the work has been completed,.
Newman, Ernest, Wagner Nights, P227.
What is interesting about the Prelude to Tristan is that Wagner had not even begun to work on the remainder of the opera when he completed the opening. Discovering this makes the Prelude more interesting to listen to because it raises the questions of how Wagner composed a piece which so perfectly creates the moods of 'endless yearning, longing, the bliss and wretchedness of love...a languishing forever renewing itself...death, surcease, a sleep without waking', (which were a few of Wagner 's own words to describe the story of Tristan), before the three acts of the opera had been realised. It is somewhat disconcerting too, that the themes within the Prelude, which have come to be known as separate 'motives', were probably not thought of in the same terms by Wagner when he composed it. For example, the motives labelled by listeners as the 'Sorrow' motive or the 'Magic' motive, may not even have been written with a view to evoke these moods in the minds of the audience.
The first time I listened to the Prelude, I had already heard other parts of the opera, so a few of the motives were familiar. I would have been able to recognise the Prelude as a piece of music from Tristan.
The appearance of the motives used in the opening makes it more logical to listen to in terms of its role as the 'Prelude'. It ties the opera together before it has even begun.
There are two motives evident in the opening bars - the first, often named the 'Sorrow' motive, is played on cellos. The second 'Desire' motive extends from the first like an echo, played quietly by the oboe. Once these motives have been named, the meanings in the music become clearer. The first bars suggest that 'Desire' or 'Magic', as this motive is sometimes called, is constantly apparent beneath grief and sorrow, and can in fact help overcome grief and sorrow.
Another motive, the 'Death' motive, occasionally 'drops' into the music and is played on the brass instruments, creating a sinister disruption of the smooth waves of strings echoed by the woodwind. Throughout the Prelude I am reminded of the sea. The waves of music become steadily stronger in anticipation of the climax and the continual echoes of the motives played on first one set of instruments, then on another, not only evokes a sense of yearning, but further that of a tide edging forward more strongly every time before being drawn back.
During the build to the climax, the echo of the 'Desire' motive continues, as, with each wave of strings, steadily becoming higher and more joyful, the 'Desire' notes become increasingly prominent in the background at the end of each wave. This culminates in the motive overcoming all when played on the brass instruments at the peak of the climax. The motive then echoes itself, played quietly on the oboes immediately afterwards.
Newman, Ernest, Wagner Nights, P 220.
There are many similarities between the opening and closing parts of the opera, which I will discuss later.
The 'echoing' conflict between strings and woodwind dies away at the end of the Prelude, giving way to a foreboding mood created by cellos and basses. The mood and the wave like pattern of the rest of the Prelude, prepares us for the sea setting in which the opera opens.
It is interesting to take a Prelude out of the context of the work it was written for to decide how it stands alone as an individual piece of music. The Prelude to Tristan 'works particularly well outside of the opera - perhaps because it was written beforehand.' The music makes 'no attempt...to epitomise the stage action and the characters of the opera...the Prelude is the slow musical elaboration of a single bitter-sweet mood.'.
Newman, Ernest, Wagner Nights, P220.
Although the almost unbearable yearning fraught by the ever- present foreboding mood created by the opening are sufficient enough as they are to listen to, Wagner recaptured the very essence of all the emotions experienced in Tristan, in his Overture. After hearing it we are left with desire to experience more of the same.
As the Prelude closes and the voice of a Young Sailor opens Scene One, I become frustrated. After being aroused so much simply by the instrumental Overture, I dislike the interruption of the voice. However, on listening to the whole work, Wagner 's belief that the highest level of poetry and music 's ultimate expression should be combined to create a new Music Drama is made clear, and indeed the music does become more powerful when combined with the voice and vice versa.
Act Two; Scene Two of Tristan sees the beginning of the Lover 's Duet, seen by many as 'the most difficult section of the whole work for both the listener in the theatre and the reader of the poem." The main difficulty I think, lies in the understanding of what the characters are saying. It may seem that without this, it is impossible to understand what the opera is really about. I am not an experienced student of the opera however, and when I listen to it, it is the music which helps me to understand what is happening in the minds of the characters. However, Act Two reflects on Wagner 's opinion, perhaps more than at any other in the opera, that the voice and musical expression play equal roles. I found that, when listening to Act One, the orchestra appears to hold back somewhat - particularly during many of the climaxes. It seldom threatens to drown out the poetic verse.
Newman, Ernest, Wagner Nights, P262.
It is Act Two in which the very essence of the characters inner and spiritual conflict is to be conveyed. This cannot be achieved using verse only; neither can it be achieved using verse only. Following the translated libretto is useful only to the point of knowing what a character is saying - but it takes all enjoyment out of listening to the music.
The Lovers' Duet can be divided into sections in which the mood of the music changes. The first section is obviously passionate, excited and chaotic. It would be impossible to imagine this mood by looking at the libretto only,.
It is the overwhelming climax as Tristan rushes in and the tempo becomes more frenzied, that truly communicates the unbelievable joy as the lovers meet. There is a fine example of the music and the verse complimenting each other at the beginning of this section. The sustained higher notes of the soprano take the music one step further, drawing attention to the chaotically cheerful background. When the voices remain on the same note, allowing the orchestra to 'leave them behind' as it were, one can fully appreciate the role each of them plays in conveying the bliss of the characters.
Throughout the earlier section of the duet, we are reminded of the 'Desire' motive, particularly in Tristan 's verse beginning 'O we were now dedicated to night.' This is particularly useful in denoting the meaning of the libretto at this point. Tristan is speaking in anger of the  'spiteful day' that separates him from Isolde,.
The appearance of the 'Desire' motive communicates Tristan 's frustration with the day more clearly. A new motive - that of 'Day' is used here, (although it first appears at the start of the Prelude to Act Two). While we usually associate the coming of day with fresh and joyful feelings, Wagner 's motive completely conveys the misery it means to the lovers and their defiance of 'Its idle pomp, its boastful glare.' The motives take our minds back to the emotions and moods we felt at previous points in the opera. I see them as landmarks or safety nets - something to lean on to prevent one from becoming completely lost in the music. When they reappear, the musical mood becomes at once more recognisable.
In contrast to this, Wagner often anticipates a musical mood that will appear later in the score. The motive of 'Love 's Happiness', for example, is anticipation in Tristans' 'da erd  mmerte mild' when prepares us for the gradual change in the music as the doves lie together on the flowery bank.
The music has lost its sense of urgency at this point and peacefulness descends as the lovers rejoice in the onset of darkness; 'holy twilight 's glorious presentment obliterates the horror of delusion, setting us free from the world.' The feeling of yearning remains however. With the smoothness and calmness of the libretto there is a sense of nervousness throughout this passage I feel. This could be the cause of many things. In a way it sounds as though they cannot quite believe they are together. Further, the sense of yearning builds more successfully to the climax towards the end of the passage (which fittingly culminates with another repletion of the 'Desire' motive reinforcing the constant presence of this mood). Further still, it prepares us for the voice of Brangaene. This is a phrase in which the music and the soprano achieve a sense of urgency and fear without becoming frantic or changing the peaceful mood already established. This clarifies the fact that Tristan and Isolde 's overwhelming love for each other contains the seeds of its own destruction - no matter what warning they are given, their union will end in tragedy.
The mood continues in the same way throughout the penultimate section of the Lover 's Duet, in which Tristan and Isolde 'resume their fond dialogue upon Love and Life and the impotence of Death to part lovers such as they.'.
Newman, Ernest, Wagner Nights, P274.
The music here allows for the libretto to take the leading role. For once this does not frustrate me. The tenderness felt by the lovers is conveyed perfectly clearly through their voices, allowing for a brief respite before the final section begins. 'So starben Wir...der Liebe nur zu leben!' sees the introduction of the idea of the Liebestod - Death in Love. Much of the melody here anticipates the Liebestod at the close of the opera.
The melody of the Liebestod is sung by both Tristan and Isolde, interrupted again by Brangaene 's voice. The Liebestod tune itself suggests the building of a climax and Brangaene 's warning is the first result in a series of unbearable anticlimaxes throughout this last section of Act Two.
The next two anticlimaxes follow Tristan 's lines, 'Shall we then defy day 's threats?' and 'So that it 's dawning light will never daunt us?' Here the strings become faster and faster but each time are held in check. Isolde 's, 'May night last for us forever!' gives way to a tremendous surge of the orchestra. However loud the music, the power of the voices together just manages to rise above it. The recurrence of the Liebestod melody is almost exhausting to listen to - it is hard to believe the music can maintain such power.
I think a lot of effort has been made in trying to decipher exactly what is meant by, 'You Tristan, I Isolde, no more Tristan...' - and vice versa. I feel that, by the time this is sung, the music has built to such an ecstatic climax that the exact meaning is insignificant. To know that they have fond a solution in their idea of Liebestod is sufficient. During the final build, the orchestra becomes more powerful- it reminds me again of a tidal motion. With each anticlimax and restart of the Liebestod melody, it gains a little more strength until the music completely overrules the words and only snatches of the voices are heard over it. At this point, to understand word for word what the characters are saying is unnecessary. The music is powerful enough alone - although the voices become an extension of it, rather than instruments used to perform the libretto. In this role, they enable the final climax of Act Two to rise to an even greater peak than the orchestra alone would let it.
Williamson, Audrey, Wagner Opera, P188.
It has been said, that the three acts of Tristan and Isolde come close to resembling a three- hour orgasm. When one takes into account the feelings of the characters as described in the poetic verse, this remark may seem perfectly legitimate. However, I think to regard the love the characters feel for each other as purely romantic or sexual is viewing the opera on one level only and this evades its deeper meanings.
It is true that many of the passages are incredibly erotic - but this only takes us so far. Wagner expresses the feelings of Tristan and Isolde in such a way that they transcend anything that is usually thought of or labelled as 'love'.
The closing 'Liebestod' illustrates this. At this point in the opera the deepest feelings of grief and torment have been expressed by the characters. Tristan is dead. Melot is dead. Kurvenal is dead. Brangaene and King Marke are in despair,.
And yet this is the point at which the most blissful passage is sung with great euphoria by Isolde, gazing down on her dead beloved. It has to be admitted that the supreme joy of Isolde believing in the power of death in love and Tristan 's escape to 'Unconscious - supreme bliss!' goes slightly beyond the conventional expression of love.
Liebestod is my favourite passage of Tristan. It was the first piece from the opera I heard and, stands equally well on its own as an individual piece of music as the Prelude does. It is not necessary to know the story of Tristan in order to understand the feelings expressed in the Liebestod.
I have been concerned during this essay to come to terms with the changing roles of music and libretto. I think the Liebestod is the resulting climax of the struggle between voice and orchestra which builds throughout the opera.
After the first appearance of the Liebestod melody in Act Two, we recognise its opening here, 'How gently and quietly he smiles, how fondly he opens his eyes!' After the culmination of this opening melody in the climax of Act Two, we are again prepared for a gradual musical build and are indeed ready for a musical resolution which has previously been cut short,.
The Liebestod begins quietly - the music serving more as a background allowing the soprano to carry the melody forward. The key change on  'soaring on high' sees the build to the climax progressing. As Isolde 's verse becomes more excited, 'How softly and gently from his lips sweet breath flutters- see friends!' the music gradually begins to catch up with and soar beyond the libretto, conveying her increasing rapture.
Again Wagner is careful to hold back slightly rather than rushing headlong into the climax. There is a brief pause at this point and on 'Do I alone hear this melody?' the Liebestod begins afresh. This technique reinforces the feeling of absolute desire communicated from the start of the opera and ensures that the audience crave for this desire to be fulfilled - the climax to be resolved.
At the point of 'in its blissful lament', the orchestra and the voice cease conflict and merge so that Isolde 's voice is carried by the melody. This continues until they take up their individual roles once more with the onset of the second Liebestod climax, 'Resounding yet more clearly, wafting about me ...'.
Thus the final build begins: the tremendous surge of the orchestra perfectly complimenting the libretto, 'Are they billows of heavenly fragrance? As they swell and roar around me ...".
The orchestra and voice reach such a point on the verge of climax, that they appear to slow slightly before the music peaks on 'of the world 's breath'. This is a point where Wagner 's opinion of music reaching the pinnacle of it 's expression leaving no other choice but to add words, is completely understandable. Without the highest (sung) note I fear the climax would be vaguely disappointing.
The utmost relief that the climax which has built so gradually has finally happened enables us to fully appreciate the beautiful 'coming back to earth' as it were, suggested in the music by the key change on 'to sink'. Again the libretto is complimented by the dying down of the music, 'to drown, to sink unconscious - supreme bliss!' The music has exhausted all tension and emotion and ends with peaceful and warming chords.
The Liebestod contains all those elements which make up Wagner 's theories of synthesis. The libretto 'grasps the inner psychology and emotions of the characters and these are portrayed for all they are worth by the music.'.
Stein, Jack M, Richard Wagner and the Synthesis of The Arts, P.
Tristan and Isolde truly combines the highest level of poetry with music 's ultimate expression. To experience it is to experience the utmost in Music Drama, which was Wagner 's greatest ambition. -------------------------------------.
