The main objective of this experiment is to use the strain gauge to measure the strain produced due to applied force. The experiment is designed only for low-level force measurement as can be seen from the experiment apparatus. "A strain is the amount of deformation of a body due to an applied force." (From web National Instrument-Measuring strain with strain gauges) It can be measured by a stain gauge since the gauge resistance changes proportional to the strain. The strain can be tensile or compressive; the two stain gauges used in this experiment are boned on the top and bottom surfaces of the cantilever beam which produce tensile and compressive stains.
In this experiment, an important theory that has to be understood is the balance condition of the Wheatstone bridge circuit. The circuit is used to measure a small change in resistance, and then convert the resistance signal to an output voltage. It consists of four resistors which connect together to form a quadrilateral. From Figure 1 on the right, a DC source voltage Vs connected across one of the diagonals AC, and the output voltage Vo connected across the other diagonal BD. The top and bottom part of the bridge can be treated as individual voltage dividers. Therefore Vo is actually determined by measuring the difference between the outputs of two voltage dividers.
Since and then the output voltage Vo of the circuit is or.
When bridge circuit is in balance, both potential dividers are equal, thus the potential difference between them which is the output voltage Vo is zero.
Then R1R3-R2R4 on the numerator of the equation equals zero :- R1R3=R2R4.
This part of knowledge has already been taught in Year one, the voltage gain of a non-inverting amplifier is.
A cantilever rig =(Figure 2): it consists of a cantilever beam with two strain gauges bonded to the top and bottom surfaces of the beam. There is a nylon screw attached at the free end of the beam for adding forces. On the other side of the transducer, there is a Wheatstone bridge circuit contains a 9V DC source supply, a balance potentiometer and the two strain gauges on the beam.
An electrocircuit board: it contains an 8 pin layout op-amp 741 in the middle of the board. It is used to design and build an amplifier using the 741 to amplify output voltage to an appropriate level. Two resistor values are chosen to form a non-inverting amplifier. Additionally, the use of a capacitor crossing the feedback resistor of the amplifier is to form a simple low-pass filter to cut off the high frequency noise caused by high gain in the circuit.
Other equipments: DC power supply, digital voltmeter and oscilloscope.
Determine the force range which can be applied to the mechanical system:
The way to calculate the maximum loading force is by measuring the geometrical dimensions of the cantilever and location of the strain gauges, then substituted these values into the equation of the strain produced in terms of F.
Since.
As shown left (Figure 3), x, l, w and t are the required measurements, where l is the length of the beam, x is the length from the starting side to the middle of the strain gauges on the beam, w is the width and t is the thickness of the beam.
Design and build a Wheatstone bridge circuit:
The circuit diagram and use have already been explained in the theory part of the report. In this procedure, the circuit needs to be adjusted at zero by the potentiometer.
Design and build an amplifier:
The gain of the amplifier is preferred to be a value of 1000 as the system output is small, usually in millivolts; the amplifier can amplify the output voltage to about 1V. After the circuit is complete, the amplifier 's working status has to be tested before connect it to the bridge circuit. This procedure is mainly to check to noise status caused by the high gain of the amplifier. Therefore connect the amplifier output to the oscilloscope to see the fluctuation. After this, a capacitor is considered to connect across the feedback resistor of the amplifier to reduce the noise level.
Test the complete force sensor which consists of the cantilever, bridge circuit and amplifier:
In this step, the relationship between the system output and the applied force can be found out by recording the output voltage values when adding washers on the nylon strew. Then plot a graph according to the records.
After testing the force sensor by an analogue device, those analogue signals can be converted into digital format for further test.
A computer software with cards either 6023E or 6024E installed is used to do the digital test of the system. In this procedure, the noise levels are compared for four situations, which are with feedback capacitor with tap, with feedback capacitor without tap, without feedback capacitor without tap and without feedback capacitor with tap.
To derive the stain produced at the strain gauges in terms of F:
The stain and stress relationship is, and from the stress and force relationship: where is from databook. then get.
The sensitivity of the mechanical system can be expressed by the equation below: , as can be seen, the sensitivity is determined by the geometrical dimensions of the system, which are the values of l, x, w and t. In this experiment, the measurement is imprecise since the lengths are measured by a ruler. As a result, to consider the sensitivity of the system, those factors which affect the geometrical dimensions measurement of the system should be taken into account, such as temperature, measurement misplay, etc.
Additionally, it is found out that only small dimensions can be used and measured in this mechanical system, since the lengths are measured by a ruler, the larger the dimension is, the more imprecise the measurement is.
Rearrange the equation above then get then=== this means the maximum force can be applied to the system is 2.93N. If a greater force is applied then the cantilever will be damaged.
The theoretical balance condition of the Wheatstone bridge circuit has already been explained in the theory part, that is when Vo=0, R1R3=R2R4. The two strain gauges both have values of, and the rest two resistors in the bridge circuit also have magnitudes of then, R1=R2=R3=R4=R=.
The factor may affect this condition is the temperature as it may affect the measurement. As we know that the resistance is determined by the resistivity, the length and the cross-section area of the material,, the three factors are all affected by temperature, therefore the value of resistance will changed with temperature. So the resistance of strain gauge is not dependent on the strain produced but also the temperature.
As above, under the balance condition, R1R3=R2R4. However, when force is applied to the system, the two active strain gauges will be changed. This is because the strain is determined by the geometric dimensions and force F,. At the beginning, no applied force, no strain. But after applying force to the system, the strain changes, then resistance of the strain gauge changes, then output voltage changes.
As one of the strain gauge is on the top surface of the beam and the other one is on the bottom surface, the bending of the beam causes a tensile strain on the first gauge but a compressive strain on the second gauge. (From theory) then bridge output can be expressed by the following: since R1=R2=R3=R4=R, R can be substituted into the above equation, then get therefore the bridge output and the relative resistance change of the strain gauge gives a linear relationship in the form y=kx.
Here, Vs=9V, so.
A non-inverting amplifier is preferred to use in this experiment rather than an inverting amplifier. The reason is that in comparison, the non-inverting amplifier has higher impedance, smaller input current and higher voltage gain than the inverting amplifier.
The gain of the non-inverting amplifier is determined as 1000 rather than other values since lower gain will not amplify the output enough, and higher gain will cause higher noise level.
Therefore for the non-inverting amplifier,, so R1+R2 =1000R2 :- R1=999R2 :- R1=1000R2 so if R1=, then R2=.
Before connect to the bridge circuit, the amplifier needs to be tested to see the noise level. Due to the high gain and the electromagnetic interference, a noise around 50HZ is formed. In order to reduce the noise, a simple low-pass filter is considered to use by connecting a capacitor across the feedback resistor. The time constant t=RC=0.1sec is given, feedback R1=, so that C=0.1/1000=100uF.
The table below shows the records of the loading force Fl with system output voltage Vo. The relationship between the two physical quantities can be found out by plotting these data on the graph.
As shown from Figure 4, there are two lines shown on the graph. The blue line represents system theoretical output which is a straight line. The red line represents system output in practice which is not linear.
The sensitivity of the force sensor is determined by the slope of the graph, which is the system output divided by the loading force,,the detailed explanation of this force sensor system sensitivity is shown in the analysis part of the report.
After converting analogue signals into digital signals, data can be collected from the computer.
First of all, compare the system output without and with feedback capacitor when there is no applied force to the system, which is without taping the nylon screw.
The graph below shows the output waveform against time without feedback capacitor without taping.
The graph below shows the output waveform against time with feedback capacitor without taping.
From Figure 5 and 6, the amplitude of both the waveforms is small since there is no applied force. However, Figure 5 shows much higher frequency noise than Figure 6, this is because the noise level is reduced by the feedback capacitor in the amplifier circuit.
Secondly, compare the system output without and with feedback capacitor when there is a force added to the system.
The graph below shows the system output without feedback capacitor with taping.
The graph below shows the system output with feedback capacitor with tapping.
From Figure 7 and 8, the amplitude of both the waveforms is increased compared with Figure 5 and 6 since there is the applied force to the system. On the other hand, only a small force applied to the system since the beam is taped very slightly, so the time need for stabilizing the output after it is disturbed can be found out from the graph.
Record from the laboratory result, the time needs to stabilize the system output without feedback capacitor is about 1 second, but only about 0.5 second when there is the capacitor.
Additionally, without the capacitor, the system gives the resonant frequency since there is no damping effect, so the resonant frequency can be worked out by:
The system needs 1 second to stabilize, and there are 10 oscillation periods, so 1 period needs 0.1 second, the resonant frequency is 1/0.1=10HZ.
Under the balance condition,:-, as Vs is constant (9V), the equation gives a linear relationship between the output voltage and the variation of resistance of strain gauges.
Additionally, is defined as Gauge factor G or sensitivity of the strain gauge. So. Then substitute into can get: also, is known, after substituting,:- therefore, the output voltage and the applied force is in a linear relationship since is a constant value. This is the theoretical result, so =.
The sensitivity of the system is dependent on the following factors: the geometrical dimensions, Young 's modulus, the DC power supply and the gauge factor. For this experiment, the gauge factor is 2.1, so it can be determined as a metallic strain gauge. However, there are other types of strain gauges with different gauge factors, such as semiconductor strain gauge. The Young 's modulus E depends on the equation, therefore the system is also dependent on strain and stress.
On the other hand, from Figure 4, since the graph is almost a straight line, the gradient of it can be calculated by the equation:, substitute two values from table 1 into the equation then get:=12.2.
Usually, a typical change in resistance of the strain gauge might be 1% of the nominal resistance value; as a result, how to measure such a small change in resistance accurately is a main problem for the experiment. In order to solve this problem, the following statements have to be considered and paid attention to:
When using the strain gauges, it is very important to make sure that they are properly mounted onto the cantilever beam surfaces so that the strain can be accurately and completely transferred from the surfaces.
The resistive elements in the strain gauge are not only sensitive to the strain produced but also they are responding to other physical quantities such as temperature and light, for the experiment, the thermal induced change is which is acceptable.
In order to reduce the thermal sensitivity of the system, a good method is to use four strain gauges on the cantilever beam instead of two. So the sensitivity of the circuit is doubled and also the arrangement can further compensate any variation caused by temperature. This is called the full-bridge configuration.
Lead wire resistances will also affect the system and reduce the accuracy of the result. Even when the system is balanced, the wire resistances changes with temperature will also result in errors.
A more precise apparatus can be chosen to measure the lengths of the cantilever rig since the sensitivity of the mechanical system is dependent on the geometrical dimensions of the rig. Especially t in the denominator should be recorded carefully otherwise it will give a big difference in result since it is inverse squared.
The system is configured to measure a low-level force since the geometrical dimensions are small. The dimensions of the cantilever rig gives an applied force range is small, only a few Newton.
For the strain gauge, the change of resistance is only expected to vary with the strain produced as adding forces to the system. However, the resistance is not only responding to the strain but also temperature changes. A half-bridge circuit configuration used in this experiment which is to use two active strain gauges can reduce the temperature effect. And an even better solution is use the full-bridge circuit configuration hence the temperature effect can be minimized.
For the amplifier used in the experiment, the gain is chosen as 1000 since higher gain will produced a considerable noise level, but the lower gain will probably not amplify the output to an expect level to observe. A low-pass filter is widely used to cut off the high noise frequency of the system.
The output voltage and applied force give an approximately linear relationship in this experiment. However, the result is expected to be a straight line. The errors produced in the result due to many factors such as temperature effect and measurement misplay. Those errors can be reduced manually however they can not be eliminated.
