Kidde plc, a global supplier of fire and safety products, is achieving increasing sales and profitability. Kidde is a highly geared company, but its reliance on loans is being reduced. Net debt is decreasing, although at the expense of cash flow and returns for shareholders. Kidde 's acquisition policy also consumes much cash, and dividends have improved little in comparison with available shareholders funds. Liquidity is an area of concern with short term debts increasingly outweighing current assets.
Adjustments for Goodwill and Provisions are areas in which Kidde can affect profit levels by subjective judgements. Kidde is in a consolidation period whereby it is investing its earnings for the future and shareholders should expect little improvement on returns at this time. It is therefore recommended at the end of 2003 that shareholders hold their shares.
Future prospects for Kidde are positive, with a number of opportunities arising. Significant growth in the security market coupled with recent acquisitions should help Kidde 's sales throughout the world. Kidde 's continuing acquisition strategy seeks to replace investments in Baxi and Robblialac which generated significant proceeds from their sale. Kidde 's exposure to currency, taxation and interest rates could have significant affects on profits over the coming year. Half year results show general continued growth in sales and profits, and a significant reduction in net debt. UTC 's takeover bid raises Kidde 's prospects significantly, but also introduces new risks. "Kidde is a leading global supplier of fire and safety products, systems and services under a range of well-known and trusted brand names to industrial, commercial, aerospace, combustion control and retail customers." Kidde plc has existed since its demerger from the Williams group in 2000. This report will analyse Kidde 's financial position and draw conclusions as to the strengths and weakness of the company. Part I will discuss the past performance of Kidde, concentrating on the contents of the 2003 Annual report. A number of indicators will be used to assess important aspects such as profitability, liquidity, efficiency and shareholders returns. Several important accounting adjustments will be looked at to assess the reliability of the annual report. Finally, a recommendation will be made to shareholders for the end of the 2003 financial year. Part II will consider the future prospects of Kidde plc over the next financial year, focussing on Market Opportunities, Acquisitions, financial data from the interim report and any significant issues highlighted by the 2003 Annual report. Unless stated otherwise, financial data used in the report is taken from Kidde plc Annual reports. Only data from 2000 onwards has been used. ,.
Gross profit margin is an "indication of a firm 's ability to turn a pound of sales into profit after the cost of goods sold has been accounted for". It describes the efficiency in which goods and services can generate profit over their costs. The formula used is;.
Scott,D.L, Wall Street Words: An Essential A to Z Guide for Today 's Investor, Houghton Mifflin, 1998 (1.1).
Data was taken from Kidde 's Annual report, note 3.
Kidde 's sales have increasing steadily over the last few years (6.6% from 2002 to 2003) and an increase in Gross Profit Ratio has followed (Figure 1). This demonstrates company growth and increasing profitability. The large value of the ratio in 2000 can be attributed to operations that occurred before the demerger from Williams in November 2000.
Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) gives a measure of the efficiency in which capital (from loans or shares) is used to generate profit. The formula used is; (1.2).
The denominator is the total capital input; the numerator is the profit output. The values of opening shareholders funds have been used (rather than average values). Figure 2 shows (ignoring the demerger effects of 2000) increasing levels of profitability. This is the result of increased turnover (7% increase over 2002), while the size of capital employed has remained fairly constant. Clearly this is positive from the shareholders point of view as they may expect a greater level of return from their investment. (1.3).
This definition assesses profitability from the point of view of an ordinary shareholder. It indicates how much profit could be distributed to shareholders as a proportion of their investment. Figure 3 shows the trend in ROSE since 2000. The negative ROSE value for 2000 results form the effects of Kidde 's demerger, from Williams PLC, completed November 2000- a loss was recorded for that year. Since 2001 the profitability is seen to decrease quite significantly. This seems to be at odds with the trend in ROCE- the reasons for this will be considered later.
Dyson, J.R, Accounting for Non-Accounting Students, 6th Edition, Prentice Hill 2004, p254,p258,p260.
WILLIAMS PLC, Proposed demerger to create Chubb plc and Kidde plc, Investor relations press release.
Gearing describes the mix of long term capital funding provided internally (by shareholders) to that contributed externally (by lenders). A high value of Gearing means that a large proportion of the funding comes from long-term loans. As long as profits can absorb interest payments, this may increase returns for shareholders since loan capital is combined with share capital to generate profit. The appropriate level of gearing varies between industries. , 06/12/2004.
The formula used for Gearing is; (1.4).
The FAME database uses an alternative to this equation which includes Short-term loans and overdrafts in the numerator. Figure 4 shows that since 2000, Kidde has become less geared, meaning that a smaller proportion of its capital funding is coming from external lenders. Note that the high value of gearing in 2000 is likely to be an effect of the demerger. The decrease in long term debt results in a corresponding decrease in interest payments since 2000 (Table 3).
Data produced on the FAME database shows that Kidde has a relatively high level of gearing when compared to its 21 peers. The 2003 value given for Kidde was 506% while the average value within the peer group was only 199% (see Table 2 for examples). Such a high level exposes Kidde to interest rate changes and burdens it with loan repayments which could be critical in times of poor profits.
The effect of Kidde 's reducing level of gearing is evident in the reducing value of ROSE (see Figure 3). As the reliance on loans decreases, there is more reliance on shareholders capital for profit generation, and returns for shareholders decrease. The reduced return goes hand-in-hand with the reduced risk resulting from a decreasing reliance on loan capital. Although this is a negative trend, it goes hand-in-hand with lower risks resulting from less reliance on loans. In the long term this may result in a much more stable position from which returns can be increased.
Dividend Yield measures the return investors can expect by comparing the dividends receivable by the price paid for shares.3 The formula used is; (1.5).
The current market price may be very different to the price originally paid by the shareholders. The ratio is therefore more useful for deciding whether to purchase more shares in the immediate future. The size of the dividends is decided by the need to attract investors against the need to reinvest profits in the business for growth and improvement. Increasing dividends show growth, while a struggling firm may only be able to maintain them. , 14/12/2004.
Figure 5 shows Kidde 's dividend yields since 2000, as averages for the year. The values are about average (around 2-3%). There is no long-term trend in dividend yield, but there was a significant decrease in 2003. The main reason for the decrease was market share price which rose from 70.8p in 2002 to 106.5p in 2003. Share prices increase when prospects in an entity are seen to be improving- investors buy more shares in the business, and in doing so drive up the price of each share.
Kidde is in the process of reducing its net debts, while increasing its capability through acquisitions. Earnings are therefore being reinvested, rather than paid out as dividends. While shareholders funds have increased greatly in the last few years (  68.2m in 2003 compared with   38.1m in 2002), dividends have only increased slightly inline with sales (a 6% increase from 2002 to 2003). Kidde Ratio Assignment, Best Ratios, Dividend Yield, student ID: 0222586.
The Earnings per Share (EPS) ratio gives the profit generated on an ordinary share. It indicates profitability from the perspective of a shareholder. The formula used is; (1.6).
Figure 6 shows the trend in EPS since 2000. EPS has increased significantly since 2000, which indicates that Kidde is an improving investment. The result matches the trend in ROCE (see section 1.1.1), and underlines the increasing profitability of the business.
Liquidity is a measure of an entities ability to cover short term debts with its current assets (e.g., cash). A high level of liquidity means that an entity is in a more secure position to pay off its short-term debts. This is appealing for investors as it indicates that less risk is involved. Liquidity can be measured using the acid test ratio which gives the ratio of liquid assets (cash etc, but excluding stock cannot be easily turned to cash) to current liabilities (debts which can be called in within a year). (1.7).
There has been a gradual decrease in the acid test value since Dec 2000. While the specific value of acid test ratio might not be of definite concern, the trend is clearly not positive (Figure 7).
An entity should be seeking to find a balance between the advantages of high level liquidity, and the disadvantages of high accounts receivable turnover ratio. Maintaining high liquidity may require an aggressive credit regime, placing strains on customer relations. A resulting loss in customers could outweigh the advantages of liquidity. While a value greater than one may not be essential, the values demonstrated here of under 0.9 may be alarming. The 2003 Kidde balance sheet shows that the reason for the decreased acid test value from 2002 is a greater increase in the level of short-term debt than the increase in current assets. , 03/12/2004.
Expenditure on acquisitions has increased in recent times (  16.4m in 2003,   13.2m in 2002);20 this is consuming much of its cash. The decrease in net debt is allowing them to increase acquisition spending.. This acquisition policy probably contributes significantly to Kidde 's high level of short term debt. It is a risky strategy, offsetting the dangers of low liquidity against the longer-term benefits of acquisitions. , 15/12/2004.
The ratio measures the efficiency with which the entity purchases and sells goods. The value calculated gives the number of times stock is turned over in that accounting period. A high value indicates that the stock spends little time in the inventory before it is sold, minimising the amount of cash tied up in stockpiles.
The formula used is (Dyson); (1.8) where the average stock is given by;.
Figure 8 shows a clear increase in stock turnover ratio since 2000. This is indicates that efficiency is improving, at least in the area of stock control. Another indicator should be considered to see if this trend in efficiency is a general one.
The ratio used is; (1.9).
The average trade debtors is found using;.
The ratio has also been calculated using closing trade debtors, both results are shown on Figure 9. The ratio gives the average time taken for an entity to collect the money owed by its trade debtors.. Cash flow problems could result if the value is too high, but longer collection periods may help customer relations. A period of 50 days is the median value in the UK, but this varies greatly between industries3. Calculations for Kidde show the Collection Period to be in excess of 60 days, however. It is difficult to know if this is too high a value without comparison with entities in the same industry. After the 2000 demerger, Kidde may have been focussed on building customer relations as a separate group, giving less stringent credit terms to customers. Figure 9 shows that there has not been any clear trend since 2000- using this indicator, efficiency does not seem to be improving.
Dictionary of Business, Oxford University Press,    Market House Books Ltd 1996, pg 148.
Kidde Ratio Assignment, Best Ratios, Trade Debtor Collection period, student ID: 0218780.
Research and development expenditure is investing internally within the entity to aid the production of new or improved products and processes which ensure the company remains competitive in the marketplace. This is particularly important for an entity like Kidde which operates in a very specialist market. Figure 10 shows that overall Kidde 's R&D expenditure has decreased since 2000, with a slightly increase in 2003. The decrease has been quite significant, with 27.6 m being spent in 2000 compared to only 18.7 m in 2003. While the company has grown since 2000, R&D expenditure has shrunk. Shareholders should be alert to further changes in R&D expenditure to ensure that this vital area is not neglected.
Kidde provides fire protection products and services throughout the world, most of its sales coming from the US, Europe and the UK (Figure 11). Using data from Note 2 of the 2003 Kidde annual report, Table 4 shows that compared to other markets, operations in Europe are highly unprofitable for Kidde, giving only a 2% net profit margin. This should be monitored in the future and may require significant work to improve it.
During 2003, Kidde 's four divisions were split into three; aerospace and specialist equipment, Residential and Commercial and Industrial Fire Protection. Note 2 of the financial statements gives a break-down of the performance of the three divisions and shows that all experienced growth in sales, except Aerospace and Specialist Equipment. This could be the result of the difficulties the aerospace market has been facing after September 11 th. Interestingly, however, profits for this division have increased, while profits for Residential and Commercial decreased.
Kidde 's 2003 Financial and Operating Review (in the Annual Report) draws attention to the impact of foreign exchange movements on the group 's profit. Over half of Kidde 's sales currently come from the US, with many in other countries. According to the group finance director, the group 's performance has been significantly affected by changes in exchange rates with these countries, particularly the US. Over the last year the US dollar has been increasing weak. The effect of this was mitigated by hedging of future earnings using financial instruments20. This course of action was wise, and probably left Kidde much better off than entities in a similar position.
Wendlant, A, Kidde limits impact of weak dollar, Financial Times, page 22, 09 Jan 2004.
The making of provisions by an entity involves accounting for events in the future that may affect the reality of current profit levels. For example, provision for bad debt accounts for the fact that a proportion of debt may never be recovered. It is an example of the prudence rule, since it tries to be realistic about the level of profit that will actually be realised. However, the setting of provisions requires a great deal of subjective judgement as to the likelihood of something occurring, and can therefore be used to influence stated profit. FRS 12 deals with "Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets" and aims to prevent the use of provisions for 'profit smoothing', by only making provisions when there are good grounds for them. , 15/12/2004.
Kidde 's 2003 balance sheet (Annual report, page 23) contains an entry named "Provisions for Liabilities and Charges", which carries a value of   49.1m. Note 21 (Annual report, page 44) gives a break-down, which is shown in Figure 12. The largest provision is that under the heading "Litigation/environmental"-   20.7m has been set aside for this,   5.7m of it in 2003. In the notes describe this provision as that for "the anticipated cost of resolving litigation and environmental issues, based on professional advice. The timing of the settlement of these claims is uncertain, but it is expected that theses provisions will be utilised over the short to medium-term.".
Assumptions have been made to decide the size of this provision, and being subject, could be altered to influence stated profit.
The other main provisions made in 2003 were for.
In total,   13.6m was charged to the profit and loss account in 2003, nearly 13% of divisional profit. Although restricted by FRS 12, there must surely be room here to understate or overstate profit by controlling the assumptions used to size the provisions.
According to FRS 10, Goodwill is defined as the difference between the value of the assets of a company and the purchase price. This difference results from the existence of intangible assets, such as employees, skills, or company reputation, which do not have monetary value but contribute to the strength of the business. Kidde 's policy on accounting for goodwill is given in note 1 of the 2003 Annual report. In line with FRS 10, Goodwill "has been capitalised in intangible fixed assets and amortised over expected useful economic lives depending on the type of business acquired, subject to impairment views." It is explained that Goodwill is to be amortised over 5, 10 or 20 years depending on the value of the acquisition. Determining this 'useful economic life' is highly subjective and difficult to predict (since the assets are intangible), and controls the amortisation payments made on the profit and loss account. , 03/01/2005.
Detail of the treatment of Goodwill is given in note 12 of the Annual report. The scale of the acquisitions Kidde made during the year is indicated by an additional   21.4m in Goodwill, added to a total goodwill of   147.8m. The total charged to amortisation for the year was   10.6m. This is a considerable amount (10% of operating profit), and any adjustments made to this figure could have a significant effect on profit levels. Here Kidde are able to affect the level of profit by their subjective judgements of the quality of goodwill. Since these judgements are subjective, they can easily remain within the bounds of "a true and fair view".
Kidde has shown an increase in sales and profits over the last financial year. Profitability has increased in terms of profit margins and return on capital employed.
Foreign exchange rates, particularly the US dollar have had a significant effect on Kidde 's performance, but this has been mitigated by hedging.
Kidde has a strong acquisition policy which has consumed much cash, but offers prospects for the future.
Returns for shareholders are not so positive at this time as a result of Kidde using earnings for acquisitions and for the reduction in net debt rather than in dividends. The reduction in long term loans also puts more emphasis on the use of shareholders capital.
Kidde has a high level of gearing but this being decreased by the reductions in long term loans.
Dividend yields are not very positive at this time due to increase in share prices and slow increases in dividends.
Liquidity is an area of concern as short-term debts mount up in the wake of the acquisition policy.
Efficiency indicators do not reveal conclusive trends overall, but Kidde seem to be controlling stock more efficiently.
Research and development lacks funding in line with the general growth of the business and should be viewed carefully over the coming year.
Goodwill amortisation is an adjustment that can allow Kidde to influence its stated profit by setting amortisation periods accordingly, while keeping within FRS 10.
Kidde has a number of provisions set aside in line with FRS 12, but there is also room here for profit adjustment by controlling the assumptions used for sizing of provisions.
The recommendation for shareholders at the end of the financial year 31 st December 2003 is to hold shares. Kidde has improved significantly over the year, generating more sales and becoming more profitable. It is however, not directing earnings towards shareholders at this time. There is much risk involved as a result of Kidde 's high debts, which are making it increasingly illiquid. This is a period of consolidation for Kidde which is trying to establish itself firmly by reducing dependence on lenders, and by acquiring all the elements it needs for future competitiveness. Shareholders should hold their shares and wait until this consolidation period starts to yield fruit.
There is currently tremendous growth in the security industry with the market increasing by 12% annually. This is partly the result of a construction boom in Asia, but also because of a higher awareness of potential threats. Fire protection systems are seen as essential components of security systems. Security companies such as Tyco International Ltd and United Technologies Corp. are therefore looking to enhance this area of their business by the acquisition of specialist companies. All of this is positive for Kidde, who can benefit from growing sales worldwide.
Wakabayashi, D, Security Industry lures GE, others; The market is growing...., The Philadelphia Inquirer, 7 Dec 2004.
On November 1 2004 new legislation came into effect in New York requiring that all homes be fitted with carbon monoxide detectors. Kidde 's experience in detector manufacture put it in good stead to capitalise on this opportunity- they expect to sell around 6 million detectors.
US legislation fuels confidence at Kidde, Financial Times, Page 24, 10 September 2004.
Prospects for the Kidde 's aerospace division are improving, with the announcement of a   147m contract with Boeing in May 2004 to provide systems to detect and fight fires in the new 7E7 Dreamliner planes for the next 20 years. The aerospace market, which was hit badly by September 11, is now starting to improve.
Tiesenhausen, F, Kidde wins $250m Boeing contract, Financial Times 24 May 2004, page 20.
Baxi and Robblialac were described in the 2003 Annual report as being highly geared companies.20 Both were sold early in 2004 generating   92.6m (not including Goodwill), which was used to significantly reduce net debt (to   206.8m). Their sale helps to reduce Kidde 's gearing and its reliance on loans as a source of capital. The profit and loss account for 2003 does however show that significant income was generated by Baxi (  11.8m in 2003,   7.2m in 2002). Indeed, in the 2004 Interim report the need for replacing the earnings generated by their former associates, and highlights the intention to continue with an acquisition strategy.18 It remains to be seen, therefore if this course of action will benefit Kidde.
Kidde plc Interim Report 2004, p3.
As explained in section 0 the security market is currently experiencing fast growth. In October 2004 America 's United Technologies Corporation made a takeover bid for Kidde. This acquisition would extend UTC 's security business into fire protection, making it much more competitive as an 'all-in-one' security system provider. UTC already owns Chubb plc, a security company, part of the original Williams group to which Kidde belonged prior to November 2000. The bid of 160p per share was rejected by Kidde 's board as being too low, and was subsequently raised to 165p on December 8 2004. This interest in Kidde has been reflected by an increase in share price- around 125p before the bid rising to 170p. Operating within UTC, Kidde could benefit significantly from the general trend in the security market, and may help it to develop its strength in the US. There are, however, increased risks involved- UTC may have different aims and Kidde 's current strategies may be compromised to the detriment of profits.
Kidde plc Statement Regarding Press Speculation, Press Release, December 8 2004.
Kidde 's 2004 Interim shows the company 's financial position at 30 th June 2004 (half year position). The main highlight is a 7.4% increase in sales (  460m compared to   429m June 2003). This is particularly significant because it seems to demonstrate that the absence of Baxi has not damaged profits.
Kidde 's Residential & Commercial Division achieved a 32% increase in sales, which, it is claimed, is the result of market share gains and US safety awareness campaigns.
Industrial Fire Protection achieved increases in sales and profits, while, as in 2003, Aerospace & Specialist Equipment suffered a 5% decline in sales (although increased profits).
During the first half of 2004 Kidde sold Baxi and Robblialac making   92.6m in proceeds, and also during this period received a tax credit of $54m. From the interim report, it is clear that much of this cash has been used to reduce net debts.
This was highlighted as a major factor affecting Kidde 's performance over 200320 and remains so as the value of the dollar has continues to decrease, reaching rates of nearly two dollars to the pound. Kidde 's policy of hedging reduces its exposure to currency variations, but does not eliminate the effects on profits.
Since Kidde operates in a number of economies it is more subject to the effects of changes in taxation in different countries. Many of the economies Kidde operates in currently have substantial public sector deficits, which may result in changes in tax legislation affecting profits. There is respite from this concern in 2004 at least, with an IRS tax audit settlement resulting in a tax credit of $54m. This has given a significant boost to profits for 2004- retained profit by June 30 th is four times what it was in the previous year.18.
Protected by Kidde, Annual Report and Accounts 2003, p2, p3, p5.
Kidde plc Press Release, Kidde settles with US tax authorities, resulting in $54m credit to profit, 2/08/2004.
Kidde has made a number of important acquisitions in the last year to enhance its capability in different markets.
In January 2004 Kidde acquired Croda International 's Fire Fighting Chemical Business, manufacturer of fire fighting powders and foam. It is hoped that this will strengthen Kidde 's position in Brazil and Mexico, while also providing an important supply bases in the UK and France to strengthen the European Market.
Acquisition of Croda International 's Fire Fighting Chemical business, Kidde plc Press Release, 19/01/2004.
The acquisition of Gloria KG, it is hoped, should also strengthen Kidde 's position in the Europe. Gloria is a leading maker of portable fire extinguishers, and has an established network of distributors throughout Europe, particularly in Germany. The acquisition should greatly enhance Kidde 's product range and sales of fire extinguishers, and increase its access to the European market. The move is also complemented by the acquisition of Croda International 's Fire Fighting Chemical Business, and has been incorporated into Industrial Fire Protection operations.
Fire Safety Engineering, May 2004, Vol. II, Issue 3, p40.
Acqusition of Gloria, Kidde plc Press Release, 19/02/2004.
The acquisition of Harden SA, another manufacturer of portable fire extinguishers is intended to boost Kidde 's grip on the French market- identified as one of the key areas in which Kidde needs to advance.
Acqusition of Harden SA, Kidde plc Press Release, 24/11/2004.
Generally, recent acquisitions have focussed on strengthening Kidde 's European operations. This is encouraging if we consider the disappointing margins produced by sales in Europe (see section 1.1.6).
Current market conditions are highly favourable to Kidde with high growth in the security industry and benefits from fire protection legislation.
Kidde 's sale of Baxi and Robblialac have helped reduce net debt significantly and provided cash for further investments. The resulting lost earnings, however, will reduce the profit of future years unless replacement investments are found.
Kidde has made, and continues to make many important acquisitions that strengthen its capabilities, particularly in Europe where margins have been poor. Long-term benefits of these acquisitions have yet to be fully realised.
Kidde 's half year position in 2004 is stronger than 2003; sales have increased, and net debt has been significantly reduced.
Taxation and currency exposure may have a great influence on Kidde 's profits over the coming years.
The possibility of a takeover will have a significant effect on Kidde 's future prospects. Takeover by an entity like UTC could be greatly advantageous in capitalising on the growing security industry worldwide, but could compromise Kidde 's successful strategies.
