The study of the connections between East and West has obtained much attention from many scholars not least because it helps to explain the current world system of globalisation. Connections between nations can be established for several reasons, including 'for reasons of profit...the desire for power, and as a result of pure inquisitiveness'. It is the purpose of this essay to establish why a divergence occurred between the West (more specifically Western Europe) and the East (the focus here will be China). I intend to investigate whether there was a rise of the West or a decline of the rest and exactly how much of this was to do with connections formed between 1300 and 1800 and how much was down to luck and good fortune.
C.A. Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 42.
Before we start looking at the areas of divergence, it is useful to investigate areas of similarity. The economies of Europe and China in the eighteenth century were 'relatively simple, dominated by agriculture and still dependent on the seasons'. Such reliance led to their description as "agrarian empires". This encompassed the stratification of peasants, including landed peasants and tenant peasants. There were few differences at this time: 'many western and southern European peasant farmers were hardly richer than their Asian and African equivalents'.
Ibid, p. 27.
Ibid, p. 28; some information in this paragraph taken from Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, pp. 27-9.
Another similarity was state control by intervention. The French monarchy, for example, had been 'effective at bringing in taxation revenues...[whilst areas] within a thousand miles of Ottoman Istanbul were ruled quite tightly'. This is an achievement by the Ottomans considering the distance and topography of the land. A comparison with China is also possible, where 'the emperors directly managed the irrigation systems of the Yellow River and maintained the Grand Canal north of Nanjing which supplied gain to the imperial heartlands'. Thus, it is tangible to suggest that each of the states could operate as a centralised authority.
Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 30.
Ibid, p. 30.
There were also similarities in religion, with Europe, China and the Ottoman state appearing to be quite secular: the Chinese were divided between Buddhism, Confucianism and Daoism; the Ottoman dynast could only head Islamic religions, yet the territory included the Jewish, Druze and Christian religions; Europe too was diverse, with denominations of Christianity such as orthodox, catholic and protestant churches all playing a role.
Globalisation in its earliest form has been termed "archaic globalisation" by Bayly. Such a process entailed the increase of social relations by monarchs exchanging 'honorific commodities' between one another (universal kingship). Often goods in one area would be considered a luxury in another, for example Chinese porcelain in Europe. Pilgrimage was another example of a true global phenomenon, accentuated further by missionaries such as the Jesuits and Franciscans. The spread of goods and practices to promote good health also played a role.
Ibid, p. 42.
Some information taken from Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, pp. 41 - 44.
A later, early modern variety of globalisation was highlighted by the 'inter-regional trades in tea, tobacco and opium...this was early capitalist expansion, beginning in the Atlantic in the seventeenth century and spreading to much of the rest of the world by 1830'. This European push was not mirrored by others. Bayly extrapolates, referring to expansion as 'becoming parasitic on, perhaps cannibalising...the earlier links created by archaic globalisation'. In addition to this, events in one part of the world were affecting other parts, where they previously had not. Bayly picks out the American Revolution which  'significantly altered trading patterns in Asia by forcing the English East India Company to redouble its purchases of tea in China and eventually to introduce Indian opium into Qing territory'.
Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 44.
Ibid.
Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 45.
Connections between the East and West helped create a convergence in certain areas. Indeed, 'Europe and parts of Asia...were in the centuries before 1800...similar both in terms of institutional structure and of economic performance'. Van Zanden comments on the use of 'convergence', declaring that it 'implies that the starting point of those various parts of the Eurasian continent was different'. He expounds on this by describing Asia 's 'top down' institutional structure, whereby the market economy exists as a 'result of concessions given...to accommodate and even promote market exchange, with the long run aim of strengthening the (tax basis of) the state itself'. This is a counter-intuitive idea: the ruling elites had 'to learn to abstain from using its power...in order to become more powerful'. Conversely, the European system relied more on a 'bottom up' approach with an emphasis on the people, by way of 'guilds (of groups of merchants), chartered towns and communes'. Such organisations were strong in early modern Europe due to its decentralised nature (seen with the emergence of economic and socio-political autonomous city-states) and worked thanks to the bond between merchants. Additionally, Van Zanden describes the property system as 'fuzzy' in China, Japan and Western Europe states during the early modern period: 'the monarch claimed to be the sole owner of the land, but peasants had strong use rights'.
J.L. Van Zanden, 'The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective', Some Thoughts and Hypotheses', Itinerario, p. 9.
Ibid, p. 14.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Some information taken from Van Zanden, The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective, p. 15.
Van Zanden, 'The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective', p. 15.
Both Asian and European approaches worked primarily to create 'conditions which were favourable to trade'. In addition to this, states were self-interested and resource hungry, leading them to compete with each other and accumulating 'as much resources as possible for warfare'. State power was important because the loss of independence resulted in a loss of economic dynamism. Competition was not just limited to territories but to market share. A Smithian evolutionary game is sketched out by Van Zanden: 'producers were forced by the invisible hand of the market to develop more efficient production processes, find new market outlets and new means to lower transaction costs'.
Ibid, p. 14.
Ibid, p. 16.
Ibid, p. 16.
The passing towards modernity, symbolised by Industrial Revolution and population growth, occurred at the same time as the passage out from the 'great domestication', where, ultimately, the people farmed land intensively and not nomadically as they had in previous centuries. The timeframe of this change marked a significant divergence between the East and the West.
Some information taken from Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, pp. 49 - 50.
However, it is worth pointing out that 'primacy in the economic field is often accompanied by political, military, and cultural supremacy and its loss with their loss'. So whilst attempting to maximise market share, political and cultural development could not be ignored.
E.L. Jones, Venetian Twilight: How Economies Fade, Journal of Economic History, p. 702.
Before discussing the Industrial Revolution and its potential importance, it is worth defining it. Up until recently, the 'big bang' theory (explosion of technology and labour saving methods alongside the 'creation of a modern market economy, including a modern set of institutions') has been widely accepted: that it 'constituted a fundamental and fairly sudden break with "pre-industrial" times...[and that] it was British in origin'. A revisionist viewpoint however was to discredit this theory and declare that the process of industrialisation can be stretched over time, 'as part of long, slow processes: market expansion, division of labour, many small innovations, and millions of people accumulating small profits'. This approach is championed by Crafts and Jan de Vries. De Vries has described the process, dating back to 1550, as a series of 'industrious revolutions' rather than being one ultimate event, highlighting gradual change and improvement at the micro level.
Van Zanden, 'The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective', p. 11.
Kenneth Pomeranz, Political Economy and Ecology on the Eve of Industrialization: Europe, China and the Global Conjuncture, American Historical Review, paragraph 3.
Ibid, paragraph 4.
Economically, the Industrial Revolution was unforeseeable and there were several reasons for this set out by Van Zanden: firstly, 'the stagnation of living standards limited growth on demand, especially for relative luxurious products'. The transformation of the economy therefore was negligible; secondly, 'declining real wages, increasing land prices and...energy prices, steered technological progress into the direction of land and energy saving innovations, whereas labour saving technologies remained under explored'. Van Zanden continues to describe that most labour saving technologies actually occurred in an earlier period, and not during the Industrial Revolution. This view is quite a turnaround from the previous views, advocating the saving of labour with technology as being centrepiece to the Industrial Revolution. In short, the 'Industrial Revolution was...not the logical next step...but a fundamental discontinuity in the pace and the direction of technological change'. With the uncertainty of the positive effect of the economic aspects of the Industrial Revolution, it is necessary to consider other factors to explain divergence.
Van Zanden, The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective, p. 22.
Ibid.
Van Zanden, The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective, p. 23.
Kenneth Pomeranz places a high emphasis on the ecological differences between the nations leading to divergence. The ecosystem provides, according to 'Thomas Malthus 's four necessities: food, fuel, fibre and building materials'. Fuel was a category which was essential for providing industry, but 'the British Isles already had severe wood shortages before 1650...[and] by 1800...had perhaps 5 percent forest cover'. Thus, Britain needed a new fuel, whilst in North China 'few people were desperately short of fuel...[with an] acceptable 37 percent forest cover for all of China proper'. This is a clear difference between these nations, and the wood crisis provoked Britain into sourcing an alternate supply of fuel, coal: 'the breakthrough required technical innovation and geographic good fortune'. The fact that coal was found 'relatively close to London' was fortuitous, providing 'the equivalent of... 15 million forest acres' in 1820 alone, whilst 'China 's best coal deposits lay...several hundred landlocked miles from the Yanhzi Delta (an area of primary economic importance)'. China was unlucky. In addition, Britain 's response to the coal finding was highly successful, which again was coincidental luck, as P. H. H. Vries points out: 'many shortages in history have presented a challenge that was never met by an adequate response'. The centrality of coal to the Industrial Revolution is emphasized by its use in 'cotton, iron, steel and railways...three of these four...depended on coal, [not to mention its use] as chemical fertiliser'. The second ecological constraint on Britain, according to Pomeranz, was the land mass. Britain survived however by using her colonies, both to obtain resources for industry and to provide goods for overseas markets. The new world 'removed [Europe 's] need to manage land intensively...[and stopped it becoming] wound up on an "East Asian", labour-intensive path'. Vries was unconvinced by some of Pomeranz 's arguments however. He argues that a large part of Britain 's "new world" export market, the United States, was already sovereign, whilst '"Latin America" only became liberated from Spanish and Portuguese tutelage after 1800'. He deemed it unlikely that the British could force their goods and prices upon these now independent nations.
Pomeranz, Europe, China and the Global Conjuncture, paragraph 22.
Ibid, paragraph 25.
Ibid, paragraph 26.
Ibid, paragraph 32.
Ibid.
Pomeranz, Europe, China and the Global Conjuncture, paragraph 31.
Ibid, paragraph 32.
P.H.H. Vries, Are Coal and Colonies Really Crucial? Kenneth Pomeranz and the Great Divergence, Journal of World History, p. 436.
Pomeranz, Europe, China and the Global Conjuncture, paragraph 51.
Ibid, paragraph 56.
P.H.H. Vries, Are Coal and Colonies Really Crucial, p. 429.
Two things that China was lacking were overseas territory and drive for technology. Without having colonies, China did have 'immense overseas trade...[but] there was no mercantilism [which had] provided Europe with far more experience in the organisation of long distance trade, colonisation and warfare'. These were key for Europe to leave Asia behind at the divergence.
Ibid.
As previously mentioned, China lacked any institution for the people, any civil society. Europe on the other hand had evolved a strong civic power, dating back from the autonomous city states and convened by the revolutions of 'the sixteenth (the Netherlands), seventeenth (England) and eighteenth (France) centuries'. China 's centralist policies and lack of civil society put it at a distinct disadvantage. Landes sums this up well: 'even when the state did not take, it oversaw, regulated and repressed'. Landes also placed value on the more temperate climate of Europe providing 'winters cold enough to keep down pathogens and pests...[but also the ability] to grow crops [all] year round'. Thus, the climate reduces the problem of disease whilst not impinging on crop growing.
Van Zanden, The Great Convergence from a West-European Perspective, p. 18.
David Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, ch. 3.
David Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, ch. 2.
Social aspects also divided the East and West, in terms of marriage and the role of women in the state and in the household. In China where households were large, often comprising of several generations under one roof, the role of women was relegated below that of the man: it was nearly always a male who headed the household. Such restraints for women in the East obviously had a large impact on the labour market as it was rare for women to work outside of the home.
In conclusion, divergence happened for a variety of reasons. The catalyst clearly was the European change of pace during and after the Industrial Revolution but differences went beyond economics and labour-saving technology. The presence of a civil society in Europe helped in many ways: with the people having a voice through merchant guilds and communes there was a perpetual power struggle between the elites and the masses. This in turn resulted in an evolving society and political climate, something that was severely lacking in Asia. The comparatively free political society in Europe inspired innovation and individualism which also developed society. The role of warfare played a part too: the Europeans had fought amongst each other and in their overseas colonies giving them greater experience of the battlefield and improving their maritime technology. When it came to confrontation with the East, Europe had a more experience and better technology allowing them to get the better of many Eastern countries. Much can also be put down to luck, for example, the coincidental discovery of coal at exactly the right time when Britain was looking for a replacement fuel for wood and the innovation to utilise the goal. The placement of coal fields in relatively easily accessible areas added to the benefit.
