It is commonly believed that left-handers are more artistic, creative and emotionally oriented due to a dominant right hemisphere. The correlation between left-handedness and certain personal characteristics was investigated in 30 left-handers and 30 right-handers. Each participant was asked to fill in a structured questionnaire. Participants were required to rate how strongly they agreed to statements concerning career choice, clumsiness and right hemisphere characteristics. Generally the findings were inconsistent with the experimental hypothesis. A significant relationship between hand preference and career choice was not found. Neither is it true that left-handers possess more right-handed characteristics than right-handers. The claim that left-handers are overall clumsier than right-handers was not supported.
Handedness refers to hand preference or hand dominance when carrying out everyday tasks. Despite substantial research on topics related to hand preference, a definitive cause for sinistral tendencies has yet to be established. However, we understand that the left hemisphere controls the right handed side of the body and the right hemisphere controls the left handed side of the body. Hence left hand inclination is caused by a dominant right hemisphere (Herron, 1980). The left hemisphere is geared towards analytical and logical thinking, dealing with speech and mathematical functions while the right hemisphere is specialized for synthetic thinking particularly in spatial tasks, art, music, and crafts (Gross, 1996). This suggests that left-handers would be more creative and visual thinkers.
These principle assumptions about handedness and brain dominance have produced many common beliefs surrounding left-handedness. Such individuals are believed to be additionally creative, artistic and emotionally oriented. There does seem to be some evidence of this. A high percentage of famous artists and musicians are left-handed. A few examples are Michelangelo, DaVinci, Lautrec, Picasso, Mozart, Bach and Beethoven. It therefore comes as no surprise that there have been many attempts to empirically verify these patterns.
Previous studies on handedness have produced conflicting conclusions. Some show that hand preference is related to certain characteristics while others do not. An investigation by Coren (1989) reported a higher incidence of injury requiring medical attention amongst left-handers and also a higher incidence of driving accidents amongst left-handed males. According to Coren (1989) this is because of a technological bias towards right-handedness. Machinery, tools and everyday implements like scissors or can openers are fashioned for dextral users, forcing left-handers to use their less adept hand or to find ways around their disadvantage. This can cause awkwardness and a higher probability of accidents. Conversely, Merckelbach et al (1994) did not find left-handers to be less physically fit nor to be more accident prone.
Besides that, left-handers seem to have an advantage in sports. Grouios et al (2000) discovered left-handers to be more common in competitive sporting activities. This may be due to tactical or strategic factors associated with handedness. Also, an analysis of cricket yearbooks revealed a high proportion of left-handed cricketers. However, there was no clear handedness effect in top batsmen and likewise, not an exceptional number of left-handers amongst 752 professional tennis players (Wood & Aggleton, 1989).
In terms of careers, engineering students were found more likely to be dextral (Jones & Bell, 1980; cited by Beaton, 1985) while art students tended to be sinistral as compared to other college majors (Mebert & Michel, 1980; cited by Beaton, 1985). Peterson (1979) found more left-handers in music and art courses than in science courses.
This study seeks to distinguish between these conflicting studies and to settle the debate that has been brought up by preceding research. The experimental hypothesis in this case is that there is a correlation between left handedness and particular characteristics. The characteristics that will be explored in this study are a general combination of those involved in previous studies namely clumsiness, career inclination and propensity towards right hemisphere attributes. The judgements and preferences of individuals are assumed to be influenced by the dominant brain hemisphere. It is also assumed that these innate differences in individuals are stronger than the environmental factors that may render the results insignificant.
It is expected that left-handers will be clumsier than right-handers and that they will be more likely to have right hemisphere attributes. It is also predicted that left-handers will be more inclined to pursue careers in art/ design, sport and music and less likely to choose careers in medicine, accountancy and engineering. 60 people (28 men and 32 women) were recruited to participate in the study. The sampling method used was an opportunity sample of volunteers. There was an equal distribution of left and right handed participants. All participants had clearly defined hand preference (not ambidextrous).
A structured questionnaire consisting of two sections was used (see Appendix A). The first section consisted of 10 questions previously used by Sadler (cited by McManus, 2002) to determine handedness while the second section consisted of 16 questions based on a rating scale from 1 to 5, and also three open-ended questions. The questions required participants to rate how strongly they agreed with statements concerning career choice, clumsiness and right hemisphere characteristics.
A within subjects design was used in which all participants were given the same set of questions. The independent variable in this experiment was the hand preference of each participant whereas the dependent variable was the answers given by each participant. The conditions in this study were the 19 questions related to personal characteristics.
Participants were administered the questionnaires individually under controlled conditions without the influence of other people. The researchers explained that the study was about handedness (but with no mention of the hypotheses) and told the participants that they would be required to complete a questionnaire. Participants were then reminded that they had the right to withdraw from the study at any time. Confidentiality was also assured. The study only commenced once participants had given their written consent (see Appendix B). After the participants had completed the questionnaire, the purpose of the study was explained to them.
The responses were then sorted according to three categories - clumsiness, career inclination and brain hemisphere related characteristics. Within each category, the values of the ratings given by each participant were totalled. This was done to establish how clumsy participants assessed themselves to be, as well as the direction in which their career choices were inclined and how handedness corresponded to right hemisphere characteristics.
Responses for the open-ended questions were coded and analysed. The frequency of particular careers and interests preferred by left-handers and right-handers was calculated and compared.
Finally, the information that was gathered was used to form correlations between hand preference and the individual characteristics of clumsiness, career inclination and right hemisphere characteristics.
Descriptive statistics for career inclination are given in Table 1.
Table 1 shows that career preference is in the direction predicted only for some careers. As proposed, a career in art/design and sport seems to be more desirable to left-handers than right-handers and right-handers seem more inclined to accountancy than left-handers. However, a career in engineering or medicine appeals more to left-handers and a career in music seems to appeal more to right-handers. This does not wholly conform to the expected career inclinations of left and right-handers.
A Mann-Whitney test indicated that there was no significant difference in career inclination between left and right-handers for music, z= -0.75; p .05, art/design, z= -0.83; p .05, sports, z= -1.37; p .05, accountancy, z= -0.46; p .05, engineering, z= -1.66; p .05, or medicine, z= -1.79; p .05. In other words, there was no relationship between handedness and general career inclination.
Descriptive statistics for clumsiness are given in Table 2.
Table 2 shows that according to self ratings, left-handers are slightly clumsier than right-handers just as previous studies suggest. However the difference in means is extremely small. Handedness does not have a large effect on the mean score for clumsiness.
An independent samples t-test revealed that left-handers are not significantly clumsier than right-handers, t (58) = .049; p  0.05.
Descriptive statistics for left hemisphere characteristics are given in Table 3.
Table 3 shows that the propensity towards right hemisphere characteristics is not in line with the hypothesis that left-handers are likelier to possess right hemisphere characteristics than right-handers. The mean score for these characteristics is slightly higher for right-handers than left-handers.
Left-handers are not significantly more inclined to possess right hemisphere characteristics as compared to right-handers, t (58) = - .375; p  0.05.
A greater frequency of left-handers had dream careers and interests that were art related (20% more left-handers than right-handers) and twice as many left-handers described an ideal career that was sport related. There was no noticeable difference for all other categories of interests and occupational ambitions between left and right-handers.
Generally the findings were inconsistent with the experimental hypothesis that there is a correlation between handedness and certain personal characteristics; namely clumsiness, career inclination and right hemisphere attributes such as creativity and synthetic thinking. The results showed that there was no significant relationship between hand preference and certain career choices. Neither is it true that left-handers are necessarily more creative than right-handers as widely believed. Besides that, the claim that left-handers are overall clumsier than right-handers was not supported.
One of the main reasons that a link between handedness and career choice was expected was that left-handers are inferred to be more likely to utilise right hemisphere processes thus preferring occupations requiring related skills (Beaton, 1985). For instance, architects are said to have greater blood flow on the right side of the brain (Dabbs, 1980; cited by Beaton, 1985) which is in accordance with findings that there was a greater than expected proportion of left-handers among student architects (Peterson & Lansky 1974; cited by Beaton, 1985).
However, the statistical data did not show a connection between career choices involving right hemisphere related skills and left-handedness. Instead, the results of this study are more in correspondence with Cosenza and Mingoti 's (1993) research which found no statistically significant differences in handedness among the students of different courses in a university. Participants may not have significantly shown preference for careers in sport, art or music (which heavily involve spatial, right brain processing) because choosing a career involves factors other than natural inclination. Things like financial return and available job opportunities are taken into consideration. So the ratings given may not be an accurate reflection of personal interest. Outside influences such as the opinions of parents and peers also play a part.
In correspondence with the empirical data, Smith et al (1989) found that right-handers were more musically disposed. Although musical ability is a right hemisphere quality, left-handers may lack interest in it as a career option because not many can afford to buy instruments specially made for left-handers and may find difficulty using instruments made for right-handers.
Surprisingly, left-handers showed higher preference for careers in medicine and engineering compared to their dextral counterparts despite the view that they would be 'weeded out' of such jobs due to the usage of highly technical right-handed tools. This could be because most of these participants have not actually pursued these careers and so do not realise the difficulty they may experience using these tools.
It has been suggested that left-handers are reported to be clumsier than right-handers because they struggle to adapt to a right-handed world (Coren, 1989). The lack of significance in this study may therefore be attributed to the possibility that people eventually successfully adapt to circumstances tailored for right-handed people and manage to overcome this struggle.
When this study was being carried out, some left-handed participants commented that they were clumsy as children but ceased to be in recent years. In this study, all participants were at least 14 years of age and the majority of them were in their late teens or early twenties. This supports the idea that the sample of left-handers used would have had considerable time to learn to modify their motor skills appropriately to adapt satisfactorily to their environment despite being disadvantaged when faced with right-handed tools.
The findings also demonstrated that left-handers were no more likely than right-handers to be significantly 'right brained'. The reason that left-handers did not show more evidence of right hemisphere attributes may be because they are constantly encouraged to adopt left hemisphere characteristics. In schools, emphasis is placed on objective learning. The ability to excel in subjects such as mathematics and science are well rewarded. In addition, the world is geared towards logical thinking. Only in recent times has creativity and lateral thinking been truly encouraged at basic education level. Thus the natural talent of left-handers for creative and abstract activities may have been overwhelmed by the motivation to pursue right hemisphere related skills.
Provins (1997; cited by Carlson et al, 2000) believed handedness to be caused by motor learning and environmental influence. According to him, only the capacity for hand preference is genetically determined. The final direction of hand dominance relies on environmental factors. Hence, the characteristics of an individual are just as susceptible to being shaped by the environment and general predictions based on laterality cannot be made.
The potential weaknesses of this study are the small sample size as well as restricted sample population. The results obtained in this study may not have been a valid representation of the population as a whole. Generalisations based on overly small samples often lack strong validity. The simplistic design of this study may also have affected validity. Due to minimal resources and restricted availability of research methods, the only measure of personal characteristics used was a basic questionnaire. A superior design of this study may be drawn up using a more in-depth questionnaire consisting of more questions and more ways of assessing the investigated characteristics. Alternative methods of research that do not involve self evaluation could be used. A few examples are observational methods, interviews involving participants' family or friends and also task based experiments.
Ultimately, it seems that generalisations about characteristics that left-handers possess cannot be made. Therefore, there is no reason to encourage left-handers towards certain fields of career or to expect increased productivity by delegating tasks according to handedness. Personal characteristics seem to be mainly determined by individual differences and experiences rather than handedness and brain laterality. Nevertheless, practical steps such as making left-handed tools more available would be useful in avoiding any unnecessary injuries. Future research may be more successful in uncovering associations between personal characteristics and handedness.
