'Politics is about the uneven distribution of power in society - how the struggle for power is conducted'. Stoker and Marsh here highlight the general consensus that power is central to the study of politics. 'Power is to political analysis what the economy is to economics' writes Hay. However, there remains much debate concerning the nature of political power. Dahl 's notion that 'A gets B to do something that he or she would not otherwise do' initiated a fiercely contested Anglo-American academic dialogue during the 1960s concerning how power should be conceptualized within the study of politics. Attempts to define political power have been controversial. Before the various approaches towards power can be addressed however, one must first establish and define the theories of pluralism and elitism within which lie the assumptions upon which these approaches are forged. Dahl 's pluralist conception depicted political power as an essentially decision making phenomenon. The so-called 'Faces of Power' controversy began as Bachrach and Baratz attacked Dahl on the basis that he ignored the political power which lies within agenda setting. The radical and contemporary approach of Steven Lukes argues political power lies in the ability to shape preferences, drawing a crucial distinction between perceived and actual interests employing Marxist theory to illustrate such concepts. It seems the essence of political power lies beyond Dahl 's analysis; debate has been fruitful and insightful and suggests a more complex notion of power.
Quotation taken from Stoker G, Marsh D. 'Theory and Methods in Political Science' Basingstoke and New York, Palgrave Macmillan (2002) p.9.
Quotation taken from Hay C. 'Political Analysis - A Critical Introduction' Hampshire, Palgrave (2002 p.168.
Quotation taken from Hay C. 'Political Analysis - A Critical Introduction' Hampshire, Palgrave (2002 p.172.
One must first establish the theories of pluralism and elitism upon which rival conceptions of political power are based. Within American political science, data from behavioural analysis has given rise to these contrasting theories of modern democracy. The general conclusion drawn was that local politics was dominated by elites. Mill 's The Power Elite (1956) exposed the formidable dominance of the military-industrial complex in America during the Cold War. Miliband produced a similar exposure of the British elite in The State in Capitalist Society (1969). Burke argued the political elite are necessarily wise and able to act in the interests of the electorate providing moral and social leadership as intellectual members of society. Liberal critics site the arguments of JS Mill who advocated the developmental potential of democracy enabling individual moral and educational progression. Elitist theory denies political equality and illegitimately regards the majority as passive and apathetic. The origins of pluralist theory lie in Dahl 's study of New Haven - Who Governs? (1961). Dahl concluded that New Haven was a pluralist democracy of 'polyarchy' - a decentralized system ruled by bargaining and consensus; various interest groups participated equally in the policy process with power widely dispersed. Dahl argued the proliferation of groups dispelled Madison 's fear of the permanent majority. However, pluralist theory has been heavily criticised for failing to address 'political marginals' - those who belong to no group and lack resources. Lukes has argued both theories have drawn upon research methods within behaviouralism which suited their hypotheses. Other models of democracy have emerged notably that of Downs who uses the metaphor of the free market to describe a democratic ideal. However, it is upon the assumptions of pluralism and elitism that the rival conceptions of political power, that provide the focus of this enquiry, are drawn.
It was Dahl 's pluralist conception of political power that initiated the debate within Anglo-American academia. For Dahl, the essence of power lay in the decision making arena. The powerful are those whose opinions hold sway, be it in a legislature or an executive. A has power by virtue of his ability to get B to do something against his own genuine self interests. Thus within Dahl 's analysis, power is understood in terms of its effects - if B has not been made to do anything against his own interest then A has no power. Power is considered an attribute of individuals, exercised through behaviour and associated with domination. Hay notes that, as a consequence, 'power is unproductive' - some gain only to the extent that others lose out yet there remains no obvious elite. Dahl 's innovative analysis remains appealing in that it identifies an area of enquiry - the decision making arena. To discover who holds power, a behavioural analysis of this arena is required. Power can be measured in the sense that a decision making area, relevant actors and their preferences can be identified, whilst decisions made can be analysed and compared with actors' preferences. Dahl has been criticised for promoting what is essentially a one dimensional view and for placing too much emphasis upon individual actors. Dahl focuses exclusively on the exercise of power ignoring the extent to which power is a possession as a result of wealth or status. If such conceptualization allows power to be measured then on what basis can the importance of different decisions be calculated? Dahl does not account for political power which may exist but remain unexercised. Most prominent within such criticism however, is that Dahl 's pluralist conception ignores those circumstances in which decisions are prevented from happening - the area of non-decision making highlighted by Bachrach and Baratz in Power and Poverty: Theory and Practise (1970).
Hay C. 'Political Analysis - A Critical Introduction' Hampshire, Palgrave (2002 p.173.
Bachrach and Baratz put forward a stark alternative to the essence of political power offered by Dahl. Motivated by a desire to defend elitist theories, Bachrach and Baratz acknowledged decision making was essentially a power relation in so far as the actions of A affect B, but they argue this alone is not a coherent conceptualization of power. Power is also exercised in what they termed 'non-decision making'; agenda setting - the  'second' face of power. Schattschneider states 'Some issues are organised into politics while others are organised out' . To be powerful A devotes his energies towards limiting the values and practises of the decision making process. Power is exerted in setting the agenda - an area overlooked by pluralists. Thus Bachrach and Baratz were essentially advancing a debate about the boundaries of the political seeking to broaden them beyond the decision making arena. This they criticised as a mere talking-shop, from which all controversial and contentious issues had been excluded. Bachrach and Baratz argued accountability could only be ensured if the agenda setting process was also subject to scrutiny - they advocated a more inclusive conception of power. A process of non-decision making is said to have helped sustain the arms race during the Cold War in which there seemed a consensus on the need for nuclear deterrents - the option of disarmament remained unexplored until the D  tente period. Bachrach and Baratz argue that the 'mobilisation of bias' operates in the interests of the  'status-quo defenders' hence their elitist conclusions. The irony of such an approach however, is that chief among criticisms of Bachrach and Baratz is that, just as they argue Dahl ignores the agenda setting process, so they are accused for neglecting the means by which preferences are shaped.
Quotation taken from Heywood A. 'Political Ideas and Concepts: An Introduction' Hampshire, Palgrave (1994) p.80.
Quotations taken from Heywood A. 'Political Ideas and Concepts: An Introduction' Hampshire, Palgrave (1994) p.84.
The third dimension within such debate was offered by Steven Lukes in Power: A Radical View (1974). Both the previous approaches share the assumption that actors, as rational and autonomous individuals capable of assessing their own interests, say what they want. Lukes argued power rests in A 's ability not just to get B to do something but in 'influencing, shaping or determining his very wants' . Luke 's three dimensional view argued power should be conceptualized by recognising the struggles involved within the decision making arena, the actions and inactions within agenda setting and the actions and inactions concerned in the shaping or perceived political interests. In expanding the notion of power to include preference shaping, Lukes subsequently draws a distinction between 'felt' (subjective) and 'real' (objective) interests in an almost Marxist fashion. Marxists believe that as the base mode of production, Capitalism dominates the superstructure of society. Hence the proletariat remain dormant under their 'false consciousness' or, as Lenin preferred, their 'trade-union consciousness' which he believed needed be transformed by the Vanguard leadership so the workers could realise their 'revolutionary conscience'. Lukes argues that it is within A 's indoctrination of B where the real essence of political power lies. To identify a power relationship B 's preferences must be proven to be contrary to his genuine interests. Lukes attracts fierce criticism for his formulation of what can be seen as deeply condescending and patronizing notion as it implies the enlightened and privileged position of A. If people 's stated interests are not to be relied upon, how is it that we are able to judge what their real interests might be? Similarly if only rational and autonomous individuals can make objective judgements how are we to decide who is rational and autonomous? Luke 's analysis is indeed innovative but involves complex and potentially misplaced judgements upon individuals.
Quotations taken from Heywood A. 'Political Ideas and Concepts: An Introduction' Hampshire, Palgrave (1994) p.87.
There has been much debate following Dahl 's analysis, suggesting the essence of political power lies beyond the relatively narrow arena of decision making. Bachrach and Baratz and Lukes have offered valuable insight alerting political scientists to other related areas of enquiry - agenda setting and preference shaping respectively. It is important to acknowledge, however, that throughout the development of the debate concerning the conceptualization of political power, Dahl 's contribution has remained appreciated - his ideas have been built upon as a benchmark. Interestingly all such approaches make the assumption that man is endowed with an instinct which drives him to try and impose his will on others - 'the will to power' as Nietzsche wrote. One must recognise that such assumptions are challenged by the ideologies of liberalism and anarchism. There remains debate about political power unexplored in this modest analysis, perhaps most notably discussion within the European tradition of political science focusing upon the 'ubiquitous' nature or power - understood in social and structural terms, and man 's inability to be liberated from it. Weber made significant distinctions between what he termed 'patriarchal', 'bureaucratic' and 'charismatic' power. Thus it seems the essence of political power lies beyond Dahl 's phrase that 'A gets B to do something that he or she would not otherwise do. ' Dahl 's conclusions were pioneering but in turn prompted a debate which, combined, offer a more coherent approach to the essence of political power.
Goodwin B. 'Using Political Ideas' Chichester (1986) p.256.
Quotation taken from Hay C. 'Political Analysis - A Critical Introduction' Hampshire, Palgrave (2002 p.170.
Goodwin B. 'Using Political Ideas' Chichester (1986) p.262.
