Legionella pneumophila, a natural parasite of amoebae is an opportunistic pathogen of humans when inhaled in water droplets. The pathway taken in amoebae is the same as macrophage, with differences only in the entry. This, along with virulence factors expressed, is thought to be important to the survival in humans, a host that would usually kill the organism. It survives by creating conditions ideal for its growth and replication in its phagosome, then by induced factors fuses with the host lysosomes, creating another niche, and finally upon exhaustion of nutrient supply, lyses the host cell and moves onto another, causing pneumonias.
Legionellosis is a recently emerged disease. It was first found in humans in an outbreak of pneumonia at a meeting of the American Legion in 1976. It is a major concern with the 1000 US cases reported each year thought to constitute only 10% of the actual cases, which is steadily rising. Legionellosis accounts for about 2-15% of all community obtained pneumonias.
Cell mediated immunity in healthy individuals is able to control L. pneumophila lung infections. However, being the opportunistic pathogen that it is, in the elderly and those with previously compromised immune systems, pneumonias known as Legionnaires disease can arise. In these individuals it has the opportunity to replicate and consequently kill human macrophage.
Initial symptoms include intestinal disorders, high fever, chills and muscle aches, which are closely followed by pneumonia. When pneumonia arises respiratory failure is the major cause of death, in about five to fifteen percent of cases. However pneumonia is not always the result of infection. In many cases, the result is Pontiac fever. This can have either no symptoms, or brief mild headaches and fever. Without treatment this is self-limiting and clears in two to five days, and is thought to account for many of the undiagnosed infections due to its high attack rate, but zero mortality rate. It is not known whether this is caused by bacterial toxin or the result of a strong immune response to the pathogen.
Industrial settings and larger populations of immunocompromised people have brought about increased numbers of infections. The disease is usually caused by altering the environment for human benefit, so work to improve the water sources containing L. pneumophila could cause the occurrence of other opportunistic pathogens in human hosts.
Patients with Legionnaires disease are seen to have significant amounts of cell debris, and the organism can be detected. L. pneumophila is sensitive to the antibiotics rifamycin and erythromycin, and treatment is usually by erythromycin.
Legionella pneumophila is a thin gram-negative rod, of about 0.6m in diameter. It has complex nutritional requirements, including the need for large amounts of iron. It is a motile bacterium with one flagellum (either polar or subpolar). Figure 1 shows a cell infected with L. pneumophila.
L. pneumophila lives naturally, and multiplies in high numbers in fresh and potable water worldwide. The water must be warm (35-45 oC), and stagnant. Places it can be found include heated reservoirs, cooling towers, evaporative condensers, large air conditioning systems, hot tanks, clinical respiratory devices, showers, mist machines in grocery stores and whirlpool spas. The water in each of these sources is nutrient poor for L. pneumophila and induces the bacterium into stationary phase. The organisms are carried in contaminated water droplets, from which they are inhaled and consequently cause disease, however human-to-human transmission has not been observed.
Part of the support of transmission from water supplies to humans by aerosol droplets arises from the correlation of the peaks in disease in mid to late summer to the peaks in air conditioning use (7).
L. pneumophila is a parasite of amoebae, and the largest genus of bacteria to almost exclusively live as single-celled protozoa parasites. Amoebae are protozoa that inhibit bottom vegetation and moist soils in water. The life cycle of L. Pneumophila in amoebae strongly resembles that observed in macrophages.
L. pneumophila are very susceptible to dry conditions, but their encapsulation in cysts allows their transmission in water droplets. These cysts are very resistant to both chemical and physical agents, increasing their persistence in water supplies despite human attempts to eradicate them.
The entry of L. pneumophila into amoebae and macrophage appears to be the only part of the infection cycle that differs between the two hosts (3). Infection of amoebae appears to be initiated solely by L. Pneumophila, however entry into human macrophage is dependent on the phagocyte cells to assist infection.
Figure 2 shows the model of infection for macrophage, the difference to amoebae being the coiling phagocytosis.
Attachment via a complement-mediated route has been proven feasible but is thought to be unlikely in macrophage, due to the low levels of complement in the human lung. Another possible method is the pili of L. pneumophila acting as a ligand to bind to lectin on the protozoa (7) supported by an insertional mutation in the structural gene for pili (pilE L), reducing adhesion in both amoebae and human monocytes by about half (12), and type IV pili being known to mediate host-cell attachment by the pathogenic Neisseria species (13). It is therefore thought to be a legitimate candidate for the job in L. pneumophila.
The entry is thought to differ between hosts. Coiling phagocytosis (figure 2a) occurs in macrophage, when the plasma membrane engulfs the bacteria within coils of itself (1). The receptors involved are known to be CR1 and CR3 (complement receptors). Coiling phagocytosis has not been observed in amoebae and so entry here is thought to be independent of microfilaments, and possibly receptor mediated, although these receptors are unknown.
Once entered into the host cell (either 1 or 2 at a time (20)), L pneumophila are inside a nascent (non-acidifying) phagosome with a single membrane. They export factors locally (demonstrated by other cellular phagosomes still fusing lysosomes) via the Dot/Icm secretion system, which cause modifications, most likely to the membrane of the phagosome, and prevent it from fusing with the endocytic pathway: vital for their survival (7). It has been seen that this replicative phagosome is missing the glycoprotein LAMP-1 on its membrane, which is seen on normal phagosomes as an endocytic pathway marker (5). The bacteria in these phagosomes are in stationary phase.
This isolated phagosome then interacts with the mitochondria, and is engulfed by rough endoplasmic reticulum, becoming an autophagosomal vacuole. Inside this protected phagosome it converts to its replicative form, where it is acid tolerant and does not require the assistance of Icm/Dot. Furthermore numerous virulence traits are not expressed, the key trait being the ability being able to block membrane fusion. This allows the phagosome to bind with the lysosomal compartment proving a harsh but nutrient rich replication niche.
When replication is complete, and amino acids are depleted, the progeny of L. pneumophila collect in the secondary messenger guanosine 3', 5' - bispyrophosphate (ppGpp). This induces the expression of virulence factors causing its new virulent phenotype, promoting transmission of L. pneumophila to a new phagocyte. This has been seen by cells in their post-exponential state converting to the virulent phenotype only when incubated in post-exponential phase culture supernatant lacking amino acids. Important traits include osmotic resistance, which increases survival in the extracellular environment, motility, which helps dispersal and contact with a new host cell, a cytotoxin, which promotes escape from the current host, and the ability to evade phagosome-lysosome gives it a better chance for survival in the next phagosome, where the cycle repeats (7). L. pneumophila have been observed in the host cell swimming away from ruptured hosts, however approximately 24 hours later, no motility is detected (3). This demonstrates the induction of the virulence factors just for the short period when it is necessary to enable it to find a new host.
The promotion of escape from the current host occurs by the development of pores in the host membrane. This can be seen in macrophages in the form of tissue damage, however it has not been observed in amoebae, where the pores are thought to exist in the membrane of the single celled organism (7). Through these pores effector molecules are sent to help evade phagosome-lysosome fusion. For up to a limited number of pores eukaryotic cells can survive (possibly by blocking them (5)), but any more and lysis occurs. Pore formation requires the presence of the Dot/Icm complex, which mediates the activation of caspase 3 (8). Caspase 3 induces nuclear apoptosis by cleavage of a specific substrate (7). Another Dot region is also involved, with a very similar function but located in a separate but unknown loci (6). The genes in this region are called dotH, dotI and dotO (5). Apoptosis allows L. pneumophila to rapidly infect an increasing number of cells, in each using up the nutrient supply, and causing them to die. It is therefore extremely important to the cytopathogenicity in the early stages of infection (8).
L. pneumophila exploit the host mechanisms that usually result in the degradation of invading microorganisms. Speculations are made, however the precise processes in which lysosome fusion is avoided are still obscure (7).
L. pneumophila is resistant to complement-mediated killing. The presence of specific antibody, and polymorphonuclear cells, are also unsuccessful in clearing the disease. A toxin has been found from the supernatant of E.coli with inhibited polymorphonuclear cell killing, which reduced the oxidative capacity of the cells and consequently directly prevented the oxidative killing (14). It is possible that a similar toxin is present in L. pneumophila.
Reactive oxygen species are present in the cells, generated by either bacterial metabolism or were present before infection. L. pneumophila produces several antioxidants that can catalyse the decomposition of these species, although it has not been proven whether these are compulsory for transmission.
Iron transferrin transports iron around the body and therefore only made when iron is present. In its presence IFN--activated human peripheral blood monocytes are not able to inhibit replication of L. pneumophila as they usually would. Therefore it is vital that the iron pool in the pathogen vacuole is of reasonable size to prevent L. pneumophila replication inhibition. L. pneumophila is thought to alter its pattern of gene expression in limited iron supplies.
The ability of L. pneumophila to control the fusion of its phagosome with lysosomes enables it to take advantage of two distinctive niches. The first apart from lysosome, and the second after fusion.
It is thought that fusion of the phagosome with lysosomes is blocked only temporarily (few hours) whilst it converts to it replicative form (as shown diagrammatically in figure 2). Avoidance of the lysosome is achieved by a formulin-resistant surface component being added to the phagosomal membrane. Changes in macrophages are thought to involve lectins and weak bases (brought about by phospholipases (22) and a cytotoxin (7)). The lectins induce cross-linking of glycoproteins bringing about endocytic vacuoles that do n't fuse with lysosomes.
Once the phagosome is in its replicative form, virulence traits blocking membrane fusion are lost and so it is able to fuse with lysosomes to form phagolysosomes. This structure promotes growth and the acidic, hydrolytic, nutrient rich, dynamic environment is exploited for replication to take place. It has been presumed (7) that autophagy machinery recognises these nonfusigenic phagosomes and delivers them to lysosomes.
The following evidence generated by Swanson et al (7) supports the fusion with lysosomes:
The time at which lysosomal proteins can be seen correlates with when replication was observed.
L. pneumophila in endocytic vacuoles are seen to be metabolically active.
If acidification and maturation of the replication vacuole is blocked, bacterial replication is unable to continue.
Replicating bacteria taken from macrophages are acid tolerant (lysosomes are acidic). A change in pH from early in infection is seen from neutral to an average of pH 5.5.
Organelles resident in the vacuole later in infection lack the ribosome and ER protein BiP components, yet granular and membranous material like that of endocytic is often seen (23).
Many of the genes expressed by L. pneumophila contribute to its virulence. Some of them are shown in table 1.
Mutations in either the icm or dot loci lead to defects in intracellular growth, recruitment of host cell organelles, and inhibition of phagosome-lysosome fusion in both mammals and amoebae (1). The dot/icm are gene clusters consisting (not exclusively) of dotA and dotB, of which dotA is next to icm and DotB about 10 kilobases away. Dot/Icm appears to be vital only in the early stages of infection (phagocytosis) to establish the isolated phagosome (avoiding the endocytic pathway (5)), and is involved in the assembly and activation of the type IV secretion system. This system works in the cell membrane to transport DNA and virulence factors out of the cell (6). These loci work together with the lvh locus (Legionella vir homologs), of which components may be able to substitute for dotB and icmE functions for conjugation (not virulence) (15).
In cultured replicating macrophages Mip is seen to promote efficient establishment of infection, and contribute to virulence. Without Mip, infection of neither mammalian of protozoan cells can occur. This was found by the work of B.S Fields (3).
KatB is expressed during the exponential growth phase to encode the cytoplasmic catalase, peroxidase. This enzyme is responsible for the stationary phase that follows, and may be important in intracellular lifestyle (24). Prior to replication there is a lag phase, which has been suspected to represent the induction of an activity that allows replication before katB is induced. katB also plays a role in hydrogen peroxide resistance and defence against H 2O 2.
Although their specific function is unknown mil (macrophage-specific infectivity loci), mak and pmi are 3 further loci that are known to be involved in intracellular multiplication and growth. Lastly a General Stress protein (GspA) is expressed after L. pneumophila 's entry, however it has been found not to be compulsory for the survival and growth in macrophages (21).
The virulence factors expressed of part f of figure 2, all play a role in surviving in the human host cells that would usually kill L. pneumophila. It has been shown that at least 35 proteins are induced at this stage and 32 repressed in U937 cells (9). Virulence proteins are expressed by the organism in response to depleted amino acid supplies. The factors include type II and type IV secretion systems, a pore forming toxin, type IV pili and flagella. The type II secretion system, not previously mentioned, like the type IV, exports proteins. However it is significant as L. pneumophila is the first intracellular pathogen to contain the chromosomal locus for this protein (17,18) and the secreted proteins are predicted to be used for intracellular growth.
It is thanks to their natural host, amoebae, that L. pneumophila are able to evade the immune system of human macrophages. It is though very unlikely that it is linked to human selection pressures, as human-to-human transmission does not occur. The virulence function induced is therefore likely to be for safe entry, robust intracellular replication, survival in fresh water, and efficient transmission from one phagocyte to another. These factors are then transferred to human macrophage, and allow infection. Experimental evidence from Gao et al (4) compared the growth kinetics in 89 mutants with similar phenotypic defects in virulence traits and found very similar patterns arise for both hosts. This shows that similar mechanisms are involved in replication in the protozoan and human hosts. Growth in amoebae prior to human infection is shown to enhance entry into macrophage by 100 to 1000 fold (11). Growth in amoebae also makes the bacteria more resistant to antimicrobial agents, and alters fatty acids and surface proteins, although it is not known if these affect the virulence (3).
At different temperatures the virulence of L. pneumophila differs. At 30 oC there are more flagella (19), higher production of factors inducing piliation, and a greater rate of adherence than at 37 oC in both aquatic and alveolar environments. However, when cultured at 24 oC L. pneumophila were less virulent than when cultured at the warmer 37 oC. (As observed in a guinea pig model of infection by measuring 50% lethal dose (TD 50) (16)) It is thought that the higher virulence at higher temperatures is the result of environmental stress that L. pneumophila may sporadically encounter in their natural host.
In view of the evidential studies it can be said that L. pneumophila is a problem organism in a number of ways. It is a problem organism due to its ability to replicate in the human macrophage, despite this not serving as its natural host. It is convenient for the organism that the pathway used, and virulence factors expressed in amoebae, work incredibly well upon infection in alveolar monocytes.
L. pneumophila are able to exploit mechanisms of their host to evade the immune system in multiple ways. Firstly L. pneumophila is capable of avoiding fusion with lysosomes that usually follows phagocytosis. This allows the phagosome to express the ideal conditions for converting to its replicative form. Upon completion of conversion, loss of virulence traits blocking membrane fusion and lysosome fusion occurrence enables it to take advantage of a second niche for replication. Expression of an autophagy-like process facilitates host cells lyses by the high production of pores, and L. pneumophila has once again taken advantage of that host.
The surveillance of the intracellular environment to react to pH, iron and amino acid levels etc, enable L. pneumophila to express virulent traits such as motility and gene expression at the appropriate times to take full advantage of the host, including transmission between hosts on exhaustion of the nutrient supply.
