This experiment covered some of the growth kinetics, for which the growth curve of Serratia marcescens was determined by measuring the absorbance using a spectrophotometer of the culture growing in a side-arm flask at 10 minute intervals during incubation at 37  C in a shaking water bath. As a result, the Lag Phase began from 0 min to 10 min, the Acceleration Phase began from 10 min to 20 min, then there was 90 min (20 min - 110 min) Exponential Growth Phase, after which the growth began to slow down (Retardation Phase) and finally entered the (Stationary Phase) at about 140 minutes. The specific growth rate "  " was calculated as 1.02 hour -1, and the culture doubling time "t d" was calculated as 0.68 hour.
The growth of bacteria is a result of many changes in the cell, including the change of the size, and the proportion of cellular components. Therefore, it is easy to measure only one or two parameters rather than all the changes as a measurement of the growth. Under simple conditions, the growth curve of a single bacterial culture shows several phases:
The Lag Phase, where bacteria are becoming "acclimatized" to the new environment. Though no growth is detectable using changes in absorbance as the measure, the cell is highly active with the proportions of cellular components changing.
The Acceleration Phase, during which the change in the growth become detectable. This results from the fact that not all cells begin to grow at the same time.
The Exponential Growth Phase, in which the bacteria population growth in maximum rate and the number increases rapidly with time. A plot of log of the absorbance against time is now linear, which in turn can be used to find out the growth rate using the equation:
The Retardation Phase, cell growth begins to slow down as a consequence of the using up of nutrients and the build up of the toxin.
The Stationary Phase, growth appears to cease, no more increase in the absorbance, though metabolic events still occurs within the cells.
The Death Phase, capacity of the surviving cells decreases, the nutrients used up and the toxic metabolic by-products builds up.
The aim of the experiment was to follow the growth curve of Serratia marcescens in nutrient broth by using a side-arm flask and a spectrophotometer at 30  C. While, a viable count was carried out at the beginning and end of the exponential phase of the growth in order to prove that not only the mass but also the number of cells increased during growth.
The experimental procedure and materials were used followed the instruction of the lab manual. For the viable count part, the initial bacterial count were carried out with 10 -4 10 -5, and 10 -6 dilution of the start of the exponential phase of the bacteria culture to give a number about 4 per plate, 40 per plate, and 400 per plate. While, the final viable count of Serratia marcescens were carried out by using 10 -6 10 -7, and 10 -8 dilution of the end of the exponential phase of the bacteria culture to give a number about 5 per plate, 50 per plate, and 500 per plate.
As shown in figure 1 on the semi-log graph paper, there is a very short Lag phase for the first 10 minutes, and then the acceleration phase begins. This lasts until about 20 mins when the maximum growth rate (Exponential Phase) is reached. This lasts until 110 minute, where it began to slow down (Retardation Phase) and finally entered the (Stationary Phase) at about 140 minutes. The Death Phase was not determined on this figure. All "Phases" are labeled on the graph. The curve of the Exponential Phase was straight, though some point lay outside this best straight line of fit.
The specific growth rate "  " was calculated using the equation (refer to appendix 2):.
As a result "  " = 1.02 hour -1,.
The culture doubling time "t d" was calculated using the equation: td = (ln 2) /   .
As a result "td" = 0.68 hour.
The result of the viable count is not included in this report.
The lag phase of the growth curve was not very long, because that this bacterium Serratia marcescens reacts rapidly to the environmental conditions. Some species adapt to the new medium in an hour or two; others take several days. During the Lag Phase, the cells were very active and increase in mass but not number, and no cell division take place. Hence did not show any change on the growth curve of A 600 against time.
The Acceleration Phase was short indeed, which indicated that the cells within the population began to grow at similar, though natural heterogeneity still present. During this phase, the cells of the population began to divide and enter their maximum growth rate at similar time, once the maximum growth rate is achieved, the cell will keep growing at this rate until the conditions are no longer favorable.
During the Exponential Growth Phase, the increasing of the number of the cell was extremely fast, that was one of the reasons that a semi-log graph was used to draw the growth curve. At this stage, individual cells actually cycle through increases and decreases in cell mass (e.g. growth, division, growth, division etc.). In this phase, the specific growth rate was determined as the increase in bacterial biomass per existing unit of biomass per unit of time, and the culture doubling time "t d" was calculated as 0.68 hour (40.8 minutes), very close to the expectation of 40 minutes. "t d" was checked by direct looking on the graph of the linear portion of the growth curve.
The result was under expectation, though some points lie outside the line, this might caused by: 1. Mistaken reading of the spectrophotometer: as the sensitivity of the spectrophotometer was very high, and the lid of the spectrophotometer was not able to close during testing, light from the environment can transferred into the spectrophotometer through the glass, which in turn affected the reading. (Also, if someone 's hand moving close to the spectrophotometer, the reading changed accordingly). 2. Time of the reading taken: which might not be very accurate, this also could affect the reading.
At about 110 minutes, the Retardation Phase began to show. This was because as the bacteria grow, the nutrients were used up, while toxins build up due to metabolic events. Both of these result in reducing in the growth rate of the population. Meanwhile, some cells stopped growth before others.
Finally, the Stationary Phase is reached where cell division ceases.
Though the Death Phase was not indicated in this figure, it 's the final fate of the cells when all the nutrients have run out.
The discussion and conclusion of the viable count is not included in this report.
