Leopold von Ranke (1795-1886), often acclaimed as the father of the scientific method of historiography, is compartmentalised by such a label. It will be argued that his methodology does not concur with that of Geschichtswissenschaft, which would stress on absolute 'objectivity, validity and truth', but more importantly, would identify a 'recurrent theme'. Furthermore, as Georg Iggers has argued, 'rigorous science' must ignore 'metaphysical speculation'. Much of the aforementioned label associated with Ranke arises from the symbol that he became rather than what he actually wrote. Hans Scheier has argued that it was this legacy that distorted the definition of scientific history, whereby it became "a search for facts alone, with no laws or generalisations with a renunciation of all philosophy". Ranke, on the other hand, had distanced himself from such extreme positions when he argued that "from the particular we can indeed...ascend to the universal", whereby it was implied that facts do indeed come together to portray a larger context.
H Feldner, "The New Scientificity in Historical Writing around 1800" in Berger et al (eds.), Writing History: Theory & Practice (London: Arnold, 2003), p. 3.
Georg G Iggers, Historiography in the Twentieth Century: From Scientific Objectivity to the Postmodern Challenge (Middleton, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 2005), p. 25.
Dorothy Ross, "On the Misunderstanding of Ranke and the Origins of the Historical Profession in America" in Iggers & Powell (eds.), Leopold von Ranke and the Shaping of the Historical Discipline (Syracuse, New York: New York University Press, 1990), p. 155.
Leopold von Ranke, "History and Philosophy" in Roger Wines (ed.), The Secret of World History: Selected Writings on the Art and Science of History (New York: Fordham University Press, 1981), p. 101.
However, this does not grant his system a scientific outlook. Lord Acton may have argued that Ranke 's 'colourlessness' in scrutinising evidence was scientific, but "whether Ranke himself was colourless...is questionable". Moreover, even by conceding Ranke 's technique to be scientific, it can be argued that he was nowhere near being the first proponent of the same. Corresponding approximately to the Aristotelian emphasis on 'man in action' and the rejection of the universal applicability of historical laws, Ranke is merely a key thinker in the line of thought that dominated Europe since the 18 th century.
Marnie Hughes-Warrington, Fifty Key Thinkers on History (London: Routledge, 2000), p. 256.
H Feldner in Berger et al (eds.), op cit, p. 5.
The main 'unscientific' problem in Ranke 's system was his rejection of interpersonal analytical and intellectual differences. The historian must "accept only the complete certain", but are there any events- more so their conclusions- barring trivial ones that can escape the "posy and empty shadows" that have been cast over them by time? For Ranke, history was about showing how it really was (wie es eigentlich gewesen), and Georg Iggers has argued that instead of 'really' the word eigentlich should be taken to mean 'essentially'. Even Ranke tried to emphasise this point by arguing that history "is not so much about gathering facts as to understand[ing] them". The problem, however, remains. 'Understanding' the 'essence' of the facts is a concept that cannot be materialised without having to pass through human- and subjective human- agency. The historian, already constrained by an infinite number of facts and faced with the daunting prospect of selecting them without showing bias, is further curtailed by the absence of an overarching structure which would guide his research. In short, the demand of the structure and the supply of facts result in a situation not unlike that of the equilibrium in a market. It is an abstract possibility, but unattainable- hence unscientific. Thus, there are two fundamental problems in giving Ranke the aforementioned title- first, that his system was not scientific, and second, that he was not the first to construct such a system.
Leopold von Ranke in Roger Wines (ed.), op cit, p. 109.
Ibid.
The interpretational problems in Ranke 's model can be explained by comparing it to a simple mathematical or scientific formula. Let us consider-.
This formula is universally applicable, no matter what the circumstances, because multiplying (a+b) with itself does indeed produce this outcome. Ranke 's formula would look something like (f+u) = h, where f are facts, u is understanding and h is history. Problems arise from the onset, as not only the collection of f within the historian 's grasp have to be complete, but to "get at the truth of the facts" his u will have to be symmetrical in the most abstract form imaginable. Additionally, this formula also assumes that u is constant for all historians. While it is scientific to put forward an inaccurate formula (say, a 2 + b 2 + ab) and consequently correct it with application, it is extremely unclear what the correct u is (since Ranke 's take on many historical issues could be readily questioned) and even if an appropriate u is determined, how to reorganise f, if at all, to get to h. In mathematics, one side of the equation can be looked at to correct the formula (say, pointing out that a 2 + b 2 + ab does n't result from a+b being multiplied twice). With Ranke, one cannot look at the h, since the historian can only proceed from the particular to the universal, if at all. In any case, h too is relative to what type of history one seeks to write. There is, thus, no guarantee that both sides of the equation will, as they should, correspond with each other. Human subjectivity plays too great a role in a discipline such as history for it to be scientific.
Leonard Krieger, Ranke: The Meaning of History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977), p. 6.
The role of intuition also mars the Rankean claim to scientificity. There is no guarantee about developing laws of history in Ranke, as he argued that "from the particular, you can perhaps ascend to the general". If we apply this to his stipulation for historians viz. that the historian needs to be "as close as possible to the historical actor", we get a scientific method not unlike an operation whereby a problem is diagnosed inside a patient 's body. However, the doctor does not operate on a patient without an understanding of the various possible solutions, or in other words, laws of medicine. Ranke himself argued in The Great Powers, "Attention ought to be directed, not to the ideas...but to the people themselves who appear as actors in history". However, to understand the complicated juxtaposition of historical actors and their actions, we need to look at what were the ideas that fuelled such actions, and whether they can be knit together to form a conceptualising framework. Depending merely on a coincidence of intuitive concurrence in this case is not adequate for a complete understanding of people and their behavioural patterns that dot history.
Ibid, p. 5 [Emphasis my own].
Ibid, p. 2.
Leopold von Ranke in Roger Wines (ed.), op cit, p. 103 [Emphasis my own].
Ranke 's "deep roots in the religious world of the 18 th century" that filters through in his historiography is also a problematic element for its supposed scientificity. According to him, the secret of world history lay in "spiritual forces...[which]...expand in the world,...fight, limit and overwhelm each other". This led Ranke to celebrate power, and more specifically state power, and he goes on to say that "there appears to be a spiritual essence in power itself", which history ought to study. With meticulous deliberation of facts for their own sake, this essence becomes revealed to the historian. Not only can we question such theologically grounded explanations of forces in world history, but it leads us back to the relativism inherent in the u in the above-mentioned example. In his own works he makes assumptions based on these questionable conclusions that undermine his objectivity. For example, as editor of the Historisch-Politische Zeitschrift (1833-6), in his "Dialogue on Politics" and "The Great Powers", Ranke argued that each state has a spiritual essence derived from God which it must preserve from outside intrusions. What led him to such a not-so-modest claim is unexplored. Similarly, in his History of the Latin and Teutonic Nations (1824), he argues that "one can almost perceive the unity of a single closer history" in the past of these nations. It can be argued that what would have made his approach scientific was to specifically highlight similar traits in the separately written national histories, and identify a causal relationship between them. This would perhaps lend greater significance to some eras than others, and while perfectly acceptable by scientific standards, Ranke rejected this procedure by arguing that "every epoch is immediate to God". Such continual references to the 'Holy Hieroglyph' have led Carl Becker to argue that Ranke 's methodology implied 'intuitive subjectivism' whereby, given interpersonal differences in religious attitudes, every man would feel free to be his own historian, dealing a mortal blow to the universal applicability of scientific procedures.
J Powell, "Introduction" in Iggers & Powell (eds.), op cit, p. xiv.
Quoted in Theodore H von Laue, Leopold Ranke: The Formative Years (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1950), p. 87.
Leopold von Ranke in Roger Wines (ed.), op cit, p. 104.
Marnie Hughes-Warrington, op cit, p. 259.
Marnie Hughes-Warrington, op cit, p. 257.
Leopold von Ranke, "The Historian 's Craft" in Georg G Iggers and Kondrad von Moltke (eds.), The Theory & Practice of History (New York: Irvington Publishers, 1983), p. 53.
J Powell in Iggers & Powell (eds.), op cit, p. xv.
In conjunction with what has already been said about the impossibility of a constant u, Ranke 's own methodology will reveal evidence for the extent of impracticality of such a claim. His idealism, reflected in his aspiration for an exhaustive study of source materials and their objective analysis, often came in conflict with the inherent conservatism that modelled his political outlook. While vehemently arguing against assigning a value to h before calculating f and u, Ranke, while in Berlin in March 1831 during the aftermath of the 1830 revolution in France, nevertheless conceded that his role as the future editor of Historisch-Politische Zeitschrift would be "to defend the actuality of our native development against the flood of alien demands stemming from...presumptuous theories." While it could be argued that Ranke came to this conclusion on the basis of earlier research into the f and u, his own arguments about taking each epoch on its own terms seems to be in contradiction with this statement, as does his prescription that the historian must "extinguish himself", since it is the conservatism of Ranke that is evident here.
Theodore H von Laue, op cit, p. 5.
Leonard Krieger, "Elements of Early Historicism: Experience, History and Theory in Ranke", History and Theory 14:4 (1976), p. 2.
John Warren, "The Rankean Tradition in British Historiography 1840-1950" in Berger et al, op cit, p. 26.
Although Ranke argued for focussing on "the variety of experiences in history", his conclusions violated objectivity on two counts- first, the selective amount and nature of primary sources available to him (hence, not satisfying the exhaustive f criteria), and second, his value judgements based on a lack of evidence. His main sources were governmental archive materials in Vienna, Venice, Florence and Rome which primarily contained official papers and documents produced by foreign emissaries. In other words, they were extremely state-centred sources- a history not of the people, but their unrepresentative aggregates. Ranke himself conceded in his History of the Popes that it primarily focussed on "the great men among them". It could well be argued that the sociological and anthropological approach taken by the Annales school of historians in France in the 20 th century satisfies  'scientificity' by this criteria far greater vis-  -vis Ranke. Similarly, his assertion that "India and China have a lengthy chronology", but at best a "natural history" is not based on sources studied that relate specifically to these civilisations, but on a lack of available material and intuition. Subsequent research by scholars like Kenneth Pomeranz (2001) unearth data and specific trends in Oriental societies that lead to conclusions much closer to what the ideal Rankean method would have been. Ironically, here Ranke departs in his conclusions from his own methodology.
Marnie Hughes-Warrington, op cit, p. 258.
John Warren in Berger et al, op cit, p. 27.
Leonard Krieger, History and Theory, op cit, p. 11.
Georg G Iggers, op cit, p. 30.
This point can be linked to a critique of Ranke 's rejection of the philosophical belief in progress in human society stemming from the Enlightenment. His assertion of the limitation of progress to Latin and Teutonic nations is based on the dearth of archival material from other countries, underlining his Eurocentrisim and undermining his apparent adherence to sources while writing history. More fundamentally, he argued that some material and moral prosperity may well have been present, but we must "guard against making this a principle of history". This may well be acceptable as scientific, but his denouncing of the notion of progress "weakening, dismantling and destroying...ancient institutions", and his disgust at the possibility of what he termed rule by "apprentices and urchins" raises more questions about how objective his value judgements really were.
Leopold von Ranke, "The Historian 's Craft", op cit, p. 52.
Ibid, p. 56.
Leonard Krieger, History and Theory, op cit, p. 3.
Leopold von Ranke in Roger Wines (ed.), op cit, p. 116.
Finally, even if we concede Ranke 's model and his writing to be scientific, he was by no means its first proponent. Epistemological questions were being mulled by European scholars since the Enlightenment which led to the Scientific, French and Industrial Revolutions, and many of their answers coincided with what Ranke himself prescribed to. The idea of Quellenkritik i.e., critical interpretation of sources and "threading [them] into narratives" owed more to Wilhelm von Humboldt 's reform of academic institutions in Germany after the Napoleonic wars in the early 19 th century of which Ranke was merely a part. Leonard Krieger identifies four principal legacies of Ranke and associates their usage much before the man himself propagated them. Use of source materials has been widely used since Thucydides, insistence on primary sources were practiced during the 15 th century by humanists such as Jean Mabillion, application of philological methods of enquiry could be associated with Hamann and Herdet since the 18 th century and seminars were used in the early 19 th century by Ranke 's mentor Barthold Georg Niebuhr. Finally, Ranke made extensive use of- and stressed the importance of- footnotes in writing history. However, he "did not invent, but dramatised" the footnote, as its usage has been noted earlier. Ranke may have been responsible for integrating these approaches to enmesh history within the academia as a separate discipline, but that is a question that does not concern this paper.
H Feldner in Berger et al, op cit, p. 7.
Peter Lambert, "The Professionalisation and Institutionalisation of History" in Berger et al, op cit, p. 45 and Georg G Iggers, op cit, p. 24.
Leonard Krieger, op cit, p. 3.
A Grafton, "The Footnote from De Thou to Ranke", History and Theory 33:4, 1994, p. 53.
The consequence of the Rankean legacy is that he was "blamed for what he wrote, the misuse of what he wrote, and for what he did not write at all". In this paper I have been concerned solely with what he did write and their implications for scientificity. Ultimately, his was an attempt to "move from mythos to logos" when writing history, but as Peter Reil has argued, his spontaneity is distinct from the mechanistic notions one associates with sciences.
M A Fitzsimons, "Ranke: History as Worship", Review of Politics 42:3, 1980, p. 553.
J Powell in Iggers & Powell (eds.), op cit, p. xvi.
