Two component systems (TCS) are sensory-response circuits which regulate many different types of behaviour in cells. The TCS in Escherichia Coli have been widely studied and many have been characterised 1. Although much is known about individual TCS not much is known about possible inter-pathway communication. Gene knockout has previously been the favoured method of studying TCS, however this destroys possible inter-pathway communication. This project aims to study inter pathway communication in E.coli with a view to fully characterising the network of TCS. This will be achieved by developing inhibitors which inhibit specific components of the 32 TCS in E.coli, giving information on how inhibiting one TCS affects the others. This project will use many interdisciplinary techniques including biophysical techniques and mathematical modelling.
Two component signalling pathways (TCS) are the main signal transductions which enable bacteria to sense and respond to environmental stimuli. They are present in all organisms apart from animals. TCS are related to many functions in bacteria including cell division, virulence, antibiotic resistance, metabolite fixation and utilization, sporulation and chemotaxis 2 3.
They contain receptor, transmitter and receiver domains, as shown in figure 3. The receptors are the sensors of the system and detect the stimulus. Currently five different types of receptors have been identified. The information they detect is transferred to the transmitter domain (consisting of Histidine Kinase) which in-turn passes the information to the receiver domain (consisting of Aspartate Kinase), through phosphorylation. The information then stimulates a physiological signal in the form of a gene transcription, enzyme regulation, kinase regulation or motor regulation 3. Much research has already been done on understanding the single pathway systems, however very little data is available regarding inter pathway communication, shown in figure 2.
Bacteria have different numbers of TCS which differ in their structure. The bacteria E.coli has been selected for this project as it is the exemplar bacteria and there is a wealth of data regarding its genome in the literature. All genes encoding the 32 two-component phosphor-transfer signal transducers in the genome of E.coli have been compiled by researchers 4. Also deletions and insertions in the genome of Escherichia coli have been tried 5 6.
Gene knockout can be used to study single pathway TCS but it could lead to confusions while studying inter-pathway communication. Molecular simulation has never been tried before. The aim of this project is to predict and design molecules which can selectively block certain domains then studying inter-pathway TCS systems will be possible. X-ray crystallographic and NMR data is available regarding every domain of all the 32 pathways. Applying the knowledge of bioinformatics along with biophysical techniques and molecular simulation, a systems level approach can be developed to study inter-pathway communication of two component systems.
It is proposed that this group will undertake work that will ultimately lead to the full classification of the understanding of the inter-pathway communications of all the 32 TCS found in E-coli. This ambitious undertaking requires a multidisciplinary, systems biology approach to the problem which would forge relationships between departments and groups across the scientific community. Success in this endeavour would unquestionably show Systems Biology to be leaders in the field in the UK and to be a worldwide centre of excellence.
The goal is to find ways of inhibiting each individual signal pathway of the 32 that are known in E-coli - furthermore, and this is crucial, each of the inhibition mechanisms will be unique and specific to a particular TCS within the bacteria.
It is proposed that the work is undertaken systematically and to progress through the known two component systems in a logical fashion. For each TCS the tasks toward a full understanding of the TCS and the inter pathway communications are as follows:
A schematic block diagram of these tasks is shown in figure 4 below.
The tasks proposed above and shown schematically in Figure 4 show the key philosophy towards the proposed approach. The first stage in the process is the modelling of the TCS and determining the susceptible portion of the system thus enabling the prediction of a suitable chemical inhibition mechanism. In order for this stage to proceed it is necessary to build upon the work carried out at other research establishments 1 3 4 5 6 7 and to use the structural data available regarding the TCS key proteins and enzymes.
At present not all the structures of the TCS have been discerned to the accuracy and resolution required - for this reason it is proposed that some budget is set aside for the additional structural determination.
The core project team secured access to a number of biophysical structural determination laboratories. It is foreseen that there will be access to EM, X-ray crystallography and NMR facilities for at least the next 8 years.
The output of the modelling effort for each TCS is a theoretical inhibitor for that specific TCS.
The next stage of the proposed approach is the synthesis of the inhibitor. The complexity of this stage is heavily dependent upon the proposed inhibition mechanism. Cost could be a limiting factor in this. For example if the proposed inhibitor for a particular TCS were found to be too expensive - there would be feedback to the modelling team to attempt to find a cheaper alternative.
Having found a suitable cost effective inhibitor the next stage is to prove experimentally that the inhibitor works effectively. Having shown the success of the proposed inhibition mechanism bio-physical techniques (EM, NMR X-ray crystallography) will be used to image the regulator/ transmitter inhibitor complexes.
As the ultimate goal is to systematically work through the 32 known TCS with a goal of inhibiting all thus providing information for the networks and pathways - the final stage is to compile the information regarding the inhibition in a database. As more information becomes available and this database grows it is proposed that a further modelling activity is undertaken to use this data to create a model for the network describing the many to many functionality of the TCS system in E-coli.
The tasks shown in Figure 4 show a linear progression from modelling to experiment - however these need not be the case as the research is being done on 32 individual TCS - the work carried out by different groups can continue in parallel.
Understanding the inter-pathway communication of TCS is a big step towards a model of all the signalling pathways in a cell. Very little is currently known about the inter-pathway communications in the TCS of any living organism. This systems biology approach will enable us to build up a model of the TCS and enable further research into the control and manipulation of signalling pathways.
This research is very interdisciplinary and will create many new collaborations between departments in the University, thus strengthening other areas of research which require a more interdisciplinary approach.
There are also many possible medical benefits of this research. Since animals do not have TCS, bacterial infections could be targeted through the disruption of these pathways. By determining the exact function of each TCS and developing an inhibitor we would be able to stop the bacteria from multiplying, whilst not affecting the animal host. Although E.coli is normally not very harmful, the inhibitors and knowledge we develop may be applied to other more pathogenic bacteria. The complete understanding of a relatively simple bacteria may be applied to more complicated and dangerous bacteria.
A full and detailed work package breakdown can be seen upon request, herein is a summary. However due to the changing environment and the large number of unknowns - an extremely high level of flexibility has been built into the project plan.
This ambitious project is proposed to take place over the next 6 years - utilizing the expertise from 12 post doctoral staff members comprising: 4 from the biological sciences, 4 from the mathematical institute, 2 Chemists, 2 Physicists. In addition to this we have secured 8 permanent members of staff who recognise the importance and ambition of this project and are willing to give 50-75% of their time.
Due to the highly interdisciplinary nature of the project, it is proposed that a full time academic administrator would facilitate the interaction between the disparate groups and manage the project.
Costs for the project have been kept minimal. All academic staff recruited have been promised work areas in the home departments due to the high level of cooperation from all departments involved in the enterprise no additional equipment is required beyond a number of desktop PCs. The main costs incurred are due to the salaries of the staff, the cost of consumable goods and materials (for example chemicals).
The projected sum is of the order   1,600,000 over the six years of the duration of the project with a proposed bi-annual review. Due to the high profile nature of this undertaking and the positive publicity MOAC funding council will receive as a consequence of this - this represents an opportunity not to be missed.
