A protein is a polypeptide, or complex of polypeptides that has attained a stable three-dimensional structure and is biologically active. A polypeptide is a sequence of amino acids linked by peptide bonds between the amino and carbonyl groups. Therefore, amino acids are sub-units that are joined into condensation polymers which make up proteins.
Glycine (aminoethanoic acid).
This normally exists as a zwitterion.
A condensation reaction occurs between the carboxyl group of one molecule of gylcine and the amino group of the other molecule of glycine to form a peptide bond (-CONH-) and a molecule of water is given off.
Gylcine + Dilute Hydrochloric Acid.
Glycine + Pure Water = Zwitterion.
The hydrogen atom from the carboxylic acid group protonates the basic amine group.
Glycine + Dilute aqueous sodium hydroxide.
Using the valence-shell electron-pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory it can be seen that in Glycine the side groups are arranged in a tetrahedral shape. There are no lone electrons on the -carbon. There are four covalent bonds, one N-H, one C-C and two C-H bonds, which are arranged evenly around the central -carbon. There is a separate region of high electron density corresponding to each bond. The bonds are spread out as much as possible due to the repulsion between them. This arrangement is taken up because it gives the lowest potential energy due to electrostatic repulsion and yields a bond angle of 109.5 o between groups.
When Glycine is placed into a weak acid the amino group acts as a acceptor and the chloride ion attaches to the amino group. The amino group is normally arranged in a tetrahedral shape but with bond angles of 109.5 o the same as the overall shape of Glycine. However with the addition of the Cl- the bond angles will be reduced to approximately 104 o due to steric interference. This means that this group within itself will be more compacted but it will not affect the overall shape of the molecule and it does not affect the bond with the -carbon.
Globular proteins are three dimensional structures that contain both secondary and tertiary structures. There are two main types of secondary structure, the -helix and the    sheets.
The -helix is a rigid formation of the polypeptide chain produced by the hydrogen bonds forming between peptide groups, C=O and N-H. The bond forms with the peptide group three residues ahead leading to a helical uniform structure. The hydrogen bonds are able to form due to the two permanent dipoles on the carboxyl and amine groups and the lone pair of electrons present on the nitrogen atom which acts as an electron donor. The hydrogen bonds are at their optimum length leading to strong bonds.
The -helix also leads to a tightly packed core maximising the association energies of the atoms and enabling Van der Waals forces to further strengthen the structure.
Hydrogen bonds occur between neighbouring polypeptide chains to form    sheets, rather than between the same chain as in -helices. These can be parallel or anti-parallel. In order to obtain the optimum hydrogen bonding conformation the sheets are pleated. Parallel sheets are less common and hence rarer than anti-parallel    sheets. In globular proteins such as carbonic anhydrase    sheets exhibit a right-hand twist which is important for their function.
Carbonic Anhydrase, illustrated here contains both -helices and -pleated sheets. These are represented by a cylinder and an arrow respectively. The 3 Dimensional folding of the secondary structure leads to its tertiary structure. There are 4 types of intramolecular forces that can contribute to a protein 's tertiary structure. The first of these is electrostatic forces. There are three types of electrostatic interaction, charge to charge, dipole to charge and dipole to dipole interactions. They occur between molecules that are not permanently polar or cannot form hydrogen bonds because they lack the appropriate donor or acceptor groups. They are dependant on the electric charge of the atoms. A type of electrostatic interaction, ion pairs, can exist e.g. between the carboxyl group of Glutamate and the ammonium group of Lysine however these are not very strong attractive forces as the free energies of the species with or without the ion pairs are almost equal.
Secondly Van der Waals forces exist between electrically neutral molecules. They are non-specific attractions and are caused by the fact that the electron density around any given molecule at one particular instant may be unsymmetrical causing a temporary dipole. This then induces an opposite dipole in neighbouring atoms and an attraction will occur between them. The distance of Van der Waals forces is important as if the molecules are too close they will repulse each other and too far away and they will not attract. They are the weakest of these interactions.
The peptide link has two dipoles and there is an electron rich lone pair on the nitrogen atom. This leads to positive to negative attraction between different parts of the polypeptide chain. Both the carbonyl and amide groups of the peptide back bone have permanent dipole moments. These all point in the same direction therefore the -helix has a positive dipole moment towards the N terminus. Dipole induced interactions then occur in neighbouring groups leading to attractive forces.
Thirdly Hydrogen bonds.
These play a large role in the formation of the secondary structure, as already discussed, but they also contribute to the tertiary structure. They occur between a 'donor' group which can be Nitrogen, Oxygen, Sulphur or Carbon, and an 'acceptor' with a lone pair of electrons. The acceptor group can be Nitrogen, Oxygen, or an Aromatic Ring (e.g. Trp). They encourage the protein to fold in the way that allows the most H bonds to form and hence is most stable. These hydrogen bonds are able to form due to a variation in the electronegativity of atoms, which is an atom 's ability to attract electrons. Where an atom that is very electronegative is bonded to an atom that is only slightly electronegative this causes an induced dipole moment and the electron is attracted to the more electronegative atom making that atom slightly negative (  -). Atoms with a   - are then attracted to atoms with   + and an electrostatic interaction is formed. Hence this causes the polarisation of covalent bonds.
Lastly hydrophobic interceptions play a very important role in the formation of the tertiary structure of a protein. Non-polar groups are repelled by water and attempt to fold the protein so they are on the interior and hence out of contact with any aqueous solvent. Non-polar residues include Val, leu, Ile, Met and Phe. On the other hand polar side chains and groups are attracted to the polar aqueous solvent. Charge polar residues such as Arg, His, Lys and Asp, Glu, are found on the surface of a protein as they are able to interact with the aqueous solvent. There are also uncharged polar groups like Ser, Thr, Asn, Gln, Tyr, Trp that can occur either on the inside or outside and can act as H-bond donors.
Disulfide bonds can also be found in proteins that exist in oxidising environments between cystine residues that contain the thiol group. These are covalent bonds that form specifically between sulphur atoms by an oxidation reaction.
It can be seen from the structure of Carbonic anhydrase that there is ample opportunity due to its intricate folding for many bonds to form between the polypeptide chain. Carbonic anhydrase demonstrates all of these types of bonding in its structure. This conformation is the most stable with the least repulsion between atoms. Carbonic anhydrase 's unique structure allows it to be very specific in its function which is important for m many biological systems.
In a globular protein such as carbonic anhydrase, a human enzyme, many hydrogen bonds exist. Globular proteins are very important in biological systems and act as enzymes, hormones and transport and receptor proteins. Typically, as in carbonic anhydrase, they contain both -helices and    sheets in their secondary structures. These secondary structures are very stable as the bonds are at their optimum length and these structures are sterically favourable. Much of their tertiary structure is maintained by hydrogen bonds. However, as hydrogen bonds are relatively weak, this leads to the structure being less stable than of other molecules containing more covalent bonds such as diamond. In fact they are only 5-10% the strength of covalent bonds. This means that globular proteins are susceptible to high temperatures which disrupt their structure by breaking the hydrogen bonds and causing a loss of function. The ability of these hydrogen bonds to break can, however, be advantageous. For example, proteins can be easily broken down by the digestive system when they are damaged, in excess or no longer required and the amino acids can be reused in another protein. This recycling of sub-units is very important in the human body. The fact that the bonds are weaker also allows the bonds to flew and stretch when required. This is illustrated in haemoglobin or other transport proteins. The weak hydrogen bonds enable the shape of the molecules to change. When an oxygen molecule binds to a heme group on haemoglobin the structure is changed so that the other heme groups become more easily available for bonding. A third advantage is that the hydrogen bonds only require a small input of energy to form and so protein synthesis uses less energy.
Theoretically the blood pH should rise from 5.5 to 7.4 during recovery from exercise, an overall change of pH of 1.94.
In order to counteract these changes in pH that could be detrimental to cellular processes a mechanism exists using a buffer solution. A buffer is a solution of weak acid or weak base that is a able to resist changes in pH. Thy do this by reacting with excess H+ or OH- ions. Protons released by the acid react with the ionized form of the buffer, A-, neutralising them whilst OH- ions react with the undissociated buffer, HA.
The system used in the blood is called the carbonate buffer system.
During aerobic exercise CO2 is produced which reacts with H2O to form H2CO3 or carbonic acid. If anaerobic exercise takes place this is further increased by the by product lactic acid. Both of these substances are acidic and would lower the pH to 5.5 as is shown in 2(a) if the buffer mechanism was not in place to maintain a steady pH.
Actually the pH only falls as low as 7.24 with the buffer system in place when the blood lactate level is raised from 1.6mM to 8.3mM.
