was referred straight to A&E by her GP on the for abdominal pain. presented to her GP with a 6 hour history of right iliac fossa pain. She describes the pain as a severe shooting pain which was sudden in onset. There was no radiation of pain, although as the day progressed she was tender all over the abdomen and the pain became more widespread. It remained most severe on the right. The pain was constant with no colicky exacerbations. felt light-headed and lethargic on admission.
No abdominal distension or fever. She denies any anorexia or weight loss in the preceding weeks.
She had no nausea, vomiting or change in bowel habit.
She had no urinary symptoms, in particular no frequency, dysuria or haematuria. denies any PV discharge or bleeding and no dyspareunia.
She is sexually active with her partner of 6 years. has a period every 28 days for 4 days (K=7/28)  's last period ended 3 weeks ago, it arrived when expected and was 4 days in length.
She is taking the combined oral contraceptive pill (OCP), so her periods are regular and they are of medium flow.
She denies any post-coital bleeding or inter-menstrual bleeding. has been taking the OCP (Microgynon 30) for 6 months, previous to this she used condoms.
She has not missed a pill since she began taking it. She cannot remember any episodes or vomiting or diarrhoea in the past 6 months either. has never had an Intrauterine coil.
No previous pregnancies.
No previous gynaecological history. No cervical smear. In particular she denies any previous sexually transmitted disease or pelvic inflammatory disease.
Radial fracture .
No previous operations. is generally fit and well.
Microgynon 30.
Allergies: Penicillin. (She develops a widespread rash) lives with her parents at home. She works as a special needs teaching assistant.
She has had the same partner for 6 years. feels she has been well supported by her parents and her boyfriend during this difficult time. has never smoked and drinks between 5-10U/week.
Nothing significant.
Acute appendicitis: The pain is describing could be appendicitis. Although in appendicitis the pain normally starts around the umbilicus and moves to the right iliac fossa (RIF), but in the pain started in the RIF. This pain is also normally accompanied with nausea and anorexia-both of which denies.
Urinary tract infection: This can present with pain in the RIF, but there would normally be urinary symptoms, such as frequency.
Although from the history it sounds an unlikely diagnosis, the most important one to rule out in a female of reproductive age is an ectopic pregnancy. The pain describes is suggestive of ectopic pregnancy, however she has experienced no amenorrhea or abnormal PV bleeding, both which you would expect in an ectopic. The PV bleeding usually follows the abdominal pain and it is possible that had she not presented at hospital so promptly then PV bleeding may have occurred at a later time. appeared pale and unwell.
Blood pressure:105/85mmHg.
HR: 70bpm.
Apyrexial.
On inspection: No scars.
Palpation: Tenderness and guarding worse in the RIF, but no rebound tenderness. The whole abdomen was tender. No organomegaly.
Percussion: Normal.
Auscultation: Bowel sounds were present.
PR: No mass felt and no peritonism.
PV: Cervical tenderness. Cervical os closed.
It is difficult from the examination and history to distinguish between appendicitis and an ectopic pregnancy. To confirm the diagnosis a bHCG test and ultrasound is required. is a 22 year old teaching assistant with severe abdominal pain. She is worried about what this may be and is keen to be treated so she can go home.
Hb: 10.4g/dL (low).
White cell count:13.2 x 10 9/L(High).
Platelets 301 x 10 9/L.
CRP 3.
Group and save: Group A negative. bHCG:Positive.
Ketones +.
Leucocytes ++.
Protein +.
These results are suggestive of a pregnancy. There could be a UTI as well although the ketones could be increased becauses of dehydration and reduced food intake.
No intrauterine pregnancy. A large area of free fluid in right iliac fossa with some low density echoes, consistent with a bleed (10.4 x 4.5cm).
With a positive pregnancy test and evidence from the USS of bleeding in the abdomen, then an ectopic pregnancy must be considered. An ectopic pregnancy is a pregnancy that occurs outside of the uterus, usually in one of the tubes going into the uterus. The best was to manage this is to have a look in the abdomen with a microscope through the abdominal wall, under general anaesthetic (laparoscopy). 2 other small incisions are made for the surgical equipment. Sometimes it is possible to remove part or all of the tube via this method, although in some circumstances the abdomen may need to be opened up to remove part of or all of the tube. One healthy tube will remain, so it will hopefully still be possible to conceive after this operation, although this is not always the case.
Prior to the surgery  's blood was cross-matched and ready for transfusion. A laparoscopy was initially performed and this was followed by a laparotomy as excess bleeding around the right fallopian tube was noted. The right fallopian tube was damaged and so a right salpingectomy was performed. There was also removal of a corpus luteum cyst on the right ovary, which was then repaired. bled quite heavily during the operation and required 2 units of blood to be transfused because Hb was only 8.8g/dL.
After the operation was given Anti-D treatment (1250IU), because she is blood group A negative.
The surgical drain and the catheter were removed and passed urine normally.
Other post-operative blood results:
Hb 10.7g/dL.
White cell count:10.8 x 10 9/L.
Platlets:163 x 10 9/L.
Fluid intake and output were closely monitored pre and post-op.
Temperature was taken regularly to monitor for signs of infection.
A previous history of ectopic pregnancy can predispose to another so an early scan in next pregnancy is advised.
She may require advice on contraception if she decides to no longer continue the OCP. was discharged on on antibiotics. Her bHCG need to be repeated in 1 week to confirm there was no viable pregnancy.
Histology: No trophoblastic cells present, only a blood clot. bHCG was re-measured to confirm there was no longer a viable pregnancy and results came back as less than 1.
Medical treatment for ectopic pregnancies is becoming more common and there is a lot of debate surrounding the use of whether a single or double dose of methotrexate should be administered. The multidose regime consists of an IM injection every other day (for a maximum of 4doses) of 1mg/Kg of body weight until bHCG falls by 15%. With the single dose a 50mg/m2 of body surface area is administered in 1 IM injection. Lipscomb et al carried out a study published in July 2005 comparing the success rates of single or multiple doses of methotrexate in 643 patients. They concluded that a single dose is as effective as a multidose, with success rates of 90% and 95% respectively. (1). These results contrast with a study carried out by Barnhart et al in 2004 who claimed multidoses were more effective, but they did agree with the Lipscomb study in the fact that single doses had far fewer side-effects. (2).
It is essential that ectopic pregnancies are diagnosed as early as possible which is sometimes difficult if bHCG levels are below the discriminatory levels for pregnancy and ultrasonography findings are inconclusive. A further, more conclusive, method of diagnosis could prevent serious complications and allow for therapies early on that may preserve tubal function. A study by Hammoud et al, published in June 2005 (3), investigated the use of ultrasonography endometrial patterns in achieving early diagnosis. In particular they looked at the presence of the trilaminar pattern and a thinner endometrium in ectopic pregnancies as compared to a normal intrauterine pregnancy. They studied 441 patients from 1999 to 2003 and concluded that the endometrium was thinner in ectopic than normal pregnancies and this measurement was a good predictor of ectopic pregnancies. However they also concluded that although the trilaminar pattern was 94% specific for ectopic pregnancies, it had very low sensitivity (38%).
There are various risk factors associated with ectopic pregnancies, which patients should be made aware of. Some patients, such as have no obvious identifiable risk factors, but the risk can be increased by several factors as demonstrated by Tay et al in their review. They claimed that the following were significant risk factors: (4).
An ectopic pregnancy refers to any pregnancy that occurs outside the uterine cavity. The most common site of extrauterine implantation is in the fallopian tubes (97%). Of these most implant in the ampulla and 25% in the isthmus. 3% implant on the ovary, cervix or peritoneum (5).
The UK incidence is about 1:100 and is rising (6). There were 11 reported maternal deaths due directly to ectopic pregnancy between 200-2002 in the UK (7).
Ectopics can present acutely, as in  's case. The classic symptoms include amenorrhoea, lower abdominal pain and uterine bleeding. The period of amenorrhoea is usually 6-8 weeks, but an ectopic can present before a period is missed, as in  's case. This highlights one of CEMACH key recommendations that an ectopic needs to be a differential for all women of reproductive age with abdominal pain, even if they have no other symptoms. The vaginal bleeding can vary from a brown discharge to the equivalent of a normal period.
Implantation of the conceptus in the tube results in hormonal changes that mimic normal pregnancy. The uterus enlarges and the endometrium undergoes decidual change. Implantation within the fimbrial end or ampulla, allows greater expansion before rupture occurs, whereas implantation in the isthmus presents earlier. The trophoblasts invade the tubal wall, weakening it which leads to bleeding. This ultimately dislodges the embryo. The tube may or may not rupture, if it does it can be sudden and catastrophic or present more slowly with increasing pain and bleeding.
In any female of reproductive age presenting with abdominal pain, a pregnancy test is essential. A transvaginal ultrasound should follow as this will allow visualisation of ectopic and uterine pregnancies. If an ectopic is diagnosed then surgical or medical treatment can be administered.
Surgical methods are by far the most common: Surgical treatments are indicated whenever diagnosis requires laparoscopy or if the mass is larger than 4 cm.
They include:
Complications occur in 5-20% of laparoscopic procedures and include postoperative bleeding and infection.
Medical treatments should be considered as they may be cheaper and may be associated with a quicker recovery time, compared to surgery. They may be used when diagnosis can be made without laparoscopy, the mother is haemodynamically stable,.
It is an important part of the management to discuss the psychological implications of an ectopic on the patient. It is particularly important in women, like , who would like to go on and have babies in the future. They may be concerned about infertility due to tubal damage and this is something that needs to be discussed. Women might also be anxious about an ectopic occurring again.
The loss of a pregnancy can be very upsetting, however early it is. Support should be offered to the patient and her partner.
I have learnt form this case how important it is to always suspect an ectopic pregnancy in women of child-bearing age, but also how difficult it is on history and examination to distinguish it from appendicitis. I have had the opportunity to learn about management, both surgical and medical.
