Mr arrived at hospital 's A & E department by ambulance following a GP referral 8 days ago. He was subsequently transferred to ward.
Mr presented with severe breathlessness, wheezing and cyanosis.
On the day of admission, Mr was visited at home by his GP who immediately called an ambulance. Although this was his first recent contact with his GP, had been suffering from increasing breathlessness and reduced exercise tolerance for about six weeks prior to admission. On the day of admission, his condition had deteriorated significantly which prompted the GP call. Exercise tolerance is now limited to 5-10 metres. This reduced mobility was said to be due to weakness in the legs, rather than breathlessness or pain. Over the past six weeks he had also been experiencing occasional chest pain and producing about two teaspoons worth of green sputum daily. Chest pain was reported as a dull ache lasting for about 10mins. It did not radiate to the arm, neck or back, and there were no recognisable exacerbating or relieving factors. There was no history of pyrexia or cough. The recent breathlessness was worse on exertion and did not exhibit diurnal variation.
Quit smoking 30 yrs ago. Previously smoked 20/day for 42 years (42 pack years). Rarely consumes alcohol. NKDA.
Mr is a former production manager of an ice cream company who retired at 65 following a TIA. He currently lives in a privately owned house with his 69-year-old daughter, who is blind and disabled. He also has a son who lives locally and visits regularly. He rarely sees his brother and other family members as they live down south. Prior to his recent illness he only could manage to walk 200 metres with the aid of a stick, although this distance varied daily. No home oxygen or nebuliser. He frequently used an electric buggy to get around and would also drive his car to get shopping with support of a friend. He has a stair lift at home. Has a bathroom downstairs, but his bedroom and toilet are upstairs. Sleeps upstairs. He also received some social support (Meals on wheels 2/wk, social help with ironing and laundry 2/wk) but no home nursing visits.
Mr is a known asthmatic who is also likely to have a degree of COPD given his smoking history. The presenting history of increasing breathlessness, wheezing, cyanosis and sputum production strongly suggests a lower respiratory tract infection which has exacerbated his asthma/COPD symptoms. The fact that he is cyanosed indicates hypoxia and therefore Mr is probably in respiratory failure. Although this is most likely to be due to the infection, physical examination and further investigations will be required before the exact cause can be determined. Physical examination will include a general exam and focused exams of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Further investigations such as blood tests (FBC, U&E, LFT, CRP, arterial blood gas), CXR, ECG, PEFR and spirometry should also be carried out. These results will therefore be obtained if available.
Clinical signs such as pyrexia, dyspnoea and lung crackles were revealed during the physical examination which supports the diagnosis of a LRTI. A raised WCC and consolidation were also observed on the FBC and CXR respectively. A CURB score of 2 indicated a severe pneumonia (urea 8mmol/l, RR 30/min). The presence of tachycardia, tremor and significantly reduced oxygen saturation suggest that inadequate gas exchange is occurring as a result. This is reflected in the ABG results which show a type 1 pattern of respiratory failure (PO 2   8kPa with normal pCO 2).
The ABG suggest is suffering from acute respiratory acidaemia due to increased CO 2 retention. This would subsequently give rise to the noted tremor. As his condition has only deteriorated acutely no rise in CO 2 level has yet been observed, due to a compensatory use of the available HCO 3. HCO 3 has therefore fallen below the normal range. If inadequate ventilation were sustained, CO 2 levels would eventually rise, as would HCO 3 levels as a compensatory metabolic alkalosis developed.
As Mr has no history of diabetes, the hyperglycaemia is probably a normal metabolic response to the severe demands currently placed upon his body. For example both infection and respiratory failure would promote secretion of glucagon, cortisol and catecholamines. It would however be important to follow this abnormal result up at a later date to ensure NIDDM can be excluded. The slightly raised urea and creatinine levels indicate a degree of renal failure however this would be expected in such an elderly patient, especially when an underlying infection is present. The ECG and CK did n't suggest a cardiac origin for his symptoms. The occasional chest pain is therefore either musculoskeletal due to the increased respiratory effort, or respiratory in origin.
Mr has developed a severe community acquired pneumonia which has led to type 1 respiratory failure and an acute respiratory acidosis. He was also found to be hyperglycaemic. Despite his age, could previously lead quite an independent life albeit with some occasional support from his son and care workers. His recent illness is therefore likely to have a significant impact upon his psychological well being as his mobility has been severely limited. In addition, any deterioration in his previous health status will have a knock-on effect on his ability to support his daughter which may cause distress to both parties.
With regards to further investigations, it is important to regularly monitor Mr  's ABG and U&E levels whilst he is an inpatient, particularly if his condition suddenly deteriorates. In order to aid treatment of the underlying infection, sputum and blood cultures should also be obtained and antibiotic sensitivities determined (These results were not obtained). Given the history of asthma and COPD, PEFR and spirometry should be performed so that any change in respiratory function can be assessed. "The symptoms you have been suffering from have occurred as a result of a chest infection. As you already suffer from asthma this infection has made it more difficult for your lungs to put enough oxygen into your blood. In order to treat your symptoms we will give you antibiotics to target the infection, and provide oxygen to ease your breathlessness in the meantime. Do you have any questions?".
The following management plan such be used for Mr :
Treat hypoxia with oxygen (35-60%) to maintain pO 2 8kPa and/or O 2 saturation  92%.
Treat underlying infection with IV antibiotics. Assuming the pneumonia is due to a typical community acquired organism such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae or Mycoplasma pneumoniae the following antibiotics would be suitable until MC&S is obtained:
Treat asthma and breathlessness with regular nebulised salbutamol (5mg qds).
His regular medication (see above) should be reviewed and administered if safe in order to manage asthma and co-morbidity. In the case of , Betahistine should be withheld as it is contraindicated in acute asthma and should generally be used with caution in asthmatics.
Prescribe as required (PRN) medication for pain, respiratory distress and insomnia e.g.
An initial 1L of 5% dextrose should be given as Mr is likely to be suffering from a degree of dehydration as a result of the infection. Following this his fluid status should be regularly assessed to avoid dehydration and maintain optimum cardiac output and therefore oxygen delivery.
ABG should be monitored regularly to detect further decreases in pO2 or increasing pCO2. Given the patient 's age and level of co-morbidity, a DNR order should be discussed with Mr and his family members as invasive ventilation would be undesirable.
Refer to physio for assessment of mobility and rehabilitation. OT referral for assessment of his home environment, for example he would require a washing/dressing/kitchen assessment prior to discharge. A care support package should be arranged for his discharge. The GP should also be contacted so that further social support can be arranged for his daughter if necessary. Blood glucose levels should be followed up to check for diabetes mellitus. Referral to an asthma nurse is not necessary for acute exacerbations.
If not already immunised, Mr should be informed about receiving the pneumococcal and yearly influenza virus vaccines.
Mr was followed up eight days after admission. On examination he was sat up comfortably in a chair. There was a purple seretide inhaler, volumatic spacer and a sputum pot containing a teaspoon of green sputum present on the bedside table. was using oxygen (1.5L/min via nasal cannula), however despite his dyspnoea, there was no sign of tachypnoea (RR=12/min). He was no longer tachycardic (HR 82bpm) and his BM had fallen to 7.0. There was still some evidence of peripheral cyanosis and a few fine crackles detected at the lung bases. Mr reported a noticeable improvement in his condition. He had also been switched to a two week course of oral antibiotics (amoxicillin 500mg PO td and clarithromycin 500mg PO bd).
Despite the improvement in his medical condition, Mr was still suffering from a significantly reduced level of mobility. He was only able to walk a maximum of 4 metres using a frame with assistance. reported that this was due to weakness in the legs rather than exertional breathlessness, and therefore he had started to receive daily rehab with the physiotherapist. He was also requiring assistance with washing and dressing. It would be important to ensure that a suitable home care package was arranged prior to his discharge which included daily follow-up with a physiotherapist. Discharge to a temporary care home should also be considered depending upon his progress.
Severe CAP is a life-threatening condition defined by the presence of respiratory failure or symptoms of severe sepsis or septic shock. It accounts for approximately 10% of hospitalized patients with CAP. The majority of patients with severe pneumonia have underlying co-morbid illnesses, with COPD, alcoholism, chronic heart disease, and diabetes mellitus being the most frequent. S. pneumoniae, Legionella spp, H. influenzae, S. aureus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, respiratory viruses (especially influenza viruses), and P. aeruginosa represent the most important causative organisms of severe CAP. Rapid initiation of appropriate antimicrobial treatment is crucial for a favourable outcome. Initial antimicrobial treatment should be based on an empirical approach. Microbial investigation may be helpful in the individual case but is probably more useful to define local antimicrobial policies based on local epidemiologic and susceptibility patterns. Mortality rates range from 21% to 54%. The most important prognostic factors include general health state of the patient, appropriateness of initial antimicrobial treatment and the existence of bacteraemia, as well as factors reflecting severe respiratory failure, severe sepsis, septic hypotension or shock, and the extent of infiltrates in chest radiograph. Initial antimicrobial treatment should consist of a second (or third) generation cephalosporin and erythromycin. (Ewig & Torres, 1999).
It is possible to manage the majority of episodes of acute respiratory failure with mechanical ventilation administered with non-invasive techniques, however the use of endotracheal intubation usually results in a poor prognosis i.e. one year survival rate is usually lower than 40% (Braghiroli, 1997).
Community-acquired pneumonia is the most common serious infection encountered in medical practice, with 1% to 10% of patients requiring admission to a hospital. The mortality rate of patients admitted is considerable, ranging from 5% to 25%, rising to 55% in those developing respiratory failure (Boersma, 1999).
This case has provided the opportunity to study the diagnosis, investigation and management of respiratory failure. It has also highlighted the importance of determining the underlying cause and need to address the various psychological and social implications which may arise in patients whose respiratory function deteriorates acutely.
