This essay starts by introducing some basic differential and algebraic topology. We then move into more advanced areas such as the various characteristic classes. The algebraic topology, which takes up much of the essay, is approached from an algebraist viewpoint. We take time to appreciate the algebraic structure of cohomology including group cohomology although we develop the main ideas in the form of De Rham cohomology from differential forms. We also take a quick look at an application of cohomology to representation theory.
After preparing ourselves, we give a sketch of the proof of an interesting theorem we wish to explore. This work is quite wide-ranging and we content ourselves with giving an introduc-tion to the main thread which involves the development of Yang-Mills moduli spaces. The theorem has a corollary that tells us that there are 'exotic' 4-manifolds, which are homotopy equivalent but not diffeomorphic to any complex surface.
The essay is presented in three chapters - the first two covering topics from smooth manifolds to cohomology and Poincare duality. The second chapter discusses applications of what was discussed in the first - operations on vector bundles and the treatment of characteristic classes. The final section give an in-depth discussion of the main theorem and a sketch of the proof.
This is one of the more interesting facts in contemporary research in differential topology. Simon Donaldson proved this in the early eighties and won the Fields' Medal in 1984 for his efforts. It is definitely one of the more intensive research topics which have led to the Fields' Medal. For example, although the proof of Monstrous Moonshine by Borcherds was a momentous achievement, the sheer volume of background knowledge required for this topological work is breathtaking.
We aim to give a good introduction to some of this mathematics which runs through Kahler manifolds to ASD connections.
This project is, indeed, presented as a collation of two essays since they can be treated exclusively depending on prior knowledge. The first and second chapters deals with an introduction to the concepts we will need in the latter chapter.
The first topic is an introduction to dealing with smooth manifolds. Our introduction is obviously weighted heavily to accentuate the points we wish to discuss later - we have, however, digressed slightly at times with an exploration of points that, while not directly related, are very interesting.
We spend he next sections discussing what can be given the blanket term of algebraic topol-ogy. We discuss a little bit of homology although cohomology, particularly de Rham coho-mology, will be of most interest later. This is because of the link to integration on smooth manifolds. We also give an introduction to group cohomology and Galois cohomology and the application to representation theory in the form of the relationship between the Brauer group of some commutative ring and the second Galois cohomology - in particular, we intro-duce the Azumaya algebras which are important because the relationship mentioned above depends on an algebra called a crossed product being an Azumaya algebra. We then give a detailed exposition of Poincare duality - an useful tool later on.
The second chapter of the essay begins by discussing operations on the vector bundles introduced in the last chapter. The most important of these is the connection and the related curvature form. Indeed, when we deal with much of the mathematics in this area we are reminded of operations in differential geometry. We then discuss characteristic classes which are central to the focal discussion point of this essay. In particular we will discuss the Euler and Pontryagin classes after mentioning the simpler case of the Chern class. We also discuss the Stiefel-Whitney class which, as we will see, is the most important for our purposes.
The focus of this  'second essay' will be to explore the following proposition.
Proposition 1. For any simply-connected, complex surface S with there is a smooth four-manifold X(S) which is homotopy equivalent to but not diffeomorphic to S, nor to any complex surface.
This proposition is actually a corollary of a more general theorem, the proof of which is the main topic for exploration in this essay.
Theorem 1. For any simply connected, complex algebraic surface S, with and any hyperplane class h in H2(S) there is a k0 = k0(S,h) such that for k   k and any Stiefel-Whitney class [  ] which is the reduction of a (1,1) class [      ], we have .
Here are brief definitions of the terms above, although they make very little sense when unaccompanied by definition and proof of the mathematical basis of differenntial topology. For an oriented four-manifold X, a Stiefel-Whitney class is one of the characteristic classes of the tangent bundle TX available, along with the Euler and Pontryagin classes as defined in Calculus to Cohomology. is simply the dimension of the maximal positive subspace for the form on H2(X). is a hyperplane class defined by a holomorphic embedding of S in a projective space. is the dimension of the space of holomorphic 2-forms. Lastly, is a sequence of polynomials in which are invariant under diffeomorphism.
The two, related but distinct, parts of this essay arose separately from one piece of work, [J05]. This essay first explores division algebras - the main example being the quaternions H. This leads to 4-dimensional space and then to exotic manifolds after an interesting discussion. The essay also involves classification of division algebras, in which the Brauer group is involved in one method of classification.
The latter is quite an intense topic and also a very broad one in that it requires a lot of specialized maths - Hodge theory, algebraic geometry - just to get something sensible. Nevertheless, it is both interesting and productive. Thanks to Dr Allan Muir, Tim Honeywill and David Webdale for their advice and inspiration.
Manifolds will be important to us throughout the discussion of cohomology and later. This gives an opportunity to discuss the interesting idea that we want to explore in full. If n = 4, a four-manifold can be constructed that is topologically equivalent but not differentiably equivalent to the Euclidean four-manifold. When considered carefully, this is quite a stunning statement. As if it were n't fascinating enough that we can construct such "exotic" manifolds but moreover, this is only true for n = 4! The proper statement is a corollary of a long and complicated theorem which we will soon develop. First, we need some familiarity with topological reasoning.
Topology is a study of the properties of a space that remain the same under homeomorphism. Familiarity with topology and some differential topology is assumed so we discuss this point briefly, so that we may move quickly to cohomology and more algebraic ideas. A homeo-morphism is a bijective, continuous function with continuous inverse. It can be thought of as the correspondence between the point of spaces A and B when we deform A into B.
A manifold will be defined more accurately below but we can think of it in a simple way as a topological space in which the small bit surrounding each point can be compared to an Euclidean space. For example, the torus is a manifold since each point lies in a slightly curved area that can be deformed into a disk in the plane, but the cone is not a manifold since the neighbourhood of its vertex can not be deformed into a piece of the Euclidean plane. We give results that we need later as well as a few other interesting results.
For an open set , a mapping is smooth(1) if it has continuous partial derivatives of all orders. For , with not open,is smooth(2) if it can be locally extended to smooth(1) map on open sets. In other words, if around there exists an open set and a smooth(1) map such that on .
A smooth(2) map , for , , is a differomorphism if it is bijective with also smooth(2). X and Y are diffeomorphic if there exists such an f. Equipped with the above we can now define smooth manifolds. A k-dimensional smooth manifold is a subset which is locally diffeomorphic to - for now we will call X a k-dimensional manifold . This means that for each , there is a neighbourhood V which is diffeomorphic to an open set . The diffeomorphism is known as a parametrization. This makes the n-manifold very interesting to those who are exploring Euclidean n-dimensional spaces [GP74, M74].
Example 1. We can show that the circle is a 1-manifold. First suppose y   0, then is a bijection of the open interval onto the upper semicircle. Its inverse is smooth extending to a smooth map . So is a diffeomorphism. This map and parametrize S1except around the points , . For these points we use , mapping to the left and right semicircles. So by covering it with parametrizations, we have shown that the circle is a 1-manifold.
We can use the same argument to show that the n-sphere is an n-manifold. Suppose that for, then for is a bijection from onto the n-sphere above the-axis. Its inverse extend to a smooth map so   is a parametrization. We proceed as in the previous case, to give local parametrizations about all pints except the axis points. of which there are 2n. We can cover these with new parametrizations, as above, finally covering the n-sphere in 2n + 2 parametrizations. So then the n-sphere in is a n-manifold.
Now for an enlightening proposition,.
Theorem 2. Every point in X, a k-dimensional manifold, has a neighbourhood diffeomorphic to all ofM,k.
Proof:
Let with . The map defined by is a diffeomorphism of onto . We see that there is a bijection from to and that can be locally extended to a smooth map on open sets and is therefore smooth.
Let X be a k-manifold, so each posseses a neighbourhood V which is diffeomorphic to U open in . Then we can take U diffeomorphic to all of , in which case so is V since diffeomorphism holds under composition.    .
We recall that the derivative of f at x, denoted dxf, is the best linear approximation of f. That is, dxf is the unique map with the property . We suppose and is a local parametrization for V open in . Let f(0) = x, then .
The tangent space at the point x of a manifold .is the image of , denoted . A tangent vector to X at x is a point v lying in , a vector subspace of . There exists a slight ambiguity about whether different local parametrizations will give the same tangent space.Take , and we may assume that f(V) = g(U). Now is a diffeomorphism. Write and differentiate to get . This implies that . We can reverse f,g giving so is well defined.
We can then show that has dimension M. Let W be an open set in and choose a smooth map , extending f _1. the identity map of V. The chain rules gives the identity map of as . Then is an isomorphism, so the dimension of is M.
The derivative of a smooth map of manifolds at a point x is a linear transformation for f(x) = y [GP74]. This derivative can be shown to satisfy the chain rule (any text of manifolds). We also see that it is the same as the usual derivative for maps on Euclidean space. Let and parametrise X,Y about x,y for , and ,. For appropriate U, giving .
We can show that this definition is independent of parametrization. Let and with , . Assume , . The maps , are diffeomorphisms. Then independence follows.
A local diffeomorphism f at x is a smooth map of manifolds X, Y that carries a neighbourhood of x diffeomorhically onto a neighbourhood of f(x) = y [M88].
Theorem 3. (Inverse function Theorem) Suppose that is a smooth map with dxf at x being an isomorphism. Then f is a local diffeomorphism at x.
We have seen many interpretations and proofs of the IFT before. However we apply it, is is an amazing result. If dimX   dimY we have injective at best. If this is true, f is an immersion at x. The canonical immersion is the inclusion of into .
Theorem 4. (Local Immersion Theorem) Suppose that is an immersion at x and that f(x) = y. Then f is locally equivalent to the canonical immersion near x.
Sketch of Proof:
The proof works very simply by taking and constructing a map and for . We find that we can apply the IFT (old) to G and that it is a diffeomorphism from some neighbourhood of to a neighbourhood of . We have where c is the canonical submersion. Then we take a new parametrization on X around x to show that f is locally equivalent to c. [M05]    .
A map is proper if the preimage of every compact set is compact. An immersion that is injective and proper is an embedding. The next theorem is proved in [GP74].
Theorem 5. An embedding is a diffeomorphism of X onto a submanifold ofY. f is a submersion at x if is surjective. The canonical submersion is the projection of onto . Then we have the following theorem - a proof is omitted but is analogous to the local immersion theorem.
Theorem 6. (Local Submersion Theorem) Suppose that is a submersion at x and that f(x) = y. Then f is locally equivalent to the canonical submersion near x.
For , the   preimage of y, , is the subset of X containing x such that f(x) = y. A regular value for f is a such that for and x such that f(x) = y, is surjective. A critical value is one which is not regular.
Theorem 7. If y is a regular value of the submersion then is a submanifold of X with .
Proof:
Let and y corresponds to . Near x, is the set - is the set of points where the set of is defined on . Then form a coordinate system on . This is an open subset of . So we see that is a submanifold of X with .[GP74, M88]   .
A map is transversal to the submanifold if for all [GP74]. A manifold X is simply connected if X is connected and every map from the circle to X is homotopic to a constant. This is a generalization of regularity which proves useful in the study of smooth manifolds. A set has measure zero if, for every , there exists a countable collection of rectangular solids in such that and .
Study of transversality and intersection is very important in some areas of research involving manifolds. Indeed, the class of objects to be studied is enlarged by considering manifolds with boundary, spaces which may fail to be manifolds. A manifold with boundary is defined as a subset Z C R n with a neighbourhood for each point that is diffeomorphic to an open set of the upper half-space in . The boundary is the set of points of the image of the boundary of . under such a local parametrization.
Theorem 8. (Sard 's Theorem) For a smooth map of manifolds , the set of critical values of f has measure zero [M05].
This leads to an interesting result - the Whitney embedding theorem. A k-manifold s, by definition, a subset of some Euclidean space for what n does contain a differomorphic copy of every k-manifold. An useful object in proving this theorem is the tangent bundle, .
Theorem 9. The tangent bundle of a manifold is another manifold and .
Proof:
Let be an open set and hence a manifold. Then and we see is open in  's topology since is open in . Take a local parametrization with an open set and then is a diffeomorphism. parametrizes the open set since . Then every point of is in such a neighbourhood.[GP74]   .
Now we can prove the first of Whitney 's theorems, proof of which is discussed in most books on the subject.
Theorem 10. Every k-manifold admits an injective immersion in .[GP74, M88, M05].
Sketch of Proof:
If is of k dimensions, , we produce a linear projection with a restriction to an injective immersion of X.
Let be an injective immersion with . Define a map and a map by . so Sard 's theorem implies that there exists which is not in the image of either map.
Let where and then is injective. Suppose but x=y and it is simple to show that this contradicts the choice of a, as does assuming that is such that .   .
Whitney formulated two more results, refining the previous proof.
Theorem 11. Every k-manifold embeds in .
Theorem 12. Every k-manifold admits an injective immersion in .
Now a few ideas we will need later. A Riemannian metric on a smooth manifold X is a collection of inner products on the tangent space for all such that is a smooth function on the set for and . A Riemannian manifold is a manifold with Riemannian structure [D903].
To close we look at the definition of a topological manifold. It is a manifold, a smooth manifold, missing a few properties. We define as follows. Recall that a topological space X is Hausdorff if , , for distinct x, and U, V open in X. A topological Hausdorff space X is known as a n-dimensional topological manifold if it has countable basis for its topology and it is locally homeomorphic to [MJ97].
We assume familiarity with homology, so we give only basic definitions. A homotopy of continuous maps is a family , 0   t   1 such that , are independent of t and , is continuous. Two continuous maps , are homotopic, , when connected in this way.
Homotopy can, of course, be shown to be an equivalence relation and the equivalence classes are called homotopy classes of f, [f]. A loop is a continuous map with . The set of homotopy classes of f forms the fundamental group, . The fundamental group is an useful tool for studying and distinguishing between topological surfaces. This is because homeomorphic spaces have isomorphic fundamental groups. However, its usefulness does not extend to higher dimensions. So we construct the homology groups to serve this purpose.
We are already familiar with this topic so we will revisit only the basic points. The n-simplex is the smallest convex set in containing n + 1 points. A simplical complex is a finite collection of simplexes in some Euclidean space, so that if a simplex lies in the collection so does each of its faces; and so that two intersecting simplexes belonging to the collection intersect in a common face. Let X be a finite simplical complex, and we assign to it a collection of groups called the simplical homology groups for .
If an edge of a polygonal curve has vertices v,w then (v,w) denotes an orientation of the edge from v to w. Then and when we have vertices v, u, w of a triangle of X with (u, v, w) denoting the orientation of ordering the vertices. The boundary of an oriented edge is defined by , .
Let X be a finite simplical complex and let be the free abelian group generated by the oriented simplexes, simplexes    in X with orientation. has elements known as n-chains. Then the kth simplical homology group of X is given by for a boundary homomorphism defined by where the hat in means that the vertex of the n-simplex is deleted.
Theorem 13. The composition of maps given by is equal to zero.
Proof:
We have, (1.1) which zero since each terms appears twice with opposite sign.   .
The sequence with is called a chain complex. implies and we define the nth homology group of the chain complex as . When we call this particular homology group the nth simplical homology group. These groups were discovered by Poincare. They were then generalized as below.
Generally, homology is defined as follows. The singular homology group of X is denoted where is as follows. -is a boundary map given by as before where where is an n-chain in and is a singular n-simplex meaning that can have singularities in its image.
A singular homology group is isomorphic to most other kinds of homology group. What we have said above tells us what a homology group in a rather abstract but it would be hard to form a clear picture from this. What is homology actually about? The homology group is just an Abelian group that 'counts' the number of holes in a given topological space - the places where there is some disconnectivity in the space. In the case of singular homology, a measure of the hole structure of a space is formed by the groups. So this answers the question that I have often been asked 'What information does a homology group contain?'.
When you are using cohomology to manipulate some algebraic construction it is used in a mechanical way, as is also true for homology above. The question above is modified to yes, but what is cohomology and why do you waste time finding out?. Of course, as we find out below, cohomology of some topological space is an invariant that is dual to homology so you can think of it as finding holes in this space. As I have discussed, my opinion is that algebraists generally have even less of an idea what homology is about, perhaps due to over-specialization. Cohomology, we will se later, is a graded ring and so has more algebraic structure than homology - so it has many more uses.
The question here is the philosophical one of whether such over-specialization is good for mathematics as a whole? Obviously, specialization is necessary but the question to ask is whether we should be in a situation where homology and cohomology are used on a daily basis by people who have no sense of what they mean. It 's a bit like a claim to understand Mozart 's 23rd Piano Concerto just because you can play the piano.
Cohomology is defined in a similar way to homology. We start with the vector space case. Let there be a sequence C is called exact when , an exact sequence. Let the sequence of vector spaces and linear maps with be called a chain complex. For a chain complex, then we define the   nth cohomology vector space to be . The elements of are called n-cycles and elements of are known as n-boundaries. The elements of H n are known as cohomology classes. Similar for the case for free abelian groups C n.
A k-linear map , for V a vector space over K, is alternating if when for some . The space of alternating maps is denoted . We can write where is a basis of V. If we see .
Theorem 14. If and then.
Proof:
Let where are fixed. Then and so .    .
For , , the exterior product is denoted ,.. We have the following, proof given in [MJ97].
Theorem 15. If , then .
Theorem 16. A k-linear map is alternating if when some for .
Proof:
By Theorem 14 we have .     is the exterior algebra of V.
Theorem 17. is an anti-commutative and connected graded algebra.
Sketch of Proof:
We prove anti-commutativity: if and then .
Let with and we have . We have (1.2).
Associativity is proved similarly and then we can see that connected is graded and connected.   .
A differential k-form   on an open set is a smooth map [M05]. The vector space of such maps is . We can write for acting on points , an open set. The set is a basis of giving . Then we can write as .
The exterior differential is given by where is the linear map given by for , being smooth functions of U and is a basis of for the dual basis of from Theorem 14.
We have from [H02, MJ97].
Theorem 18. If for and , we have .
The exterior product on     (U) is induced from the usual one by defining .
Theorem 19. For and we have .
Proof: ==== (1.3) [MJ97]   .
Galois cohomology is basically summed up as a study of the application of homological algebra to modules of Galois groups. An M-automorphism of N is an automorphism with   (m) = m for all . Recall that the Galois group of the field extension N : M is the group of all M-automorphisms of N under the operation of composition - see [J04] for proof that the set of M-automorphisms is a group under composition.
Let G be a group acting on H an abelian group. H is a G-module if the action g of G on H satisfies:
As we discussed for cohomology vector spaces, the first cohomology group of H is the quotient group H1(G,H) = Z1(G, H)/B1(G, H). Taking the groups of cochains, we have the group of cocycles and the group of coboundaries .
Let F be a field and F its algebraic closure [J04]. A discrete -module is an abelian group H which acts upon such that the action is continuous on the discrete topology of H and the profinite topology of . The profinite topology is the topology of the profinite group - a topological group is profinite if it is isomorphic to the inverse limit of some projective system of finite groups.
Then the first cohomology group follows after a bit more work. Say that a map is continuous if it is continuous for both the profinite topology on and the discrete topology on H. We define the group of continuous cocycles as being the group os continuous maps satisfying . H is discrete so any coboundary is continuous. Then the first Galois cohomology group is .
Theorem 20. Let be an exact sequence of G-modules. Then there is a long exact sequence where is the cohomology class of the cocycle f in H1(G, A) for.
Sketch of Proof:
We prove this in three steps: 1) First we show that is exact. We have so for every cohomology class .
Conversely, assume for and then . is surjective so there exists such that so that . Then there exists with . Since is injective we can show that a is a k-cycle because . Then we have a cohomology class with . 2) We now show that is exact. First, . Conversely we follow a similar argument to above. 3) Similar argument to above to show that .    .
This extends to Galois modules or generalizes to chain complexes. In fact, most results in group cohomology will extend to Galois cohomology [MJ97, M05].
One question that has been asked of me is why Galois cohomology. The answer is that it has many applications in the theory of elliptic curves, although this is conveniently beyond the scope of this discussion. It is involved in the proof of the Mordell-Weil theorem saying that the Mordell-Weil group E(K) of elliptic curves on a number field K is finitely generated.
Recall the definition of a Brauer group and their relation to associative division algebras [J05]. Another interesting fact is that these groups are homomorphic to the second Galois cohomology groups under certain conditions.
Let A be an algebra over a commutative ring R. Then A/R is an Azumaya algebra if and only if A is faithful finitely generated as an R-module and the induced ring homomorphism is an isomorphism.
Theorem 21. A finite dimensional algebra A over the field F is central simple if and only if   A is an isomorphism.
Sketch of Proof: If A is central simple then so is A and so is [J05] . Then   A must be injective surjectivity follows from checking dimensions.
Conversely, we assume that   A is an isomorphism. is central simple since it is a matrix algebra [J05]. We tensor an ideal of A by an ideal of to get an ideal of . is central for    central in A. since EndF(A) is a matrix ring.   .
Let P be a commutative ring and G a finite group with elements acting as automorphisms on P. Suppose is a 2-cocycle into a group of units . From [J05, S98] we see that    defines an element of . We can then define an algebra known as a crossed product on . It is possible to show from this that there is a homomorphism to from .
To be precise, we form the P-module , where is the image of t under for the polynomial ring P[t].
Theorem 22. There is an unique associative multiplication on    such that and [S98].
Take -     is an R algebra written and we say that the are the canonical elements of associated to   . If    is 1 it is a 2-cocycle. The crossed product is then called trivial and is denoted . We then proceed to find that allow us to construct Azumaya algebras. We find the P/R for which the trivial crossed product is Azumaya and this is enough to show that P/R is a Galois extension if and only if is an Azumaya R-algebra.
Theorem 23. Let P/R be a G-Galois extension. Then: i) Then is Brauer equivalent to ; ii) Suppose there are such that for all . Then ; ii i) The crossed product construction defines a group homomorphism .
Sketch of Proof:
Let and let and let be the seperating idempotent discussed in Chapter 2 of [S98], as an element of . Set and and so we take P as a subalgebra of A.
We then show that if g = h then . So the conclusion is that A is spanned over S by the and so . We have e the unique idempotent so . Then so we can show . Then there is an isomorphism . With a few facts regarding Brauer equivalence in [C02], this proves the theorem.
Let and let . Define and letting    be the identity on P. f is a morphism of R-algebras and is an isomorphism since , are Azumaya algebras which can be proved to be isomorphic since they have the same rank so ii) is proved in this way.
Then iii) is easy since i) shows that it is possible to define a homomorphism on the group of 2-cocycles and the fact that is an isomorphism if and only if P/R is Galois with group G together with ii) shows that this homomorphism is the identity on the coboundaries.   .
It is possible to extend this to an isomorphism where R is a field and P/R is an infinite Galois extension.
There are further ideas involved, such as the subject of Lie algebra homology of which a general exposition is given in [GL76]. This is idea is extended to Kac-Moody algebras in [K90], and even further in [J05, J96] to Borcherds or generalized Kac-Moody algebras. The results can be used to find a character formula for the Borcherds algebras.
Another interesting idea is that of orbifold cohomology discussed in [EO00]. We ca n't go into any detail since this section is already a major digression. It will suffice to say that a type of cohomology implies some interesting properties of a Cherednik algebra. My interest in these algebras derives from interest in triple groups which result after making some changes to the generators of a Coxeter group.
We define the de Rham complex of U to be the commutative, differential, graded algebra for an anti-commutative algebra with a differential , .
Theorem 24. The composition is zero for all non-negative k.
Proof:
We have . We use the fact that and with proof in [MJ97]. ===.    (1.4).
Theorem 25. The operator d :    k(U) -       k+1(U) satisfying is unique.
Proof:
We have defined with these properties. Let e satisfy the above properties. Then we must show that . Now it is simple that from property 1 and implies that . We see from property 3 that and that.
So .    .
The kth d e Rh am cohomology group is . The de Rham cohomology group coincides with other cohomology groups so we will use the usual notation for a cohomology group. The kth de Rham cohomology group of the smooth n-manifold X is the kth cohomology vector space of . The exterior product of forms extends to give a product .
A category C category consists both a collection of objects and, for each pair of objects, a collection of morphisms from one object to another. In most categories over sets, an object is given as some mathematical structure such as a group, open set, vector space or chain complex. A morphism is simply a map between two objects in C. It is required that the morphisms then satisfy some conditions such as the identity map between an object and itself is always a morphism, and the composition of two morphisms is always a morphism too.
The morphisms are usually required to preserve the mathematical structure of the objects. If the objects are groups, the morphisms should all be group homomorphisms. For vector spaces, linear maps would be the morphisms of choice, for manifolds, one would choose smooth maps and, similarly, chain maps for chain complexes.
We say that de Rham cohomology is functorial,.
Theorem 26. A smooth map induces a linear map with .
Sketch of Proof.
Let have , a cycle from with cohomology class its corresponding cohomology class in and define . Considering the chain complexes and chain maps we have so that is a cycle. is independent of the choice of cycle so if [x] = [y] then and and so and , define the same cohomology class [H0 2].    .
A contravariant functor maps every object in C to an object in , and every morphism in C to an object in given by for a morphism such that and . is a contravariant functor.
We define to be the linear map given by for the exact sequence of chain complexes .
Theorem 27. Let be an exact sequence of chain complexes. Then is exact.
Sketch of Proof:
Follow the proof of Theorem 20.    .
Theorem 28. If C and C are chain complexes then .
Proof:
The proof follows from the observations that and that [S02].   .
Theorem 29. (Mayer-Vietoris) Let U1 and U 2 be open sets in with . Then there exists an exact sequence .
The proof depends on the following lemma [MJ97].
Lemma 1. Let U1 and U 2 be open sets in with . Let and be the inclusions corresponding to the sets. There is an exact sequence: where and .
Proof of Theorem:
We see that we have chain maps and so we can apply the previous lemma. Then 27 and 28 give [H02].    .
The support of f, a function , is the set . Define an integral on the vector space of n-forms with compact support.
The treatment of differential forms on manifolds is, for the most part, as discussed above. We say that a family of alternating k-forms is smooth on if is a smooth function for any local parametrization. The set of such    is denoted . The nth de Rham cohomology of X, , is the nth cohomology vector space of .
An orientation form on the k-manifold X is an with . An orientation of X is the equivalence class of orientation forms. The standard orientation representing is the orientation form . A basis of is positively or negatively oriented depending on whether is positive or negative for    the orientation form of X [M05].
We can define an integral on the space of differential n-forms with compact support just as we can integrate 1-forms of 1-manifolds. Take X which is diffeomorphic to a region which has a smooth boundary. Let be an orientation-preserving diffeomorphism. Define the integral where is the standard basis for .
Theorem 30. If is also an orientation-preserving diffeomorphism then we have .
Proof:
We have a diffeomorphism and for h(x) = y by the chain rule.
We write , and we can show that where . We also have that det A is the Jacobi determinant of h. Since the dif-feomorphisms are orientation preserving, we have the equality [MJ97].   .
We can restate this as a change of variables in - saying that for two regions U, V in and an orientation-preserving differomorphism we have for any n-form   . Similarly, for any n-form    if    reverses the orientation.
This comes from the restating [GP74] since the form is equal to some smooth function on U times a determinant by Theorem 30. Then by a theorem we will give shortly. Then we restate the previous theorem after redefining .
Theorem 31. For 1-forms .
This is obvious for k = 2. Then the lemma follows by induction on k applied to the definition of the exterior product.
The other important theorem in this discussion is, of course, Stokes' theorem which is stated in this case as:
Theorem 32. Let be a compact oriented k-manifold with boundary. Then for .
A proof can be found in [MJ97].
Let X be a compact, oriented smooth n-manifold. Poincare duality is the statement that for integer k. Let denote the de Rham cohomology group with compact support. It is given in [M052] that:
Theorem 33. only if k = n and i n all other cases.
We have a theorem that follows from Mayer-Vietoris which is needed to prove the duality theorem.
Theorem 34. There is an exact sequence.
Proof:
Let X be a smooth manifold with open subsets . We define the direct image hom o-morphism extended from , the chain map induced from the inclusion . We can define another inclusion to give a covariant functor on the category of open sets and inclusions.
Let U1 and U 2 be open sets in with . Let and be the inclusions corresponding to the sets. There is an exact sequence: where and . Apply Mayer-Vietoris to this exact sequence.[H02]    .
Theorem 35. For , pairwise disjoint open subsets with union U of the smooth manifold X, we have given by and given by.
The idea here is to use the fact that there are such isomorphisms for chain complexes, and to extend that. The proof of Poincare duality follows after a bit more work. We define a linear map from the bilinear map defined by where is the vector space dual of . This follows from a composition with integration of the bilinear map .
A contravariant functor sending A to its vector space dual A* is exact. So we can dualize the sequence of Theorem 34 and by the previous theorem we have an isomorphism . For an oriented n-manifold the exterior product defines inducing .
Theorem 36. The diagram commutes for open sets .
Proof: Let , be cohomology classes. Then and for i'the vector space dual of i*. Then since we can integrate over V instead of U. We see that the forms are the same on V. So the diagram commutes [S99].    .
We can extend this to the theorem below, which is proved by the same methods.
Theorem 37. For open sets of X, U1 and U2 with union U, we have the commutative diagram .
Corollary 1. For open subsets of X we have their union satisfying Poincare duality if , , satisfy that condition. Similarly for pairwise disjoint open sets. Lastly, U satisfies duality if it is diffeomorphic to .
Then we give a theorem proved in [MJ97] that will let us proceed.
Theorem 38. Let U be a collection of open subsets of the n-manifold X with open cover V. We have , Any open subset that is a subset of a set in the open cover and is diffeomorphic to is in U, the union of two open subsets is in U is the open subsets and their intersection are in U and a similar condition for pairwise disjoint open subsets.
This lets us prove duality.
Theorem 39. (Poincare Duality) For an oriented n-manifold we see that is an isomorphism for all k.
Proof:
Let U be the open subsets of X with being isomorphisms. Let V be the trivial cover X. Then Corollary 1 shows that we have satisfied the conditions of Theorem 38 [H02, MJ97, M05].    .
Another way of expressing this is . denotes the set of one-dimensional subspaces of . It is the n-dimensional complex projective space. For we let spanned by z be denoted by .
Theorem 40. The cohomology of is for or otherwise.
We can extend the embedding to an embedding of into . Assume the statement for C and n   2 since the cohomologies by Proposition 13.11 [?] which states that there is a certain long exact sequence. Then is homeomorphic with by a certain homeomorphism defined in [MJ97] . The exact sequence has the form.
Then by Theorem 33 we have only when k = 2n when it is R. The result follows.
A fiber bundle is three topological spaces T, the total space, B, the base space, and F, the fiber space together with a continuous map such that each has an open neighbourhood U b and a homeomorphism such that . The fiber over x is the pre-image of , denoted . If T, B, F are smooth manifolds then we have a smooth fiber bundle [MJ97, M052, S99].
A vector bundle is a quadruple with the fiber space F and are vector spaces for all x and we can choose the local homeomorphism h so that is a linear isomorphism. One bundle which will be very useful is the tangent bundle. Take a smooth n-manifold and with . The fiber over is the tangent space .
A map (f,g) between fiber bundles and is a pair of continuous maps and such that . A homomorphism between vector bundles is a fiber bundle map such that is linear for all .
Vector bundles over the same base space are isomorphic if there exist homomorphisms and such that . A vector bundle that is isomorphic to a product bundle is called trivial.
Theorem 41. A continuous map of vector bundles over B is an isomorphism if it maps the fiber injectively onto .
The direct sum of two vector bundles over the base space is the vector bundle with total space and a projection . An inner product on a vector bundle    is a map such that is an inner product on each fiber .
Theorem 42. Every vector bundle over a compact B has an inner product.
A section in a fiber bundle is a smooth map such that .
Theorem 43. Every vector bundle    over a compact base space B has a complement.
We consider the tensor product and the exterior product; first applied to vector spaces and then investigating the application to vector bundles. We assume familiarity with the definition of modules and free algebras.
The tensor product of two R-modules is the quotient where is the free R-module with basis for R a commutative ring with unity, . The canonical projection given by is R-bilinear when restricted to by the generators of the submodule in the quotient module. Any R-bilinear map can be expressed as the composition of the restricted canonical projection and an unique R-linear map. In this case, we say the tensor product is universal. To prove this, we have the following:
Theorem 44. For an R-bilinear map , with U, V, W being R-modules, there exists an unique R-linear map such that .
This has the immediate consequence that the tensor product is a functor.
Proof: f extends naturally to an R-linear map . f is R-bilinear so the image of , , is 0 under f'. Then f' induces the map g from to W. We see then that is R-linear. g is uniquely determined by f since is generated by the image of under .    .
We define a new entity by considering the R-submodule generated by . The exterior kth-power is the quotient module .
We define a canonical projection by . Then for some permutation    by Theorem 14 and Theorem 16. Then the composition is an alternating map where    is extended to k-variable tensor products. There is then an obvious extension of Theorem 44 to accompany the new definition. From Theorem 44 extended to k-variable tensor products:
Theorem 45. There is an unique R-linear map for any R-alternating map such that .
In the case R = K where we consider finite-dimensional vector spaces the exterior ppwers are dual to the alternating powers introduced earlier. Letting , the exterior product gives an alternating map . By Theorem 45 we have an unique linear map . For this map we have the following, proved in [MJ97]:
Theorem 46. We have: i)   is an isomorphism; ii) is a basis for for a basis of V; ii i) There is an isomorphism .
The balanced product, denoted is the cokernel of the R-linear homomorphism given by . The cokernel of a homomorphism of modules is the quotient module . We define by which becomes a B-module when B is commutative which is obviously isomorphic to the R-module.
The next section involves connections, although some of the more interesting discussion is omitted since our goal in this section is to develop the idea of characteristic classes. We will later see how Yang-Mills theory, the theory of connections, makes frequent appearances in our work.
A connection on    is a linear map satisfying for , and exterior differential d, where is the tensor product. We require to be C-linear when    is a complex vector bundle with a complex vector space.
We can tidy this up to a connection being a linear operator satisfying the Leibiniz rule by letting . The trick here is to extend the connection to an operator satisfying similar conditions to the derivation on differential forms that we discussed above.
We define a -bilinear product by where , , and .
Theorem 47. The -bilinear product A satisfies the following:
This follows simply from the associativity of the exterior product. Then we have to following for [MJ97]:
Theorem 48. There is an unique linear operator satisfying that when i = 0 and for and . gives a sequence of vector spaces . Amazingly, this is not a complex generally, although it is the de Rham complex when and    is the trivial line bundle. We do have which can be seen to be -linear since .
We also have that by a theorem we omitted earlier, [M74]. The 2-form is called the curvature form of the pair . The connection is called flat if .
We now define the -bilinear product mapping a pair into .
Theorem 49. There is a map from t to.
Proof:
By Theorem 48 we have .     So the sequence mentioned above is a chain complex when is flat.
We are, for the most part, interested in the Stiefel-Whitney class, so we only briefly visit the following ideas as an introduction to characteristic classes.
Let    be a complex vector bundle. The kth Chern character class of the pair is the cohomology class , the cohomology of the complexified de Rham complex. The factor that normalizes the cohomology class is there so that the Chern character class is in fact a real cohomology class in , a fact we discuss further later.
The kth Pontryagin character class of the pair is given by where which in turn induces a complex connection .
We need to revisit the discussion of connections to understand the definitions above. We see that if is a section that vanishes on an open subset then so does so is a local operator. In particular, this induces a connection on , the restriction of the vector bundle to the open subset .
The connection form with respect to the basis for and is denoted by A where is a kxk matrix of 1-forms and since elements of has the unique expression for .
Then we calculate from (2.1) so . For the connection on we have defined by and from this definition we have:
Theorem 50. (Bianchi 's identity) We have .
Proof: (2.2).
The trace homomorphism induces [MJ97] .and we can prove that for .
Take to be a homogeneous invariant polynomial with variables in a n x n matrix A. The exterior product is commutative on even-dimensional differential forms so we can replace with differential 2-forms . Then we can define .
As earlier, there is a matrix B of 2-forms of . We can from this define a global 2-form, one that is independent of basis, denoted . If we to let to get a 2k-form then it would be possible to prove that the connection involved was a closed form and that the cohomology class is independent of the connection.
Then the kth Chern class is where is the coefficient of in . Then for we have the kth Chern character class being . It 's simple to see equivalence with the earlier definition.
With the updated definitions, say    is a real vector bundle. Then and .
We let    be a smooth real 2k-dimensional vector bundle over a manifold X with and inner product . This induces a pairing with defined where . A connection on the pair is said to be orthogonal if .
Let be the curvature form of a metric connection . We treat this form as we did in the previous section and finally apply the Pfaffian polynomial. We define the Euler class of the oriented 2k-dimensional vector bundle    as . For a complex k-dimensional complex vector bundle we can prove that the Euler class is equal to the kth Chern class.
Let    be a vector bundle and take S(  ) to be the vector space of sections on the bundle   . We have the zero section in S(  ) assigning the origin in the fiber to . The zero section embeds B into T with as a retraction map and then is an isomorphism. Let denote the nonzero vectors of T. This next theorem is proved in [M74].
Theorem 51. (ThomIsomorphism Theorem) There is an unique cohomology class such that for each fiber F, the image of [c] under the restriction is nonzero. Furthermore, defines an isomorphism .
The composition of the isomorphism and the one defined in Theorem 51 is known as the Thom isomorphism. Then the ith Stiefel-Whitney class is given by the composition where is a Steenrod square, an additive operation satisfying.
From this point on we restrict our attention to 4-manifolds and their topology. This type of work is the perfect setting to describe the cohomology and related issues that were in-troduced above. In this section we will direct our attention to compact, simply connected, differentiable 4-manifolds and will give a proof of a result involving simply connected, com-plex surfaces. We will be forced to introduce some new methods as well, but will try to approach the theorem without any major headaches. Many of these new ideas are quite complicated so we content ourselves with a more general explanation of ideas.
Take a closed, orientable four-manifold, X. By Poincare duality we have . When X is simply connected we have so that any homological information exists only in . By the universal coefficient theorem [INS] we have being a free abelian groups, giving the fact that is a free abelian group.
We now need to realize the homology and cohomology classes of a four-manifold X. More than this, we will find later that many of the ways of doing this will prove useful at some point so we need to be able to work our way between them. The first way is by the complex vector bundle of rank 1 - complex line bundle - which is determined up to isomorphism by its Chern class in so we have a bijection from the isomorphism classes of line bundles to .
We can also use smoothly embedded, two-dimesional, oriented surfaces in X. A surface of this type carries a fundamental homology class in so that we can choose a general smooth section of a line bundle whose zero set us a surface which represents the homology class that is dual to . Then, last of all, we have de Rham cohomology - a representation of real cohomology classes by differential forms.
Let X be a compact, oriented, simply connected four-manifold. The Poincare duality isomorphism is equivalent to a bilinear form known as the intersection form of the manifold X. It is a symmetric form which induces an isomorphism between the groups and . We call the latter property unimodular.
For two oriented surfaces , in X, a four-manifold, we assign the notation to each point in their intersection according to the orientations in the isomorphism of the tangent bundles with intersection number given by the total number of points counted by sign. We can, of course, move this over to homology to give the form F. Then the cup product is . In terms of de Rham cohomology we are given the intersection number by the integral for some closed 2-forms , representing the classes that are dual to the oriented surfaces , in X.
We know that the Betti number of the manifold X is given by . For the second Betti number we write where the are the dimensions of the maximal positive, respectively negative, subspaces for the intersection form on H 2(X; R). The signature of an oriented four-manifold is then defined to be . The intersection form on the real vector space is classified up to equivalence by and .
An n-dimensional complex manifold is a 2n-dimensional smooth manifold with an open cover U1 and maps so that are complex differentiable on . A hermitian metric on X, an n-dimensional complex manifold, is a positive definite hermitian inner product, an inner product where the first term is linear and the second is complex linear, at each point which varies smoothly over X.
A hermitian metric where . is called a Kahler metric. In this case, is called a Kahler form and a complex manifold that is equipped with such a metric is know as a Kahler manifold.
Hodge theory involves a study of the algebraic topology of a smooth manifold X of the partial differential equation theory of generalised Laplacian operators associated to a Riemannian metric on X. In other words, Hodge theory gives representatives for cohomology classes on X, a compact Riemannian manifold. The theory was developed by W. V. D. Hodge in the thirties - as an extension of de Rham cohomology - and it has major applications in the discussion of Riemannian manifolds, Kahler manifolds and algebraic geometry of complex projective varieties.
The adjoint operator is defined . The Hodge theorem gives for each unique representative a of a real cohomology class. Given a Riemannian metric we have the decomposition into self-dual and anti self-dual harmonic 2-forms.
For an oriented four-manifold the characteristic classes to hand are the familiar Euler and Pontryagin classes along with the Stiefel-Whitney classes denoted by . The second Stiefel-Whitney class w2 is from the mod2 reduction of the intersection formula for all [D903].
We finish with a few useful definitions. Given two disjoint connected n-manifolds X and Y, then a connected n-manifold called the connected sum can be constructed by deleting the interiors of closed n-balls and and identifying the boundary spheres which result. Define a complex surface as a complex manifold of dimension 2 - which is a smooth 4-manifold X.
Suppose that X is an oriented Riemann four-manifold. From Hodge theory we have the decomposition of 2-forms on X into dual and anti self-dual parts . This extends to the curvature form on over X.
Write for . A conection is anti self-dual if . On the space the ASD equation is the system of PDEs: , , , for .
ASD connections are solutions of the Yang-Mills equations a special case of the Euler-Lagrange equations for the Yang-Mills functional, the square of the L 2-norm of the curvature form . Take a twice differentiable function from to and a twice differentiable function from to . An integral is defined on the first function which we allow to vary while fixing the second. The first function must satisfy a certain differential equation when we try to find the Lagrangian. Then this equation is known as the Euler-Lagrange differential equation or the Euler-Lagrange condition.
Take l a Hermitian line bundle over some manifold X. The curvature form for the connection on l is known to be an imaginary 2-form so that is a real 2-form that is closed by Bianchi 's identity. Take a new connection which gives so so it is dependent only on the choice of l. This is the Chern class c 1(l). Let    be a vector bundle and we know . The 4-form depends only on   . These forms represent a characteristic class of   ; for a complex vector bundle v.
The Pontryagin class discussed earlier is the standard four-dimensional class for a real orthogonal bundle given . This bundle also has a Stiefel-Whitney class, satisfying .
First we define the gauge group of the bundle    as the set of automorphisms which '[respects] the structure on the fibres and [covers] the identity map on [the smooth manifold] X' [D903]. The gauge group acts on the set of connections.
The moduli space on a bundle   , over a compact, oriented Riemannian four-manifold X, is defined to be the set of gauge equivalence classes of ASD connections on   . The moduli space C has an induced topology, induced by the topology in the space of connections.
The space is a Sobolev space and is defined to be the completion of the space of smooth functions on that is compactly supported on the norm for the tensor of the ith derivatives of f. We define for a vector bundle    over X a compact manifold [A82, D903, 1]. Then we have:
Theorem 52. (Sobolev embedding theorem) If then there is a bounded inclusion from into the Banach space when .
So for a four-manifold X the Sobolev embedding theorem says that is a space of continuous functions when . The set of gauge equivalence classes is defined to be the quotient space where S is the space of connections on    and Q is the group of gauge transformations and we denote the equivalence class of a connection by . the L2 metric on S and this is preserved by Q so we have.
We can show that this is a metric in quite a simple way. The only condition for metrics that is n't trivial is to show that implies . We suppose that and we let be a sequence in S with all gauge equivalent to and the sequence converging in to so the proof depends on showing that and are gauge equivalent. If then we can prove . So we just show that g lies in the subset of unitary sections of .
On a Riemannian manifold X, we can move tangent vectors along a path by parallel transport, preserving vector addition and scalar multiplication. A closed loop at a base point x, gives rise to a invertible linear map of Tx(X), the tangent vectors at x. We can compose these closed loops and we invert them by going backwards. The set of linear transformations resulting from parallel transport along closed loops is called the holonomy group.
A connection on    is reducible if the holonomy maps of all loops based at each lie in some proper subgroup of the automorphism group . If we have a connected base X then it is possible to find a holonomy group . We define of in the gauge as . We can show that the centralizer of . Further, for small , we can show that the projection induces a homomophism from to a a neighbourhood of and for , the isotropy group of is isomorphic to the isotropy group of . This is for , where is the bundle of Lie algebras associated to the adjoint operator .
Then we have to find the solutions of the ASD equation to complete the construction of the moduli space. Consider the Sobolev space - denote by the orbit space. For and a bundle    'we have a moduli space composed of ASD connections modulo gauge transformations' [D903].
Theorem 53. The inclusion is a homeomorhism.
This theorem means that we can ditch the cumbersome Sobolev-type notation. We let be an ASD connection and we define given by.
We take the zero set and from our earlier work we see that a homeomorphism is induced from to the neighbourhood of in .
We take a leap here, defining and stating what we need. These results follow from what we have discussed above but the ideas involved are quite complicated so we we will avoid them, Although the work is complex, the ideas are, as with most work in this area, geometrically reasonable so that we can get some sense of what is happening. What we want to do is to be able to distinguish between four-manifolds that have the same invariants. So, first we define some new invariants using moduli spaces.
To illustrate, we take the simple case of a zero-dimensional moduli space. So the invariant is an integer since it is a class in zero-dimensional homology. Take a simply-connected four-manifold with with    an SO(3) bundle with nonzero and for . We can see that for this to be true, must be odd so that . We define the invariant to be for the sign at a point depending on the orientation of the determinant line bundle and the moduli space for some generic metric g.
We can prove that q is independent of the choice of generic metric g. We can apply this idea more generally. That is, we can define invariants of a four-manifold X by a process similar to above - taking the moduli space to contain some homology class that is indepdenent of the choice of generic metric.
Theorem 54. Let X be a simply connected four-manifold with odd, and suppose that with . Then the polynomial invariants are identically zero.
We now complete our investigation.
Corollary 2. For any simply-connected, complex surface S with there is a smooth four-manifold X(S) which is homotopy equivalent to but not diffeomorphic to S, nor to any complex surface.
This theorem follows from:
Corollary 3. No simply connected, complex, algebraic surface S can be written as a smooth connected sum with and positive.
This theorem is as follows from the next theorem and the results regarding polynomial invariants.
Theorem 55. We have for large k if S is a compact, simply connected, complex surface with .
This theorem is implied by the following central result that we have aimed to discuss. We saw earlier that the four-manifold has a standard orientation with . The embedding of S in projective space defines h, a hyperplane class in .
Theorem 56. For any simply connected, complex algebraic surface S, with and any hyperplane class h in there is a such that for and any Stiefel-Whitney class which is the reduction of a (1,1) class , we have .
A detailed proof is included in Section 10.1.4 of [D903].
We will not attempt to give a proof but will discuss the more comprehensible ideas behind it. We let S be a complex, algebraic surface. We put a Kahler metric on S, that is compatible with a certain projective embedding [D903]. The de Rham cohomology of the metric 2-form is dual (Poincare) to the hyperplane section class . We define , [X]) where is a specific cohomology class and for X the compact, regular moduli space of ASD connections defined relative to the Kahler metric.
We know that we can represent by the 2-form since the metric form is self dual. By de Rham cohomology, . Then as required since X must be a complex manifold and the 2-form of the natural Kahler metric on X. , the Riemannian volume element on X [MJ97], so .
