The majority of the articles produced today about economics are to do with the developed countries of with North America and Western Europe, especially the United States of America. This is not surprising as the USA is the largest economy in the world and has a pivotal role in the running of the world economy. For this reason, it is vital for scholars of economics to study how the US economy is driven.
What goes on in the USA does not only affect the domestic economy but influences almost all economies in the world. Following a decade marked by the longest US expansion on record, the US economy slipped into recession in early 2001. This recent slowdown has had a major impact upon almost all economies of the world. In order to evaluate the reasons why this had occurred, it is vital to examine what had occurred coming up to the year 2001.
America enjoyed a remarkable economic expansion throughout the second half of the 1990s. This contrasts to the sluggishness of the US economy in the early 1990s. In the US, hesitant growth during 1995 gave way to more solid expansion in 1996, in part reflecting the response to lower interest rates. The US economy continued to operate near capacity during 1996, with further improvements in business and consumer confidence. This is largely due to rapid capital accumulation, a surge in the number of hours worked and faster growth of total factor productivity. The acceleration of productivity growth, driven by improvements in IT, is the most remarkable feature of this US growth resurgence. In 1999, America 's trade deficit had hit an all-time high with imports exceeding exports by far. This was because the US economy was growing at a much faster rate than the rest of the world 's. Whilst other nations were cutting back on the consumption of American goods and services, American consumers were overindulging on foreign goods.
By 2000, the US economy was showing signs of an economic slowdown: America 's GDP growth was falling; the sales of durable goods also fell; corporate profits were being squeezed by a combination of higher oil prices and slowing sales; unemployment-insurance claims had risen which is often the first evidence of a downturn. Lower sales also forced American firms to reduce production. In short, America 's nine-and-a-half year expansion was clearly slowing sharply.
So, why has this occurred? Firstly, the American economy was being stretched beyond its limits. By 2000, every measure of inflation had ticked up, particularly consumer prices; productivity growth had slowed significantly and labour costs were rising at a fast rate because of rising wages and higher benefit costs. Until the second half of 1999, productivity grew so fast that it more than made up for rising wages. Interest rates actually rose to achieve a sustained slowdown in 2000. The result was the slowdown in 2001.
The financial crisis of the US stockmarket also helped trigger the slowdown. The bursting of the "dotcom" or "IT bubble" dealt a fatal blow. Oil prices had shot up as well from around $10 a barrel in 1998 to over $40 and this acted as a drag on the global economy. America 's huge current account deficit was another contributor of the slowdown of the US economy. In 2001, the US had a current account deficit of $417 billion. Wall Street Journal. New York. NY: May 2, 2002 pg.A.2.
The tragic events of September 11 th and their aftermath contributed to a sharp deterioration in confidence. The economy 's weaknesses were exacerbated by the event. An unanticipated event of the magnitude of September 11 th terrorist attacks would and did in fact rapidly alter the view of the future for both consumers and businessmen. It would spur consumers and investors to postpone or even cancel spending. In fact, the fall in consumption expenditures was one of the largest contributors of the downturn of the falling GDP growth. According to the Keynesian multiplier, the impact of such reduction in aggregate demand would be even greater reductions in output. Such incidents create uncertainty and this crisis of confidence depends on factors such as the progress in the war against terrorism. Most believe that a recession was already under way before September 11 th.
A particularly alarming aspect of slowdown of 2001 was its synchronicity across nearly all regions of the world. This was due to the recent increase in globalization and trade. This caused a massive problem for the US economy. As an example, in the "world recession" in 1991, the American economy sank, but Japan, Germany and the emerging East Asian economies continued to boom, which helped sustain the level of world demand. However, extensiveness of this slowdown means that as the US economy became sluggish and it would cut down on, for instance, its imports from East Asian producers. The Asian producers then, in turn, would trim their imports, not only from the USA but from countries of Europe and Japan as well. Such nature of the 2001 "recession" increased the chances of a prolonged American, as well as global, downturn.
The slide in the value of the US$ made it more dangerous for the US economy because a sharp fall in the dollar against other currencies would reflect weakening faith in America 's economic prospects and further undermine confidence, resulting in lower consumption. Fortunately, the recession had a soft landing and the economy began to recover at the end of 2001.
In contrast to previous world recessions in the past, inflation was low. This meant that there was plenty of room to ease monetary policy. The Fed cut interest rates several times. Moreover, as the US economy entered this downturn with a large budget surplus, the US Federal Reserve was able to push through huge tax cuts in order to boost consumer spending in the economy. Such timely fiscal and monetary stimulus in 2001, strong consumer spending combined with continued productivity gains lead to a turnaround in late 2001 and early 2002. Interest rate cuts also helped sustain demand through the American housing market. In 2001, houses in the USA were rising at their fastest pace for more than a decade. Such increase in consumer wealth helped offset the fall in share prices at the time allowing the American consumers to keep up their spending.
America 's goods and services trade deficit was still widening with a rise in imports in late 2004 fuelled by higher oil prices as well as continued strong domestic demand for foreign goods. The US has spent its way out of recession, leading to dangerously high levels of debt. Despite a weakening dollar, exports only rose by a small amount.
Despite a slight detour, the US economy was still showing signs of improvement in 2004. To begin with, there were five interest rate rises in 2004 to avoid unsustainably rapid growth and inflationary pressures. This signifies that consumer spending has stabilized in the country. Figures showed continued economic strength, an increase in industrial output and retail sales outpaced forecasts. Business investment also went up. There were signs of an increase in consumer and business confidence accompanied by a rebound in global trade. The GDP statistics of 2004 were consistent with an economy that is solidly growing, largely driven by productivity gains. The global GDP growth projected to an average of 5% last year.
Despite the high energy prices and high unemployment, consumer spending has held up because of low inflation, a rise in disposable incomes due to large tax cuts and the low cost of borrowing despite the increases in interest rates.
So, what if oil remained at around $40 a barrel? According to IMF 's rule of thumb, a sustained $10 a barrel rise in price would reduce global output by 0.5% after one year. The world economy as a whole will be worse off, as inflation edges up and demand falls. If oil prices remain over $40 a barrel, it would increase the possibility of a downturn of the US economy in 2005. What affects the US also affects the rest of the world, particularly in East Asian economies. Over the years, America 's economic engine has helped to pull along emerging economies by sucking in great quantities of imports. The USA is in fact the region 's biggest export market along with Japan. If the US economy hits a downturn, it would further undermine business confidence in Asia 's economies. In other words, if the US economy falters, exports from Asian economies would go down by a considerable amount.
A higher oil price hurts an oil-importing economy in two ways. Firstly it increases firms' production costs and reduces profits, so they supply fewer goods and services at any given price. Secondly, higher oil prices transfer income from oil-importing countries to oil producer. Since income and spending are squeezed in the importing countries, aggregate demand will go down. Overall output will fall and headline inflation will go up. Such movements can be illustrated using the AD/AS curve as shown below.
If oil prices remain at $40 a barrel or even higher, corporate profits and household real incomes will be squeezed.
America 's economy should, in theory, be hurt even less by higher oil prices than Europe 's or Japan 's, because America is also an oil producer, so its oil imports are smaller. however, as the world 's biggest consumer of oil, the impact of high oil prices would be larger in the US than any other nation. The increase in global oil consumption is likely to continue to grow, largely thanks to China; therefore, America, the world 's biggest oil consumer, may have to adjust to permanently higher oil prices.
High oil prices would dampen global demand and this would slow recovery of countries like Japan. In contrast, weakening oil prices help support global activity. In 2003, China accounted for no less than one-third of the increase in world oil consumption. Therefore, the Chinese economy would be heavily affected by a rise in oil prices than other economies. Emerging Asian economies would also be profoundly influenced because much of their GDP growth consists of exporting goods produced in the manufacturing industry requiring large amounts of energy resources. Europe would be affected to a lesser extent because some countries such as the Netherlands and the United Kingdom have their own oil reserves.
Higher oil prices increase headline inflation and is likely to reduce business confidence resulting in sluggish economic growth. Weakening oil prices help support global activity.
Statistics show that the current US economy is growing solidly and it has recovered well from the slowdown in 2001. However, there is still a lack of trust that has not been fully recovered in Wall Street - there is still a fear of another Enron, WorldCom and Global Crossing. Such corporate scandals, bursting of the dotcom bubble and the terrorist attacks of September 11 only remind us of the instability of the world that we live in. The current situation in the Middle East augments uncertainties of the situation even more and the crisis of confidence should be overcome. With worries about petrol prices, the prospect of higher interest rates together with further deterioration of the US current account deficit future looks very uncertain.
Massive fiscal and monetary stimulus has helped to support the American economy, but only at the cost of bigger economic and financial imbalances. The US should start taking actions to reduce its deficits if the US economy is ever to find composure. It is not merely their own economy in question, but involves the rest of the economies of the world as well.
