Gamma ray photons are uncharged and create no ionisation or excitation of any material they pass through and hence the methods of determining their energies are somewhat limited. Therefore the detection of such gamma-rays is dependant on them transferring all or part of their energies to an electron in the absorbing material. From the excitation of such electrons, the energies of the incident gamma-rays can be determined.
When a gamma ray interacts with another particle there are three significant ways in which that interaction may occur: photoelectric absorption, Compton scattering and pair production. It is from these three possible situations that the photon energies can be quantified.
Photoelectric absorption is where a gamma ray interacts with a particle and disappears. Its energy is transmitted to the absorber atom and is converted into a photoelectron produced from one of the atom 's outer shells. This photoelectron has kinetic energy given by: Equation 1 where is the kinetic energy of the photoelectron is the binding energy of the electron in its original shell.
This binding energy is only a few keV for low-Z materials, increasing to tens of keV for materials with higher atomic number.
Conservation of momentum dictates that the atom must recoil, however this recoil energy is nominal and hence usually can be neglected.
The vacancy that arises from the ejection of the photoelectron from an outer shell is then quickly filled via a rearrangement of the electron configuration. This yields a change in the binding energy of the atom which manifests itself as an emitted X-ray. These X-rays travel some distance before being reabsorbed by less tightly bound electron shells of neighbouring atoms.
By this form of interaction, the energy of the gamma-ray is transferred in its entirety and so the photoelectron energy is always representative of the photon energy. Hence if the kinetic energies of electrons entering a detector are measured, the resultant distribution will take the form of a delta function at the point , known as the photopeak.
It is not possible to observe such a distinct delta function from experimental data due to the limitations of the resolution of the detector that is used. As a result, the single peak will look 'blurry' - more like a convolution - and have a finite width that is reduced as the resolution is increased.
Compton scattering occurs when only part of the photon energy is transferred to a recoil electron and as a result the photon still has some energy and is scattered. Hence the energy of the incident photon is equivalent to the sum of the kinetic energies of the recoil electron and the scattered photon. The division of this energy between the electron and the scattered photon is dependant upon the scattering angle,   .
The energy of the scattered gamma ray is given by Equation 2 where is the rest mass energy of the electron (0.511MeV). Therefore the kinetic energy of the recoil electron can be expressed as: Equation 3.
There are two extreme cases:
An extremely low scattering angle (): from equation 1 and from equation 2. The incident photon barely grazes the electron, retaining almost all of its energy and so transferring minimal energy to the recoil electron.
A head-on collision (). The incident photon is scattered directly backwards and transfers the maximum amount of energy to the recoil electron, which then continues along the incidental path. For this scenario equations 1 and 2 become: Equation 4 Equation 5.
Scattering occurs across a range of angles between the two extreme situations mentioned above. Hence a continuum of electron energies would be received by the detector, ranging from to a maximum defined by equation 4 above. The electron energy distribution takes the following form:
There is a noticeable gap between the maximum Compton energy and the photon energy . This energy gap is given by Equation 6.
This analysis is based upon the notion that the electrons are free. In detectors where the electrons are bound, the binding energy of the material may alter the shape of the resultant Compton continuum.
This process involves the creation of an electron-positron pair from the incident photon in the intense electric field near the protons in the nuclei of the absorbing material. The photon disappears entirely and, provided that an energy of at least is carried by the photon, the pair is generated with any excess energy contributing to the kinetic energies of both the positron and electron. This energy distribution can be modelled as follows: Equation 7.
The contribution of pair production is only significant for energies greater than the 1.02MeV threshold and so this interaction mechanism will have less of an effect on the emission spectrum than photoelectric absorption and Compton scattering. For this reason this form of interaction is not particularly significant in this experiment.
Values calculated from 19 repeat integral readings (discounting result number 2 as an outlier): therefore.
Error in integral, (0.41%).
Error in mean integral, (1.2%).
Error in , (0.8%).
The experimental value for the standard deviation is in agreement with the theoretical value. There is a discrepancy of only 1% which is encompassed by the error bounds of the experimental value, however there will always be a difference in the two values due to the statistical nature of the problem. The 2 values will converge as more readings are taken but they will only be equal when .
As (time), then t - and hence n - would have to be increased by a factor double in size to the factor by which the error must be reduced. This is due to the fact that the error in measurement = .
For example to half the magnitude of the error 4n readings would have to be taken.
A scintillator crystal is a means by which to linearly convert the kinetic energy of a particle into detectable light such that by measuring the light from the crystal, the kinetic energy of the particle may be ascertained. With a refractive index close to that of glass (~1.5), the crystal can be connected to a photomultiplier tube in order to magnify the light signal for clearer analysis.
A Sodium Iodide Thallium-doped (NaI(Tl)) scintillator crystal is used in this experiment because the relatively high atomic number of the iodine constituent (Z=53) ensures that the photoelectric effect is the most prominent form of interaction between the gamma-rays and the electrons in the detector. Therefore it has high intrinsic detection efficiency. It has a high light output which maximises the quality of the output signal. They also have a smaller decay time - the lower the decay time, the more frequently the light pulses can be sent and so measurements can be taken at a greater rate.
A device is required to convert the relatively weak light output of a scintillation pulse into a strong electrical signal that can be analysed more easily. The photomultiplier tube is particularly adept at achieving this, converting light signals of only a few hundred photons into a usable current pulse without adding large amounts of noise to the signal.
The entire system is sealed within a glass envelope which maintains the vacuum conditions required for optimal acceleration of the low-energy electrons by the internal electric fields. A photocathode converts the majority of photons that enter the PMT into low-energy photoelectrons. When such a photon pulse is received from the scintillator crystal, a pulse of equal duration of photoelectrons is transmitted. However the charge of the electrical signal of such a few low-level electrons (perhaps only a few hundred in a single pulse) is not sufficient and so they are passed on to the electron multiplier.
The electron multiplier has suitable geometry to efficiently collect and amplify the number of electrons in the pulse to a level where the signal is considerable enough to be useable (~10 10 electrons from a single signal). This charge is collected at the anode of the multiplier structure where it is then transmitted on to the MCA for analysis.
A configuration comprising a sodium iodide scintillator crystal and photomultiplier tube was set up to receive gamma-ray emissions from a sample chamber and send the resultant electrical signal to a Multi-channel Analyser (MCA).
The MCA displayed the distribution of energy levels, separating them differentially into discreet channels in order to create a visual representation of the response function which was then outputted to the monitor.
Aside.
Throughout this experiment references are made to flux or counts measured by the detector. This refers to the actual reading minus the background reading (measured with no radioactive source present).
In order to correct for any shifting in the spectrometer (see   ##), the emission spectra of three known sample were analysed: Caesium-137 - main photopeak at Americium-241 - main photopeak at Radium-226 - many peaks (refer to tables [2]).
Both of the sources with specific photopeak energy levels were each in turn placed into the source chamber and the program was run for a period of 120 seconds. The emission spectra for both sources were displayed on the same axes, clearly showing two prominent photopeaks - one for each source.
By highlighting the main photopeak relevant to each of the first two sources and telling the program the type of sources that they corresponded to, the MCA was able to adjust its axis labels such that the 661keV point on the scale corresponded to the centre of the Caesium-137 photopeak and the 59.5keV point coincided with the centre of the Americium-241 photopeak. The program then used these two reference points to plot a linear relationship and hence calibrate the MCA in order to measure the energy peaks of the Radium-226 source.
The Radium-226 source was then used for an exposure time of 120 seconds and the peak energy values, along with those of the two other sources, were plotted against the theoretical values [2]. The linear relationship exhibited by the data demonstrates that the MCA was correctly calibrated and hence ready to use for analysis of unknown sources.
Radioactivity is in essence a process of random emission and is therefore governed by Poisson 's distribution law. The probability P(Y) of observing Y counts in a given channel is given by Equation 8 where is the average number of counts which accumulate in the channel under consideration.
Due to the Gaussian nature of the distribution peaks, the standard deviation is equivalent to half of the full width at half maximum (FWHM).
By taking 20 repeat measurements of the integrated intensity under the full energy peak of the Caesium-137 on the MCA display, a mean value for the integral (), and the standard deviation () was calculated for the number of counts accumulated at this point. The integral and count values were found using the tabular output from the Region of Interest (ROI) function in the MCA program.
A Caesium-137 spectrum was accumulated for 60 seconds with significant counts ( 10 4) under the full energy peak. The energy levels for the key features of the spectrum were found and the theoretical energy at which the Compton edge should appear was calculated.
The relative efficiency is defined as the ratio of the photopeak flux to the total flux recorded [3]. This was calculated for the detector, along with the energy resolution of the detector at 661keV, where at E.
The dead time of the detector was the calculated using the relationship Dead time = Real time - Live time.
In other words, this is the time for which the detector was activated less the time that the detector was actually receiving pulses. These time intervals were taken from the MCA display.
The attenuation of a collimated beam of radiation of flux passing through a medium of thickness t and emerging with flux is governed by the equation Equation 9 where , the attenuation coefficient, is characteristic of the absorber and the photon energy.
In this case the detector is positioned behind the material as shown below.
However, another arrangement is possible whereby the detector is within the material. The equation then becomes Equation 10 t is defined at the right-hand side of the material, increasing towards the source.
Equation 10 can be applied to 2 different peaks such that & is the attenuation coefficient at peak 1 and is the flux for peak 1 (analogous for peak 2).
These two equations can be combined to form a single equation involving t Equation 11 and are normalising coefficients specific to energy peaks with flux and .
The 2 -values were found by fitting a quartic equation to the values given in the lab script [3] . These were then inserted into equation 11 such that only t remained unknown. By rearranging and setting the exponential component of the equation as y(t) and then plotting y(t) against t, a simplified exponential equation containing only one t was found, which could be solved. Equation 12.
Hence by taking the flux at two specific energy peaks and finding their normalising coefficients, a value for the thickness of the material can be found. It is therefore possible to find the thickness of the scintillator crystal.
The Radium-226 source was used for an exposure time of 300 seconds to create a detailed spectrum. ROI 's were set up around 2 high energy lines ( 1MeV) and 3 low energy lines ( 1MeV). One high-energy and one low-energy peak ROI were then chosen and the ratio of their integral flux values was used to calculate the thickness of the crystal, t as described above.
Spectrums were obtained for two unknown sources - "Sample A" and "Sample B". Each was exposed for 300 seconds to ensure that the resulting spectrums were highly defined. By identifying the main energy peaks of each sample and comparing these energy values to known materials, the samples were identified.
By rearranging equation 9 (  2.4), a new equation can be obtained involving a linear relationship between the flux and the thickness of the absorbing material: Equation 12.
Therefore by varying the thickness of the material and measuring the emerging flux and the flux for t=0, the attenuation coefficient for a material can be calculated from the gradient of a graph of equation 12.
The attenuation coefficient for lead (Pb) could therefore be found using this relationship. A ROI was set up around the main photopeak for sample A and a 120 second exposure time was set. Firstly the flux was measured using the MCA. Then a sheet of lead with known thickness t1 was placed inbetween the source and the detector and the new flux reaching the detector, I1, was noted. Another lead sheet with known thickness t2 was then placed behind the first sheet and the new flux value was recorded. This process continued until 6 lead sheets were in place, with the combined thickness of the plates at any one time defined as t. This was then repeated for sample B and the two values were compared.
Compton scattering is the main interaction method due to the abundance of lead atoms with which to scatter the incoming gamma-rays, as well as the atoms in the scintillator crystal.
If figure 11 is magnified, the X-ray peaks become more noticeable:
From figures 11 and 12, and by consulting the MCA, the main features of the spectrum occurred at the following energy levels:
The error in determining the exact position of each feature was taken to be around channels, depending upon the gradation of the peak (if the peak is steeper, the centre is more defined and hence the range of channels in which it lies is less). This equates to an error range of . i) Full Energy Photopeak ii) Compton Continuum The Compton continuum can be seen in both figures 11 and 12 as the counts distributed across the energy range . This is as a result of Compton scattering of photons through a range of angles . iii) Compton Edge The Compton edge represents the energy of a Compton scattering event occurring at (see   1.1.2). This edge is more like a slope due to the restricted energy resolution of the detector limiting the image quality, causing the image to be convoluted.
Equation 6 was used to find the energy gap between the photopeak and the Compton edge ,.
From this the theoretical energy of the Compton edge was calculated iv) Backscatter Peak This backscatter peak occurs as a result of gamma-rays undergoing Compton scattering in one of the materials surrounding the detector. If the angle at which they interact is , the scattered photons have almost identical energies. This gives rise to many scattered gamma-rays with energies near to this minimum value, and hence a peak appears in the recorded spectrum at . v) X-ray Peaks & . The location of these two X-ray peaks correspond to the energy lost by the atoms in the detector because the X-rays - emitted as a result of the change in binding energy - have not been reabsorbed (see   1.1.1). Instead they have escaped and so do not contribute any energy to the atoms in the detector. The resultant loss in photon energy manifests itself as these two smaller peaks towards the left-hand side of the energy spectrum. i) Calculation.
Relative efficiency, ii) Error.
Error in flux = due to Poisson nature of gamma-ray emission i) Calculation.
Energy resolution, where ii) Error.
Error in photopeak energy level = (small error due to highly defined peak).
The resolution of the detector is dependant upon the amplification of the signal - as the quality of the amplifier is increased; the peaks become more well-defined and so (and hence ) decreases. As the peak tends to a delta function (see figure 1,   1.1.1).
The dead time was calculated to be Dead time = Real time - Live time.
This value corresponds to 74043 counts taken for a period of 60 seconds.
The error in the time values given by the MCA display was taken to be around and hence considered to be negligible. Dead time = 0.74%.
The 5 ROI 's were set up around 5 energy peaks in the Radium-226 energy spectrum.
Error in Energy value = .
ROI 's 3 and 5 used for analysis: & [3] [4], hence and.
Plot of yields exponential equation:
Rearrange and solve to yield.
Let.
Error in t,.
There are two distinct peaks in the above spectrum: (for error analysis see   3.3.1ii).
These two energy values are comparable to those of Sodium-22:
The values are in agreement as the theoretical values lie within the error bounds.
Hence Source A is Sodium-22.
Again there are two distinct peaks in the above spectrum:
Peak 1 at Peak 2 at.
Compton Edge at X-ray Peak at (for error analysis see   3.3.1ii).
These two energy values are comparable to those of Cobalt-60:
The values are of the correct order of magnitude and in agreement with the theoretical values; however the error bounds are not sufficient enough to encompass them. Hence Source B is Cobalt-60.
The primary photopeak was found at.
Flux, I, within ROI Error in t,.
Equation 12 plotted with against (figure 18). Gradient yields [Error given by Origin]. This value leads to (error ~10 -6 hence negligible) = statistical error.
The measured value is in agreement with the theoretical value as it is of the correct order of magnitude with a small statistical error.
The primary photopeak was found at.
Flux, I, within ROI = Error in t, (see   3.5.1 for method).
Equation 12 plotted with against (figure 19). Gradient yields [Error given by Origin]. This value leads to (error ~10 -9 hence negligible) = statistical error.
The measured value is of the correct order of magnitude; however there is a significant statistical error. This leads me to believe that the quartic relationship used to predict the attenuation coefficient at a given energy level does not hold for higher energy levels and hence this result is skewed whilst the source A result is more accurate.
The calibration peaks were easily identifiable and when the peak energy values were plotted against the theoretical values a clear linear relationship was evident. The error in this peak location was minimised by the MCA program locating the maximum of the peak rather than using the naked eye. By recalibrating the equipment each time the laboratory was revisited this prevented the energy scale from shifting and hence avoided any systematic error appearing in the results.
The mean and the 2 values for were found: , , .
These 2 values are in agreement to within 1% - they are of the same order of magnitude and hence Poisson 's distribution is obeyed. As mentioned in   3.1iii, these values will only be equal for an infinite number of readings and so 1.5% deviation for a 60 second exposure time is acceptable.
The spectral data plot for Caesium-137 (figure 12) clearly shows all of the expected features at energy levels that are of the correct order of magnitude and whose error bounds encompass the theoretical values. The clarity of the spectrum could be improved by increasing the exposure time in order to make the key features more defined. An example of where this would have been useful is around the 2 X-ray peaks - a considerable amount of each peak is identified with only one point and so led to ambiguity regarding the exact location of the centre.
The following information was calculated concerning the detector:
These are all acceptable values with realistic error bounds associated with them.
This value is of the correct order of magnitude; however the error bounds are small. Although this is partly due to the long exposure time, there is a considerable difference between the upper error bound and the true value ( [1]). These two should overlap, however this may be as a result of using incorrect   -values. The   -values were taken from a quartic equation that was constructed from 5 known values in order to ascertain values in-between. However, in approximating a fit to the data there may be a discrepancy (as found later when finding    for lead) and hence the theoretical values taken as exact may have some error associated with them.
Source A was identified as Sodium-22. The photopeaks matched up well within the error bounds of the MCA display peaks and hence it was possible to easily identify the source. The two Compton edges are clearly visible and because of the large gap between photopeaks there is no superposition of features.
Source B was identified as Cobalt-60. Again the photopeaks matched the theoretical energy levels given, making identification simple. However, the close proximity of the 2 main photopeaks led to superposition of the first Compton edge with the second photopeak, making the Compton edge difficult to identify. As a result, the Compton continuum raised the photopeak to a greater counts plateau and hence gave a higher value for the integral under the curve than was caused solely by photoelectric absorption. To counter this, the continuum should be treated as further background radiation and removed from the total integral, leaving the true counts for the photopeak alone.
Two values for the attenuation coefficient of lead (Pb) were found: &.
Both values are in agreement with the theoretical values given in the lab script[2], however the error bounds for source B do not encompass the theoretical value. This is due to the use of an approximation fit to calculate the theoretical   -values and hence provide incorrect values as the approximation breaks down for higher energy levels. Due to the statistical error in the source A value being considerably smaller than that of source B, it is logical to suggest that this value is more accurate, however this is solely dependant upon the theoretical values used for comparison.
There is considerable error in the method for this section of the experiment, mainly due to the irregular shape of the lead plates. The plates were not uniform and so the thickness measurement was not necessarily true for the point at which the gamma-rays were passing through. There was no apparatus to ensure that they were all aligned perpendicular to the gamma-ray beam and hence the thickness of lead the beam actually passed through would have an angular component no longer equal to t. These effects could be reduced by minimising the distance from the source to the plates and also from the plates to the detector. This would curtail any angular deviation that may occur over larger distances.
Key features of the gamma-ray energy spectra were identified as well as the energy levels at which they appeared. The Poisson nature of radioactive emission was proven via calculating statistically and experimentally:
The mean and the 2 values for were found: , ,.
These 2 values are in agreement to within 1%.
Features of the detector were calculated that affect the shape of the spectrum:
The errors associated with these results are small as a result of a long exposure time and hence count values are large.
By comparison of the energy levels of the key features, Source A was identified as Sodium-22 and Source B was found to be Cobalt-60. In each case the two photopeaks were easily matched up with the theoretical energies, making identification straight-forward. The two values for the attenuation coefficient of lead (Pb) found using these two sources were: &.
Although these values seem to be of the correct order of magnitude it is difficult to compare due to the different energy levels. The problems with the lead plate orientation and ambiguity in the theoretical values that arose from the quartic equation fit have limited the accuracy of these results.
