Beginning in the 1950s, industrialized countries of the world experienced over 20 years of sustained economic growth. Economic growth can be defined as an increase in the productive capacity of a country to produce more output over a period of time. This period is undoubtedly the "golden age of growth" because from 1950 to 1973 real GDP (Gross Domestic Product) per capita growth was the highest at 3.7%. In this essay we will look at three main factors which brought about the "Golden Age" of economic growth in Europe. We will first examine how Investment facilitated the catching up process which brought about economic growth. Next we would analyze the role of social capital (labour) in generating growth. Lastly, we will observe how trade contributed to this growth. As illustrated in table 2 though most European countries experienced remarkable increase in growth rates, economic growth was not uniform. In particular I would like to focus on Britain and examine the reasons behind Britain 's relatively slower growth during this period.
John Black (2002), Oxford dictionary of Economics, pg 204.
Strictly speaking Economic growth refers only to long run potential growth which is represented by an outward shift of the production possibility frontier as illustrated in figure 1. However in this essay we shall include short run actual growth (reflected by an increase in real per capita GDP) in our definition of economic growth.
Source: Crafts (1995).
After World War Two, the United States introduced the Marshall Plan (1947-51) which included $13.2 billion in aid to stimulate recovery in Europe. For every US dollar in aid, the same amount would be matched by the recipient government. This contributed to 1.7% of GDP in the next four years. Critics assert that the Marshall Plan was not the key to recovery of track and rolling stock and relative to total investment the plan was not large; thus it can only account for part of GDP growth. Moreover while relaxed foreign exchange constraints allowed the import of essential inputs, the bottleneck effect alone cannot explain the phenomenonal increase in growth. Nevertheless, a key contribution of the Marshall Plan was towards restoring the role of the market in European economies which facilitated economic growth in the next period.
Solow 's growth model suggests that growth is independent of investment rate. Instead long run growth of income per person is dependent on exogenous improvements in technology which generates productivity growth. Verspagen found strong economic evidence that catching up in the golden age did indeed involve some convergence in technological competence and reduced technology gaps between countries. According to Abramovitz, this transfer of technology was made easier by more equal social capability in terms of education levels and financial institutions which provided capital for investments.
Crafts, N.F.R. (1995), "The Golden Age of Economic growth in Western Europe 1950-1973", Economic history review 48:429-47.
Challenging Solow 's model, Rebelo 's model demonstrates that well defined property rights and political stability creates a conducive environment for investment which drives growth.
The figure above illustrates that at g* there is an equalization of the return to consumption and the return to investment. The rate of time preference (less impatience) or a reduction in the marginal rate of taxation leads to an equilibrium characterized by higher steady state growth. During the "golden age" non-consumption taxes in European countries averaged around 19% of GDP. However there existed a number of possible offsets to the new tax regimes which would act to raise gross returns to investment or perhaps lower the rate of time preference. During this period, increased government expenditure (table 6) in the form of expansionist fiscal policies and budget deficits also encouraged Investment.
Applying the IS-LM analysis (Sir John Hicks), an increase in investment would cause a rightward shift of the downward sloping IS curve and increase national income. (figure 3) During the "golden age" continuously high investment was made possible by the following factors:
MNCs not only increased foreign investment, they also impart their entrepreneurial capability and technological knowledge. Investment generated substantial addition to GDP by raising demand in many sectors and it ensures short run efficiency of the firm 's plant and equipment. Furthermore it also promoted the long run growth of a firm by encouraging a high degree of innovation.
Eichengreen argues that postwar European countries succeeded through arriving at institutional arrangements that promoted high investment by firms in return for wage restraint by workers leading to high growth and long term advantage to both sides. This was the "social contract for growth" thesis in which the wage moderation social pact between owners of capital and labor helped prevent conflicts which in turn attracted investments.
Crafts, N.F.R. (1995), "The Golden Age of Economic growth in Western Europe 1950-1973", Economic history review 48:429-47.
In addition, inflows of foreign workers through international migration helped maintain a more stable wage and lower rates of inflation in the favored country as they eased the labor shortage problem. The lack of restriction on movement of labor within the European Community (EC) added to the general shift of workers within Europe. Exports and output grew more rapidly in countries like Germany, Italy and Switzerland than in Britain, Belgium and the Scandinavian countries because in the former there were readily available supply of low wage labour in the form of domestically unemployed, rural migrants and foreign migrant workers.
According to Maddison, accumulation of human capital through education is responsible for a very small part of the growth during the "golden age" and accounts for little difference between countries or periods. Instead, Maddison avers that total productivity growth, taken to be exogenous in the traditional model, plays a large part in accounting for variation in growth rates and is estimated to have been exceptionally high in both France and West Germany, though not in Britain, during the "golden age".
John Black (2002), Oxford dictionary of Economics, pg 372.
Productivity growth is defined as the rate of increase in the amount of output per unit of input achieved by a firm, industry or country.
Next, we shall analyze how the rise in commodity trade contributed to the "golden age" of economic growth. From 1953 to 1963, trade in primary product rose by 44% and in manufactures by 83%. Concomitantly, agricultural output rose by 22% while mining and manufacturing output rose by 54%. (A.G.Kenwood and A.L.Lougheed, 1992, pg 214) As figure 4 below indicates an increase in trade would result in an upward shift of the aggregate expenditure curve and via the multiplier effect, increase national income.
Increase in trade can be attributed to the increase in foreign demand for exports from industrial Europe, progressive tariff reductions and continuous elimination of other restrictive trade barriers, especially within Europe. From the late 1950s, containerization became a means of speeding up the building and transportation of goods. Increasing after 1945, air transport of people and goods by domestic and international airlines made greater and greater inroads on land and sea transport. In particular air transport made possible the rapid extension of the international company by providing the necessary face-to-face communication needed to administer complex affairs with the appropriate speed and at a reasonable cost. Thus the improvements in the international transport network facilitated trade which encouraged growth.
A.G. Kenwood and A.L. Lougheed (1999), "The international economy, 1950-90" in the Growth of the International Economy, 1820-2000, 4th edition, London: Routledge.
In September 1949, nineteen countries accounting for almost two thirds of total world trade devalued their currencies relative to the dollar by approximately 30%. The initial parity values of many currencies established in 1946-7 were out of line with each other and did not truly reflect the differences in domestic purchasing power of the currencies of the various trading countries. As a result countries with overvalued currencies were unable to earn export receipts needed to buy urgently required foreign imports. Improvement in the Balance of Payment position of a number of countries following devaluation was also helped by the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 which raised the level of world demand considerably. European production continued to expand thereby reducing the region 's dependence on foreign goods especially those of the US. At the same time, Europe 's export capacity increased and intra-European trade was revived.
A.G. Kenwood and A.L. Lougheed (1999), "International monetary relations, 1945-90" in the Growth of the International Economy, 1820-2000, 4th edition, London: Routledge.
The "golden age" was also assisted by the establishment of new institutions like the IMF (International Monetary Fund), the World Bank and GATT (General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs). Though these institutions cannot explain the growth in trade in the immediate post war years because they did not function as expected until the late 1950s, they helped establish a framework for multilateral trade and committed the world economy to openness and free trade. To summarize, the catching up in the "golden age" depended on making policy decisions that facilitated high investment, technology transfer, promoted more efficient use of factor of production and encouraged trade.
During the "golden age" growth in Britain was disappointingly slow despite being higher than any time previously. Britain 's relative decline can be explained by the lack of scope for catching up, a low level of investment and macro-economic management problems.
New growth economics explain productivity growth by emphasizing more the accumulation of broad capital and the conditional convergence in postwar OECD. (Crafts, 1995) Germany had a growth advantage over Britain in the golden age resulting from investment in broad capital and it also had a greater scope for catching up growth given its lower productivity level in 1950.
Conditional convergence refers to the adjustment towards long run equilibrium in capital to labour ratio and reduction in organizational and technological gaps between leaders and followers. ( Crafts, 1995).
The low level of investment in physical capital in Britain also contributed to its slower rate of growth. Had investment been at the median level of Maddison 's European countries during the "golden age", the Levine and Renelt model (table 4 above) suggests that Britain 's growth rate would have increased by about 0.8% per year. During this period investment in human capital was also at a low level. Thus it appears that besides having weaknesses in investment in broad capital, Britain failed to use its investment efficiently during the "golden age".
The British economy was also characterized by exceptionally steep marginal tax rates and the effectiveness of subsidies is doubtful because their value changed frequently as the Labour government practised a stop-go policy which affected growth performance. There was a tendency for the government to pursue expansionary monetary policies when approaching election but it is argued that if catching up was the main objective then Keynesian demand management policies should have been applied.
Eichengreen highlights Britain 's failure to establish a framework in which equilibrium of high investment and wage moderation could be sustained. In addition, Bean and Crafts suggest that the craft union structure of British industrial relations may have operated both to reduce the return on investment and to lower the long-run growth rate( Crafts, 1995, pg 444). Therefore in conclusion, other than relatively smaller scope for catching up growth, low level of investment in physical and human capital, mismanagement of macro-economic policy, institutional factors also accounted for Britain 's relative decline.
