This report aims to analyze the relationship between GDP and imports of goods and services of three countries with different economic status. The countries are - United States (a developed country), India (a developing country) and Sierra Leone (a less developed country). Countries with different economic status are chosen in order to facilitate the differentiation of the variation between the characteristics of countries with different GDP levels and growth rates. For example, a developed country, the US, has much higher imports compared to a developing and less developed country, although the level of its imports constitutes only to a small part of its total GDP. This difference in imports portrays the GDP gap between a developed country and a less developed country.
GDP and imports are chosen as indicators of economic development. It is expected that countries with high GDP levels will also have high import levels, however not high enough to drive the country into a trade deficit. Whilst a less developed country is expected to show unstable levels of imports (because of an unstable economy and unstable exchange rates) and thus will be expected to show signs of having trade deficits. The data have been further investigated by applying correlation and regression analysis between GDP and import figures of each country.
The GDP and import values are ranged from 1970 to 2003, which have been acquired from the World Bank database. The GDP values and import values are in US dollar 1995 constant prices, which implies that the values between 1970 and 2003 have accounted for inflation, and thus have been converted to real GDP and real import figures. Likewise, to make our data comparable with each other, the GDP and import values of all three countries are in a single currency, US dollars.
Economic and Social data Service, World Bank, World Development Indicators (November 2004).
According to economic theory imports can depend on multiple factors such as the level and dynamics of domestic income of economic integration. However, with respect to the aim of our analysis the emphasis will merely lie on the relationship between Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and imports. By definition, GDP is seen to be a measure of aggregate output in the national income accounts equalling the sum of incomes earned domestically by both nationals and foreign citizens working in the country. In relation to imports, GDP has to consider the level and dynamics of the GDP components and thus differentiate between them i.e. investment, consumption, public expenditure and exports. However, economic theory - ceteris paribus - suggests that when GDP rises imports rise as well, for example because disposable income increases. In real life on the other hand, there are many exceptions to this rule.
Blanchard, Olivier.
Piana, Valentino. Imports.
Overtime the general trend GDP seems to follow is a steadily increasing one. The reasoning behind this is the following: as free market economies aim to maximize GDP they will produce at least the same output in subsequent years as they have in previous ones. In addition however they will aim to increase the level of output by improving the factors of production, i.e. the standard of the machinery by expanding industries or creating new ones. Therefore, overtime GDP will - due to the improvements that are likely to be made - increase. The extent to which this is the case varies in different economies. This reasoning however, does not apply to economies in a state of emergency such as civil wars or natural disasters (as is the case in many less developed countries i.e. Sierra Leone). This is due to the devastation of the economy. Similarly, imports can be said to generally be increasing over time. This can be justified by referring to the way that GDP determines the level of imports, meaning given that (for the above reasons) GDP increases overtime, imports must also rise overtime.
However, since imports have a negative effect on the current account of the balance of payments, governments often choose to impose import restrictions or protectionist measures such as the introduction of value added taxes or quotas. This coupled with the general national attitude towards foreign goods may manipulate the consumer in such a way that the above relationship does not apply. Yet, as long as free market forces operate without governmental or other intervention, it can be said that imports as well as GDP increase overtime.
Investigating the relationship between GDP and imports in the US we find our expectations are realized.
Figure 1 illustrates that in the US the relationship between GDP and imports is positive, as you would expect. Although GDP increases by larger amounts than imports, the two correlate closely. This is substantiated by a high correlation coefficient: 0.969175. By definition, the correlation coefficient is a measure of the interdependence of two variables that ranges in value from    1 to +1, indicating perfect negative correlation at    1, absence of correlation at zero, and perfect positive correlation at +1. The calculated figure (0.969175) therefore illustrates that there is a causal and reciprocal relationship between imports and GDP in the US over this period. This is because as income and output increase, so does spending and therefore the demand for imports both by consumers (with more disposable income) and by firms (with a greater demand for capital and materials to invest).
Answers.com. Correlation Coefficient.
Further evidence of this is given by the line fit plot (see figure 2). A line fit plot will draw scatter plots of each independent variable on the x-axis, and the predicted and actual values of the dependent variable on the y axis, thus showing how theory and reality are linked.
Miles, Jeremy, Applying Regression and Correlation: A Guide for Students and Researchers.
This is further clarification that the two variables are as closely related in reality, as they are in theory, and that the relationship is positive. In order to examine the accuracy of this model further we can use the residual plot. A residual plot (see figure 3) will draw scatter plots of each independent variable on the x-axis, and the residual on the y-axis, therefore showing more clearly the discrepancy between the model and reality. ibid.
What we find is that the residuals are very small, the model fits closely, but they are not constant and neither are they equally dispersed. The reason for this may be that the line fit is exactly that, a line, in reality things are unlikely to happen in a linear manner, however this does not explain the reason we see a pattern; values below, then above, then below. There is correlation between the residuals, the goodness of fit of the last value will affect the next because they are happening over time, they will be influenced by previous events, the higher the GDP value in one year the higher the value of predicted GDP the next year.
In India we find a similar situation to that which we found in the US. Imports and GDP are positively correlated, in fact marginally more so with a correlation coefficient of: 0.979607. We see that the line of fit and residual plot are again substantive to this conclusion. The line of fit is closely followed by actual values and the residual plot shows small variance. It appears that once more imports and GDP are linked in the way our model predicted.
In contrast to our previous observations we find a very different situation in Sierra Leone.
As Figure 7 portrays, there appears to be no consistent relationship between imports and GDP. The correlation coefficient is low; 0.133331.
The line of fit (see Figure 8) illustrates how widely dispersed predicted and actual values are, and how the relationship is only just positive (very small upward slope).
What is also interesting is how different the figures are in size in comparison to the other two countries we have investigated this may be the key to understanding the lack of success of our model for Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone was ranked 177 th out of 177 countries for their HDI (Human development Index-a measure combining three dimensions of development - longevity (life expectancy at birth), knowledge (adult literacy and mean years of schooling), and income. Clearly this is going to cause a severe hindrance to economic growth and development. The civil war in Sierra Leone from 1991-2002, can provide an explanation for the downturn in GDP since 1991. Together with the general hampering of economic development specifically the UN sanctions imposed on Sierra Leone in 1997 caused a 20% drop in GDP, bauxite and rutile mines (main manufacturing outputs) have been shut down by civil strife.
Canadian International Development Agency Definitions.
The path imports has taken is less easily explained, there has been a generally steady decline in imports, after the civil war this is explained by the fall in GDP but previously other factors were at play. The essential cause of the downward trend in imports is explained by the fall in purchasing power. In order to import money is required and money is earned through exports, if exports decrease then so does your power to purchase. There has been a fall in exports over this period, this is because Sierra Leone 's main export, diamonds, is increasingly exported illegally, (this trend was accelerated by the rebel occupation of the diamond production area, during the civil war) they therefore earn the country no official money, imports have, as a consequence been falling. This illustrates the importance of other factors on imports, in addition to GDP. The case of Sierra Leone is especially interesting because it is an under developed country, other factors are often weighted in their importance in these types of situations, where society and economy is unstable.
We are not only interested in the relationship of GDP and imports within countries but also how each country 's relationships compare with each other. One of the clearest indicators of this is the difference in the countries correlation coefficient for GDP and imports. As we saw previously GDP and imports are very closely correlated in the USA and in India with correlation coefficients 0,969 and 0,979 respectively. These are in stark contrast to the correlation between the variables in Sierra Leone which stands at 0,133. This difference can be due to multiple factors, such as the stability in the economies of India and the USA compared to the unstable economy of Sierra Leone where external factors hinder the functioning of economic rationale. This suggests that in an economy where there are no adverse external factors GDP and imports will be correlated closely.
Comparatively the size of the GDPs which we are examining is very informative.
In the 2003, where the difference is at its greatest, the GDP of the USA is exceeds that of India by 8,9 trillion US$. At the same point in time the GDP of India is over half a trillion US$ greater then that of Sierra Leone.
This emphasises the vast difference in GDP for these countries. GDP among other things is an indicator of the level of economic development experienced in a country. According to the Human Developed Index the USA is ranked 8 th, while India holds the 127 th place and Sierra Leone is at the bottom of the list at placing number 177. Another reason for the difference in GDP is the area of the countries. The USA 's area is 9,631,418 sq. km. compared to India 's 3,287,590 sq. km. and Sierra Leone 's 71,740 sq km. This has obvious effects on the amount of output that a country can experience and thus its GDP.
Human Development Index.
CIA World Factbook United States ibid ibid.
When examining the amount of imports for these countries we once again see differences between nations.
In the period of time investigated, USA 's imports have increased by 1,3 trillion US$, while the imports in India have only increased by 78 thousands of million of US$ and Sierra Leone experienced a decrease in imports by 500 million US$. The great difference in these figures is partially due to the great difference in the countries GDPs but also due to the stability in the countries.
After all, our analysis makes it obvious that there is a positive relationship between the two economic figures under discussion, GDP and imports. Generally, GDP tends to increase over time, so do imports. As far as our empirical data is concerned, this is the case with respect to the USA and India. Sierra Leone however, seems to be an exception as there is no constant correlation between the two economic indicators. Therefore, in conclusion it can be said that one needs to differentiate between the state of an economy when applying economic theory. In this case, this refers to the fact that a less developed, unstable country like Sierra Leone does not follow economic theory that developed and developing countries follow.
