In "What Achilles said to the tortoise" Lewis Carroll asks for a way to make clear the inherent "truth" of logical or analytic statements to an observer insensitive to logical intuition. Achilles showed that this cannot be accomplished by adding instructive premises to an argument. Rather, the "truth" of a valid argument is said to be inherent in the logical form or pattern of the argument. More generally, the question we want to be able to answer objectively seems to be is this or that a valid argument? We want to be able to say yes, because or no, because, hold something up, and point to it. The question is similar to the question is that sentence grammatical or not? in the sense that an infinite number of novel sentences may be checked for grammatical soundness even though grammatical rules are finite. In the same way most well formulated arguments are said to be either valid or invalid, although Russell and others have showed by debate that some sentences (e.g. "The present king of France is bald") may be ambiguous. Still, while it is clear that grammar, although infinite in scope, is man-made, or at any rate hard-wired into our organisms, I will try in this essay to defend the view that logic is more than that - it is a feature of the physical world. As such, it is not revisable as thinkers such as WVO Quine will have us believe.
Consider the following piece of reasoning: The sun is shining on my back through the window so there must be no clouds covering the sun. According to thinkers like Quine (I believe) this sentence is not completely reducible (analytically) to P, P- -Q |- -Q. The reason being that the sun is shining on my back cannot mean that no clouds are covering the sun (or anything else for that matter). Quine imagines that in all possible worlds a number of explanations could account for sunshine on my back: two new suns might have suddenly appeared in the sky without my notice, rendering the clouds a useless cover; a UV-lamp might have been placed just outside my window, and so on. So far I agree with Quine. All I can do in my attempts to know is to make sure the explanation I chose as most likely coheres logically with the rest of my beliefs in what Quine calls my "web of beliefs". In other more austere words, all my conclusions and beliefs are and must be falsifiable and subject to revision.
However, Quine holds the idea that not only are all statements subject to possible error and revisability but so is logic itself. What does this really mean? At the most immediate level, if logic is to be considered revisable I think Quine would have to allow consideration of a fundamentally different explanation for why sun is shining on my back: that there is no sun shining on my back. In my opinion, the possibility of this explanation must follow if one admits the revisability of logic. But to admit such an explanation would be to admit the possibility of an existing physical paradox, two contradictory events existing and being observed at a singular moment in time, an absurdity not even allowed at the Quantum level.
Is Quine really arguing for the revisability of logic? I still want to believe he is not, but statements like "even pure mathematics and logic is a man-made fabric" have confused me for weeks. "...the logical laws being in turn simply further statements of the system" states Quine while asserting the revisability of that very system on the basis of sensory experience. Any statement can be held true come what may, he declares, and enthusiastically goes on to announce that even revision of the logical law of the excluded middle ( |- Pv-P ) has been proposed as a means of simplifying quantum mechanics. But looking at present-day physics, this last statement sounds like a misunderstanding of the nature of quantum mechanics, which clearly states that a particle can never be observed in its simultaneous quantum states by a (conscious) observer and therefore could never constitute the sensory data upon which Quine 's web of belief hinges. To my knowledge, this is what Heisenberg 's uncertainty principle implies and what mind-games such as the famous "Schr  dinger 's cat" tries to illustrate. Challenging the law of the excluded middle is one of many ways of demonstrating the multiple, yet simultaneous states of sub-atomic particles at the quantum level, not a suggested revision of a cornerstone of classical logic.
In addressing Susan Haack, who also advocates the revisability of logic (albeit in a less extreme form compared to Quine) Michael Neumann of Trent University highlights an important distinction between an object-oriented and a subject-oriented conception of logic in the following way: If we imagine a physics of soap bubbles, the phrase may refer either to our current theories about the behaviour of bubbles (subject-oriented) or to that which our studies are trying to investigate (obeject-oriented) - the actual behaviour of soap bubbles. "We have discovered the physics of soap bubbles, in this sense, when we get our physics of soap bubbles, in the  'study' sense, right" (Neumann, 1997). The object-oriented view of the physics of soap bubbles is not extreme in its realism: no independent mechanism exists independently of the things (the soap bubbles) it is a mechanism of, but the bubbles do exist and behave in a certain, perhaps lawlike way.
Like physics, logic has a subject-oriented sense which is subject to correction, expansion and replacement. No one will deny that logic in the subject-oriented sense is revisable; every one has made mistakes in their reasoning, and new formal languages are continually devised. But in its object-oriented sense, logic, like physics, is not an assertion or a theory and, therefore, is not revisable. As I understand it, it is in the object-oriented sense that logic impinges on our sensory experience and hence on our "web of belief". The macroscopic, Newtonian world we inhabit is logical and remains logical in all possible worlds, even in a so called level 4 multiverse (Max Tegmark, 2004) where particles exist in all possible arrangements. Thus Quine is making a mistake if he in statements like "...the logical laws being in turn simply further statements of the system" asserts that our beliefs are logically interconnected by logic in the subject-oriented sense only.
What I have tried to do in this essay is advocate a sort of direct realism concerning logic. For a while it seemed fruitful - if the physical world at a macroscopic level does n't admit to paradox this must have directly discernable effects on our experience and thus our epistemology. I maintain that logical principles hinging on such non-paradox reasoning [e.g. Pv-P, -(Q&-Q)] cannot be revisable. But semantic connectives (such as and, if... then, either... or, not etc.), truth-tables (as advocated by Stevenson) and (formalised) logical intuition (Belnap) remain in practise our tools for vindication or articulation of even the most classical or primitive rules of logic. At this semantic level there is still room for possible error and counter-examples and I cannot see a way to refute Quine or Haack when they bring what I see as knowledge about valid patterns of argumentation down to the level of uncertainty associated with scientific theory. Incidentally, Michael Neumann whom I referred to earlier reaches a similar conclusion. The answer in my opinion to the essay-question: must a subject/object-oriented conception of logic admit to the revisability of logic? seems to remain: probably.
