The Bertrand and Cournot competition models both relate to an oligopoly. An oligopoly is a market with relatively few firms but many buyers. It is characterised by each firm recognising their mutual interdependence and therefore acting strategically as well as the fact that the goods sold within the market are usually close substitutes. Under the Cournot model firms behave strategically with respect to the quantity of the good produced whereas under the Bertrand Model the firms compete through prices. When comparing the intensity of Bertrand competition with Cournot competition it is vital to be clear about the meaning of intensity. The most common meaning in this context is how close to perfect competition each model is. The closer to perfect competition, the more intense the competition is. Another way of looking at this is how much tolerance the market gives to inefficient firms. The lower the tolerance to inefficient firms the more intense the competition. Using this definition the Bertrand model, assuming homogeneous goods, can be seen to have significantly more intense competition. Under differentiated products the competition can still be seen to be more intense under Bertrand, however, the Cournot and Bertrand models move much closer together and the difference is not as stark. In addition, there are other ways of measuring competition intensity such as the level of a discount factor required for mutual collusion in an infinitely repeated Bertrand or Cournot game as well as the degree of advertising in each type of market. It is interesting to compare the Cournot and Bertrand models in these circumstances.
Mutual Interdependence means that the price or output choices made by any one firm in the market affect the profits of all the firms in the market.
Two goods that are substitutes satisfy similar wants. An increase in the price of one good leads to an increase in the quantity demanded of a substitute (Katz and Rosen, 1998, p60).
It is essential when comparing the Cournot and Bertrand models to first look at their construction. For ease and graphical purposes it is sufficient to consider a duopoly. We also assume linear demand (1), constant marginal cost (2) as well as (to start with) homogeneous products that are perfect substitutes (3):
Under the Cournot Model each firm wishes to maximise profits () with respect to their own output with the assumption that other firms' output is given.
Profit of Firm 1:
First Order maximising condition:
Therefore, we can solve for Firm 1: Due to identical products:
Hence, we now have the two best reaction functions for both firm 1 and firm 2 which can be shown graphically (Figure 1). The type of strategic relationship that exists between the firms is one of strategic substitutability which means that each firm will do the opposite to the other. If firm 1 increases quantity produced then firm 2 will decrease quantity produced due to the fall in market price. The Cournot - Nash equilibrium values are where the best reaction functions cross as here both firms' profit is maximised with respect to the other firm 's choice of output. The equilibrium output levels are equal as the firms are identical.
These functions indicate the firm 's quantity that maximises profit with respect to the other firms' choice of output. and therefore .
Supernormal Profits are which are less than the monopoly profits of but greater than the supernormal profits of perfect competition which are zero.
The Bertrand Model differs as it is one of simultaneous price rather than quantity setting. Each firm sets their price and the market determines the quantity sold. When assuming perfect substitutes, the pair of prices such that each price is a profit-maximising choice given the choice made by the other firm is simply the competitive equilibrium where price equals marginal cost and supernormal profits are zero. Price cannot be higher than marginal cost as one firm could simply slightly undercut the others price and so capture the entire market. The Bertrand model can be thought of as a price-bidding war for customers' business. The only price that cannot be undercut is price equal to marginal cost.
This initial comparison of the Bertrand and Cournot models with homogeneous products shows that the Bertrand competition is more intense than Cournot competition under our initial definition. The Bertrand model represents a perfectly competitively market whereas the Cournot model lies somewhere between the monopoly outcome and perfect competition so making Bertrand competition more 'intense'. Within the Cournot model there is not the incentive to cheat as within Bertrand competition. If firm 1 decides to sell over the equilibrium quantity then the price of firm 1 's product will decrease but the price of firm 2 's product will also decrease as firm 2 will make the necessary adjustments to sell its equilibrium quantity. Unlike in the Bertrand Model, in the Cournot model a firm cannot capture the whole market by cheating. This makes competition less intense.
An efficient firm has a lower marginal cost than an inefficient firm. In the case of the Cournot model, therefore, if firm 1 becomes more efficient the best response function shifts to the right (Figure 2). The quantity and profits of firm 1 increase and the quantity and profits of firm 2 decrease, but the inefficient firm 2 can survive in the market until the equilibrium reaches point A.
However, within the Bertrand model an inefficient firm cannot survive. The efficient firm 1 will simply set its price just below the inefficient firms marginal cost which is higher than its own. The inefficient firm 2 cannot match this price and therefore will go out of business. Within Bertrand competition, as opposed to Cournot competition, inefficient firms cannot survive which makes the competition more 'intense' assuming homogeneous products.
It is, however, a little unrealistic to only consider goods that are perfect substitutes. For example, very often within a market consumers will not always choose the cheapest good as they perceive a more expensive good to be 'better'. This would be a case of differentiated products. Within most markets there is a degree of differentiability whether this means that goods are imperfect substitutes of even complements. It is essential to examine the intensity of competition under the Bertrand and Cournot models within a market for differentiated products.
A market is said to have differentiated products when consumers view the products of the various producers as being somewhat different from one another (Katz and Rosen, 1998, p463).
Two goods are complements if they tend to be used together. An increase in the price of good 1 leads to an decrease in the quantity demanded of a complement (Katz and Rosen, 1998, p60).
We assume that firm 1 's price is and that firm 2 's price is where d is the measure of differentiability within the market. If then the goods are imperfect substitutes whereas if then the goods are complements. If then the goods are independent, at the good are perfect complements and at the goods are perfect substitutes. Within most oligopolies it would be reasonable to assume that good are usually imperfect or perfect substitutes, hence it is possible to focus solely on . Using the same method as previously it is possible to calculate the reaction functions for the Cournot model under differentiated products and demonstrate these graphically (Figure 3). We obtain and .
It is also possible to calculate a reaction function for Bertrand competition (Figure 4). Below is the calculation for firm 1. Firm 2 is similar. (4) and (5).
Subtract (5) multiplied by d from (4) to obtain . . Hence.
R2R1 Figure 3: Best reaction functions for the Cournot mode when (imperfect substitutes). As d tends to zero the gradient or slope of the reaction functions increases. Output Firm 1Output Firm 2R2R1 Figure 3: Best reaction functions for the Cournot mode when (imperfect substitutes). As d tends to zero the gradient or slope of the reaction functions increases. Output Firm 1Output Firm 2A comparison between Bertrand and Cournot equilibrium with differentiated products can now be seen from the above diagrams. When the products are imperfect substitutes the reaction functions show that the firms operate under strategic substitutability within the Cournot model whilst under Bertrand competition the firms operate under strategic complementarity. Hence whilst within the Cournot model the firm 's react in opposite directions, under Bertrand competition the firms will react in the same direction, perhaps making competition more intense. However, as we can see from the value of the Bertrand equilibrium, price can be set above marginal cost under differentiated products. Perfect competition is not achieved. This is because the gains from cheating under Bertrand are not so dramatic when products are differentiated. A small price difference does not necessarily induce everyone to buy the lower price good as they may believe a higher price good to be better. Under Bertrand competition for differentiated products inefficient firms can still survive as demand is not as elastic as for perfect substitutes. Hence we can see that under differentiated products Bertrand competition is less intense than within the market for perfect substitutes. The Cournot and Bertrand models move closer together. However, under the Bertrand model the two firms still produce more than under the Cournot model and have lower profits as a result. The Bertrand model is still less forgiving of inefficient firms as well as still being closer to perfect competition. Hence Bertrand competition can still be seen to be more intense than Cournot competition under differentiated products.
The comparison so far has focused on a 'one shot' game where the competition between each firm occurs only once. It is perhaps more relevant to consider infinitely repeated game theory. Firms do not have a set length of time that they believe they will compete for in the market and therefore infinitely repeated game theory represents the ongoing relationship of firms. We assume that firms value current profits over future profits and therefore take into account a discount factor () to obtain the present value of future profits. In addition, we assume homogenous products for simplicity. The infinitely repeated game in both cases can be modelled as a Prisoner 's Dilemma game.
Under Bertrand competition, collusion is both firms charging the monopoly price and sharing the monopoly profit. Mutual cheating is the unique Nash Equilibrium of the 'one shot' game where each firm charges price equal to marginal cost and therefore has zero profits. If one firm cheats whilst the other colludes it would charge slightly under the monopoly price and capture the whole market so obtaining the monopoly profit.
Strategy within the infinitely repeated game can be modelled as a Grim Trigger Strategy. Firms collude if the other players have a history of colluding otherwise they cheat forever.
Firms will collude as long as the present value of profits from colluding are greater than the present value of profits from cheating, known as tacit collusion. Therefore collusion will occur if which happens when the discount rate is greater than a half.
Under Cournot competition, mutual collusion is again the shared monopoly profit and mutual cheating is the Cournot profit obtained from the 'one shot' game. If one firm colludes and the other cheats then the cheating firm maximises profit assuming that the colluding firm produces half the monopoly amount. The output level can be obtained using the best reaction function. Again Grim Trigger Strategies are assumed.
Therefore, similarly, it is possible to calculate that under infinitely repeated Cournot competition, collusion will occur when the discount rate is greater than .
In the case of infinitely repeated games perhaps we can measure intensity of competition by the likelihood a firm will cheat rather than collude. Under Cournot competition the discount factor needed for mutual collusion is higher than that under Bertrand competition. It takes less for firms to collude under Bertrand than under Cournot competition perhaps therefore meaning that the infinitely repeated game competition is more intense under Cournot than Bertrand competition.
Advertising can demonstrate how intense the competition in a market is as it is a tool 'to increase sales by expanding total market and attracting customers from competitors' (Nicholson, 1972, p202). When measuring intensity of competition in this way Bertrand competition is not necessarily more intense than Cournot competition. A market could appear to follow a less intense Cournot model in that it is comparatively passive with regard to pricing policies but could compete rigorously with regard to advertising policies. For example, the car market could be seen to follow a Cournot model as price can be more easily adjusted than production. Quantity is the dominant strategic variable. However, advertising is fierce for instance on both television and radio. This can be compared to the mail order catalogue market which should operate under the Bertrand model as price is the dominant strategic variable. However, in this market advertising is not as strong as within the car market. It is, therefore, perhaps possible for Cournot competition to be more intense than Bertrand competition when measured in this way.
There is much microeconomic theory to support Bertrand competition being more 'intense' than Cournot competition. Under homogeneous products this difference in intensity is stark with Bertrand competition representing a model of perfect competition where inefficient firms simply cannot survive. However, the difference in intensity becomes much less clear when a market for differentiated products is considered. Here the predictions of the models are much closer together and whilst Bertrand still appears to demonstrate the most intense competition, the difference between the two models is certainly not as transparent. We can also look perhaps at different types of competition measures such as the discount factor required for collusion within infinitely repeated Cournot and Bertrand competition or advertising intensity. Here it can be seen that a market operating under Bertrand competition is not necessarily more competitive than a market operating under a Cournot model. We must be very careful of our definition of intensity of competition when discussing this topic. We must also remember that the Bertrand and Cournot models are simply the building blocks of oligopoly theory. In order to discuss intensity of competition further, we could perhaps investigate market concentration ratios to discover if the number of firms entering each type of competitive market differs and how this affects intensity of competition.
