ATP is the universal currency of energy (Stryer et al., 2002). It serves as an energy source in muscle contractions, active transport, signal amplification and biosynthesis, amongst a myriad of other energy requiring reactions in the body. This chemical energy can be synthesised by several different metabolic pathways from a number of energy sources taken in in the diet. As well as carbohydrates, this includes lipids and proteins. The central pathway used for glucose metabolism is also used for these compounds (Rowland, 1992).
After hydrolysis during digestion, lipids produce fatty acids and glycerol. The fate of glycerol is to be converted to dihydroxyacetone in the cytosol of cells, by enzyme action. Dihydroxyacetone is an intermediate in the glycolytic pathway, and can therefore be introduced into respiration at an early stage. The fatty acids produced from the hydrolysis of lipids are long chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms. These chains can be broken into two-carbon acetyl fragments which are then converted to acetyl CoA and introduced into the Krebs cycle, which occurs in the mitochondrion. This process which results in the production of acetyl CoA is known as   -oxidation. The maximum energy yield for ATP synthesis from lipids is approximately 39.06 kJ/g. Lipids are not usually respired straight away. They are more likely to be stored in the body and respired at a later date during prolonged exercise.
Proteins also provide some energy, although their main function is growth, repair and maintenance of cells. During digestion they are broken down into amino acids, which cannot be stored in the body due to high levels of nitrogen contained within them. Since surplus amino acids cannot be stored, they are used as a metabolic fuel and they are therefore immediately catabolised. However, since there are twenty different amino acids, there must be twenty different initial catabolic steps, although the general principles remain the same (Rowland, 1992). The   -amine group is removed and, in mammals such as humans, converted to urea through the urea cycle. This is then diluted and expelled from the body. The remaining carbon skeleton is converted into a metabolic intermediate, which will pass through the citric acid cycle. The carbon skeletons can form one of seven molecules: acetyl CoA or acetoacetyl CoA (ketogenic amino acids), pyruvate, keto-glutarate, succinyl CoA, fumarate or oxaloacetate (glucogenic amino acids).
The oxidation of amino acid carbon skeletons in the central metabolic pathway provides about 22.68 kJ/g of energy in the form of ATP (Rowland, 1992). However, protein respiration tends to be a last resort mechanism during prolonged exercise.
Carbohydrates are completely respired by four separate steps in the metabolic pathway: glycolysis, the link reaction, Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. One molecule of glucose respired in this way theoretically produces 38 molecules of ATP but, since two molecules are used in glycolysis to activate the glucose molecule, the net gain of ATP per molecule of glucose is only 36. Therefore, the maximum energy yield for ATP synthesis for a typical carbohydrate is 17.22kJ/g (Rowland, 1992) Carbohydrates are usually respired during "explosive" exercise, since it releases energy in manageable amounts and can be fully respired more quickly than lipids or proteins.
Although the catabolism of both lipids and proteins (or rather, the products of their hydrolysis) provide more energy than the complete respiration of carbohydrates, energy release is not their primary function. Lipids are involved in the production of membranes and proteins, as previously mentioned, are broken down and their constituent amino acids used to create proteins which function in the human body as structural proteins, enzymes and hormones, amongst others. (Stryer et al., 2002).
Glycogen is a large, branched polymer of glucose residues. It acts as a readily mobilised storage form that can be broken down to yield glucose when energy is needed. The glucose residues are linked by   -1,4 glycosidic bonds, except at points of branching where they are linked by   -1,6 glycosidic bonds, forming a helical polymer (Stryer et al., 2002). The controlled breakdown of this polymer releases glucose in small amounts into the blood stream, allowing glycogen to act as a sort of buffer for maintaining blood-glucose levels. This is important as, except during prolonged starvation, glucose is the only fuel used by the brain. Since glycogen can be readily mobilised, due to its highly branched nature, it is a good source of glucose for sudden, strenuous activity. The two major sites of glycogen storage are granules in the cytosol of liver cells and the skeletal muscle cells (10% and 2% by weight respectively), although the majority of it is stored in the skeletal muscle. In the liver, glycogen is degraded to suit the needs of the entire organism, whilst in the muscle it serves to provide glucose depending on the needs of the individual muscle (Stryer et al., 2002).
Glycogen phosphorylase is the enzyme responsible for the breakdown of glycogen to yield glucose molecules (Stryer et al., 2002). This enzyme cleaves the bond between the C-1 carbon atom and the glycosidic oxygen atom of the substrate by the addition of orthophosphate, which is a process known as phosphorolysis. This results in the sequential removal of glucose 1-phosphate residues from glycogen. This reaction is reversible in vitro. The value for   G  ' for this reaction is very small since a glycosidic bond is replaced by a phosphoryl ester bond, which has very similar transfer potential. However, the equilibrium of the reaction shifts in favour of glycogen breakdown since, in vivo, the [Pi]/[glucose 1-phophate] ratio is usually greater than 100 (Stryer et al., 2002). A phosphorolytic cleavage is energetically advantageous here since the glucose molecule released is already phosphorylated. Glucose 1-phosphate can be easily and readily converted into glucose 6-phosphate (rather than phosphorylating glucose produced from a hydrolytic cleavage at the expense of a molecule of ATP). This is done by the action of an enzyme, phosphoglucomutase. Glucose 6-phosphate is an important metabolic intermediate as it can be channelled into either aerobic respiration (via glycolysis, the link reaction and Krebs cycle) or into the pentose phosphate pathway (Stryer et al., 2002).
Glycogen breakdown occurs during periods of starvation in the body, when energy levels and availability of other fuels are low. The release of glucose and the remodelling of the glycogen to permit further degradation require the interplay of several enzymes in complex regulation mechanisms. Glycogen breakdown is also affected by several enzymes (Stryer et al., 2002). Glucagon and epinephrine trigger the breakdown of glycogen in the cytosol of liver and skeletal muscle cells. Muscular activity or its anticipation leads to the release of epinephrine (adrenaline) from the adrenal medulla. It has a major effect on glycogen breakdown in muscle cells and, to a lesser extent, the liver. The liver responds more effectively to glucagons, a polypeptide hormone secreted by the    cells of the pancreas when the blood-glucose level is low. Physiologically, glucagon relates to a starved state. Glucagon is the hormone that signals low blood glucose levels. Glucagon stimulates glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis in the liver and inhibits glycogen synthesis and glycolysis. Glucagon also binds to receptors in the adipose tissue activating the lipase which mobilizes fatty acids and glycerol. All of the affects of glucagon are mediated by the cAMP phosphorylation cascade.
Fuel choice during exercise is determined by the intensity and duration of activity (Stryer et al., 2002). During sudden, explosive bursts of activity, muscles are powered by stored ATP, creatine phosphate and anaerobic glycolysis of muscle glycogen (Stryer et al., 2002). During prolonged exercise ATP is generated from fatty acids to supplement the ATP generated from the breakdown of both liver and muscle glycogen. The fatty acids are derived from fat stored in adipose tissue and therefore, metabolism during prolonged exercise is characterised by cooperation between the muscle, liver and adipose tissue.
Prolong fasting produces the starvation state. Metabolic changes have to occur because the rate of protein catabolism would rapidly consume all of the body 's protein. After 4-5 days of fasting, the body enters the starvation state. The muscles quit relying on ketone bodies for fuel and rely solely on fatty acids stored in the adipose tissue for fuel. The result is a higher concentration of ketone bodies in the blood stream. The brain begins to utilize these ketone bodies as a source of fuel. Glucose is still required to fuel the red blood cells, but now the liver needs to produce only a fraction of glucose as it did in the fasting state. The decrease in gluconeogenesis spares the muscle tissue. The decreased rate of amino acid catabolism reduces the rate of urea production. The adipose tissue plays an important role during starvation. How long you will survive starvation depends on how much fat you have stored. During starvation fatty acids are fuelling every tissue of the body except the red blood cells. When the starving person runs out of stored triacylglycerols. Proteins become the only source of fuel. Soon the proteins of the individual have become so depleted that the heart, kidneys and other tissues stop functioning.
