Establishment of asymmetry and specification of cell fate in the C. elegans embryo are processes occurring at a very early stage of embryogenesis. Maternal effect genes play a predominant role in initiating asymmetrical divisions and certain cell-cell interactions that influence cell fate, and mutations in these genes often have detrimental results concerning the embryonic phenotype. The functions and mechanisms of regulation of maternal effect genes have been extensively studied in the last two decades, mainly by investigating the effects of genetic modifications on young C. elegans embryos.
The invertebrate Caenorhabditis elegans is a small nematode worm, which normally lives in soil, feeds on micro-organisms and measures only 1 mm in length. It has several properties that made it very popular among developmental biologists as a model organism after being discovered as such by Sydney Brenner in the 1960s. Embryogenesis only takes 16 hours and can be accomplished in vitro. Furthermore the embryos are transparent, thus development can be monitored easily. Adults can be stored as frozen stocks and recover upon thawing. And because the species consists of few males and mostly hermaphrodites, one hermaphrodite individual can seed a whole population by self-fertilisation since it produces both sperm and eggs. Also, C. elegans has a small genome with less than 20000 genes, which has been entirely sequenced. It can be easily genetically manipulated with techniques common in developmental biology to identify important genes.
Because C. elegans is remarkably simple, with an invariant somatic cell lineage, all cell divisions and any inductive interactions between cells are programmed and predictable. Thus the origin of the 959 somatic cells within each adult organism is exactly known. Therefore, C. elegans serves as an excellent example for the determinate mode of development exhibited by various, albeit rather simple, species.
Cell fate is specified by two processes very early on in embryogenesis. Firstly, a number of invariant asymmetric cell divisions, in which important regulatory molecules are being unequally distributed along the cleavage furrow, thus creating daughter blastomeres with different developmental fates. Secondly, there are different cell-cell interactions which have reproducible invariant patterns in every individual as well. In cell-cell interactions, a certain cell 's signal will either alter the fate of an adjacent cell, or it will trigger polarisation of this cell, resulting in asymmetric division.1.
The majority of genes involved in early cell fate specification are maternal effect genes; so called because these genes are transcribed from the maternal genome and are delivered to the early embryo by its mother instead of being transcribed from the zygotic genome. And while the effects of mutations in these genes are not visible in the mother, the offspring will often have an easily distinguishable phenotype.
This essay focuses on a number of these genes and their protein products, as well as regulation of their expression. The first cell division of the P0 zygote is already asymmetrical, resulting in a bigger anterior founder cell called AB and a smaller posterior stem cell called P1. Each of the early cell divisions produces one somatic founder cell, denoted AB, EMS etc, and one stem cell, denoted P1 to P4, which is a germline precursor. The stem cell lineage always divides so at to produce another stem cell and a new anterior founder cell, as can be seen in fig. 1.:
There are two autonomous processes that take place at the one-cell stage, which are important in asymmetrical division. One is determination of the posterior pole of the P0 blastomere and the second concerns asymmetrical localisation of the PAR proteins, which are vital for maintaining the initially established asymmetry and cell fate specification of the daughter blastomeres AB and P1. One sign of asymmetry is the migration of P granules, which are ribonucleoprotein complexes involved in specifying the germline and are randomly dispersed throughout the cytoplasm at the early one-cell stage. The P granules can be found migrating to the posterior axis shortly after fertilisation, so that they enter only the P1 blastomere formed from the posterior cytoplasm.
When a sperm enters the oocyte in the spermathecum, the centrosome associated with its pronucleus initiates cytoplasmic streaming which localises the paternal pronucleus to the nearest end of the oocyte, which adopts an oval shape due to egg shell constraints, thus determining the posterior pole of the zygote. Both maternal and paternal pronuclei move to the zygote 's centre and the first mitotic spindle is formed. During anaphase, the spindle becomes displaced to the posterior, resulting in an unequal division.2.
The sperm pronucleus/centrosome complex (SPCC) seems to specify the anteroposterior axis, involving NMY-2, a nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain and MLC-4, a myosin light chain, by inducing cytoplasmic streaming and a process called pseudocleavage that involves ruffling of the anterior cortex of the embryo while the posterior cortex remains smooth. These processes are thought to localise the PAR proteins (see fig. 2) to specific areas of the zygote, which is important for establishing and maintaining the anteroposterior axis, but it is not known how PAR proteins interact with the actin cytoskeleton or the myosin. But it has been found, that the C terminus of PAR-1 binds NMY-2, so there must clearly be some sort of interaction. Also, mutations of nmy-2 or mlc-4 result in defects in the localisation of PAR-3, PAR-2 and P granules.1.
Mitotic spindle alignment with the anteroposterior axis in P0 is also dyein and dynactin dependant. Posterior displacement results from unequal pulling forces and requires the PAR-2 and PAR-3 proteins since these seem to position the DEP domain protein LET-99. LET-99 is localised in a narrow band along the posterior cortex and it has been shown that LET-99 weakens microtubule interactions with the cortex via dyein, resulting in a stronger net pull from the posterior cortex on the posterior centrosome, which contributes to posterior displacement of the P0 spindle. The DEP domain in LET-99 might also spatially regulate the uniformly cortical and centrosomal G subunits GOA-1 and GPA-16 to influence asymmetric spindle movement.3.
During the first phase, the sperm asters at one end of the embryo exclude the PAR-3/PAR-6/PKC3 complex from the posterior cortex. Close association of the centrosome and astral microtubules with the cortex excludes PAR-3 from the posterior pole. The exclusion of PAR-6 from the posterior also involves PAR-5 and the non-muscle myosin NMY-2, which prevents PAR-6 from sensing the sperm cue. It allows PAR-2 to sense this displacement and accumulate at the posterior pole. Subsequently PAR-1 accumulates, which is responsible for the correct asymmetrical distribution of MEX-5, MEX-6 and PIE-1 during the establishment phase. PAR-4, whose function is not known as of yet, is not polarised in distribution but found mainly in the cortex. A summary of this can be seen in fig. 3.4.
The second phase begins after pronuclear meeting. During this phase, PAR-2 maintains anteroposterior polarity by excluding the PAR-3/PAR-6/PKC3 complex from the posterior when the sperm dependant polarity ends. The conserved small G protein, CDC-42 is thought to be necessary to maintain polarity as well, by binding to PAR-6 and activating the PAR-3/PAR-6/PKC-3 complex by promoting PKC-3 kinase activity.2, 4.
MEX-5 and MEX-6 are some of the proteins that act downstream of the PAR proteins in establishing protein asymmetries, but do not affect spindle asymmetry in one-cell embryos. MEX-5 is localised towards the anterior, which is complementary to the posterior localisation of a group of posterior-localised germline proteins. Normal protein asymmetries appear to depend on a balance between MEX-5-MEX-6 function and the level of Ras-MAP kinase activity.2.
A maternally contributed transcription factor, SKN-1, is required to specify the identity of EMS, thus also establishing the dorsoventral axis in the C. elegans embryo at the 4-cell stage. Mutations in skn-1 lead to MS and E taking up a C-like fate, thus skn-1 mutants have an excessive number of hypodermal cells on their ventral surfaces and inside their bodies, where the pharynx and intestine would form in wild-type embryos, while the muscle, pharynx, and intestine normally produced by MS and E are absent. In addition, skn-1 mutant MS blastomeres are unable to induce pharyngeal cell fate in AB descendants at the 12-cell stage.5.
The maternal skn-1 mRNA encodes a nuclear-localised protein that is distributed unequally in early C. elegans embryos. At present the embryonic distribution of skn-1 mRNA could not be determined. Yet the SKN-1 protein is localised in specific cells as can be seen in fig.4. This localisation involves the maternal MEX-1 protein as well as the PAR-1 protein, as mex-1 or par-1 mutants show a more or less equal distribution of SKN-1 between AB and P1 and their respective descendants.6.
SKN-1 activity is regulated by several different signals depending on the particular cell type since SKN-1 is found in P2, MS and E blastomeres, but only E expresses genes specifying its descendants to take up an intestinal fate.
It has been proposed that in P2, SKN-1 is repressed by PIE-1, which is differentially segregated to P2 during the first 2 cell divisions by associating with the P granules, and a general inhibitor of transcription. In MS, SKN-1 activity is repressed by the maternal POP-1 protein. But in E, both SKN-1 and POP-1 are required to express endodermal genes. It was found that two convergent signalling systems, a Wnt-type and a MAP kinase pathway, both originate from P2 and participate in the interaction that activates endoderm development by inactivating the endoderm-repressor function of POP-1, possibly converting it into an activator.7.
Targets of SKN-1 include the zygotic med-1 and med-2 genes, which both encode similar GATA-type transcription factors that then continue to activate transcription of endodermal genes. SKN-1 contains a basic region similar to those of basic Leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins, but paradoxically, it lacks a leucine zipper dimerisation domain. Thus SKN-1 binds to specific DNA sequences as a monomer. It was found that SKN-1 binds directly to the med-1 promoter, thus activating transcription. But SKN-1 also performs a function similar to that of PIE-1, namely transcriptional silencing of PAL-1. A transcriptional regulator called PAL-1 is found in several nuclei of the germline (see fig.4), but it is only responsible for determining cell fate of the C and D blastomeres. It has been shown that SKN-1 activity inhibits PAL-1 activity in the EMS, thus promoting E and MS cell fates. In germline precursors, PIE-1 could prevent PAL-1 function in the same way that it inhibits the action of SKN-1. 1, 8.
Mutations in the maternal pie-1 gene lead to abnormal division of the P2 stem cell, resulting in daughter cells C and P3, which are very similar to wild-type MS and E blastomeres. Thus pie-1 mutations lead to loss of the stem cell lineage, which is necessary for development of the germline, and are usually fatal.9.
Maternal pie-1 mRNA can be found in the gonads, oocyte and blastomeres up to the 4-cell stage of embryogenesis. The PIE-1 protein has two CCCH zinc finger motifs and can be found in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm of P1 to P4 blastomeres (see fig.4). During division of each germline blastomere, PIE-1 initially associates with both centrosomes of the mitotic spindle. However, as the mitotic spindle rotates 90  , PIE-1 disappears from the centrosome destined for the somatic daughter, and persists only in the other. The rotation brings the centrosome into a different cellular environment, this affects PIE-1 stability and/or binding.9, 10 Interaction between a certain ubiquitin ligase and the first zinc finger of PIE-1 is responsible for degradation of PIE-1 in somatic blastomeres, as this ligase marks proteins for proteolysis. MEX-5 and MEX-6 are also necessary for partitioning PIE-1 into germline destined cytoplasm just before cell division as well as localising it to P granules, and this localisation somehow involves the second zinc finger of PIE-1.14.
The localization and the genetic properties of PIE-1 suggest that it represses the establishment of somatic cell fate and preserves the totipotency of the germ cell lineage.10 In general, germline cells are thought to show a reduced level of transcription compared to somatic cells on the basis of transcriptional inhibition by PIE-1. Thus PIE-1 protects the germline cells from somatic differentiation pathways, by preventing transcription of factors such as SKN-1 and PAL-1. PIE-1 is thought to prevent transcription via interfering with a CTD kinase, which phosphorylates the CTD domain of RNA polymerase II, a process normally necessary for transcription. Furthermore, the stability and expression of maternal effect genes depends on PIE-1 activity.12 But PIE-1 is said to be bifunctional, since it has shown to be important in regulation of both maternal and zygotic gene expression, as it not only inhibits transcription of zygotic genes but also promotes transcription of maternal genes. One example is nos-1, a Nanos homologue that is needed for the correct localisation of the Z2 and Z3 germ cells.9, 13.
MEX-1 is essential for maintenance of the germline but does not directly control gene transcription. The mex-1 mutant phenotype is similar to par mutant phenotypes, but a bit weaker, and mex-1 mutants exhibit cell fate changes, defects in localisation of P granules, SKN-1 and PIE-1 proteins as well as defects in asymmetrical cell division. The MEX-1 protein has two zinc finger motifs similar to the ones found in PIE-1 and is localised in a similar pattern to that of PIE-1. MEX-1 is localised to the cytoplasm of germline blastomeres and P granules until the birth of the P4 daughters, but in contrast to PIE-1, it is not found in the nucleus.9, 11.
In the C. elegans embryo, the first cell division generates two unequal cells with distinct developmental potentials: The founder cell AB and the stem cell P1. AB divides into two developmentally equivalent daughter cells, ABa and ABp, which have asymmetrical contacts with the neighbouring blastomeres EMS and P2. This enables a cell-cell interaction between ABp and P2 by the late 4-cell stage of embryogenesis that is essential for formation of a dorsoventral axis and causes ABp to adopt a different developmental fate from ABa.15.
Translation of maternal glp-1 and expression of GLP-1, a transmembrane receptor similar to the Drosophila Notch receptor, by ABp and expression of maternal APX-1 by P2 is essential for this interaction. When glp-1 mRNA is delivered to the embryo by the oocyte, it is distributed to both anterior and posterior blastomeres but GLP-1 protein expression is restricted to the anterior AB descendants of 2-28 cell embryos. As many other maternal mRNAs, glp-1 is regulated by its 3' untranslated region (UTR). Two regions within the glp-1 3' UTR mediate control of translation: a temporal control region (TCR) represses translation until the 2-4 cell stage, and a spatial control region (SCR) is required to repress translation in P2 and its descendants.16.
The balance between POS-1 and SPN-4 is thought to control the translation of maternal glp-1. POS-1 is a protein that binds to the SCR of glp-1 and is thought to negatively regulate the translation of glp-1 in P2 by shortening its poly(A) tail. SPN-4 is an RNP-type RNA-binding protein whose interaction with the TCR seems required for the translation of glp-1. The translation of maternal glp-1 mRNA is suppressed in posterior parts of the embryo where POS-1 is very abundant, but it is turned on in the anterior half, where the concentration of SPN-4, which is abundant in both the posterior and anterior parts of the embryo, predominates over the abundance of POS-1. Interestingly, GLP-1 is not translated in oocytes or one-cell embryos which do have abundant SPN-4 but not POS-1, thus there must be yet another type of temporal regulation preventing SPN-4 from activating translation at this early stage.17.
APX-1 is a membrane-bound protein similar to the Drosophila Delta protein and the C. elegans LAG-2 protein, and was found to be one of the ligands of GLP-1 involved in P2 signalling at the 4-cell stage. While the maternal apx-1 mRNA is present in nearly every blastomere at this stage, its expression is restricted to P1 and P2 blastomeres, in a way similar to the localisation of the PAR-3 protein, thus it could be regulated in a similar fashion. POS-1 seems to be positively involved in the translational regulation, while SPN-4 acts negatively on apx-1 expression. GLP-1 and APX-1 have nearly reciprocal patterns of expression. Furthermore, pie-1 mutants, which can fail to specify the fate of ABp, have defects in the localisation of APX-1.17, 18.
At the 12-cell stage, the MS blastomere provides a signal that is necessary for determining left-right asymmetry in cell fate and the development of neighbouring ABa descendants, which form most of the anterior half of the pharynx.
Since both P2 and MS signal to GLP-1, which has to be expressed by ABa descendants, it was thought that the signals originating from P2 and MS might be identical or at least related proteins. But while APX-1 is present at high levels in P2 at the 4-cell stage, neither embryonic nor maternal APX-1 was detected in the MS blastomere at any stage of embryogenesis. Other related proteins could not be assigned as MS signals either, and as of yet the ligand for GLP-1 in MS signalling has not been identified. There is a possibility that zygotic instead of maternal gene activity in the MS blastomere is needed for the expression or activation of a ligand for GLP-1 at this stage.15, 16.
A lot of research has been done in order to understand the mechanisms that establish asymmetry and specify cell fate in the early C. elegans embryo. The major conclusion the processes are achieved via arises through a combination of asymmetric cell divisions and cell-cell interactions. It has been found that a whole range of maternal effect genes play a vital role in early embryogenesis but it is not clear in all cases exactly how the maternal information acts on the expression of zygotic genes and in which way these genes participate in the processes described. Further analysis of zygotic gene mutations is needed to elucidate this. Furthermore, there remain several gaps in our knowledge about how the various maternal factors interact with one another. The spatial and temporal regulation of expression of any given maternal effect gene often seems to be dependant on a number of other maternal effect gene products, so it should be interesting to shed light on the connections between regulation of different maternal genes in different stages of early embryogenesis.1.
