Laceration (15x8cm) to left lower shin following a motorcycle accident on . An ambulance was called by a motorist.
Mr fell from his bike and slid down an embankment and hit his left leg against a lamppost. His left leg was extensively bruised he sustained a laceration (15x8cm) to left lower shin. It was active and bloody and his calf was very swollen. He did not lose consciousness during the fall.
Mr had recently made purchase of a sports motorcycle. He had been an avid biker 20 years previously but had since stopped partaking in the sport. He was riding at night when he slipped on some spilt diesel and fell from his bike onto his left side. He did not sustain any fractures but has extensive soft tissue damage to the left side of his leg. He had a haematoma removed from his leg 5 days into his admittance into hospital. He will have another investigation done to see if there any more clots in his leg. He is being treated for DVT.
Mr was a motorcross enthusiast from 1979-1983. This is a competitive sport, which involves cross terrain motorcycling. He used to suffer from joint pains due to the strain his sport placed on his body. He underwent a laporoscopic investigation in his right knee in 1983 but nothing was found. He was diagnosed with asthma in childhood, but has not had an asthma attack for over a decade. He had a vasectomy in 1994 and an appendectomy in 1999. He was diagnosed with osteoarthritis in his lower back, both knees, and both wrists in 2003.
Mr is a 39 year old driving instructor. He lives with his partner in a 3 bedroom semi-detached house that he owns. He has 4 sons and 2 daughters, and is a grandfather to a 4 year old and a 2 year old. He was divorced from the mother of his children in 1999. He describes this as a very dark time and suffered from depression for which he did not receive medication. He states that he is happy now and has been with his current partner for 4 years. He enjoys his occupation and the freedom it gives him to organise his own workday. He lives in a small village where there is a good social network and sense of community.
Soft tissue injuries are those injuries (excluding fractures) affecting the joints and muscles of the limbs. Sprains, strains and dislocations are considered soft tissue injuries, with some authorities also including bruising. Soft-tissue injuries are often classified as:
The treatment of soft tissue injuries is based on resting the injured part, applying ice packs to limit swelling and reduce pain, the application of a firm compression bandage as support, and elevation of the limb. This treatment is known as 'RICE'.
RICE = Rest, Ice, Compression and Elevation.
Ice packs should be placed on for a maximum of 10 minutes and can be re-applied when the damaged area becomes warm again. Never apply ice directly onto the skin, as this may cause tissue damage. Always use a barrier, such as cloth, between the ice pack and the skin to help protect tissue.
Bruising, or more correctly, 'contusion', is bleeding by damaged blood vessels beneath the surface of the skin. This is invariably caused by blunt trauma, the application of force to the injured site.
A common injury, especially in contact sports, is 'corked thigh', a heavy blow to the muscle mass of the thigh, which involves damage to blood vessels as well as injury to the thigh muscle tissue. Although not a serious injury, it is very painful and prompt first aid assists in a rapid recovery.
A soft tissue injury can be categorised into three grades or degrees of severity of injury.
The result of a mild stretch of ligament or capsular structures, or over-stretch or direct blow to muscle. There is minimal swelling and bruising but mild pain is felt at the end of range of movement or on stretch or contraction of muscle. There is no joint instability, minimal muscle spasm and no loss of function.
The result of moderate stretch of ligament or capsular structures, or excessive stretch or direct blow to muscle, causing tearing of some fibres. There is moderate swelling and bruising, with moderate pain felt on any movement which interferes with the ability of the muscle to contract or lengthen. There may be some joint instability with ligament / capsular injuries. Moderate muscle spasm may result as a reflex response to both ligamentous / capsular injuries and muscle injuries. Due to the tearing of some fibres, there is a decrease in the tensile strength of ligament / capsule or a decrease in the contractile strength of muscle, both of which cause interference with function.
The result of a severe over-stretch of ligament, or excessive stretch or direct blow to muscle, causing a complete tear of the injured structure. There is significant swelling and bruising with severe pain even at rest which significantly interferes with function Ligament injuries result in gross instability and significant decrease in tensile strength, with muscle injuries causing severe muscle spasm and  'splinting', while the injured muscle is incapable of exerting force. Function is severely impaired.
Approximately five per cent of all cases seen in A/E departments of hospitals in the UK are due to participation in sport / exercise - an estimated 2,000,000 sports injuries per annum, of which ten per cent involve time off work. (Williams and Sperryn, 1981).
The early management of soft tissue injuries can be either extremely effective or, if inappropriately applied, may be damaging. The course of injury can be modified by the effective and timely use of therapeutic techniques and modalities. For example, chartered physiotherapists, who are frequently the first of the health care team to see an injured athlete, are in an excellent position to prevent the development of chronic oedema which can markedly interfere with the later stages of treatment, lead to a poor rehabilitation outcome and increase the potential for recurrence of injury. Application of the appropriate modality at a particular stage in the healing process can act to prevent undue complications and can help save much time that might otherwise be spent unnecessarily in a prolonged period of convalescence.
The current literature describes three main phases of soft tissue healing. An initial reaction phase which lasts up to 72 hours post-injury.4 This phase is also referred to as the acute inflammation phase.3 The reaction phase displays with the classic signs of inflammation with pain, swelling, redness and warmth.
The long-used application of cryotherapy (ice) is still supported by numerous studies as very effective treatment in this initial phase.6,7,8,9 Cryotherapy slows the inflammatory process as well as provides an analgesic effect. Ultrasound may also be used to decrease swelling in this inflammatory phase, but must be used for short periods to prevent hyperemia.10 Transcutaneous nerve stimulation (TNS) and electric muscle stimulation (EMS) have.
The use of manipulation can also be employed in the reaction phase and is suggested in the areas of fixation that have resulted from the injury. This will expedite the removal of hemoarthrosis, reduce spasms, edema and pain as well as reduce nerve root irritation when present.12.
The second stage of healing, the repair phase, may last from 48 hours up to 6 weeks. This phase is characterized by the production and laying down of new collagen. During this phase, the collagen is not fully oriented in the direction of tensile strength.5.
The third phase, the remodeling phase, which lasts from 3 weeks to 12 months or more, is the phase in which the collagen is remodeled and along with with phase II determines the functional capabilities of the soft tissue after the healing process is completed.14 True rehabilitation must focus on maintaining these functional capabilities.
To regain the functional capabilities, stresses of function must be put on the healing tissue." Mobilization techniques must take place throughout the repair and remodeling phases to insure proper tissue adaptation. Several benefits of mobilization have been defined which include increased strength and flexibility of healed tissue, less scar formation and adhesions, increased cartilage nutrition, and lesser incidence of recurrence of injury.18.
The management of soft tissue injury during the first 72 hours has eight aims:
Take account of.
Required to protect the injured tissues from undue stress which may disrupt the healing process and delay rather than promote healing. A further obvious function of protection is to remove the athlete from the location of injury.
Protection may be applied by:
Required to reduce the metabolic demands of the injured area and thus avoid increased blood flow. Also needed to avoid placing undue stress on the injured tissues that may disrupt the fragile fibrin bond which is the first element of the process of repair. Rest may be applied selectively, to allow some general activity, but the patient must avoid any activity involving the injured area which may compromise the healing process.
Rest may be achieved by:
Total rest is rarely required - this is difficult to achieve and advice to avoid all activity rarely meets with good compliance, particularly from athletes!.
Although the injured structures should be rested during the early stages of the healing process, adjacent structures should be exercised. However, general activity should be reduced during this period to reduce metabolic rate and tissue demand for oxygen, decrease heart rate and blood pressure and consequently reduce blood flow. The concept of rest to promote the early part of the healing process and protect the newly formed repair tissue, together with controlled exercise / movement of the injured part to provide the stresses necessary for the correct alignment of the healing tissues, must be carefully balanced.
Ice is the most common means by which cryotherapy (or cold therapy) is applied. At this point, therefore, ice will be used to represent the application of cryotherapy in general, with the different means by which this may be applied being considered in more detail later. Ice is used in an attempt to limit the damage caused by the injury, by reducing the temperature of the tissues at the site of injury and consequently reducing metabolic demand, inducing vasoconstriction and limiting the bleeding. Ice may also reduce pain by increasing threshold levels in the free nerve endings and at synapses, and by increasing nerve conduction latency to promote analgesia.
Compression is applied to limit the amount of oedema caused by the exudation of fluid from the damaged capillaries into the tissue. Controlling the amount of inflammatory exudate reduces the amount of fibrin (and ultimately the production of scar tissue) and helps to control the osmotic pressure of the tissue fluid in the injured area.
Elevation of the injured part lowers the pressure in local blood vessels and helps to limit the bleeding. It will also increase drainage of the inflammatory exudate through the lymph vessels, thus reducing/ limiting oedema and its resultant complications.
Rehabilitation protocol following soft tissue injury must include mobilization techniques to insure good functional adaptation. A program combining manipulations, the use of modalities, mobilization technique, and a strengthening program will insure optimal rehabilitation.
Manipulations and modalities should be used during all three phases of healing to limit fixations, control pain and spasms as well as maintain neurologic integrity. Mobilization should be carried out within the limits of pain on the patient, starting with controlled passive motion. Controlled passive motion should be employed until a maximum range of motion is reached. At this point, active assistive motion should be employed. As the injury heals and the tissue adapts, the patient can be graduated to active resistive motion. Active resistive motion should be followed by a strengthening program of kinetic resistive exercise. This will insure a return to maximum strength for the patient. Keep in mind all rehabilitation should be performed within the patient 's limits of pain and periodic re-evaluation and testing such as muscle testing and surface EMG should be performed to evaluate the patient 's progress. Also remember that the final remodeling phase can last over a year post injury; rehabilitation should be directed accordingly.
Radiology: Radiological changes of osteoarthritis may be seen in 10% of the population and in 50% of those over 60 years in age. Although only a proportion of these have symptoms. (2) Radiology shows loss of joint space, subchondral sclerosis and cysts, marginal osteophytes.
MRI. MRI demonstrates early cartilage changes.
Other tests. The FBC and ESR are both normal. Rheumatoid factor is negative, but low-titre tests may occur incidentally in elderly people.
Here follows a summary of the guidelines for the management of soft tissue injury during the first 72 hours, together with an evaluation of the supporting evidence. Each section will conclude with a brief summary of current practice with respect to each of the elements of PRICE, as extracted from a questionnaire distributed to 500 members of the ACPSM. A summary of the questionnaire response can be seen in Appendix E.
The guidelines are for the application of PRICE; they are based on the assumption that an accurate diagnosis has been made, and that PRICE is the appropriate intervention of choice.
Individuals may decide to apply alternative modalities, as identified in Appendix C. Individual consultation and agreement may be required to ensure adherence to the guidelines.
Situations in which caution should be observed have been identified in sections 1.2, 3.4 and 7.7.1. Specific contraindications are identified in individual statements relating to each of the elements of PRICE. A summary of precautions and contraindications are presented in Appendix G.
Injury results in a sudden drop in the tissue 's ability to withstand tensile stress. Immediately following injury there is little or no drop in tensile strength but within the first few days, as the inflammatory process evolves, a significant loss of tensile strength is observed (Houglum, 1992). The extent of this loss is proportional to the degree of tissue damage.
Protection against further tension to the area of tissue damage is essential until an accurate diagnosis of the extent of the lesion is established (Hunter, 1994). In the early days following injury (up to four to six days), tension to the site of injury may disrupt the fragile fibrin bond which forms a network of  'scaffolding' which provides the link between the margins of the injured tissue (Hunter, 1994).
Protection may vary from the initial moving of the injured athlete from the location in which further injury may occur, through provision for general support to avoid using the injured part (eg crutches), to the application of specific means of limiting movement (eg braces / splints).
Various modes of protection have been advocated:
Protection does not form the focus of any of the papers reviewed. However, it is mentioned as an element in the total early management of soft tissue injuries (including following surgery) but specific recommendations are not provided.
However, taking into consideration the nature and timing of the healing process and the evidence of the effect of excessive early stress on healing tissue, the following recommendations are made.
After a comprehensive evaluation of the disorder, the orthopaedist will make recommendations for the treatment plan. For most orthopaedic disorders and injuries there is more than one form of treatment, and the treatment plan may involve a combination or progression of several.
Physical therapy. The application of heat to an affected joint may provide pain relief. Exercises maintain muscle power and improve the mobility of weight-bearing joints. Hydrotherapy may be useful.
Drugs. Paracetamol for pain. If not effective try NSAID 's which should be used on an intermittent rather than a continuous basis. Low dose tricyclics are used for nocturnal pain.
Physical therapy. Reduce weight, walking aid held in the contralateral hand in hip arthritis, in the ipsilateral hand if knee arthritis. Do exercises (e.g. regular quadriceps exercises in knee osteoarthritis) and keep active.
Surgery. Replacement of the joint is indicated if pain and loss of function have failed to respond to drugs and physical therapy.
Colour. The skin was reddened and bruised discoloured over the whole of his left leg.
Contour. The joint was normal.
Deformity. The joint in a normal position.
Relations. The other knee joint in the other leg was also osteoporotic but neither of the joints was pathological. The nearby muscles were not wasted in either leg.
Skin. The skin temperature was normal, not hot.
Tenderness. Pressure on the left leg caused pain.
Synovium. The synovium was not palpable.
Muscle bulk. The leg was swollen, it was not possible to detect the bulk of the muscles that control the joints in the left leg.
Bony contours. It was not possible to feel the bone at the edge of the articular cartilage..
It was not possible to move the left leg. It was bandaged and raised.
Crepitus. There was no crepitus.
Abnormal movements. There were no abnormal movements because the ligaments were all in place. There was reduced movement due to the soft tissue injury in the left leg. The movements in the right leg were not affected.
General examination. Osteoarthritis is not associated with any other generalised disease, so the rest of the examination should be normal. As the patient was young, he had no unrelated illnesses.
General: The patient was comfortable in bed. His left leg was bandaged from the ankle to mid thigh. He has not been allowed to leave his bed due to the risk of DVT.
Neuro. There is no sensory deficit. He is able to move his toes in his left leg. It was not possible to test his reflexes in the injured leg due to the plaster. The reflexes in his right leg were normal.
Abdo. No abnormal signs.
Mr has been referred to hospital after a motorcycle accident where he sustained a laceration to his left lower shin. He will be treated with a skin graft once the wound heals up sufficiently. He has osteoarthritis in both of his knees, both wrists and in his lower lumbar region.
Ideas. Mr is aware that he had an accident and he attributes this to slipping on some spilt diesel. He describes it as an unnavoidable accident. He states that there is an increase in the number of motorcycle accidents due to lorries having ineffectual diesel caps whci do not seal very well. Therefore when the lorry turns a corner it spills diesel.
Concerns. Mr is concerned that he may have more blood clots in his left leg. This would mean that his stay in hospital would be prolonged whilst they are removed. He has not been given a time frame for when he might be discharged and since he is bed bound he is very bored. He would like to have some idea of when he might be able to go home. He is also concerned about how long it might take for his leg to heal because he is the main breadwinner. He has suffered from depression in the past and there is a risk of him developing depression again and this could stunt his physical recovery.
Expectations. He hopes that if clots are found they will be removed. This will be followed by a skin graft. He hopes that it will not take long for the graft to heal and then he will be able to start working again.
When treatments such as anti-inflammatory medications, cortisone injections, and physical therapy fail to improve the situation, total knee replacement could be an option. A Total right knee replacement was undertaken for the management of Mrs.
X-rays - There are no fractures.
Mr was informed about the x-ray findings. He is aware that he will require a skin graft and the risks involved have been fully explained to him.
Mr was admitted to an orthopaedic ward. He is waiting for futher tests to be undertaken to see whether any other clots are found. Then he will have a skin graft applied to the wound.
Check for DVT, Infection, Haematoma, PE.
He had an accident after falling from his bike, he could be advised to avoid riding bikes.
He is still waiting for his skin graft.
Undue morbidity (eg, amputation) may befall the patient subjected to inappropriate or ill-timed care of knee dislocations.
Oversight of the magnitude of soft tissue injuries of the knee may result in a failure to expeditiously consider compartment syndrome and its resultant complications, including loss of limb.
Misdiagnosis or mismanagement of damage to supporting structures of the knee may lead to chronic knee instability with subsequent development of degenerative joint disease and loss of knee function, including an inability to bear weight or ambulate.
Cemented total knee replacements will remain the gold standard for total knee replacement but the use of uncemented designs with bioactive surfaces such as hydroxyapatite are showing promising midterm results.
Research into mobile bearing knee replacements continues. Such prostheses appear to demonstrate an attractive way of overcoming the constraint versus conformity conflict inherent in any artificial knee replacement.
Total knee replacement in some form has been practiced for over 50 years. The complexities of the knee joint only began to be understood 30 years ago. Significant advances have occurred in the type and quality of the metals, polyethylene, and more recently, ceramics used in the prosthesis manufacturing process, leading to improved longevity. As with most techniques in modern medicine, more and more patients are receiving the benefits of total knee arthroplasty (TKA).
