Vince, an employee working at a building site operated by BloggsBuild Limited, died after falling from the third story of scaffolding. His death can be attributed to manslaughter by gross negligence on the part of individuals or organization to maintain a safe working environment. The facts of the case indicate that Mr. Bloggs, Managing Director and majority shareholder of BloggsBuild Limited, visited the site only occasionally. Malcolm, the site manager, took all decisions regarding the site and permitted Colin, a dangerous driver, to operate the crane- the immediate cause of Vince 's death.
Recklessness has been replaced by 'gross negligence' as the mens rea required for manslaughter following the decision of Adomako supported by previous precedents of Bateman and Andrews . It identified that once breach of duty is established, the jury must go on to consider whether the defendant 's breach caused the death of the victim and whether the conduct was of such seriousness that placed the life or health at risk, to amount to gross negligence given the circumstances. A jury may take into account the degree of harm risked and the defendant 's  'state of mind' when dealing with cases of manslaughter by gross negligence. Against this background, one can consider Malcolm liable since his conduct maybe seen as the main cause of Vince 's death and may be serious enough to establish gross negligence manslaughter. However, the principle of fair labeling is concerned to see that distinctions between kinds of offences and degrees of wrongdoing are respected and punished proportionately. This essay will not only consider liability for the death between Sid, Colin, Malcolm, Mr. Bloggs and BloggsBuild Limited under the current law, but will also evaluate the effect of the proposed changes in the field of corporate liability, although, the decision in the case rests with the Jury.
R v. Adomako [1995] 1 A.C. 171.
R v. Bateman [1925] 94 LJKB 791.
Andrews v. DPP [1937] A.C. 576.
Gobert, James & Punch, Maurice; "Rethinking Corporate Crime" (2003); Butterworths, London Page 92 "Corporate Guilt of Manslaughter", The Journal of Criminal Law; Attorney-General 's Ref (No. 2 of 1999) [2000] The Times, 29 th February Vol. 64 Pages 370-371 Page 370.
Ashworth, Andrew; "Principles of Criminal law" (2003) Fourth Edition; Oxford University press Page 89.
Sid was in charge of erecting the scaffolding and could be culpable for unsafe construction without enough clamps for stability. However, Sid does not satisfy the mens rea required because he made every effort to convey the unsafe situation to the site manager requesting for more clamps. Malcolm did not take any action and instructed that Sid 'make the most of it' even signing a form stating falsely, 'the scaffolding was safe and complied with Health & Safety Regulation'. Sid could not go against the decision of the site manager although could have voiced his concern directly to Mr. Bloggs. However, even if there was a breach of duty and serious risk of death or injury due to his actions, a jury may not find his conduct severe enough to constitute gross negligence manslaughter given the circumstances.
The immediate cause of Vince 's death was when Colin, a 19-year-old apprentice carpenter, had swung the jib of the crane into the partially collapsed scaffolding. Since the crane driver had not arrived for work, Colin volunteered to operate the crane due to 'urgent need'. Malcolm had agreed without checking his credentials regarding experience with operating crane and had previously ignored reports by other workers voicing concerns about his dangerous and unpredictable operating. It may be argued, 'unqualified practitioner cannot claim to be measured by any lower standard than that which is applied to a qualified man'. Colin 's offer to operate the crane bestows a responsibility and caution expected of a professional operator and thus may be liable for its consequence, making him the factual cause of Vince 's death under Constructive Manslaughter (Unlawful and Dangerous Act Manslaughter). Given Colin 's history and inexperience in operating cranes, his act can be described as unlawful. The fact, he drove the crane dangerously into the scaffolding causing it to fully collapse and resulting in the death of the victim satisfies the mens rea of dangerousness based on the objective reasonable man set out in the cases of Andrews and Church . While Colin may be liable for the death of the victim, his defense lies in the fact that Malcolm should have checked his credentials and qualification to operate the crane and also taken seriously the warnings given to him regarding Colin 's reckless operation. He may also argue that he was only doing a favor and there is no legal authority to prove that his act was unlawful. Jury may find Colin guilty of constructive manslaughter due to negligent conduct that placed a person 's life or health at serious risk.
Wells v. Cooper [1958] 2 All ER 527 R v. Church [1966] 1 Q.B. 59.
Wells, Celia; "Corporations & Criminal Responsibility" (1993); Clarendon Press, Oxford University.
Press Page 77.
Malcolm as site manager was under a contract with BloggsBuild Limited responsible for most of the decisions regarding the site and maintaining a safe working environment. He, therefore, should have known what is expected of a man of his position just as Adomako should have fulfilled the expectations of a reasonable anesthetist in his position and circumstances. Malcolm seemed to lack adequate definition of responsibility and overall supervision focusing on 'getting the job done' and pushing the issue of safety into the background with regard to Sid and Colin resulting in the death of Vince, thereby falling below the standards expected of a reasonable professional. He disregarded the health and welfare of the workers for whom he was responsible, placing them at a high risk and should be guilty under the principles set out in Stone & Dobinson where the defendants were convicted of manslaughter by gross negligence. Thus, it seems clear that Malcolm 's conduct or omission satisfies the criteria in Adomako supported by Bateman and Andrews, which state that a high degree of disregard for the life and safety of others (Bateman) is required to establish manslaughter by gross negligence.
Clarkson, C.M.V. & Keating, H.M.; "Criminal Law- Text and Materials", (2003) Fifth Edition; Sweet and Maxwell, London Page 655.
R v. Stone & Dobinson [1977] Q.B. 354.
Malcolm for his defense can argue that Colin 's negligent operation of crane breaks the chain of causation. However, Colin had only volunteered to fulfill urgent requirement and was only following instructions. Malcolm, despite the busy nature of his work, should have checked Colin 's experience and qualification with regard to cranes. Thus this defense, while shifting some of the blame to Colin, does not absolve Malcolm of liability. Secondly, one can argue that the jury should have taken into account the defendant 's  'state of mind'. However, as stated by Rose LJ in AG Ref. No. 2 (1999), evidence regarding  'state of mind' is not a prerequisite to establish liability for gross negligence manslaughter. In addition, if a consequence is foreseeable, as should have been to any man in Malcolm 's position, then even a mere negligent act may be seen as grossly negligent. English Law does not impose liability for omissions; however, this does not apply to Malcolm as he falls under one of the special category, i.e. 'Contractual Duty'. Thus, the best argument is to associate Malcolm with BloggsBuild Limited based on Meridian. It was ruled by the Privy Council that the employees could be identified with the company as its 'mind and will' because they were best placed to make the deal. If this flexible approach is adopted then Malcolm will be best placed with regard to the site and his decisions would be considered the 'mind and will' of BloggsBuild Limited. Therefore, the company would be liable for Vince 's death rather than Malcolm. R v Adomako [1995] 1AC 17, the Court of Appeal ruled on 15 February 2000 in Attorney General 's.
Reference (No. 2 1999).
Haines, Fiona; "Corporate Regulation- Beyond 'Punish or Persuade" (1997); Oxford University Press.
Page 76 "Fawcett (note 1 supra), Page 111".
Meridian Global Funds Management Asia Ltd. v. Securities Commission [1995] 2.A.C. 500.
Ibid "If the guilty man was in law identifiable with the company then whether his offence was serious or venial his act was the act of the company" Lord Reid. The 'Identification' doctrine associates actions of individuals as those of the company which can be liable for almost any offence even if lack mens rea. Under the current law, company is liable if the identified person is 'directing mind and will' of the organization and therefore "their misdeeds are the misdeeds of the company". On this basis, Mr. Bloggs is identifiable with BloggsBuild Limited being Managing Director and majority shareholder, following House of Lords decision in Tesco (leading authority on the judicial identification of a company 's mind) and supported by Spooner. In consequence, actions of Mr. Bloggs maybe associated with BloggsBuild Limited and if held responsible for Vince 's death, the company will be culpable under corporate manslaughter. However, he does not satisfy the actus reus or mens rea required to establish gross negligence manslaughter. Mr. Bloggs only visited the building site on three occasions working mostly from the Head Office. Thus, Malcolm took all decisions and unless gross negligence comes under vicarious liability or becomes a statutory offence, his conduct shows nothing to implicate Mr. Bloggs in the crime. Lord Reid in Tesco did recognize that Director [Mr. Bloggs] can '...delegate some part of their functions of management giving their delegate full discretion to act independently of instructions from them" (pg. 171). Tesco Supermarkets Ltd. v. Nattrass [1972] AC 153 (p 164).
Jefferson, Michael; "Corporate Criminal Liability in the 1990s"; The Journal of Criminal Law (2000).
Part 1 Vol. 64 Pages 107-122 Page 106.
Leigh, L.H.; "The Criminal Liability of Corporations in English law" The Journal of Criminal Law (1969) Pages 43-67 Pages 43-44.
R v. H.M. Coroner for East Kent, ex p Spooner[1989] 88 Cr. App Rep 10.
Ross, Jennifer; "Corporate Criminal Liability: One Form or Many Forms? " Judicial review Part 1 1996 Pages 49-65.
Elliott, Catherine & Quinn, Frances; "Criminal Law" (2004) Fifth Edition; Pearson education Limited.
Page 248.
However, Tesco is seen as too stringent and if the more flexible approach outlined in Meridian is adopted, Malcolm would be associated with the company and his conduct would be identified with the company, transferring his liability to BloggsBuild Limited. However, this challenge to 'Identification Principle' was rejected in AG ref no 2 of 1999 (2000) in which (using Meridian as precedent) it was proposed that a third type of liability, 'Personal Liability', be introduced with regard to corporations. This allows companies to be liable for failing to take general care of safety regulations and introduces the 'aggregation principle' in order to allocate fault. However, this was rejected because Meridian was seen as an exception, specific to interpretation and application of statute, to companies without the requirement of mens rea and cannot be used as a 'general principle'. Rose LJ stated, "unless an identified individual 's conduct characterized as gross criminal negligence can be attributed to the company, the company is not liable for manslaughter." Therefore, the 'identification principle' survives since the courts have not accepted 'personal' liability as a basis for corporate manslaughter.
Ibid Page 247.
Ibid.
Bergman, David; "T he Case for Corporate Responsibility- Corporate Violence & the Criminal justice System" (2000); Disaster Action Holborn Studios, London Page 72.
Ibid.
Attorney-General 's Reference (No.2 of 1999) [2000] QB 796 "Fawcett (note 19 supra), Page ???".
Ibid Page 248.
Criminal law Lecture "Gross Negligence- Manslaughter " Warwick University Law School 2005.
Thus, under the current law, only Mr. Bloggs may be identified with the company and since he is not guilty, neither is the company. Liability can be attributed mostly to Malcolm for his conduct/decisions, and to some extent, Colin for negligent operation of crane, not only because they infringed Health and Safety Act but also do not satisfy the principle of identification remaining individually culpable for the crime committed.
Since the 1990s, English Law attributes liability to companies to the same extent as person although, in focusing on corporate criminal liability, there is a danger of overlooking individual fault and responsibility. The individuals constituting the embodiment of the corporation can be identified with it thereby making the corporation liable for any crimes committed by them. However, effectiveness of this doctrine limits corporate criminal liability to small organizations, as there have been only 3-4 successful prosecutions for corporate manslaughter, most notably OLL Ltd. and Kite, where several children were killed in a canoeing disaster. Since only Mr. Kite and his wife ran the company, it was easy to identify Mr. Kite as the 'will' of the company. However, with increase in organizational structure, it becomes difficult to identify any one 'brain of the company', as was in P&O European Ferries Ltd where Turner J was faced with consequences of a tragic 'accident' but unclear legal liability when no one individual could be identified to satisfy the mens rea required for gross negligence manslaughter. "Fawcett (note 7 supra), Page 253".
Sullivan, Bob; "Corporate Killing- Some Government Proposals"; [2001] Crim.L.R 31-39 Page 33.
OLL Ltd and Kite, The Times, December 9, 1994.
Criminal law Lecture "Gross Negligence- Manslaughter " Warwick University Law School 2005 "Fawcett (note 19 supra), Page 249".
P&O European Ferries (Dover) Ltd. (1991) Cr. App. R 72.
The field of corporate criminal liability is a relatively new arrival to the criminal law without which companies might escape regulations and individuals may be prosecuted for faults of the company. One reason why companies escape liability is the identification test applied by courts to determine their guilt, focusing on individual officers rather than company mismanagement. This has proposed important changes in the field of corporate liability as the "defects in existing law can cause real problems and, indeed, distress". This has forced the government to rethink corporate crime.
Heaton, Russell; "Blackstone 's- LLB Learning Text- Criminal Laws" (1998).
Second Edition; Blackstone Press Limited Page 413 "Fawcett (note 6 supra), Page 248".
Bergman, David; "The Case for Corporate Responsibility- Corporate Violence & the Criminal justice.
System" (2000); Disaster Action Holborn Studios, London Page 12 "Corporate Killing Proposals to Sharpen up Safety Management" ENDS Report 304, May 2002; Jack.
Straw Home Secretary UK.
As a response to inadequacies in the field of corporate liability, the government has endorsed the proposals outlined by the Law Commission Report No. 237. Under the proposals, the separate offence of 'Corporate killing' and 'Substantial Contribution to Corporate killing' should replace the 'identification' doctrine. This broadens the scope of corporate criminal liability and a corporation is liable if management failure (mens rea) to maintain health and safety of employees or people affected results in death, falling 'below the standards' expected. It is not essential that (1) the defendant corporation foresees or appreciates the likelihood of risk and (2) the immediate cause of death is the act or omission of an individual. The focus is on general practice of organization rather than actions of an identifiable person. This would hold accountable BloggsBuild Limited for Vince 's death under the new offence of corporate killing without need to identify the conduct of any particular individual. BloggsBuild Limited should have ensured adherence to Health and Safety Regulation through frequent checks and visits. Malcolm 's conduct or Colin 's negligence has no influence with regard to corporate liability under the new proposals although they can still remain individually liable separate from the corporation. This criterion also affects unincorporated organizations and is of significance when attributing liability to large companies (P&O). "Reforming the Law on Involuntary Manslaughter: The Government 's Proposals"; Author: Rt. Hon.
Jack Straw MP Published: 23 May 2000 April 5 th 2005 "Fawcett (note 6 supra), Page 251" "Fawcett (note 32 supra) " "Fawcett (note 6 supra), Page 251" "Fawcett (note 33 supra), Page 248" "Fawcett (note 6 supra), Page 252".
The proposed new offence of corporate killing does not increase or decrease individual liability but merely provide a different basis of criminal liability for corporations. The Law Commission "intended corporate killing to be exclusively a corporate crime, lacking any direct punitive consequences of individual". However, government proposed two new offences (Reckless killing and killing by gross carelessness) in trying to differentiate between individual and corporate liability. The mens rea required for reckless killing is, that the individual was aware of the risk that his conduct could cause death or serious injury and consequently, it would be unreasonable to take the risk attracting a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. With regard to killing by gross carelessness, the risk of death or serious injury must be obvious to the reasonable man causing the defendant to fall below reasonable expectations, receiving the maximum penalty of ten years imprisonment. Therefore, Malcolm and Colin cannot escape individual liability as they fulfill the mens rea of the offences mentioned above. Colin may be guilty of killing by gross carelessness, as the reasonable man would have known that dangerous operation would entertain the risk of death or serious injury. Malcolm would be guilty of the more serious offence of reckless killing as given his position as site manager; he would have known that his decisions and conduct would cause risk of death or serious injury. If he is not convicted of reckless killing, Malcolm may be disqualified from work under the offence of  'substantial contribution' to corporate killing.
Law Commission Report No. 237 Paras 8.56-8.58.
Jefferson, Michael; "Corporate Criminal Liability: The Problem of Sanction"; The Journal of Criminal.
Law (2001) Pages 235-281 Page 237 "Fawcett (note 32 supra) ".
Ibid "Fawcett (note 6 supra), Page 252".
Eventhough, the Law Commission 's aim for the proposals is to make corporations more accountable in law where death results due to management failure; they may have some gaps that require consideration. The commission has not extended its new doctrine 'management failure' to offences, which require subjective 'awareness'. They fail to take into account that corporate intentionality is projected through their policy. It would be difficult for the jury to consider, implicitly or explicitly, how the particular company 'could have been aware' or even the correct definition of 'corporate awareness'. With regard to 'corporate guilt', serious injuries are not taken into account, as the corporation is culpable only for death. The government believes that under the proposals, the holding companies will not be able to evade liability by transferring their riskier activities to subsidiaries that may lack assets to pay large fines, but critics fear otherwise. Fines still remain the chief penalty for corporate liability, which companies can regain from consumers. Lastly, the proposals will be difficult to enforce on companies 'not incorporated' in Britain and where "firms are made insolvent to evade liability." Despite having some criticisms, the proposals may be considered stepping stone to ensure "no one should be at peril unless there is clear evidence to place responsibility for the act...then the full force of law and penalties should be applied." "Fawcett (note 31 supra), Page 78".
Ibid Page 68 "Fawcett (note 32 supra)" "Fawcett (note 6 supra), Page 50" "Fawcett (note 32 supra)" "Fawcett (note 31 supra), Page17 ".
The key difference between the current law and the changes proposed under the Law Commission is crucial for not only this case but also the field of corporate liability. If the proposed changes are adopted, the scope of corporate liability will widen to encompass both corporation and individuals distributing culpability in equal proportions for Vince 's death. However, what remains fundamentally unchanged is that such questions of fact are for the jury to decide.
