The regulation of mergers forms a fundamental component of competition law and policy, evidenced by the fact that more than 80 of the 100 or so national regimes presently in operation have adopted provisions to that end. The United Kingdom, in much the same vein as other nations with similarly well-developed, complex and expansive market economies - the US, Australia and prominent EU Member States in particular - has acknowledged the importance of having such regulation and has for many years employed a system of merger control. The FTA 1973 provided the UK 's statutory regime for 3 decades until, in 2002, the Enterprise Act was passed. With the underlying belief that "vigorous competition between firms is the lifeblood of strong and effective markets" , the Government brought forth substantial reforms to the domestic system, with the bold intention of establishing a "world class competition regime". To that end, amongst a host of other changes, the system of merger control was targeted for modernisation and accordingly, reforms to both its substantive and procedural aspects were made. "Competition Law", Richard Whish, 5th ed., 2003, Lexis Nexis Butterworths, p. 782.
Its statutory inception came in 1965 under the Monopolies and Mergers Act and later replaced by the Fair Trading Act 1973 the Fair Trading Act 1973 hereafter, the "EA 2002" "Productivity and Enterprise - A World Class Competition Regime", Cm 5233 (2001), DTI White Paper, para 1.1 Ibid.
In the following paragraphs, I will endeavour to critically evaluate the UK 's substantive and procedural approach to the regulation of mergers, as amended by these reforms. I will first consider the issues surrounding the crucial choice of which substantive test to use in merger control in order to evaluate the UK 's decision to adopt a "substantial lessening of competition" (SLC) test, before directing my attention to the procedural aspects of the regime, focusing particularly on the reforms' effect on the system 's transparency, efficiency and legitimacy.
Both the OFT, under EA 2002 s.21(2) and s.33(1), and the CC, under s. 35(1)(b) are required to consider merger situations with respect to whether their creation "results or may be expected to result in a substantial lessening of competition within any market or markets within the UK".
The type of substantive test used in merger assessment is of paramount importance: "its set-up will not only determine the ratio of allowed to prohibited mergers but will also influence the number and quality of the mergers notified to the competition authority, as firms interested in merging will generate expectations concerning the probability that their merger will be deemed compatible with competition" . "Switching to Substantial Impediments of Competition Can Have Substantial Costs", Stefan Voigt and Andre Schmidt, E.C.L.R. 2004, 25(9), 584-590.
The previous approach employed in the UK was one whereby the "public interest" formed the crucial matter upon which decisions were based. While the FTA 1973 listed a variety of factors which might be taken into account in determining the public interest, it otherwise left the definition open-ended, and thereby left the competition authorities to determine what to take into account. This system, giving as it did enormous discretion to the authorities, fell under heavy criticism for the imprecision and uncertainty it created for UK merger control. By the time the Government came to draft reforming measures, it had become clear that this test needed changing for the sake of its rationality and predictability for businesses. The more difficult question was, however, what test should be introduced as its replacement.
FTA 1973 s.84.
For example, in 1995, the House of Commons Trade and Industry Committee reported that "the DGFT defined the public interest as 'consumer well-being' but admitted that 'I do not think anybody could possibly pretend that they could sit down and do some sums and have an answer they can defend against all comers at the end of the day'. The MMC Chairman said that it was 'impossible to define the public interest in a general context', and the Minister simply referred to the criteria set out in the Act", HC249, Trade and Industry Committee Fifth Report: UK Policy on Monopolies, 1995, London, HMSO, pt. 20.
There has been, and there continues to be considerable debate over what is most appropriate substantive test for competition authorities to employ when regulating mergers. The 2 major competing approaches are the abovementioned SLC test and another predominantly concerned with the strengthening of a dominant market position. Whilst an unequivocal victor has yet to emerge, given the worldwide proliferation of merger regimes, and thus from the experiences and lessons learned through their operation, certain accepted legal standards have developed which would seem on balance to favour the former of the two approaches. To evaluate the SLC approach taken by the UK, the arguments for and against the competing tests must be investigated. illustrated by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 's report on "Substantive Criteria Used for the Assessment of Mergers", 11th Feb 2003, DAFFE/COMP(2003)5.
A dominance test had been employed in various European states and notably under the pre-reformed ECMR, where mergers were declared incompatible with the Common Market if they created or strengthened a dominant market position - which the Commission 's decisional practice indicated would require at least 40% market share - as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded. It might have seemed logical for the UK to follow suit, after all, one of the underlying principles of competition policy had been to make its approach consistent with the EC 's. However, there are some fundamental shortcomings of the test which have been highlighted at case law, notably in Airtours/First Choice, and acknowledged by numerous academic commentators, particularly in the responses to the debate launched by the EC 's Green Paper on Review of Council Regulation 4064/89, which provided considerable incentives to avoid its adoption.
European Community Merger Regulation, Commission Regulation (EC) No.4064/89.
The clearest examples are the Chapter I and II provisions of the Competition Act 1998 which mirror Articles 81 and 82 EC, and s.60 CA 1998 providing that competition issues should be dealt with, so far as possible, consistently with Community law.
Case T-342/99 Airtours v Commission [2002] E.C.R. I-2585; [2002] 5 C.M.L.R. 7.
For example, in the "Proposal for a Council Regulation on the Control of Concentrations Between Undertakings", COM (2002) 711, Dec 11 2002.
The test 's major limitation is its apparent impotence in certain situations of oligopoly. In particular, it relates to cases where the merging firms would be in a position to raise prices unilaterally without holding the largest market share and without resorting to co-ordination which attracts scrutiny under the "collective dominance" theory, which itself only operates in very limited circumstances given the CFI 's restrictive conditions laid out in its Airtours decision. This so-called "enforcement gap" applies, to provide the classic example, where the market is comprised of three competitors holding 65%, 25% and 15% market shares respectively and a merger occurs between the latter two, leaving them with insufficient market share to permit a finding of a dominant position but, nevertheless, given the high degree of concentration in the market, competition concerns could readily arise. The SLC test, which does not rely on this inflexible jurisdictional threshold of market share, which must be reached before the effects on competition of the merger can be considered, bypasses these problems.
In finding that the EU Commission had stretched the boundaries of collective dominance to prohibit a transaction that might have reduced competition, but which did not give rise to a material risk of tacit collusion, the CFI imposed 3 strict conditions that had to be met for a finding of collective dominance requiring (i) sufficient market transparency, (ii) sufficient incentives to sustain collusive practice and (iii) such market conditions as to ensure the feasibility of enforcement of the common policy. The OFT has indicated that it employ 's these criteria in UK competition law in "Mergers: Substantive Assessment Guidance" (OFT Guideline 516), para 4.12.
As the Chairman of the OFT has noted: "There are numerous mergers that could seriously jeopardise competition without crossing the threshold of dominant market power...escaping the net set out in the ECMR", in "Merger Policy in Europe: Resrospect and Prospect", John Vickers, E.C.L.R (2004) 25(7) 455-463 at p. 458.
Demonstrated, for example, in the case of Lloyds TSB/Abbey National where the employment of a SLC test enabled the OFT to refer, and the CC to ultimately prohibit, a merger where the increase in market share was relatively modest (just a 5% increase from 22% to 27%) but where the combined share of the four large banks increased to 77%.
Furthermore, it has been noted that the necessity to focus on finding a dominant position, which is essentially a legal construct, "distracts attention away from the question of whether there is a problem created by the market structure and may encourage competition authorities to equate finding dominance with proving that there is a problem" . By contrast, the SLC test has been noted for being more rooted in economics meaning competition issues can be more easily and coherently addressed. This, coupled with its greater comparative flexibility and sufficiently broad scope, lead to the near unanimous conclusion of commentators on the abovementioned Green Paper that the SLC test is more suitable to deal with competition concerns in merger situations. "The Enterprise Act 2002 and Competition Law", Cosmo Graham, MLR 2004 67(2) p. 282 noted in Britain 's submission to the abovementioned OECD report, see supra note 11, "The SLC test...is fundamentally rooted in economics and, in that it can be used from first economic principles, it is therefore better adapted to merger control".
It has been noted that "the debate did not raise any criticism by commentators of the SLC test while the dominance test has raised a number of concerns"; "From Buyer Beware to the Confident Consumer: Does the Enterprise Act 2002 Create a World Class Competition Regime?", Aparna Viswanathan, I.C.C.L.R. 2003, 14(4), 139-145.
Importantly, the SLC test also has widespread credibility as the test adopted in the US, Canadian and Australian competition regimes. It seems logical that the Government has been unwilling to depart significantly from the standards applied in those regimes; to do so would take the UK merger control regime outside the mainstream and would risk "undermining the standing of the UK authorities in the eyes of the business community and of their counterparts abroad" . Furthermore, it would also appear beneficial, given the increasingly international dimension to mergers, for there to be a parity in substantive approach between those states with whose markets the UK 's so frequently interacts, for both reasons of providing certainty to businesses and to avoid potential rifts in merger control, having been demonstrated so prominently by the US/EU clash over the GE/Honeywell merger. found in s.3 of the Clayton Act and the US Department of Justice 's Merger Guidelines "Mainstream versus Maverick: the New UK and EC Merger Tests", Paula Riedel, Linklaters, London, taken from "In Competition" found at.
There are potential risks, however, which may be associated with the introduction of the SLC test. The main concern relates to its open-textured nature giving it an extremely broad scope and thus the UK competition authorities a high level of discretion in decision-making. This, it has been argued, could "give [them] too much power and influence" , whilst also creating uncertainty for businesses who may fear tougher scrutiny, thus leading to a potential chilling effect on merger activity.
I bid, p.2.
Voigt and Schmidt: "If market actors are uncertain concerning the interpretation of competition rules by the competition authorities...negative welfare effects can result: if market actors believe that a merger will not be cleared, mergers whose consummation would allow the realisation of efficiency gains will not take place. This means that productive efficiency is lower than it could be were the merger carried out", supra note 8, p.586.
However, wary of this, the EA 2002 also introduced new safeguards to ensure such problems can be avoided. Firstly, combating the potential for possible over-scrutiny of merger activity, is the availability, as detailed in both OFT and CC guidelines, of an efficiencies defence to mergers which may be deemed to cause a SLC, but nonetheless may be cleared based on its ability to harness efficiencies to deliver 'relevant consumer benefits'. The other safeguards are essentially procedural in nature, and so are discussed in the part of this evaluation to which I now turn. at paras 4.29-4.35 and 4.34-4.45 respectively.
Defined in EA 2002 s.30.
The EA 2002 both maintained several procedural aspects of the previous regime and introduced some extremely welcome changes:
Under the FTA 1973, three government bodies participated in merger regulation: the OFT, headed by the Director General of Fair Trading; the CC (the Monopolies and Mergers Commission at the time) and the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry (SoS) - the Minister at the head of the DTI. A chain of referral existed in relation to merger investigations, whereby the OFT would conduct initial scrutiny of a qualifying merger and then advise the SoS on whether to refer it to the CC to conduct a further, in-depth investigation. The CC would then report to the SoS on what remedies, if any, it felt were necessary to avert detriments to the public interest, with the SoS then making his own decision on the raised issues and on whether to instruct the OFT to secure those remedies.
The EA 2002 reformed this procedure by removing the SoS from the referral chain, leaving decision-making almost exclusively in the hands of the OFT and CC. The curtailment of the SoS 's role in the decision-making process comes as perhaps the most important procedural refinement to UK merger control. In 2001, a comprehensive independent review of the UK competition regime was published which concluded that a fundamental weakness of the UK system was its lack of political independence. The above procedure was evidently characterised by ministerial involvement, with final decisions as to whether to refer and whether to adopt remedies resting in the hands of a politician. When one is reminded that those decisions were based on the wide public interest test, it becomes apparent that an extremely high level of political discretion existed under the old regime. While, it has been noted, in practice the involvement of government ministers in the decision-making process had become of increasingly limited relevance by the time the EA 2002 was introduced, the statutory establishment of a politically immune procedure was hugely welcome. "Peer Review of the UK Competition Policy Regime", PricewaterhouseCoopers, 18th April 2001.
Of some 2,300 merger cases that qualified for investigation in the 1990s, in only 17 cases (i.e. fewer than 1%) were decisions taken on reference which diverged from the DGFT 's advice - "Mergers: The Response to the Consultation on Proposals for Reform", p.6 para 1.5, Oct 2000.
As the Peer Review indicated: "The implementation of the proposed reform of UK merger control would enhance the status and effectiveness of the overall UK regime. This applies very much to the cornerstone of the planned reform which is designed to ensure political independence", supra note 28, p.4.
Merger decisions now rightly lie in the hands of the two specialist and independent competition authorities who, under the SLC test, are solely concerned with competition issues of which they have expert knowledge. Certainty for businesses, no longer having to "factor in the possibility that decisions will be influenced by political considerations" , has thus been greatly improved. However, merger control has not been placed out of the SoS 's reach entirely, who may intervene in the limited circumstances identified in the Act. Nevertheless, such residual powers are important and justifiable since, from its own admission, "the OFT is not well-placed...to assess" the non-competition issues raised by those few circumstances over which the SofS retains jurisdiction.
The CC, for example, consists of roughly 50 members appointed for their relevant experience and proven competence in their field and come from diverse backgrounds of specialisation (e.g. the bar, accountancies, corporate leadership and academia), noted in "UK Merger Law", Douglas Nave & Juliet Enser, Global Competition Review supra note 5 at para. 5.4,.
Chapters 2 & 3 deal with "public interest cases" and "special public interest cases" in which the SoS can intervene. The former are essentially limited to cases raising issues of 'national security, and the latter to where mergers involve government defence contractors, newspapers supplying more than one quarter of that type of newspaper or broadcasting involving at least one quarter of that type of broadcasting in the UK or a substantial part of it.
Northern & Shell Group/Express Newspapers, OFT advice 2nd Feb 2001.
The fact that there are 2 separate bodies in operation is not, however, entirely devoid of potential drawbacks. Considering that in the EC, merger investigation is conducted by the Commission alone, it is conceivable that it might not be necessary and in fact somewhat impractical to have two in operation. The recent and well-documented case of IBA Health Ltd. v. OFT demonstrated the potential for problems to arise in the referral process which might have been avoided had merger control been placed in the hands of a single authority. In theory, there are benefits to be had from "[achieving] a separation of powers between detection and investigation" , in that the OFT can filter out cases which do not merit a profound second-phase investigation, thereby conserving the valuable resources of the CC and ensuring they are applied only to the most contentious transactions. In practice, however, such efficiency has not been so readily achieved considering that, in 2002, 60% of mergers referred to the CC were cleared unconditionally indicating that perhaps the threshold for referral is set too low when compared to EC practice, in which only 22% of Phase-II investigations resulted in clearance. However, it remains that "the CC has demonstrated time and time again that it can and does cope" , and one must not give too much weight to such concerns. (Case 1023/4/1/03) "UK Merger Control: Law and Practice", Roger Finbow & Nigel Parr, Sweet & Maxwell, 1995, p.2 "Steady as she goes: the EA 2002 charts a familiar course for UK merger control", Shaun Goodman, E.C.L.R. 2003, 24(8), 331-346, p.343 "IBA Health Ltd. v. OFT: Hysteria Over the Future of UK Merger Control", J. Whittaker, C.L.I. (2004) 13(28).
Despite it being "rare among countries that actively regulate competition...not to have any mandatory requirement that parties notify sizeable or potentially problematic transactions" , the EA 2002 retained the UK 's voluntary system of notification. There are advantages in having such a system due to its flexibility and appeal to businesses.
Nave & Esner, supra note 31.
In mandatory notification regimes such as the ECMR, filing is required provided certain jurisdictional thresholds are met and penalties can be imposed for failure to file. These pre-merger notifications usually require "detailed industry information, such as industry market shares, information as to the cost of production...and details regarding the level of investment required to enter the industry" . It can be difficult and time-consuming to obtain this data, thereby leaving scope for unwelcome delays in the process and potential further costs for business who can be fined for late filing. It has also been noted that a mandatory system requires competition authorities to expend an "enormous amount of time and effort to try to unravel the intricacies of [the] arrangements - resources that could be used much more productively elsewhere.".
Article 14 (2) of the ECMR provides for the imposition of fines not exceeding 10% of the aggregate turnover of the undertaking concerned, for failure to notify a qualifying concentration. "Globalisation of Merger Control: Multinational merger review", Marshall, Hatton and McDavid, Global Competition Review (2004) 7(3) 17-19 with reference to the Australian merger notification system: 'Pre-merger Notification and the Trade Practices Act 1974', Office of Regulation Review, Industry Commission 's Submission to the Treasury, February 1995, from submission/premerge/premerge.pdf.
Under the UK 's approach, undertakings have a variety of options available to them regarding the notification of mergers. They may choose to apply to the OFT to receive informal advice on the likely competition issues arising out of a prospective merger; for confidential guidance on the likelihood of a referral being made to the CC; or to conduct pre-notification discussions after a merger has been made public, allowing broader considerations, such as relevant third-party interests, to be taken into account. This practice serves usefully to bridge the gap between competition authorities and businesses, providing information which, whilst non-binding on the OFT, can give potentially cost and time-saving certainty to the former, whilst allowing an in-advance insight of potential competition risks to the OFT. It thereby provides transparency through enabling a high degree of accessibility to the UK merger regime. "Mergers: Procedural Guidance", paras 3.4-3.10.
Ibid, paras 3.11-3.18.
Ibid, paras 3.19-3.20.
Concern could be raised, however, in that under a voluntary notification system, undertakings may simply neglect to notify the OFT of mergers which might lead to detrimental effects on the market if consummated. However, measures are in place to temper such concern. The OFT is empowered to challenge mergers and seek an in-depth investigation from the CC, for period of 4 months after completion, which could lead to a demand for its revision. Considering the risk this poses to businesses of a "post-merger 'unscrambling of the eggs'" , which is a "highly undesirable outcome for firms", in practice the usual choice of firms is to notify and take advantage of the legal certainty and expediency of a binding decision, which the OFT is obligated to give within 20 working days, post-notification. Following from this, it should be mentioned that the EA 2002 established tighter and more predictable time limits for the completion of merger reviews. While the deadlines for OFT decisions have been modified relatively little, the law now requires the CC to decide cases within 24 weeks of the initial reference. Such expediency in decision-making has been achieved in practice by the CC and has been noted as a welcome development which "stands comparison with... ECMR Phase II practice" .
Marshall, Hatton and McDavid, supra note 41, p.2.
Whish, supra note 1, p. 883.
EA 2002 s.97 - permits extensions of up to 10 days in certain circumstances.
From a maximum of 35 and 45 days under the FTA to 30 and 40 days under the EA 2002, for formal and informal notifications respectively (it should be noted that the latter time limits are non-binding ). (subject to the possibility of an extension up to eight weeks).
Of the 5 final decisions made by the CC under the EA 2002 by Oct 2004, all were dealt with within 24 weeks, 3 of which only took between 20 and 22 weeks; as noted in "UK Merger Control - A Year 's Experience of the Enterprise Act", Peter Freeman (Deputy Chairman, CC), Third NERA Competition Policy Symposium, 2 Oct 2004.
A crucial flaw in the previous regime was its lack of transparency. There was no obligation of the SoS to give reasons for why a merger was or was not referred. The OFT 's recommendations on any particular merger case were not published and there was no obligation on the SoS to follow the recommendations of the MMC or even to explain why he/she had followed them or not. In essence, "it was a closed and secretive system" .
Graham, supra note 19, p.274.
The EA 2002 changed this dramatically. The OFT and CC are now required to publish detailed guidelines explaining their substantive and procedural approaches to domestic merger control which is essential for the sake of creating transparency and certainty for business. The Act also places an obligation on the OFT to publish its decisions (whether clearing a transaction or referring it to the CC) in all merger cases, which is an extremely welcome development. Published decisions provide a valuable source of authority to businesses which again promotes transparency and enables certainty for interested parties, whilst encouraging "increased intellectual rigour in the OFT 's decision making" .
EA 2002 s.106(1). Accordingly, "Mergers: Substantive Assessment Guidance", OFT 516 (2003); "Mergers: Procedural Guidance", OFT 526 (2003); "Merger References: Competition Commission Guidelines", CC 2 (2003) have been published amongst other, more specific publications.
EA 2002 s.107(1)(a).
Goodman, supra note 37, p.346.
Finally, the Act also provides an express right of appeal against merger decisions, on judicial review grounds, to the specialist Competition Appeals Tribunal (CAT). Applicable to referral and clearance decisions made by the OFT and decisions of the CC, the right is available not only to the merging parties, but also to "any person aggrieved by a decision...in connection with a reference or possible reference to a relevant merger situation". It has been noted that, historically, the courts adopted a standoffish approach to the scrutiny of competition authorities, having been "reluctant to inquire too deeply into Minister 's exercise of their discretion" and willing to give the CC a wide discretion since it did not make decisions itself. Now that these underpinning reasons have changed, "the CAT has not shown any great deference to OFT decisions" and thus operates as yet another useful check on the way in which competition authorities' exercise their powers. It is these factors combined which form the aforementioned procedural checks on the application of the SLC test, thus further justifying its employment in the UK merger regime.
EA 2002 s.120.
Graham, supra note 19, p. 284.
Ibid., citing, for example, Aberdeen Journals v. DGFT 19th Mar 2002 and the abovementioned IBA Health v. OFT case.
This essay has demonstrated that the UK 's system of merger regulation has been greatly improved by the reforms made to the substantive and procedural aspects of the regime under the EA 2002. The SLC test, with its widespread international credibility, offers both sufficient stringency and flexibility to effectively deal with competition issues raised by merger transactions, based on sound economic principles employed by the specialist and now politically immune competition authorities, and measures are in place to alleviate concerns of potential over-application. Procedurally, while there may remain an element of doubt as to the need for two competition authorities, the UK now offers an accessible and much more transparent system which in turn provides welcome certainty for businesses and leaves scope for greater scrutiny of the competition authorities' decisions. The major defects of the previous system, having been so markedly criticised in the abovementioned Peer Review, have been appropriately addressed by Parliament, thereby enabling the UK to assert with confidence that its merger regime now operates in accordance with the best international practice.
