The aim of this investigation is to discuss economic development in fifty developing and transition countries in different regions. Both economic indicators (GNI, GNI growth) and social indicators (life expectancy, infant mortality rate) will be examined, and the survey will highlight the importance of employing at least one from each of these sets of indicators to adequately appreciate the state and dynamics of economic development.
Full list of countries provided in Appendix 1.
The GNI (gross national income) per capita is arguably the most revealing single development indicator, displaying the value of everything produced in the formal sector of an economy, (including net income from abroad) divided by the size of the population. In this survey, mainly the GNI based on PPP will be discussed, as this better facilitates comparison of living standards between different countries than GNI converted at official exchange rates. Like the GNI per capita indicates the present state of an economy, the growth of GNI per capita reflects how an economy changes over time. It is imperative to realise that GNI per capita growth is not necessarily the result of output growth, but may as well follow from a population decline, a shift of production from the informal to the formal sector, or a change in real prices. Figure 1 shows annual GNI per capita growth over two time periods for the selected fifty countries according to region.
Indicators, 212.
Figure 1 shows that most countries experienced moderate positive growth (2-6% p.a.) in both time periods. The red line separates the countries growing faster in the first and second period respectively; the further away the country is from the red line, the greater was the difference in growth rate between the two periods.
A regional trend is discerned for the Latin American and Caribbean region, where nearly all countries demonstrated lower growth rate in the second period. The situation seems to be particularly severe for Venezuela and Argentina, both experiencing negative growth in the second term. In Venezuela, this was arguably due to a "disastrous two-month national oil strike" adversely affecting growth figures for 2002 and 2003. Argentina 's negative growth in this period can be linked to the transition from a pegged to a floating exchange rate system with consequent inflation (25.9% in 2002, 13.4% in 2003), generating economic instability. Thus, there was no single reason for the falling growth rates in the region, although it is arguable that decline in one economy had adverse effects on neighbouring ones (e.g. by falling demand for imports). Only two countries, including Costa Rica (considered economically and politically stable for the region ), maintained high and fairly stable growth rates in both periods.
World Factbook, "Venezuela".
World Factbook, "Argentina".
World Development Indicators. .
World Factbook, "Costa Rica".
In Europe and Central Asia, several countries demonstrate very high average annual growth rates: Ukraine, Tajikistan, Moldova and Romania in the second period, and Armenia, Georgia and Belarus in both periods. These countries are "economies in transition" (shifting from planned to market economies), and several have adopted growth-promoting policies (sometimes under the influence of the IMF and the World Bank) such as of market liberalisation combined with monetary and fiscal tightening Although this is a very heterogeneous group of countries - GNI per capita ranged between 730 (Tajikistan) and 5830 (Romania) in 2003 - it is arguable that they share some significant economic characteristics (as "transition economies"), and the great disparity during the first period could partially be attributed merely to the fact that they are in different stages of economic transition.
World Economic, 88.
Most East Asian countries enjoyed high positive growth rates throughout the two periods, with China and Vietnam - communist states moving towards more market-oriented systems - being the front runners. Most African and Middle Eastern countries show a similar pattern, although it is arguable that many impoverished economies of Sub-Saharan Africa in particular would require significantly higher growth rates to substantially relieve poverty.
In Figure 1, Sierra Leone seems to be an astounding example of how to turn negative growth (-4.3%) in the first period to a positive number (18.3%) in the second period, outperforming all other countries. Here, an explanation will be attempted by considering some additional indicators on the Sierra Leonean economy (Table 1).
Sierra Leone experienced Civil War 1991-2002, and as Table 1 indicates, the economy was every unstable throughout this period. Between 1995 and 1999, Sierra Leone experienced high levels of inflation, eroding currency value and purchasing power, whilst foreign aid per capita fell by more than two thirds. Since 1999, peacekeeping troops have been present and there has been a substantial injection of foreign aid (450% increase 1999-2001). Comparing the amount of aid with GNI per capita (according to the Atlas Method, i.e. not adjusted for purchasing power), it is arguable that the GNI per capita increase can be explained by the increase in foreign aid alone. Also the stricter control of inflation after 1999 may have contributed to retaining the purchasing power of income. Thus, it is clear that the extraordinary sequence of annual growth rates depicted for Sierra Leone in Figure 1 need not necessarily indicate output growth.
World Factbook, "Sierra Leone".
Whilst GNI per capita is a sensible indicator for monitoring economic growth, it is arguable that economic development - improved living standards - is better evaluated using non-economic indicators, measuring social or environmental development. Here, two social indicators - life expectancy at birth and infant mortality rate - will be discussed. These indicators reflect various features correlated to economic development (e.g. the prevalence of disease, food availability, health-care standards). Table 2 shows the unweighted mean values of these two indicators for each region in the discussion.
Comparing life expectancies displayed in Table 2, it is concluded that Sub-Saharan Africa diverges significantly from the other regions, signifying lower living standards. The same argument is mirrored in the figures for the infant mortality rate, which is twice as high in Sub-Saharan Africa compared to everywhere else.
Table 2 also invites the reader to conclude that that the infant mortality rate is higher in the Middle East and North Africa (40) than in Europe and Central Asia (25). However, the standard deviations for this indicator within each of these two groups (21 and 28 respectively) are so large that the difference in mean value (15) is rendered statistically insignificant. Furthermore, the unweighted mean values poorly reflect the actual situation of each region, as population differences are not accounted for: ideally, more populous countries should be given greater weight when determining the mean value for each region.
Figure 2 conveys a general idea about the infant mortality rate in developing and transition countries.
Most investigated countries (all European and Central Asian, all mainland Latin American and most East Asian) fall in the range 5-65 deaths per 1,000 births. A significant number of countries (mainly African, but including Yemen and Cambodia) fall in the 85-125 range. In this study, infant mortality rates above 125 were found only in Sub-Saharan Africa, again emphasising the severity of the situation in this region.
The most notable feature of the data in Figure 2 is its positive skewness: most countries are found in the lower region of the range. The skewness explains why the mean value is significantly higher than the median. The large standard deviation reflects the wide spread: as evident from the graph, the data is not clustered around a single point.
Figure 2 clearly demonstrates the heterogeneity of the group in this study. Even the differences within a single class are so significant that it is debatable whether this grouping is acceptable at all: for instance, the gap between Croatia (6 deaths per 1,000 births) and Jordan (23) indicates a distinctive disparity in living standards.
Discussing the importance of economic and social indicators of development raises the question of what insight can be obtained from comparing the two. Figure 3 shows the relationship between GNI per capita and life expectancy for the 50 countries (note that here, the value of GNI - not GNI growth - is considered, as the discussion concerns the state - not the dynamics - of the economies).
At low income levels, there is a positive correlation between GNI per capita and life expectancy. When GNI per capita approaches $4,000-5,000 p.a., the increase in life expectancy falls and the trend curve becomes asymptotic to the life expectancy in OECD countries (about 79). The spread of values reflect, for instance, income equality, public policy priorities (e.g. spending on health-care and vaccinations) and natural circumstances (e.g. prevalence of disease in the region).
World Development Indicators (database).
South Africa and Botswana demonstrate very low life expectancies for their income level. If income was the main determinant of life expectancy it is arguable that these countries would demonstrate a figure similar to that of Costa Rica, rather than Uganda as is the actual case. The great discrepancy may be explained by referring to the figures of HIV prevalence (causing premature death) in these countries (Table 3).
It must be argued that neither the value of GNI per capita nor life expectancy accurately reflects the level of development in South Africa and Botswana if considered on their own. This exemplifies the importance of using different kinds of indicators when attempting to evaluate levels of economic development.
Many web-based resources provide useful information on developing countries' performance in meeting the Millennium Development Goals.
The United Nations Statistics Division maintains a website called "Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, 1990-2005" (see Figure 4), providing both statistics and analysis on the advancement towards the final goals. The website is relatively up-to-date, well-designed and easy to navigate: the front page provides a quick summary about the progress towards each of the eight goals, and more detailed reports for each goal can be downloaded using the well-labelled menu at the left. The UN could be considered a relatively reliable and accurate provider of information, although it is arguable that the UN as an organisation has an interest in collecting and analysing data to suit its own purposes, for instance by signifying that programmes supported by the UN are doing particularly well in making progress towards the MDGs.
The World Bank Group publishes a site on the Millennium Development Goals as part of their "Global Data Monitoring Information System" (see Figure 5). Also this internet resource has a user-friendly interface, and provides plenty of information. The progress towards each millennium goal is summarised in a more graphical way than on the UN website, and major geographical regions are analysed separately on their progress towards the goals (which they are not on the UN website). An additional feature is that readers may access the section "Research and Country Studies" and download a range of reports published by the World Bank on topics related both to the MDGs is general and to each specific goal. Some papers are critical in nature, dealing with topics such as "Are the MDGs feasible?" which are unlikely to be found in places such as the official UN website. A major drawback of this resource, however, is that it does not seem to be frequently updated and hence, it fails to provide information on the latest developments.
A somewhat different view on economic progress can be obtained from the Oxfam "Policy & Analysis" website. As a major international non-governmental organisation, Oxfam produces a number of policy papers, some of which are within the area of economic development. As an independent NGO, it is arguable that Oxfam represents a different opinion than intergovernmental establishments like the UN and the World Bank, although this need not mean that Oxfam is more neutral (for instance, Oxfam certainly has an interest in making people more generous in their donations). The website contains a wide range of information, but the organisation is not ideal: for instance, it is not possible to browse the policy papers topically, but they must be identified using the "Search" function. The website is continuously updated with new policy papers whilst it is still possible to access older ones from an archive. Thus, this resource also provides useful information on the development over time.
