Astonishingly, the academic interest in financial markets has a much shorter history than many other topics in economics. Only after the stock market crash in 1929, finance suddenly became an important issue for academic research and was no longer considered a subject "not (...) fit for academic inquiry".
Mandelbrot, B. and Hudson, R. L., "The (Mis)behaviour of Markets", New York 2004, page 54.
In this essay I will first refer to the most important academic models, hypothesises and assumptions in order to illustrate the behaviour of asset prices made since the beginning of the 20 th century. After that, I am going to question these academic concepts most agreed in the past by introducing a specific departure from them which is in general known as part of the academic field of behavioural finance. Finally, I will claim a particular failure of the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) and as a consequence attempt to identify a suitable trading or portfolio strategy which will exploit market anomalies of a single stock arising from the malfunction of the EMH.
Developing further the ideas of Gauss (the bell curve), Bachelier (the laws of chance) and Samuelson (options-pricing), Eugene F. Fama eventually built up a theoretical framework for pricing assets in financial markets in the 1960s and 1970s. It was called the "Capital Asset Pricing Model" (CAPM) and was based on a so-called "Efficient Market Hypothesis" (EMH). This EMH can be divided into three forms: the weak, the semi-strong and the strong form. compare Mandelbrot, B. and Hudson, R. L., "The (Mis)behaviour...", New York 2004, page 53 ff the weak form states that all past information is included in the current price and it is no use trying to draw conclusions from past behaviour of prices. Since new news arrives randomly with an average of zero (no effect on asset price) the best guess for the price of tomorrow is the price of today.
The semi-strong form claims that all publicly available information is immediately priced in every single stock of an index. Since there are many sophisticated traders in the market, new pieces of relevant information are discovered by several traders instantly and a single market player is not able to make financial gains from news.
According to the strong form of market efficiency, even insider information of for instance CEOs of large companies cannot be used to make a profit since there are always said to be traders who observe every single buy and sell order thus discovering the knowledge of insiders and revealing their private information which will be priced in by them at once. These traders are also called "arbitrageurs", which means that they spot without delay new public and private news which arrives at the market and trade to price in these announcements if relevant.
In order to uphold market efficiency, arbitrageurs have to dominate the market. In the following, I will in short present a model which shows what happens if there are not enough arbitrageurs in the market. The majority of the findings of the essay "Noise trader risk in financial markets" by de Long et. al. (1990) shape the fundamental part of the idea behind my trading strategy I will develop later on.
In 1998, Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), a huge hedge-fund, nearly went bust. The investment concept of LTCM consisted of recognizing market inefficiencies and betting huge amounts of money on the disappearing of these differences in market prices (compared to their historical values) in the future. Furthermore, 95 per cent of its capital had been liabilities and when the Russian bond market collapsed as consequence of a threatening bankruptcy of Russia, the prices of the bonds hold by LTCM differed further away from the fair historical values computed by complex computer programs. Without the Federal Reserve Bank of America and additional money from the involved banks, the hedge-fund would have gone bust.
Woodward B., "Maestro. Greenspan 's Fed and the American Boom", 2000, German Edition, 2001, pages 275 ff.
This failure of a concept which aims at eradicating market inefficiency shows that it may be the case that sophisticated arbitrageurs do not predominate in financial markets. This is a crucial point since, according to Keynes (1964), "it makes a vast difference to an investment market whether or not they predominate in their influence over the game-players.".
Keynes, J. M.: "The general theory of employment, interest, and money", First Harvest/Harcourt Inc. edition 1964, page 156.
When we name the "game-players" of Keynes "noise traders" we arrive at a model of De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1990) which tries to quantify the effect of noise traders on asset prices.
In the end they derive the following equation:
Pricing function for risky asset at period t where is the price of the unsafe asset u (interpreted as aggregate equities) in period t. denotes the misperception of the expected price of the risky asset by noise traders and is an independent and identically distributed random variable with being a measure of average "bullishness" of the noise traders, and the variance of noise traders' misperceptions of the expected return per unit of the risky asset. designates the proportion of noise traders in relation to all traders in the market (). At last, is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion of the involved agents.
According to the derived equation the unsafe asset u is priced equal to the safe asset s, if the price of u is the net present value of its future dividends which is 1. This would be the case if there were no "noise traders" =0) in the market at all.
So, what are the most important lessons from the model? First, one can learn from the second term of the pricing function that varies more when noise traders' opinion change (). So the larger the ratio gets, the more volatile the asset prices will be. Second, the third term of the equation shows us that the average misperception of the noise traders may not be zero and consequently causes the price of equities to deviate from . There may occur both positive and negative departures from the fair value of 1.
Third and last, we can observe from the final (negative) term of the pricing function that sophisticated traders may be driven out of the market. This may happen since with the share of noise traders rising they (the arbitrageurs) demand a compensation for bearing the risk that the noise traders may become even more pessimistic about the risky asset and behaving in an irrational way by selling the asset out of pure misperception of information. This means that prices may move further away (up or down) from the fundamental value for a long period of time.
Compare this paragraph with De Long, Shleifer, Summers, Waldmann, 1990, Journal of Political Economy vol. 98, no.4, University of Chicago, pages 703 ff.
Consequently, the fair value does not necessarily play a big role in a new trading strategy.
Remark for completeness: the noise trader model also deals with different generations of noise traders with distinct levels of misperception which is not of prime importance here.
To summarize we have on the one hand excess volatility of asset prices and on the other hand positive or negative deviations from the fundamental value which may persist for a long time and which revert to the mean sooner or later.
In short, there is, in my opinion, sufficient evidence for market inefficiency. It could be shown that "risk created by the unpredictability of investor sentiment significantly reduces the attractiveness of arbitrage". Some concrete features of noise traders' behaviour such as representativeness (or more detailed the law of small numbers) are furthermore made obvious by Barberis and Taylor (2003).
Shleifer, A.: "Inefficient Markets - An introduction to behavioral finance", 2000, Oxford University Press Inc., New York, page 51.
Compare Barberis N, Thaler R,: "A survey of behavioral finance" in Handbook of Economics and Finance, 2003, page 1084 ff.
Now, after market failure has become clear, a strategy based on the described characteristics of market inefficiency is demanded in order to make a profit. This will be done in the following.
It must be clear that although being able to criticize the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) it is now the task to build up a trading idea or strategy and not to develop a complete new alternative model to the CAPM since there are great difficulties to overcome.
Compare Fama, E. F.: "Market Efficiency, Long-Tern Returns, and Behavioral Finance", 1997, University of Chicago, page 2 ff.
So, what skills are required in the fields of research, portfolio construction and execution of the described strategy?.
First, an underlying asset has to be picked suitable for the trading strategy. That means that there are enough appropriate call and put options issued on this special asset and there are permanently new options offered to investors by huge banks - the availability of a special kind of option is essential for the subsequent trading strategy. "Appropriate" implies that there are options with an approximate omega of 10 and a proportional weekly theta, which stands for the loss of time value, of not more than 1% as used in the calculation. Options constructed that way can be found without difficulties. So, considering these criteria I choose the Deutsche Bank AG over a period of time of four years starting end of November 2001 to November 2005. I considered three different trading schemes: first, I looked at the performance of the stock over one week and took the performance as a signal of buying an option with the identified properties at the end of the week. If the stock of Deutsche Bank AG did well over the previous week (performance 0), I fictitiously bought a call option and sold it a week later on. On the contrary, if the stock did poor over the last week I calculated the performance of a put option for the upcoming week (the fact that the Deutsche Bank AG had been traded around its fair value of 63 $ at the beginning of the investment period is not of great importance since, as mentioned above, both the observed excess volatility and the process of mean reversion declare the fair value useless for the following calculations).
Compare the website , 2005,.
Compare Moerschen, T.: "Finanzm  rkte - Deutsche Aktien schwach ...", HB Nr. 036, 2002, page 29.
After doing these two trades (buying and selling of call or put options) every week for the four years I enlarged the period of time to 14 days and eventually to a month (4 weeks). After having sold the option the received money was transferred to an again fictitious money market account yielding two per cent and kept there till end of November 2005. It quickly became clear that the trading costs and the loss of time value would have eradicated the profits and even totalled up to loss of 133,9 % of single amount of money invested in each period without investing the revenues in the money market in this case (I dropped the calculations of what the money market would have been able to shorten the loss or even producing a small gain since the possible gain would not have been significant at all for further thinking about).
Compare the data sheets for "weekly trading", "14 day trading" and "monthly trading" attached at the end of this essay.
Now, contrary to that rather useless outcome, when doing 14 days trades we can see that the result is now obviously a positive average return per year on the invested money in these four years. Computing the Sharpe ratio as a measure of the significance of the abnormal returns we obtain a quite low result of 0.06 (see corresponding data sheet attached) - so it can be concluded that there is an opportunity of achieving abnormal but small abnormal returns with this 14 days trading scheme of the strategy. After halving the trading cost again we can calculate the profit per year for monthly trading of put and call options. At first sight, the earnings appear quite impressive with 1104,68 % of a single invested amount in total. On the averagely invested money we still get a return of 10,62 % per year. The Sharpe ratio gives us a value of 0,12 saying a abnormal return of 0,12 per unit of risk taken which is at least double the rate of the 14 days trading experiment.
To summarize we can see that we are able to get abnormal returns of 10,62 % per year on the averagely invested money when we are buying the put or call options, holding them for a month, selling them and reinvesting the thereby received amounts (including positive or negative profits) in the money market. Measuring the significance by the standards of the Sharpe ratio we unfortunately are not able to confirm the statistical significance of the earnings.
To put it all in a nutshell, one can see that the strategy of buying a call option after a month of positive returns of a stock and buying a put option after a month with negative returns yields 10,62 % on average on the invested money when the money from the sold option is invested in the money market and yields 2 % a year.
Fama (1997) concludes that "long-term returns are fragile (and) statistically marginal" and given the calculated example of the Deutsche Bank AG over the period of four years he seems to be proven right. Nevertheless, although the statistical measure of significance - the Sharpe ratio of the monthly trading scheme is only 0.12 - I think that nowadays where low interest rates prevail (the 10-year-government bond of Germany currently yields at 3,35 per cent) almost 11 per cent a year represent a lucrative investment opportunity which could be added to portfolios of rather wealthy risk takers - affluence and risk taking are necessary since one has to be prepared to lose the full amount of invested money in several periods.
Fama, E. F.: "Market Efficiency, Long-Tern Returns, and Behavioral Finance", 1997, Chicago, page 26.
Compare data sheet at the end of this essay again.
In the monthly trading scheme it happened five times (see data sheets attached).
I acknowledge that this strategy has to be tested further which due to constraints of the length of this essay will not be done here.
One pressing question for me remains: am I myself a noise trader when pursuing this approach? May it be the case that this plan itself can be considered as an action or a model of noise traders? De Long et. al. (1990) define noise traders as follows:
De Long, B. J., Shleifer, A., Summers L.H., Waldmann R.J.: "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets", 1990, Journal of Political Economy, page 706.
After searching for indicators from the technical analysis similar to those of my trading strategy I discovered that there are analogous technical indicators indeed: both the momentum and the relative strength index (RSI) are calculated similarly to my proportional returns over a week, 14 days and a month. Since I use corresponding measures in order to generate signals this strategy itself can be considered an action of noise traders. Well, but it pays.
