The French labour movement is typified as 'contestatory' and as embodying an ideologically and politically divided trade union movement (Valenzuela 1992:73). The argument that France 's trade union movement is ideologically and politically divided is widely discussed and sustained and this indicates the significance of the issue (Bridgford 1991; Boltansk 1999; Daley 1999; Lange et al 1982; Moss 1987; Mouriaux 1983; Schain 1987; Verberckmoes 1996; Visser 2000). It is important, firstly, because 'the study of inter-confederal relations is central to any understanding of French industrial relations' (Bridgford 1991:82) and secondly, because divisions in the union movement can have a negative impact on trade union membership (Bean 1994:41; Rehfeldt 1999), collective bargaining (Schain 1987), neo-corporatist industrial relations (Valenzuela 1992:76) and hence, the entire industrial relations system. The main trade union confederations in France are the CGT, the CFDT, the FO, the CFTC, the CFE-CGC and UNSA, though it is acknowledged that the FEN and the US-GdD are influential trade unions, primarily in the public sector. The traditional ideologies or organising principles of the main confederations are communist, socialist-centre, socialist-syndicalist, Christian, centrist and independent respectively (Visser 2000:239).
Confederation Generale du Travail (CGT), Confederation Francaise Democratique du Travail (CFDT), Force Ouvriere (FO), Confederation Francaise du Travail Chretien (CFTC), Conferderation Francaise d'Encadrement (CGC-CFE), Union Nationale des Syndicats Autonome (UNSA),.
Federation de l'Education (FEN), Union Syndicale-Groupe de Dix (US-GdD).
This essay will focus on the inter-confederal ideological divisions of the CGT and CFDT, firstly, because the most marked divisions, and indeed alliances, in the French trade union movement are attributable to the CGT and the CFDT (Schain 1987). Secondly, because the CGT and the CFDT are the largest and most widely supported trade union confederations in France (Labbe 1996; Bilous 1998; Rehfeldt 1999) and thirdly, because the CGT and the CFDT have traditionally 'unlike other trade union confederations, seen themselves as actors in the political sphere' (Brigdford 1991:3). The period under analysis is from 1970 until the present day, whilst acknowledging that divisions were significant prior to this period (Schain 1987:259). In addition, the discussion is limited to inter-confederal ideological divisions, whilst recognising that intra-confederal divisions have been 'a constant feature of French trade unionism' (Bridgford 1991:104). In this essay, a brief discussion of the traditional ideological positions of the CGT and CFDT will be followed by an analysis of recent evidence claiming that the CGT and CFDT have overcome traditional ideological divisions. Finally, a critique of the nature of the change found will highlight the argument that, in spite of evidence to the contrary, little has changed and the CGT and the CFDT remain divided, perhaps not as openly on ideological grounds, but divided nonetheless. It is argued that the unions' continue to place varying emphasis on negotiation and collective bargaining, and protest and mobilisation, thus symbolising divisions based on ideology. Against a focus on the ideological divisions between the CGT and the CFDT, the conclusion will present an overview of recent inter-confederal divisions in the French trade union movement as a whole.
Trade unions in France have a history troubled by ideological divisions both within the trade union movement as a whole and, more controversially, within the trade unions themselves. In the post-war period the CGT 'derived its Marxist strategy from the French Communist Party (PCF)' (Moss 1987:238) and identified itself with mass and class unionism (Mouriaux 1983:181) where 'maximalist demands would heighten the sense of injustice, raise expectations, and spur activism' (Moss 1987:239). The CGT 's ideology in the 1970s focused on the 'fight against capitalism and imperialism' (Verberckmoes 1996:21) and it has been argued that union strategies and industrial practice consistently supported the union 's ideals (Moss 1987). The CFDT on the other hand has been  'subtle and elusive' changing 'from a fairly moderate social democratic union to a radical left movement in the early 1970s' (1983:245). In 1978 the CFDT adopted a policy of 'recentrage' as a response to the crisis in the trade union movement (Mouriaux 1983:192) and its failure to convert 'its ideal of self-management into social relations' (Verberckmoes 1996:28). Furthermore, the CFDT endeavoured to distance itself from the political sphere following self-criticism for its support for the French Socialist Party (PS) in the 1970s and early 1980s. Conversely the CGT, until recently, maintained direct links with the PCF and it 's 'ideological position has remained closely wedded to the Communist Party' (Financial Times 1999). The PCF has traditionally maintained considerable control over CGT strategy, influencing both trade union response and mobilisation. The CGT has criticised the 'reformism' of the CFDT and, despite suggestions of a modification of ideology (Daley 1999:174) there is evidence to suggest that the CGT, at the confederal level at least, continues to embody an ideology that emphasises the struggle of workers, thus following a strategy centred on protest and mobilisation. This evidence is discussed below.
Firstly, however, it is important to note that 'in terms of ideology, the two confederations unmistakably moved closer together and their strategies converged' during the 1970s (Verberckmoes 1996:26). This episode was, to a large extent, an outcome of the Union of the Left from 1972 until 1977, where closer relationships between the political parties, the PS and the PCF and the trade unions, namely the CGT and the CFDT stimulated confederal and political unity (Bridgford 1991:94). Moreover, the CFDT embraced a radical form of unionism throughout this period adopting 'a class-based analysis of society and in this way made a major step towards the ideological position of the CGT' (1991:91). It is evident, however, that during this critical stage of union unity, underlying divisions were persistently discernible. Ross (1987:55) has described this period of unity as 'unity in conflict' where 'each confederation had its own unique approach to the hows of union struggle, even if the priority goals of such struggle could be agreed upon mutually' (1987:53). Agreements were 'unable to mask persistent ideological divisions' (Verberckmoes 1996:17) and it is argued that with the 'recentrage' of the CFDT in 1978 ideological divisions intensified throughout the 1980s and 1990s. Firstly, there has been inconsequential evidence of inter-confederal unity (Bilous 1999) and secondly, 'as of 1980, the French labour was splintered into competitive organisations divided by politics and strategy' (Daley 1999:169). Furthermore, it could be argued that the increasingly moderate stance of the CFDT has accentuated the CGT 's radical stance. Thus, against a background of relatively consistent ideological division, is there any evidence to suggest divisions have been overcome in recent years?.
Firstly, cessation of direct links with PCF, during the CGT 's forty-sixth congress in February 1999, symbolises a shift in strategy and with a severing of the 'umbilical cord' linking the confederation to the PCF permits the union to pursue its objectives with greater autonomy (Le Monde 1999). Furthermore, the CGT rejected PCF calls for joint mobilisation in 1999, presumably indicating a shift in trade union ideology away from wider political objectives to pursue more narrow objectives in industrial the industrial sphere. However, it is evident that, in spite of officially breaking links with the PCF, the union and party 'remain ideological partners' (Financial Times 1999). Moreover, the CGT 's 'new' strategy is  'summed up in the watchword protest-mobilisation-proposal-negotiation' and it is argued that this reflects continuity of ideology and union strategy (Rehfeldt 1999:3). The strategy 's emphasis is on protest and mobilisation and does not 'represent a complete break' from the CGT 's 'traditional tendency of mainly basing union action around protest' (1999:3). Consequently, it is proposed that the CGT continues to embrace an anti-capitalist ideology, promoting consciousness of the inherent conflict between labour and capital. It could be argued that inclusion of negotiation as part of the confederation 's strategy implies that the CGT have recognised the legitimacy of capital. Yet, this measure is, perhaps, superficial, and falls short of overcoming inter-confederal ideological divisions. The CFDT tends to adopt a more accommodating stance towards management and it 's objective of 'trade unionism based on negotiation' (Rehfeldt 1999:3) and portrayal of the strike as an 'archaic tool' (Daley 1999) continues to separate the unions' on ideological grounds.
Secondly, in June 1998 the CGT and the CFDT held joint talks to encourage inter-confederal unity. The CFDT 's 'olive branch' was accepted by the CGT (Rehfeldt 1999:4) and the confederation 'exchanged ideas from conference documents, while respecting the other 's identity, in order to deepen their respective approaches to the concept of trade unionism' (Bilous 1998:1). In spite of the apparent strengthening of ties between the CFDT and the CGT, it is argued that 'no assumptions should be made, as union alliances fluctuate according to the issue at hand' (EIRO 1999:7). The discussion above highlighted the contingent nature of inter-confederal unity and, whilst the 1970s unity was facilitated by the political unity of the left, recent unity is presented, firstly, as an outcome of the introduction of working time legislation which has strengthened the presence of unions and secondly, as a result of the trade unions' desire to increase membership. Thus, the recent united front is not a significant indication of a discontinuity of inter-confederal ideological divisions.
Thirdly and finally, MEDEF 's proposed 'overhaul' of the French industrial relations system has recently demonstrated the fragility of joint action between the CGT and the CFDT and the continuation of ideological divisions. For instance, the 'employers confederation succeeded in splitting the fragile trade union pact three times and was able to strengthen what appears to be a budding alliance with the CFDT' (Rehfeldt and Vincent 2001:7). The CFDT 's willingness to make agreements with MEDEF has serious implications for the recent inter-confederal unity evidenced above and makes explicit the 'reformist' nature of the CFDT. The CGT has been and is vehemently opposed to any agreement with MEDEF and appears to be adopting a strategy of protest and 'mobilisation at any price' (Segrestin 1987:208). Whilst the CFDT has adopted its traditional strategy of 'coping with the issues' through concessionary bargaining and a relative aversion to mass mobilisation, it is proposed that the CGT has continued to  'support the rank-and-file' acting as a 'vigilant watchdog, a powerful combat force ready to press workers' demands' (1987:208). Therefore, this evidence reflects persistent ideological divisions between the CFDT and the CGT. Furthermore, this evidence develops the above discussion on the divergent approaches to the 'hows of union struggle' and it is argued that the CGT continues to be 'the most maximalist in the formulation and the negotiation of demands' and it is 'the level and not the type of demand that makes it anti-capitalist' (Ross 1987:239). The CGT 's calls for mass mobilisation are incessant and, whilst admitting that the CFDT has engaged in mobilisation, the confederation appears to favour agreement and negotiation with employers, whilst the CGT appears to advocate wider political objectives and raising consciousness of the struggle of workers (Mouriaux 1983).
Mouvement des enterprises de France (MEDEF).
Evidence of moderation in the traditional ideologies of the CGT and the CFDT is thus ambivalent and the divisions persistent. It is acknowledged, however, that the neutral leadership of the CGT has recentred strategy, at the confederal level, in order to 'allow as many members to identify with it as possible' (Rehfeldt 1999:4). The focus on protest is maintained but with the need to build up a membership base, it appears that the CGT is outwardly upholding an increasingly moderate stance in order to enhance its position in relation to other unions, Europe and, more significantly, to its current and potential members. Recognition of the 'French anomaly (the fragmentation of the union movement, and low levels of membership), relative to other European trade union movements' appears to have stimulated, firstly, strategies to increase union membership and, secondly a more moderate discourse (Bilous 1999:4). In spite of this outward appearance and incentives for the trade union movement to unite, in terms of gaining greater membership, a stronger position in Europe and a united front against employers' federations (Ross and Martin 1999:389), the evidence above indicates that the CGT 's and the CFDT 's ideological positions are rooted in the history of their formation and they continue, despite moderation of discourse, to influence current values, objectives and strategy. By way of illustration, the changing nature of the labour market has and will increasingly affect the unions' ability to organise. This is a stark provocation for the CGT and the CFDT to overcome ideological divisions and unite against further losses of representation. Yet, it is argued that ideological differences are irreconcilable as the CFDT advocates salvaging the majority of jobs at the expense of a few losses and the CGT advocates, on principle, the salvaging of each and every job, potentially at the risk of losing all jobs (Segrestin 1987:207). Thus, the minimal change evidenced above stems from persistent ideological divisions between the CGT and the CFDT and recent evidence is insufficient to support an opinion to the contrary.
The French trade union movement is divided and the CGT and the CFDT have been the traditional forces driving and enhancing these divisions. Recently it appears that the apolitical FO has increasingly empathised with the CGT 's strategic position, particularly during the 'overhaul' of French industrial relations. This is an indication of the distinctly political nature of trade union activity and the difficulties of separating the political and the industrial sphere (Bridgford 1991). A refusal to accept the political and ideological nature of the unions is, in itself, an ideology (Mouriaux 1983:180) and this ideology, consistently espoused by French employers, has reinforced the CGT 's oppositional ideology and encouraged oppositional behaviour from other confederations. The preceding discussion highlights the conclusion that traditional ideological divisions have not been overcome and this is apparent in the disunity of the CFDT and the CGT and the divergent strategies, objectives and values espoused by the unions. The implications of this conclusion are that unions will continue to diverge and further institutionalisation by the state will reinforce divisions as unions lack incentive to alter their behaviour due to assumptions of representivity and the extension of collective bargaining agreements. If representivity rules are changed, a collective political project may develop as unions seek to prove their legitimacy and their ability to represent an increasingly fragmented workforce. It is certain, however, that ideological divisions continue to split the French union movement and this is exemplified in the preceding discussion.
The emphasis throughout has been on ideology at the confederal level as an analysis of the ideology of workers and the motivations for joining particular trade unions are beyond the scope of this essay. Nevertheless, it is recognised that 'ideological divisions affect rank-and-file practice only to a limited degree' (Segrestin 1987:1999) and that the ideologies' and wider political interests of the CGT and the CFDT are not automatically generalisable to rank-and-file members. Furthermore, a limitation to the above argument is the difficult nature of identifying specific ideological motivated strategies, objectives and values.
