The photoelectric effect causes electrons to be emitted from a metal surface when electro-magnetic waves (eg: X-rays, Ultra-violet, light) are shone upon it. This effect was first observed in 1887 by Heinrich Hertz [4]. Later, further investigations of this phenomenon produced puzzling results which brought into question the commonly held view of light as being a wave.
The energy carried by a wave is determined by its intensity. But altering the intensity of the light falling on the metal did n't increase the energy of the electrons being emitted. Instead the energy of the electrons was increased when the frequency of light was increased.
In 1905, Albert Einstein showed that this was due to light being emitted in discrete quanta, which became called 'photons'. The energy of these photons was related to their frequency, explaining the observed energy distribution of the electrons emitted due to the photoelectric effect.
Planck 's constant (h) is defined as the ratio of the energy (E) of a quantum of energy to its frequency (  ) [2]. [equation 1.1].
The value of Planck 's constant is:
When dealing with a quantum of light, i.e. a photon, E will be the energy of each photon, and    the frequency of the light.
The electrons emitted due to the photoelectric effect, when light shines on a metal surface, are called photoelectrons. These photoelectrons can have a maximum kinetic energy (K) equal to the energy of the incoming photon (E) minus the work energy (  ) of the metal (the energy required for the electron to escape from the surface). [equation 1.2].
If the light is shone onto the cathode of an evacuated photocell, some of the photoelectrons can pass from the cathode to the anode, and so a small current is created.
The application of a negative voltage to the cathode (with respect to the anode) can reduce and, if large enough, stop this current. The minimum voltage for which the current no longer flows is the stopping voltage (V 0). At this voltage the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons is not enough to overcome the voltage between the cathode and the anode. [equation 1.3].
Where e is the elementary charge on the electron.
Rearranging equation 1.2 and substituting for K now gives: [equation 1.4].
In order to create the potential difference across the photocell, it can be put in series with a capacitor, as in figure 1. The current caused by the movement of the photoelectrons will charge the capacitor. This will create a potential difference across the it, which will produce an equal potential difference between the anode and the cathode. The capacitor will continue to charge until the potential difference across it equals V 0, when the flow of electrons from the cathode to the anode will stop.
The light filter produces monochromatic light at a known wavelength, from which we can determine   , using the wave equation: [equation 1.5].
Using different filters, V 0 can be measured for different values of   . Equation 1.4 then gives that plotting V 0 as a function of    will produce a straight line with gradient: [equation 1.6].
The elementary charge is known and so a value for Planck 's constant can then be determined.
The light source used was a high-pressure mercury lamp, positioned approximately 450mm from the photocell. A revolver optical interference filters was placed just in front of the lamp, around 355mm from the photocell. The optical interference filters produced monochromatic light at wavelengths of 578nm, 546nm, 436nm, 405nm and 365nm. The cathode in the photocell was made of potassium, which has a suitable work function to allow the photoelectric effect to take place at these wavelengths. To focus the light beam a lens (f=100mm) was initially positioned around 260mm from the photocell, then adjusted backward and forwards to produce a sharp light spot of the photocell. An iris diaphragm positioned approximately 80mm from the photocell was used to adjust the size of the light spot so that only the cathode was illuminated. The height of the photocell was also adjusted to ensure the light spot was on the centre of the cathode.
The photocell was connected to the capacitor, and a multimeter put across it to measure the voltage.
To measure the stopping voltage, the interference filter was set to the required wavelength, and the capacitor was discharged. Then the capacitor was allowed to begin charging, and the multimeter was observed until the capacitor had been charged to the stopping voltage, at which point the reading on the multimeter ceased to increase. This stopping voltage was then recorded.
Three independent values for the stopping voltage were taken at each wavelength of light, and recorded in a table.
After obtaining a complete set of results, the intensity of the light on the photocell was adjusted using the iris diaphragm. Another set of results were taken at this intensity. This second set of results was for use in assessing the reliability of the experiment, and not for the calculation of Planck 's constant.
The random error in the reading of the stopping voltage was estimated through the accuracy of the multimeter. At lower voltages this was   0.01V, and at higher voltages a different scale had to be used resulting in an error of   0.02V. The random error in the wavelength of light was estimated at   0.1nm due to the inaccuracy of the optical interference filters.
The mean of the three results taken at each wavelength of light was found. Then the values of    for the different wavelengths of light were derived using equation 1.5. These two values, the mean stopping voltage and the frequency were plotted against each other in a graph (figure 3).
From equation 1.6, the gradient of the linear-fit for this graph is equal to h/e. So multiplying the gradient by the elementary charge calculated the value for Planck 's constant as:
The random error quoted is derived from the error in the linear fit as quoted by the graphing program Origin 7.0 which was used in the data analysis.
Reducing the intensity of the light on the photocell produced larger values to the previous results.
The value for Planck 's constant calculated was:
This does not agree with the accepted value of:
The calculated value deviates significantly from the accepted value, which lies well outside of the error range given in the calculated value.
The theory of the photoelectric effect predicts that the graph of V 0 against    should be a straight line with gradient h/e. The results of this experiment have produced a straight-line graph, with a strong linear fit, within the experimental error bars. This suggests that the error was a systematic one.
The most likely source of this error is a 'leakage current' across the capacitor. This would have the effect of lowering the voltage across the capacitor, giving a lower value for the stopping voltage. The leakage current would be greater at higher frequencies, as the actual stopping voltage would be higher. The net effect of this would be to give the graph a shallower gradient. Once this was used to derive a value for Planck 's constant, the calculated value would come out to be smaller, as is the case here.
Table 1 shows that as the intensity was decreased, the stopping voltage measured increased. This is contrary to theory which says that changing the intensity should have no effect on the maximum energy kinetic of the photoelectrons, and therefore no effect on the stopping voltage. This was probably due to an oxide spot being present where the light spot was.
Ideally, the cathode is in an evacuated photocell. However in practice the vacuum is not perfect, and so thin spots of oxide can form on the surface of the potassium. This has the effect of making it harder for the photoelectrons to escape from the surface, effectively reducing their maximum possible kinetic energy. If the initial light spot lay on such a point, then it would have a noticeable effect on the stopping voltage. As the intensity was decreased, the area of the light spot was increased. As a result the oxide spot would have a smaller effect on the stopping voltage, so it would appear to increase.
The strength with which the results produced a linear-fit, and the smallness of the random error estimated, mean that to obtain a more accurate value for Planck 's constant would require reducing the systematic errors in the experiment, primarily caused by the leakage current.
The amount of leakage current that can flow across a capacitor, is a reflection of the quality of the capacitor. So by using a better quality capacitor, the leakage current could be noticeably reduced.
The additional readings taken showed that increasing the area of the light on the photocell, reduced the effect of any oxide spots on the potassium cathode. So by tuning the area of the light spot, so that it was as large as possible, without touching the outer zones, the metal ring or the black coating, the effects of these oxide spots would be minimised.
