The "first generation" model is first pointed out by Krugman in 1979. It is a model about the timing of the balance of payments crisis and how the country 's currency is being attacked. When a central bank 's foreign currency reserves are limited but the bank is committed to tolerate the persistence of government budget deficits, it will find itself unable to maintain the fixed exchange rate and eventually leads to the collapse of the exchange rate regime. This essay sets out to look at the macroeconomic model within which the "first generation" speculative attack model is conducted. The next section looks at the empirical evidence in support of this model and finally, the essay examines the limitations and extensions of the model.
The model used in this essay is a simple linear example developed by Flood and Garber (1982). The basic setup of the model includes three important relations:
The LM equation is a money demand equation. are money supply, price level and output at time t respectively; is the interest rate between t and t+1. This means that the demand of money depends positively on price level and output and negatively on interest rates.
The purchasing power parity condition (PPP) requires that the prices of goods,, are similar to those prices abroad, , when exchange rates, , are taken into account.
The uncovered interest parity (UIP) is an arbitrage relation stating that domestic and foreign bonds must have the same expected rate of return, expressed in terms of the domestic currency.
All starred (*) variables are assumed to be given exogenously. In this model, the country is having a fixed exchange rate regime. as long as the fixed exchange rate is sustainable.
The supply of money in the country is (4) where D is the domestic credit in the monetary base and R represents the foreign reserves held by the central bank. Domestic credit grows at a constant rate of   .
In this economy, the government budget constraint is (5) where G is the government spending , T the tax receipts, D are government bonds held by central bank and B are government bonds held by the public.
If the public is already holding the maximum level of bonds issued by the government, the only way for the government to finance its budget deficit would be through issuing bonds to the central bank. Thus, the central bank has two roles in this model. It has to monetize the government budget deficit by buying government bonds and it also has to defend the exchange rate of the country by buying and selling foreign reserves. Since the requirement to monetize government budget deficit is given priority, the inconsistency of the central bank 's two objectives will cause the exchange rate to float ultimately.
Under the fixed exchange rate, and substituting this into equation (1) to (3) will yield (6).
When all exogenous variable are normalized, the exchange rate will be equal to money demand. (7).
This show that under fixed exchange rate regime, the monetary policy is endogenous since it must be consistent with the level of exchange rate chosen by the government. Knowing this, the supply of money in the economy, which is made up of domestic credit and foreign currency reserves will now be (8).
The inverse relationship between domestic credit and reserves indicates that as domestic credit is growing constantly at the rate of   , reserves must decrease steadily over time in order to keep money supply constant. When government spending increases and leads to increased domestic money supply, the central bank has to sell foreign reserves in order to buy domestic money such that total money in the economy remains the same.
The central bank stops intervening in the foreign exchange markets when it has no more foreign reserves to trade on the market. Since the central bank has only limited foreign currency reserves, it is therefore possible to estimate the timing of the crisis where the central bank is forced to leave the fixed exchange rate regime and lets its currency floats.
Figure 1 shows the case where the crisis happens at T. This figure follows the technique developed by Flood and Garber (1984), which is to use the "shadow exchange rate". The shadow exchange rate is the exchange rate that would prevail if the central bank held no foreign reserves and allowing the currency to float but at the same time, domestic credit continues to grow over time. Since the fixed exchange rate would collapse when reserves is zero, the shadow rate in the fixed regime is the ongoing inflation in which the exchange rate has an upward trend that follows the domestic credit growth rate. (9).
At time T in Figure 1, the shadow exchange rate reaches the level at which the exchange rate is pegged, , and the domestic credit is therefore (10) or (11).
From equation 11, the level of reserves before the collapse of the fixed exchange rate can be derived (12).
This is the amount of reserves that the speculative attack will wipe out completely. The size of this reserve loss is FT*, which is shown on the lower panel of Figure 1. Sudden decrease in reserves also affects the money supply and thus, money supply drops suddenly.
The timing of the fixed exchange rate collapse can be determined by looking at the dynamics of D. (13).
Since we know that at time T, the shadow rate and the fixed rate are the same, equation 13 can be substituted into equation 10 to obtain the T, which is the time for which crisis takes place. (14).
In this model, there is no sudden jump in exchange rate. This cannot happen because there would be arbitrage opportunities and speculative attacks would take place. Looking at Figure 1, if the reserves first hit zero at time T ', the shadow exchange rate shows that the exchange rate should be at EsT'. Speculators who know that the currency is going to depreciate sharply at time T ' will try to profit by buying foreign reserves from the central bank at the lower exchange rate of EsT just before time T '.In this case, reserves will be wiped out before T ' so T ' is not the time when reserves first hit zero. This contradicts with the initial assumption.
The only equilibrium in this model is when foreign reserves hit zero at time T exactly. There is no sudden jump in the exchange rate but money supply and nominal interest rate jump. The jump in interest rate is because for the UIP condition to hold, the interest rate parity after the abandon of fixed exchange rate has to adjust immediately to reflect the depreciation in currency. As for the price level, it increases gradually when there is floating exchange rate. These are illustrated below.
The model has so far suggested that when a country leaves the fixed exchange rate regime, the exchange rate is continuous and there is no sudden jump. However, foreign exchange reserves, the money supply and nominal interest rate all experience sudden jump after the crisis. The most important cause of this crisis is the persistent government budget deficit which the central bank has to tolerate. To test this model, the empirical evidence must be able to support all of these testable implications of the model.
The European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) was set up in 1979 to reduce exchange-rate variability in Europe and countries in the ERM have fixed exchange rates. In 1992, Bundesbank set high German interest rates to counteract inflationary effects but this caused significant stress across all other countries. The speculative attack occurred in September when speculators bought pounds and lire to sell for DM, in the expectation of earning profits through the difference. Countries attacked were UK, Italy and Spain.
The exchange rate of UK and Italy depreciated about 10% within 2 weeks from 12 September 1992 to 26 September 1992. (Appendix 2 and 3) There was a sudden jump after the crisis and no apparent steady depreciation after that. These countries all had high and persistent government budget deficits. This coincides with the "first generation" model stated above but Belgium which had higher than average budget deficit was not attacked. (Appendix 1).
The foreign exchange reserves of Italy declined steadily before the crisis but there was no sudden drop after the crisis. (Appendix 4) Interestingly, Spain had actually increasing reserves before the crisis but when the crisis took place, there was a sudden drop in reserves. (Appendix 5).
Interest differential (i-i* in Figure 2) according to the model should be continuous before the crisis and a sudden jump upwards after the crisis but UK had a completely different pattern. UK interest differential with Germany was positive before the crisis and negative after the crisis. (Appendix 6) For Italy, the interest differential after the crisis was not significantly higher but the increase in interest differential occurred in the run-up to the crisis. (Appendix 7) Although Sweden was not attacked, its interest differential went up significantly about 500% for several days before the crisis took place.
There was no evidence of inconsistency between fiscal policies and the fixed currencies those countries were maintaining. Additionally, there was no excessive growth in domestic credit. Neither of the country 's experience is consistent with the predictions of the "first generation" model.
In December 1994, the economic crisis in Mexico was triggered by the sudden devaluation of the Mexican currency. Peso, which was previously on a fixed exchange rate regime, was overvalued and the interest differential with US Dollars was increasing before the crisis. It has been agreed that devaluation was necessary. When the government suddenly announced to let the Peso float freely, this caused the currency to jump suddenly from three Pesos to a Dollar to ten Pesos to a Dollar. It then depreciated even further. (Appendix 8) Foreign reserves, as a result, experienced a sudden jump during the crisis but there was no steady decline before the crisis and this is inconsistent with the model predictions.
Again, the "first generation" model predictions are not consistent with Mexico 's crisis because there was no severe government budget deficit and especially foreign reserves prediction was wrong.
The Asian financial crisis started in 1997 in Thailand. The countries were mostly have pegged exchange rate and large current account deficits but no apparent problem in government budget deficits. However, speculators were assuming that government were defending the fixed exchange rates and such policies would eventually lead to a balance-of-payments crisis. Eventually, Western investors began to pull money out after losing confidence in East Asia securities.
During the crisis, there was sudden depreciation of currencies. Thai Baht was most severely hit by the massive attack, followed by Indonesia. However, unlike Thailand, Indonesia had low inflation, huge foreign reserves and a good banking sector prior to the crisis. The "first generation" model predictions did not work for the East Asian crisis.
From the empirical evidence shown above, the "first generation" model is unable to explain all the behaviour from the crises. Two major findings from the crises are the sudden depreciations during the crises but no steady depreciation after that and higher interest differentials before the crises. Therefore, the "first generation" model needs to be extended in order to be able to explain these findings.
So far, the model predicts that in the absence of large shocks, currency attacks should be predictable and leads to small devaluations. However, in reality, uncertainty exists.
The new assumption in the extended model is the uncertainty in domestic credit expansion and UIP condition. where is the random shock to government budget deficits and UIP now includes expected currency depreciation or appreciation.
The shadow exchange rate now has to depend on the current observation of the domestic credit. (17).
When the shadow exchange rate is higher than the current fixed exchange rate, it means that the currency is actually overvalued and should be depreciated. When there is a large enough domestic credit expansion that led to a higher shadow exchange rate than the fixed one, the fixed exchange rate regime must collapse and the exchange rate will jump to the shadow exchange rate in order to avoid an arbitrage opportunity. This is the reason for sudden exchange rate jump during the crises in 1990s.
Uncertainty also implies that rational expectations are now formed in UIP. (18) where is the probability of collapse. If (there is probability of fixed exchange rate regime to collapse), then the UIP will capture this and domestic interest rate is higher than foreign interest rate. This is the reason why interest differential rose over time before the crises.
Such extensions are able to explain the behaviour of fixed exchange rate and interest differential observed from the crises but the "first generation" model is still unable to explain other problems. This is due to limitations of this model such as price stickiness in a country.
In the model, it is assumed that prices are flexible in all countries. However, this is not true. So far, the empirical evidence showed that currency crises happened in regional area (Europe or East Asia) which also formed the country 's main trading partners. For example, during the ERM crisis, UK and Italy had real exchange rate appreciation of about 10%. Furthermore, they have positive inflation differential with Germany and this has caused both UK and Italy to lose their competitiveness in terms of trade leading to sizeable trade deficits in both countries. During the crisis, both countries also experienced recessions and this might be caused by the overvaluation of their currencies. From this, it is evident that prices cannot be adjusted immediately even though the government has the intention of lowering inflation rates by joining a fixed exchange rate regime.
Another limitation of this model is that it is not realistic enough by assuming the government 's policies are exogenous. In this model, the policymaker is pursuing a constant rate of domestic credit expansion and made no effort to intervene until its reserves are exhausted. It should be allowed for the possibility of other policies adopted by the government and these should be endogenous policy decision for the government.
The "first generation" speculative attack model is a traditional speculative attack model that is being referred to by many economists. However, this model is based on a simple macroeconomic framework which assumes private speculators have perfect and rational information whereas the government is very simple-minded. This model does not hold if the policymaker is forward-looking. It is the inconsistency of recent crises with the predictions of this model that has called for the development of further models, such as the "second generation" model which addresses the weaknesses of the "first generation" model".
