The phenomenon of Currency Substitution (CS) has a long tradition in economic literature 1. The term refers to a situation where a foreign currency is utilized as a medium of exchange by agents in a particular economy (Calvo and V  gh 1996, p.153). This phenomenon is particularly important when the domestic currency is not fully credible, probably associated with a lack of confidence in the monetary policies applied in the country.
If CS holds, agents will swap the domestic for foreign currency as the domestic exchange rate tends to depreciate. This approach has been utilized in the empirical literature on CS, where a demand for money function is augmented with the introduction of the exchange rate (Arango and Nadiri, 1981).
The econometric testing of CS with a vector error correction (VEC) model has been applied in different developing countries with diverse results. For instance, Pozo and Wheeler (2000) did not find evidence of CS in Singapore against the US dollar. On the other hand, Bahmani-Oskooee and Techaratanachai (2001) and Prockal. (2003) found evidence of CS in Thailand and Latin-America,2 respectively, also against the US dollar.
The objective of this paper is to test the CS phenomenon in Argentina with a VEC model utilizing a simple open-economy money demand function. As usual in the literature on VEC models, the technique developed in Johansen (1988) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) to determine the cointegration relations is applied.
As non-normalities in the residuals of the first vector autoregressive (VAR) formulation were found, the nonparametric test proposed by Bierens (1997) is also introduced. Both approaches confirmed the existence of one long-run relation in the demand for money.
Finally, the results obtained through the estimation of the cointegration vector suggest the absence of the CS phenomenon in Argentina from 1991:04 to 2003:12.
The paper is organized as follows. Section I introduces the data. Section II discusses the demand for money equation. Section III explains the VEC formulation and the cointegration analysis. Section IV briefly describes an extension to analyse the model 's short-run dynamics. Section V concludes.
After the implementation of the Convertibility Plan in April 1991 3, real cash balances holdings in Argentina increased markedly. The economic authorities' commitment to following strict monetary policy rules during the 1990s enhanced confidence in the domestic currency, showing a break with the unstable pattern of the 1980s 4. Figure 1 shows the positive evolution of real cash balances during the 1990s.
The relative stability of the velocity of money during the period also reflects the improvements on the monetary side of the economy. I constructed a pseudo-velocity variable, replacing the corresponding level of prices with the nominal effective exchange rate (See figure 2). The empirical evidence on the validity of the PPP in the long run supports this assumption 5. Furthermore, the evolution of the pseudo-velocity was plotted with the interest rate in order to appreciate the long-run behaviour of these variables.
Figure 2 shows a similar trend in the pseudo-velocity of money and in the interest rate, suggesting the existence of a long-run relationship between them. In Figure 3 the evolution of the Industrial Production Index was plotted, showing important variability during the 1990s.
The variables included in the model are the real demand for money M, the real income Y, a short-run interest rate R and the nominal effective exchange rate E. The monetary aggregate is real M1 6. As a proxy of the real income the monthly industrial production index was utilized (IP). Both, M1 and IP are seasonally adjusted. R is the interest rate on time deposits up to 60 days and represents the opportunity cost agents face when holding cash. The exchange rate is the effective market exchange rate measured as units of Argentine pesos per unit of US dollars. All the variables are in logarithms, the sample period is 1991:04 to 2003:12 and the data were obtained from the Central Bank and the Ministry of Economy of Argentina.
Table 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics of the data. Non-normality in the variables is remarkable. Also important is the high volatility present in R and Y, a fact that may affect the results of the econometric analysis. The number of observations is considerable, which supports testing for long-run relations 7.
Following Prockal. (2003) a log-linear model of demand for domestic currency in open economies will be tested. The money demand function takes the following form: (1) where the only variable not defined previously is   , representing the error term. As usual, the sign of b (i.e., income elasticity) is expected to be positive and the interest rate elasticity reflected in c is expected to be negative. Finally, the sign of d (i.e., exchange rate elasticity) will depend on the existence of the CS phenomenon.
If CS holds, as the exchange rate increases (i.e., depreciation of domestic currency), agents will substitute domestic for foreign currency (Prockal. 2003, p.421). In this situation d is expected to be negative. On the other hand, a positive value of d means that CS does not hold 8.
The cointegration analysis followed in this paper corresponds to the Johansen (1988) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) approach (hereafter Johansen technique). Among other benefits, the Johansen maximum likelihood (ML) technique is easily applicable in multivariate frameworks, but is based on the assumption of Gaussian errors in the VEC specification. For this reason, as a last step in the analysis the non-parametric Bierens (1997) test for cointegration will be addressed.
The Johansen technique only holds if the variables included in the model are non-stationary with the same order of integration. I tested the order of integration of the variables in equation (1) with the augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) and the Phillips-Perron (PP) tests 9,10.
As is suggested in Harris (1995, pp.31-32) under data generation process (DGP) of unknown form, it is recommended to first test with the less-restrictive specifications of the tests and continue with the more restrictive forms 11.
Following Table 2, I conclude that the variables stated in (1) are integrated of order 1 12 and thus it is possible to proceed with the Johansen technique.
The notation is based on Johansen and Juselius (1992) and Favero (2001).
Consider the m-dimensional VAR model of order p: (2).
Where, X is a vector of m variables I(1),    is a constant, are i.i.d. , and are variables included to take into account short-run shocks to the system as well as seasonal dummies.
By differencing (2), the error correction formulation takes the form: (3).
Where and .
If the rank of (hereafter r) is   m, then n can be factored into , where a is an (m x r) matrix of weights and is an (m x r) matrix of parameters determining the r cointegration relations. The Johansen technique consists of estimating n using the procedure known as "(...) reduced rank regression (...)" (Harris 1995, p.79). To determine the rank of , two tests proposed by Johansen (1988) will be considered: (4) (5) where are the estimated characteristic roots of the matrix .
To specify the number of lags to include in the VEC system, a VAR model was tested with the variables included in (1). To determine the lags, different information criteria were utilized up to a maximum VAR order equal to 12 13. I decided to utilize the 6 lags suggested by the AIC and FPE criteria after analysing the residuals with an autocorrelation LM test 14. Furthermore, L  tkepohl (1993, p.133) argued that "(...) in small samples AIC and FPE may have better properties (choose the correct order more often) than HQ and SC (...)".
A first estimation of the VAR model formulated in (2) considering 6 lags, the variables introduced in (1) and none exogenous variables gives strong evidence of non-normalities in the residuals (Table 4). Since the ML approach of the Johansen technique requires the approximate normality of the residuals (Johansen and Juselius 1990, p. 176), further improvements in the VAR specification were needed.
Following Clements and Mizon (1991, pp.901-903), I decided to introduce a number of Dummy interventions as exogenous variables in the model to reduce this problem 15. Most of these dummies are concentrated between 2000 and 2002 as a consequence of the high political instability that Argentina suffered during that period. A brief description is presented in Table 3.
Following Table 4, it is possible to observe a deterioration of the LM test after introducing the dummies, but the null hypothesis of no serial correlation is not rejected. However, there is still some evidence of non-normalities in the residuals individually analysing each series (Figure 5), which suggests the possibility of further improvements in the specification of the model. Figures 4 and 5 report graphically the residuals without and with the dummies, respectively 16.
Nevertheless, I decided to proceed with the Johansen technique as the multivariate tests after including the dummies do not reject the null hypothesis of normality (see table 4).
The next step consists of deciding which deterministic components to include in the VEC model. Table 5 shows the different alternatives considered.
Model 1 was not considered since "(...) the intercept is generally needed to account for the units of measurements of the variables (...)" (Harris 1995, p.96). In order to select one of the remaining models, the Pantula principle was applied (Harris op cit., p.97)17.
From Table 6, one may appreciate that with the Pantula principle the   trace and the   max tests selected Model 2. Furthermore, the data seem to support the selection of this model.
Table 7 presents the cointegration tests results considering the deterministic components of Model 2 with 6 lags and 10 exogenous dummies 18. From these tests, I conclude that there is one cointegration relation in the VEC model (Table 7).
Bierens (1997) proposed a nonparametric test for cointegration as a complement to the Johansen technique. Furthermore, deviations from Johansen 's test may indicate misspecification of the VEC model (Bierens op cit., p.403).
This method gives consistent cointegration tests that do not need DGP specification (Bierens, op cit., p.380)19. Only the test for cointegration obtained with this method is presented (Table 8)20.
The result of this nonparametric test also suggests the existence of one cointegration relation. This fact gives additional support to the existence of a one long-run relation between the variables defined in (1).
Table 9 reproduces the results obtained with the Johansen technique. As there is only one cointegration relation, no restrictions were imposed on the cointegration vectors. The normalisation is such that M equals 1.
The cointegration relation can be interpreted from equation (1) as follows: (6).
As expected, income elasticity is positive while interest rate elasticity is negative. Interestingly, income elasticity was found to be higher than in studies on the demand for money in Argentina in the 1980s. In particular, Ahumada (1992) obtained a coefficient of 0.482, well below the 1.116 obtained in the present study. Several improvements in the macroeconomic and monetary environment during the 1990s may explain this fact. The low interest-rate elasticity coefficient probably reflects the importance of the transactional demand for money which is not very sensitive to interest rate movements.
The most relevant finding is the positive effect of the exchange rate on the real demand for money. This means that as the currency depreciates the public increases real cash balances, in opposition to the CS hypothesis 21. A possible economic explanation is suggested in Arango and Nadiri (1981, pp.72-73), where they argued that the positive wealth effect generated by holdings of foreign assets measured in domestic currency after the domestic exchange rate depreciation may generate the rise in the real demand for money 22.
Observing the elements of vector    in Table 9, one may appreciate that real money reacts very little to disequilibrium in the cointegration vector. Interestingly, Ahumada (1992, p.343) found a greater speed of adjustment with a similar model for the period 1977 to 1988. This fact may suggest that the economic reforms implemented in Argentina in the 1990s affected the speed of adjustment of real cash balances to disequilibrium in the long run relation of the demand for money.
Up to now I have discussed and found a long-run relation in the demand for money where the CS phenomenon does not hold. An interesting question arises about the implications of this finding in terms of the short-run dynamics of the system. Intuitively, as CS does not hold, it seems plausible to find an important short-run effect of shocks to M on Y 23. A brief analysis of the short-run dynamics with a slightly different formulation of the model discussed in the previous sections is presented as an extension of the paper.
Following the empirical work on the monetary transmission mechanisms 24, the study of the short-run dynamics of the system will be addressed with the VAR formulation stated in equation (2).
After considered this VAR formulation with the endogenous variables defined in (1) and 6 lags, a number of empirical anomalies were found in the IRFs. Most of these non-well behaved results are associated with the broadly-denominated economic puzzles25,26. These puzzles have been solved in the empirical work introducing exogenous variables which control for autonomous monetary policy movements (Favero 2001, pp.176-180).
Peersman and Smets (2001) proposed focusing on certain exogenous variables to solve these problems, the discussion of this framework being the objective of the next subsections.
Peersman and Smets (2001) analysed the Monetary Transmission in the Euro Area through different VAR specifications 27. They found that in the "benchmark" case, which included a Choleski decomposition, the IRFs were practically equal to those obtained with the other identification approaches (Peersman and Smets 2001, pp.9-19).
In what follows, an adaptation of the "benchmark" case proposed in Peersman and Smets (2001) with the endogenous variables stated in equation (1) and the VAR formulation presented in equation (2) will be applied to the Argentine case.
Thus, the endogenous variables included in the VAR are: Y, M, R, E. Peersman and Smets (2001, p.8) suggest including the World Commodity Price Index (CPW), the US Monthly Industrial Estimator (YUS) and the short-run Treasury Interest Rate (SUS) as exogenous variables to control for changes in world demand and inflation 28.
All the variables are in logarithms and the sample data cover the period 1991:04 to 2003:12. The identification scheme corresponds to a standard Choleski decomposition. Therefore, the residuals and the structural shocks can be related as follows: (7).
Perfect identification is achieved since there are 10 parameters to estimate out of 10 obtained in the VAR estimation. To obtain a suitable economic interpretation, the endogenous variables were ordered as Y, M, R, E. As commonly assumed in the literature, output is only contemporaneously affected by its own innovations. Considerations about arbitrage conditions in the foreign exchange spot markets support ordering the exchange rate as the most endogenous variable 29. Finally, 6 lags were considered for the estimation of the VAR model 30.
After a positive shock to M, the pattern of the endogenous variables is in line with the economic theory. The output response is positive, with the highest impact reached after 5-6 months (Figure 6). This pattern is also found in Peersman and Smets (2001) in the Euro Area case and may indicate that the real monetary policy effects are not reached immediately. Furthermore, in the Argentine case the real monetary shocks seem to have an important degree of persistence (Figure 6).
The highest effects on R and E of the shock on M are reached in shorter periods than in the case of Y. This fact seems reasonable since R and E are variables with high short-run sensitivity to changes in economic variables.
Table 10 shows the limited contribution of the monetary shock to the forecast variance error of output and exchange rate. This result suggests that monetary shocks are not an important source of output or exchange rate fluctuations in Argentina 31. On the contrary, monetary shocks seem to contribute markedly to exchange rate fluctuations.
The CS phenomenon may have important implications in terms of monetary policy since it implies a swap from domestic to foreign currency as the exchange rate tends to depreciate. A number of empirical studies of CS in developing countries have been carried out through VEC models, obtaining results which support or not the CS hypothesis.
To analyse the CS phenomenon in Argentina between 1991:04 and 2003:12, I followed the VEC approach addressed in Prock et al (2003). In order to test for cointegration the well-known Johansen technique was followed, but several issues arose when this method was implemented.
In particular, as a possible consequence of the Argentine data 's high fluctuations, the residuals of the first VAR formulation showed strong evidence of non-normalities. Since these non-normalities affect the inference in the Johansen technique, I incorporated 10 dummies in the VAR specification to obtain normal multivariate residuals. Nevertheless, inspection of the residuals of each variable indicated the possibility of further improvements in the specification.
Concerned about this problem, the non-parametric test of cointegration proposed by Bierens (1997) was introduced. Furthermore, since the results of both approaches indicated the existence of one cointegration relation and the multivariate residuals behaved approximately normally, I continue with the Johansen technique to estimate the cointegration vector.
Curiously, the normalised cointegration vector obtained with the Johansen technique does not show evidence of CS in Argentina for the period 1991:04 to 2003:12. Several improvements in the monetary policies implemented during the 1990s may explain the differences with the results obtained by Prock et al (2003) with data from mid-1980s.
Interesting extensions of this paper are postponed for further research. Firstly, the estimation of the cointegrating vector with the nonparametric approach of Bierens (1997) and the comparison of the results with those obtained by the Johansen technique. Furthermore, as a consequence of the high instability of the Argentine data, nonparametric methods for analysis cointegration seem to be an interesting avenue for future research. Secondly, it seems interesting to analyse the CS phenomenon in Argentina during the 1980s. Such an analysis may provide an important reference to compare the effects of the economic policies implemented during the 1990s on the long-run demand for money. Finally, it might be interesting to continue the analysis of the short-run dynamics of the model considering different VAR identification approaches. 1 See Calvo and V  gh (1996) for a discussion. 2 Prockal. (2003) considered the cases of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. 3 See Cavallo and Cottani (1997) for a review. 4 From the analysis by Ahumada (1992) for the period 1977 and 1988 it is possible to appreciate that "(...) Real holdings ofmoney declined during the early 1980s, increased sharply after June 1985, ...followed by a new demonetization period withpartial recoveries in 1987 and 1988 (...)" (op cit., p.337). 5 For a discussion on the empirical evidence of the PPP in the Long-Run see Sarno and Taylor (2002). 6 To obtain the real demand for money the nominal quantity of M1 was deflated by the consumer price index (CPI). 7 The EViews econometric software (version 4.1) will be utilized to perform the cointegration analysis. 8 The economic interpretation of a positive value of d will be discussed in subsection F. 9 While the ADF test corrects for higher serial correlation adding lagged terms, the PP test makes a nonparametric correctionwhich is more robust under a serial correlation and time-dependent heteroskedasticity of unknown form (Chenal. 2002,p.1122). 10 To determine the number of lags included in the tests, the Akaike (AIC) and Schwarz (SC) information criteria were utilized.In case of divergence, the SC criterion was considered since it tends to select a more parsimonious model (Enders 2004, p.193). 11 In fact, the tests' power for unit roots might be reduced if deterministic components not present in the DGP are included in thetest (Harris op cit., p.31). 12 The only exception is in the ADF test including the intercept for R in levels, where the null hypothesis is rejected at asignificance level of 5%. Nevertheless, when R is tested under other specifications or in all cases with the PP test, the nullhypothesis is not rejected in levels. 13 The information criteria utilised in the paper are: Akaike (AIC), Schwarz (SC), Final Prediction Error (FPE) and Hannan and Quinn (HQ). 14 In fact, in the case of the 3 lags suggested by the most parsimonious SC criterion there still was evidence of serial correlation.On the other hand, considering 6 lags in the VAR model the LM test for autocorrelation did not show evidence of serialcorrelation. 15 I included a total of 10 dummies which adopt a value equal to 1 in a particular observation and otherwise. 16 The possibility of a misspecification will be introduced later in the paper and a nonparametric test for cointegration will be addressed. In particular, it is worth noting the noise in the exchange rate residuals after the exchange rate correction in January 2002, not solved with the introduction of the dummies. Furthermore, the analysis of the model considering the possibility of a structural break after January 2002 needs further research. 17 This method consists of estimating all the specified forms from the most restrictive Model 2 to the least restrictive Model 5,under different cointegration relations. The selected model is determined the first time that the null hypothesis is not rejectedutilising both, the   trace and the   max tests. 18 The inclusion of the dummies modifies the deterministic nucleus of the model and the appropriate critical values for the testsshould be re-computed (Favero 2001, p.74). Nevertheless, I decided to follow Favero (op cit., p.76), and ignore the modificationof the relevant distributions generated by the inclusion of dummies. 19 This test was constructed with the EasyReg software obtainable from Bierens 's official web page: 20 The comparison of the normalised vectors obtained through the Johansen and Bierenes approaches will be left for furtherresearch. 21 Interestingly, this result is contrary to the findings by Prockal. (2003) for the period 1986:10-2001:06. 22 However, this explanation does not emphasise the importance of the domestic currency 's expected depreciation to explain theresult. I sustain, following models such as Krugman (1979), that agents increase real cash balances after a depreciation of thedomestic currency only if they do not expect further depreciations. Following this statement, it is possible to suggest that after1991:04 agents perceive exchange rate corrections as a once-and-for-all phenomena. Thus, this could be a symptom of theconfidence that agents have in the monetary policies carried out recently by the economic authorities and, indirectly, in thedomestic currency. The validity of this hypothesis is an interesting issue for further research. 23 Assuming the existence of a flexible exchange rate in the economy and some degree of capital mobility, a positive monetaryshock will tend to depreciate the domestic currency. As agents tend to increase real balance holdings in this scenario, it ispossible to have a reinforcement of the original monetary shock and, thus, the effect on Y could be more persistent. 24 See Christianoal. (1998) for a review. 25 In particular, I found the interest rate puzzle, which refers to a situation in which an increase (decrease) in the money supplypositively (negatively) affects the interest rate. 26 For a review of the economic puzzles see Christianoal. (1998). 27 This paper 's main contributions are: (i) The model includes the exchange rate from an individual country perspective, and (ii)The results found were robust through different identification schemes. 28 The exogenous series were obtained from the International Financial Statistics made available from DataStream. 29 Peersman and Smets (2001, p.16) specifically indicated that "(...) the exchange rate, being an asset price, reacts immediately toall the other innovations (...)," which supports the previous interpretation. 30 The response standard errors of each IRF were constructed considering 3000 draws by Monte Carlo Integration.
