The electron is a particle that exhibits quantum complementarity. A value for the mass of the electron of 7.00x10 -31   2.82x10 -32kg, in poor agreement with the accepted value of 9.11x10 -31kg, was obtained by using a uniform magnetic field to deflect an electron beam into a circular path, demonstrating the particle-like behaviour of electrons. Wave-like behaviour was investigated by using electron diffraction to determine the interplanar spacings of graphite crystals. Values of d 1=2.20x10 -10    5.48x10 -21m and d 2=1.20x10 -10    1.97x10 -12 were obtained, in agreement with the values of d 1=2.127x10 -10m and d 2=1.228x10 -10 m calculated using a value of the carbon-carbon bond length of a=of 1.418x10 -10m and a simple geometric description of the graphite molecule as a regular hexagon.
When a beam of particles is produced by a heated cathode not all of the particles have exactly the same energy, and hence they do not have exactly the same speed. A velocity selector allows the user to overcome this experimental difficulty, as it results in the production of a particle beam purely of particles with one specific speed. The device uses strong, perpendicular electric and magnetic fields to deflect the particles produced by the cathode, and only those with a speed given by [1] are able to pass straight through the device without being deflected [1]. Note that because q does not appear in this equation, the velocity selector works for both positively and negatively charged particles. This principle was used by J. J. Thomson in 1897 in his landmark experiment that proved the existence of the electron. [1].
The electron gun used by Thomson accelerated the particles that he was investigating using a potential difference V. The potential energy of the particles is therefore equal to eV, where e is the charge on the electron. The loss of potential energy as the electron is accelerated is equal to the gain in kinetic energy,, of the electron. Equating these energies and rearranging gives [2].
Only those electrons that have a speed v of the right magnitude to satisfy equation [1] passed through the device to strike the fluorescent screen at the end of the tube. Equating equations [1] and [2] and rearranging gives [3].
Thomson 's experiment showed that this quantity remained constant, independent of the conditions of the experiment. Thomson concluded that the particles that he was investigating were present in all matter. He had discovered the first subatomic particle. Fifteen years later Millikan determined the charge of the electron in his famous 'oil drop' experiment, and this allowed the first calculation of the electron 's mass. The experiment carried out used similar principles to Thomson 's experiment, but applied a strong, uniform magnetic field perpendicular to the path of the electron beam in order to curve it into a circular path. This experimental method is the basis of the modern mass spectrometer used to investigate the mass-charge ratio of any charged object.
When a charge moves through a magnetic field, it experiences a force in addition to those due to gravity and the interactions with the electric field which accompanies the magnetic field. This force is proportional to the magnitude of the charge, and to the strength of the magnetic field. The force is a maximum when the magnetic field is perpendicular to the direction of motion of the charge, as in this experiment, in which case [4].
This is known as the Lorentz force after its discoverer, the famous mathematician Hendrik Lorentz. [3], section 22.2 The direction of the force is given by the right hand rule, as illustrated by figure 1 a). Assuming that the magnetic field is strong and uniform, and that it covers a sufficient area, this magnetic force causes the charge to follow a circular path. [3], section 22.3.
The magnetic force provides the centripetal force for the circular motion of the charge, as shown in figure 1 b). This centripetal force has a magnitude of [5] where R is the radius of the circle. Equating equations [4] and [5] and rearranging gives an expression for the speed of the charge moving through the field. [6].
The magnetic field along the axis of a narrow circular coil with number of turns n can be found by considering the following diagram.
If you consider the magnetic field set up at the point P by the section of the coil , and then consider the field set up by section , you can see that due to symmetry the field along the axis can have no components in the y- and z-directions. By integrating the field due to all of the points on the ring and assuming that the width of the coil is narrow compared to all of the other dimensions you can derive the expression for the magnetic field along the axis of the coil [5] [7].
You can see that this field varies with distance along the x-axis. However this experiment requires a uniform magnetic field, which is provided by a Helmholtz coil. The Helmholtz coil arrangement consists of two coils of the same dimensions and number of coils, arranged coaxially. The fields along the x-axis from the two coils add to produce a very uniform magnetic field, provided that a current of the same magnitude flows in the same direction around both coils. To maximise the strength of this magnetic field at the plane midway between the coils through which the electron beam will pass, the coils must be separated by a distance equal to their radius. If this is the case then the decrease in the magnitude of the magnetic field due to one of the coils is exactly compensated for by the increase in magnitude of the magnetic field due to the other coil, producing a uniform magnetic field over a large volume. The magnitude of this magnetic field is given by [8] where n is the number of turns in each of the individual coils.
The magnetic field produced by the Helmholtz coils also has focussing properties. The electron gun used in this experiment produces a beam of electrons that have a small range of energies, and therefore a small range of velocities. The Lorentz force acting on the electron beam causes the electrons with different speeds to follow different circular paths with the same radii. This results in a slightly diffuse electron beam, which would potentially cause difficulties in measuring R. However, the magnetic field acting on these particles focuses the different circular paths so that they all pass through the same point a distance 2R across the circle from the point of emission. [6] p25.
Squaring equation [8] and substituting into equation [7], followed by rearrangement of the resulting expression, gives [9].
It can be seen from this expression that if i is measured for different values of V whilst R is kept constant, then a graph of i 2 against V will give a straight line with gradient that passes through the origin. The charge-mass ratio of the electron can then be found from the reciprocal of the gradient, and the mass of the electron can hence be calculated.
Electron diffraction was first observed in 1927 for low energy electrons by Davisson and Germer [8], who observed the phenomenon after an accident in their laboratory produced very smooth surfaces on the nickel specimens that they were investigating. Later that year G. P. Thomson and Reid [9] used high energy electrons and thin gold film to produce the first electron diffraction pattern. These experiments were the first to provide direct evidence for the wave-particle duality hypothesis of de Broglie, proposed in 1925. De Broglie 's theory states that all matter has an associated wavelength, i.e. that all matter can exhibit either wave or particle properties depending on the nature of the observations that are being made. The theory states that the wavelength of this 'matter wave' is equal to Planck 's constant divided by the linear momentum of the matter in question. For an electron of mass m moving at speed v, the wavelength is therefore given by [10].
A moving electron therefore has a finite wavelength, and can undergo the process of diffraction.
Electron diffraction is a widely used tool in the investigation of crystalline structures. By firing an electron beam at a sample at a slight angle and measuring the position and intensity of the diffracted beams, it is possible to determine many details about the precise structure of an unknown crystal sample. Electron diffraction has a major advantage over x-ray diffraction when used in this way, which is that electrons are diffracted more strongly than x-rays. This means that very thin, about 10nm thick, and very light, about10 -10g, samples can be used. This strong diffraction also means that the time required to carry out the analysis of a crystal specimen using electron diffraction is much shorter than the equivalent time when x-ray diffraction is used.
The theory underpinning basic electron diffraction is known as the Kinematic theory.[4] This theory assumes that only a negligible fraction of the electrons in the electron beam incident on the crystal are diffracted, and that the majority of the electrons pass straight through the sample to produce the bright central spot in the diffraction pattern. It is also assumed that every atom in the crystal receives an incident wave of the same amplitude, and so the intensity drop as the beam passes through the sample does not need to be accounted for. This basic theory is all that is required to understand this experiment, but there is a dynamical theory which does not make these assumptions. [4].
In order for the diffraction pattern to be produced the incident electron beam must be finely focused. This can be achieved using a collimator, which is a simple tube with an aperture at either end. The first aperture is much larger than the second, which focuses the electron beam as it passes through the collimator.[6] Fig 8.6 The collimator must be shielded from the Earth 's magnetic field, which would otherwise cause the electrons to follow a curved trajectory inside the collimator. This can be achieved by situating the first aperture of the collimator just in front of the cathode responsible for producing the electrons, and the second aperture past the plates that supply the accelerating voltage.
Electrons are diffracted by crystals in the same fashion as x-rays. If the electron beam is incident on the smooth surface of the specimen at a shallow angle of a few degrees then the path difference between waves reflected at successive atomic planes is ABC, as illustrated by figure 3. A strong reflection is obtained when this path difference is an integral number of wavelengths, and hence [11].
Figure 4a) shows the interaction of an electron beam with a polycrystalline specimen. The angle between the incident and diffracted beams is , and due to the three-dimensional nature of the diffraction process the diffracted beams produce a cone of semi-angle . nFigure 4b) shows that the projection of this cone onto a screen produces a circle with radius [12].
Since is only a few degrees, the approximations and can be made. This allows the elimination of from equations [11] and [12] to give [13].
The electron beam is produced by an electron gun. Therefore the speed of the electrons in the beam is given by equation [2] according to the arguments accompanying that equation. Substituting this into the de Broglie equation gives [14].
This can then be substituted into equation [13] and rearranged to give [15].
It can be seen from this expression that if a graph of S against is plotted then the gradient of the graph will be , and the graph will pass through the origin. The values of the interplanar spacing, d, can be found using the reciprocal of the gradient. In this experiment two diffraction rings were visible as the graphite molecule contains two different interplanar spacings. If a simple geometric approach is used in which the graphite molecule is assumed to be a regular hexagon, then these spacings correspond to the distances d 1 and d 2 indicated in figure 5. Equation [15] was therefore investigated for both diffraction rings.
The electron beam was produced by an electron gun pointing vertically downwards at one side of the glass bulb. The glass bulb contained hydrogen gas at ~1Pa. When the moving electrons collided with the hydrogen gas molecules visible light was emitted, allowing the electron beam to be observed. The accelerating voltage was provided by a high voltage supply, and controlled using an analogue dial with a range of 0 - 300V connected to a digital display. The uniform magnetic field was produced by a Helmholtz coil on either side of the glass bulb supplied by a stabilised current supply. The current was controlled using an analogue dial, and the magnitude of the current given by an analogue scale with a range of 0 - 3.0A in 0.1A divisions. The radius of curvature of the electron beam was measured using a fixed rule across the front of the Helmholtz coil and sliding markers as shown in figure 7a).
Initial experiments were carried out in order to determine the most appropriate method of maintaining the radius of the electron beam. It was found that the most appropriate method would be to choose a set value of the diameter of the electron path, mark this set value using the sliding markers, and then measure the current required to maintain this set diameter at each voltage. The constant radius of the electron beam required by the theory would therefore be maintained. The two sliding markers were set as shown in figure 7a). The error in the position measurements of the markers was taken to be   0.5mm, as it was felt that this accuracy could be achieved due to the well defined, regularly sized divisions on the rule. The errors in the two position measurements combined to give an error in the diameter, and hence in the radius, of   0.707mm. The focussing effect of the magnetic field (see introduction) helped to minimise this error.
It was noted that the electron beam became very faint at voltages below 150V. The lowest voltage used was therefore limited to 150V in order to maintain the intensity of the electron beam at a level at which its diameter could be measured to a satisfactory degree of accuracy.
Measurements were taken over a voltage range of 150-300V, increasing in 10V steps. For each voltage the current was adjusted in order to maintain the diameter of the electron beam at the chosen set value. The diameter of the electron beam was checked against this value by comparing the position of the point of the electron beam furthest from the electron gun with the edge of the sliding marker. In order to minimise parallax errors care was taken to look directly at the rule when making the comparisons (see figure 7b), but problems were encountered whilst trying to focus on both the electron beam and the marker simultaneously. The value of i required to maintain R at that voltage was then read from the analogue scale.
The error in the measured values of i was evaluated as   0.1A, as it was felt that this was the greatest accuracy that could be achieved in light of the difficulties encountered in the maintenance of the constant diameter. The error in the value of V was evaluated as   1.0V, as although the digital display gave V to the closest integer the value fluctuated between values 1.0V higher and lower than the voltage value that had been set.
The collimated electron beam was produced by passing a current through the filament in order to produce thermionically emitted electrons, which were accelerated by a high tension supply. The electron beam was passed through a graphite sample, producing a visible diffraction pattern on the fluorescent screen. The voltage of the high tension supply was controlled using an analogue dial, and the value given by an analogue scale with a range of 1.5-5.0kV in 0.1kV divisions. The filament current could also be controlled, but the value was not being recorded. Altering this current changed the brightness of the rings, allowing more accurate measurements of the radii to be taken.
Initial experiments were carried out to determine the most appropriate method of measuring the radii of the first two diffraction rings. It was decided that this would be to measure the diameter of the rings before converting the measurements into radii once the experiment was complete. It was found that using a ruler to measure the diameters would be inaccurate and imprecise, as the ruler would have to be replaced on the fluorescent screen every time a new measurement was required. It was not possible to place the ruler in precisely the same position every time, even when using the bright central spot on the diffraction pattern as a reference position, so it was therefore decided that some form of fixed scale had to be used in order to obtain the desired accuracy of measurement. A piece of graph paper with 1.0mm divisions was therefore attached across the front of the fluorescent screen, giving a fixed reference scale against which the distances could be measured. The error in these measurements was evaluated as   0.5mm, as the 0.1mm divisions were well defined and of uniform width.
Measurements of the diameters of the two diffraction rings were taken over a range of voltages from 1.7kV to 5.0kV, increasing in 0.2kV steps. No measurements were taken at 1.5kV, as at that voltage the rings were too faint and diffuse to be measured to a satisfactory level of accuracy, even when the filament voltage was varied. Whilst taking these measurements it was noticed that the high tension supply scale was damped, as the pointer on the scale moved far more slowly than the rate at which the dial was turned and lagged behind the movement of the dial. Due care was therefore taken to ensure that the voltages were set at the correct values. However it was felt that this damping did not impact on the accuracy of the voltage settings due to the large size of the scale and the correspondingly large size of the divisions upon it. The error in the voltage settings was therefore evaluated as   0.05kV.
The positions of the two sliding markers were set at:
Therefore R = 48.5    0.707mm.
Since the errors in the two positions were equal, each contributed equally to the error in R.
Figure 9 shows a graph of i 2 against V on which are plotted the data obtained from the measurements of i needed to maintain R for changing V. There is no intercept point plotted, as equation [9] predicts that the graph should be a straight line through the origin. The gradient of this graph is , and a least mean squares fit using the graph plotting package "Origin" gives a value of.
The line cuts the y-axis at -0.06094    0.03893 A 2, close to the intercept of 0 predicted by theory.
The scattering of the points about the line of best fit appears to be randomly above and below the line, and so a linear fit to the data points seems appropriate. The error bars are clearly visible on the graph, and are all intersected by the line of best fit, but it is noticeable that the error bars are considerably longer than the average distance in the y-direction between the plotted points and the line of best fit.
Figure 10 shows a graph of the distance S 1 against on which are plotted the data obtained from the measurement of the diameter of the first diffraction ring at increasing voltages. Equation [15] predicts that the graph should be a straight line through the origin, and so no intercept point has been plotted. The gradient of this graph is , and a least mean squares fit using the graph plotting package "Origin" gives a value of.
The value of the intercept of the graph with the y-axis is , which is close to the value of 0 predicted by the theory.
Figure 11 shows a graph of the distance S 2 against on which are plotted the data obtained from the measurement of the diameter of the second diffraction ring at increasing voltages. The gradient of the graph is and a least mean squares fit using the graph plotting package "Origin" gives a value of .
The value of the intercept of this graph is . Since the magnitude of the error in the intercept is greater than the value of the intercept itself, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that the y-intercept of the graph is approximately 0. This agrees with the predictions of equation [15].
The scattering of the points about the line of best fit appears to be randomly above and below the line for both graphs, and so a linear fit seems appropriate for both data sets. The x-error bars have been included on both graphs, as it was felt that the varying error in would affect the positioning of the line of best fit. This proved to be the case, and so the x-error bars were included. The line of best fit for both graphs intersects the error bars of all of the data points, indicating an excellent correlation between theory and experiment, but the size of the y-error bars on both graphs seem slightly too large when compared to the average y-distance between the plotted points and the line of best fit on both graphs.
From the values for d 1 and d 2, the ratio of the interplanar spacings of graphite can be calculated. This was found to have a value of.
Equation [9] predicts that a graph of i 2 against V should be a straight line through the origin with gradient . When plotted the experimental data do lie along a straight line within experimental error. However the graph intercepts the y-axis at -0.06094    0.03893A 2, and so cannot be considered to pass through the origin. The value of the intercept is small compared to the value of the gradient however, and so the theory discussed in the introduction can be applied in reasonable confidence in order to find a value of the charge - mass ratio of an electron. This can then be used to find a value for the mass of the electron using the value for e of.
This gives a value for the mass of the electron as: which compares poorly to the accepted value of.
The uncertainty in m arises from the uncertainties in the gradient of the graph, r 2, R 2, and e 2. n is an integral number of turns with no associated error, so it can have no effect on the overall error in m. The magnitudes of and e 2 are very small and are known to many decimal placed, so these quantities will have a negligible effect on the overall error in m. The value for r was given in [7] without an associated error value and with no information on how the value was obtained, so the error in this quantity cannot be assessed. The error in m therefore depends only on the errors in the values of and R 2 and, since the error in the gradient depends on the error in the gradients plotted on the axes of the graph, on the errors in the values of i 2 and V. The error in m due to the errors in these quantities is not large enough for the measured value to agree with the accepted value, so it is possible that there was an initial misevaluation of one of the random errors.
The error in i was evaluated as   0.1A, leading to a typical error in i 2 of approximately   0.2A 2. However, the error bars on the graph appear far too long for the quality of the correlation obtained. "Origin" gives the standard deviation of the plot as 0.03125, far less than the length of the error bars, which suggests that the evaluation of the error in i was overly pessimistic. Taking the error in i to be   0.05A gives a typical error in i 2 of approximately   0.1A 2, still far greater than the scatter of the graph which implies that the error in i is about   0.01A. This is a greater accuracy than can be measured however due to the finite nature of the divisions of the scale. It therefore seems as though the initial evaluation of the random error in i was justified, if not slightly pessimistic.
The error in V was evaluated as   1.0V due to the fluctuations of the reading on the digital display. Since the reading fluctuated over a range of values between 1.0V above and 1.0V below the set value, the evaluation of the error as   1.0V seems entirely justifiable.
The only other error which affects the magnitude of the error in m is the error in R. This was evaluated to be   0.707mm due to an error in the reading at each end of the diameter of   0.5mm. This may have been slightly optimistic, but the magnitude of the error in each of these measurements could not be greater than   1.0mm, as the divisions on the rule were uniform in size and clearly defined, whilst the edges of the markers provided a precise measurement point. If the error in the measurements at either end of the diameter was indeed   1.0mm, then the error in R becomes   1.41mm. Taking this increase in the error in R into account, the error in m can be recalculated. This gives a new value of which is still in poor agreement with the accepted value, but increasing the random error in R to a value greater than   1.0mm would seem to contradict the accuracy to which the value of R could be measured using the available equipment, It is unlikely that the error in R was greater than this value therefore, and so it appears that there was a source of systematic error present in the experiment that was not initially identified.
The most likely source of this systematic error is in the maintenance of the constant diameter of the electron beam. Figure 4a) shows that the sliding markers against which the diameter of the electron beam was measured had a reasonably large finite width. The difficulty in comparing the position of the electron beam with the position of the sliding marker has already been commented on in the experimental details section, and this may have led to the position of the electron beam being consistently judged to be further to the right than was actually the case. The measurements of the values of i would hence be consistently lower than the actual value. Since m depends on i 2, a consistently lower measurement of i would lead to the calculated value of m being smaller than the accepted value. This was found to be the case, and so it is possible that this systematic error had a real effect on the value of m obtained through experimentation.
To improve the accuracy of the experiment the problems inherent in the comparison of R to the diameter of the electron beam would have to be eliminated. This could be achieved by using smaller sliding markers, as this would reduce the magnitude of the systematic error that arises from the misjudgement of the position of the electron beam relative to the marker. The measurement of the electron beam diameter could also be made more accurate by inserting a calibrated length scale inscribed on a circular piece of card across the centre of the glass bulb. The point at which the electron beam intersected with the scale could then be precisely measured. This method eliminates parallax errors, and hence would greatly reduce the error in the measurement of R.
The errors in the measurement of i could be reduced through the use of a digital ammeter, as the readings fluctuated very little. The digital meter would measure the value of the current to a greater number of significant figures than the analogue meter, producing more accurate values of i.
Equation [15] predicts that graphs of S 1 and S 2 against should give a straight line through the origin. When plotted, the data from the two sets of measurements do lie along straight lines to within experimental error, although the data for S 2 appears to fit the straight line more closely than the data for S 1. However the y-axis intercept for the S 1 data is at a value of S 1 = 5.84x10 -4    3.39x10 -4m, and so it can not be concluded that the graph for the S 1 data agrees with the predictions of the theory behind the experiment. The intercept with the y-axis for the graph of S 2 data cannot be firmly established, as the error in the value is greater than the value itself. Therefore this graph can only be said to pass approximately through the origin, and so it can not be firmly concluded that this graph fits the predictions of the theory behind the experiment either. However in both cases the value of the intercept is small compared to the value of the gradient, and so the theory discussed in the introduction can be applied to the data with some degree of confidence in order to allow conclusions to be drawn.
The values of d 1 and d 2 found through experimentation are and .
These values compare very favourably to values of and calculated using a value for the carbon-carbon spacing in the bulk form of graphite, and the simple geometrical model of the graphite molecule as a regular hexagon which gave d 1 as and d 2 as . (From now on these values for d 1and d 2 will be referred to as the accepted values.).
From the values for d 1 and d 2, the ratio of the interplanar spacings of graphite can be calculated. This was found to have a value of.
The actual value of the ratio of the interplanar spacings in graphite can be found using the values for d 1 and d 2 quoted above as found from the simple geometrical model of the graphite molecule. This approach gives a value for the interplanar spacing ratio of.
The uncertainties in the experimentally determined values of d 1 and d 2 are very small, and dependant on the errors in the values of L, h, m, e, and the gradient of the graph. h, m and e are all small in magnitude and known to many decimal places, so the error in these quantities will be negligible compared to the errors in the other quantities. Therefore the errors in h, m and e can be discounted when calculating the error in the interplanar spacing values. The value of L was provided in [7] with no associated error value, and with no knowledge of the method of measurement of L the error in the given value cannot be assessed. Therefore the error in the values of d 1 and d 2 depends only upon the error in the gradient. This is given by the graph plotting package "Origin", and depends on the errors in the values of S 1 or 2 and . These were evaluated as stated in the experimental details section, and lead to the small error values for d 1 and d 2 quoted above.
The evaluation of the random error in the measurement of the diameters of the diffraction rings appears pessimistic when the size of a y-error bar on each of the graphs, 7.07x10 -4m, is compared to the standard deviation of the two graphs, which according to the graph plotting package "Origin" is 2.39904x10 -4m for S 1 and 2.91787x10 -4m for S 2. The error bars are approximately three times larger than the standard deviations, indicating that the error in the values of S 1 and S 2 may have been overestimated. This justifies the decision to use the set graph paper scale to measure the diameters of the rings, as it is probable that if a ruler had been used the random errors in the diameter measurements would have been evaluated to have larger values. These might then have been an even greater overestimation, depending on the effect that the decreased accuracy of the measurements would have had on the quality of the data obtained. Despite the apparent overestimation of the error in the values of S 1 and S 2 it is felt that the evaluated error is the maximum accuracy to which the measurements could possibly have been taken due to the diffuse nature of the diffraction rings. Therefore the error evaluation will not be revised.
There is a possible systematic error in the experiment arising from the relativistic effects that must be taken into account when a particle is travelling at speeds close to the speed of light, c=2.997924580x10 -8ms -1[2]. In these circumstances equation [10] ceases to be valid, and hence the theory used to plot the graphs no longer holds. These relativistic effects depend on the value of , where [16].
At the maximum voltage used to accelerate the electrons in this experiment, 5000V, the kinetic energy in joules of the electron is equal to the voltage multiplied by e, the charge on the electron. The magnitude of can then be calculated using the formula for relativistic kinetic energy. [17] where m o is the rest mass of the electron. This formula gives a magnitude of the relativistic correction of 1.01 3sf, and so relativistic effects in this experiment are negligible. Therefore equation [10] is still valid, and the theory used to produce the graphs can be confidently applied to the data collected during this experiment. This conclusion is supported by the excellent correlation between the measured values for d 1 and d 2 and the accepted values, and by the closeness of the graph to the form predicted by theory. Also, as the voltage increases the speed of the electron increases, and so the value of    increases. If the relativistic effects had been of a great enough magnitude to render equation [10] void, then the graph might therefore have had a slightly curved shape. This is not the case, and so relativistic effects can be ignored.
It is interesting to note that although the individual calculated values of d 1 and d 2 compare very favourably with the accepted values, the value for the ratio of the distances obtained experimentally does not agree favourably with the value obtained using the simple geometric argument. The error in the experimental value of the ratio is due entirely to the errors in the individual values of d 1 and d 2, and these seem entirely reasonable as discussed above. The discrepancy in the value for the ratio probably arises from the magnification of the discrepancies between the individual values of d 1 and d 2 and their respective accepted values that occurs when the values are combined.
To increase the accuracy of the experiment, a digital meter could be used to set the voltages. A digital meter would be capable of changing the voltage in much smaller increments, hence increasing the accuracy of the measurement of the values of V. The accuracy of the diameter measurements could be improved by using a more finely divided length scale, and by possibly using some form of magnifying equipment to allow the centre of the rings to be located more precisely. This would reduce the errors in the measurements due to the slightly diffuse nature of the rings.
By passing an electron beam through a uniform magnetic field and measuring the current required to maintain a constant diameter of the beam for increasing values of the accelerating voltage, a value for the mass of the electron of 7.00x10 -31    2.82x10 -32kg was obtained, in poor agreement with the accepted value of 9.11x10 -31kg. The initial evaluation of the random error in i was judged to be correct, whilst the evaluation of the random error in the measurement of the diameter was judged to have been underestimated slightly. The subsequent corrected value for the error in m was still insufficient to account for the discrepancy in the value of m, and so a systematic error arising from the maintenance of the electron beam diameter was suggested.
By measuring the diameters of the first two diffraction rings produced by the interaction of an electron beam with a graphite sample, values of the interplanar spacings d 1 = 2.20x10 -10    5.48x10 -21m and d 2 = 1.20x10 -10    1.97x10 -12 were obtained, in agreement with the accepted values of d 1 = 2.127x10 -10m and d 2 = 1.228x10 -10 m calculated using a value of the carbon-carbon bond length a = 1.418x10 -10m, and a simple geometric description of the graphite molecule as a regular hexagon. The initial evaluations of the random errors in the measurement of the diameters and the value of the accelerating voltage were judged to be correct, and the possibility of relativistic effects introducing a systematic error into the experiment was discounted due to the small value of   .
