Abstract:The organisation of the semantic mental lexicon is still an open question. Two opposing views have emerged: one emphasises similarities among objects; the other highlights associations of these objects in the environment. Previous studies have also found a hemispheric asymmetry in the mental lexicon: left hemisphere stores categorical information and right hemisphere organises association networks. The results, however, have been mixed. This study aims at testing the hemispheric asymmetry hypothesis in a single subject (split-brain patient), holding constant several variables that varied in previous research.
The mental organisation of the semantic lexicon is an important question in cognitive science. Two views have emerged (Buchanan et al., 1999): one assumes that objects in the world are represented in the mind according to the similarities they share; the alternative view posits that it is the co-occurrence, not the similarities, of objects in the environment that organises the semantic space.
According to the first view (henceforth feature-based), the more features two objects share, the closer they are in the semantic space. For example, 'apple' and 'plum' share several features; both are round, juicy and grow in trees. 'Apple' and 'basket', on the other hand, share much less features (not round, not juicy, not in trees). Thus, 'apple' and 'plum' are closer neighbours in the semantic space than 'apple' and 'basket'. As a result, if a feature (e.g., 'roundness') is activated in the mental lexicon, then, all objects sharing that feature (e.g., 'apple', 'plum') should also be activated. Furthermore, the more features two objects share, the more simultaneous activation they should experience. Thus, 'apple' should strongly activate representations of 'plum', but not of 'basket'.
The second view on semantic organisation (henceforth association-based) posits that words are arranged in the mental lexicon according to the frequency that they co-occur in the environment. Thus, if 'apple' and 'basket' occur together more often than 'apple' and 'plum', the former should be closer neighbours in the semantic space than the latter. Indeed, when asked to generate words related to 'fruit', people usually mention 'apple' and 'basket' among the first 15 associates but not 'plum'. According to this view, if 'fruit' is presented as a stimulus, closer associates (e.g., 'apple', 'basket') should be concurrently activated more strongly than remote associates (e.g., 'apple', 'plum'), regardless of their similarities (e.g., 'apple' and 'basket' small feature overlap).
Stadleral. (1999) laid out norms for association lists. For 'fruit', the free associates are (strongest to weakest link): apple, vegetable, orange, kiwi, citrus, ripe, pear, banana, berry, cherry, basket, juice, salad, bowl and cocktail.
The false memory paradigm (Roediger & McDermott, 1995) is particularly useful to test the different predictions yielded by each theory. In its original form, this paradigm refers to the fact that people tend to falsely remember words, in a recognition test, that were not previously shown during a study phase. For example, after being exposed to a list of words associated with 'fruit', but not including it, participants wrongly claim that the word was present in the study list. Words such as 'fruit' (non-presented word heading list of free-associates) are called critical lures. Although developed for use with lists of free associates, the paradigm can be adapted to use lists of category-related words. In this case, the critical lure is the first exemplar of the category (e.g., 'apple' for the category 'fruit'; see Battig & Montague, 1969).
The false memory paradigm and its variation have been used to provide support for both theories of semantic organisation. Buchananal. (1999) showed that both category- and association-based lists produced false memories in participants. Association lists, however, yielded the larger effects, bringing support to the view that association is a major driving force in semantic organisation.
Building on findings of cerebral hemispheric specialisation (Gazzaniga, 1998), recent research suggests that the mental lexicon may be lateralised: the left hemisphere (LH) arranges information in a category-specific manner, whereas the right hemisphere (RH) organises data through association networks (henceforth hemispheric asymmetry hypothesis).
In fact, Metcalfeal. (1995) found that a split-brain patient 's LH falsely recognised more words than its RH when presented with category-based lists of words. This suggests that category-specific information in spread more intensely in the LH than in the RH. By contrast, Westerberg and Marsolek (2003) found that normal subjects falsely recognised critical lures more often in the RH than in the LH when presented with associations-based lists of words. This suggests that RH may organize the mental lexicon in an associative way (non-feature-based), since association-specific information spread more intensely in the RH than it did in the LH.
At face value, these results appear clear-cut. A closer look, however, reveals flaws that impair comparability across experiments. The results from Metcalfeal. (1995) are based on data from a single split-brain patient called J.W. Consequently, the result may not be general: the lateralization pattern of that patient may differ from average. In fact, Westerberg and Marsolek (2003) pointed out that J.W. 's lateralization performance for spatial processing was opposite to normal. Thus, it is important to validate those results on a different patient.
Two brain lesions are rarely the same. Moreover, injured brains may undergo functional rearrangement. Thus, in order to validate results from lesion studies, one has to look for similarities across patients (Gazzaniga et al., 1998, p. 105).
Likewise, Westerberg and Marsolek (2003) did not control for hemispheric word recognition. What if the RH of most participants did not recognise the words in the first place? This could have given an advantage to the participant 's LH that was not related to association. The fact that subjects were less confident in judgements of words presented to the RH than to the LH supports this observation. Thus, when comparing hemispheres, it is important to control for 'word knowledge'.
Those findings were also produced in different experiments, using different paradigms, analyses (group vs. case study) and participants (normal vs. split-brain). While previous experiments found single dissociations for semantic organisation (different neural correlates for different semantic arrangements in different groups), no study has set out to find a double dissociation (different neural correlates for different semantic arrangements in the same group). We aim at finding a double dissociation by testing the hemispheric asymmetry hypothesis in a single split-brain patient. By holding constant participant and varying list type (category-based and association-based) and hemisphere (left and right) we believe we can test more directly whether or not there is a hemispheric specialization concerning semantic lexicon organisation.
J.S. is a 45-year-old, right-handed male who underwent a complete callosotomy 10 year ago to treat intractable epilepsy. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed complete callosal section. Testing in 2000 showed IQ score of 98, verbal score of 99 and Memory Quotient of 102. J.S. also presents normal visual and hearing abilities.
Category-based and free-association lists were presented to the participant auditorily over headphones to both ears during the study phase at a rate of 1.5s per word. Twenty lists of words were used: 10 association-based lists (Stadler et al., 1999), 10 category-based lists (Battig & Montague, 1969). Each list contained 9 words. To increase power, words sharing many features in association lists and words sharing few features in category lists were filtered out.
False memories are stronger when stimuli are presented auditorily rather than visually during the study phase (see Westerberg et al., 2003). Nonetheless, Buchananal. (1999) and Metcalfeal. (1995) used visual stimuli on training.
Word lists were presented visually to either left or right visual hemifield field for recognition. Sixteen lists were presented in the test phase (4 filler lists left out). Each list contained 7 words: 5 previously presented words, one unrelated word and the critical lure. Unrelated words were included to test whether false memories in J.S. are related to lures or to a general memory problem. A button box with the two buttons ('old', 'new') was used to assess recognition memory.
Two sessions were held on consecutive weeks: 10 lists (5 category, 5 association) were studied per session. The first and the last lists (in each condition) were used as fillers to attenuate primacy and recency effects. After the 10 lists were presented, the participant was asked to execute a 2-minute nonverbal maze task (to avoid covert rehearsal). Next, 8 test lists were presented (4 per hemifield; 2 category- and 2 association-based lists in random order). Table 1 summarises the procedure.
The words were presented in a computer screen during the test phase. A 2mm black dot was used as a fixation point in the centre of the screen and a chin rest was used to control for the participant 's distance from the monitor. The words were flashed at least 2   from the fixation point for 150ms. The participant was asked to look at the fixation point while the words were flashed either to the left or to the right of the central dot. The participant should then press a button ('old'/'new') in the button box with the hand ipsilateral to the hemifield where the word was presented.
Only words recognised by both cerebral hemispheres were included in the study and test lists. To assess J.S. 's hemispheric word knowledge a match/no-match task was carried out. He was presented with 1,500 pictures representing 500 words. Following each picture, a word was shown to either hemisphere. He was then asked to decide whether or not the word matched the picture. Only words for which J.S. made at most one mistake were considered for the study and test lists.
The design was a three-way [2 (list type: category vs. association) x 2 (hemisphere: left vs. right) x 2 (word type: unrelated word vs. critical lure)] within-subject ANOVA. The dependent variable was the proportion of unrelated words and critical lures that were falsely recognised. Table 2 shows a hypothetical result table for this experiment.
If the hemispheric asymmetry hypothesis is correct, we expect to find at least two major interactions between list type and hemisphere (critical lures falsely recognised more often in the: i) LH than RH when list is category-based, ii) RH than LH when list is association-based).
