The approach taken in this assignment is to understand the marketing mix used by a top Indian company in the soft furnishings market that exports its products to the UK and to analyze how they use the controllable variables to their advantage. The firm chosen is Fabindia. The company has been chosen on the basis different parameters like brand name, specialty of products etc. Though Fabindia is a well-known name in India and to some extent around the world, it has only recently ventured in to the export market, which gives us the opportunity to analyze and maybe predict its future course of action.
American entrepreneur John Bissell founded Fabindia, expanded to fabulous India, in 1960. The company is unique as all its products are sourced from "7500 craftsman and artistes" (fabindia.com, 2005) from all over India, mainly rural parts. Through this unique feature Fabindia has been able to keep alive India 's traditional textile industry while creating a distinct style of its own. The product range of Fabindia includes furniture, lights and lamps, stationery, home accessories, pottery and cutlery. Only from September 1 2005, Fabindia has extended exporting its products to 33 countries around the world including UK.
The above adage cannot hold truer than in the case when a company is trying to export its products. Identifying plausible markets and planning your foray into them can be an onerous task.
The product is the most important element of the marketing mix of Fabindia. Right from the time it was founded in 1960, its product offering is how Fabindia differentiates itself from the competition. Its product mix and branding and how Fabindia uses them to market effectively is discussed in the following section.
The first of three levels of the product (Strategic Marketing notes, 2005) is the core product that deals with what the buyer is actually buying. For Fabindia, providing the core benefit translates to providing furnishings to decorate homes. It is at the second level, when the actual product is formed and attributes like quality, features etc. are incorporated, that Fabindia has done exceedingly well. Fabindia aims for people who want "fashionable products at reasonable prices " (Fabindia.com/presskit) hence, it has made its offered product different from the g eneric product of home furnishings. (Levitt, 1980). This differentiation appeals more to Fabindia 's customers.
The third and final level, augmented product is where Fabindia can make its presence felt in the UK. It has just started exporting via its e-commerce site, which has very basic offerings on warranty, delivery and credit aspects. Now, in order for Fabindia to do well it has to come up with attractive offers like delivery slabs of 7 days /10 days/15 days and charge accordingly. This way it wo n't lose the competitive advantage it gains through it offerings at the actual product level.
Evaluating Fabindia 's product mix on four parameters width, length, depth and consistency (Kotler, 2000), it is found that, - The width consists of two product lines. - The length consists of four products - The depth, though varying for various products, is still substantial, with cushion covers having 126 variants (including 18 types and 7 colours) and placemats having 7 variants. - All product lines of Fabindia are soft furnishings that go`through the same distribution channels i.e. either piecewise`through their website or through wholesale distribution, which makes them closely related hence consistent.
Now, using the above product assortment Fabindia can expand on the following two while exporting: _ By expanding width by adding more product lines: The actual product width of Fabindia is huge, including tableware, lamps etc., but being a new entrant in the export market it has not offered many of its products. Fabindia will need to add more product lines to gain acceptance in a wider market segment. _ Considering demand of its exported products it can think of adding more distribution channels or even opening up stores in UK. This area has been dealt with in detail further in the assignment when the distribution strategy of Fabindia is discussed.
Of all the product considerations, branding is most important to Fabindia 's exporting success. A growing market segment of people are aspiring to have and 'elite-life style' (Hassan and Katsanis, 1995: 140) on a global scale, which can be cited as one of the reasons for Fabindia 's success at the domestic and international level. Its success in branding can be understood if an analysis of the 'brand levels' (Kotler, 2000: 404) is done: _ Attributes: Fabindia suggests a casual carefree and a free spirited attitude. _ Benefits: The brand provides a functional benefit of a high quality product and thus durable. The emotional benefit is of experiencing the culture of a country, India in this case. _ Values: Fabindia is associated with values like creativity and social responsibility providing employment to the poorer people of India. _ Culture: Fabindia represents the Indian culture standing for diversity, colour and uniqueness. _ Personality: Fabindia suggests a very vibrant, trendy and tasteful personality. _ User: Fabindia does not really suggest the age group of its target users but considering its price range and intellectual image its brand image would appeal to all age groups alike.
In his article David Aaker clearly states that until and unless a company is facing a strategic threat or an emerging opportunity, it should not think about "vertical extension of its brand or repositioning". Fabindia has always branded itself as being a high quality, niche market company. This has partly to do with the quality of its products which are very high together with a feeling in people that they are wearing something authentically Indian. This can be cited as one of the reasons behind its success in exporting to countries like USA, Italy etc. Fabindia is replicating the same brand strategy in the UK, which can be seen on their website.
The importance of pricing cannot be over estimated in the success of any product, but in Fabindia 's case it is more interesting as numerous small companies in the UK sell literally the same products having the same appeal at lower prices. In this section various pricing strategies of Fabindia that will help it cope with the new market will be looked at.
Nagle and Holden in their book 'The strategy and tactics of pricing' write that "it is important not simply to process orders at whatever price customers are willing to pay but rather to raise customers' willingness to pay a price that better reflects the products true value", which is what Fabindia exactly does. Customers buying Fabindia products buy-in to the value it has to offer rather than the price. Taking a look at the history of Fabindia 's pricing strategy in India and abroad it can be found that it never gives away a discount on its products, which means that customer satisfaction is due to the inherent quality that the customer see in the product, rather than the discount. This helps Fabindia to steer clear of competition as its customers show loyalty.
Fabindia is using a product line pricing strategy (Kotler, 2000:475) whereby it has well established price levels for its products. Each of its products has a price ranging from high to medium to low. This can work as a double-edged sword for the company as it might happen that customers associate the various price points to high, medium and low quality products or that Fabindia attracts customers from different classes having varying degrees of paying capacity.
The Fabindia product brochure on its website clearly communicates the difference between for example, a high priced bed sheet for $235 and a low priced one for $29 (Fabindia.com), in terms of material used, design, kind of artwork and level of craftsmanship. This helps the customers to choose from a wide price range giving them price flexibility.
This section will look into the important aspect of the availability of products for Fabindia consumers. Its website, , is the main source of exporting goods but it has other options like wholesale exports and upcoming retail stores to give it a foothold in its target markets. As Fabindia has been very successful with its exclusive retail outlets both in India and countries like Italy and U.A.E, it has become a big retail player. The following section will give more insight on how Fabindia can use its marketing channel expertise to replicate the same kind of success in the U.K.
Though historically Fabindia has been a wholesale export house it is trying to cash in on its success and brand name by expanding rapidly around the world. It plans to open 12 new stores by 2008, both in India and abroad (Indian Business Insight, 2005) and is on the look out for retail options. Fabindia has evolved from a producer-wholesaler-customer model to producer-retailer-customer as well as to a producer-customer model. Retailing has helped Fabindia successfully increase its turnover manifold and it is now a $ 26m company (The Times of India, 2005). Following the exclusivity route (Stern, El-Ansary and Coughlan, 1996) Fabindia has successfully regulated the type and number of intermediaries it has creating a distinctive dealership advantage. This might have a slight disadvantage, as when demand increases exclusive dealership would not be able to cope with it.
The main export source of Fabindia has been or will be the direct marketing channel, in this case its e-commerce site. The use of the Internet means that Fabindia can reduce retail costs but in a segment like home furnishings people do want to touch and see a product before buying it, so, it cannot be a long-term strategy. For Fabindia delivery is also a crucial aspect because being a new entrant into the UK market on time delivery will increase customer satisfaction hence customer loyalty of its products. The delivery channel presently used by Fabindia is the courier services of the global company UPS International, which being reputed should help in delivering reliably.
A combination of the above two models, direct marketing and retail, can work best for Fabindia in the longer term. This is true, especially in UK, as it is a new market for Fabindia and to sell more it does need to establish itself first. Once it has found a customer base and people want to shop again they can do it over the Internet. Also, Fabindia can sell those special products over the Internet that are not present in the retail store. This way it can maximize the advantages of both, retail and direct marketing.
Fabindia started as a wholesale export company and though it is focusing on retailing and direct marketing presently, it still carries out wholesale export orders especially for resorts, hotels and corporates. (fabindia.com/business).
For wholesalers, the minimum order for export is $ 5,000, of which 40 % is advance and the rest is routed through bank, preferably Citibank (Personal reference - Ms. Nisha, Fabindia). Since the minimum order is small, many importers, traders etc. keep on placing orders as per need, season, fashion, and trends. Thus the market penetration is fairly wide and dependency on few clients is avoided as orders/works are spread.
By concentrating on wholesaling Fabindia is performing a number of marketing functions (Stern, El-Ansary and Coughlan 1996), both for its customers and itself, like:       Market coverage: Fabindia is covering large geographical areas of the necessary markets at a reasonable cost.       Sales contact: It is saving the cost of maintaining an outside sales force.       Market information: It is getting better feedback on customer product and service requirements.
Wholesaling is creating a separate kind of market for Fabindia and by giving it due importance, it has kept all its selling options open.
The place for marketing communication in the mix of Fabindia is interesting. Fabindia as a policy do not advertise anywhere as they are of the opinion that their product in itself is enough advertisement for them. But after entering the foreign market they are concentrating more on promotions, the methods of which we will look in this section.
On line marketing could prove really advantageous for Fabindia, reason being that using the World Wide Web as a marketing tool could "heighten customer satisfaction and loyalty" (Grossman, 1998:13). Products can be customized according to customer needs thereby giving personalized interaction based on a feeling of one to one communication. So when one enters the website of Fabindia, they can look at the available options, decide the colour, type of craft, size of the product etc. and order required quantities of items from their homes globally. Fabindia is trying to cash in on the philosophy of using the Internet for hassle free information to expand its customer base all around the world. Using services like newsletters, personalized web accounts etc., the customer can give feedback or ask for any information. This way Fabindia is creating awareness about its company but more importantly about the "experience" that is Fabindia.
As far as communicating to its customers goes, public relations are the heart and soul of Fabindia. As discussed earlier, Fabindia does not advertise its products making it unique straightaway and a subject of curiosity for its customers.
In his article 'PR gets personal', Thomas L Harris suggests, "In its marketing support function, public relations are used to achieve a number of objectives. The most important of these is to raise awareness, to inform and educate, to gain understanding, to build trust, to make friends, to give people reasons (and in some cases permission) to buy and finally to create a climate of consumer acceptance." Fabindia does this very well, especially informing, educating and building trust with its consumers. The Fabindia website contains its press kit which allows any user to read about its past laurels and future plans. Facts about Fabindia 's social responsibility or that it was awarded the Economic Times "Indian Retailer of the Year" in 2004 sure leave a positive impact. Recently Fabindia joined the 'Craftmark' tag, launched by a Non Government Organization, All India Artisans and Craftworkers Welfare Association, (Economic Times, 2005) whereby all artisans who have made a handicraft will print their names on the product to protect its authenticity and to create an emotional bond with users, specially first time customers who do not know much about the company.
Through the above sections the marketing mix used by Fabindia was clearly established. The various strategies adopted by the company for its products, pricing them, distributing them and finally promoting them could be differentiated. While evaluating the success of these marketing mix strategies it was found that as Fabindia has entered the mainstream exporting market very recently, there is more of speculation regarding how successful it can be if it pursues the same methods. While speculating two clear trends were spotted:       Retailing has helped them grow at 35% Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) for the past 3 years and quadrupled their yearly sales from $6m to $ 26m for the period 2002-2004. (Economic Times, 2004).       The success of Fabindia can be largely attributed to the quality of its products, which are its greatest selling point.
Fabindia 's success in the past clearly shows the importance of its product 's quality and exclusive retailing strategy. Building upon direct marketing, if Fabindia opens retail outlets in UK then there is evidence to suggest that it will be able to repeat its success story.
Innotech 2 was the name assigned to team 2 's company for the marketing game. After looking at the market analysis it was decided that revenues for Innotech 2 would come from either of three market segments namely typists, writers and managers, as they were willing to pay maximum i.e.   250,   260 &   300 respectively. Also, market research suggested that students wanted only cheap software, making them less lucrative while the home scribblers and concerned parents did not have enough market share collectively to attract Innotech 2. Examining the three segments (typists, writers & managers) it was clear that unlike other segments (excepting students) they had a heavy leaning towards the special commands configuration of the product. Another similarity between the three segments was that they bought their product heavily from channel 1 making it simpler to distribute the workforce between the two channels, 1& 2.
Innotech 2 decided to make a product configuration that would target all three segments, typist, writers & managers. So the configuration decided was C=15, E=5, L=4 with a unit cost of 83. Our team was hoping to make a dent in all three segments rather than a niche market so selective specialization was the choice (Kotler, 2000). The configuration did not exactly match any one of the segments, but at the same time was not out of the reach of any one. On the production front it was decided to flood the market with 24,000 units, as the demand was uncertain and Innotech 2 did not want to fall short.
It was decided to redistribute the sales force on channels 1 & 2 from 10 in each channel to 15 in channel 1 and 5 in channel 2. The exposure goal was set to 5 and 2 respectively, indicating a medium distribution strategy. The heavy emphasis on channel 1 was because our customers had a greater presence in channel 1, hence bought more from channel 1.
Difference of opinion existed as far as the type of advertising to be used for the company was concerned. Some members wanted to go for indirect competitive advertising that "influenced future purchases and built selective demand" (Strategic Marketing class notes) while some wanted direct competitive advertising that "influenced immediate purchase and built selective demand for the firm 's own brand " (Strategic Marketing class notes). In hindsight, preferring indirect advertising was a mistake as our team tried to influence our buyers' future purchase without building Innotech 's brand name in the present. Almost 45% of our budget,   200,000 was spent on advertising, which should have been increased because competing in a tight market; advertising would have helped us gain a bigger market share.
A substantial amount,   24,000 was allocated for dealers as part of sales promotion. This was because Innotech 2 was a new entrant in the market and was facing heavy competition.
With a substantially high unit cost at   83, pricing had to be just right for all three target segments. Having fewer customers in channel 2, it was decided to keep a higher wholesale price of   188 for channel 2 and lower for channel 1 at   145 so that revenue could be maximised from prospective buyers. Consequently, the retail price for both channels was   290, which was a good price for our customers to pay per unit considering that they were looking for higher specifications in their product.
In Year 1 our team managed a good profit of   485,854. Our strategy of targeting the higher paying capacity segment customers worked and Innotech 2 managed to sell all of its 24003 produced units.
Analyzing results of year 1 the following key points were observed that formed a basis for the strategy decisions of year 2: a. Innotech 2 had the highest market share with the writers but only by a razor thin margin. This meant that though the targeted segments were hit, stiff competition followed. Wordsoft 3, who had a product configuration close to ours, were doing very well in the segments targeted by Innotech 2 and had highest overall sales. b. Innotech 2 had the lowest production volume and as a result lowest volume of sales, but it made a good profit, which meant that our price was right for the customer. Also, all four teams priced in the same bracket as Innotech 2 making it a very tough market to be in. c. Analyzing Wordsoft 3, which had the highest profit for year 1, it was seen that they had a higher advertising budget and lower sales promotion budget as compared to Innotech 2. Also, they went for direct advertising, which helped them garner larger profits.
As our product had been successful in year 1, the configuration was not tinkered with and kept the same. Securing a profit and forecasting higher demand prompted us to ramp up production by 6,000 units to 30,000 units.
Anticipating higher competition for our products, more sales people were hired to market our product aggressively. To incentivise them, a commission rate of 8% was decided upon. As our business was more via channel 2, so out of the 5 extra sales people, 3 went in channel 2 and 2 in channel 1. Also, higher demand meant increasing the exposure goal to 6 & 3, for channel 1 & 2 respectively making the distribution more intensive.
The money spent on advertising was increased from   200,000 to   300,000 but type of promotion was retained as indirect advertising. This was done because in our quest of maximising profit & market share, promoting our company aggressively was very important. The same logic was applied to the sales promotion budget, which was nearly tripled to    60,000 for year 2.
Pricing was by far the most conspicuous strategy change by Innotech 2 for year 2. Comparing our results with our competitors it was found that among our target segment of writers, typists and managers, a good market share was gained only in two segments i.e. of writers and typists. It would not have been very beneficial to target managers as Fantastic 4 had a major presence in that segment (49% of market share) hence, it was decided to concentrate on our customer base. The remaining segments had some presence in channel 2 and hoping to gain market share in channel 2, retail price was reduced from   188/unit to   150/unit.
The strategy of reducing the price in channel 2 worked very well as also did the decision to increase advertising costs as our sales from channel 2 doubled in comparison with year 1, raking in a profit of   990,575. Innotech 2 produced more than its predicted demand of 30,000 units and produced 36,000 but it managed to sell all the units. Innotech 2 also gained on the writer 's market share and had a dominant lead in that category with 35.1 %.
Analyzing results of year 2 the following key points were observed that formed a basis for the strategy decisions of year 3: a. Inspite of having profits and a major share in the writers segment, our team was 3rd in a race of 4 as far market share by sales was concerned. b. Both teams ahead of us in the market had higher price as they were clearly targeting the manager segment that had a higher paying capability. Also, they had higher advertising budgets compared to us.
Our team was of the opinion that it had created enough loyalty in the writer 's segment to keep them coming back to us and in order to increase sales it was decided to follow what Wordsoft 4 was doing i.e. cater to the manager market. Hence having gained a good market share of the writer 's segment, it was decided to make our product more suitable for the managers and change the product to C=16; E=5; L=5. The production for our new configuration was increased only by 3,000 units to 33,000 as entering a new segment required more restraint on our part.
After increasing production to 33,000 units 3 more people were added into the sales force, putting 1 person in channel 1 and 2 people in channel 2. A strategic error was made at this point, as when our target were the managers who anyway did not buy from channel 2, sales force should have been increased in channel 1.
Also as Innotech was aiming a new segment, it should have distributed aggressively by changing its exposure goal.
Deciding to increase the advertising cost by   8,000 was not in proportion to the risk of entering a well-established segment but it was pursued. Trying to emulate the successful strategy of Fantastic 4, there was an increase in the sales promotion budget by   30,000.The advertising was changed to reminder type for year 3, thinking that customers have become conscious of the brand and it would need just a reminder to keep them interested in Innotech 2.
As the manger segment was being targeted in year 3, there was a deliberate increase in the channel 1 retail price. Our competitors were having a much higher price at   315, but increasing our price to that level would have meant a wipe out from the other segments. Hence, to retain our customers and gain new ones it was decided to settle on an in between price of   299.
The results of year 3 were surprising insofar as our profits were halved from year 2 and our market share by sales eroded by 2%. Worse still, was the fact that the writer 's segment, where Innotech 2 was leading the previous year (year 2), was lost out to Fantastic 4 who made a positive swing. Our market share was reduced even in our target segment of managers. Overall, as Innotech tried to enter a concentrated market (Kotler, 2000) it remained third in the market, which meant that our strategy of entering a well-established segment did not do well.
Analysing results of year 3 the following key points were observed that formed a basis for the strategy decisions of year 4: a. The disappointing results of year 3 showed us that there was no point targeting segments that were not our strength, especially where one team is overwhelmingly dominant. (Fantastic 4 with 66% market share with managers) b. Underestimating the importance of advertising had proved costly for Innotech 2, especially compared to other teams who were spending more on advertising and doing better. c. For the past two years our production line had to produce more than what was asked for which meant that there was more demand for our product. It was only a matter of taking a calculated risk by increasing production.
This time having learnt our lesson, it was decided to change the configuration to suit only one target segment of the writer 's and make it exactly according to their requirements. Also, as lowering configuration would not have cost money, the specifications were modified to C=14; E=2; L=5. Wanting to market our product very aggressively production was increased from 33,000 to 45,000 units.
Reducing the sales work force was a decision taken to keep our expenses in control because Innotech 2 had shot up production expenses heavily. As the writer 's bought in a 60:40 ratio from channel 1 & 2, channel 2 strength was kept same at 10 people but three people were fired from channel 1 reducing the workforce to 15 people. As a result exposure goal was reduced to 5 while still retaining the intensive distribution strategy.
The long overdue increase in budget finally came about when advertising costs were increased to   494,000. As our competitors had advertised heavily and kept ahead of us marketing heavily was imperative for Innotech 2. Also, this increase would have helped us to win back the market share we had lost. The type of advertising again changed from reminder advertising previous year to indirect advertising, as it had proved successful in the past. The sales promotion budget was also pushed up slightly to help us win back our customers.
Pricing strategy was again a topic of much discussion for Innotech 2 as some members argued that price should be increased to maximise profit. But due to the quantum leap in production from previous years, lowering the price was a better option. Also having to target the writer 's, price was set in accordance with their needs. In the end the average retail price in channel 1 was lowered from   145 to   137 whereas channel 2 price remained the same.
Undertaking a very high risk - high gain policy worked tremendously well for us and our profit reached nearly   2 m in year 4. Speculating the demand of our products correctly, all of our 54,000 units produced were sold. The biggest strategy decision that worked well for our team was to target one segment, in this case the writer 's, and making a tailor made product for them that made them buy heavily from us.
Overall Innotech 2 came second at the end of year 4, but in the process learning a number of important lessons in marketing and its application in the real world. These are summarised below as learning points. a. Niche marketing.
Marketing has changed over the years from one being centered on higher market share to being centered on creating more customer value (Kellogg, 2001). Keeping oneself focused on one market segment creates more value for the customer, as the company can understand a customer 's needs much better thereby improving its profitability. b. Consolidating segment position.
After finding a foothold in any segment, in Innotech 's case the writers, it is better to consolidate your position by bringing flexible market offerings (Anderson and Narrus, 1995) rather than thinking about entering a totally new market segment where the competition has already taken a chunk of the market share. c. Risk taking.
Though it is unnecessary to take undue risks, but incorporating risk taking into the marketing strategy can be extremely useful as it can create new markets by producing new demand that never existed in anybody 's mind before. d. Market research.
In Innotech 's case the market research data obtained could not be very significant as its most important stage, the problem definition stage (Chapman, 1989) was not thought about. Hence Innotech ended up paying money for data that was not required. The significant lesson learnt from this was that data is only useful when it is needed and market research should never be carried out just for its sake. e. Advertising.
It is extremely important to put a lot of emphasis on advertising because in a competitive market reaching out to more people helps foster more customers. In doing that advertising plays the most pivotal part as it puts the company 's message across to more and more people creating the required buzz.
