The question of what determines long run economic growth has divided Macroeconomists over the last twenty years. According to Solows' neoclassical view, growth can only occur with the change of exogenous factors. Endogenous growth theorists suggest however that economic growth stems from a change from within the structures of the economy.
At the base both models share a set of common assumptions. Both production functions are of the form Y=F(A,K,L), i.e. Output is determined by the amount of (K)physical Capital (e.g. machinery or software), (L)Labour (effective labour force) and some parameter A (Total Factor Productivity), which comprises all exogenous factors influencing production, such as technological capabilities, market sector compositions or political systems. An augmented production function would include Human capital (H) as well.
By firstly describing the Solow model, secondly, analysing the most prominent of endogenous growth models, the AK model I will finally establish which model is the closest to reality by focusing my attention on their differences. a. The Solow model assumes decreasing marginal productivity of inputs. An individually added unit of K or L will thus have a smaller effect on output than a previous one. Illustrating this effect are the Inada conditions, showing that as K and L tend to 0 the slope of the production function will be steep (   ) and as K and L tend to    , the slope of the production function will flatten: as , as.
In line with these assumptions, the Cobb Douglas-type production function will be the most appropriate and easy to use, yielding:
Barro and Sala-i - Martin p.26-29 where .
This allows for the following diagrammatic representation:
The Solow model suggests that every economy is in equilibrium, once it reaches its steady state, characterised by a capital growth level of zero. In order to compare capital and income levels across countries, one has to take per capita capital and income levels into consideration instead of absolute values of K and Y. The following notations will thus be used: Y/L=F(K/L,1)=f(k)=y where k=K/L.
Factors determining k growth over time are:
Investment levels, determined by sf(k) the proportionate amount of income saved, adding k directly to the growth equation.
A given level of material depreciation,   , that is inherent due to wear of machinery, reducing the pace of capital growth.
New entrants into the workforce or the population growth, n, that will push k-growth downwards. As population grows the given level of capital must be spread over more workers, which eventually leads to a decline in k.
These three elements lead to the following differential equation:
G  rtner, M p.238 (1).
To determine a condition for the steady state k-level, we must rewrite equation (1) in the following way: , where .
As in the steady state, we obtain the following steady state condition: (2).
It shows that there exists a capital per capita level at which the savings, and thus investment levels, will exactly compensate for the fall in k due to depreciation and population growth.
Graphically, the steady state is thus represented by the cross point between depreciation ((n+  ).k) line and savings curve (s.f(k), at k*:
Given that y = Ak   (), one can obtain the steady state level of y by replacing k with k* from equation (2):
As Y/L=AK  L1-   /L =AK  L-   =Ak   suggesting that countries with higher saving rates will be richer, due to more accumulated capital, thus higher output and income. By shifting the savings curve upwards (to s'f(k)) in diagram 2, one can demonstrate that k* and y* will increase (to k'*) as investment levels rise, given all other factors stay the same.
Population growth on the other side is negatively related to y*. The upward shift around the origin of the depreciation line shows that the new k* and y* values are clearly lower than the initial steady state values of y and k. A higher fraction of savings must go simply to keep the capital-labour ratio constant in the face of growing population.
Barro and Sala-i-Martin p.35,36.
Graph 1 and 2 show how close to reality the above mentioned interactions between (a) savings and income and (b) population growth and income are. Graph 1 draws real GDP per worker on investment for a group of heterogeneous countries. Its upward sloping line of best fit clearly proves the positive relationship between the investment rate (ultimately the savings rate) and real GDP per worker.
Jones, C p.33.
With regards to population growth and income Graph 2 shows that countries with lower birth rates (Norway, USA or Belgium) profit from higher real GDP per worker. Economies with higher population growth see their GDP distributed over a larger number of workers, which eventually leads to a fall in real income per worker. Population growth and GDP are negatively related.
Jones, C p.34.
By replacing f(k) by Ak   in equation (1), we obtain the following dynamic equation: .
It describes the growth of k over time by determining the difference between the savings curve and the depreciation curve. With    being less than one, the growth rate of k declines as k rises, leading to a downward sloping savings-curve. The depreciation line, independent of k, is horizontal.
If k deviates from its steady state value k*, the growth of k will be such (negative or positive) that in the long run capital will eventually reach its steady state level. Drawing the two curves clearly shows that an economy will grow or shrink temporarily but eventually reach its k*.
If k k*, capital will grow, albeit in a decreasing manner, due to decreasing marginal productivity. The further away from the steady state (i.e. the poorer) an economy is, the faster the convergence towards k* will be.
As soon as the savings curve is below the depreciation curve (k k*) however, k will decrease and its growth rate will thus be negative until k* is reached. Hence the further an economy is ahead of the steady state (i.e. the richer), the faster its convergence towards k*. This system is thus globally stable as every economy will follow a specific transition path to its steady state, no matter where its initial income and capital level.
Jones, C. p.34,35.
The idea of initially poorer or richer countries to converge faster towards a given steady state value is referred to as absolute convergence. Empirical data suggests that this type of convergence throughout all types of economies does not occur in reality. Unlike expected Graph 3 depicting the growth development of 114 countries over the time period 1960-2000, seems to show a positive relationship between the initial level of wealth in 1960 and the growth rate of GDP in the last 40 years. As the richer countries get richer and the poorer countries fail to catch up, divergence not convergence would be the appropriate description of economic development after the war.
Barro and Salaa-i-Martin p.45.
Easterly and Levine (2001).
If we now consider economies with similar population growth, technological capabilities and savings level patterns; we can see that they indeed do converge in an absolute manner. Graph 4 draws the growth rate versus initial level of GDP for all OECD countries.
Barro and Sala-i-Martin p.45.
The expected relationship of poorer countries in the 1960 's (e.g. Portugal, Ireland, Greece) to grow faster than richer ones (e.g. Switzerland, Sweden, United Kingdom) over the last 40 years finds its proof in the data of homogeneous countries.
The reason for these opposing results is that homogeneous economies will have one common steady state value and thus all converge towards the same k* and y*. By, however considering economies with heterogeneous economic patterns, we lack of one common benchmark steady state level. We are thus not able to compare the various growth data in one given framework. To be in the position to compare different countries we must consider the concept of conditional convergence: An economy will grow faster; the further it is away from its own steady state. Graph 5 underlines this neoclassical theory prediction by drawing growth rates of GDP per worker against the deviation from steady state in 1960. Korea, Japan and Singapore are prime examples of countries that exhibited a high growth level and were the furthest away from their respective steady state.
Jamele Rigolini, lecture notes.
Jones C. p.45.
Endogenous growth models do not assume decreasing returns to capital. Theoretically this stems from the idea of an augmented Human capital production function of the form: .
Where H is human capital, which usually is comprised in the Total factor productivity parameter A. It is now assumed that human capital is positively related to capital per worker, i.e H=K/L. The intuition behind the assumption is such that workers that have access to more and sophisticated machinery will be able to improve skills and knowledge faster than other ones. The production function is now of the form of:
G  rtner M p.275-277.
Y=AK, dividing both sides by L y=Ak.
This type of endogenous growth model is known as AK-model because it was developed by Auerbach and Kotlikoff. Conveniently the resulting production function only consists of total factor productivity (A) and capital stock (k).
The marginal productivity of k (dy/dk=A) is a constant parameter independent of k. Hence, as capital stocks rise, production grows constantly at a given rate. Capital not only adds to production directly but indirectly as well by raising human capital.
Growth is thus endogenised: The diminishing returns encountered by k in the direct effect are counteracted by the growth of technology, in turn proportionate to capital (indirect effect) 13. In the AK model output growth can thus be influenced by an internal factor, unlike the Solow model where only exogenous factors (technological change, savings rate...) will lead to sustained growth.
Diagrammatically, the production function (f(k)=Ak) represents itself as straight line with the slope A. The savings line (s.f(k)) must thus be a less steeper line, since a given proportion s (where s 1) of income is saved.
Identical to the Solow model, the capital accumulation over time follows the function: , where.
This allows for the following graphic representation:
The only steady state in both panels is at the origin. Only in Panel (a) is the steady state a stable equilibrium, because no matter how high levels of capital and income an economy may have initially, it will always regenerate back to its subsistent level. Savings are thus too low to compensate for the depreciation of capital and population growth 13.
If however savings surpass population growth and depreciation levels, there is no steady state and capital will permanently accumulate, leading to infinitely rising income levels as well (panel b). Economies thus do not converge towards an equilibrium point, since growth is either only positive (b) or only negative (a). The lack of convergence and only the partial existence of a stable steady state differentiate the AK-model from Solow 's theory.
Furthermore, one has to acknowledge the fact that a shock on inputs has a permanent effect on growth in the endogenous model, whereas the Solow model predicts a shock followed by only a temporary effect. The neoclassical model hence leads one to think in irregular economic growth surges from steady state to steady state, unlike the endogenous growth theory, which implies a smooth, steady and never-ending growth path over time.
Jamele Rigolini lecture notes.
So far, only the income and capita levels have been explained in the Solow model section. What is of furthermore interest and directly comparable with the AK-model, is the question of what makes income grow over time?.
According to Solow it must be an external factor that changes production methods, i.e. political regimes, population growth or saving rates, always leading to new steady state levels. Endogenous growth theories imply that sustainable growth comes from within, through capital accumulation that will lead to more effects than just directly adding capital to income but by raising human capital as well.
A growth accounting procedure, as followed by Easterly and Levine (2001) speaks in favour of the neoclassical prediction. It has been found that Total Factor productivity accounts for over 50% of GDP growth in all major economies, as can be seen in the last column of Table 1.
Easterly and Levine 2001.
The argument however is not flawless. By looking at the data relating to South East Asia, capital and Labour accumulation (70% to 90 %) seem to play a more important role than TFP growth (up to 30%), which in turn would back the endogenous growth theory.
Furthermore the exogenous conception of growth development would imply that it is independent of the structural characteristics of the economy, since they are part of the "internal" (endogenous) economy. Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) however found that the average growth rate of GDP is positively correlated to structural factors (education attainment, life expectancy and terms of trade).
Barra and Sala-I-Martin p.352.
Both these arguments against Solow and his neoclassical fellowship are dispossessed with the argument that TFP and hence external factors are the causation of higher capital accumulation and structural change.
In other words, input accumulation and structural factors are thus not necessarily as strongly related to GDP, because only an exogenous factor could have changed structures or input factors and in turn lead to higher GDP growth.
Aghion p.29-31.
Another element of debate, relates to the diverging assumptions of returns to capital. In 1987 D. Romer found that the elasticity of income with respect to capital was larger than the share of capital income in value added 17. This would imply constant or even increasing returns to scale.
These findings however failed to take into account the upward bias these regressors have, since every shock in output is met with an accumulation of inputs, as argued by Benhabib and Jovanovic in 1991. In line with the human capital augmented Solow model brought forward by Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992), that spreads the decreasing effects of capital over human and physical capital, overall empiric data and analysis now generally backs the idea of decreasing returns to capital.
As already described in the first section, there is little doubt that the notion of conditional convergence draws a realistic picture of economic development. Romer, Mankiw and Weil (1992) find however that "all is not well for the Solow model": the speed of convergence is faster than the neoclassical model suggests (0.7 instead of 0.3). Extending the Solow model with human capital leads them to support the idea of conditional convergence, where the effects of decreasing returns to capital are now spread over physical and human capital.
Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992).
Table 2 shows the regression results of Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992). The negative coefficients on Output in 1960 (lnY60) prove the existence of conditional convergence, since they underline Solows' theoretical predictions: The higher the initial value of income, the lower the growth rate. The inclusion of the investment GDP ratio (i.e. savings) and a comprised factor of population growth and depreciation (ln(n+  +g)) with positive and negative respective signs furthermore underline Solows theories. Countries with higher saving-levels ad lower population growth will experience starker GDP growth.
Three main theoretical differences are at the base of the diverging views relating to growth: (a) decreasing returns to scale, (b) the existence of steady state levels towards which economies converge and (c) the determinants of long term economic growth. (a) Econometric literature overall supports the neoclassical idea of decreasing returns to scale, which are unlike initially assumed encompassed by both the growth of physical and human capital. The Solow model seems to find support on the idea of (b) conditional convergence as well. Simple scatter graphs and Romer, Mankiw and Weil show that homogeneous countries do tend to grow in different paces, which lets them all converge towards one steady state.
Concerning (c) the determinants of long run growth, it seems as though endogenous growth theorists have a more valid explanation by emphasising that growth can come from structural changes within the economy. Growth is thus not an external factor forced upon an economy, but much more a consequence of its policies, structures and behaviour.
