Expansion of production to overseas locations offers opportunities, but one must never forget the possible pitfalls. This investigation concerns prospects of Allisgood plc, a conglomerate that plans to manufacture part of its production outside the UK. Cross-border expansion is a prosperous opportunity to exploit competitive advantages offered by foreign economies. It is clear that low cost and to some extent quality differentiation is important for Allisgood plc. Quality textiles is a high cost material and kitchen equipment manufacturing industry has relatively high labour intensity, thus, gains could be realised by expansion to foreign markets. However, legal considerations must be done in order to avoid setbacks and clearly, the legal aspects are complex when we consider contracting with foreign agents. Similarly, in conjunction with joint ventures conflicts between company regulations might arise. In case of other forms of strategy, financial aspects and notion of risk gain even more impetus. Furthermore, the sum of financial and legal results must be adjusted for factors arising from the nature of the location the business is expanding to. All factors mentioned above have relevance to the case of Allisgood plc due to the necessary strategic, location and finance considerations before the final decision of whether or not to move a part of production abroad.
There were three strategies of foreign expansion that were set for investigation, each of them having clear strengths and limitations. Hence, none of them seems to be a prevailing strategy. Strategic choices are to an extent a matter of organisational culture, which for a traditionally UK based firm such as Allisgood plc might be a complicated issue when expanding abroad.
Porter et al phrase similar opinions, Porter et al; 2003: 37.
First strategy option suggested was acquisition of established foreign firms, which represents a choice that has arguably become a more popular strategic option over the past two decades. By buying an established foreign firm, knowledge about local economy and business environment is acquired, which is strength of this option. Clearly, workforce is there and operations are ongoing, there is no immediate need to start recruitment. Also, there can be a group of existing customers, which are relevant to conglomerate businesses like Allisgood plc because the company 's other products could be then directly marketed to them, allowing further expansion. A major problem with acquisition is the high requirement of capital, which in turn needs wide research of acquisition target and the prospects available in order to value accurately the risk involved. Therefore, precise information must be gained to minimise information asymmetries. Furthermore, organisational problems might arise if the management of the acquired company is integrated to the decision-making structures and some resistance might arise from shaping the organisational cultures together. Nevertheless, this popular method of expansion would suit Allisgood plc.
Rappaport et al agree, Rappaport et al; 1997: 3.
Adapted from Morrison, Morrison; 2002: 43.
Angear et al support this, Angear et al; 1989: 123.
Adapted from Rappaport et al; 1997: 4.
Porter et al argue empirical evidence supports this, Porter et al; 2003: 34.
Second strategy proposed was setting up a new overseas subsidiary. Although, there is strong contrast to the acquisition method discussed above, both are nevertheless relevant strategic options for Allisgood plc. A crucial advantage is that this method can be used to expand into a country that has no existing industry or on the other hand where no feasible acquisitions can be made due to various reasons. Other advantage is that "organisational resistance to change should not be overwhelming". But at the same time there are concerns about no existing workforce or production machinery in place. In addition, knowledge of local business environment must be acquired, which implies incurring extra costs. However, this method is going to require a high amount of capital and also the risk burden is entirely on Allisgood plc.
Adapted from Morrison; 2002: 35.
Porter et al; 2003: 45.
Adapted from Rappaport et al; 1997: 6.
Finally, there is a case for a joint venture, an interesting option for Allisgood plc. Its speciality compared with the other options is that a partner business is needed to set up a joint venture. This will prove to be to an extent a difficult consideration, as the nature of the partner business must be carefully taken into account. Because Allisgood plc is a conglomerate, it does not really matter if the venture partner is from a rather different kind of business sector, which in some cases can lead into further integration of the companies. Such speculations aside, the main advantage arising from a joint venture is that risk of the venture is divided between the companies. The opportunity cost is, not surprisingly, management problems arising from differing views and conflicting company cultures, and the short-term nature of joint ventures.
Morrison agrees, Morrison; 2002: 143.
Ibid.
In sum, it is not clear which of these methods is the most optimal for Allisgood plc. To further evaluate these options, considerations about location and financing of the foreign operation must be made. It is only then we can try and formulate an accurate evaluation of prospects involved with each of these strategy options. Hence, the issue of location is discussed next.
Naturally, in foreign expansion plans the most central consideration is to decide the location of expansion. There is a variety of countries with their specific competitive advantages available for a business. The number of locations under investigation was limited to three areas, which will be analysed here. Interestingly, it appears that we can distinguish the feasibility of these areas and rank them in an order of preference. However, the analysis below is unlikely to be exhaustive as there are yet considerable differences between the countries in the given areas.
Adapted from Caves; 1996: 34.
To begin with, expansion inside European Union (EU), but not Eastern Europe, was suggested. A great advantage of this area is that identical legal framework is in force due to standardised European Community (EC) legislation. Moreover, the EU is a common market, so trade inside it is not subject to restrictions on movement of goods and capital. Another important advantage in this area is that the workforce is highly skilled and expectations of quality can be set high, which is important for Allisgood plc, as quality is an important attribute of the clients of its textile operation. The fact that the location is geographically close means transportation costs are likely to be lower than in other suggested locations. Additionally, due to the geographical proximity the location is relatively convenient in terms of monitoring of the process, the management will hence have better information about the state of the operation. Clearly, there are downsides to this location, main ones being expensive and highly regulated labour. Also, the location is not likely to differ in any aspect that much from the UK. The labour cost consideration is particularly important for Allisgood plc, as their profits have been falling and hence it can be concluded: this location is not feasible.
Morrison; 2002: 43.
Ibid.
Ibid: 123.
Ibid.
Second proposed option was expansion to Eastern European countries inside the EU. As the countries are part of the supranational organisation, same advantages arising from identical legislation can be derived here. The main advantage is labour which is cheaper than in the UK, which is particularly important for the cost-ineffective kitchen equipment segment. Although, the labour productivity in the given Eastern European country has to be considered, it may be low. However, one can expect a skilled workforce and adequate quality accompanied with appropriate reliability. Furthermore, transportation costs are likely to be higher than from the rest of the EU due to geographical distance. Limitations to the advantages of Eastern Europe can be identified, namely, labour is available elsewhere at lower cost. Additionally, Eastern Europe is struggling with corruption problems and it may have an impact on the business operations. In spite of these limitations the EU countries of Eastern Europe seem to be a convenient location to expand for Allisgood plc.
Ibid.
Large differences in the region exist, see Montezemolo; 2000: 37.
Bilgin et al agree, Bilgin et al; 2004; 59.
According to Transparency international; 2005: 1.
Therefore, South East Asia is discussed to evaluate that conclusion. A low cost and limitedly regulated labour market is a considerable benefit of this location. However, there are costs to offset this advantage. Clearly, South East Asia is not part of the EU and there will be costs arising from differing legislations, as well as from external trade regulations of the EU. The presence of trade regulations discourages locating into an area that is not clearly strong in other areas in order to offset this weakness. These involve e.g. import quotas, which have been causing problems for textile industry in particular. Also, in general products from South East Asia do not have a reputation of quality, which might risk losing some customers of the textile operation who value the attribute of quality. Moreover, the geographical distance poses a problem in two ways. Firstly, the transportation costs are very high and there is greater risk due to longer transportation distance. Hence difficulties might arise when contracting for transport. Secondly, it is hard to impose a firm control on the foreign operation, as the opportunity cost of the top managers of travelling from the UK to South East Asian locations would be high. It has to be agreed that these costs are persuasive to doubt the idea of expansion to South East Asia. Although, there is some evidence that setting up subsidiaries and making acquisitions are easiest to accomplish in this area.
Adapted from Rodan et al; 1997: 1.
Caves; 1996: 27.
According to European Commission; 2005: 1.
Thus, it has been identified that the Eastern European countries in the EU would appear to be a feasible location for Allisgood plc 's foreign expansion. It offers advantages - although not in their extremes - that could help pushing down the costs of production of the cost-ineffective kitchen equipment branch. Interestingly, it could help to capture a share in local markets of the area that are growing on high rates. It would be as well a rather convenient location in terms of monitoring the process. Nevertheless, one question, perhaps the most important one remains: finance.
It is crucial to find the optimal solution for provision of finance - this aspect should be carefully considered. Again, three options were offered. None of these options offer prima facie a definite solution for Allisgood plc, but certain advantages and limitations can be identified. Persuasion of Allisgood plc 's shareholders becomes important here, and also, the fact that there is a single major shareholder, will make his persuasion even more crucial as he can greatly affect to the acceptance and rejection of the plans. Therefore, we investigate the feasibility of each financing option.
A suggested financial solution for Allisgood plc foreign expansion is issuing of new shares. This is a feasible way of raising capital in terms of the company 's financial structure. It is usually considered that high amount of equity in comparison with high debt is better. Also, the control of the foreign operation would stay in hands of Allisgood plc and paying in cash for acquisition will send investors a signal that the company has a strong belief in the future success of its operation. Issuing of new shares has also downsides to it. The burden of risk remains entirely on Allisgood plc shareholders. In most cases financing expansion with issuing new shares will make existing shareholders worse off in terms of net gain from the acquisition. Thus, there is a need to convince the shareholders and investors about the feasibility of the foreign operation. This means that promotional costs are incurred, and the task of promotion might prove difficult as the recent performance of Allisgood plc has been declining. Finally, as Allisgood plc is the smallest company by market capitalisation (low number of shares or low share price) on London Stock Exchange, it implies that raising a high amount of capital is difficult using this method.
McLaney et al; 1999: 211.
Adapted from Rappaport et al; 1997: 6.
McLaney et al; 1999: 118.
Rappaport et al; 1997: 5.
McLaney et al; 1999: 120.
Another solution offered for consideration was raising debt capital to finance the expansion. For the reasons stated above, this option is not feasible in terms of the capital structure of the company. There is a need to contract with the bank about securities to the loan, which will again require extra efforts and result in costs incurred by the lawyers of Allisgood plc. This way of raising capital is costly, as loans will involve interests and there is a need to budget for repayments over time, which adds to the concerns of the company as failure to pay can ultimately mean losing the assets set as securities. The major advantage of raising debt capital is that the cash will be available in a relatively short time and hence the expansion planning does not need to provide for delays that occur when cash is raised by issuing of new shares. Therefore, this might be a feasible financial solution for Allisgood plc.
Hoffman agrees, Hoffman; 2001: 18.
A solution to be deeply considered is equity swap, which appears to be a feasible option. It offers opportunities of special kind to Allisgood plc, but again, it requires finding a suitable partner. In this option some Allisgood plc 's stocks are swapped with the shareholders of the company subject to acquisition in foreign expansion. Therefore, it cannot be used as financing solution to set up a new business abroad, but only in case of an acquisition. In this option, risk is dispersed among the shareholders of both companies, there seems to be some evidence that Allisgood plc 's shareholders might be left better off than the other company 's as the stock trend will usually be negative for the shares of the initiator of the acquisition. Another point of consideration here is that the decision-making powers might not remain completely with Allisgood plc and cause problems in management, but the capital structure of the company would not worsen, ceteris paribus. It seems that this option could be feasible, but small market capitalisation of Allisgood plc is likely to negative the benefits stated above.
Adapted from Rappaport et al; 1997: 4.
In conclusion, all of financial options have downsides to them. Debt capital as a financial solution might be the most logical, because Allisgood plc has low market capitalisation affecting negatively the other two options. Again, anything more conclusive in this regard is rather speculative to state without further financial information about Allisgood plc.
Of the options offered for consideration, it can be concluded that there are a number of feasible combinations available, each of them subject to certain limitations. However, there seems to be some evidence - at least by intuition - that acquisition of an established company from the EU countries of Eastern Europe, financed by debt capital would offer some advantages compared with other solutions for Allisgood plc. Nevertheless, limitations to this solution have been identified and it cannot be definitively argued for. Foreign expansion is often a good way of pushing down the costs of production. But given the limited set of options here, it has not been considered whether some other options would be better for Allisgood plc. Whatever the final solution will be, it seems that Allisgood plc is heading to a future of opportunities. Although ultimately, each of these opportunities require thorough investigation that ought to be conducted with great care due to the risks involved.
