Patterning of the vertebrate limb involves the formation of three axis, D-V, Pr-D and A-P to produce complete and correct morphology. Initially a limb bud is induced via Wnt and Fgf signalling, with fore- verses hindlimb identity proposed as specified by Tbx5 and Tbx4 respectively. The AER is positioned at the dorsoventral boundary as a consequence of R-fng expression, and through expression of Fgf4 and Fgf8 gives rise to the Pr-D patterning and outgrowth of the limb. Signalling from dorsally expressed Wnt7a and ventrally expressed En-1 in the ectoderm gives rise to D-V patterning of the limb. The ZPA appears to mediate A-P patterning of the digits via expression of Shh, and interacts with the AER in reciprocal regulation and maintenance. Due to evolutionary conservation, the mouse and chick examples discussed here may be applied broadly to all vertebrates, with the possibility of homologous genes performing comparable functions.
Pattern formation is defined as the "set of processes by which embryonic cells form ordered spatial arrangements of differentiated tissues." Patterning of the limb involves the formation of three axes, the proximal-distal axis (Pr-D) from close to far from the body, the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis from thumb to little finger, and the dorsal-ventral axis (D-V), from knuckle to palm. Correct patterning leads complete formation of the proximal stylopod, the intermediate zeugopod, and the distal autopod.
Scott F. Gilbert Developmental Biology 2003 Sinauer Associates Inc. 7th Edition.
The vertebrate limb is not essential to embryonic survival, so grafting experiments can be performed to understand its patterning. Classical experiments have shown that the limb does not develop when certain cells are removed, and that a limb will form when groups of cells are transplanted to an alternative location.1 These observations can be explained in terms of the limb field, seen in figure 1.
Classical experiments also identified several important signalling centres involved in the patterning of the vertebrate limb, seen in figure 2. If the AER is removed, distal limb development stops,1, , so it seems the AER is vital to limb outgrowth, and Pr-D patterning. Transplantation of the ZPA to the anterior of another limb bud causes mirror-image digit duplications,1-3 suggesting its involvement in A-P patterning. When the ectoderm of the limb bud is rotated 180 o with respect to the mesenchyme, distal elements are reversed,1 demonstrating a role in D-V patterning. This essay shall consider the how these signalling centres set up their corresponding axes and interact with each other to bring about the patterning of the vertebrate limb.
Tickle The contribution of chicken embryology to the understanding of vertebrate limb development 2004 Mech Dev 121:1019-1029.
Niswander, L. Pattern formation: Old models out on a limb 2003 Nat Rev Genetics 4:133-143.
The induction of the limb begins with formation of the limb bud, where lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) proliferates to form a circular bulge. Fgf8 was first implicated as a chick limb inducer. Fgf8 mRNA localises to the intermediate mesoderm (IM) at the level of the prospective forelimb and hindlimb territories, whilst being absent from the mesoderm of the prospective inter-limb territory, at stages 13 to 15 in chicks. Chick limb bud induction occurs over stages 13 to 15,5 theredore Fgf8 appears to be expressed at the right time, and in the right place to be a limb inducer. Fgf8 soaked beads induce a limb-like structure when inserted into the LPM of the inter-limb region,5 further indicating a role in limb induction. Fgf8 expression in the IM appears to induce its own expression in the overlying ectoderm of the limb bud which becomes the AER, as seen in figure 3.
Crossley et al. Roles for FGF8 in the induction, inititation and maintenance of chick limb development 1996 Cell 84:127-136.
Fgf10 has also been shown to be important in limb induction. It is initially widely expressed in the segmental plate, IM and LPM, but its expression is restricted to the LPM at stage 14 of chick development. Therefore Fgf10 is also present at the right time, in the right place. Fgf10 expressing cells can cause ectopic limb formation when implanted into the inter-limb region,6 and Fgf10 - / - mice show complete truncation of both fore- and hindlimbs, seen in figure 4. No Fgf8 expression was detected in the small limb buds formed,7 suggesting Fgf10 is upstream of Fgf8 in limb bud induction.
Kawakami et al. Wnt signals control FGF-dependant limb initiation and AER induction in the chick embryo 2001 Cell 104:891-900.
Sekine et al. Fgf10 is essential for limb and lung formation 1999 Nature Genetics 21:138-141.
Together this produces a model where Fgf-8 from the IM restricts Fgf10 expression to the LPM at the level of the prospective limbs, and then Fgf10 induces Fgf8 expression in the overlying ectoderm.6 However, limb bud initiation is seen in the Fgf10 - / - mutant mice, so it appears expression of upstream gene or genes are required earlier on in limb bud induction.
Expression of Wnt2b, belonging to the Wnt family of secreted factors, is found in the LPM of the prospective forelimb at stage 14 in chicks,6 seen in figure 5. When Wnt2b expressing cells are implanted into the inter-limb region, a limb bud is induced, and Fgf10 is expressed in the LPM after 8 hours, and Fgf8 induction occurs at around 20 hours.6 This suggests Wnt2b acts upstream of Fgf10 and Fgf8 in limb bud induction in the chick. Wnt2b is however not detected in the prospective hindlimb region, however, Wnt8c is expressed in the LPM of the prospective hindlimb until stage 12 in the chick, when Fgf10 expression becomes localised to the LPM of the prospective hind-limb region.6 Wnt8c expressing cells can also induce an ectopic limb bud when implanted into the inter-limb region.6 This suggests Wnt2b and Wnt8c in the forelimb and hindlimb respectively, contribute to the restriction of Fgf10 expression in LPM to the prospective limb regions.
Some Wnt proteins, such as Wnt3a, have been shown to function via the activation of the intracellular mediator    -catenin, which as part of a multiprotein complex, regulates transcription of target genes.6 Evidence in figure 6, strongly suggests that Wnt2b and Wnt8c signalling is mediated via    -catenin activation in the fore- and hindlimb respectively.
As discussed above, it is proposed that Fgf10 induces Fgf8 expression in the overlying surface ectoderm, which becomes the AER.6 Wnt3a expression has been shown to be an upstream regulator of Fgf8 expression in the chick, and Wnt3a appears to mediate its affects via activation of    -catenin.6 Figure 6 shows that antagonism of    -catenin at stage 15-16 does not affect Fgf10 expression, however the limbs that develop are truncated, as Fgf8 expression is down-regulated in the ectoderm, and there is disruption of AER formation. 6 This indicates the induction of Fgf8 in the ectoderm by Fgf10 occurs via Wnt3a and is    -catenin dependant. Figure 7 summarises limb bud induction in a proposed model.
Tbx4 and Tbx5 are members of the T-box transcription factor family, and are specifically expressed in the hindlimb and forelimb respectively.& When a conditional Tbx5 allele is expressed in mice, forelimbs are completely absent, while hindlimbs are unaffected,9 seen in figure 8. This demonstrates Tbx5 is vital in early limb development, and illustrates specificity to the forelimb. In Fgf10 null mice, there is expression of Tbx4 and Tbx5, and initiation of limb bud formation, suggesting these genes are upstream of Fgf10.
Rodrigues-Esteban et al. The T-box genes Tbx4 and Tbx5 regulate limb outgrowth and identity 1999 Nature 398:814-818.
Rallis et al. Tbx5 is required for forelimb bud formation and continued outgrowth 2002 Development 130:2741-2751.
Takeuchi et al. Tbx5 and Tbx4 trigger limb bud formation through activation of the Wnt/Fgf signalling cascade 2003 Development 130:2729-2739.
Misexpression of dominant negative Tbx5 and Tbx4 induces limb-less phenotypes, and repression of Wnt and Fgf genes, shown in figure 9, with a critical time period between stages 7 and 10 to induce the limb-less phenotype.10 This suggests Tbx4 and Tbx5 function before the Wnt and Fgf signals. This is also supported by the fact that their expression is first detected in the prospective limb mesenchyme prior to overt limb outgrowth.9.
In chick embryos leg grafts expressing Tbx4 can develop into toe-like digits when placed into the wing,8 suggesting a role for Tbx4 in specification of the hindlimb. A recent study by Takeuchi et al 10 provided significant evidence for the role of Tbx4 and Tbx5 in specification of limb identity. When Tbx5 was misexpressed in the inter-limb region, a wing-like limb formed, and Wnt2b was expressed, and conversely with Tbx4 misexpression a leg-like limb formed, and Wnt8c was expressed.10 It seems therefore that Tbx4 and Tbx5 operate in the gap between the Hox genes that specify the primary A-P axis and the Wnt/Fgf network, in specification of limb identity and limb induction.10.
The AER is situated at the dorsoventral limb boundary, and is vital for limb bud outgrowth. Rodriguez-Esteban et al 11 found that chick Radical fringe (R-fng), homologous to the Drosophila fng gene, encodes a secreted signalling molecule, with expression as seen in figure 10.11 Ectopic expression of R-fng in the ventral side of the limb resulted in limb bud phenotypes lacking a defined AER, having a divided AER, having additional ventral or ventrally expanded AERs and having a lengthwise expansion of the anterior AER.11 This suggests that R-fng functions in the normal formation of the AER.
Rodriguez-Esteban et al. Radical fringe position the apical ectodermal ridge at the dorsoventral boundary of the vertebrate limb 1997Nature 386:360-366.
It appears that R-fng requires previous establishment of the D-V axis since its expression is dorsally restricted as seen in figure 10. Dorsal misexpression of ectodermal gene.
En-1, results in severe truncations with AERs that are undefined, discontinuous AERs, and additional dorsal AERs.11 Therefore it is suggested that ventrally expressed En-1 in the ectoderm represses R-fng expression, restricting it to the dorsal ectoderm, creating a 'R-fng boundary' and resulting in the formation of the AER at the dorsoventral boundary.11.
As seen in figure 7, Fgf10 in the LPM is proposed to induce expression of Fgf8 in the ectoderm via Wnt3a and    -catenin. Wnt3a is detected before Fgf8 in the limb field ectoderm, and is up-regulated in cells near the dorsoventral boundary. Misexpression of Wnt3a induces ectopic expression of AER-specific genes, and application of Wnt3a-expressing cells to limbs with the AER removed induces Fgf8 expression.12 It therefore appears Wnt3a is involved in the formation of the AER and induces AER-specific genes. As shown in figure 6, Wnt3a signals via    -catenin, which forms a complex with members of the LEF/XTCF family to activate transcription of target genes.12 A member of this family, Lef1, is strongly expressed in the AER, and misexpression of Wnt3a enhances Lef1 expression. It therefore appears Wnt3a requires    -catenin/Lef1 signalling to induce its response.
Kengakuet al. Distinct WNT pathways regulating the AER formatio and dorsoventral polarity in the chick limb bud 1998 Science 280:1274-1277.
The signals that regulate dorsal-ventral identity are derived from the ectoderm.& Wnt7a expression is present in the ectoderm at the level of the both the presumptive fore- and hindlimb in mice, and during the initial stages of limb bud outgrowth, expression is uniform throughout the dorsal limb ectoderm.13&14 It is therefore thought to be involved in determining the D-V axis. Wnt7a - / - mice show normal ventral structures in the limbs, however many dorsal-to-ventral transformations of mesenchyme cell fates are observed.13 This phenotype is more severe in distally,13 suggesting other factors are also involved in D-V patterning. Ventrally restricted expression of genes such as En-1 and Bmp-2 remains intact, so it seems the cell fate changes observed occur to the underlying dorsal mesenchyme.13 Overall, this demonstrates that Wnt7a is required in dorsal patterning of the limb.
Parr, B. and McMahon, A. Dorsalizing signal Wnt7a required for normal polarity of D-V and A-P axes of mouse limb 1995 Nature 374:350-353.
Riddle et al. Induction of the LIM homeobox gene Lmx-1 by WNT7a establishes dorsoventral pattern in the vertebrate limb 1995 Cell 83:631-640.
Lmx1, belonging to the LIM homeobox gene family, is expressed in the dorsal mesoderm of the limb bud, seen in figure 11.14 It is restricted to the mesoderm adjacent to the Wnt7a expressing ectoderm, in both the fore- and hind limb.14 Its timing of expression shows great similarity to that of Wnt7a in the ectoderm, and ventral misexpression of Wnt7a leads to ectopic expression of Lmx1 in the ventral limb mesoderm, seen in figure 11.14 This suggests that dorsal expression of Wnt7a in the ectoderm induces dorsal expression of Lmx1 in the mesoderm, which gives the mesoderm dorsal identity. In the absence of surrounding ectoderm, dorsal Lmx1 expression is still detected proximally, suggesting continuous signalling from the ectoderm is not required to maintain Lmx1 expression in proximal limb mesenchyme.14 Wnt7a appears to induce Lmx1 expression via a    -catenin independent pathway.12.
We have seen that En-1 is expressed in the ventral ectoderm, and functions in positioning of the AER.11 En-1 is thought to be involved in specifying ventral cell fate, as misexpression of En-1 represses the expression of the dorsally restricted Wnt7a and Lmx1 genes.11 Therefore it appears that correct spatial expression and interaction of Wnt7a and En-1 in the ectoderm are key to D-V patterning of the limb, although other genes are also likely to be involved.
The progress zone is a region of proliferation of undifferentiated cells. Cartilage staining shows that the limb develops along the Pr-D axis, and outgrowth is thought to occur as in the progress zone (PZ) model. 2,3 This is where cells in the progress zone are maintained in a proliferative and undifferentiated state, and their fate is dependant upon the time spent in the PZ. The longer the time spent in the PZ, the more distal the cell fate. It is thought that the AER regulates outgrowth through maintaining the undifferentiated and proliferative state of cells in the PZ.
Niswander et al. FGF-4 replaces the apical ectodermal ridge and directs outgrowth and patterning of the limb 1993 Cell 75:579-587.
Mahmood et al. A role for FGF8 in the initiation and maintenance of vertebrate limb bud outgrowth 1995 Current Biology 5:797-806.
Application of Fgf4 soaked beads to chick limb buds with the AER removed results in stimulation of limb bud outgrowth and almost normal proximodistal pattern and limb length, although with some abnormalities in shape, compared to truncation in the controls.15 Simultaneous application of Fgf4 beads to the apical and posterior wing bud mesenchyme following AER removal, leads to virtually complete skeletal elements of the limb, with only some digit abnormalities seen in figure 12.15 This suggests Fgf4 is involved in the stimulation of limb bud outgrowth, and for complete formation of the Pr-D axis Fgf4 may stimulate posterior mesenchyme cells to produce a signal which maintains the active progress zone.15 However, Fgf4 mRNA is restricted to the posterior part of the AER,16 and Fgfs are thought to act over only short distances, so it seems other factors are likely to be involved in Pr-D development.
Fgf signals are transduced via Fgf receptors (Fgfr). Fgfr2 is expressed in the LPM during limb bud initiation, and then concentrates to the surface ectoderm, and at lower levels in the adjacent mesenchyme.17 Its pattern of expression therefore overlaps the domains of Fgf10 and Fgf8 expression discussed in section 2. Xu et al17 found that mice with a deletion of a domain of Fgfr2, show failure of limb induction, with no staining for Fgf8, and Fgf10 staining weaker than in the wild-type which gradually reduced and disappeared, in both fore- and hindlimbs.17 This suggests that Fgfr2, which is present in limb bud as two major isoforms, is involved in induction of Fgf8 by Fgf10, and in turn the maintenance of Fgf10 by Fgf8, and this reciprocal interaction is vital for limb bud formation and outgrowth.17.
Xu et al. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2)-mediated reciprocal regulation loop between FGF8 and FGF10 is essential for limb induction 1998 Development 125:753-765.
Fgf8 expression induced in the ectoderm by the expression of Fgf10, persists in the limb bud and is found to be restricted uniformly to cells of the AER, before the expression of Fgf4.16 Mice forelimbs maintain limb bud growth after AER removal and incubation with Fgf8.16 This shows that along with Fgf4, Fgf8 may also perform most of the functions of the AER when it is removed. Conditional inactivation of Fgf8 determined that it is only absolutely required in the anterior AER, as only anterior forelimb elements were absent. Fgf4 levels had increased, suggesting that the two are co-regulated, and Fgf4 compensates for the loss of Fgf8. Overall it appears that both Fgf4 and Fgf8 are vital for the correct outgrowth and Pr-D patterning of the vertebrate limb.
Moon et al. FGF8 is involved for outgrowth and patterning of the limbs 2000 Nature Genetics 26:455-459.
Early experiments found that the A-P axis involved ZPA, as seen in figure 13. Riddle at al 19 isolated a Drosophila hedgehog homolog, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and via in situ hybridisation found that Shh is expressed in the posterior regions of the fore- and hindlimb corresponding in both position and intensity to the polarising activity of the ZPA.19 Ectopic expression of Shh was found to result in mirror-image digit duplications similar to those with an ectopic ZPA.19 This suggests that the polarising activity of the ZPA is mediated by Shh. Ectopic Shh expression in the anterior could induce mirror-image activation of Hoxd gene expression, as occurred when the ZPA is transplanted.19 This implicates Hoxd gene expression as a downstream target of Shh in limb A-P patterning.
Riddle at al. Sonic hedgehog mediates the polarising activity of the ZPA 1993 75:1401-1416.
In situ hybridisation shows Hoxb-8 is expressed in the posterior of the chick forelimb, with position and intensity corresponding to the ZPA. It seems Hoxb-8 is involved in establishing the position of the forelimb ZPA. The expression of Hoxb-8 can be regulated in a dose-dependant response to retinoic acid (RA), suggesting RA lies upstream of Hoxb-8 in specifying the position of the ZPA according to the primary axis.20 The loss of Hoxb-8 expression at stage 18 in the chick appears to be as a result of inhibition from the ZPA and AER,20 seen in figure 14. Hoxb-8 is not expressed in the hindlimb, however, a more 5' Hox gene, with a more posterior boundary is predicted to perform a similar function in the hindlimb.20.
Stratford et al. Hoxb-8 has a role in establishing early anterior-posterior polarity in chick forelimb but not hindlimb 1997 Development 124:4224-4234.
Gli3 has been suggested as a target of Shh signalling in A-P limb patterning. Shh - / - limbs have severe distal skeletal deficiencies, with zeugopod and autopod elements missing, fused or lacking identity. Gli3 - / - limbs exhibit severe polydactyly.21 Shh - / - Gli3 - / - mice, develop virtually normal stylopod and zeugopod elements, however the autopod is polydactylous.21 This suggests the two are required for constraining the polydactylous potential of the autopod and specifying digit identity. Since the Gli3 - / - and Shh - / - Gli3 - / - limbs are almost indistinguishable, this would suggest Shh has no effect in the absence of Gli3, and Gli3 is therefore required for Shh to function in A-P patterning.21.
Litingtung et al. Shh and Gli3 are dispensible for limb skeleton formation but regulate digit number and identity 2002 Nature 418:979-983.
Gli3 is a transcription factor thought to be present in the limb in transcriptional activator (Gli3A) and repressor (Gli3R) forms, with a proteolytic cleavage generating the repressor form.3,4,21 Shh is proposed to inhibit this cleavage, therefore generating the activator form, and creating an A-P gradient of Gli3A:Gli3R. 3,4,21 The expression of target genes then leads to the A-P patterning of digits. As reviewed by Niswander,3 early A-P patterning in the stylopod and zeugopod is thought to be a result of Gli3 expression in the anterior mesenchyme and dHand expression in the posterior mesenchyme. The transcription factor dHand is also thought to be required to activate Shh expression in the ZPA.
The ZPA requires a signal from the AER for establishment and maintenance of Shh expression, and it appears that the AER requires the ZPA for maintenance of Fgf4 expression.15 This has been examined by looking at limb deformed (ld) mutants, which show normal activation of Shh expression, but subsequent up-regulation does not occur.22 Grafts of Shh expressing cells in the wild-type induce ectopic Fgf4 expression, however in the ld mutant this does not occur.22 Further evidence as seen in figure 15, has lead to a model for a proposed Shh/Fgf4 feedback loop.
Zuniga et al. Signal relay by BMP antagonism controls the SHH/FGF4 feedback loop in vertebrate limb buds 1999 Nature 401:598-602.
Khokha et al. Gremlin is the BMP antagonist required for maintenance of Shh and Fgf signals during limb patterning 2003 Nature Genetics 34:303-307.
The D-V, Pr-D and A-P patterning systems are highly interlinked, with grey areas in understanding that may be clarified with future experimentation. The progress zone model of progressive Pr-D specification for example, has recently been challenged by an alternative model based on early specification of Pr-D fates in the limb bud.3 Therefore it seems questions are still to be answered concerning when specification actually occurs. The chick and mice models discussed in the essay may be related to the limb patterning in other vertebrates, due to high levels of evolutionary conservation. Parallels have also often been drawn with Drosophila. Overall the patterning of the vertebrate limb is produced by complex and interacting signalling cascades, which set up the axes that are essential in producing complete and correct morphology.
