Our task is to propose a model that provides a theoretical rationale linking two economic variables and investigate their relationship. The two variables we have chosen are investment and interest rates. In finding time series data for these variables we used gross fixed capital formation for investment and interest rates on 10-year government bonds for interest rates. Gross fixed capital formation is the addition to capital stock minus depreciation. Interest rates on 10-year government bonds were used because they represent interest rates over a time period sufficient for completion of investment projects.
The countries we chose for analysis are the United Kingdom, Netherlands and Denmark, all members of the EU and OECD. We have collected quarterly time series data for the period 1992-2003 as shown below:
Investment spending by firms depends on two factors: the level of sales and the real interest rate. A country facing an increase in sales needs to increase production to meet increasing demand. To do so it may need to buy additional machines or build additional plants. Conversely a country facing low sales has no need to spend on investment. Similarly, since most investment projects are financed through loans, the higher the interest rate, the less attractive it is to borrow for investment. At a high enough interest rate, the incremental profits will not be sufficient to equal the cost of the project. In our model we assume that nominal interest rates are equal to real interest rates since inflation is kept at low and stable levels in most developed countries, however higher inflation can affect the level of investment.
The investment relation states that investment, I, depends on production Y and interest rate. The positive sign under Y indicates that an increase in production leads to an increase in investment. The negative sign under the interest rate, , indicates that an increase in the interest rate leads to a decrease in investment.
The negative relation between interest rates and investment as proposed by theory can be seen in the scatter diagrams below for our countries. The interest rate, the independent variable, is plotted on the x-axis and gross capital formation, the dependent variable, is plotted on the y-axis.
The British economy experienced nine years of economic growth after the last recession in autumn of 1992. Since 1996 the level of real national output has grown in excess of 2% each year, investment in the UK grew uniformly throughout this period.
Under the Thatcher government in 1990 the UK joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) at a high rate as predicted. The pound was fixed to the Deutschemark and from 1990 until 1993 the main concern of the British authorities was to keep the parity with the Deutschmark. This resulted in increases in interest rates to keep the pound within the ERM. Although the British economy was entering recession and lower interest rates would have helped.
On Black Wednesday (16/9/1992) the UK left the ERM and allowed the pound to float freely. In order to recover interest rates were reduced by 4% then onwards interest rates were used as a monetary tool to maintain inflation within 1-4%.
Since 1994 UK economy has experienced increases in economic growth. Interest rates were raised in 1994-1995 to keep inflation within targets.
In 1997 the Bank of England was made independent; since then, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has been free to set interest rates to keep inflation around 2.5%. Monetary independence decreased long-term interest rates reducing the cost of borrowing, resulting in steady increases in investment between 1997 and 2003.
At the end of 1999 the house booms lead the MPC to raise interest rates to maintain the low inflation performance that the UK had enjoyed. Investment remained at similar levels mostly due to the credibility of monetary policy.
From 2000 to 2003 the UK experienced positive economic growth but was slowed by the central European deceleration. Despite this investment showed positive growth throughout this period.
Loss in competitiveness in the 1990s, high growth with low interest rates between 1995 and 2000 led to labour shortages which affected the price/wage setting curve. During the period of 1995 to 2000 there were steady increases in investment, from    15000m to    22000m. Since then labour problems have been partly solved, fixed term contracts were liberalised, dismissals made easier and tax credits to the lower earners increased, which have made the Dutch labour force more flexible resulting in 3% unemployment in 2002.
Private consumption contracted in 2003 because of stagnation in the house market and ends to mortgage equity withdrawals. This may have contributed to the slump in investment in 2003. The Netherlands has an export-reliant economy and is particularly attractive to foreign investment, so it depends on foreign capital flowing into the country.
The Netherlands participated in the EMU and since 1994 pursued a budgetary policy that must satisfy European requirements. It was also pegged with the Deutschemark until 1999 when the EMU was introduced.
The trends show that the variables move inversely. There is, however, a delay of two or three months after an interest rate change before investment responds. At the beginning of our time interval, Dutch rates were over 8% and investment was at    15,000m, up until 1995 the investment level stayed fairly constant, although it varied each quarter it stayed between     14,000m and     17,000m. At the same time interest rates were falling and dipped below 6% in Q4 1993 before climbing to 7.5% in Q1 1995. Between 1995 and 1999 shows the clearest relationship between the variables. There were constant declines in interest rates, reduced from 7.5% in 1995 to 4% in 1999; simultaneously investment rose from    16,000 in 1995 to    20,000 by Q1 1999 and to    22,300 by Q4. After 1999 interest rates began to rise and hovered around 5% until mid 2002. By the beginning of 2003 they had dropped to 4%. In the same period investment reduced from    22,000 to    20,000.
The Danish economy is very dependent on trade with other countries and lacks the possibility to influence international economic factors, e.g. interest rates. Denmark has experienced moderate economic growth since the slowdown of the 1990 's. Economic growth from 1987 to 1993 averaged less than 1% a year. In 1994-1996 growth averaged 3.4%, in 1997-1998 3% and in 2000 GDP increased to 3.6%.
In 1993, as Finland and Sweden were applying for EU membership, Denmark negotiated separate terms for their existing membership. Denmark had joined the European Community (pre-form of EU) in 1973. In the Edinburgh summit, December 1992, Denmark excluded themselves from the third phase of the EMU (European Monetary Union) thus not taking the Euro as their currency. Denmark allowed the currency to be pegged to Euro later on with a somewhat fixed rate, within a band of +/- 2, 25%.
Interest rates in Denmark follow a similar pattern to the UK and Netherlands. The beginning of the period was characterised by the European Monetary System crisis. When DEK was pegged to Deutschmark and Germany raised their interest rates, Denmark had to follow, even though this harmed their economy. This crisis resulted in Denmark leaving the ERM and reducing their interest rates to 6%. After this point started the "consumer-lead growth" lasting until the end of the decade. In 1994-1995 Denmark raised their interest rates following the Federal Reserve Bank in United States. In March 1995 Denmark realigned with the ERM and followed the interest rates of other ERM countries. In 1999 the actual exchange rates were fixed between the ERM countries and from this point the Danish interest rates have been almost exactly equal to the Euro zone ones.
From the graph above we can see that the countries have similar interest rate trends, conducting a hypothesis test will see if their respective population means are equal within a 5% significance level. We will test each nation with each other but not their investment means due to the different relative sizes of the economies. The UK has a significantly higher level of investment than both the Netherlands and Denmark simply due to the size of the economy.
We will use central limit theorem (n 30) to approximate a normal distribution and decipher if the null hypothesis can be rejected or not within a 5% significance level.
At the 5% significant level we reject if OR.
Given that Z1 = 0.730548172   1.96 we do not reject at the set significance level of 5%. Therefore the mean interest rates of the United Kingdom and those of Denmark are equal within our set accuracy criteria.
Now a similar hypothesis regarding the United Kingdom and the Netherlands;.
At the 5% significant level we reject if OR.
We find that Z2 = 2.8742665   1.96 and so we reject . So, mean interest rates of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands are not equal taking the significance level to be 5%.
Lastly we will compare the final combination from the countries:
At the 5% significant level we reject if OR.
Here Z3 = 2.10177323   1.96 and so we reject . The population mean for interest rates in Demark is not equal with that of the Netherlands when using a 5% significance level.
We tested the hypotheses using an average of the interest rate over the twelve years. If we look closer there is a divergence of the rates starting from September 1992 caused by crisis within the ERM and subsequently certain nations including Britain and Italy leaving it. At its peak the difference between the rates of the nations was 2% in 1996, after that they began converging and moved together up until they reached a common point with the introduction of the EMU. Even though Great Britain and Denmark did not join the new currency they were within a half a percentage point of Holland from Q1 1999 until Q4 2003.
We backed up our rationale by mathematical tools, using regression, correlation and descriptive statistics.
Descriptive statistics show information on each country. The results from Excel:
We compared how interest rates and investment varied across countries.
With interest rates: By taking the mean, the UK had the highest interest rates (6.55%), then Denmark (6.32%) and tailed by Netherlands (5.72%). Now, we see how spread out interest rates are in each country. Dispersion is similar in the UK and Denmark (found by comparing the standard deviations and sample variances), whilst rates were less dispersed in Netherlands. We also compared dispersion by looking at the range. It confirms that the UK and Denmark had a greater range (hence more dispersion) than Netherlands. We wanted to see how skewed the data was. Skewness shows us the degree of asymmetry of a distribution around its mean. In Denmark and Netherlands, interest rates were more positively skewed, indicating that they tended to be of higher values, whilst in the UK, rates were also positively skewed but tended to be very close to the mean.
We now look at investment: In absolute terms, we cannot draw any conclusions from the total value of investment in relation to interest rates, because of the different sizes of countries. However, it is useful to see how widely dispersed investment is. By looking at the standard deviation and sample variance, the UK has the largest dispersion in investment, followed by the Netherlands and Denmark. It seems that more dispersion in interest rates does not necessarily mean more dispersion in investment levels, Netherlands and Denmark show. In the UK and Denmark, investment is almost non-skewed, whilst in the Netherlands, investment is negatively skewed.
It is important to identify and prove which variable depends on which (i.e. causation). Regression analysis will help us do this. Assuming a linear relationship between interest rates and investment, the mathematical relationship between the interest rates and investment is a regression function of investment on interest rates.
A linear regression model takes the form of where: x represents the independent variable; the interest rates of 10-year government bonds.    represents the gradient of the line, also known as the regression coefficient of y on x. It is calculated by: . Should b be positive, a direct relationship would exist between x and y; should b be negative, x and y will be inversely proportional.    represents the y-intercept; the level of investment undertaken when interest rates are zero. y represents the dependant variable; the level of investment for a given interest rate.    represents the error term which accounts for the variability in y that cannot be explained by the linear relationship between x and y.
Let 's look at the regression lines generated for the countries:
The regression lines portray an inverse relationship between interest rates and investment. However, we cannot tell in which country this relationship is more pronounced. So, correlation must be introduced. The product-moment correlation coefficient (r) indicates the linear degree of scatter; how strongly the variables are linked. It takes a value between -1 and 1. The closer r is to -1 or 1, the closer the points on the scatter diagram are to the regression line and hence the stronger the relationship between the variables.
We conclude that the variables are inversely proportional, and the relationship between the level of investment and interest rates is most strongly felt in the UK, followed by Denmark and lastly in Netherlands.
Through using theoretical and mathematical tools we have verified the relationship between interest rates (exogenous variable) and investment levels (endogenous variable). There is a clear and evident inverse relationship between the two which varies across the countries. As interest rates increase investment falls. However, investment is not solely affected by interest rates; there are other factors which influence it. It is not instantaneous either as there are lags delaying the response of investment after interest rate changes.
