Various properties of enzymes were investigated in this class. Enzyme activity is affected by factors such as pH, temperature, cofactors, inhibitors, etc. pH and high temperatures changes the structure of enzymes and therefore their ability to bind with the substrate. Low temperatures do not provide enough energy to drive the reaction. The optimum pH and temperature of alkaline phosphatase are pH 9.0 and 50   respectively. The Michaelis-Menten constant was determined by measuring the rate of reaction using different concentrations of substrate. It is found to be 0.4631  mol dm -3. The effect of phosphate on the reaction was investigated. The minimum concentration for the inhibition of alkaline phosphatase is 2.5  mol dm -3.
Compartmentalisation plays a significant role in increasing the efficiency of a cell. Apart from providing membranes for embedment of enzymes, different environments are created for different enzymes to work at their maximum efficiency. Different enzymes work at different optimum temperatures and pHs. Most enzymes work best at 37  , which is the normal temperature of human body. Around the optimum temperature, enzyme activity increases with temperature, but decreases as it reaches a certain point, this is when the hydrogen bonds in the enzyme is broken and it starts to denature. The enzyme will show no activity at all when it is totally denatured. When the temperature decreases, the activity of enzyme decreases as there is insufficient kinetic energy to drive the reaction. pH plays an important role in enzymes, for example, enzymes in the gut cannot function in the ileum due to extreme differences in pHs. Enzymes in the gut will have a low optimum pH and will be denatured by the alkaline environment in the ileum. This is because pH affects the hydrogen bonds, disulphide bonds and the hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions.
Alkaline phosphatase was used in this class. It hydrolyses organic monophosphate esters into inorganic phosphate and an organic alcohol. In this experiment, p-nitrophenyl phosphate was hydrolysed into p-nitrophenol (pNP) and inorganic phosphate. P-nitrophenol is yellow in alkaline pHs, whereas the others are colourless, therefore the rate of reaction could be calculated from the absorbance of the reaction mixture. To ensure that the mixture is alkaline enough, sodium hydroxide is added in the end of the reaction, it can also stop the reaction by denaturing the enzyme.
The activity of enzymes follows the Michaelis-Menten equation: where v is the rate of reaction; v max the maximum rate; [S] represents the substrate concentration and K m the Michaelis-Menten constant. This reaction is a first order reaction, where the rate is proportional to the concentration of substrate.
In this experiment, the activity of alkaline phosphatase in various pHs and temperatures was investigated. The rates of reaction in different substrate concentrations were measured and used to calculate the Michaelis constant. The effect of inhibitors was also observed. The order of reaction was determined by measuring the absorbance of a reaction mixture at regular time intervals.
The methods described in the laboratory manual were carried out without major modifications.
To measure the order of reaction, a reaction mixture consisting of 1.5ml 0.5mM p-nitrophenyl phosphate and 0.75ml buffer was placed in a cuvette. It was placed in the 37   waster bath for a few minutes to equilibrate. 0.75ml alkaline phosphatase was added and mixed. The A 410 was measured every 30 seconds for 20 minutes.
Molar extinction coefficient = 2   mol -1 8ml tube.
The optimum pH for alkaline phosphatase is pH 9.0. The activity reduces as the pH is further from the optimum.
The optimum temperature of alkaline phosphatase is around 50  . It is partly denatured in 70   and is totally denatured in 100  .
The gradient of the line of best fit equals to the value of K m, therefore K m = 0.4631  mol dm -3.
The rate of production of pNP decreases with increasing concentration of phosphate solution. The lowest molarity of phosphate is 0.625   mol dm -3. However, this value is not accurate since the decrease in rate is fairly rapid from 0.00625 - 0.625  mol dm -3.
The number of moles of pNP produced shows a linear relationship with time. It exhibits first order kinetics.
The optimum pH and temperature for alkaline phosphatase are pH 9.0 and 50   respectively. The enzyme activity decreases as the pH or temperature move further from the optimum. A change in pH would affect the hydrogen bonds, disulphide bonds and hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions of the enzyme molecule, therefore denatures it. A decrease in temperature would reduce the energy available for the reaction and eventually stops it. An increase in temperature would provide more kinetic energy to drive the reaction, but when the temperature is too high, hydrogen bonds in the enzyme molecule break and causes denaturation. The presence of co-factors and non-competitive inhibitors can alter the values of the optimum pH and temperature, because the enzyme structure is changed when co-factors or non-competitive inhibitors bind to allosteric sites.
The minimum concentration of phosphate solution which could inhibit alkaline phosphatase is 0.625  mol dm -3; therefore the amount of phosphate must be over 2.5  mol in a 4ml tube to have any inhibitory effects. The amount of phosphate produced is equivalent to that of pNP and the amount of phosphate produced in the previous experiments did not exceed 2.5  mol, therefore the enzyme was not inhibited.
From the graph, the concentration of pNP is directly proportional to time, therefore it exhibits first order kinetics although there is more than one reactant. Since the other reactant, water, is in excess in the reaction, it is not involved in the order of reaction. The accumulation of product is not linear, this is because substrate was used continuously and would run out eventually. On another hand, increasing amounts of phosphate produced would inhibit the enzyme and slow down the reaction. Therefore the accumulation of product would level off eventually.
