Anoxia (or hypoxia) occurs when the level of oxygen present and needed by the brain becomes insufficient. Most mammals and in particular humans have a very low tolerance to this condition resulting in brain damage. However, evolution seems to have resolved this problem in a few species.
Researchers have studied 3 species that show a very high tolerance to anoxia/hypoxia: Carassius sp. , Trachemys and Chrysemys sp. and Hemiscyllium ocellatum sp. They use different strategies to survive anoxia but their overall goal is to maintain ATP production to a certain level.
Carrassius sp. survives by increasing its glycolytic pathway and converting the end-product lactate into ethanol. It also reduces its neuronal activity as a second line of defence resulting in the organism being active through the anoxic period.
The freshwater turtles survive by entering a comatose-like state due to a radical repression of the brain 's activity and by buffering any lactate and sequestering it in the shell.
As for Hemiscyllium ocellatum sp, it survives at elevated temperatures and protects itself from any neuronal damage by increasing nitric oxide synthase production.
These mechanisms appear to have evolved several times and separately. Their understanding therefore relies on a concise analysis of each of them independently.
The brain is one of the most sensitive organs in any vertebrate organism and damage to it is most of the time irreversible and fatal. Brain cells are extremely sensitive to oxygen deprivation, even though there is an adequate blood flow (). This condition refers to cerebral hypoxia also known as cerebral anoxia. This can result from, for example, carbon monoxide poisoning, head trauma, choking, but the most common occurrence is being under water, which greatly increases the possibility of encountering anoxia (). This is primarily because water can hold much less oxygen than air, and its diffusion rate is only about 1/10000 of that in air (Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004).
However, there are a few aquatic vertebrates that have evolved to become hypoxia tolerant. The study of these vertebrates is of great importance for non-anoxia tolerant mammalians, especially humans and can lead to the prevention and treatment of this condition. This study focuses on one question: how do these vertebrates survive anoxia and avoid brain damage?.
In this essay three species that have evolved adaptive mechanism for dealing with anoxia will be reviewed: the Crucian carp, the freshwater turtles and finally the epaulette shark. They all appear to survive anoxia via different mechanisms and they will each be discussed along with their survival scheme in order to answer the question asked above.
The Crucian carp is a scandinavian cyprinid that is found in small, shallow lakes and ponds in Northern Europe. This fish is able to survive very harsh conditions without oxygen for several months during the Nordic winter (see fig.1).
The survival of this aquatic vertebrate during those conditions relies on its adaptation to the environment at 3 different levels.
One of the most important factors in the physiological adjustment of the carp during anoxia is its capacity to acquire the little oxygen that is present in oxygen defiant water due to its extreme high affinity for oxygen. Its haemoglobin is 50% saturated at an oxygen partial pressure (PO 2) of 0.34 kPA (2.6 mmHg), allowing it to maintain its routine rate of oxygen consumption down to water oxygen level of 5-10% of air saturation (Nilsson and Lutz, 2004; Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004 ).
In addition, when exposed to anoxia, it can change the morphology of its gills to increase its respiratory surface area. This is achieved by the apoptotic death of cells covering much of the lamellar surface during normal conditions, resulting in its protrusion (Nilsson and Lutz, 2004; Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004).
Other minor adjustments but worth mentioning appear to be the temporal blindness and deafness of the carp as a result of the activities auditory nerves and of those involved in vision being strongly suppressed (the reason for this will be discussed in part C).
These adaptations are minor compared to the process by which the Crucian carp prevents the damage of the brain and insures it survival through a strategy involving glycolytic activation.
ATP is the most important form of energy in the brain and it is mainly associated with the control of ion pumps when needed to sustain the electrical activity of the brain. The carp must be able to match ATP consumption with ATP production in the absence of oxygen thereby avoiding energy failure and accumulations of high concentrations of potassium leading to the depolarization of the neuron. The net result of this is the activation of degenerative and lytic processes involving the degradation of DNA, proteins and the cell membrane itself by lytic enzymes, free radicals and nitric oxide (Nilsson, 2004). The Crucian carp avoids this catastrophe by using glycolysis to make ATP. Since glycolysis yields 2 mol ATP/ mol glucose (in contrast to the production of ATP by aerobic metabolism which yields 36 mol ATP/mol glucose), the carp maintains ATP level by increasing the rate of glycolysis. Glucose is the only cellular fuel that can be used by the brain (Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004).
At the commencement of anoxia, the organism undergoes glycolysis to produce extra large glucose stores that can be utilized later on. The carp starts producing ethanol as the major end product of anaerobic glycolysis (instead of lactate as in other vertebrates) (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997; Nilsson, 2001). Carassius sp. utilizes this glycolytic strategy to avoid the problem of self-intoxication and the high lactate levels and consequent acidosis faced by other vertebrates (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997). The main steps in this conversion of glucose into ethanol are the transformation of pyruvate into acetaldehyde in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase, also releasing CO 2 . Acetaldehyde slips out of the mitochondrion rather than being converted to acetyl CoA (in contrast with other vertebrates). It is finally converted into ethanol by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). This enzyme is found at extraordinary high levels in skeletal muscles. Although ADH is predominant in this part of the body, the Carassius sp. brain lacks it and so the brain releases lactate as the end product of the glycolytic pathway. It is then translocated to the muscles via the blood where it is transformed to ethanol and CO 2 . The ethanol then leaves the organism by spreading over the gill membrane (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997; Nilsson, 2001; Nilsson and Lutz, 2004). Figure 2 shows the ethanol-producing pathway of the carp.
The obvious advantage of this system is that the organism has tolerable steady-state levels of lactate and ethanol and it still swims, in other words it is still active although its activity is reduced. And it can survive until it supply of glycogen stores is depleted, making its life expectancy high during the Nordic winter (Nilsson, 2004; Nilsson, 2001) However the unfortunate drawback of this system for the organism is the loss of high energy carbohydrate (Nilsson and Lutz, 2004).
This apparatus appears to be one of the most important survival strategies of the Carp but what happens at the neuronal level?.
During anoxic conditions, the animal 's activity is reduced as mentioned above but not shutdown. The reduction of the electric activity (which accounts for more than 50% of neural energy consumption in vertebrates) contributing to a reduction in ATP consumption is believed to rely on 3 principle neurotransmitters and neuromodulators:
Microdialysis measurements have shown that   -aminobutyric acid (GABA) is a mediator of survival in the brain of the organism (Nilsson, 2001; Nilsson and Lutz, 2004). This neurotransmitter inhibits transmission in the brain and it is released in the Crucian carp at moderated levels to reduce neuronal activity such that ATP consumption is reduced but the organism maintains a certain level of activity.
The second neurotransmitter that takes part is glutamate. It appears that this major neurotransmitter in mammals and fish during normoxia, is highly toxic in the anoxic brain. The Carp avoids this anoxic exitotoxin by reducing its release (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997; Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004).
Finally adenosine appears to play an important role in neuromodulation of the Carp brain. This has been proven by blocking adenosine receptors which leads to the increase in the rate of ethanol release to the water (Nilsson, 2001). Being the result of the net breakdown of phosphorylated adenylates (such as ATP, AMP and ADP), it acts to produce an increase in cerebral blood, inhibit neuronal activity and release of excitatory neurotransmitters (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997).
As a consequence of metabolic depression, Na+/K+ ATPase (which is used to restore ion-gradients constantly disrupted by electrical activity) is also reduced (Johansson et al, 1997). The Crucian carp also maintains a low extra-cellular K+ levels and any harmful rises in intracellular Ca2+ are avoided. It is also believed that the voltage gated channels of those in have reduced permeability but experiments have so far given negative results for this supposition (Nilsson, 2001; Nilsson, and Lutz, 2004). These reductions appear to be a second line of defence (Nilsson, 2001). Figure 3 summarizes the reductions occurring.
These reductions result in vision and hearing being (Johansson et al, 1997). However responses to anoxic environments are moderate in the carp and they have much more severe effects in turtles.
In contrast with the Crucian carp, Trachemys sp. and Chrysemys sp. appear to survive anoxia for about 3 months at 3  C in the anoxic mud at the bottom of ponds, lakes and rivers. The turtles employ very similar strategies to survive anoxia to that of Carrassius sp. but the outcome of those strategies differ greatly. The major difference is that they become comatose (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997; Nilsson and Lutz, 2004). This is achieved through brain metabolic depression and glycolytic depression.
As mentioned above, the freshwater turtles clearly differ from the Crucian carp in that of the drastic suppression of the use of ATP (Jackson, 1999). First, the turtle is an ectotherm (cold blooded animal) and it therefore has a metabolic rate that is low compared to an endotherm of similar size (five to ten times lower even at the same temperature). This facilitates the transition to anaerobic metabolism and the drastic suppression of electric activity. ATP consumption is lowered to such a degree that brain energy needs are met by anaerobic glycolysis (Jackson, 1999) this will be further discussed in part B.
More than 50% of brain ATP used to maintain ion gradient is reduced by reducing ion flux. This is achieved through a decrease in ion permeability and it is termed channel arrest (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997): in the first hours of anoxia, extracellular potassium flux is reduced by about 50% and this is mediate by the K ATP channels and activated adenosine A 1 receptors. The voltage gated Na+ channels are 42% decreased and this mediates the elevation in the action potential threshold causing "spike arrest" (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997; Jackson, 1999). Also contributing to spike arrest is the extreme increased levels of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA which silences much of the brain activity accompanied by an increase in GABA A receptor numbers. On the other hand extracellular glutamate is suppressed. Not only because it happens to be very toxic during anoxia, but also because its synthesis (and the breakdown of GABA) is an oxygen dependent process and will therefore stop during anoxia (and GABA breakdown will halt) (Nilsson and Lutz, 1997; Jackson, 1999). These changes result in the comatose like state of the turtle. Figure 5 shows the metabolic suppressions that happen in the brain .
Some of these changes although much more enhanced in the turtles, are similar to that in Carassius sp. , but the major contrast lies in the glycolytic strategy of the freshwater turtle.
During prolonged anoxia, the freshwater turtles have to cope with enormous lactate levels although their glycolytic pathway (in order to reduce ATP consumption) is substantially decreased (Jackson, D. C. 1999). This is because very high concentrations of lactate are still reached during prolonged anoxia. This is mediated by a decreased in enzymatic activity especially those associated with glycolysis (such as glycogen phosphorylase).
Chrysemys sp. and Trachemys sp. do not have the ability to excrete or convert these high levels of lactate in contrast with the Crucian carp . To avoid self-poisoning by acidosis (lactate is produce from dissociation of lactic acid, accompanied by releases of many protons as well) the turtle employs 2 mechanisms: buffering the body fluid by releasing carbonate buffers and uptaking lactic acid via its shell and bones.
As the lactate concentration increases, the acidity of the extracellular fluid increases (lactic acid    lactate- +H+). In the case of the first mechanism, the freshwater turtle releases calcium and magnesium carbonates which both complex with lactate. In the former, CaLact+ is formed. Two thirds of the total Ca2+ can be bound in this way, reducing the amount of free lactate (Jackson, 2000). Such high levels of calcium can circulate in the turtle 's body because the permeability of the calcium channels is extremely reduced and this calcium can not enter the cells. Presumably, a similar reaction occurs between magnesium and lactate, however this has still to be demonstrated.
The source of calcium and magnesium, based on both direct and indirect evidence, is considered to be the bony tissues (Jackson, 2000). This is further supported by the fact that the shell and bone are the major sites for calcium and magnesium storage and that during anoxia, the shell magnesium concentration dramatically falls.
In addition to this, other strong cations are released from the shell: the potassium concentration greatly increases from 2.5 meq to as high as 10 meq (Jackson, 2000). However in vivo sodium concentration does not rise, but falls significantly in the shell as well as in the extracellular fluid (Jackson, 2000). The role of the release of this sodium from the shell and it the localisation of where the sodium goes has not yet been identified and remains to be further investigated. Not only are cations released, but chloride concentration is reduced. The overall effect is a positive strong ions difference or SID (Jackson, 1999).
The second mechanism is the sequestering of lactate. Lactate enters the shell in parallel with lactate rise during anoxia. However, lactate can not enter the shell alone; it must accompanied by a cation or must be exchanged with another anion such as chloride to maintain electroneutrality (Jackson, 2000). But this would therefore not contribute to the acid-base balance of the organism. Experiments have shown that lactate enters the shell with a proton (Jackson, 1999; Jackson, 2000). The proton is buffered by carbonate, producing carbon monoxide. This then moves into the extracellular fluid and diffuses to the surrounding water. Lactate is then buffered by carbonate and stored for the duration of the anoxic period. Fig.6 shows the 2 different mechanisms.
The study of the freshwater turtles is of great importance for the simple fact that they are the most anoxia-tolerant air-breathing vertebrates, bringing the scientist a step further to elucidating a way of resolving anoxia in mammals i.e. humans.
Another organism that is very interesting for studies on anoxia survival is the epaulette shark.
The epaulette shark (Hemiscyllium ocellatum) is a slender species found on coral reefs and shallows (tide pools) along Australian and Papua New Guinea shores () (see fig.7).
It can tolerate repeated exposure to severe hypoxia and even anoxia at 25   -30   C. This organism when exposed to hypoxia, first maintains its oxygen uptake by breathing more rapidly, achieved by a change in the gill perfusion pattern. As the conditions become more and more hypoxic (oxygen levels fall below 30% of normoxia), the shark becomes more and more hypoxic-tolerant.
At first the shark is still active like the Crucian carp. However, when it reaches the point of severe hypoxia, it induces metabolic depression, it shuts down its neuronal activity to the maximum, slows down its heart beat, breathing and relaxes arteries to make the pumping of blood to the brain much easier. However, the cerebral blood flow is not increased in contrast with the 2 other organisms reviewed above. Despite it remaining constant, the shark 's brain displays vasodilatation of the vessels (S  derstr  m et al, 1999; Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004). This phenomenon does not involve adenosine (unlike in other vertebrates). This was demonstrated by perfusing brain slices with adenosine. The result of the experiment was the blood pressure and the heart rate remained constant (S  derstr  m et al, 1999).
Instead, adenosine appears to be involved in metabolic depression of the epaulette shark during anoxia. Surprisingly adenosine appears to mediate increase in the arterio-venous circulation in the gill during hypoxia (Stenslokken, et al. 2004). This was demonstrated by injecting adenosine then aminophylline (an adenosine receptor antagonist which when added results in adenosine binding to it and not activating its receptors). Blood flow in the vessels located in the outer borders of the tip of the gill filament critically reduced (Stenslokken et al. 2004).
The most interesting feature of Hemiscyllium ocellatum is that although it releases GABA just like the freshwater turtles and the Crucian carp, it either reduces its glutamate levels or rather maintain them in selected parts of the brain. It will maintain the glutamate levels in the median longitudinal fasciculus and lower them in the fasciculus of Steida (Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004). This appears to be appears to be a transmitter system to induce metabolic depression in the shark 's brain.
In addition to this, nitric oxide synthase production is greatly increased in the vasculature of the shark 's brain and it is believed to acts as a neuroprotector (Renshaw and Dyson, 1999; Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004).
Three species, three different strategies in surviving anoxia and avoiding brain damage. These three strategies are summarized in table 1.
Could the study of these species be the answer to minimising brain damage injury after heart surgery or stroke?.
Maybe a combination of an aspect of each strategies could be the solution. For example the freshwater turtles have their neuronal activity also controlled by many molecular factors such as heat shock proteins (Hsp), HIF-1 alpha mRNA and NF-kappaB also found to play a major role in coordinating many adaptive response to hypoxia (the former) and a delayed defence mechanism to prevent reoxygenation reactive oxygen species (ROS) damage and initial apoptosis in mammals (Nilsson and Lutz, 2004). And so this combined to the fact that the epaulette shark survives anoxia at 25-30 C (normal room temperature) may be an important step further to treatment.
However, other species are also under investigation such as the leopard frog (Rana pipiens), although death is the ultimate result of its encountering hypoxia, which eventually might help in discovering a treatment.
