The sense of humour and humour expression exist in every culture. Individuals who have greater sense of humour are usually thought to have better interaction with others and have better mental health. A high association between sense of humour and better psychosocial adjustment has been found in cancer patients (Dowling J, 2003). Also, research indicated that positive humour style was positively associated with social competence (Yip J, 2005). However, there is little research that focus on the role of humour and its relationship with intercultural adjustment.
Studying and staying abroad can be regarded as a life transition. International students encounter stressful life changes and intercultural adjustments (Leong & Mallinckrodt, 1992). Many international students reported that they experience less social contact due to their language insufficiency; nevertheless, the majority of international students still fulfilled their academic goal and completed the study successfully. They also reported that they have grown to become more independent and more confident after the life transition. The positive characteristics that affect the adaptation to a foreign culture and the development of new social relationship are my research interest. The purpose of this study is to understand the meanings and uses of humor while international students are studying abroad in the U.K. International students are defined as non- U.K. students, first time coming to the U.K for pursuing degree. The study will utilize a nonexperimental design to achieve the desired aims described below. First, to understand how international students use humour and humour styles. Second, to gain insight and understanding of how they establish social support and its relation with humour styles. Third, to know how they use humour to enhance their intercultural adjustment. Fourth, to explore possible links between their intercultural adjustment and their objective sense of well being.
A non-experimental design will be utilized, and correlational research method will be used to study the relationships between attribute variables such as humour and adjustment. The most important reason to choose correlational research is that the relationships between humour and intercultural adjustment are like an interactive network. In other words, they are mutually-causal relationships. It is more efficient to use correlational method to explore the possible, underlying linkage. Another reason to use correlational method is that my research is happening in everyday life rather than in a laboratory. The intercultural adjustment refers to the difficulties international students would experience everyday in a foreign culture. For example, expressing their thoughts in a foreign language. Correlational method is also useful when I use optimism and humour as the predictor variables to predict the condition of adjustment. On the other hand, an experimental design is not suitable in this study because it is difficult to generalize the result to day-to-day settings. Indeed, individual adjustment is such a complex phenomenon that it cannot be tested in experiments. Moreover, the relationship between individual differences and their adjustments is not linear; consequently, it is not suitable to infer causal relationship by an experimental design.
Before the start of term two, 1st-year international undergraduate and postgraduate students at the University of will be recruited to participate in a longitudinal study on life adjustment to the U.K. The samples are limited to students who have stayed in the U.K. for less than six months. Students are contacted by e-mail and are requested to link to the website on which researcher put the questionnaires in advance. Students are acknowledged that they would complete a battery of questionnaires at the beginning of the term and then again after twelve weeks. In order to understand the possible language difficulty when participants do the questionnaires, the pilot study was done at the end of term one. The initial questionnaires (Time 1) are administered within the first three weeks of term two; the second questionnaires (Time 2) are administered twelve months after Time 1. A minimum of 200 subjects completed both the Time 1 and Time 2 questionnaires will be required. According to the information from the International Office, the mean age of international students is 25 years old (SD=4).
The main measures in this study are humour, social support, social adaptation and wellbeing. Other measures such as optimism and extroversion are administered for confounding elimination. Some research indicated that there are high correlation between optimism, humour and extroversion (Martin, 2003). All measures are administered twice, once at the initial stage (Time 1) and once at the second stage (Time 2). The battery of the questionnaire is designed to be understandable for students with limited English proficiency. Possible vocabularies are hyper linked to a brief definition.
The subjects' optimism is assessed by Life Orientation Test-Revised (LOT-R; Scheier et al., 1994). There are six self-report items and four filler items in this measure. Subjects rate by using a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Sample items for the scale are: 'In uncertain times, I usually expect the best' and 'If something can go wrong for me, it will'. Scores ranged from 5 to 24, with higher numbers reflecting greater optimism.
Participants' humour is assessed by using the Humor Styles Questionnaire (HSQ; Martin et al., 2003), a 32-item questionnaire developed to measure individual differences in uses of humour. There are four dimensions of humour usage: Using humour to enhance their selves (Self-enhancing), to improve the relationships with others (Affiliative), to enhance their selves at the expense of others (Aggressive) and to enhance relationships at the expense of their selves (Self-defeating).
Extroversion is measured by the sub-scale of The Big Five Inventory (BFI; John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991). The BFI consists of 44 descriptive phrases to assess the Big Five factors of personality: Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Extroversion, Neuroticism, and Openness. Each item is rated on a 5-point scale (1=disagree strongly, 5=agree strongly). The sub-scale 'Extroversion' of the BFI consists eight items, including three reverse-score items.
Participants' social support is measured by The Index of Sojourner Social Support (ISSS, Ward, C., 2005). The ISSS is an 18-item measure designed for use with sojourner in the Singapore to assess the four functional dimensions (i.e., emotional support, social companionship, tangible assistance, and informational support) of social support. The statements describe certain helpful behaviours that might help a sojourner stay in Singapore easier or more pleasant. Sample items include: Listen and talk with you whenever you feel lonely or depressed? (Emotional support); Explain and help you understand the local culture and language. (Tangible assistance). Respondents use a 5-point rating scale: 1 = no one would do this, 5 =many would do this. A higher score indicates greater perceived availability of supportive behaviour.
Sociocultural adaptation is assessed with a 29-item measure of the Sociocultural Adaptation Scale (SCAS, Ward, C., 1999). The questionnaire is designed for evaluating the amount of difficulty experienced in a variety of situations (e.g., making friends, getting used to local food). Five point rating scales (1=no difficult, 5= extreme difficulty) are used for rating; higher scores reflect more sociocultural adaptation problems.
Subject 's well-being is measured by the Affect Balance Scale (Bradburn, 1969) which is a 10-item rating scale including five statements phrasing positive feelings and five statements phrasing negative feelings. It was designed to evaluate present psychological well-being. Respondents reply either yes or no to each item. The sample questions are: 'Did you feel particularly excited or interested in something?';' Depressed or very unhappy?'. Scores range from 0, the lowest affect balance to 10, the highest affect balance.
The statistical analysis method of this study is still under development. The basic idea is, the quantitative data from both Time 1 and Time2 included participants' demographic information, the LOT-R, the HSQ, the extroversion sub-scale of BFI, the ISSS, the SCAS and the Affect Balance Scale will be collected. Then I will use descriptive statistics to generalize the basic information of study sample (mean age, gender, race and duration of staying U.K, etc.). Furthermore, correlational analysis will be used to look for correlations between perceived social support, self report social cultural adaptation, subjective well-being and humor styles scores. Hypothesis testing will be done to determine whether humour style has high correlation to better development of social relationships and adjustment to a foreign culture? How does this relate to people 's well-being?.
As I mentioned in the introduction, I chose the non-experimental design to carry out this study for reasons below:
First, the natural of the variables that I want to study is not observable. For example, intercultural adaptation is an abstract issue. What is a 'good adaptation'? How do we observe an individual 's adaptation condition from his or her behaviour is really a difficult issue.
Second, the intervention in my study, which should be controlled in an experimental design, is the natural setting itself. When we discuss the intercultural adjustment of people from different corners of the earth living in a new environment, we encounter the difficulty to 'create' the same intervention as a different culture.
Third, we can expect the relationships between variables will be very complicated. It is nearly impossible to obtain a one-way causal inference to interpret the relation. Therefore I rather choose a non-experimental design to investigate the phenomenon.
Fourth, the Pretest-Posttest Design can establish a wider scope of interpretation. We can examine how humour and social adaptation change over time and see if people with sense of humor have better social support and better adaptation after three months.
How about using a quasi-experimental design, namely, nonequivalent control group design in this study? The nonequivalent control group design has the advantage of providing a comparison group. Comparison group also improves controlling for changes that may be due to time or other causes. In this study, it is impossible to use the design because we cannot find a comparison group that does not face different culture and ask them to complete the measure of their intercultural adjustment. However, to enhance the external validity, we could have two groups that include adults moving to other country for working and younger adults entering new schools to see their humour style and the relation to adjustment.
There are several limitations to the proposed study. First, the personal characteristics of the subjects may be limited to a specific set due to the recruitment procedure. It is also possible that maladapted students do not have time or desire to take part in the study, which may bias my findings. Besides, the research environment may be lack of control because subjects are assessed through the Internet.
Second, the first data will be collected at the beginning of term two, which is later than the beginning of academic year, lead to incorrect baseline value. Therefore the participants' basic mental status and their adaptation condition are unknown. It could have some confounding factors that would influence the results. Also, some maladapted students will not be included in the research because they could have discontinued schooling.
Finally, the HSQ has seven response options, which may be confusing for some participants. Social desirability response bias must also be considered.
Despite these limitations and potential problems from this study, this preliminary research has vast potential and great innovation in humour study within the positive psychology field.
