Planck 's constant was calculated by use of the photoelectric effect and found to be h = 5.1 ( 0.1 x 10-34 J s. This result is inconsistent with the 2002 CODATA recommended value of h = 6.6260693 ( 0.0000011 x 10-34 J s. Suggestions of a limited data spread and errors in the measurement of the stopping voltage are put forward as possible reasons for this discrepancy. Investigations into the effect of varying the intensity of the incident light and the values of h derived under these conditions prove inconclusive in confirming that the energy of light is independent of its intensity as suggested by theory.
In the latter part of the nineteenth century the general scientific consensus was that a firm grasp had been obtained on all the laws of nature and that only patience and perseverance were required to complete our understanding of all physical phenomena. Two notable exceptions to this were the phenomena of blackbody radiation and the photoelectric effect, which had yet to be explained in a manner consistent with classical theory.
The term blackbody radiation is used to describe the temperature dependant radiation spectrum emitted by a perfect absorber, an ideal black material that absorbs all and reflects none of the radiant energy falling on it. The laws of thermodynamics and Maxwell 's equations had been successfully used to describe several features associated with blackbody radiation, and models explaining the phenomena were found for certain wavelength ranges, although attempts at describing the entire form of the blackbody spectrum using classical theory alone failed.
Planck first introduced the parameter h, which is now associated with his name, in his theory on blackbody radiation (Planck 1900) for which he was later awarded a Nobel Prize in 1918. In this theory Planck presented a model that explained the entire form of the blackbody spectrum, consistent at all wavelengths with experimental results. Planck had started with an empirical model that matched the data and had then developed a physical model that physically justified it. In this model atoms on the inside surface of the blackbody where described as electric oscillators which absorbed and emitted radiation over all frequencies. Critically he stated that the energy of the electric oscillating atoms could only be changed by discrete prescribed amounts, which he named light quanta.
The amount of energy exchanged by one light quantum () is given by the equation (1) where h is Planck 's constant and f is the oscillator frequency.
Later, in 1905, Einstein resolved the many puzzling problems surrounding the photoelectric effect by developing upon the ideas put forward by Planck. In this work, for which he received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921, Einstein theorized that just as the atomic oscillators in blackbody radiation can only change their energy in discrete jumps, the energy in an electromagnetic field is also quantized and can only take on a set of discrete values proportional to the field 's frequency. We now call the discrete amounts of energy that make up the electromagnetic field photons.
Relating to the photoelectric effect, electrons in an illuminated metal surface will absorb photons one at a time, and if the energy transferred to the electron is sufficient to rip it free from the metal 's surface it is emitted as a photoelectron with kinetic energy (2) the difference in the incoming photons energy (hf) and the work function of the metal ().
Einstein 's theory supported the observations that a photocurrent appears without delay, here a single electron absorbs each incident photon, transferring energy to the electron that is either sufficient to overcome the work function of the cathode leading to a photoelectric emission material or insufficient in which case the energy is dissipated. The intensity of the incident light has a direct effect on the emitted photocurrent since it varies the number of photons incident on the metal. It is the energy of the photons (determined by their frequency) that determines the energy of these photoelectrons. These were observations previously unexplained by classical theory.
The maximum energy of emitted photoelectrons can be measured by applying a voltage to the emitted photocurrent. The minimum voltage required to reduce the photocurrent to zero is known as the stopping voltage (V0) where (3) where e is the charge on an electron. If the stopping voltage is measured for a range of different monochromatic light sources a plot of the stopping voltage against the frequency of the incoming light source will yield a straight line of gradient (4).
Analysis of the slope of this graph permits a value for Planck 's constant to be derived.
The value of Planck 's constant is an important quantity because the constant is fundamentally related to the rate and quantum amounts by which energy can be transferred, and it is also critical to the argument for the wave particle duality of light. It is the fundamental constant which underlies Quantum Theory, described as one of the two great revolutionary theories that changed the face of physics in the early twentieth century (Gamow 1972), the other being Einstein 's Theory of Relativity. Quantum Theory has since been through many evolutionary stages and today gives us a deep insight into the behavior of systems on a nanometer scale.
Planck 's constant was obtained by the use of a method first performed by Millikan (1916), which involves exposing a photocell to a monochromatic light source and measuring the maximum kinetic energy of the resultant ejected photoelectrons.
In order to use the photoelectric effect to determine a value for Planck 's constant h we used a high-pressure mercury lamp and a range of five narrow-band interference filters to create five different monochromatic light sources. Each interference filter selects one spectral line from the light emitted by the mercury lamp; the frequencies of the transmitted mercury lines are shown in Figure 2.
The light was focused onto the photocell using a lens of focal length 100mm, with the heights of the optical riders adjusted until the light was incident only on the sensitive area of the photocell. A tight fit between the photocell cover and the photocell was ensured so as to minimise the effect of any remaining background light falling on the photocell after semi-blackout conditions were introduced. In order to vary the intensity of light falling on the photocell the size of the iris diaphragm was altered.
The light incident on a potassium surface, chosen for its low work function (a property caused by the weakly bound valence electrons of alkali metals), caused the emission of photoelectrons, some of which travelled to the anode of the photocell in the form of a photoelectric current. This photoelectric current charges the capacitor, until the voltage is sufficient to reduce the incident current to precisely zero. This value of the voltage was the stopping potential (V0). At this value even the electrons with the greatest energy (i.e. the lowest work function and the greatest kinetic energy, see equation 2) can no longer overcome the capacitor voltage. It is noted that the work function in this experiment includes in the energy balance the contact potential between the cathode and the anode.
A capacitor was used to determine V0 since it eliminated the necessity to search for V0 manually by observing the value at which the photocurrent is reduced to zero, this method would likely have reduced the accuracy in a V0 measurement.
Each interference filter was cycled through three times in order to obtain repeat measurements of the V0 stopping potential. Between each measurement the capacitor was discharged completely. Once the interference filter was in place the capacitor was charged by the photocurrent for 60 seconds. The Vo value was recorded from the display on the multimeter, which is connected in parallel with the capacitor. Care was taken to avoid parallax error by making each reading at the same incidence angle to the display; this measurement was conducted at right angles to the display.
For the yellow and green interference filters the multimeter display could be read to an accuracy of 0.005V, whereas for the blue, violet and ultraviolet interference filters the scale of the multimeter required changing, leading to an increase in the error of the measurement to 0.01V. In both cases these errors equated to a percentage error 1%. The interference filters have been tested and errors can be ignored, while the value of e, the charge on an electron, has been obtained experimentally on numerous occasions to a very high accuracy and therefore can be assumed to have negligible error.
Figure 4 shows a linear fit to the five data points, each corresponding to a different interference filter and thus a specific frequency of incident light. The value of the gradient for this weighted fit was analyzed using equation 4 to derive a value of Planck 's constant of: .
From the fit shown in figure 4 the work function for the cathode can also be obtained: although as noted in section 4 this value includes the contact potential between the cathode and the anode in the energy balance and therefore it cannot be compared to any standard values.
Planck 's constant was obtained by experimental method and is calculated as: .
This compares with the 2002 CODATA (Committee on Data for Science and Technology) recommended value of: .
Since the first experimental calculation of h Millikan (1916), the value has been progressively refined by ever more accurate experimental techniques. A recently employed technique involves a comparison of the electric power, measured in terms of the Josephson and quantum Hall effects, with mechanical power, measured in terms of the meter, kilogram and second, of a moving coil watt balance (Williamsal. 1998).
The value derived using here using the photoelectric effect is of the right order of magnitude, but far outside the current recommended value. At this point it is pertinent to analyze the limitations of the experimental set up employed here in order to understand why this reported discrepancy has occurred.
The derivation of h in this experiment relies heavily upon graphical analysis, in this case the computation of the slope of a linear fit to a plot comparing the stopping voltage of a photocurrent induced by incident light of differing frequencies. The accuracy of such a measurement is strongly related to the number of data points analyzed. Here, with only five different interference filters, h is calculated based on the gradient of a fit to only five data points. Although, in theory, it is possible for two data points to be sufficient for an accurate gradient to be calculated (assuming a linear fit), it is likely that experimentally this would be very hard to achieve. Figure 4 presents a linear fit whose gradient is influenced significantly by the accuracy of each separate individual data point. It is suggested that a larger range of interference filters would have reduced the dependence of the linear fit on individual results and thus would give a more reliable fit. With such limited data it is difficult to discern whether any points are anomalous, although the strong correlation observed in figure 4 would suggest against this. A systematic error however, would be very difficult to identify.
The kinetic energy of photoelectrons emitted by the photoelectric effect is in practice difficult to measure directly. Instead this can be obtained using the relationship K.E. = eV0 , as used in the derivation of equation 3.
The stopping potential for the emitted photocurrent in this experiment is measured directly from the potential difference (V) across the capacitor when it is fully charged by the photocurrent. V0 was defined as the maximum value of V, assumed reached after a charging time interval of 60 seconds.
Elementary knowledge of a capacitor shows that the charge (Q) on a charging capacitor increases exponentially with respect to time. The relationship Q ( V indicates that, for a given fixed capacitance, V also increases exponentially. During the charging process the initial growth in V is very rapid but this growth gradually reduces as the photocurrent is reduced. V eventually approaches V0 asymptotically with no well-defined cut off point for where V0 is definitely reached.
Measurements of V were made at inconsistent times after the minimum 60 seconds of charging and it is therefore suggested that since the final increase in V to V0 takes a larger respective time than the initial growth in V it is possible that significant underestimates of V0 may have been made for certain data points if the capacitor was still in the process of charging. However, although this may have shifted the position of individual data points and thus changed the uncertainty in the gradient of the linear fit, it is unlikely to have caused a concerted shift in the value determined for the gradient, and thus the value calculated for Planck 's constant. However a larger experimental error may have brought the calculated value in line with the 2002 CODATA recommended value. It is suggested that either leaving a longer period of time before measurement, or taking a measurement of V0 after a fixed time interval would have improved the reliability of the data set. It is noted that underestimations in the stopping voltage would have reduced the gradient of the fit, thus consequently reducing the derived value for h. Planck 's constant calculated experimentally here is indeed smaller than the recommended value.
If the value of determined from the data set was compared with a reference value for potassium it would be possible to deduce from this comparison whether the error in V0 mentioned above was likely to have affected the gradient of the linear fit, or solely the uncertainty in this value. A close match between the calculated value and a reference value would indicate that the intercept of the linear fit was correct and therefore any experimental errors would most likely only have affected the gradient of the fit, and thus directly the calculation of Planck 's constant. However as mentioned in section 2 the work function in this experiment includes in the energy balance the contact potential between the cathode and the anode and therefore it is unsuitable to compare with recommended values of for potassium.
The effects of a reverse current induced at the anode by the incident light, which would be accelerated by the stopping voltage produced at the capacitor, also deserves further investigation. No attempt to quantify the results of a reverse current has been investigated, and therefore it is difficult to discern what effect they would have on the calculation of h.
One of the fundamental concepts surrounding Einstein 's work on the photoelectric effect was the conclusion that when viewing light as particles, the energy of light was independent of its intensity and solely dependant on it frequency. This was investigated by determining a value of Planck 's constant for light of different intensities. Theory, as seen in equation 3, clearly shows that the value of h should not change. . .
The results given above are inconclusive in determining whether intensity affects the value of Planck 's constant. If the intensity of light were to affect the energy of the photons it would be expected that a higher intensity light would increase the value calculated for h. This is not the case; both results are lower than the original calculated value.
It is noted that a very weak correlation was obtained for the lower intensity readings. Einstein 's work on the photoelectric effect showed that intensity was related to the number of photons incident on the photocell in a given time. A lower intensity would result in less photons per unit time incident on the cathode, and the net effect would be less photoelectrons and a smaller photocurrent charging the capacitor. This would results in longer charge time in the capacitor, it is suggested that this would amplify the effect of the error previously suggested in the measurement for V0 . A longer charge time would mean the capacitor was even less likely to have reached V0 in the 60 second time interval, leading to possible underestimations in the stopping voltage. This would explain the larger uncertainty in the value quoted for h for this intensity. Since a set up amplified to the error in V0 indicates that this error is likely, it is not unreasonable to suggest that this error was also in effect in the original set up.
The photoelectric effect was investigated at a potassium cathode illuminated with different frequencies of light from a mercury lamp and interference filter setup to determine a value for Planck 's constant h . By use of a graphical method, which involved analyzing the slope of a fit to data points comparing stopping voltage against frequency of incident light, a value of h was calculated as: .
This result was found to be inconsistent with recommended values. It is suggested that the limited data range puts a large emphasis on the accuracy of individual results and thus there is little tolerance to anomalies.
Possible errors in the measurement of the stopping voltage are also discussed, it is noted that the asymptotic nature of voltage across the capacitor as it reaches the stopping voltage means that it is critical that sufficient time is left for the capacitor to fully charge. It is commented that if the stopping voltage was recorded too soon, it is likely to have affected the uncertainty in the h value rather than have changed the value itself.
Investigations into possible reverse currents at the anode are suggested, since these errors have not been quantified in this technique and their influence on the calculated h value cannot be accounted for.
Values of h are derived under conditions of higher and lower intensity incident light. Results of these experiments prove inconclusive in determining whether the energy of light is independent of its intensity as suggested by theory, since no agreement is found between the values of h for these conditions. Lower intensity light shows a very poor correlation of data points indicating a large uncertainty in the value of h. It is reasoned that this is due to the longer charging time of the capacitor, because of the smaller photocurrent under these circumstances, which amplifies the error in the measurement of V0 previously discussed.
