There are a number of models of international trade; these models focus on alternative determinants of trade within a common basic framework of assumptions. The Heckscher-Ohlin model is one such model, and has proved a popular reference point for the development of international trade theory and policy. I will explain the model and its assumptions and link them to the robustness of the theorem. Finally, I will address the relevance of this particular model to the policies that governments develop with regard to trade with foreign countries.
E. Heckscher and B. Ohlin, developed 1919-24.
There are five main assumptions of the characteristics of a closed economy: identical production functions (technologies) among countries; the same relative endowments (K/L) of the two factors of production, capital and labour, across countries; constant returns to scale (CRS); identical and homothetic tastes/preferences of consumers in all countries; no market imperfections/distortions such as taxes, labour unions or imperfection competition. These five conditions imply that no trade will take place, and hence if any of them are relaxed, trade becomes a possibility. They can therefore be thought of as the "bases" for trade. i.e. Proportional changes in both inputs lead to the same proportional change in output; production is homogeneous of degree 1. See Appendix A.
Homotheticity implies that the same fraction of income is spent of different goods when income increases, and is a sufficient condition for drawing community indifference curves. See Appendix B.
The base for trade in this model is that countries differ in terms of their respective resources. This has two aspects. Firstly, countries have different relative endowments of factors of production, i.e. different relative factor abundance. Secondly, the goods produced by each country use factors of production at differing relative intensities. Since it is these relative endowments and intensities that matter, as opposed to absolute values, the model is also known as the "factor-proportions" model. Some further assumptions, in addition to those of autarky outlined above, are necessary: both factors of production are assumed to be available in fixed amounts and fully employed. They are also homogeneous and perfectly mobile within a country, but perfectly immobile internationally. Perfect competition is assumed in markets, and there are no transportation costs, tariffs or other barriers to trade between countries.
Capital is equally useful in the production of all commodities; labour has identical type/level of skill.
Large number of producers, each without influence within the market, hence all are price-takers. Free entry to the industry drives excess profits to zero.
In order to begin illustrating the model, consider two countries: Home (H) and Foreign (F). Relative factor endowments are defined specifically as the ratios between capital stocks and labour forces in the two countries. Since we are assuming that factors are available in fixed amounts, then if one country, which I will take to be H, is relatively capital abundant, then the other country, F, must necessarily be relatively labour abundant. That is, (1).
The countries both produce goods X and Y. I assume that good Y is used relatively capital-intensively, and good X relatively labour-intensively:
See Appendix C for an Edgeworth Box illustration of equation (2). (2).
In (autarky) equilibrium, both the X and Y sectors choose capital-labour ratios such that costs are minimised for the prevailing factor price, (3) where w is the wage rate and r is the rental rate on a unit of capital.
Fig. 2 below shows the production possibility frontiers (PPF 's) for countries H and F. Their relative shapes reflect the differing endowments of K and L. Country H, being capital abundant, has its PPF biased towards the Y axis, whereas country F, being labour abundant, has its PPF biased towards the X axis. The diagram also shows the interaction of community indifference curves with these PPF 's: in the case of country H, the highest curve, u hA, is tangent to its PPF at point Ah; for F, the point is Af. The ratios of commodity prices (px/p y) that apply at these points of tangency are ph for country H and pf for country F. Since community indifference curves have the same slope along any ray from the origin, the equilibrium price ratio in autarky must be steeper in country H. That is, ph   pf . Furthermore, since both PPF 's and community indifference curves are homogeneous, the respective autarky price ratios would be the same regardless of country size (and hence the distance of the PPF 's from the origin). Specifically, the respective equilibrium points would lie along rays from the origin as shown. This reiterates the earlier point that it is relative, not absolute values, that matter in this model.
The slope of a PPF is known as the Marginal Rate of Transformation (MRT); the concave shape of the frontier is due to differing factor intensities in the production of the commodities.
Fig. 3 reproduces the PPF 's and autarky equilibrium points of Fig. 2. However we now turn to the situation in which trade can occur between the two countries. First, recall that in autarky, p h is greater than p f i.e. (p x/p y) is greater in H. If trade can occur, consumers in country H will observe that good X is relatively cheaper in country F, and hence make some of their purchases of X by importing from F. Producers in F therefore respond by increasing supply, and this clearly causes p h to fall. Similarly, consumers in country F observe that good Y is relatively cheaper in H, and.
Basic concepts of supply and demand dictate that increasing the supply of a commodity leads to a lower equilibrium price. so p f rises through the same process. As long as price differentials exist between countries, consumers will continue to shift some of their purchases of commodities from the higher-priced market to the lower one.
These changes in demand also have implications for production. Since consumers in H now purchase some of good X in F, and consumers in F purchase some of good Y in H, production in country H moves along its PPF towards the Y-axis (from A h towards Q h), and production in country F moves along its own PPF towards the X-axis (from A f towards Q f). This again implies that the relative price ratios in each country will change, due to the changing tangencies of the price ratio lines with the points of production. This process will continue until there is zero excess demand and supply for both countries; this result is illustrated by the equally sized "trade triangles" in Fig. 3.
Remembering the earlier assumptions that there are no distortions or imperfections that act as barriers to international trade. See Appendix D.
Eventually, trade will result in the equalisation of commodity prices to an intermediate level p*, such that (4).
The points at which this price-ratio line p* is tangent to the two PPF 's are Q h and Q f . Since this single price-ratio is tangent to both PPF 's, the slope of the PPF 's at the points of tangency must necessarily be equal. Points Q h and Q f also illustrate that under free trade, both countries continue to produce both goods. Another important result is that both countries now consume at points C f and C h, which lie on community indifference curves that outside their respective PPF 's. That is, free trade results in welfare gains that would not be achievable in autarky.
It can be concluded that this result is consistent with the countries respective comparative advantages: the labour-abundant country F exports its labour-intensive commodity (X), while the capital-abundant country H exports its capital-intensive commodity (Y). The Heckscher-Ohlin theorem is drawn from this result:
Various other important theorems and ideas can be drawn from the model, relating to relative factor prices, real factor returns and output. However, these are beyond the scope of this essay.
The implicit implication of this is that a country exports the services of its abundant factor and imports the services of its scarce factor, hence trade in commodities also exchanges surplus factor services between countries.
The assumptions of the model are restrictive with regard to its applicability to more advanced theories of international trade. The assumption of factor mobility between industries is only relevant to the long run position of an economy. That is, the transition of factors of production from one industry to another is subject to potentially large time periods. Capital may require time to depreciate in some uses and for new investment to take place in others. Similarly, labour may need considerable re-training in order to acquire the skills necessary to work in a different industry.
The assumption of identical and homothetic preferences across countries is also clearly unrealistic in the real world. Cultural and socio-economic factors are likely to be significant in the formation of preferences, and hence community indifference curves, across countries.
The model does not allow for the possibility of Factor Intensity Reversals: these occur when a good can be capital-intensive in the capital abundant country, but labour-intensive in the labour abundant country. Within the model, this would imply that both countries would export the same good - clearly an impossibility.
The extent to which the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem is robust can be considered in terms of the extent to which the assumptions can be relaxed while the theorem still holds. If production did not exhibit constant returns to scale, the size of the country would become significant, and hence invalidate the theorem. Similarly, if production technologies were not identical in both countries, this would disable the use of the theorem. Some propositions of the model would be unaffected however, for example the impact of a tariff on real wages in H only depends on technologies in H, not on those in F.
Recall that the degree of homogeneity would therefore be     1.
Caves, R.E., Frankel, J.A. & Jones, R.W. (2002), World Trade and Payments, P.121.
If the factors of production were heterogeneous, this would mean that the two-factor version of the theorem would not be of any relevance, since there would be a large variety of capital and labour factors. Despite this, a short-run version of the theorem may still be applicable, if factors are locked into contracts that prevents their mobility between industries.
The model assumes that factors are immobile internationally, due to complications involving trade in factors between countries. However, it is possible to relax this assumption, since the theorem is expected to hold even under simultaneous commodity and factor trading.
Factors may "migrate" across countries in order to take advantage of differences in relative factor returns, w and r.
Markusen, J.R., Melvin J.R., Kaempfer, W.H., & Maskus, K.E. (1995), International Trade - Theory and Evidence, p.107.
It may be possible for market distortions to overturn the theorem if the effects were severe enough to offset the fundamental influence of differences in relative endowments within the model. Distortions such as tariffs imposed on imports can impose restrictions by acting as barriers to trade. However, even if some of the trade in goods was eliminated, any remaining trade would still follow the pattern described by the theorem, and hence it would still be applicable.
An interesting extension of the Heckscher-Ohlin with regard to policymaking is discussed by Grossman & Rogoff (1995): Given the underlying assumptions of the model, and the presumption that preferences for policy depend only on self-interest, it can be deduced that individuals will rank different policies on the basis of their factor endowments. Policymakers may also have different preferences, such as transferring resources to favoured groups, being re-elected or maximising social welfare. The assumption that income distribution is irrelevant in the Hecskcher-model may also mean that policy will be chosen in order to maximise the aggregate real income of the economy.
Grossman, G.M. & Rogoff, K. (1995), Handbook of International Economics, p.1459.
Policymakers' interventions can be in the form of price policies, such as tariffs or export subsidies, or quantitative restrictions such as quotas.
Grossman & Rogoff (1995) also explain that the Heckscher-Ohlin model cannot account for the large share of world trade that takes place between industries. This means that the relevance of the model to policymaking may be depleted in terms of policies that may be undertaken in order to redistribute welfare between industries.
Magel, Brock & Young (1989) developed ideas relating to the role that political contributions play in conjunction with the Heckscher-Ohlin model with regard to policymaking. They hypothesise that political lobbying groups interact with political parties by making campaign contributions in order to increase the probability that their favoured party is re-elected. The two lobbying groups are those of labour capital owners; price and quantitative policies tend to redistribute welfare unevenly between these two groups.
In general, political economy models often work within a Heckscher-Ohlin setting, and modify the objective function that is maximised by policymakers in order to illustrate preferences for particular distributional outcomes.
