Methods by which Helicobacter pylori contribute to disease are relatively unknown, but a link between infection and clinical symptoms, such as gastric ulcer and cancer are clear. Current research has highlighted several possible factors that influence disease outcome, such as adhesion factors and secreted proteins found on the bacterium. Since the discovery that Helicobacter pylori has a role in causing ulcers the medical treatment of this symptom has drastically changed to now involve the use of antibiotic therapies. This article aims to outline the molecular biology of the organism in its survival mechanisms, its major role in causing gastric ulcers and the modern treatment of them.
The genus Helicobacter was first proposed in 1989 and since then 31 species have been identified, 22 of these are associated with gastric niches. Helicobacter pylori is a small, spiralic gram negative bacillus that is highly motile due to the several polar flagella (see figure 1). The bacterium is only found in the mucus layer of the human stomach lining, the gastric epithelium cells. After thousands of years of co-evolution between the bacterium and humans a complex relationship between the two has developed leading to chronic infections allowing both the bacteria and host to survive. The World Health Organisation in a recent report stated that about half the world 's population is infected with Helicobacter pylori. Infection with Helicobacter pylori is associated with two outcomes: duodenal ulcer disease (preceded by antral-perdominant gastritis and high acid production) and gastric adenocarcinoma (proceeded by corpus-predominant gastritis, atrophy and intestinal metaplasia).
The method of transmission is still relatively unclear for this bacterium but two pathways have recently been suggested: faecal-oral and oral-oral. Several studies from developing countries also show that environmental factors maybe important, such as drinking water management and sewage treatment.
Different transmission routes are likely to be predominant in different geographical areas, for example countries with well developed sanitation will show more oral-oral transmission then faecal-oral. The oral-oral transmission pathway was proposed because Helicobacter pylori colonies have been found in saliva and dental plaques, this means it is probable that the bacteria will survive and move within family groups allowing possible tracking of infection through the developed world. Through this method of transmission the mother is believed to play a major role in transmission of the infection to her children during infancy.
In developing countries a study by Klein et al, 1991 looked in to the prevalence of H.pylori infections in Peruvian children and the drinking water source of their families. Those families that had external water supplies were three times more likely to be infected with H.pylori than those with internal plumbing. Also discovered was that children from high income families that had a municipal water supply had a twelve fold increase risk of being infected that those families with a water supply from community wells.
Doubts have been cast however to the faecal-oral transmission method, studies among sewage workers (Friis et al 1993) into the diseases caused by H.pylori did not show an increases level in stomach cancer or ulcers. Levels of IgG antibodies against H.pylori were measured in the sewage workers and in referents with matching age and socio-economical status and it was found that exposure to sewage gave no rises in the antibody count and therefore no increased risk of H.pylori infection.
Helicobacter pylori infects the epithelium of the gastric pit cells in the stomach, along the transition zone between the squamous epithelium of the forestomach and the zymogenic region. The pathogen posses polar flagella, and with its corkscrew shape will easily borrow into the gastric mucosa which protects it from the acidic environment of the stomach. A mucus-hydrolysing enzyme also aids the bacterium on entering the mucus layer. The H.pylori urease enzyme is required for the initial colonization in the gastric niche; it is used to mediate acid resistance by producing ammonia and is activated at pH5.5. The enzyme requires nickel as a cofactor and it was found that in acidic conditions the enzyme relocates from the inner to the outer section of the bacterial cytoplasm where, it assembles urea channels called Ure1. The urea is imported by a proton-gated mechanism through the Ure1 channel, the proton-gating is achieved through the formation of hydrogen bonds by periplasmic residues inducing a conformational change in trans-membrane protein domains. Nickel homeostasis is required to maintain urease activity and is achieved by the H.pylori nickel-regulation NikR; it acts as a pleiotrophic metal-dependant regulator. Overall the urease action produces an alkaline cloud around the bacterium, neutralising the acid and protecting the cell.
Adherence to epithelium cells is a requirement for successful colonisation of the stomach. A bacterium with better adherence to epithelium cells is likely to be more resistant to clearance by the immune system and therefore a more successful pathogen. Close contact with epithelium cell surfaces will prevent the pathogen being removed during mucosal shedding and give it a supply of nutrients acquired from the damaged epithelium cells. However this close contact does have disadvantages, it puts the pathogen into such close contact that it will cause a large immune response that will be difficult to escape due to the pathogens reduced motility. There are several proteins currently believed to be important in host cell adhesion these include: BabA, SabA, SabB, HopZ and OipA. BabA (b-binding adhesin) is the best characterised H.pylori adhesion proteins to date; in vivo studies suggests that it interacts with Lewis B blood group antigen found on the surface of gastric mucosa and using them as targets for adhesion. A possible secondary role of the Lewis antigen for H.pylori is that it might allow it to evade the immune system producing prolonged infections by antigenic mimicry. However in vitro studies have produced different hypothesis, a study by Rothenbacter et al 2004 stated that host Le (a-b+) phenotype may hinder the colonisation of H.pylori in the population they studied. Of the women studied the H.pylori prevalence was lowest in those women of phenotype Le (a-b+) showing a significant difference between women of this phenotype and of other blood groups. People of the Le (a-b+) phenotype possess Le B in their bodily secretions such as saliva and gastric fluids, these antigens may bind to the glycoproteins on the H.pylori surface and so hinder there adhesion to gastric epithelium cells. This mechanism was also used to explain the common observation that none secretors (such as blood group O subjects) are at increased risk of H.pylori diseases such as peptic ulcers. This study highlighted the importance of both the strain of Helicobacter pylori and the phenotype of the host it infects with respect to the incidence of infection and the disease outcome.
The putative adhesin SabB encoded for by the gene sabB is another adhesin molecule that has been studied although little is still known about it, it is believed to cause inflammation. The SabB adhesin is a homologue of the sialyl-Lewis x binding protein SabA. Sialyl Lewis glycoproteins function as receptors for selectins found on the surface of leukocytes during inflammation. They help mediate the movement of leukocytes cells to the site of infection or inflammation. These glycoproteins are almost never present in healthy living tissue yet are found abundantly in inflamed tissue (like during a H.pylori infection). In mimicking inflammation glycoproteins the SabB adhesin may play a role in ulcer formation, by increasing the amount of cell damage caused by high levels of inflammation. The exact function of the adhesin for H.pylori is still unknown.
When the pathogen infects it stimulates both branches of the immune system into a response.
Innate immunity:
The body initiates a strong inflammation reaction producing a number of cytokines typified by high concentration of interleukin-8 (IL-8) produced by gastric epithelium cells. This cytokine is chemotactic and encourages neutrophils to the site of infection contributing to the inflammation cascade. Macrophages are activated and release other interleukins such as IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and IL12 along with interferon-   and tumour necrosis factor-  , the cytokines cause T helper cells to migrate to the site of infection. The innate immune response is not sufficient to clear the infection and increase inflammation.
Adaptive immunity:
H.pylori causes B cell activation and antibody production, including circulation IgG and IgA found in mucous. These antibodies can activate circulating T helper 1 cells; the vigorous immune response does not eliminate the infection.
It is extremely rare that the infection is cleared naturally by the immune system once clinical signs of disease have been presented.
There are several identified virulence factors produced by H.pylori that mediate cell damage and can give rise to ulcers.
Neutrophil-activating antigen is a protein released by the bacterial cell and will bind to its surface, its primary role maybe as an adhesion molecule and is highly involved in the inflammation response. It will act as a chemotactic for neutrophils and monocytes and will promote adhesion of neutrophils to the epithelium cell membrane. It will also induce mast cells to produce proinflammatory cytokines. Also by inducing neutrophils to release oxygen radicals its roles as a gastric ulcer former is strengthened, as these oxygen radicals will react and damage epithelium cells.
VacA or vacuolating cytotoxin is a secretion system and is believed to be similar to that of other type V secretion systems. Its model was confirmed by Fischer et al 2001, who discovered that the C-terminal VacA domain is inserted into the bacterial outer membrane, the toxin binds to the plasma membrane of target cells and is internalised by a pore formation. Once inside the host cells the toxin can cause rearrangement in the organisation of endosomes and lysosomes, vacuole formation and membrane fusion and swelling. The vacuole produced can be used to facilitate intracellular survival of H.pylori; the pathogen creates a reservoir of itself within the vacuole which is difficult to access by antibiotics and host immune responses. It is also believed that VacA can down regulate the T cell response; VacA will bind to T cells and inhibit its nuclear factor (NF-AT) of the activated T cell. When Vac A is present NF-AT fails to translocate to the T cell nucleus inducing the down regulation of IL-2 transcription. This occurs in conjunction with VacA induced signalling to p38 stress kinase in neutrophils and T cells, this suggests that VacA plays a major role in causing gastric inflammation and by hampering the immune response allow for a persistent infection.
CagA or cytotoxin-associated antigen is linked to peptic ulcer disease and gastric carcinoma and is not found in all strains of H.pylori. The CagA protein is coded for in the CagA pathogenicity island, this is a cluster of genes encoding for CagA and a number of associated proteins which is about 40kb long and has 30 open reading frames. CagA has a highly diverse amino acid sequence and contains both tyrosine phosphorylation motifs and cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate dependant phosphorylation motifs. The CagA protein will become tyrosine phosphorlated at different sites and can induce changes in the tyrosine phosphorylation of eukaryotic proteins.
This CagA phosphorylation is achieved by members of the Src-kinase enzyme family. This process will down regulate a phosphatase called SHP-2 which can lead to abnormal cell growth and possible promote gastric cancer. The CagA protein is delivered to host gastric cells by a type IV secretion system that protrudes from the cell envelope to the outside (see figure 2). The method of assembling this structure was first revealed by Rhode et al 2003, who described it as a filamentous, needle like preformed structure. The needle is covered with a protein from Hp0527 which forms a VirB10-homologous protein sheet. This protein sheet is mechanically stable and is believed to protect the needle against the acidic environment of the stomach and due to its lack of antigenic variability may protect it against the host immune system. The structure may also be the primary binding structure for the type IV secretion system by binding it to a cellular receptor. The Hp0527 contains an unusually large amount of direct DNA repeats allowing for variable gene expression. The type IV secretion system in H.pylori is slightly modified compared to other naturally competent bacteria which take up DNA by a type IV pili, once the CagA had been translocated and phosphorlated it was mostly confined to the area just below the attachment site. This secretion system allows the pathogen to "talk" to the host cells through signalling pathways translocating CagA protein product in to the gastric epithelium cells.
This molecule then has an effect on the host cell, one of these is to initiate actin polymerisation which alters the motility of the gastric epithelium cells so stabilising the link between the H.pylori and the host cell. It also enables an attachment pedestal to be pushed out by the epithelium cell allowing the H.pylori to be in much closer contact with it. It is also believed that CagA causes disruption of the epithelial barrier function and dysplastic alterations in the epithelium cell morphology. The actin polymerisation will ruffle structures in the epithelium cell; this process is totally dependant on the type IV secretion system and had no bearing on the expression of the CagA protein. Membrane ruffling, cell spreading and motility are the early consequences of the infection on epithelium cells. At a molecular level a change occurs when the Rho-GTPase Rac1 and Cdc42 are activated, later in the infection the CagA protein enhances motility and epithelium cell elongation.
Helicobacter pylori infections are often associated with host cell proliferation and cancer, and strains of H.pylori that are CagA-positive give a further risk of the patient contracting gastric cancer. It has been suggested that CagA protein may exert a growth factor like effect within the target epithelium cells. The epithelium cell derived matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7 is found in large quantities in tumour formations and is induced during bacterial cell contact, suggesting a link between the metalloproteinase and cancer. Cag positive strains of H.pylori increase expression of MMP-7, where as cag negative strains have no effect on MMP-7 production. In a study by Bebb et al 2003, it was observed that human gastric epithelium cells in vivo and vitro that had been infected by H.pylori have higher levels of MMP-7 protein and its corresponding mRNA. This showed that H.pylori infections are linked to gastric cancer cases.
Once it was proven that gastric ulcers were cause by bacterial infections, various antimicrobial agents were studied for their efficiency at eradicating H.pylori. Single drug treatments were abandoned early due to the high levels of resistance in the bacterial community particularly to nitroimidazoles and macrolides which are key elements in multi drug treatment. In 1990 dual combination therapies containing a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and an antibiotic, either amoxicillin or clarithromycin were introduced; this treatment however was soon abolished due to low eradication rate of just 60%. Bismuth based triple combination therapies were used as a replacement containing colloidal bismuth subcitrate, tetracycline and metronidazole. This combination is popular because it is cheep to produce, consists of a two week course of treatment and has high eradication rates. This treatment however is not adequate world wide due to a high (80%-90%) metronidazole resistance in H.pylori strains mainly in developing countries, because of this alternate triple therapy were devised containing a PPI and two antibiotics. The proton pump inhibitors have a synergistic effect with several antibiotics by raising the pH levels making it optimal for antibiotic activity. PPI based triple therapies are now considered the first line of treatment; they consist of a 7-14 day course with lansoprazole, omeprazole or pantoprazole with two of the following agents: viz. clarithromycin, amoxicillin and metronidazole.
According to an Iranian study (Malekadeh et al, 2004) 37.5% of H.pylori strains are resistant to metronidazole, 28% to clarithromycin confirming the need for multiple drug treatments.
A new group of triple regiments have been developed containing ranitidine bismuth citrate (RBC), that are designed to replace the PPI therapies, theses cause less acid suppression but provide a bactericidal action against H.pylori.
If a 100% eradication of H.pylori is desired then a quadruple combination therapy is required, it is achieved by adding an anti-secretory agent like PPI to the classical bismuth triple therapy. This treatment allows for high and consistent eradication rates after just a week of treatment.
A recent study highlighted the possible use of chicken egg in immunisation and treatment of H.pylori infection. The paper by Suzuki et al, 2004 discovered that chicken egg yolk was a source of antibody, immunoglobulin Y (IgY) which acted against H.pylori. In the study IgY prepared form hen egg yolks that had been immunised with H.pylori urease (anti-HpU IgY) was orally administered to volunteers who had been diagnosed positive for H.pylori infection by a C-urea breath test. The treatment course lasted 4 weeks and after that time the C - urea breath test results were significantly lower, showing a reduction in infection, but no cases had completely cleared the infection. This antibody if administered from early childhood, possibly through diet, might be effective at preventing intestinal infection. The antibody has the effect of preventing the bacterium from adhering to the epithelium cell wall. It was estimated that one egg yolk of a vaccinated chicken contains 141mg/egg of IgY antibody and approximately 40g annually making this a cheap source of antibody for immunisation. The antibodies resistance to acidic conditions and pepsin degradation is yet to be confirmed, it was reported that inactivated of the antibody occurred at pH3 due to a major conformational change in its structure lowing the antigen binding affinity. To help counteract this problem a proton pump inhibitor was administered with the anti-Hp IgY. The mechanisms to how this IgY works are still unknown but the study 's results indicate that, along with an anti-acid agent the antibody will inhibit H.pylori associated gastric mucosal inflammation.
Now that the role Helicobacter pylori plays in gastric ulcer and cancer formation is beginning to be understood biologists can start to produce more efficient and safer treatments for its cure, and begin to look at possible immunisation techniques to help prevent countries that suffer greatly from the disease. There are still large areas of the bacterium 's biology we do n't understand, such as it method of transmission, but modern advances in biology are greatly helping researched to take great leaps forward in solving some Helicobacter pylori mysteries.
