Self-referral to A+E for bruising 2 to accident at home.
Miss stated she was at home on the morning of 20 th Sept. this year preparing both her six-week old daughter (), and her 3-year old boy () to go shopping. was playing with a skateboard in the hallway, and was strapped into a pushchair. She left both children temporarily as she went to the toilet. When she returned she found sprawled across the hallway floor, in some distress with the skateboard nearby. was still strapped into the pushchair, which had fallen backwards onto the vinyl-covered floor of the hall. She was screaming, and had a minor graze over her right eye. was sprawled over the floor, and the skateboard was nearby. Later, explained that he had skateboarded along the hallway, lost balance and grabbed onto the handles of  's pushchair. The pushchair fell backwards and fell with it, hitting her head on the floor.
Miss said there was no loss of consciousness, and was not bleeding from the graze. She phoned her partner 's mother, who suggested she phone the Health visitor. The Health visitor was called, and recommended that attend A+E. arrived at A+E four hours later. was seen by the A+E SHO, who referred to the paediatricians.  's past medical history is unremarkable, excepting an oral Candida infection post-natally. Miss said she had suffered from Candida infections throughout her pregnancy. lives at home with her mother, half brother , and his father who is a paint sprayer.
She has not had all her relevant immunisations due to difficulties attending the surgery. She is not on any medications, or has any allergies.
Miss described a normal pregnancy, and had a normal vaginal delivery at term. Neonatal period was unremarkable. Developmentally, all appropriate milestones have been achieved. Systems review was unremarkable.  's mother is a 19year-old partly trained hairdresser. She has had three children. They live in cramped, rented accommodation on the outskirts of . is the eldest, aged three years. He is currently on the Child Protection Register after being physically abused by his father.  's father is now in prison for unrelated assault charges, and Miss has a strained relationship with him. It was unclear when he is eligible to be released. Miss had a second child with this partner, as she "felt it'd bring us closer together". was born a year after . had an uneventful pregnancy and labour, and was delivered vaginally at term. Miss added was always a small child, and never seemed to "catch his breath easily". Unexpectedly, was found dead in his cot one morning. He was 10 months old. Briefly describing the events around this difficult period, Miss said she was perennially confused and unable to concentrate, and just felt "my head was spinning" all the time.  's unexpected death did little for Miss  's relationship. Elaborating further, Miss said "That when he started drinking, and began hitting me." Miss eventually left him, and he was imprisoned on unrelated assault charges.
Miss found a new partner, and quickly fell pregnant with .  's father works full-time as a trainee paint-sprayer at a local car factory. He feels he does n't spend as much time with as he would like, but has to work all available overtime.
Unremarkable. There was a minor graze over  's right eye that was not evident by the time of discharge. was on the 75 th centile for weight and length, and on the 50 th centile for head circumference. Otherwise, is a happy, active young baby making appropriate social contact with her mother, and fully interacting with the environment.  's presentation is eminently suitable for examination using a biopsychosocial approach. Biologically, there is actually very little wrong with . She is at least average compared to her peers; she has not 'fallen off' any of her centiles regarding physical progress, and appears to be a happy and contented 6-week-old girl.
However, This apparent biomedical well-being disguises the considerable psychological stressors and social depravation the family is living in. The salient points are outlined below:
None performed.
No prescription. Miss was given advice regarding appropriate transport for infants, and put in contact with a social worker regarding relevant benefits for lone parents, and possible funding for more appropriate ambulatory equipment. .
Observed on ward for several hours.
Acutely,  's care involved the A+E team at Hospital, and the on-call paediatricians at Hospital. The on-call social worker was also consulted.
After being observed on the ward, was discharged uneventfully the same evening.
There was little evidence based care regarding Non-Accidental Injuries to infants on the internet. However, some relevant EBC on domestic violence was found:
The varied presentations of a possible non-accidental injury; the complex psychosocial arrangements affecting families in 'pockets of depravation' , family and peer pressure in bringing up children. 1. . 2. 3. . 4.
