The whole process of presenting Mulan, from choosing a story to tell to finalizing our product on stage, is like a journey of treasure hunt to me. The more I look back on the journey, the more I grow fond of being a storyteller. To be a better storyteller, each review right after the performance is indispensable and invaluable as well. Therefore, the aims of the following reflection are, first, to deepen my understanding of storytelling and second, clarify some important points of presenting Mulan on stage. This reflection will be divided into three parts: why Mulan was chosen as a story to tell, how she was characterised and what can be done to make the presentation better.
Women consist of half of the world 's population. To glorify the importance of his opposite sex in China, Chairman Mao also said, "Women hold up half of the sky". Ironically, beyond the praise lies the reality that it is men who have been dominating in most of the places and most of the time. The proof can be easily found in the written records, be it in the East or the West. There has always been a tendency to marginalize or belittle women in history. As Hourihan points out in her book, for instance, women are few in the hero myth and "most of those few function only in the domestic sphere" (1997, p. 156). She also argues that the records of the hero story can be seen as a "conscious campaign to marginalize women" (1997, p. 159). Only when a woman engages herself in the public affairs - men 's domain usually, can her words or deeds leave a mark in history.
In many stories, women are always depicted with negative character traits. Most of them are wicked stepmothers, evil witches, undutiful daughters, or bad-tempered princesses. Tatar refers to these female characters as "disagreeable heroines" (1992, p. 98) in whom seven typical sins can be found - disobedience, stubbornness, infidelity, arrogance, curiosity, laziness and gluttony. These prevailing stereotypes of women in fairy tales and folklores serve a vital function of social conditioning. This is by no means uncommon in traditional Chinese stories. Most female characters in Chinese folktales and legends are either evil spirits leading men astray or pathetic victims only succumbing to their destiny. Disproportionately, the stories of Chinese heroines can be counted on one 's fingers. Thus, after reading most sexually biased stories, boys may reinforce their stereotypes about their opposite sex to a further degree. What 's worse, girl readers may unconsciously or subconsciously internalize this fixed image that women are secondary or inferior to men. One of our purposes of doing Mulan is to counter that negative effect on both male and female readers.
Concerning the meaning of a story, it should be the core issue worthy of a storyteller 's attentive consideration. According to Cassady, a story "should help the listeners in some way to appreciate life, to understand a particular facet of living, and to rejoice in life 's richness" (1990, p. 46). Lavender also claims that myth, legend and lore can give us "a sense of our own identity and a sense of security - a sense of belonging to the world, to mankind, and to the wisdom of accumulated experience" (1975, p. 5). In addition, Cassady suggests that folktales and myths are more appealing to children from ten to early teens than other types of stories. Since our target audiences are early-teenagers, the legend of Mulan may catch their eye and be meaningful to all listeners, especially girls. It is a story about a Chinese girl, who takes the initiative and plays a key role in her time. Different from those unfavourable female images in most stories, Mulan is an admirable heroine because she shoulders her father 's responsibility to fight for their country and eventually has a remarkable achievement. Even in a modern perspective, what Mulan has accomplished is beyond our imagination, let alone for those living in ancient China. Notoriously, China had had a long history of the practice of foot binding, which was an inhumane means of domesticating women and depriving their freedom by causing their disabilities. In such a society, Mulan 's story has still been kept, passing down from one generation to another. There is no doubt that many people, especially females, must be mentally inspired by Mulan 's deed even though they are physically confined.
Like all the other legends, Mulan 's story has proliferations and reproductions. These phenomena identify with Zipes 's comments. He states that a legend, usually based upon an actual event, may be "told in many different versions depending on the social and temporal context"(1995, p. 153). In the first ballad version, Mulan is portrayed as a brave and dutiful daughter disguising herself as a man to join the army for her father. But this version does not include any specific descriptions about her characteristics and upbringing. In Disney 's Mulan, we see clearly that Mulan has been molded as a western liberal feminist. She fights not only for the honour of her family but also for equality and individuality in an explicit manner. Undeniably, Mulan has become a household name worldwide due to Disney 's adaptation and its global circulation network. However, not every Chinese audience appreciates Disney 's Mulan because there is too much distortion of reality in it, such as the revelation of Mulan 's true identity in the army, her saving of the emperor, the confusion of mingling Japanese with Chinese culture. Besides, the Chinese dragon is downplayed as a jester, Mushu, in that cartoon. Unwilling to accept these misrepresentations, we'd like to shape up our own Mulan, who is the very embodiment of traditional Chinese virtues combined with modern values.
To truly present our ideal Mulan, we'd like to borrow the thorough analyses from Cassady (1990). Based upon his suggestions, the role of Mulan can be analysed and characterised as follows:
Important traits and background.
Mulan lives in a country embroiled in the turmoil of war and in a time women can only depend on men. Adept at martial arts, horse riding and archery, she hardly has the approval from her mother, who is worried about Mulan 's lack of essential skills for an ideal wife-to-be. Mulan may appear to be as pretty, smart, and patient as her elder sister, but she is not self-assured. As a matter of fact, she is overshadowed by her sibling. Although she possesses some precious qualities such as bravery, perseverance and humbleness, she cannot see these traits in herself in the beginning until she starts her journey in the army.
Motives.
Cassady emphasizes the importance of figuring out the characters' motives, most of which derive from the characters' backgrounds, because their motivations are highly related to their relationships with other characters and the purpose of the story. So what motivates Mulan to stand up against barbarians in place of her father? Filial piety and the defence of family honour are the answers to the question. It has long been the Chinese tradition to emphasize the paramount importance of family and filial piety. For example, in his book on Chinese thought, Greel (1954) claims that filial piety, for Chinese, has been not merely a moral but even a legal obligation since 11 th century B.C. These explanations of Mulan 's motives play significant roles in our characterisation of Mulan. As they are the traditional Chinese virtues, we want to show them to our audience.
Emotions.
Determining the emotions of the character can help establish the story 's framework. In order to understand the feelings Mulan has gone through, the emotions line in the major scenes of the story is shown as follows:
Theme.
Theme is what the story conveys to the audience as a whole. As mentioned, one of the themes of Mulan is to uphold the traditional Chinese virtue of filial piety. The other theme is to encourage our target audience to be who they really are and what they truly want to be. Like Mulan, some early teens may feel frustrated at not being able to find their self-identity. Mulan, however, finally gains confidence in being her true self when she stops imitating her sister and starts to do what she is really good at. This is also the message we want to get across to our audience.
Mood.
It is also essential to decide the overall feeling of a story, its mood. Although the story of Mulan carries some moral messages, we do not intend to preach at our audience. On the contrary, we want the predominant mood in Mulan to be comical and light-hearted, which can not only serve one of the main function of storytelling - to entertain but also help pass the story themes to the audience in a less dictatorial way. For the creation of the brisk mood, we develop some funny scenes to show Mulan 's kung fu, cunning, bravery and intelligence. An uplifting marching song is also sung twice in the performance.
Except for the story analysis above, there are still some important points to be considered in terms of presenting the story of Mulan. Take the characters' names as an example, Cook has pointed out, "it is always tiring to listen to a story which is cluttered with unknown names, especially if they are in a foreign tongue" (1976, p. 50). She suggests that minor characters can be referred to as "the king his brother", "a nymph", etc. In Mulan, the characters' Chinese-sounding names can be confusing to our audience, who are not familiar with Chinese background. Only the protagonist, Mulan, is addressed with Chinese name lest the audience might get lost in the similar pronunciations of the other characters' Chinese names. All the other characters are simply Mulan 's father, mother, sister, comrades, etc.
The style of presenting the story is another major consideration. To manifest the Chinese style of the story, we incorporate many typical gaits, gestures and movements of Peking opera into our performance. The ways males and females walk in Peking opera are very different from each other. The male characters usually swagger with upturned feet (see Figure 1) and the female ones need to move with small steps. Besides, the hand positions are equally important in characterisation. Riley (1997) has noted that the most female hand positions in Peking opera are related to the imagery of flowers. The orchid hand (see Figure 2) and cloud hand are widely used by female characters. Regarding the hand sign for sword, the actor should straighten the first two fingers to make a pointing gesture with the thumb holding down the rest of the fingers against the palm (see Figure 3). In our performance, we also adopt the fight routines of Chinese theatre, which, according to Riley, "express total exploitation of the concept of roundness" (1997, p. 310).
It was a nice experience of telling Mulan 's story. The audience seemed to enjoy our presentation very much and many of them were still singing the marching song several days after the performance. We are delighted with the success of the presentation, but we also know that there is always room for improvement. To begin with, I think we should polish our gestures, gaits and movements of Peking opera to make them look more professional-like. I learned Peking opera at primary school, which was indeed a long time ago. All the gestures we had in our presentation were drawn from my memory so they were not strictly precise. It would be better for us to consult someone with sufficient knowledge of Peking opera. In addition, we should increase the fluidity between scenes. For instance, the connection between the battle scene and Mulan 's glorious return to the palace was not smooth enough and neither was the one between the palace scene and Mulan 's journey back home. Lastly, the pacing of the story also needs to be improved. In the middle of the story, the pacing dragged a little bit, which made that part of presentation weak. To conclude, we are all looking forward to another chance of presenting Mulan after the necessary improvements are made.
