On 14 th March 2000, the Defendant, Mrs Vivien Marie Kay, acquired a Property, which was transferred and registered in her sole name, for the purpose of a Holistic Healing Centre. Between 24 th May and 25 th September 2000, the Claimant, Mr Servan Keondjian, contributed a total of   62,000 paid in seven separate instalments which he alleges was in respect of the renovation and refurbishment of the Property. According to him, an oral agreement had been made between them before the acquisition (around Christmas 1999) in which they agreed that: the Claimant would enter into a written guarantee of   100,000 with Northern Rock Plc, which would provide the Defendant with a mortgage of   650,000 in respect of the Property; the Claimant would provide such funds from time to time as required by the Defendant for the purpose of either developing the Property or repaying the mortgage instalments, and in return the Claimant would obtain a beneficial interest in the Property.
However, in summer 2003, owing to financial problems, the Claimant was prepared to convert the original terms of the agreement into a loan in order to recover his money back. The Defendant initially accepted to repay the money but eventually failed to do so. Since no repayment had been made, the Claimant claimed that their original agreement had not been altered and he was therefore still entitled to a beneficial interest in the Property under a constructive trust held by the Defendant for the two of them.
The Defendant, on her part, argued that the monies represented a part repayment of a debt owed to her by the Claimant and that they had never agreed that the latter should receive a beneficial interest in the Property. Therefore, the issue for the judge in this trial was to determine whether at the time of purchase such a trust was brought into existence so as to give the Claimant a beneficial interest in the Property.
Based on the facts of the case, the judge held that there was no constructive trust but that the fund provided was by way of loan repayable on demand. Since the claim based on constructive trust had failed, the Claimant was allowed to plead in the alternative that the monies were advanced by loan. The Claimant was therefore entitled to the repayment of his money plus interest.
The reasoning behind the judge 's decision to conclude that there was not a common intention as to the Claimant having an interest in the property was that first of all the terms of the agreement were too vague in relation to the size of the beneficial interest and also there was no precise figure as to the amount the Claimant intended to invest. However, in Midland Bank Plc v Cooke it was held that "positive evidence that the parties neither discussed nor intended any agreement as to the proportions of their beneficial interest does not preclude the court, on general principles, from inferring one". Besides, the law proceeds on the basis that parties may act on the understanding that the proportions of their beneficial interest will be determined when the mortgage has been repaid or property has been disposed of, according to the amount each has contributed directly or indirectly. Thus, the vagueness of the terms as to size of beneficial interest and precise amount of investment at the time of acquisition is irrelevant. [1995] 4 All ER 562.
Ibid. at 575 per Waite L.J, Mark P. Thompson, Modern Land Law, 2nd edition, 2003 at pg 274.
Burns v Burns [1984] 1 Ch 317, CA per Fox L.J, Materials D at pg 7.
The claim based on constructive trust also failed because the judge thought that it was unlikely that the Defendant was prepared to agree for the Claimant to have a beneficial interest in the house since the former could obtain finance by way of loan from other friends, who were also ready to stand as guarantor for the mortgage if the Claimant had not. On this point, I would agree with the judge 's finding because this clearly shows the intention of the Defendant that the additional fund required was to be provided to her as a loan repayable on demand, irrespective of whoever she chose to accept help.
The next factor the judge took into consideration was the fact that it would be in the nature of someone with a business background such as that of the Claimant to record his investment with proper documentations, particularly since all his earlier investments were recorded. However, lack of documentation is typical of transactions between friends, where normally oral agreements will suffice as is generally the case. Besides, this is the primary reason why we have the law in relation to constructive trust. In our present situation, it is clear that we are dealing with two friends who both seek advice from or confide to each other their business as well as their personal matters. Thus, the business practices of the Claimant are irrelevant. The judge was wrong to rely on this line of reasoning to assume that the Claimant 's intention was not to have an interest in the Property for if he did, he would have had the agreement reduced at least in some form of writing.
The final evidence in favour of the arrangements being simply a loan according to the judge is the content of the e-mails sent to the Defendant where the Claimant was asking for recovery of his money. Indeed, I agree with him that from these e-mails it can be inferred that originally the Claimant intended the monies to be advanced by way of loan: "Over the last 18 months you have repeatedly let me know you wished to pay me back in full. I respected this decision and waited". This clearly demonstrates that their agreement was for a loan.
Servan Keondjian v Vivien Marie kay, Case No: HC04 C00493, para. 21.
Thus, we can notice that some of the reasons can be challenged and weakened, and as a result provide insufficient support to the final decision. From my point of view, the judge 's approach as to the establishment of a constructive trust was wrong. He failed to explore fully the scope of common intention, i.e the different situations from which a common intention can be inferred, and failed to take into account detrimental reliance.
In Burns v Burns , it was regarded that if a spouse makes a substantial contribution to family expenses so as to enable the mortgage instalments to be paid, he/she can acquire a beneficial interest in the house. Applying this line of reasoning to our present situation, a common intention can be inferred that the Claimant was entitled to a share in the property given the fact that the monies were largely used for the purchase of equipments, fixtures and fittings, thus making a substantial contribution to the development cost. However, mere common intention on its own is not enough, the Claimant must have acted to his detriment in the reasonable belief that by doing so he would obtain a beneficial interest in the property. Hence, it could be argued that the Claimant has indeed acted to his detriment in reliance on the agreement to receive a beneficial interest in the property by willingly standing as the guarantor for   100,000 in respect of the mortgage. Therefore, initially, it could be inferred that a constructive trust came into existence at the time of the acquisition. [1984] 1 Ch 317, CA.
Ibid, Materials D at pg 8.
Grant v Edwards and Another [1986] 2 All ER 426 per Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V-C, Materials D at pg 12.
We shall now assess whether with the events that followed there is the possibility to rebut this finding. For this purpose, we shall refer to the statement by Lord Diplock in Gissing v Gissing : "Unless it is alleged that there was some subsequent fresh agreement, acted on by the parties, to vary the original beneficial interests created when the matrimonial home was acquired, what they said and did after the acquisition was completed is relevant if it is explicable only on the basis of their having manifested to one another at the time of the acquisition some particular common intention as to how the beneficial interests should be held". It is clear from the oral evidence provided by the Claimant that when he seeked to recover his money, he approached the Defendant on the basis that he was ready to forgo any increase in value of the property and was prepared to liquidate his asset in order to get his money back. And on those conditions, the Defendant agreed to repay the money. As a consequence, this evidently shows that a subsequent fresh agreement has been reached to convert the beneficial interest created when the property was acquired into a loan repayable on demand. However, Lord Diplock clearly mentions that the subsequent fresh agreement must be acted upon by the parties. In our case, it is clear that the Defendant 's complete failure to repay the monies means that she has not responded to the new agreement in any way. The new agreement has not been acted upon by the parties. Therefore, the judge 's decision in concluding that the monies were advanced by way of loan is wrong and the claim based on constructive trust should have succeeded. [1970] 2 All ER 780.
Ibid, Materials D at pg 3.
The alternative approach can also be problematic in the sense that to hold that a constructive trust exists on the basis that the Claimant made substantial indirect contributions enabling the Defendant to repay the mortgage instalments, seems to blur the line between constructive and resulting trust. Indeed the underlying basis of resulting trusts is that contribution to the acquisition of the property carries with it an inferred intention to acquire a corresponding share of the beneficial ownership.
M P.Thompson, Modern Land Law, 2nd edition, 2003 at pg 258.
Thus, this case, which is indeed a very recent one, does not cast further light on the difficulties encountered in this area of the law which is dominated by the law of trusts. Indeed, as the Law Commission mentioned in Sixth Programme of Law Reform: "The present rules are uncertain, difficult to apply and can lead to serious injustice". Everything is just a matter of making inferences as to common intention and detrimental reliance. And such inferences will be made according to what the judges think. This is highly undesirable in the sense that it gives too much discretionary power to the court. This case fails to take into consideration the scope for the doctrine of propriety estoppel which belongs to the sphere of equity. The concept of this doctrine as enunciated in Re Basham is: "where one person, A, has acted to his detriment on the faith of a belief, which was known or encouraged by another person, B, that he either has or is going to be given a right over B 's property, B cannot insist on his strict legal rights if to do so would be inconsistent with A 's belief...... ". Under such a principle, the decision in our case would have been more clear-cut: that Mr Keondjian did not have any right in the property because Mrs Kay did not in any way encourage him to have this belief since for the past eighteen months she has been constantly warning him that she wished to repay him in full. Therefore, perhaps there is the need to reform the law in such a way that this area is entirely confined to the doctrine of propriety estoppel. (1995) Law Com. No 234, para. 4, M P.Thompson, Modern Land Law, 2nd edition, 2003 at pg 277. [1986] 1 WLR 1498.
Ibid, at 1503 per Edward Nugee Q.C, M P.Thompson, Modern Land Law, 2nd edition, 2003 at pg 500.
Op.cit, note 4.
In brief, we can see that oral agreements are greatly problematic and under the law of trusts, the courts have to make many inferences as to common intention and detrimental reliance, which is undeniably not an obvious and easy task. Indeed, "there is little guidance in the authorities on constructive trusts as to what is necessary to prove that the claimant so acted to her detriment". As suggested the well-established doctrine of propriety estoppel might be the best means of dealing with such cases.
Op.Cit, note 7, at pg 12/13.
