Whether worker happiness leads to productivity is an old and controversial topic. At least since the Hawthorne studies, authors and managers have assumed that a happy worker is a productive worker (Roethlisberger and Dickson, 1939).However, many researchers (e.g.Brayfield and Crockett,1955; Vroom,1964) placed doubt on this form, indicating that happiness did not necessarily lead to productivity. Accordingly, the confused views brought what Schwab and Cummings (1970) called "the development of uncertainty" with regard to the happy-productive relationship.
It is worthy specifying the meaning of happiness. Most organisational researchers have used job satisfaction as a proxy as their measure of happiness. Job satisfaction, indicated by Organ (1988), is linked to citizenship behaviours over which the employees can control. Others authors from psychology areas have been developing measures of well-being, positive and negative effect and emotional state (Wright and Staw, 1999). Thus, the notion of happy-productive relationship is separately discussed with reference to two connotations of happiness. One refers to a satisfied state brought by work, and the other is concerned with individuals' optimistic traits, in other words, one tends to experience positive affect and emotion.
The essay consists of three main sections. In the first section, five models illustrating the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance are identified, three of which are emphasized. The second section turns to explain that why happiness causes productivity provided that happiness refers to personal dispositional. A summary as well as suggestions on future research are offered in section three. The essay investigates the contentious argument from different perspectives and attempts to summarize the situations where the statement that a happy worker is a productive worker could be acceptable.
The study of the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance is the most respected and classic one in the industrial-organisational psychology (Judge et.al., 2000). After the first research done by Kornhauser and Sharp (1932) on this relationship, substantial different views of point have been developed as to the nature of the relationship, based on both qualitative and quantitative investigations. By reviewing the literature, five main distinctive models regarding the relationship between satisfaction and performance are identified. They are: job satisfaction causes job performance; job performance causes job satisfaction; the relationship between the two is moderated by other variables; job satisfaction and job performance are reciprocally related and re-conceptualization of job satisfaction and job performance (see figure 1). While mentioning five of them, this section focuses on the first three models.
This model presents the causal effect of job satisfaction and job performance. Judge et al (2000) highlighted that this was probably the oldest specification of the relationship and was often identified with Human Relations Movement. According to Strauss (1968), "early human relationists viewed the morale-productivity relationships quite simply: higher morale would lead to improved productivity." In terms of this proposal, the level of job satisfaction gained by an employee determines his performance, that is, the more satisfied a worker is with his work, the more productive he will be. As Steers and Porter (1979) stated, this proposition had an intuitive appeal, which reflected the concept that "all good things go together". Additionally, this model has its origin in the broader attitudes literature. Some researchers assume that attitudes carry with them behaviour implications (Judge et al, 2000). For instance, Eagly and Chaiken (1993) suggested that people who assessed an attitude object favourably have a tendency to be actively involved in behaviours than people with a negative attitude. As a result, attitude towards the work is associated with behaviour at the work, the central of which is performance of the work. Therefore, a satisfied worker, namely a happy worker, performs better than the unhappy one.
Motivation theories and job-related techniques are continuously adopted by organisations on the assumption that satisfaction leads to better performance. Likewise, humanists and motivation theorists tend to claim the link between motivation principles and productivity. For example, Herzberg (1966) indicated that the motivational values in job design was not only essential for job productivity, but also bring benefit to the individual worker. Furthermore, the job characteristic framework introduced by Hackman and Oldam (1976) aims at identifying different factors affecting one 's job satisfaction, with the implicit assumption that performance will necessarily follow. When an employee finds the work environment and the tasks are more enjoyable, he/she is more satisfied and is inclined to perform better (Lawler and Poter, 1967).
It is argued that empirical evidence does demonstrate the possibility that satisfaction could lead to performance for some employees, under certain conditions. Although Sheridan and Slocum (1975) 's research results on the relationship between job satisfaction were inconclusive, satisfaction was found to affect the performance of operative level of workers. Moreover, cases of connection between satisfaction and performance are more likely to be found in service management literature (Silvestro, 2002). Rucci et al (1998) advocated the statement that "the employee-customer-profit chain" in US, which shows support for the view that employee satisfaction drives customer satisfaction and financial performance. More significantly, Silvestro (2002) identified four possible conditions in service sector under which the direct link between satisfaction and profitability may be positive. Initially, services where staff contact with customer is high; secondly, services where technology can not be a substitute; thirdly, services where employee contact is vital to customer value creation and fourthly, "services with high labour costs". Furthermore, according to Silvestro (2002), the satisfaction leading to financial performance happens comparatively more in professional services, high contact and high variety services which are based on people rather than equipment.
Organ (1976) maintained that evidence of positive satisfaction - performance relationship was alive in contemporary writing. He emphasized that the research results relevant to this proposition provided more support than one was often led to believe. In contrast, Steers and Porter (1979) argued that Organ 's opinion did not overcome the paucity of causal evidence grounding this satisfaction caused performance thesis. Similarly, in spite of employee satisfaction, Silvestro (2002) pointed out that "another set of performance levers have to be applied" in analysing the drivers of productivity and profitability in service industry. He included store size, product range, level of investment and location as other important conditions which could influence financial performance of organisations.
It is interesting that many managers, researchers as well as employees believe that happiness leads to job performance without deeper investigation. Acceptance of this proposition offers a solution for management (Steers and Porter, 1979), since it makes sense to reward more to satisfied and well-performing workers. Similarly, Ledford (1999) identified two possible reasons referring to ideological and aesthetic aspects in order to explain the prevalence of the belief. Firstly, he claimed that the "a happy worker is a productive worker" notion rooted deeply in management ideology. Tracing back to the Human Relations movement, human relations supporters presumed that organisational performance was depended on meeting employees' needs for social relationship, satisfaction and self-actualisation. Meanwhile, employees have ideological reasons to accept this proposition so that they can ask for more from management. Secondly, people are likely to agree with this thesis since it is elegant and neat (Ledford, 1999). We prefer to believe the theories which represent both performance and attitudinal outcomes. Therefore, morale, productivity, quality, employee commitment and so on could be simultaneously improved.
Although most attitude researchers presume that the link is from attitude to behaviour, others (e.g. Lawer and Porter, 1967; Olson and Zanna, 1993) have challenged this view by indicating either theoretical rationale or empirical results. Though there are different explanations for this prediction, the most broadly established one is based on the supposition that performance leads to valued outcomes that make workers satisfied (Judge et al, 2000). In details, dissimilar performances determine different rewards, suggested by Steers and Porter (1979), which in turn construct "variation in employees' expressions of job satisfaction". In addition, according to expectancy-based theories of motivation, satisfaction follows from the rewards generated by performance. Expectancy theorists such as Lawler and Porter (1967) highlighted that performance led to satisfaction through intrinsic and extrinsic rewards. In favour of their opinion, Locke (1970) tended to consider satisfaction as a function of value attainment and goal-directed performance.
With reference to the empirical researches, this proposition is supported by quite a few studies. The findings of Bowen and Siegel (1970) as well as Greene (1972) showed a relatively strong correlation between performance and satisfaction. These correlations were notably higher than the low correlations between satisfaction and performance, which suggested the lower possibility of satisfaction leading to performance. A general logic could be offered to understand it. A worker could be motivated and then feel happy to undertake his task. However, whether he could perform well does not only depend on his willingness but other factors such as his ability, the existence of performance obstacles and degree of supervision. On the other side, when a worker is performed superiorly, she could get better rewards extrinsically and even gain a sense of achievement intrinsically. Thus she would feel satisfied and happy by and large.
However, Steer and Poter (1979) pointed out that the correlation coefficients in Bowen and Siegel 's studies were not strong and the possibility of other variables could not be ruled out. Accordingly, Steer and Porter (1979) argued that the statement "performance determined satisfaction via rewards" received some support but that support was equivocal. Other variables such as self-esteem, occupational group pressure and personal ability are suggested, which could be said to moderate the relationship between performance and satisfaction.
By far the most popular approaches for testing the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance have involved the use of moderate variables (Judge et al, 2000). A few researchers including Herman (1973) stated that in the absence of these situational factors, a strong position would be obvious for satisfaction and performance. Yet, no enterprise performs in a vacuum environment where all the factors are void. Hence, Selladural (1991) suggested that organisations ought to gain the knowledge of these factors which could be helpful in improving the satisfaction and performance relationship of their employees. Moreover, he provided a job satisfaction - job performance relationship conceptual model where eight variables are identified (see figure 2). Similarly, Ledford indicated that organisational changes, for example, in job design, compensation systems, management styles, mission and so on would lead to a change in employee satisfaction level.
The most investigated variable is reward contingency. Job rewards mainly referring to economic incentives has been discussed in the previous model. The underpinning logic of this proposition, indicated by Judge et al (2000) is that payment is valued by employees and high performance should be satisfying to the extent that salary is associated with performance. Nevertheless, payment is only one of rewards, and research shows a weak correlation between economic reward and job satisfaction (Spector, 1997). According to Jurgensen (1978), employees report that they value intrinsic rewards more than money. In spite of these constraints, after reviewed previous literatures, Podsakoff and Willams (1986) reported that the relationship between satisfaction and performance was stronger in which rewards were linked to performance than where there was no pay contingency connecting to performance.
Another key moderator of the job satisfaction - job performance relationship is job characteristics. This one is similar to the monetary factors since both are concerned with rewards. The difference is that job characteristics are intrinsic while payment is extrinsic. The job elements consisting of task variety, responsibility, and autonomy have been proved to affect the relationship between satisfaction and performance (Locke, 1976). Hackman and Lawer (1971) found that when a worker perceived his job loading with those features, both of his satisfaction and performance would be increased. The underneath principle of job characteristics influencing satisfaction and performance is that the improved positive aspects of the job lead to larger satisfaction, which enhances employees' willingness of performing better (Hackman and Oldam, 1976). Additionally, the job characteristics framework formed by Hackman and Oldam (1976) is categorized into the process theory of motivation, and it has been greatly used to support the thesis of satisfaction leading to performance.
Another commonly tested moderator is self-esteem. According to Korman (1970) 's self-consistency theory, individuals are more satisfied when taking those actions which are consistent with their self-image. In other words, high performance would not necessarily bring satisfaction to low self-esteem individuals because it is incompatible with their self-perceived sufficiency. In reviewing of related literatures, Judge et al (2000) found mix support for Korman 's theory and they suggested that the results were inconclusive.
There are several more factors affecting the relationship between satisfaction and performance proposed by researchers. Nevertheless, pointed out by Judge et al (2000), it is difficult to evaluate the validity of those variables since very few of them have been tested in more than one investigation. Consequently, there is a lack of assimilation and integration though numerous studies are engaged in the moderators' perspective research.
With regard to two positions that satisfaction leads to performance and performance leads to satisfaction, some could argue that both theoretical explanations are reasonable. They tend to offer a hybrid model which shows that job satisfaction and job performance are reciprocally related. As Selladural (1991) highlighted, there appeared to be "a circular, continuous relationship" between satisfaction and performance. However, the chief criticism of this model is that it lacks a theoretical foundation. Thus Judge et al (1999) raised some questions such as how it would work if the relationship was reciprocal.
Some researchers argue that the traditional concept that attitudes lead to performance has its merit on the condition that attitudes and performance are reconceptualized (Judge et al, 1999). George and Brief (1996), for instance, used emotion replaced satisfaction in the satisfaction - performance hypothesis and claimed that positive emotions associated with motivation are related to job performance. Likewise, Organ (1988) stated that the failure to find a relationship between satisfaction and performance was due to the narrow definition of job performance. He pointed out that when performance included both task performance and citizenship behaviors, its correlation with satisfaction would improve.
To sum up, among the five models of job satisfaction - job performance relationship which are examined herein, the results seem inconsistent. There probably is no one single "accurate" relationship between satisfaction and performance. Nonetheless, Job satisfaction could lead to high performance under certain conditions, to certain employees. Other various factors rather than these two dependent variables would jointly impact on the satisfaction - performance relationship.
While some researchers treat happiness as job satisfaction, others (e.g. Wright and Cropanzano, 1997; Wright and Staw, 1999) regarded it as an affective construct when analyzing the happy - productive worker relationship. They indicated that when happiness was operationalized as emotional well-being, it seemed to demonstrate consistent relationship to job performance. That the statement "a happy worker is a productive worker" may be true in this context.
Some recent researches focusing on psychological affect show a moderate support on the relationship between a dispositional measure of well-being and work-related behaviours. Adopted expectancy theory, George and Brief (1996) illustrated that positive effect might improve individual 's expectancy that one 's effort could lead to performance and that performance would lead to positive outcomes. Moreover, a goal-setting model of motivation was used by Locke and Latham (1990), who reported that workers with optimistic propensities set more challenged goals and engage in higher performance. Similarly, According to Weiner (1985) 's attributional model of motivation, affect has a significant influence on task persistence. Optimists are inclined to perceive failure as a temporary obstacle caused by external environment (Forgas, 1992). Likewise, several studies found that people who have positive mood were more successful partly via the help of others in organizations. Since happy workers may be more fun to be around and are more easy-going, supervisors could provide more positive evaluation for them (Robbins and DeNisi, 1994).Thus, disposition affect is an important predictor of operational as well as interpersonal elements of performance.
In an empirical evidence level, Seligman and Schulman (1986) chose 103 new life insurance agencies and found that the optimists stayed on their jobs as twice as the number of pessimists and sold more insurance than the pessimists. Furthermore, after re-analyzing a longitudinal data, Staw et al (1994) highlighted that the measure of affect such as depression did predict the changes in salary, performance valuation and social support. In the contrast, Ledford (1999) placed the criticism towards Wright and Staw 's proposition reporting dispositional rather than state affect the performance. Ledford (1999) pointed out that their studies neglected the significance of other factors such as rewards system, working conditions, job design, leadership styles and so on which might change the level of job satisfaction of workers and thus performance.
In conclusion, this essay provided a review and examination of the relationship between happiness and productivity. It stated two definitions for happiness and illustrated five models to explore the argument that "a happy worker is a productive worker". When happiness refers to job satisfaction, it could be concluded that a happy worker could be a productive worker provided that he is capable of accomplishing the task in certain context. These conditions are associated with, for example, well-established reward system, a self-perceived interesting job and relatively stable economic environment and etc. When happiness is defined as dispositional well-being, it is suggested that the people with positive traits have a tendency to performance better than those pessimists, attributed to their operational and interpersonal strengths. A number of researchers do not consider any positive relationship existing between happiness and productivity and some even hold the point that there is no relationship at all. Whereas, it does not mean that to maintain a high levels of worker satisfaction is not desirable. Neither, it is not used to justify that profitability can not be reached without happy workers (Silvestro, 2002). Employee satisfaction is vital for organisations triumph in a long run, since it matters to company reputation, long-run strategy planning, and corporate social responsibility and so on.
Since dispositional affect productivity is moderately supported, it is worthwhile to develop the researches on psychology area of personal attribute. Whether disposition is a personal trait, an attitude, cognition, or just a measure of state of mental health is uncertain (Ledford, 1999).More investigations need to be done in this psychological management scope. However, it is beyond the discussion of this paper.
