The law of tort, as Alix Adams suggests, is a civil wrong independent of contract. Negligence is the cornerstone of tort liability and a key factor in most tort liability and a key factor in most personal injury and property damage trials. It involves duty, breach of that duty, causation, and damage which together forms any successful claim. Until the 1930s, damages as a result of the 'negligent performance' of a contractual relationship are not compensated for third parties. Using the case Winterbottom v Wright as an example, Lord Buckmaster said that 'the breach of the defendant 's contract with A to use care and skill in and about the manufacture or repair of an article does not of itself give any cause of action to B when he is injured by reason the article proving to be effective.' This general principle was overturned by the case of Donoghue v Stevenson. Mrs. Donoghue, appellant, drank a bottle of ginger beer bought by her friend at a caf   of which, later, to her horror found the decomposing remains of a snail slithered into her glass. As a result, she became ill with gastro-enteritis and took legal action against the manufacturer of the product. The verdict was that Stevenson did owe Mrs. Donoghue a duty of care and was liable for the breach of the duty. Following the landmark case, a new general principle called the neighbour principle is formulated by Lord Atkins. The rule is to treat those people around us, who are closely and directly affected by our actions, with care and always to have them in contemplation when we are directing our mind to the acts or omissions which are called in question.
The neighbour principle had provided a legal remedy against and obvious social wrong, thereby giving legal expression 'to a general public sentiment of moral wrongdoing'. Markesinis and Deakin 's Tort Law 5th ed, Oxford University Press, 2003, p.76 pp 6-1.
In Anns v Merton London Borough Council, the principle has been reaffirmed and consequently a two-stage approach was formulated by Lord Wilberforce. This two stage-test approach made problem appear much simpler than it is. The first stage corresponds to Lord Atkin 's neighbour principle, but the second stage tends to obscure the fact that considerations of policy are inherent in the neighbour principle itself. Michael A. Jones, Textbook on Torts, Oxford University Press, 8th ed, p. 34, pp. 3-1. However, Lord Keith dissent the two-stage test because the 'determining of the existence of a duty of care in negligence has been elevated to a degree of importance greater than it merits.' Thereafter, the two-stage test in Anns is not to be regarded as in all circumstances a suitable guide to the existence of a duty of care. For the benefit of the future, criteria for the establishment of duty of care have been laid out by Lord Bridge in Caparo Industries v Dickman. This case concerned a claim for financial loss which resulted when an investor relied on published report that had been prepared negligently by the defendant. The criteria are: the damage must be foreseeable; there must be a sufficiently proximate relationship between the parties; it must be 'fair, just and reasonable' to impose such a duty.
In Spartan Steel and Alloys Ltd v Martin & co. Ltd the question of duty has got the lawyers on a debate marathon. The negligent operation of a power shovel outside the claimant 's steelwork resulted in a power cut which halted their non-stopping operation for 14    hours. The appellant has admitted their negligence for the devaluation by $368 and the consequent loss of profit of $400 for the first melt. The debate was solely on the liability for negligence on the account of the other four melts. They strongly deny that they are liable for the $1767 loss for the other four melts. They say that was purely economic loss for which they are not liable for. The appeal was allowed by Lord Denning on the basis of policy considerations to which Edmund Davies LJ dissented as unjustifiable. According to Lord Denning, economic loss of this sort should be borne by the whole community. It is unfair and unreasonable for the defendant to bear a disproportionate claim of liabilities.
In my point of view, a duty is prima facie owed to the claimants whose power is supplied directly by a power station via a cable. Before work begins, the defendant has a duty to check the location of the cables under their site of construction in order to avoid any damage to the cables and also for their safety sake. Yet with plans being shown and enquiries done, their statutory undertaker negligently damaged the cables. Therefore it is clear that they have breach that duty towards the users affected by the damage. That damage has cause physical damage to the claimant 's property and also the loss of profit as a direct consequent. While the liability of care for the first melt is uncontested, the other four melts will have to be tested with the three-stage duty test for it to be convinced that liability exists. It is foreseeable that if the cable is damage the factory work will be halted and hence the damage from it. There is physical damage on the furnace and the first melt which was, at the time of occurrence, in it. Like Edmund Davies LJ agreed on, it is common ground that both types of loss were equally foreseeable and equally direct consequence of the defendant 's admitted negligence. After plans were shown and enquiries made by the claimant and appellant respectively, there is proximity between both parties as the claimant has rightly rely on the technical profession of the statutory workers in the handling of the cables beneath the road. I think the reason for not giving in the liabilities for the other four melts lies with the third stage duty test. Duty is likely to exist when it is believed to be in the public interest. In Donoghue v Stevenson, public health considerations and lack of legal remedy has obliged the court to impose a duty. Alix Adam, Law for business studies, Person Longman, 2003, 3rd edition, p.143 from the point JUSTICE and REASON. For the present case, the fear of inviting a flood of litigation or to fraudulent claims has prompted Lord Denning to draw an arbitrary line to liability before it just out of control. In the case Muirhead v Industrial Tank Specialities Ltd, the claimant is not entitled to recover for profits lost during the time that the lobsters' production was suspended or cost of replacing pumps which was purely economic loss. Likewise, the four melts in the present case should not be recoverable because it is purely economic loss.
At bottom, I think Lord Denning has made the right decision to act independently ignoring the duty test by considering the relationship in hand. In Cattle v Stockton, the claimant failed in his attempt to recover the expenses lost due to the delay of his construction of the water tunnel of which he has a contract with another party. For the same reason, the present case and the latter is not granted for their claims for liability. They are all purely economic loss which is by law and practice not recoverable. Be it 'remote', or 'no duty' is owed, the volume of the damage is too huge and had it been permitted, in future, with cases involving the interruption of supply of water, gas or power, who should the lawyers go after. Thus, I give credits to Lord Denning for his brilliant judgment for being able to balance and weigh on the damage done on to the claimant and also the liability for which the appellant has to bear.
