Influenza A virus causes pandemics as continued selective pressure from the immune response causes frequent mutations at antigenic sites. These accumulate most frequently in the five epitopes of the haemagglutinin subunit, forcing the immune response to alter to achieve virus clearance.
Occasionally, genetic reassortment can occur between two co-circulating influenza strains. New haemagglutinin and neuraminidase subtypes are acquired, resulting in antigenic shift and substantial mortality due to the lack of pre-existing immunity.
This laboratory investigation demonstrated the fundamental assays, haemagglutination assay, haemagglutination inhibition assay and infectivity assay aid influenza characterisation. It was demonstrated that antigenic drift can happen gradually if one epitope mutation is selected for at a time. If two epitopes are selected, the virus is completely neutralised.
Influenza A is a major pathogen and a leading cause of death in infants, the immunocompromised and the elderly 9. In the US alone, an average of 51,000 deaths occurs annually due to influenza 18. This highly contagious respiratory disease causes pandemics and epidemics resulting in high mortality and morbidity, which could be prevented through vaccination.
The 1918 pandemic of H1N1 is ranked as one of the three most destructive human epidemics with a death toll approximately 25 million 15. It is estimated that the annual epidemics have had a more significant impact on human health than the three pandemics combined 16. Since 1918, the other pandemics have been H2N2 1957, H3N2 1968 and H1N1 again in 1977 11. It is believed that we are overdue for another pandemic 19.
The threat of a new pandemic is believed to come from 'bird flu' or H5N1. Influenza strain A/Hong Kong/156/97 initially appeared in Hong Kong in 1997 from crossing the species barrier from birds to humans 7. Since then it has resulted in the culling of millions of birds, 147 human cases with 78 deaths 20. As yet, H5N1 has yet to acquire mutation(s) which would allow efficient transmission between humans. As the virus is already demonstrating resistance to the anti-viral drug amantadine 7, the pressure to develop a vaccine against H5N1 is rising.
Influenza viruses are classified within the orthomyxovirus family, figure 2.1. There are three main types A, B and C of which A and B cause serious disease 16. Influenza A is classified into subtypes based upon the degree of homology between the haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) surface proteins 4. The 16 subtypes of HA and 9 of NA 2 generate 144 different virus combinations which can and potentially cause disease.
The main antigenic sites are the three envelope proteins, of which, HA and NA are the most important. M1 is the least antigenic of these, forming proton channels which span the envelope 6. The HA protein trimer has an important role in viral entry and uncoating 15, figure 2.2, and binds to sialic acid on the cell surface allowing fusion to occur.
NA cleaves the terminal N-acetyl acid or sialic acid by a hydrolysis reaction. This is important for viral egress as it allows the removal of surface sialic acid at the release site to prevent binding upon budding and subsequent re-infection of the cell.
HA and NA proteins are the main antigenic sites targeted by the adaptive response. The five antigenic sites on the HA protein 8, figure 2.2, elicit a neutralising antibody response. Regular selection pressure from antibodies and the lack of proof reading ability in the viral RNA polymerase 4 leads to an accumulation of sense mutations in the HA sequence which enable the virus to evade the immune response and infect susceptible hosts. This finding was confirmed by Knossow et al in 1984 whose X-ray crystallography data illustrated that escape mutants have very small changes in HA structure. This antigenic variability is termed antigenic drift and is characterised by the acquisition of less than four amino acid changes in two different antigenic sites 4, 12.
Antigenic shift is essentially the reassortment of genetic material of two influenza viruses from different species upon co-infection of a host. Unpredictable recombination results in the acquisition of a new H or N subtypes to which the population is unlikely to have pre-existing immunity 4. Of the 144 possible serotypes, we have only been exposed to four. Although not all combinations may cause pandemics, influenza still remains a significant threat to human health.
This laboratory focuses upon the H1N1 influenza virus A/PR/8/34 (PR8), isolated in 1934 and attenuated due to repeated passaging in embryonated chicken eggs. The aims of the laboratory are outlined in the laboratory manual 13.
The experimental procedures are described in detail in the laboratory manual 13. There was one change to the materials used in the final sequence purification step in experiment 8, which involved the addition of blue dye separately to the reaction mixture rather than with the acetate.
Eggs were inoculated with antibiotics in proximity to a Bunsen, equipment was flamed, needle tips were changed regularly and improvements in personal technique all helped to minimise contamination over the laboratory investigation. Out of the many eggs inoculated, two were contaminated whereas a few others produced small volumes of allantoic fluid.
The HA assay enables the amount of viruses in a sample to be quantified in HA units/ml. Erythrocytes express sialic acid on their surface, to which influenza binds using the HA protein allowing cross linking to occur. If insufficient virus is present, inadequate cross linking occurs causing erythrocyte precipitation.
HA binding to sialic acid resulted in the agglutination of the erythrocytes at low virus dilutions, figure 4.1. The averaged end point for PR8 was 746.6 HAU/100  l equivalent to 7466 HAU/ml. Infectious units are calculated by multiplying this value by 10 6, giving 7.466x10 9IU/ml. This value is quantitative allowing comparisons between IU values of other viruses, allowing a universal concentration of virus to be calculated so haemagglutinin inhibition assays can be performed.
The HI assay demonstrates the ability of a virus to agglutinate erythrocytes and the efficacy of an antibody to inhibit this 17. It calculates the antibody titre required to inhibit 50% agglutination of 160HAU/ml of virus.
The HI end point was calculated between the two virus dilutions, resulting in 96 HIU/100  l, thus 960HIU/ml. This indicates that 960 HIU/ml of MAb1 is required to inhibit 160HAU/ml of PR8.
Virus replication is not efficient thus not all cultured virus will be infectious. The infectivity assay determines the titre of virus needed to infect 50% of the inoculated eggs, ID 50, as the virus is diluted until it is no longer infectious.
Figure 4.3 illustrates the ID 50 of PR8, calculated using the following equation.
Log10 ID 50/inoculum volume = highest dilution tested + (half the dilution interval)-(sum of virus negative egg at each dilution/number of eggs inoculated).
The infectivity assay generated ambiguous data for the virus diluted to 10 -7 as more eggs produced agglutination in 10 -8 than 10 -7 dilution, figure 4.3. 10 -7 was therefore not included in the final ID 50 calculation.
NA, a type 2 capsid glycoprotein, cleaves sialic acid to glycoproteins and glycolipids. Its activity can be measured quantitatively using serum glycoprotein fetuin to generate a coloured compound, which can be measured spectrophotometrically.
Between 0 and 6 hours, NA works optimally in the existing conditions causing the amount of cleaved fetuin to increase exponentially, figure 4.4. As incubation time increases, free fetuin decreases, causing less substrate to be available for cleavage by NA. Catalytic activity decreases causing a curve which could plateau if incubation time was continued, as all substrate would be cleaved by NA.
An anomalous result at 6 hours was omitted from the graph. The value did not fit the trend observed and may have occurred due to inaccurate pipetting, mixing and blanking.
The density and velocity gradients allow the separation of components from a mixed sample. This technique is often used to separate virus particles from patient serum for further identification through PCR or ELISA.
Upon centrifugation, the samples travelled a distance appropriate to their density. Crbcs settled at an average of 2.55cm and mrbcs at 2 cm, indicating an equilibrium had been reached, where the density inside and outside the cells was equal. Reading accuracy increased as the samples settled as the bands were clearer. Crbcs travelled further down the gradient than mrbcs indicating that crbcs are denser.
A velocity gradient allows the sedimentation coefficient to be calculated which is dependent upon cell mass, density and shape. The crbcs pelleted between two and seven minutes whereas mrbcs pelleted between seven and twelve minutes.
This experiment demonstrated antigenic drift in PR8 through growth cycles in eggs each with a neutralising MAb directed against one of the five HA antigenic sites. The four best fluids were analysed as they were plentiful, and contamination free.
Appendix 3 illustrates the HA results for MAb1. The second virus sample did not contain virus whereas the first and third virus samples did with end points of 1/5120. Therefore, the samples contained virus at 51200 HAU/ml, with 5.12x10 10IU/ml. The fourth virus sample end point was 1/7680 and contained virus at 76800 HAU/ml, with 7.68x10 10IU/ml. For the first replicate at 1/5120 dilution an end point was observed but was discounted as this well contained more blood.
Appendix 4 illustrates the mini HA and HI performed on the first and third virus samples. This demonstrated that virus sample 1 was not neutralised by MAb1 whereas sample 3 did show a possible end point in    dilution. This result indicated that both virus samples have been successfully mutated at a HA antigenic site to allow escape from neutralising MAb1. PR8 control was inhibited at 960 HIU/ml.
From these experiments the virus sample 1 was mixed with MAb2 and MAb1 in an attempt to generate a double escape mutant. MAb1 was included to ensure the maintenance of the mutated epitope.
Appendix 5 illustrates the HA results for double escape mutants. Virus samples one and two were calculated to have 1.024x10 11IU/ml whereas virus samples three and four were calculated to have 5.12x10 10 IU/ml. Appendix 6 illustrates the HA results for MAb1 and MAb2 double escape mutants for PR8. No agglutination of erythrocytes was observed. These experiments demonstrate that double escape mutants can be generated if inhibited at a single epitope per growth cycle to allow for mutants to replicate.
Figure 4.7 illustrates that virus samples two and three produced double escape mutants as these samples were not inhibited by MAb2. The possible end point for virus sample one at    dilution was discounted as the duplicate value caused agglutination. PR8 required MAb2 at 960 HIU/ml to successfully be inhibited.
Appendix 8 illustrates the data collated from the class results. In all experiments performed for the antigenic drift assay, all viruses initially isolated in HA assays for both MAb1 and MAb1 and MAb2 were found to be true mutants whereas all the wild type double mutants were unable to be isolated.
The specific region of the HA molecule which MAb1 and MAb2 were directed against was determined through sequencing of single escape mutant virus 1 and double escape mutant virus 3. Appendices 9-13 illustrate the sequence data for PR8, single and double escape mutants respectively. The mutation at amino acid residue 97 which allowed the MAb1 mutant to escape neutralising antibody was conserved in the sequence of MAb2 escape mutant. MAb2 escape mutant had an additional mutation at residue 85 which allowed it to escape neutralising MAb2.
The mutated residues 97 and 85 for MAb1 and MAb2 respectively equate to residues 152 and 140 in two different antigenic sites of HA. This demonstrates that two mutations at the different epitopes targeted by the antibodies were required for the virus to escape.
Influenza possesses several characteristics which can be exploited for use in identification and quantitative techniques. Chicken eggs provide an appropriate culture system for cheaply producing high yields, with minimal contamination. They contain   2,3 NANA not human   2,6 NANA which induces mutations in the HA protein to allow efficient growth. However, not all influenza virus strains replicate efficiently in eggs 8, therefore it would be ideal to develop a mammalian cell culture system allowing rapid growth and reduced harvesting time. Currently, no such system exists which permits cost effective production of high viral titres.
HA subtypes can be identified using HA and HI assays, rapidly, cheaply and reproducibly to a high degree of accuracy and thus are advantageous over PCR or Elisa 's. When compared to infectivity assays, HA 's are used preferentially as fewer resources are needed, they are less complicated and live virus need not be used, reducing infection risk. Both assays produce comparable data, which may not occur for other viruses. However, variation may arise due to experimental differences such as egg batches.
The infectivity assay generated anomalous results, figure 4.3. This may have occurred due to contamination as the yolks looked abnormal and the harvested fluid was of low volume, dark and cloudy. Secondly, the 10 -7 eggs were inoculated last to prevent viral carry over from low to high virus dilutions therefore less care may have been taken in maintaining sterility and technique. Thirdly, the virus may have settled in the Eppendorf and the solution was not thoroughly mixed before injecting, leading to a greater proportion of PBS being injected than virus. Finally, a higher virus dilution may have been inoculated into these eggs, causing ambiguous data for 10 -7.
When compared to the HA assay, figure 4.1, 7.466x10 9 IU/ml was obtained for infectious units whereas in the infectivity assay 10 9.1ID 50/ml was calculated. The values are very similar, both being in the range of 10 9 therefore experimental differences such as different egg batches, contamination and concentration variations may have led to the slight difference between the values. HA assays give total counts regardless of whether the virus is infectious or not, whereas infectivity assays provide an end point of infectivity as the virus is diluted. Therefore both samples contain a similar proportion of infectious virus.
From these experiments it can be concluded that the HA assay provides accurate, comparable data for determining infectivity of a virus titre and the titre needed to cause 50% agglutination.
HI assays can rapidly characterise influenza subtypes if multiple experiments are conducted simultaneously, using specific antibodies. Calculation of HAU/ml enables antibody optimisation whilst allowing comparisons to be made between different antibody efficacies to inhibit the same virus. HA and HI assays can be straightforwardly adapted to allow high throughput analysis, invaluable when developing therapeutic agents or characterising many samples. However, serological characterisation of influenza strains does not distinguish between viral groups or indicate that an antibody does not bind 7. Progressive antigenic drift results in a few mutations which may not be detected by the antibody used, these are only detected by sequencing and molecular analysis.
The NA activity assay, density gradient and velocity gradient experiments reinforced understanding of influenza properties and common virology techniques. Experiment 6 demonstrated that crbcs are denser than mrbcs because crbcs are nucleated, DNA is heavier than protein and as mrbcs lose their nucleus during maturity, crbcs will travel further down the gradient. Crbcs and mrbcs differ in mass, density and shape, crbcs are denser, have more mass due to a nucleus and are slightly larger and oval. Therefore the velocity gradient demonstrated that crbcs have a greater sedimentation value and pellet faster than mrbcs. For both the velocity and density gradients, another faint band was seen in the mrbcs samples as some cells may still have contained a nucleus.
Experiment 7 demonstrated that escape mutant virus 9 generated a possible end point against MAb1. This may have occurred due to blood volume differences or most likely, steric inhindrence of MAb1, which may still be able to bind to the particle preventing agglutination from occurring.
The five antigenic sites of HA provoke a neutralising immune response. As figure 5.1 demonstrates, a single mutation was generated in the MAb1 escape mutant at residue 97. However, the sequence data was ambiguous, appendices 10 and 11, demonstrating equal fluorescence for a G or T nucleotide at this position. This may indicate a population of two mutants in the sample or an ambiguous result, which may require repeat sequencing. Residue 97 maps to residue 152 located in the Sb antigenic site of HA. MAb2 escape mutant encoded a valine at position 97 and a glutamic acid residue at position 85. This indicates that the double escape mutant was formed from either the valine MAb1 mutant population or that the sequence data was ambiguous but was in fact valine. Glutamic acid at residue 85 maps to residue 140, which is between residues 139 and 141 in the Ca2 antigenic site of HA.
When wild-type PR8 was incubated with MAb1 and MAb2 simultaneously, the harvested virus was neutralised whereas when escape mutants were generated using neutralising antibody directed against one epitope at one time, double escape mutants were generated. This occurred because when two neutralising antibodies are directed against two different epitopes, the virus would need to mutate at these two sites simultaneously. This event is extremely rare and therefore it was expected that a double mutant for wild-type PR8 could not be produced in one incubation step.
Influenza evades the immune response by mutations in its major antigenic epitopes. It is proposed, that mapping changes in these regions will allow future antigenic drift to be predicted. Currently several models, mathematical and graphical have been proposed 1, 9, 10, 14, 17, which rely on gradual antigenic change to generate escape mutants 9, 17. Identification of these crucial epitopes will narrow the search for candidate vaccine strains 9 and allow understanding of the virus evolution and therapeutic design to stay ahead.
Vaccination has the potential to decrease transmission, causing a decrease in frequency of further antigenic drift 1. The HA1 region of H3N2 changes at a rate of 6 nucleotides substitution per genome per year 10 thus, it is essential that these sites are identified in both this and other influenza subtypes to allow effective vaccine production. However, circulating subtypes must still be monitored as 95% of strains survive less than 1 year and infect few people 5 and thus, influenza 's dynamic nature may still result in regular vaccine updation.
Due to the rigorous selection pressures imposed upon this virus by our immune system and the threat of a pandemic looming imminently, the need to develop tissue culture systems for virus production and a cross-protecting vaccine may enable us to control this disease rather than cure it.
Influenza virus will continue to pose a significant threat to human health. Antigenic shift and progressive antigenic drift allows influenza to evade the immune system and develop resistance to anti-virals and vaccines. This laboratory investigation successfully demonstrated that antigenic drift occurs gradually against a single selective pressure at a time.
The outbreak of SARS highlighted how prepared we were for an outbreak of a respiratory infection. However, influenza is more easily transmitted and unlikely to be controlled through screening and quarantine measures alone 4. Intercontinental travel is likely to exacerbate the problem, therefore the race to develop a protective vaccine to overcome influenza and its progressive antigenic drift has never been so important.
