The racial and economic factors, which were the principal contributors to the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America, are intertwined in a complex relationship as they overlap considerably.
The function of racism in enslavement alone is an overtly intricate concept, as highlighted by the widespread and multifaceted debate regarding the 'chicken-or-egg' problem of which came first: racism or slavery. This has been a hotly contested topic on which there has been such extensive indecision and disagreement that a firm conclusion is unlikely to be arrived at.
Carl N. Degler, 'Slavery and the Genesis of American Race Prejudice', in Betty Wood, The Origins of American Slaver: Freedom and Bondage in the English Colonies (New York, 1997), p.42.
Consequently, this has played a role in the rise of enquiries concerning the precise dating of the institution of slavery, which embodies two vastly conflicting theories: firstly, that Africans were brought to North America as slaves, owing to existing economic strife and preconceived opinions on race, and secondly, that it was actually a result of economic and racial factors transpiring subsequent to the initial arrival of Africans that slavery was established.
These two separate debates are central to discussions on the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America, in relation to its racial and economic origins, and thus in ascertaining the most significant causal factor.
Economic factors were of indisputable importance in the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America. 'Progressivism', which emphasises an economic stance regarding enslavement, has been the dominant force in American historiography since the turn of the century, alluding to slavery as an 'economic institution', which was 'created primarily for economic reasons.'.
Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.v.
Eric Williams, 'Capitalism and Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.5.
Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.viii.
As stressed by Winthrop D. Jordan, 'it may be taken as given that there would have been no enslavement without economic need." Such economic necessities in North America included, most importantly, an overwhelming requirement for agricultural labour as a result of the 'high land-to-population ratio." This was specifically true of the plantations of the underpopulated colonies that, in a quest to maximise their profits, desired to take advantage of the opportunities offered by escalating European demand. They 'called for some sort of bound, controlled labour', which was created by enslaving Africans. Peter Kolchin argues firmly that  'shortage of labour was the most basic element', alluding to the utmost significance of economic strains as a primary factor for enslavement.
Winthrop D. Jordan, White Over Black. American Attitudes Toward the Negro, 1550-1812 (United States, 1968), p.91.
Peter Kolchin, Unfree Labour. American Slavery and Russian Serfdom (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1987), p.17.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.61.
Kolchin, Unfree Labour, p. 19.
The familiarity of Africans with the rice crop, as cultivated in their homeland, was of significant interest to North American colonists who wanted to establish it as a staple crop. The prior knowledge that Africans bought with them across the Atlantic would aid the economy and thus was an additional incitement for their enslavement. 'This would help to explain the joint growth of slavery and rice production in South Carolina between the 1690s and 1720s', and therefore stands out as an important economic factor of enslavement. However, it must be taken into account, as has been noted by Philip D. Morgan, that the Africans supplied to South Carolina were predominantly males from coastal regions where rice was not grown, and women primarily undertook the cultivation where it was. Therefore, the economic advantage of having Africans with existing skills of rice cultivation could not have been a leading impetus for enslavement. However, if it were the case that such skills were versatile and could be transferred to another area of cultivation, such as cotton or tobacco, then African slaves would still be economically advantageous.
Kenneth Morgan, Slavery and Servitude in North America, 1607-1800 (Edinburgh, 2000), p.42.
Philip D. Morgan, cited in Morgan, Slavery and Servitude, p.42.
On the other hand, 'the Atlantic slave trade cannot be explained by the demand for these crops', cotton and tobacco, thus it was not these economic factors alone that caused the enslavement of Africans. The importation of eighty percent of all slaves was carried out between 1451 and 1810. However, the early nineteenth century was a period in which the cotton industry was still in its very early years of production, consequently not requiring the vast numbers of slave workers previously brought into North America. This is particularly true of New England where there did not exist a staple crop that required such an economic need and 'compelling demand for Negroes', yet, as early as 1638, there existed a slave trade. Even though this has been viewed as merely 'weakly rooted', slavery was not at all essential for the colony. In an explicit contrast, in Virginia and Maryland slavery became a 'vitally important institution', once legally established in 1660 following the initial arrival of Africans as indentured servants in 1619, signifying regional variation across the colonies of North America. A further example of regional disparity is seen in the fact that  'slavery became the backbone of the economies in some colonies while in others it made little or no advance." It can be inferred, therefore, that slavery existed in some areas where there had not been an overwhelmingly economic motive for enslavement.
Robert William Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman, Time on the Cross. The Economics of American Negro Slavery (London, 1974), p.15.
Fogel and Engerman, Time on the Cross, p.15.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.66.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.66.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.72.
Kolchin, Unfree Labour, p.20.
In comparison to the exigencies of the cotton crop, there was ever-increasing demand for tobacco and hence for labour, which was to be infinitely available, 'cheap but not temporary, mobile but not independent, and tireless rather than skilled." This contributed to the enslavement of Africans who adequately fulfilled such criteria, although slaves on tobacco plantations only accounted for a 'miniscule fraction of the six million slave imports during the same period." Therefore, it can be surmised that they were being distributed elsewhere. Nevertheless, economic motives still prevailed as it was the sugar plantations, producing the most popular consumable in Europe from colonial America, which soaked up between sixty and seventy percent of Africans brought into America. This underlines the role of major features of the economy in enslavement. It is apparent that, having begun to move away from the declining labour of Indians and white indentured servants, 'the eventual solution to the supply for North American plantations lay via the Atlantic slave trade', which has been estimated as accounting for the trafficking of between twelve million and fifteen million Africans.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.72.
Fogel and Engerman, Time on the Cross, p.15.
Fogel and Engerman, Time on the Cross, p.16.
Morgan, Slavery and Servitude, p.29.
Morgan, Slavery and Servitude, p.29.
John White, Slavery in the American South (Bristol, 1970), p.8.
The relationship between capitalism in the economy and slavery is 'complicated' yet, nonetheless, draws attention to a further economic factors contributing to enslavement. Even though the view that 'the roots of slavery are found in capitalism' has been contended as being somewhat extreme, it is undeniable that 'the Negro played a major role in the development of the New World and in the growth of commercial capitalism." It was the expanding desire of colonies in North America to accumulate wealth through the exportation of staples, which required the labour of ever-more people, namely Africans. Their diversity also enabled these slaves to be used in industrial work. The development of North America with the export of manufactured goods, in the nineteenth century, was primarily owing to the toils of enslaved Africans. George Fredrickson has criticised Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman for their 'controversial claim that slaves were willing collaborators in this economic miracle as well as beneficiaries of it', for which there is a lack of evidence. It has been suggested that 'Negroes were relatively helpless in the face of European aggressiveness and technology', and vulnerable to the economic policies of North American colonists.
James Oakes, The Ruling Race. A History of American Slaveholders (New York, 1998), p.xii.
Williams, 'Capitalism and Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.3.
White, Slavery in the American South, p.8.
George Fredrickson, The Arrogance of Race. Historical Perspectives on Slavery, Racism and Social Inequality (New England, 1988).
Fogel and Engerman, Time on the Cross.
Fredrickson, The Arrogance of Race, p.115.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.91.
Thus economic factors, comprising of labour requirements, managing demand, diverse transferable skills, and increased capital, reflect that 'American Negro slavery was created for expressly economic purposes.'.
Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.vi.
On the other hand, the controversy over the origins of slavery has 'elicited much new consideration' over the last half a century, as the acceptability of contemporary racism provoked concerns. The development involved the incorporation of a new element into the debate on slavery, where 'the burden of proof rests with... those who suggest racial rather than economic foundations." This added a complex dimension and a 'racial twist... to what is basically an economic phenomenon." It was Carl Degler whom first challenged this orthodox economic interpretation of slavery. He suggested that 'the American idea of the racial inferiority of Africans has roots deeper than the labour needs of early colonists', thus racism is seen as having stood above economic factors in the enslavement of Africans. This theory carries with it his proposal that racial prejudice and discrimination came before slavery, hence initiating (and outliving) it, and therefore was not a product of it. The Handlins' strongly argue the case of the latter, citing that chattel slavery was established long after the original arrival of Africans who were, at first, indentured servants. This ensued in heated conflicts with Degler, who maintained 'that racism existed from the moment that blacks stepped ashore." On the other hand, Jordan takes the safer middle-road with his view that 'the two probably evolved at the same time' by generating one another, whilst J. H. Plumb asserts that 'racism is merely a justification for slavery' although, overall, it is a controversy that remains universally unresolved.
Winthrop D. Jordan, 'Modern Tensions and the Origins of American Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.67.
Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.x.
Williams, 'Capitalism and Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.5.
Degler, 'Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.41.
Morgan, Slavery and Servitude, p.35.
Jordan, 'Modern Tensions', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.68.
J. H. Plumb, 'Does Race Prejudice Cause Slavery?', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.151 'Something about Negroes... set them apart for drastic exploitation, oppression, and degradation." It is evident that Africans were rendered different from Europeans due to their differences such as their physiognomy, level of civilisation, religion, strange language, and skin colour. This caused exhibitions of racism against Africans.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.85-6.
Englishmen were predisposed to stereotype blackness with disdainful and negative connotations such as Satan, savagery, barbarism, magic and heathenism, even prior to their first contact with Africans. They carried these attitudes across the Atlantic, which then combined with early examples of 'ethnocentrism and xenophobia' and 'invited pejorative feelings' towards Africans. Therefore, when the already stigmatised Africans arrived there, they were 'treated as somehow deserving a life and status different from English and other European settlers." This instigated the debasement of Africans as slaves in an attempt to control, subordinate and dehumanise them, which is a highly illuminating example of racism. It is inferable that, due to the pre-existing antipathy of Englishmen towards Africans, 'it would seem logical that racial prejudice preceded and probably caused the enslavement of the Negro', which explicitly underlines the function of racism.
Morgan, Slavery and Servitude, p.31.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.97.
Jordan, White Over Black, p.44.
Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.x.
Also, 'various passages in Scripture condoned the existence of slave societies' and, as the practice had already been widely accepted since ancient times, North American colonists had little moral qualms when enslaving Africans. Furthermore, their lack of moral consciousness was a result of the accepted belief in the inferiority of Africans because of their skin-colour. There was undoubtedly a 'causal connection between the institution of slavery and the colour prejudice of Americans', which highlights the role of racism in enslavement; that 'American slavery was racial slavery.'.
Morgan, Slavery and Servitude, p.42.
Degler, 'Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.42.
White, Slavery in the American South, p.21.
On the other hand, Kenneth Stampp has 'noted that there was no prejudice or racial discrimination against the African before he was enslaved." Such a surmise is comparable to the Handlins', which harps back to the unsolved chicken-or-egg dispute of which came first. In relation to this, an important question has been put forward: 'Does the mere fact that racism existed prior to slavery prove that racism caused the institution?" The implication is that, even though racism existed, it may not have necessarily been the only influence on the enslavement of Africans, although it was undoubtedly a contributory factor of enslavement:
Kenneth Stampp, cited in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.viii.
Plumb, 'Does Race Prejudice Cause Slavery?', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.151.
Morgan, Slavery and Servitude, p.35.
The many different and conflicting views postulated regarding the role of racism as a factor must be taken into equal consideration, including the opinion that 'racism does not create slavery. It is an excuse for it." This proposes that racism played its role as a justification for slavery as opposed to being directly involved in its formation, implying that there were other factors that caused it, which includes economic ones.
Plumb, 'Does Race Prejudice Cause Slavery?', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.151.
To conclude, there was a multiplicity of factors, both economic and racial, which led to the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America. Many historians argue for either one or the other, such as Williams who firmly states that 'the reason was economic not racial' and Degler who asserts that 'the racial inferiority of Africans' caused their enslavement. However, it can be contended that it was neither of these factors in isolation but a combination of both of them that led to the enslavement of Africans. Although it was largely economic requirements that instigated the need for extra plantation workers, it was only as a result of already engrained racial prejudices regarding Africans that it was they, in particular, whom were considered appropriate candidates as slaves for the colonies of North America.
Williams, 'Capitalism and Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.16.
Degler, 'Slavery', in Wood, The Origins of American Slavery, p.41.
