Following the creation of the independent United States after the successful revolution of 1776, American values cemented themselves around the possibilities obtainable under the new republican model of government. The nation 's enduring myths came to laud the opportunities available to the individual, who through sustained hard work and self-reliance could achieve status and position through the attainment of wealth. Mainstream society founded itself on the rudimentary belief that without Old World systems of government and class structure, for its white population at least, the republic would offer no impediment to social and economic reward through personal focus and development. Literature certainly bolstered and promoted such values, with well-circulated early texts such as Benjamin Franklin 's autobiography propagating personal testaments to the abundance of opportunities available to the U.S. citizen. Accordingly, particular well-defined notions pertaining to these goals established themselves firmly in the American consciousness. The optimism of early texts however was noticeably not maintained as the century progressed, and by the end of the period the nation 's literature had adopted a marked shift in its trajectory. Narratives such as Nathaniel Hawthorne 's "The Blithedale Romance" of 1852 and Herman Melville 's "Bartleby the Scrivener" of 1853 focused on critiquing and exploring the reality that the promise established at the country 's outset had failed to materialise. The emergence of the Naturalist genre as the dominant literary mode at the end of the nineteenth century however heralded a specific endeavour to hypothesise and explicate the persistence of social problems and inequalities. Though the U.S. witnessed sustained immigration throughout the century, by its closure it had become even more ethnically diverse, housing a far greater variety of immigrant groups than had traditionally emigrated. Particularly within the emergent urban environment of its main cities, the groups within the lower classes experiencing this social hardship came to be predominantly those of immigrant communities. The nation 's growing awareness of the conspicuous dichotomy between its prosperous and indigent aligned with new modes of social thought that drew influence from advances in scientific progress. The influence of the work of Charles Darwin in particular introduced the concept of genetics and heredity into contemporary social commentary, with intellectuals coming to regard the ability of individuals and groups to succeed within their social milieu as essentially a result of their biology. As such, late nineteenth century texts such as the work of the American Naturalist writer Frank Norris were heavily influenced by the emergent strands of thought such as Social Darwinism and biological determinism. In its examining of lower class individuals, the novel "McTeague" of 1899 explores the degree to which its characters can achieve in the urban environment, and ultimately concludes that their heredity condemns them to an inauspicious, pre-determined fate. "McTeague" is significant in apportioning a biological explanation for the novel 's social problems, and in being a thoroughly accurate portrayal of its location of San Francisco, provides a credibly bleak and depraved tale. The pathos Norris creates around each of his protagonists points to the notable absence of a hero or archetype within the story, with each individual possessing their own set of reprehensible traits, demonstrating exaggerated versions of common types. The author suggests that even under a propitious city environment, his central couple are ultimately inept to escape conflicting and debilitating genetic make-ups which constrain them within an inexorably brutal and destructive fate. In his accurate description of metropolitan life, Norris 's narrative proffers an inference that dissents with the core American tenet of birth being irrelevant to opportunity. Norris 's novel ultimately concludes that the quintessential American goals of wealth and social mobility prove unrealisable for characters whose inherited biological constitutions consign them to a lower form of life.
George Brown Tindall and David E. Shi, America: A Narrative History. (New York, 1999) P.939.
George Brown Tindall and David E. Shi, America: A Narrative History. (New York, 1999) P.966.
Norris' central protagonist in "McTeague" is portrayed as an infinitely obtuse and dull-witted individual, who initially lives a contented though distinctly plebian existence, working as an unlicensed dentist in his Polk Street 'parlors'. McTeague 's inherent stupidity is stressed continually throughout the text, but his distinctly uncultivated lifestyle does not automatically suggest a complete brute, "McTeague 's mind was as his body, heavy, slow to act, sluggish. Yet there was nothing vicious about the man. Altogether he suggested the draught horse, immensely strong, stupid, docile, obedient"(7). Such descriptions are reiterated frequently throughout the narrative, but progressively shift to hint at an untamed beast within the man that will eventually surface. McTeague is equated with bestial properties from an early stage, which when combined with the constant reiteration of his dull brain cement an overriding notion of biological inferiority. Though the central figure throughout the text, McTeague represents no real laudable characteristics, and the author is ardent to emphasise him as an immensely pathetic creature, rather than a victim of circumstance or heredity. Indeed, the author successfully establishes a sense that McTeague 's eventual degeneration into becoming an alienated, murderous outlaw is inevitable; the result of a struggle under circumstances from which he cannot escape. The regular allusions to his dormant savagery grants a potent sense that under less balanced and tolerable circumstances, the inner brute will emerge. Particularly during his initial meetings with Trina, the reader experiences McTeague 's latent malice, which is at times barely repressible, "Suddenly the animal in the man stirred and woke; the evil instincts that in him were so close to the surface leaped to life, shouting and clamoring"(26). This tension between instinct and conscious restraint, and the struggle between savagery and civilisation that it implies, is sustained throughout the text, occupying a central significance in the author 's suggestion for his character 's regression. The primordial, instinctive nature of McTeague is made then explicitly "evil", a notion substantiated further in the later description of: "The evil of an entire race flowed in his veins"(28). Such emphasis allows the author to establish at an early stage that McTeague 's atavistic characteristics will ultimately destroy any opportunity to function well within society. Indeed, when his marriage begins to break down as a consequence of the unfavourable circumstances which befall the couple, principally when the jealous Marcus draws the authorities' attention to the dentist 's lack of a license and Trina 's subsequent obstinate refusal to relinquish any of her fortune, the change in McTeague 's external environment initiates what the author has established as an inevitable outcome. McTeague 's openly barbaric behaviour and his eventual alcoholism is as such described as an inexorable regression, the realisation of a genetic flaw which consumed his father during his lifetime, and from which McTeague himself has no real escape.
Charles Child Walcutt, American Literary Naturalism, A Divided Stream. (Minnesota, 1956) P.131.
Charles Child Walcutt, American Literary Naturalism, A Divided Stream. (Minnesota, 1956) P.131.
Norris 's thoroughly accurate portrayal of San Francisco is significant in ensuring the credibility of the ideas springing from the text. The location is important in establishing a literature of the American West, but the novel 's specific focus on the city enables the author to concentrate on the social interactions of an urban environment, in the type of metropolitan centre that had become a progressively more prominent feature of American life by the end of the nineteenth century. San Francisco itself embodied something of an emblem of the U.S. 's development over the course of the century, as a developed western city showcasing the completion of the nation 's traversing of the continent. Norris 's descriptions display a prosperous environment in which technological innovations such as the street car play a leading role in a developed and successful urban centre. His protagonists however do not function to the high level of their milieu, and occupy something of an uncertain social and economic status. That the tale is rooted in the Naturalist genre ensures the author 's direct observation of what was real and everyday, and accordingly establishes a recognisable and believable location in which contemporary social problems can be explored through the experiences of his characters. Congruently, Norris displays the ethnic heterogeneity of the city, the significance of which greatly dictates the overall explanation for the narrative 's projection. The final period of the nineteenth century witnessed a high level of immigration into the U.S.A, particularly from groups from southern and eastern Europe and the Far East who had not traditionally emigrated. The nation had historically maintained awareness of its various ethnicities, most palpably in the separation of whites, blacks and Native Americans, but equally those of British, Irish and German ancestry within the white population. By the end of the nineteenth century however, as a result of the influx of these more diverse groups, U.S. society had become even more ethnically conscious. Significantly, such trends coincided with new strands of social thought and commentary which, influenced by Charles Darwin 's biological theories, stressed one 's ability to achieve within environment as essentially a consequence of genetic heredity. The Naturalist genre drew heavily on the influence of determinism and Social Darwinism, which aligned well with its basic tenets of employing literature to reflect and explain social phenomena within a realist framework. Whilst Norris 's characters clearly possess their own personalities and sets of idiosyncrasies, their portrayals' seemingly reflect a universality of contemporary city life, and in their bland daily routines are arguably homogenised representations of the lives of the masses. Thus McTeague is described as a man of a "sham education and plebian tastes", whose fondness for steam beer and simple concertina tunes indicate the preferences of a distinctly lower class individual. The lives of the characters nonetheless end in extreme circumstances, reflecting the author 's desire to depict exaggerated outcomes for individuals who, under a prosperous city environment, eventually degenerate as their respective genes catch up with them under the onslaught of changing external circumstances. That these individuals are to be taken as broader representations ensures that the author can project a credible social commentary through characters that function as generalised symbols.
George Brown Tindall and David E. Shi, America: A Narrative History. (New York, 1999) P.929.
J.C Levenson, The Red Badge of Courage and McTeague: Passage to Modernity. In Donald Pizer (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to American Realism and Naturalism. (Cambridge, 1995) P.167.
George Brown Tindall and David E. Shi, America: A Narrative History. (New York, 1999) P.939.
George Brown Tindall and David E. Shi, America: A Narrative History. (New York, 1999) P.966.
Dr. Graeme MacDonald, lecture delivered on "McTeague", EN213, University of Warwick, Coventry, Warwickshire, 9th March 2004.
The influence of biological determinism on the author 's representation of character leads him then to construct a narrative in which changing external circumstances induce the respective regressions of individuals who are unable to escape their debilitating genetic make-ups. His protagonists initially pursue lifestyles that, though hardly congruent with the idealised American mode, are ostensibly understandable given their biological characteristics. Norris nonetheless develops the narrative to depict that once circumstances and environment alter to become less balanced and more challenging, the lives of his characters become disrupted and enter an inexorable spiral of decline. The author 's "ethnic chauvinism", influenced by scientific racism, positioned those of Waspish ancestry at the height of progress and advancement, with all groups of non-Anglo-Saxon origin possessing varying degrees of inferiority to the ethnic elite. In examining McTeague, certain critics, such as J.C. Levenson, have observed that Norris' central character possesses characteristics, specifically in his brutish qualities and intemperance, which could be equated with contemporary perceptions of the Irish in America. Whilst comments on the race or ethnicity of McTeague are never explicit in the text, the repeated instances of his inability to control his urges are clearly equated to a savage ancestry and heredity, which confines him to a destructive and dysfunctional life.
J.C Levenson, The Red Badge of Courage and McTeague: Passage to Modernity. In Donald Pizer (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to American Realism and Naturalism. (Cambridge, 1995) P.171.
J.C Levenson, The Red Badge of Courage and McTeague: Passage to Modernity. In Donald Pizer (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to American Realism and Naturalism. (Cambridge, 1995) P.171.
The author 's peripheral characters however are described fundamentally by their ethnic backgrounds and characteristics, and, with the exception of the Sieppe family, emerge as merely sole representatives of specific groups. Considering the sub-plot of Zerkow and Maria, the author consciously reinforces stereotypes; his characters are singular encapsulations offering generalised portrayals of ethnic traits. Owing to his Jewish background, Zerkow is confined to the traditionally prejudiced role apportioned to Jewish characters. Accordingly, he is presented as an infinitely covetous and avaricious individual, "It was impossible to look at Zerkow and not know instantly that greed - inordinate, insatiable greed - was the dominant passion of the man"(36), who deludes himself so excessively in his pursuit of a mythical source of gold that he ends up murdering his wife and prompting his own death. Zerkow 's single-minded devotion to gold and acquisition of material wealth is made immediately apparent, with his responses to personally irritating circumstances being portrayed as instinctive reactions. As such, the author makes potent use of descriptions of irrational sensual outbursts to emphasise the extent of the Jew 's all-consuming and self-abusive greed, as in his reaction to the news of Trina 's lottery win, "It was as though a knife had been run through the Jew; a spasm of an almost physical pain twisted his face - his entire body. He raised his clenched fists into the air, his eyes shut, his teeth knawing at his lip"(99). This instance in the narrative presents a conspicuous equating of Jewish characteristics with financial envy; Zerkow is completely incapable of concealing his innate contempt. Similarly Maria, who is later his wife, is portrayed as merely a scavenging, mildly-irritating Hispanic woman whose dreamy claims about an ostensible past fortune bring her a fruitless marriage and ultimately death at the hands of a compulsive husband. The author 's suggestion of their genetic incompatibility is further emphasised by the ephemeral product of their union. Their baby 's short life and the indifference with which it is treated is attributed solely to the parents' ancestries. The short description it is granted in the text reflects this chronic lack of affection, with the author stressing its pathetic and almost nauseating appearance, "It had not even a name; a strange, hybrid little being, come and gone within a fortnight 's time, yet combining in its puny little body the blood of the Hebrew, the Pole, and the Spaniard"(185). The anonymous child 's repellent traits are then equated purely with its biological make-up. It is essentially a bad combination of blood and, as had been established about McTeague in an earlier description, an overt example of bad breeding. Zerkow and Maria as a couple provide then a disturbing and dysfunctional parallel with the narrative 's central couple, and their subplot exemplifies a more extreme example of an inability to achieve a wealthy and cohesive family unit. Their reactions to money and gold are infinitely deleterious, with the author 's repeated juxtaposition of personal biology and aspirations towards wealth suggesting palpably that these characters are ultimately unable to attain the social position and economic well-being central to the ideal American lifestyle.
The characters interaction with money then encompasses a central theme of the text, to which each of their failings is related. With the exception of McTeague, each of the novel 's individuals are portrayed as obsessed with their own financial gain, a focus which, owing to genetic predispositions, proves instrumental in their respective degenerations. As previously discussed, money instills an all-consuming passion in Zerkow, but his wife equally possesses her own fascination in her pretensions to a past family fortune and collecting of others' possessions and discarded waste. Equally, Trina 's natural inclination for frugality hardens into a zealous parsimony following her fortuitous lottery win, eliciting the decline of her relationship with McTeague and her ultimate death at his hands. Indeed, the chance instance of the lottery win presents a contrast to the narrative 's overriding focus on what is probable and pre-determined. What is unpredictable greatly influences the movement towards the murderous and brutal events that arise as the tale progresses. It is Trina 's windfall which proves the pivotal event in the narrative, influencing the direction of the other characters' lives in their individual responses to her luck. The jealously felt by Zerkow is rooted in his contempt for one who acquires so much without any effort, his covetous instincts intensifying following the revelation of her win to the point of being seduced by a quasi-mythical tale of a luxurious gold dinner set. Marcus 's breed of envy centres on his perception of a lost opportunity in having previously willingly surrendered his claim for Trina 's affections to McTeague. Marcus 's chagrin is rooted purely in this pecuniary loss, and it is McTeague 's refusal to compensate him which induces the break-down of their friendship and the shocking instance in which he nearly seriously wounds the dentist by throwing a knife. For the author, if wealth constituted the core requirement of a successful life in the American system, it is his characters' biologically-induced inefficacious reactions to this requisite which confine them to a dysfunctional plane of existence.
J.C Levenson, The Red Badge of Courage and McTeague: Passage to Modernity. In Donald Pizer (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to American Realism and Naturalism. (Cambridge, 1995) P.169.
Just as aspirations towards wealth fail to achieve social stability and mobility, the author 's examination of lower class life similarly does not represent a prototypical family unit through whom American values and modes of behaviour can be delineated. The novel 's sole family group in the Sieppes is instead a quasi-comic, German-Swiss immigrant family, whose odd mannerisms and accented English reflect an inability to fully assimilate and acculturate to the new environment they inhabit. Indeed, that Mr. Sieppe 's business interests and investments suffer a steady decline throughout the narrative, to the point where he and his family are forced to emigrate once again, serves as a prominent suggestion that their background obstructs the family from prospering in the city. Though this outcome would not necessarily imply that the family is genetically impeded in their failings, that they cannot fully shed their culture and previous modes of behaviour demonstrates an incompatibility with achieving lasting success in an urban American milieu. Trina 's response to her family 's troubles however is suggestive of pernicious genetic characteristics, drawing upon the stereotype of the Swiss as inherently thrifty. Her complete unwillingness to provide any of her fortune to alleviate her family 's financial difficulties exposes a chronic and irrational self-regard; "'I've not, I've not,' declared Trina, 'and you know I've not. I wish mamma had n't asked me for any money. Why ca n't she be a little more economical? I manage all right. No, no, I ca n't possibly afford to send her fifty'"(193). That Trina 's compulsive hoarding of her finances leads to her almost unfeasibly selfish refusal to provide some of her lottery win to consolidate her family 's long-term position, suggests potently that even under the most fortuitous of circumstances, as encapsulated in the windfall, innate characteristics springing from heredity inhibit a beneficial outcome. Norris, in soon after referring to the departure of Mr. Sieppe and Owgooste, thus subtly suggests that the family 's cultural, and crucially biological differences impede their success within the functional American mould, to the point where the only solution is emigration to another culture.
Norris' narrative in "McTeague" ultimately concludes then that his characters are incapable of escaping pre-determined degenerations, where once external circumstances change for the worse, decline is inevitable. In examining the lower class lives of San Francisco, the author sought to interpret and explain social problems and ills through a naturalist lens. The overriding inference proffers that individuals are confined by their heredity to lives and roles that conflict with what was traditionally regarded as achievable within the United States. His characters provide exaggerated examples of dysfunctional types, whose ancestries and genetic make-ups consign them to seemingly self-destruct in a dynamic and challenging environment. Writing in a climate of new strands of socialised biological thinking and heterogeneous immigration, the author dispels the belief in the possibilities made universal by the notion of the American Dream, portraying figures that, though exaggerated, provide representations of specific ethnicities. The nation 's myths of social mobility and acquisition of wealth through self-reliance prove unrealisable in this mindset, with the existence of a rudimentary ethnic hierarchy dictating that particular groups suffer the burden of certain inescapable traits which continually surface to severely weaken their prospects. Such interpretation of social environment, rather than dissenting with the notion of the American dream, merely reevaluates it within a biological framework, displaying that opportunities are in reality achievable only for those with the requisite constitutions. For Norris and the Naturalist movement, U.S. society 's anxiety about the persistence of social problems within its ostensibly auspicious system were explicable by an updated version of the American Dream, one which took into account the implications of debilitating genetic characteristics. Late nineteenth century texts of the Naturalist genre were not so much lamenting a loss of opportunities as the nation developed, but rather demonstrating that they were never universally available in the first place.
