Robert Dahl 's summary of political power must be seen as a model, not a definition of political power. It is important to recognise the possible dangers associated with defining such a broad topic, or even attempting to identify its essence. As Charles E Merriam rightly argues: the "nature of power must be reconsidered from time to time in the light of the trends of social organization and of the human intelligence playing upon it". The disadvantages of identifying an essence of a given topic have often been argued. My main objection to it, is that the effects may lead us to constrain the way we think about the topic. In this particular instance, we may find we are unable to reassess the issue of political power objectively and to approach it in new and more helpful ways. However, there are benefits to attempting to identify the essence of political power, particularly if it is concerned with an analysis of the political power evident in our lives at present. I will consider the following points in this essay:
Merriam, C. E. (1964) Political Power Collier Macmillan Ltd. London, p.18.
An appreciation of the relevancy of Dahl 's statement and its limits as a model to be applied to different instances of one-dimensional political power.
An alternative consideration of what at present sums up the essence of political power in most western democracies today with particular emphasis on the second and third faces or dimensions of power as identified by Bacharach and Baratz, and Lukes respectively.
There are two other aspects of the essay title which should be discussed before continuing. Firstly, this essay will adopt relatively wide boundaries in the definition of "political power". That is to say that it will not solely be concerned with governance by government but other types of authority and power relationships between people in non-government related institutions or environments. Secondly, I will approach Robert Dahl 's statement from a very broad and open stance; perhaps more openly than he may have intended. For example, it may sometimes prove more useful to substitute the word "do" with "think", "feel", "believe", "contemplate", or as I will argue later, "fail to do", "fail to think" etc.
The "A gets B..." statement is so broad that many power relationships or events can be compared to it. It is clear that on a "one-dimensional" level it can be applied to the decision-making processes of political power. For example, a retail shop 'team leader' may get his or her staff to arrange the clothing in the store in a way that they would not otherwise have done. However, there are very few, if any, examples where the statement can be applied so literally and without consideration of other issues. By omitting any consideration of interrelated issues, (for example, motives; how power was obtained; the kind of relationship that may already exist between A and B; other power relationships which may have led to this decision), it does not explain or help us to understand political power. Its application can stretch from the influence of a friend, (A) on her friend, (B), in raising an issue from the newspaper she 's reading, which B had not previously considered, to the coercive force of a labour camp worker with a gun, (A) to get a prisoner, (B) to work faster. It seems that many attempts to define power, for example, those of Hay or Benn, (see footnotes), can be seen to apply to most instances of power, although they are not particularly helpful in explaining it and in some cases may stop us from identifying political power in forms which we are not familiar with. While political power, is clearly something created and affected by people, Charles E Merriam 's personification of power may prove helpful in maintaining an objective stance in one 's approach: "Power...is a creature of habits, of culture patterns woven deeply into the lives of men...as if apart from the central drive of life". "...we can define power as the ability of actors (whether individual or collective) to 'have an effect' upon the context which defines the range of possibilities of others." Hay, C. (1995) 'Structure and Agency' in Marsh, D. and Stoker, G. (eds), Theory and Methods in Political Science London: Macmillan "X by his power over Y, successfully achieved an intended result, r; he did so by making Y do b, which Y would not have done but for X 's wishing him to do so, moreover, although Y was reluctant, X had a way of overcoming this." Benn, S. (1967) 'Power' in Encyclopaedia of Philosophy Macmillan.
Merriam, C. E. (1964) Political Power Collier Macmillan Ltd. London p.21.
Having shown that a simplified statement like that of Dahl 's, which attempts to describe the continuous and indefinite essence of power, is not of particular use to the political analyst, I will now attempt to identify and describe what could be the essence of political power in our time.
Here I will concentrate on the essence, or more significantly, the most important form of political power, evident in the political system in which we live. It is broadly accepted that political power in a democracy takes the form of an authority 's ability to govern the state 's citizens: a 'majority', (note: usually as little as 30% of the population), of whom will have voted for the existing government to be in office. As Barbara Goodwin describes: "a politician, office-holder or other politically active individual...(has power to)...cause them (citizens) to do what he or she wants." The essence of political power could thus be described as the ability first to gain enough votes and secondly to manipulate and act within the parameters of the existing constitution (in the broadest sense). However, the passing of laws is usually a non-event as far as the general public is concerned. If they know about them at all, the extent of their involvement in this act of 'power' may be a discussion at the pub or by the water dispenser at work. In fact, the majority of the population may in fact be against the passing of a law and yet it will pass and very few people will break it. It therefore seems that in the democracy in which we live, a politician 's task to get B to do something he or she would not otherwise do is an easy one, so easy that it cannot be considered the essence of political power.
Goodwin, B (1997) Using Political Ideas (4th ed) John Wiley & Sons p. 306.
The success of this type of political power clearly relies on the fact that the citizens of a country will remain docile, non-questioning and to a certain extent apathetic to the actions of government. It is therefore essential, in order to sum up the essence of political power, to identify and explain the power which causes these conditions. Here it is useful to consider two opinions of power. Firstly, that of Lukes: "...that we need to think about power broadly rather than narrowly - in three dimensions rather than one or two - and that we need to attend to those aspects of power that are least accessible to observation: that, indeed, power is at its most effective when least observable". Secondly, that of Marx and Engels: "Political power, properly so called, is merely the organised power of one class for suppressing another". If we adopt a Marxist approach to identifying the essence of power at present, it can be argued that under late capitalism, in the age of Transnational Corporations, governments (politicians) depend on the support of the TNCs to the extent that it may ultimately be true to say that government exists to service them in all sorts of ways. Before developing this argument it is important to say that ethical considerations are inappropriate in this sort of analysis and I do not attempt to pass moral judgement.
Lukes, S (2005) Power: A Radical View (2nd ed) Palgrave Macmillan, p.1.
Marx, K and Engels, (1998) Communist Manifesto, Signet Classics; Reprint edition.
The political power which is evident as a result of the influence of TNCs manifests itself in two main ways. Firstly, through the two-dimensional face of power, as identified by Bacharach and Baratz: "to the extent that a person or group...creates or reinforces barriers to the public airing of policy conflicts, that person or group has power". This type of power can take the form of non-decision making and agenda-setting. The most clear example of this is provided by Crenson 's investigation into Air pollution in two American cities. He attempted to find out why, in two cities of similar size and which produced the same amount of air pollution, one identified and tackled the problem of air pollution thirteen years after the other: "US steel, which had built Gary and was responsible for its prosperity, for a long time effectively prevented the issue from even being raised.".
Bacharach, P and Baratz, M (1970) Poverty and Power: Theory and Practice. New York: Oxford University Press p. 8.
Crenson (1971) The Un-politics of Air Pollution: A Study of Non-decision making in the Cities University Press, Baltimore p. 124.
Secondly, the three dimensional face of power can help to understand the power that governments utilise as a result of the power of TNCs. Included in this face of power is "control over the political agenda, (not necessarily through decisions)...issues and potential issues...observable and latent conflict". The way that government serves large businesses may be by maintaining public order and private ownership, by maintaining a docile, uncomplaining population of workers and consumers, by making sure that the popular media (TV principally, but also newspapers) support the status quo and the same again with education at all levels. One result of this is that political parties have moved ever-increasingly towards each other. In terms of policy, they differ only in minor details. This results in a constraint, not only on what is discussed but on what even occurs to people to discuss. One example of this is the movement during the 1960s which brought the concept of 'the right not to work' to the political agenda. This concept is now a non-discussable issue and one which many people may never have even considered. This form of power may be described as invisible in that its very nature means that we as citizens, over whom it has control, cannot or rarely can, identify it. Also its effect can be described as negative in that it often "gets us not to do something we might otherwise do", or that it "fails to get us to do something we might otherwise do." The problems with this type of power in terms of immeasurability and broadness have been highlighted by Lukes himself, yet this does not reduce the importance of such power. For as the foundations on which observable political power in our society rest, it should be identified as the essence of political power in our time.
Lukes, S (2005) Power: A Radical View (2nd ed) Palgrave Macmillan p. 29.
Lukes, S (2005) Power: A Radical View (2nd ed) Palgrave Macmillan pp. 40-42.
To conclude, Dahl 's statement is applicable to many, if not all forms and instances of political power. However, it does not sum up the essence of political power, nor should it attempt to. I have offered an alternative summary of the essence of political power which should be applied to the present and to the democratic society in which we live. It hinges on the premise that power resides within the class which controls the means of production but its different forms are multiple, complex and interconnected and often, like the dark matter of the universe, invisible.
