Human resource planning is of crucial significance to an organization for formulating and implementing strategy for achieving its goals. For the past twenty odd years, it is being seen that organisations are trying to match the characteristics of their people with their business strategies (Schuler and Jackson, 1987). Considering that employees play the most pivotal part in making a business successful, when expansion or growth is aimed at as a part of business strategy the personality traits, skills, perspectives, ability, values and knowledge of employees become crucial. Therein comes a need to adopt a strategic approach to Human Resources, in particular the recruitment and selection process.
This piece of coursework tries to explore strategic issues associated with the recruitment & selection process within personnel management. It will first look what constitutes a strategic approach to human resource management in general by discussing various available models of aligning HR strategy with the business strategy. Next, it will throw light on the many different policies and practices used for recruitment and selection in organisations, distinguishing between strategic and non-strategic approaches. Finally, the circumstances that lead an organisation to adopt a strategic approach towards recruitment and selection shall be explained.
Recruitment and selection is not just a single stage but a process (Kossek and Block, 2000) wherein an organization tries to attract a pool of qualified candidates who would be suitable for a job vacancy created in an organization either due to an employee leaving the job or due to expansion of the organization. Sometimes, the organization fills the vacancy from its own pool of employees, but most of the time the organization seeks employees externally. (Schuler and Jackson, 1987) Organizations market or  'sell' their jobs so that they are able to attract sufficient candidates for the position created in their organization (Torrington et al., 2005). Out of the large number of potential candidates a small number are short-listed or interviewed for the potential position. The best possible candidate is made the offer of that position. This process ends only when the candidate has accepted the offer made to him by the organization.
Recruitment and selection are not different from each other but are intertwined. However, they can be differentiated saying that recruitment involves finding or attracting candidates for a particular job whereas selection consists forecasting or estimating which candidate will prove to be most valuable to the organization in the present and in the long-term. (Wright and Storey, 1997).
Gratton (1994) talks how various organizations create business strategies independent of the human resource department. The article says that usually business strategies are "handed down" to HR professionals for mere implementation. This, according to her, happens due to lack of representation of the HR function at the Board level, which does not create initial integration. This one-way process can also be attributed to the thinking that members of the HR function have restricted business awareness and they are fit only for a "clerk of works" operation rather than an "architect" role. (Tyson and Fell, 1986 quoted in Lynda Gratton). This behaviour leads to lack of functional synergy while creating "strategic imperatives" and the "implementation process", leaving the HR function to develop systems oblivious of the business objectives. In this way the HR function cannot achieve, create or sustain the continuity by which initiatives build upon each other. Instead these initiatives "bump along" the bottom, losing "momentum from one to another." (Lynda Gratton, 1994). In order to give HR strategy a "grounded frame of reference" it is important for it to be aligned with the business strategy.
A strategic approach takes into account the organisational goals and objectives. Its main aim is to align various key elements of HRM like recruitment and selection so that they function in tandem with other functions to achieve organisational goals.
Aligning business strategy to HRM is a well-researched area and there are a number of descriptions, definitions and models explaining how HRM policies - in particular those related to functions like recruitment and selection, training and development etc. should 'fit' a particular management style or strategic orientation (Legge 2005). According to David Guest (1989), "an integrated strategic approach through which organizations attempt to achieve the policy goals of flexibility, quality and commitment through the appropriate use of various types of systems such as recruitment, selection, appraisal, training, development, pay and communication." constitutes strategic approach to HRM.
The fit model of HR strategy (Torrington, Hall and Taylor, 2005) talks in terms of external and internal fits, whereby an external fit recognizes the need to "employ and deploy labour" (Torrington, Hall and Taylor, 2005:214) against future needs while internal fit supports people policies which are "mutually reinforcing" (Torrington, Hall and Taylor, 2005:216) and are applied consistently.
Miles and Snow in1984 developed another widely used fit approach of matching HR strategy to business strategies. Here, they used a contingent/open approach and categorized organizations into four strategic types: Defender, Prospector, Analyzer and Reactor. They defined 'defender' to have a narrow but stable product line an d having a functional structure so there HRM strategy would be to build human resources. Also, 'defenders' involve themselves in extensive skills training programmes because of their narrow product lines. In contrast the 'prospectors' are more adventurous insofar these organisations seek new products and market opportunities to do business in. So they employ sophisticated recruitment techniques and less training, emphasis being on acquiring skills. Similarly, 'analysers' who operate in both stable and dynamic environments need the right allocation for their human resources. i.e. which ones should be put in the stable market environment and which ones in the dynamic ones. Miles and Snow developed guidelines for proactive human resources management systems that tap an organizations full complement of human capability whilst supporting the formulation of new business strategies. Based on their work Rousseau (1995) developed a more exhaustive model to demonstrate the linkage between business strategy and HR practices by developing "buy strategy" and "make strategy" wherein organisations who are 'defenders' use the 'make strategy' to develop their resources and 'prospectors' use 'buy strategy' to acquire human resources.
Schuler and Jackson (1987) further linked HR practices to the three competitive strategies described by Michael Porter in 1985. They described how Porter 's three strategies of Innovation, Quality enhancement and Cost reduction could be achieved by linking them with various human resource practices like Job definition and specialization, reward, appraisal and performance management etc. Thus, for example while innovation requires high creative talent in the organisation, hence jobs require close interaction and coordination among individuals whereas; cost reduction would require repetitive and predictable job behaviours.
While deciding the human resource practices are to be linked with business strategies, organizations generally choose from "six human resource practice menu" (Schuler and Jackson 1987) that concern different aspects of human resource management. The policies, practices and strategic issues of one of these aspects that is recruitment and selection would be discussed in the next section.
The issues to be taken into consideration as far as strategic recruitment and selection are concerned can be understood well when we take an organisation in question. Recruitment and selection of human resources certainly have a very important impact on how well an organisation can successfully materialize its business strategy. Also, at this stage organisations face an important question of whether it should develop its existing employees in such a way so as to fulfil its vacancy requirements or should it try to acquire or hire human resource from outside the organisation. In order to build a sound staffing policy organisations develop guidelines around these two major challenges (Kossek and Block, 2000).
Organisations usually take help of the three strategic approaches to recruitment and selection, namely traditional approach, staffing as strategy implementation and staffing as strategy formation, to develop employees for successful implementation of their business strategies. (Snow and Snell quoted in Schmitt and Borman, 1993).
The traditional approach to recruitment and selection gave very little or no importance to business strategies. It downplayed the link between staffing decisions and an organisation 's business strategy. The aim was to find a person who could fit the job perfectly and to recruit people who could perform the best in the given job. The use of this approach was also seen extensively during the First World War, where cognitive ability tests were used by the armies of US, UK and France wherein soldiers employed were simply placed in a job where they were best suited without taking into consideration the strategies formulated by the army. This was a very successful practice and became extremely popular among organisations other than the army in a short span of time.
While this approach may have benefited organisations in several ways but it is considered non-strategic because it completely ignores business strategy. A business strategy has to be taken out from the contextual position it was placed in traditionally and put in a prominent place. The following two strategies of staffing as strategy implementation and staffing as strategy formulation were developed thereafter and emphasize towards recruiting and selecting within a strategic framework.
To be successful, an organisation is forced to take a strategic approach to recruitment and selection especially in the long term as following the traditional approach is not practical in the present scenario with the heightened competition. This approach sees strategy as fixed and employees as a variable aspect.
This approach focuses on the fact that every business has a business strategy, which remains fixed. Employees have to be recruited and selected based on how well they will be able to perform their jobs in order to be successfully able to implement the fixed business strategy. In such an approach, the policy of business must be to design a recruitment and selection process that will be successful in fishing out employees who suit the organisation so as to materialise its business strategy profitably. This model can be easily applied into a real organisation situation. First, the organisation should develop an organisational strategy. Then it should find the organisational skills, as well as abilities and knowledge required in order to implement its business strategy. Finally, it should recruit and select only those candidates who are fit in the desired criteria .For example, if an organisation has to survive competition in the market, its strategy will be to make sure that its products are low-cost, better quality, and innovative in comparison to its competitors. Now, for it to achieve this, the organisation should employ people who have a broad outlook, well aware of the markets and quick learners. When an organisation organises training programmes, industrial visits etc. it expects its employees to be enthusiastic and grasp things the recruitment and selection policy aims at staffing candidates who are academically sound and are willing to experiment. This approach can be termed as strategic and can be successfully implemented in the context of the organisation.
In a competitive environment, an organisation constantly faces a number of threats from its competitors. Also, any business provides varying opportunities that need to be exploited at the earliest in order for an organisation to flourish.
To completely utilise its human resources, organisations use this approach wherein the capabilities of candidates to be recruited are considered. The primary concern here is to match the qualities of candidates with the business strategy of the organisation. This approach sees employees as a variable aspect. Also, another major difference here is that strategy is also seen as a variable aspect unlike the previous approach. (Lengnick-Hall, 1988) The business policy here is to recruit employees based on their personal qualities and traits like knowledge, skills, abilities and other characteristics. (KSAOs). Hiring on a "value-added" (Kossek and Block, 2000: 13.26) basis will enrich the organisation 's human resource pool hence, making it easier to implement not just a single business strategy but, a wide range of business strategies. This approach can be pretty well understood taking the example of sports. When an athlete is selected for a team, no specific criteria are set about his/her qualities or characteristics. When a pool of potential athletes having the best KSAOs are found, strategies are made based on all their characteristics. The inference that can be drawn from this is that though an organisation can recruit candidates with a wide range of KSAOs it is not possible to foretell what business strategy will be formulated with a particular set of KSAOs. Another important policy within this approach for an organisation is to give equal priority to staffing decisions alongwith decisions like allocation and acquisition of funds. Finally, the organisation should make human resource an important part of all its policy decisions making sure that when a strategy for business is formulated, it is not too rigid. When employees are hired in an organisation, the organisation should be flexible enough to be able to make them a part of the organisation so that they adjust to its environment in the shortest time and contribute towards its success. For example in Becton Dickinson (Garvin,1993), manufacturers of medical equipments, contribution of the top management is only to give expansive guidelines to its employees on market strategies. Thereafter employees, starting at the lowest level and within every section division formulate their own strategies.
To develop employees within the organisation, they employ another strategic approach that makes use of recruitment and selection as a pure development strategy (Kossek and Block, 2000: 13.27) or the "make" strategy. This is a slow process and undertaking this strategy organisations have to make sure that employees are eager to learn and willing to develop the required KSAOs that will enable them to become an asset to the organisation.
By applying a pure staffing strategy (Kossek and Block, 2000: 13.27) or the "buy" approach the organisational policy changes to hiring those people who are qualified and experienced in such a way that they successfully start yielding profitable results for the organisation as soon as they join it. This policy is generally undertaken by organisations that face a lot of competition in the market owning to which their recruitment and selection strategy hires people who mesh well into the organisation as soon as they arrive.
While the "make" approach is best suited for jobs that require employees to be less dynamic, the "buy" approach needs people to be extremely dynamic as employees in this case have critical jobs in the organisation. The most suitable approach would be a proper blend of both the strategies so that an organisation can benefit dually.
Management style is a method by which employees are managed based on a set of policies, procedures and principles that guide the intentions and outcomes of the organisation as a whole. This is simply based on what people claim to do and what they actually do, also at the same time what is experienced or felt.
Purcell (1986) (Class notes), talks about different management styles, and how for each style a strategic approach could be taken towards recruiting the right people.
When a traditional management style is followed within an organisation, it becomes important to take a strategic approach to recruitment and selection because management discourages any union activity and very little importance is given to individualism or collectivism. While recruiting, the management considers the past records of employees for involvement in union activity in previous employments.
For an organisation following sophisticated human relations, the policy is to make sure that their employees do not become a part of a union. Since these organisations encourage individualism and discourage collectivist or union activity, hence, its strategy includes paying high rates of salaries, promoting employees, giving rewards based on merits, having an easily accessible communication network, etc. so that employees do not feel the need to be part of a union.
The recruitment and selection strategy followed when the consultative management style is applied is to employ people with good past records in terms of union and management relations. The management also makes its employees a part of important strategic issues and encourages suggestions. Here, both individualism and collectivism are seen to be at full bloom.
Constitutional management style is quite like traditional management style insofar collectivism is quite high whereas individualism is not. Not only collective agreements but also their administration is given importance. Here the management strategy is to emphasise the preponderance of its power and control in order to restrict extensive union activity.
The opportunistic approach is the most practical approach wherein organisations recognise that employees need to be a part of trade unions and this fact cannot be changed. The management also realises that newfangled employee relation strategies and techniques will not last in the long run, hence aim at negotiation and consultation. The same organisation may have different practices or approaches at different stages in the hierarchy.
Applying Storey 's HR practice model, it can be said that a strategic approach is most likely for 'changemakers' and 'advisers' as compared to 'handmaidens' and 'regulators'. It can also be said that, the extent to which an HR practitioner can affect recruitment and selection practice depends directly on their knowledge, reliability, etc. (Storey, 1992 in class notes).
In the 1980s, HRM models suggested that for the successful implementation of HR policies in practice it was extremely important for a function to take on a strategic and business role more in line with Tyson 's 'architect' model. It was recognised that the need for the roles of 'clerk of works' (an administrative function organizing pay, etc. for employees, and acting as a welfare function related with a paternalistic style of basic management) together with 'contracts manager' (personnel management function providing legal, bureaucratic, etc. services) would decline. (Tyson and Fell 1986, Tyson 1987).
David Ulrich, professor of Organizational Development at University of Michigan, describes how the role of a 'change agent' and a  'strategic partner' are strategic in nature. For the role of 'change agent', the HR role is to facilitate change occurring in organisations due to varying business conditions like globalisation. This is done implementing efficient and flexible systems throughout the various departments in an organisation. For a  'strategic partner' role, HR ensures that its policies and practices are in sync with the organisational strategy. A capacity to accomplish that strategy is developed and implementation time is minimised. Also, management is provided with valuable and current information essential for strategic planning (e.g. turnover trends, recruiting and hiring statistics, etc.). (auxillium.com/about.shtml 2005).
When employing people for a High Involvement Organisation (HIO), a strategic approach to the recruitment and selection is taken to make sure that highly enthusiastic candidates and those apt for the job are selected. A very high level of employee involvement is expected. Working in self-managed teams, etc. is encouraged to enhance employee decision-making power. (Bowen et al., 1991).
The other type of organisation, specially used by Japanese auto firms use values of teamwork, peer control, non- specialized career paths etc. within jobs. Thus, they employ a selection system whereby people with interest in work variety and organisational commitment are employed.
HR policies within an organisation need to fit with each other in order to make sure that the organisational strategies are successfully implemented. Recruitment and selection strategies have strong links with HR planning and employment conditions. If there is a lack of fit, enthusiastic individuals will not be provided proper training and development facilities and successful team players will not be utilised to the fullest. Hence, for recruitment & selection policies to fit together productively for an organisation, advance planning needs to be carried out to attract a resourceful pool of candidates. (Wright and Storey, 1997).
Finally, it can be said that each organisation must make its recruitment and selection process quite dynamic and strategic as today 's business attributes - such as shortened product life cycles, sophisticated technologies, shifting customer demands etc. (Bowen et al., 1991) not only demands the selection of the best candidates, but of those candidates who fit in an organisation 's overall objectives.
