Despite the inherent connotation in this statement that Realism has acquired long term success as an approach to international relations, it is important to note that no single theoretical approach can consistently maintain a leading position, especially when it is dependent on geopolitical shifts and the rise of opposing schools of thought. Hence this essay seeks to acknowledge and evaluate the long term success of Realism using a chronological or periodic approach, taking its starting point from post WWI when realism rose from the ashes of the discredited idealist approach till the post Cold War era and will further extend the discussion of its debatable success today and potential success in the near future based on its performance in the past.
As the statement also suggests, Realism is more of an approach rather than a theory which is further reinforced by Kenneth Waltz which ensures its continuing vitality. It points to a set of actor(s) that are important (fundamentally state-centric), makes claims about the considerations that decision makers weigh (security and power concerns) and describes sets of outcomes that can result from particular combinations of national policies. Therefore, although it does not readily yield specific propositions, its acquired and continued success as an approach derives from its ability to generate new questions, insights and arguments.
Jervis, B. (1998) "Realism in the Study of International Politics", International Organisation pp. 980.
Jervis, B. (1998) "Realism in the Study of International Politics", International Organisation pp. 980.
To further examine and evaluate the reasons for the long term success of Realism since 1945, it is important to establish the criterion to measure the success of any international relations approach and weigh the success of Realism accordingly.
Firstly, the power of fascination of a doctrine ultimately must rest on its apparent ability to provide answers to practical questions. The answers must be attributable to the doctrine, at least in the sense that some connection may safely be posited between successful practitioners and doctrinal commitment. With that, we will examine the main tenets of the realist approach and its relevance to international relations.
Rothstein, R.L.(1991) Perspectives on World Politics (2nd ed). London:Routledge, p. 388.
Its theoretical viewpoint that states seek a high measure of security is difficult to falsify if we examine the nature of international relations. Indeed, there are many instances when states have surrendered rather than pay the destruction in war, in the hope of regaining their autonomy. Moreover, there are increasing examples of states who have peacefully (or not) submerged their political units or joined together to form larger units in the belief that doing so will serve common political and ideological goals, i.e. the European Union and ASEAN. Despite the fact that security has been defined differently by different actors and the routes to it can be multiple and contested, the desire for security is part of the bedrock explanation for why international relations and politics exists at all.
Jervis, B. (1998) "Realism in the Study of International Politics", International Organization pp.981.
Furthermore, the realist approach is accurate to address the context of which international relations function: the state of anarchy. It is evidently true that despite a system of world governance being implemented, there can never be a legitimate and universal world government. Its emphasis on the virtues of moderation, flexibility and compromise was an intelligent response to the dangers of living within an anarchic world.
On top of that, the centrality of war in our lives as well as the continuity of the state system account for its continued success. It is evident that realism provides the most powerful explanation for the state of war which is the regular condition of life in the international system. And despite criticisms of the state system, there is yet to be another system put in place. Hence, with the continuity of the state system, it is clear that realism will continue to be a successful approach, if not, an important one.
The success of a doctrine also rests on its adoptability, usefulness and feasibility. In particular, Realism has proven its worth to the Great powers, diplomats and politicians. For the former, it is a doctrine based upon and beholden to, the behavioral style of the traditional Great Power. For instance, the prescriptions it offers are particularly well suited to the US rise to become the global hegemon; it taught the US to focus on interests rather than ideology, to seek peace through strength and to recognize that great powers can coexist even they have different values and beliefs. Furthermore, the focus on the primacy of foreign policy in decision making made Realism singularly attractive to professional diplomats and practitioners. Hence its long term success since 1945 till 1970s stems from it being essentially a conservative doctrine, attractive to men concerned with protecting the status quo.
In addition, as with any other successful approaches to international relations, it must be dynamic enough to address current geopolitical developments and yet stable enough to preserve its main lines of thought. Realism has been a progressive approach, it has evolved and developed itself since 1945 and the resulting competing predictions of realist theorists make realism difficult to falsify. Almost any outcome can be made consistent with some variant of realist theory. Perhaps it has not been proven unsuccessful because it has been difficult to test realist propositions against evidence drawn from specific cases as realist theorists do not share common definitions of the core concepts they use to construct variables. Individual definitions of national interest, power, balance of power, and polarity allow for an unacceptably wide range of conceptual and operational meaning and make it difficult to test.
Lastly, recent events and contemporary political atmosphere influence the acceptability and success of theories. The basic outlines of the study of international politics remain established by the outlook of political realism. This, without doubt, is related to the centrality that realism has always given to war, a preoccupation that surely needs no justification. The emergence of Realism coincided with a general mood of pessimism after the world wars, and continued with the onset of the Cold War till 1980s. Moreover, with the recent conflicts in various new forms - terrorism, civil conflicts, threats of nuclear wars, liberal optimism has receded in the wake of a harsher international environment, the provocative label of political realism have certainly revitalized their powers of enchantment.
Walker, R.B.J.(1987) "Realism, change and international political theory", International Studies Quarterly. Vol. 31: pp. 65.
With all the reasons mentioned above, it is evident that Realism has acquired long term success since its establishment in 1945 till the end of the Cold war.
However, one should not exaggerate its vitality as its success was also punctuated by periods of disillusionment and there is sufficient reason to believe that the success of Realism today is offset by the rise of new approaches, new structural, political and global developments and the shift in the nature and scope of international relations since then.
One significant development that may mark Realism 's declining success is the shift in attitudes of its founding figures of the 1940s. E.H. Carr had acknowledged that he had exaggerated the role of power and he was not alone in moving away from what had become the basic tenets of the approach. Hans Morgenthau, the father of the subject of power politics, later warned of the cosmic dangers of realism and advocated world government. George Kennan the creator of containment, became relaxed about the Soviet threat and became anti nuclear.
Booth, K. (1991) "Security in Anarchy: Utopian Realism in Theory and Practice", International Affairs Vol. 67:pp. 532.
In addition, the realism approach is becoming outdated and irrelevant in relation to current systemic developments. As James N Rosenau asserts, we are currently living in "post-international politics". States are increasingly marginalized and the appeal of realism is becoming deceptive and dangerous for it rests on definite assumptions about state behaviour. The growing interdependence between economic, social and cultural spheres within the state system implies a system in which the autonomy and sovereignty of all members is being eroded. Rational decision-making on such issues requires a degree of international cooperation well beyond anything which has occurred in the field of security. Therefore, the general disposition that Realism fosters constitutes an impropriate response to these current developments which requires a new style of decision making and changes in thought patterns.
Booth, K. (1991) "Security in Anarchy: Utopian Realism in Theory and Practice", International Affairs Vol. 67:pp. 532.
Furthermore, the "structuralist" view adopted by realists sees structure as a static model which cannot be modified and by extension, states cannot escape from the predicament of anarchy, the best they can do is to adapt to the underlying realities of international relations. However, the reality is that the awareness of structure and process with the benefit of hindsight has enabled human beings to alter their social environment in profound ways. The superpowers' success in escaping the security dilemma during the cold war evidently indicates that units are not always victims of some foreordained structure, but responsive, reflective actors who, by their coordinated behaviour, can and have transcended the consequences of anarchy as depicted by realism. Therefore, the postwar experience suggests that an "atomic" or "transformational" concept of structure is more appropriate to the study of contemporary international relations among the developed democracies.
The Realist approach may have accurately pinpointed the security issue as the central concern of all states but it has proven inadequate to the extent that it has not addressed new security issues. In today 's context, security is different in scope and character; it is increasingly a localized issue that has global implications i.e. environmental issues and civil wars or a global issue that has localized effects i.e. terrorism which extends the problem to both individual humans and the global community of humankind.
Lastly, despite its initial success in establishing itself as a rival to liberalism, realism fails to capture the extent to which international politics is a dialogue of different international relations voices and perspectives. Realism has always treated the study of international politics as a domain of its own which fails to grasp the fact that the conduct of international relations now takes place within a globalized arena. This new arrangement requires an eclectic approach; the borrowing of insights from a range of perspectives - the world society school, international political economy, comparative politics and critical theory as well as other disciplines. Failure to make more of other approaches has been a characteristic feature of the realist hegemony.
Booth, K. (1991) "Security in Anarchy: Utopian Realism in Theory and Practice", International Affairs Vol. 67:pp. 537.
With the points mentioned above, the realism approach may seem inadequate to address current international developments, however this is not to state the decline or demise of such an approach, rather the potential pitfalls this approach may land itself in if it is not responsive enough to address the current systemic revolution.
The potential long term success of realism will be based on addressing present concerns mentioned above and building on the work of Hans Morgenthau rather than that of Schelling or Waltz. In particular, it would mean addressing the important issues of the post Cold War state system; the emergence of the US as a hegemon with the demise of the Soviet Union, the return to a contemporary version of the concert system of great powers (epitomized by the United Nations Security Council), the threat posed by peripheral "rogue states" such as Iraq and the problems posed by failed states and the issue of great power responsibility for the protection of human rights in a world of states.
To ensure its survival and continued success, the realist approach would have to be more flexible in relation to dynamic changes in today 's world and pursue the goal of reconciling "utopia" and "reality", "power" and "morality" and the interests of both the particular and the universal.
