The neo-liberal belief that democracy fosters economic development is widely accepted as a norm of today 's world order. While some see this premise merely as a means for the West to propagate neo-liberal ideology, significant evidence suggests that the nature of a state 's political regime does have determining influence on its economic wellbeing. In his paper "Dictatorship, Democracy and Development", Mancur Olson offers a theoretical explanation for the economic superiority of democracy over autocracy. His argument provides a means of understanding the fall of Chinese autocracy and the rise of democratic Western states since in the Late Middle Ages. One can therefore contrast the impact of democratic and autocratic regimes on a state 's economy both on the basis of Olson 's theory and through the historical example of the Chinese experience. Such an analysis seems to reveal that "it is no accident that the countries that have reached the highest level of economic development . . . are all stable democracies.".
Olson, Mancur (1993), "Dictatorship, Democracy and Development", American Political Science Review, 87, p.573.
Olson initiates his comparison of different political regimes with the observation that order is a necessary incentive for production: in the absence of security, public goods are not provided due to the free rider problem, and the Fundamental Problem of Exchange impedes trade from occurring. In order to avoid anarchy, societies accept to be exploited by a  'stationary bandit', a dictator who achieves a 'monopoly of theft' from the people via taxation. As opposed to a 'roving bandit' who plunders the entire revenue of a population before moving to another territory, the stationary bandit acquires an 'ecompassing interest' in his society; he has an incentive for his society to increase productivity, as an increase in taxable production raises his own tax revenue. Consequently, the stationary bandit will protect his people so as to maintain an efficient work force, will provide public goods that increase productivity, and will not tax the society 's full income so that individuals still retain the motivation to produce. Olson 's notion of encompassing interest explains why a strong state can serve to increase economic efficiency.
The costs of providing public goods are very large, whereas the benefits of these goods are shared with individuals who did not help to share the costs; individuals are therefore reluctant to provide these goods.
Trust is lacking between participants in a bargain, due to uncertainty as to whether the other participant will fulfill his contractual obligations. (Greif, A (2000), "The Fundamental Problem of Exchange: a Research Agenda in Historical Institutional Analysis", European Review of Economic History, 4).
Olson, "Dictatorship, Democracy and Development", p.568.
The positive contribution of the state to an economy 's wellbeing can be illustrated by contrasting the fate of the Chinese empire and of European feudal regimes between the 7 th and 14 th centuries. While European growth stagnated in feudal and manorial structures that North describes as a "vast wilderness", China flourished thanks to the efficient functioning of a bureaucratic state. The Chinese bureaucracy maintained the state unitary by coordinating logistics, taxation and defence efficiently throughout the empire; the standardisation of weights and measures and similar systems introduced by the bureaucracy ensured good conditions for commerce; well-defined property rights further contributed to encouraging citizens in the accumulation of wealth. Thanks to a centralised system of government, Chinese per capita GDP rose from $450 to $600 over the first millennium, whereas European levels had only reached $500 by the thirteenth century. The operations of a strong autocracy thus served to raise living standards in China, whereas the European economy floundered at the hands of roving bandits.
North, D. C. and Thomas, R. P. (1973), The Rise of the Western World: a New Economic History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p.26.
Maddison, Angus (1998), Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run, Paris: OECD, Ch.1.
Deng, Kent G. (2000), "A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History", Economic History Review, 53, p.3.
Maddison, Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run, Table 1.3.
However, a more thorough observation of Olson 's analysis suggests that it is detrimental for the state to acquire too much power over its people. A leader 's encompassing interest determines his provision of public goods to society and the level of taxation he imposes. In purely numerical terms, if an autocrat taxes one-quarter of any increase in income in society, he receives one-quarter of the benefits from the public goods he provides. Consequently, the greater the society or the smaller the leader 's share in national income, the less his provision of public goods and the higher the tax rate he imposes. This has implications for comparing the "reach of dictatorships and democracies". As an autocrat 's sole revenue from society is in the form of taxes, he will set taxes at the highest level that the population can pay without lowering its productivity. A democratic leader, on the other hand, represents the interests of a majority and therefore earns a large share of society 's income in addition to tax revenue; democracies will therefore exact lower tax rates on the work force than will autocracies. Olson sees democracies' ability to "preven[t] significant extraction of social surplus by their leaders" as a "great advantage", which provides greater incentive for production in citizens and leads to economic growth.
Olson, "Democracy, Dictatorship and Development", p.570.
Olson, "Democracy, Dictatorship and Development", p.570.
Olson, "Democracy, Dictatorship and Development", p.574.
The disadvantages of an autocracy 's narrow encompassing interest are well illustrated by the fall of Chinese economic performance after the thirteenth century. In the Late Middle Ages, China declined dramatically with respect to rising West European states: while European per capita GDP soared from $500 to $870 between 1280 and 1700, Chinese figures remained constant at $600 over this time period. Although Europe and China had similar market structures in terms of agricultural surplus, specialization, and mercantile policies, these regions differed in terms of their contrasted political regimes. China 's bureaucratic elite, created on a selective meritocratic basis and representing less than one percent of the population, had a comparatively low encompassing interest in society. Indeed, certain state decisions seem to have reflected only the interests of the ruling minority: for example, a 15 th century ban on trading expeditions to the 'Western Oceans' had catastrophic repercussions on the economy, and was simply the result of rivalry between the bureaucracy and a rising eunuch aristocracy. The detrimental impact of autocracy on the Chinese economy of the Late Middle Ages lends support to Olson 's theory of encompassing interest.
Maddison, Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run, Table 1.3.
Deng, "A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History", p.11.
Deng, "A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History", p.19.
In this vein, Max Weber argues that it was the "predatory bureaucratic behaviour" of the Chinese state that impeded capitalistic development; this idea is shared by both Maddison and by Deng. "Rent-seeking . . . and exploitative landlordism" , contributed not only to the decline of China, but also to the economic demise of certain West European states in the Late Middle Ages. In 1428, when the French Estates General gave Charles VII monopoly of tax power, the king levied taxes without popular consent; while the crown 's tax revenue increased threefold in real terms over the Renaissance period, this fiscal policy left the population with no incentive to accumulate capital. Representative bodies in Spain similarly surrendered taxation control to the monarchy in the 16 th century; as in the case of France, unchecked rulers abused their absolute power, so that "seizure, confiscation, or the unilateral alteration of contracts [became] recurrent phenomena". Consequently, French and Spanish GDP per capita figures only reached $727 and $462 respectively in the year 1500, whereas the Western European average lay higher at $774. By exacerbating the Fundamental Problem of Exchange and reverting to behaviour typical of Olson 's roving bandits, autocracy can be fundamentally destructive to a state 's economy.
Maddison, Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run, Ch.1.
Maddison, Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run, Ch.1.
Deng, "A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History", p.
Deng, "A Critical Survey of Recent Research in Chinese Economic History", p.16.
North and Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: a New Economic History, p.122.
North and Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: a New Economic History, p.131.
Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: a Millennial Perspective, Paris: OECD, Table B-21.
The relationship that Olson establishes between democracy, dictatorship and development finds further historical backing when one contrasts the failures of the Chinese, French and Spanish autocracies to the success of democratic European states over a similar time period. Whereas China provided no legal system to its citizens, post-11 th century Venice created political and legal institutions that guaranteed merchants' property rights and enforced contracts. This mitigated the Fundamental Problem of Exchange and "create[d] an incentive to channel individual economic effort into activities . . . that le[d] to economic growth." Furthermore, the Venetian state adopted a fiscal system that encouraged capital accumulation, setting taxes below the tax revenue maximising point so as to attract the business of foreign merchants. A democratic regime additionally granted merchants a common voice in the form of guilds, whereas the Chinese bourgeoisie was wholly dependent upon the state for much of its activity. By 1500, Italian GDP per capita consequently reached $1,100, towering over China 's $600 figure. The advantages that Olson attaches to democratic rule are also exemplified by the economic success of Britain in the Early Modern Period: while the secular Chinese state had no religious or military bodies to balance the power of the state, the monarchy 's supremacy was highly contested in Britain, where Sir Edward Coke sought to limit the crown 's special privileges; indeed, after 1688, a system of Parliament dominated state decisions. Governed by a majority with a high encompassing interest, Britain reached Europe 's highest level of per capita GDP by 1700. Alternative sources of power in the Venetian and British democratic regimes thus increased the security of entrepreneurial activity and fostered economic growth.
North and Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: a New Economic History, p.1.
Maddison, The World Economy: a Millennial Perspective, Ch.2.
Maddison, The World Economy: a Millennial Perspective, Table B-21.
North and Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: a New Economic History, p.147.
Maddison, The World Economy: a Millennial Perspective, Table B-21.
To conclude, Mancur Olson 's claim that "the conditions necessary for a lasting democracy . . . generate economic growth" is grounded both in sound theory and in a detailed historical record. Indeed, this proposition provides an insightful explanation not only of the rise and fall of the Chinese empire, but also of the diverse economic experiences of states such as Venice, Spain and England over the Late Middle Ages. This conclusion has implications not only for understanding the rise of the West since the 15 th century, but also for analysing economic divides in the world order of today. What are the prospects that developing countries may progress from autocratic regimes to democracy? Olson acknowledges that this is an "improbable transition"; similarly, a study of evolution from authoritarian rule in Africa shows that "outcomes of these transitions have been highly variable: ... more often the transition has been blocked, flawed or precluded." Severe economic problems continue to plague contemporary Third World democracies. In spite of Olson 's theory and of its historical support, we must remain wary of prescribing democracy as a panacea of underdevelopment. Rather, it may be that the success of any political structure, be it autocratic or democratic, is simply dependent upon the changing social and economic frameworks of passing eras.
Olson, "Democracy, Dictatorship and Development", p.567.
Olson 573.
Bratton, Michael and Van de Walle, Nicolas. "Neopatrimonial Regimes and Political Transitions in Africa". World Politics, Vol. 46, No. 4. (Jul., 1994), p.453.
