Today 's global music industry is facing an unprecedented crisis. In 2002 music sales fell by 7% worldwide, and these drops have persisted despite companies cutting CD prices by upto 31%. While many blame these plummeting sales on internet music downloads, others attribute them to changes in consumer tastes, to the development of alternative entertainment forms, or simply to a decline in the quality of the music produced. Whatever the cause, the music industry is clearly redefining itself. An analysis of the current situation divides its future along two possible extremes: on the one hand, if recording companies continue to resist the internet 's technological advances through mergers and court cases, today 's oligopolistic industry may tend towards a monopoly; alternatively, if the companies undergo the technological change exemplified by file-sharing agencies, costs throughout the music industry will fall and the market may become more competitive. To evaluate these options' likelihood and their potential impact on consumers, record producers and artists, an economic investigation of the music industry 's situation is necessary.
Matheson, Clare, "Mixing Up the Music Industry". BBC. Internet. Accessed at:
McCarthy, Michael, "Record Industry lowers prices". USA Today. Accessed at:
Today, the global music business is an oligopoly. The industry is split up among few producers, the "Big Five", each possessing a high market share. As in all oligopolies, the music industry has high barriers to entry due to the imposing start-up costs of setting up studios and distribution channels, manufacturing records, and promoting new artists. This oligopoly has traditionally competed on non-price factors. Today, however, CD prices are being lowered to counter the industry 's falling sales. As graph 1 indicates, this actually worsens the situation: lowering price in the PED inelastic portion of the oligopoly 's Average Revenue curve (P to P 1) in fact lowers total revenue ( is lost, while only is gained). Falling prices are thus increasingly forcing suppliers to take losses, and to either desert the music industry in the long run, or merge with other producers to cut costs. While this sales crisis therefore harms producers, consumers, however, are benefiting: by forcing producers to cut costs and to become more efficient, lowered sales allow consumers access to cheaper-priced goods. This lowered price shifts budget constraints outwards (BC to BC 1 in graph 2), increasing individuals' consumption by without necessitating a rise in income. Dropping sales, while perhaps dooming record companies, are thus advantaging consumers.
The "Big Five" consist of Warner Music (11% market share), EMI Group (13%), Universal Music Group (24%), Bertelsmann Music Group (10%), and Sony (15%).
Oligopoly Watch, "Industry brief: Music recording". Internet, 28 June 2003. Accessed at:
Oligopoly Watch, "Industry brief: Music recording". Internet, 28 June 2003. Accessed at:
PED inelastic: where a change in price causes a less-than-proportional change in quantity demanded.
What is lowering these sales? Many point to the emergence of cheap substitute goods (goods with a similar utility to CDs) in the form of internet file-sharing devices. These illegal "P2P networks" allow consumers to freely download music from the internet (at P 0 in graph 3), thus completely out-pricing the record companies' price P 1 and forcing them to take losses (). File-sharing has consequently been blamed for a 31% drop in US CD sales since 2001 7, and for a "20% reduction in music sales worldwide between 1998-2002". Some studies, however, suggest that file-sharing is not fully responsible for the music industry 's struggles. Koleman Strumpf shows that piracy has "no statistically significant effect" on CD sales; Aram Sinnreich even claims that downloads boost sales by acting as complementary goods to CDs (indeed, while downloading led 65% of file-sharers in Strumpf 's study to not purchase an album, 80% bought an album after online sampling). If piracy is not entirely guilty of dropping CD sales, then, other sectors of the music business must be faulty.
P2P networks include agencies such as Kazaa, Gnutella and Earthstation 5.
Zieman, George, "A Logical Explanation For Music Industry Woes?" Internet. Accessed at:
Peitz, Martin and Waelbroeck, Patrick, "The Effect of Internet Piracy on Music Sales: Cross-Section Evidence". Accessed at:
Oberholzer, Felix, and Strumpf, Koleman, "The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: an Empirical Analysis". Accessed at:
Complementary goods: goods that enhance one another 's utility.
Borland, John, "Student Attitudes toward File Sharing & the Record Industry". Internet, April 2005. Accessed at:
Oberholzer and Strumpf, "The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: an Empirical Analysis".
Graph 5: inwards shift of the budget constraint.
Firstly, substitute products other than illegal downloading may have harmed sales. The DVD, digital media player and computer gaming industries all provide entertainment forms that are substituted for CD music when the latter 's relative price becomes too high. The perceived quality of music is also key to sales: a recent Rolling Stones Magazine poll indicates that, by "bundling good songs with second-rate songs" in their CDs and by converting bands into increasingly short-lived and homogeneous goods, the music industry is turning consumers away. The resulting drop in CD demand (D to D 1 in graph 4) reduces both the price and quantity demanded of the good (Q and P drop to Q 1 and P 1 respectively). CD sales may thus be plummeting due not only to the availability of cheap substitutes for music, but also to the deteriorating quality of produced albums.
Peitz, Martin and Waelbroeck, Patrick, "The Effect of Internet Piracy on Music Sales: Cross-Section Evidence". Accessed at:
Parmar, Bipin, "The music industry, part 2- Underlying issues are the real problem". The Chili, Internet. Accessed at: "Music 's Brighter Future", The Economist, 30 October 2004, p.92.
Besides such changes in the industry 's modes of supply, consumer behaviour is vital to understanding these declining sales. Consumption of a good depends on two factors: preferences and constraints. An increase in one 's financial constraints will reduce disposable income (BC to BC 1 in graph 5), thus reducing the amount of goods one can consume (by if preferences do not change). A global drop in income would thus theoretically explain decreasing CD sales; income has however risen in the past decade. In this case BC shifts out in graph 6, while the quantity of music purchased drops (x to x 1); the resulting income consumption curve (ICC 2), by contrast to ICC 1 in graph 5, is negatively sloped. This suggests either that music is an inferior good, or that factors other than income are modifying consumers' music preferences. RIAA studies indeed link music consumption to consumer confidence levels and to age (the median age of music consumers in the United States, for instance, has increased from 23 in 1989 to 32 in 2000). Despite these influential changes in consumer tastes, however, record companies' production continues to primarily target young adults. The industry 's inadequate response to consumer preferences, combined with its powerlessness before the internet 's technological advancements, may be causing today 's drop in CD sales.
Inferior good: a good that is viewed as less attractive (quantity demanded drops) as income increases.
Recording Industry Association of America.
Scherf, Kurt, "Trends in U.S. Broadband Adoption". Internet, April 2004. Accessed at: http ://.
Scherf, Kurt, "Trends in U.S. Broadband Adoption". Internet, April 2004. Accessed at: http ://.
How will the music industry adapt to these obstacles? For the "Big Five", two extreme alternatives seem possible: to resist the ongoing market transformations through mergers and legalistic procedures, or to undergo technological modifications. The first option is already being attempted: mergers are multiplying (Sony and BMG have recently joined, now possessing a 21.5% market share), as are anti-piracy lawsuits (in 2003 the RIAA sued 341 U.S. file-sharers over two months, while its international equivalent the IFPI announced "2,100 new legal cases against individuals" worldwide). This prosecution of lower-cost competition and these mergers are pushing the "Big Five" towards a monopolistic market, where they would be the sole producers of music. Alternatively, however, record companies could undergo technological change and provide legal download services which consumers would pay for - over 180 of these opened in 2004. Such modernization would drastically reduce the music industry 's startup costs, and therefore its barriers to entry; the "Big Five" would consequently lose their oligopoly status and have to compete with other firms, forgoing their previous supernormal profits ( in graph 8 below). As consumers' choice of goods would expand while price dropped, the PED 6 of music would furthermore increase. A semblance of perfect competition (where PED is perfectly elastic, there are no barriers to entry, there is perfect knowledge - enabled through the internet here - and normal profits are made) would therefore be reached.
Oligopoly Watch, "Industry brief: Music recording". Internet, 28 June 2003. Accessed at:
Graham, Jefferson, "Q&A: How does Apple 's video iPod work?". USA Today. Accessed at:
International Record Industry Organisation, "Biggest wave of actions yet announced against illegal file-sharing". ". IFPI. Internet. August 2, 2005. Accessed at:
International Record Industry Organisation, "IFPI Releases Definitive Statistics on Global Market for Recorded Music". IFPI. Internet. August 2, 2005. Accessed at:
Bockstedt, Jesse C., Kauffman, Robert J., and Riggins, Frederick J. "The Move To Artist-Led Online Music Distribution: Explaining Structural Changes In The Digital Music Market". Accessed at: misrc.umn.edu/workingpapers/ fullpapers/2004/0422_091204.pdf.
How would these changes affect market actors? Comparing graphs 7 and 8 suggests that shifting from an oligopoly market to a monopoly harms consumers by lowering the amount of music available (Q drops to Q 1) and raising price (P to P 1), thus increasing consumer welfare loss from to . Producers, inversely, benefit from this change: their supernormal profits increase from to . By contrast, shifting to a perfectly competitive market increases producer efficiency, thus lowering price (P to P 2) and raising output (Q to Q 2). Consequently both welfare loss and producers' supernormal profits completely disappear. Therefore, while changing to a monopoly would transfer resources from consumers to producers, shifting to perfect competition would do the opposite - thus, according to Koleman Strumpf, generating "added social welfare" and possible positive externalities by offering more consumers a wider range of music.
Positive externalities: beneficial side-effects of market activity on non-market participants.
Oberholzer and Strumpf, "The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: an Empirical Analysis".
Neither of these options, however, is fully realistic. A monopoly 's abnormally high prices would be challenged by parallel markets like internet file-sharing agencies, which persist despite the RIAA 's persecutions. Additionally, high monopolist prices would make substitute entertainment even more attractive to consumers than it is today. Resisting technological change through merging, therefore, seems unsustainable in the long-run; adopting new technologies and a more competitive market structure, by contrast, could allow the music industry 's survival. Achieving perfect competition, however, is highly improbable, as this requires all goods to be homogeneous - or, unreasonably, all artists to produce identical songs. A future situation of monopolistic competition (where goods remain heterogeneous) is therefore more likely.
Zieman, George, "A Logical Explanation For Music Industry Woes?" Internet. Accessed at:
In all of the above cases, how would the industry 's labour - the artists - fare? In perfect and monopolistic competition, as firms would seek to cut costs the payment to artists would drop; in the monopoly situation artists would also suffer, as they would face a monopsony labour market. Artists would consequently have to compete for hire, and wage and employment would drop by W 1W 2 and L 1L 2 respectively (graph 10 below).
Monopsony labour market: there is a single buyer of labour (the monopoly recording company here).
Nevertheless, some argue that artists can benefit from the music industry 's crisis, as today 's technological changes are eliminating the need for recording companies in the market. If artists are able to sell their product directly to consumers through the internet, the intermediary role played by the "Big Five" will become obsolete. Were these companies to disappear completely, artists would reap the full revenue generated by their songs, and consumers would benefit from legal access to lower-cost products (as the share paid to the recording companies in music production would disappear). The music industry 's future may therefore exclude recording companies completely, favouring a direct exchange between artists and consumers.
To conclude, whether the music industry 's current fall in sales is caused primarily by internet piracy, by poor quality of the produced music, or by substitute entertainment forms, the industry must clearly alter. From their current oligopoly structure, the "Big Five" recording companies may choose the conservative path of merging and monopoly, or they may adapt to today 's technological challenges and draw near more perfectly or monopolistically competitive markets. Alternatively, they may simply disappear as technology renders their role obsolete. The implications of technological transformation on the music business are undoubtedly enormous - particularly as, in an era of technological change, other industries face similar challenges worldwide.
