This essay describes some selected studies using comparative microbial genomics. Two investigations are discussed in detail, namely those on Enterococcus faecalis and Bacillus anthracis. These studies reflect the importance of comparative microbial genomics for the better understanding of microbes. It is apparent that the comparison of complete genome sequences can reveal the variation in gene content that may affect observed phenotypic differences in infectivity and virulence between closely related strains. In addition, genes that have been deliberately introduced into bio warfare agents can be identified. Among the many discoveries from studying the complete genome sequence of these two examples, perhaps the most significant outcomes are the identification of virulence factors and surface exposed proteins that may be important targets for drug design against the pathogens.
Comparative microbial genomics involves comparison of bacteria, requiring a range of sophisticated bioinformatic techniques, and is usually based on completely sequenced genomes. An important outcome of these comparative studies is to provide an insight into the genetic basis of observed phenotypic differences of different microbes and also different strains of the same species. Discovering the genetics behind phenotypic differences in infectivity and virulence allows the pathogenesis of bacteria to be understood. Moreover, these studies may also provide a better understanding of their resistance to certain antibiotics and even facilitate identification of genes that may have been deliberately introduced into bio warfare agents.
According to Read et al., "genome based analysis of microbial pathogens will provide a powerful tool for the investigation of infectious disease outbreaks". As well as outlining studies involved in the identification of genes that are conserved between species to allow clarification of their phylogeny, this essay will discuss the uses of comparative microbial genomics to improve our current understanding of the genetics behind virulence of important pathogens.
In their review in Trends in Microbiology, Sebaihia et al. describe four major comparative analyses that are currently taking place. The first one of these involves Bacillus anthracis, a bacterium probably most well known due to its uses in bio terrorism attacks in October 2001. B. anthracis is the causative agent of anthrax, and Read et al. and Ivanova et al. among many others, have been engaged in extensive comparative analyses of the B. anthracis genome with other organisms. These include Bacillus cereus, an opportunistic pathogen that causes food poisoning in humans, Bacillus thuringiensis and Bacillus subtilis as well as different strains of B. anthracis. In short, these analyses concluded that the common ancestor of B. cereus must be an insect pathogen rather than a soil bacterium. Other important results, such as the location of potential virulence factors and genes encoding surface proteins which could be targets for future vaccines were discussed, however, these details will be described subsequently in this essay.
A second, important ongoing analysis has been on Leptospira interrogans, a spirochete that causes a disease which triggers influenza-like symptoms and sometimes kidney or liver damage, and haemorrhage in the worst cases. L. interrogans possess two circular chromosomes and from these studies it was discovered that the larger of the two consist mostly of housekeeping genes and the smaller contains genes involved in heme, cell envelope and vitamin B 12 synthesis. The small gene was also discovered to have genes involved in attachment and invasion into eukaryotic cells. These organisms are unique in that they can penetrate mammalian collagen and hyaluronic acids. It is thought that the genes for motility, chemotaxis and the shape of the spirochete are also present on this chromosome. Knowing that the shape of the spirochete is a result of the gene products involved in cell-envelope murein layer synthesis may help to understand its virulence, since its shape and unusual motility is thought to contribute to its pathogenicity.
The third and fourth analyses described by Sebaihia et al. concern members of the human gut flora, Enterococcus faecalis and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. E. faecalis is a normally harmless opportunistic pathogen, known for causing urinary tract infection. This bacterium is tough and is resistant to many physical and chemical stresses and is known to acquire resistance at a very fast rate. The genome of the vancomycin resistant chemical E. faecalis V583 isolate was analysed. It has one chromosome and three plasmids and one quarter of its genome was found to be made up of mobile and foreign DNA. This leads to a high level of genome fluidity and is the probably the reason for the bacterium 's "rapid acquisition and dissemination of virulence and drug resistance". (Paulsen et al., 2003) The study on E. faecalis described by Paulsen et al. will also be discussed later in more detail in this essay.
Another member of the human gut flora, B. thetaiotaomicron, was studied by Xu et al. and was found to have interesting features. For example, its genome included seven capsular polysaccharide biosynthesis loci and some of these genes are regulated by a promoter inversion, which are able to switch the genes on and off. B. thetaiotamicron also appears to possess other methods of gene regulation such as ECF sigma factors as well as several one and two component regulatory systems. This means that the organism is able to sense and respond with ease and flexibility to changes in the environment. Knowledge of the genetic basis behind these abilities is valuable for the better understanding of microbes such as B. thetaiotamicron.
In 2002 Read et al. published a paper detailing the comparison of a reference with the whole genome sequence of B. anthracis isolated from a victim from the bioterrorist anthrax attack of October 2001 in Florida. The reference was a strain used in databases that was originally isolated from a dead cow in Texas in 1981. This strain was coined B. anthracis Ames. The Porton chromosome, that is, the B. anthracis Ames isolate that lacks pXO1 and pXO2 virulence plasmids, was also aligned with the sequences from the Florida isolate. The aim of these comparative studies was to find markers, including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), inserted or deleted sequences (indels) and variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs).
Only four differences were discovered between the main chromosomes of the Florida and Porton isolates, which suggested that the two are very closely related. The four differences were two SNPs and two indels. Although the differences that were found were few, many of these SNPs have a phenotypic effect. These changes, however, may be possibly due to the relaxed selection of B. anthracis in laboratory conditions. Because the Porton isolates have no pXO plasmids, the Florida plasmids were compared with the B. anthracis Sterne strain pXO2 and Pasteur strain pXO2. A total of 38 SNPs, eight VNTRs and three large indels were found. In addition to this, two large inversions in the Florida isolate 's pXO1, in relation to the Sterne strain, was identified. The pXO1 was found to contain a pathogenicity island which includes genes for the tripartite lethal factor toxin.
To evaluate the utility of the polymorphisms as genetic markers for strain discrimination, the genomic DNA of the following B. anthracis isolates were screened: the Florida isolate, the Porton isolate, two non-Ames isolates and five Ames isolates including four lab isolates and one from a goat in Texas, which is the only known other natural occurrence of the Ames genotype. The results obtained showed six distinct groups, as shown in the diagram (fig. 1) on the next page. Of all the plasmid markers tested, nine SNPs and six VNTRs varied between B. anthracis isolates. All but three were found in the pXO2, suggesting that this plasmid must be the source of most of the short-term variation in the B. anthracis genome.
Following this study, Read et al. published another paper in 2003 which compares B. anthracis to a closely related bacteria rather than different strains of the same species. Several chromosomally encoded proteins that may contribute to pathogenicity were found, including haemolysins, phospholipases, iron acquisition factors. In addition, numerous surface proteins, which may be possible targets for vaccine and drugs were found.
In short, the study involved comparative genome hybridisation of Bacillus cereus and Bacillus thuringiensis strains against a DNA microarray of B. anthracis and confirmed the general similarity of chromosomal genes among this group of close relatives. However, pXO1 and pXO2 plasmids were found to be more variable between strains; and as found in the previous study, this is where high proportions of transposons and genes involved in toxicity among other genes with unassigned functions are present.
As mentioned before, B. anthracis was used as a bio weapon and the reason behind this is because the bacterium has a tough, environmentally resistant endospore that causes lethal inhalational anthrax. According to Dixon et al., expression of the major plasmid encoded virulence determinants (the tripartite toxin and poly-D-glutamic acid capsule) is essential for full pathogenicity. The sequencing performed by Read et al. helped to identify additional genes that may contribute to virulence, either by encoding for functions necessary for survival and escape from macrophages in the mammalian host or by enhancing evasion of the immune system and the extent of damage it causes to the host.
Plasmid transfer within the B. cereus group is well established after the works of Thorne et al. and there are a number of mobility genes on pXO1. Despite genomic variability in the B. cereus group, the B. anthracis chromosome and virulence plasmids display little variation in G and C content and dinucleotide composition. This suggests that most genes in B. anthracis are native to the B. cereus group.
B. cereus is a closely related strain to the B. anthracis Ames and therefore most of its chromosomal proteins have homologues in B. cereus. This means that even potential chromosomal virulence-enhancing genes in B. anthracis have homologues in B. cereus, suggesting that the genes are not specifically associated with the pathogenesis of the B. anthracis but are common to the B. cereus group. Ivanova et al. also describe the presence of a core set of genes in both B. anthracis and B. cereus which are involved in invasion, establishment and propagation within the host.
Moreover, the chromosome of B. anthracis Ames contains several homologues of genes known to be involved in B. cereus and B. thuringiensis pathogenesis. These include two channel forming type III haemolysins and a complex of three non-haemolytic enterotoxins. Also, there is homology to proteins that contribute to virulence of Listeria monocytogenes, a Gram positive pathogen. The homologies may have arisen due to similarities in the pathways of intracellular survival and survival and escape between these organisms.
B. anthracis contains a gene encoding a homologue of the enhancin protein, a metalloprotease that boosts viral infectivity by degrading the mucin layer surrounding insect guts. Interestingly, a homologue of B. anthracis enhancin also found in genome of Yersinia pestis, an organism that survives in both mammals and insects. B. anthracis also contains two homologues of B. thuringiensis immune inhibitor A metalloprotease, a protein that enhances virulence in insects through the cleavage of bacteriocidal lectins. The presence of these genes suggests that a recent ancestor of B. anthracis infected insects. These results mirror the studies done by Ivanova et al., who also suggest that the insect intestine could well have been the natural ecological niche of the cereus group ancestor, due to the presence of genes involved in chitin and mucin breakdown.
Germination of anthrax endospore is the key initial event in B. anthracis infectious cycle. The B. anthracis genome has seven operons utilised by endospores to recognise presence of specific molecules to initiate germination. Protection of DNA during dormancy and efficient DNA repair during germination are also important factors in endospore viability, genes of which some are found to be homologous to those in B. subtilis. Also, Read et al. describe that the B. anthracis chromosome encodes a "machinery" for sporulation that is similar to B. subtilis.
Another outcome of these studies is that B. anthracis was discovered to have three homologues of sortase transpeptidase which is responsible for attachment of secreted proteins to peptidoglycans on Gram positive bacteria cell surfaces and also contains the genes for binding proteins with S-layer homology (SLH) domains to polysaccharide. At the time of Read et al. 's study the role of these SLH domain containing proteins were unknown but may be responsible for the interactions between B. anthracis and the external environment. If this is the case, it is an important target for vaccine and drug design.
A study was undertaken by Paulsen et al. which involved examining the complete genome sequence of E. faecalis V583, a vancomycin resistant clinical isolate. E. faecalis, a Gram-positive bacterium whose natural habitat is the mammalian gastrointestinal tract, is known to be able to withstand many extreme environmental conditions. (Klare et al., 2001) These include oxidative stress, desiccation, extremes of temperature and pH. The organism is also able to withstand salinity, bile acids, detergents and antimicrobials. E. faecalis V583 is the first vancomycin resistant clinical isolate that was reported in the United States of America. The study of its genome sequence allows for a better understanding into the pathogenesis of E. faecalis and the role of mobile elements in genome evolution as well as providing an important insight into the transfer of vancomycin resistance.
Over 3000 protein encoding open reading frames (ORFs) were identified on the chromosome and the three plasmids of E. faecalis. What was significant is that over 25% of the E. faecalis V583 genome is made up of mobile and exogenously acquired DNA. According to the authors, this is one of the highest proportions observed in a genome of a bacterium, and suggests that these mobile elements contribute to the accumulation of virulence and drug resistance factors in by E. faecalis.
The vancomycin resistance was found to be encoded within a previously unknown mobile element with some similarities to the E. faecalis vanB vancomycin resistance conjugative transposon. (Garnier et al., 2000) The vancomycin resistance genes in E. faecalis V583 encode vancomycin resistance through the synthesis of modified peptidoglycan precursors and were discovered to be almost identical to those in the genes from the transposons mentioned earlier. However, the remainder of the E. faecalis V583 element is very divergent from the transposon with multiple insertions, deletions and rearrangements.
Paulsen et al. also identified 38 insertion elements (IS), with three predominating types. One of these is associated with a pathogenicity island and integrated plasmid genes. Previously, a large pathogenicity island was identified in E. faecalis V583 which included genes for aggregation substance, cytolysin and other possible virulence or adaptation genes. (Shankar et al. 2002) Trinucleotide composition analysis revealed that most of this island has a highly atypical composition, except for a region containing integrated plasmid genes. This region encodes multiple homologues of genes found in Streptococcus mitis, which are responsible for coding proteins involved in binding human platelets, and interaction that is important for the pathogenesis of infective endocarditis.
The chromosome of E. faecalis has three or more integrated plasmid remnants (Paulsen et al., 2003), two of them encoding aggregation substances that may be important in virulence. These are surface proteins that improve conjugative transfer and have an important role in adhesion to colonic mucosal fibronectin and also translocation across the intestinal epithelium. (Sussmuth et al., 2000). According to Paulsen et al., the presence of these plasmid remnants in E. faecalis V583 emphasises the importance of plasmids for its genome fluidity.
E. faecalis from previous studies is known to adhere to various cells and extracellular matrix components. The Enterococcus species have adhensins such as aggregation substance, haemagglutinin and various other virulence factors. In E. faecalis V583, 47 possible choline or integrin binding motifs were identified, and are thought to be important in the adherence and internalisation processes of the bacterium. In addition, adhesion lipoproteins including an endocarditis specific antigen, sortases and LPxTG motif cell wall surface anchor proteins were identified. Due to the atypical nucleotide composition of the LPxTG proteins, Paulsen et al. suggest there are from foreign origin.
To evade the immune system, a common tactic of pathogens is to have antigenic or phase variation of surface structures. This is indeed the case for E. faecalis: almost half of the surface exposed proteins found contained homopolymeric sequences or iterative nucleotide motifs located within the ORF or promoter region, enabling "phase variation via a slippage type mechanism." (Paulsen et al., 2003) Moreover, a large proportion of the E. faecalis V583 genome are mobile elements, whether intact or partial. Many of these regions have a complex mosaic structure containing different elements, suggesting they are, as Paulsen et al. describe, "hotspots" for mobile element insertion. The apparent ease for the incorporation of mobile elements in these regions is probably the reason behind its rapid acquisition and dissemination of drug resistance. The study of the complete genome sequence of E. faecalis V583 has allowed the identification of virulence factors and surface exposed proteins that may be important drug targets against this pathogen, similar to how the study of B. anthracis revealed SLH domains that may be important targets for drug design.
From the examples studied, it can be seen that genome based analysis is a powerful tool, which can be used for investigating unexpected outbreaks of infectious diseases in all circumstances: spanning from biological warfare attacks, emerging agents to familiar pathogens. As even monomorphic species like B. anthracis show phenotypic variation in infection potential, the technique of genomic comparison can be used to investigate the genetic basis of pathogenesis.
According to Read et al., comparative analyses based on whole genome sequence data provide the most comprehensive picture of species diversity and does not pose the bias presented when using methods such as multilocus sequence typing, as the latter only samples a small fraction of the genome. The comparison of the whole genome is advantageous in that it allows for polymorphic loci to be identified, which can then be used for PCR-based sampling of variation within bacterial populations. Moreover, comparative genomic sequence is a valuable method because it can reveal novel, lineage-specific markers that enhance the resolution of genotyping schemes. For example, in the study of B. anthracis by Read et al. (2002), eleven DNA sequence differences between the chromosomes of the Florida and Porton isolates were discovered. Solely by their VNTR profiles, these isolates would have been indistinguishable.
Another obvious value of comparing complete genome sequences is that the variances in gene content that may affect observed phenotypic differences in infectivity and virulence between closely related strains can be revealed. In addition, genes that have been deliberately introduced into bio warfare agents can be identified. These comparisons, however, can only be efficient with complete genomes, opposed to multiple, unordered assemblies of "draft" sequences. Hence, there is a necessity for the acquisition of accurate data to increase the span of databases. This means the construction of databases derived from genome-based surveys of natural variation in all major pathogens and not only potential biological warfare agents. (Read et al., 2002) The hope is that databases will increase in breadth and as a consequence more comparative studies will reveal important aspects involved in the virulence and infectivity of various pathogens that affect us.
