To deliberate whether John Maynard Keynes was a classical or neo-classical economist is essentially to compare the two traditions in light of Keynes' theories. This essay will consider how Keynes' thought compares with either school. Above this analysis it is equally important to interpret Keynes general approach to the study of economics. The tradition of the classical political economy should be taken synonymous with the liberal critique of mercantilism and the analyses of the advantages of international trade. In this way, the neo-classical economy further advocated the principles of free trade within British hegemony in the 19 th century. The approach of the neo-classical marginalist revolution signaled a specialization of economics as a purely technical discipline. As Michael Bleaney comments, 'Keynes' achievement was to bridge the gulf between these practical ideas and pure neo-classical theory; to root these thoughts in a new general theory of economics'. Hence, Keynes' writing was composed of a m  lange of classical and neo-classical ideas. Yet, his approach to the study of economics most closely resembles the classical consideration of a political economy. These arguments of theory and approach will be brought forward hereinafter.
Bleaney, p.1.
It is essential to compare the two strands of liberal political economy - both the classical and neo-classical approach. The classical political economy is most commonly characterized by the works of Adam Smith and David Ricardo. Both wrote about an economy deeply rooted in a social context. Social relations were did not take a backseat to economic theory. Hence, Smith, in his analysis of social institutions, was careful to point out the properties of a market society that could potentially have adverse effects on the human condition. From this background Smith develops the theory of the invisible hand would direct individual interests to benefit the collective of society. However, this is not to be confused with the neo-classical perception of the homo economicus.
More importantly, in his Wealth of Nations he outlined that the real value of a nation is not the gold or silver reserves it possesses but the labor it holds. In the 19 th century David Ricardo contributes to the classical political economy thought by introducing his theory of comparative advantage. This theory essentially puts forward the idea of international trade being a positive sum rather than a zero sum game. Hence, these are some of the fundamental points that contribute to the understanding of classical political economy.
Both Smith and Ricardo directly criticize the mercantilist approach to political economy. They label it a statist and protectionist doctrine that emphasizes the wealth of nations on the basis on material reserves. Indeed, mercantilist economies understand the benefits the trade as mutually exclusive. In contrast, according to Ricardo 's theory of comparative advantage if a country engages in free trade then it will be beneficial to all nations involved due to specialization. Hence, both classical political economists are similar in their view that acting out of self-interest, either in society or in international relations becomes the general interest of all.
States and Market Lecture, No. 2,.
The development of a neo-classical school saw the discipline of economical thought evolve into a more scientific and more technical direction. It is generally seen as a departure point from the classical political economy. The analysis of 'how choices are made between alternative ends under conditions of scarcity' became the focus point of neo-classical studies. Therefore it was seen to be a science free of any political or moral undertones. Indeed, the Austrian school, which is most commonly associated with neo-classical thought, emphasized the need for the universality of economic concepts. This stands in opposition to the historical school who are firmly believe in a historically contingent analysis. Hence, the neo-classical approach treats economics as a pure science that considers socially indifferent individuals. This approach has often lent the neo-classical economists a reputation for being market fundamentalists. Furthermore, they are additionally seen as predecessors to the Hayekian neo-liberal political economy.
Gamble 1995: 518.
Gamble, p.5.
In order to compare Keynes' thought with the classical and neo-classical school it is necessary to analyze some of Keynes' viewpoints and stances. Several of his economic theories point towards Keynes as disapproving of classical economic thought. Ricardo and the classics were convinced that savings would be automatically reinvested. However, 'the difference between Keynes and the classical economists was that while they thought of this as the normal, universal state of affairs, he saw it as a special case.'.
Stewart, p.99.
In this way the classical economists believed that balance between savings and investment was regulated by a changing interest rate. For instance, if the level of savings increases the interest rates will fall with a consequence of investments rising again. Thus, a decrease in consumption would be balanced by a rise in investment and hence employment would stay equal. Yet, as Keynes argues that savings are not reinvested by default, an increase of savings would then mean a decrease in consumption. The subsequent decrease in national income would signal a rise in unemployment. Hence, in this respect Keynes' thought hardly aligns with classical economic concepts of savings and investments.
Classical economists and Keynes clash once more about the relationship of wages to unemployment. In this regard, Michael Stewart has argued that Keynes relied on fundamental classical concepts, yet developed a different conclusion. A combination of the Law of Diminishing Returns and the Theory of Marginal Productivity results in the observation if the number of workers increases then individual must fall. The studies of Keynes' theories indicate that there was concurrence on this issue between him and the classics. Nevertheless, he claimed that they had not distinguished between real and money wages. In terms of macroeconomic principle if everyone experiences similar changes in money wages then the combined real wage will remain unchanged. From this it follows that if real wages do not change, then neither will the level of employment. Hence, in opposition to the classical economists Keynes argued that it was interest rates and not wages that cause unemployment. Interestingly, however, this theory is somewhat negated in light of the international political economy where individual countries are seen to have open economies.
Stewart, pp. 109-112.
Stewart, p. 109.
In terms of theory Keynes is not significantly closer to the neo-classical thought of economics. Indeed, Keynes disagreed with Say 's Law, which is seen to be one of the cornerstones of neo-classical economics. Keynes contradicted this proposition by disagreeing with the stipulation that supply will create its own demand. However, Michael Bleaney notes that Keynes 'did not make any obvious departures from the neo-classical tradition in the assumptions around which his theory was built'. This leads us to the neo-classical synthesis argument that claims the Keynes' General Theory was merely a  'special case of the classical theory'. Yet, as seen above, Keynes' thoughts are not necessarily favorable towards the classical political economy. Indeed, Keynes' accusation that "the classical economic theory of being itself one of these petty, polite techniques which tries to deal with the present by abstracting from the fact that we know very little about the future" is not exactly favorable to the classical thought.
Bleaney, p.17.
Togati, p.3.
Keynes cited in Togati, p.47.
In light of these theoretical comparisons it is necessary to abstract and analyze what scientific approach Keynes used to develop these theories. The constructive method of the neo-classical school was criticized by Keynes as merely dealing with particular cases. Therefore, Keynes is seen as placing 'emphasis on aggregates rather than on representative agents as irreducible realities of economics'. In addition, the General Theory market... mathematics graph only developed later.
Togati, p.44.
