Further restructuring of company operations supported by the adoption of Internet links to high-street agents was proposed by the Operations Director and was approved recently. This report analyses the changes to be made and thus recommends the approach for implementation. As IT facilities have progressively been developed improving communications with the high-street agents is believed to be the way forward for the company. With regards to the staff, the Group feels that their concerns should be better addressed in order to avoid any dissatisfaction as seen during the structural change in 2001. Since the proposed changes are breaking new ground as far as the company is concerned, care must be given in ensuring that expenditure are well-monitored and controlled besides keeping risks to a minimum.
To improve competitiveness and profitability by enhancing the quality of service and reducing costs through restructuring the company 's operations into cohesive, multi-purpose teams and establishing internet communications with high-street agents.
Within 2 months from the start of the project, to have special software developed and installed.
Within 6 months from the start of the project, to have ten multi-purpose teams, each having its own open-plan office. to have all staff fully trained to deal with all types of insurance policy (except Life). to have all staff fully trained and capable of using the software.
Within 9 months from the start of the project, to have all staff feel more motivated by working in teams. to have increased staff competency in being able to deal with all types of insurance policy (except Life). to have increased the number of policies taken up by each customer by X%. to have enhanced working relationship with high-street agents. (Each proposed evaluation refers to each objective as stated above, respectively).
To do simple inspection on all computers; whether software is operational.
To do simple observation; whether each team has its own separate open-plan office.
To obtain records of staff attendance for each of the training sessions held; to carry out an evaluation either computer-based or written in order to test staff competency.
To obtain records of staff attendance for each of the training sessions held; to observe staff and obtain responses from all staff regarding capability to use software.
To obtain responses from all staff by carrying out focus group discussions.
To analyse the breakdown of sales made by a sample of staff; to analyse recordings of their telephone conversations.
To obtain and analyse the record of the number of policies taken up by a sample of customers.
To obtain feedback from all high-street agents and views from a sample of staff through questionnaires.
The table below shows the classification of stakeholders according to influence and interest with regards to the project.
Will not be directly involved in the project implementation hence low stake. Low influence as main concern is the company 's financial performance.
Therefore should be informed about project type and project duration so as to keep them updated about current developments in the company.
Their identification as having low interest is based on past experience where they have been somewhat passive.
However in this case it is vital that they are well-informed of the changes that will be taking place as the changes will have a large impact on their members.
Also, they should be regularly consulted in order to gain their views and to provide them with the opportunity to express their concerns.
Relatively high degree of interest as changes to be made will impact on communication as well as working relationship with them.
Should be consulted with regards to the software development, but generally should be informed of the progress of the project.
The two main drivers of the project hence high interest but relatively low influence.
Must be kept up-to-date with the project progress regarding each of their functions; Consultation would be highly recommended in order to gain their commitment.
Have high interest as the bulk of the project concerns them thus must be informed and consulted at the same time so as to gain their commitment and reduce the probability of resistance.
Has a high level of interest in the project; considering the considerable amount of risk involved. Also, has great influence with regards to position in the company.
Thus should be invited to participate in overseeing the project i.e. to be in the Steering Committee.
Has high stake since brainchild of the project thus concerned with the success of the project as this will greatly impact position in the company.
Should be invited to participate in the Steering Committee.
Identified as having: Low probability of occurrence; High level of impact.
The level of impact is high on the project as well as the company if the capabilities of the Operations staff do not increase to cope with the change in their work and the extra workload. However since the company has a well-structured employee development programme as well as competent and experienced Training staff, there is high confidence and trust that they will be able to provide adequate training for the Operations staff, hence the identification of having low probability to occur.
Mitigate - As staff training is critical to the success of the project, extra time, cost and especially effort should be put to ensure sufficient training is given. Particular emphasis should be placed on aspects of team-building as the Operations Department will be working in teams later. A well-designed training programme should be developed and thus be well-managed by the Training staff.
Identified as having: Medium probability of occurrence; Medium level of impact.
The I.T Department does have the experience to develop and install software but since this is a new venture for them there exists the risk that the software may not be fully operational. This will affect the efficiency of communications between the company and the high-street agents. However it should not be too problematic as it will not affect the whole business operation of the company with its customers.
Mitigate - As the risk is considered critical to the project, more time and effort is suggested to be allocated in the development stage to ensure that the software is developed to the right specifications and requirements. However the budgeted cost should be monitored closely so as not to exceed it. Careful installation needs to be carried out by those in charged to guarantee that the software is operational.
Contracting out the work is deemed unnecessary as the risk involved is relatively low and the I.T Department is capable to carry out the work.
Identified as having: Low to Medium probability of occurrence; High level of impact on project.
Due to a history of minor resistance in the past, there is a probability that it could happen again as the employees might view the project skeptically and thus tend to have a negative perception of the changes to be carried out when the project initially commences. The fact that the company has been a valued employer to its employees by providing secure jobs and a caring environment also plays a role in predicting the probability of resistance that is likely to take place.
A high level of impact is predicted as the employees are actually the assets of the company. Their support for the company 's decisions and actions is vital in ensuring that the company achieves its mission and strategic objectives both in the short and long-run.
Mitigate - Initially a survey could be carried out to identify the level of possible resistance as well as the expectations of the employees. Alternatively, more attention could be given in providing extra effort, time and cost to facilitate the management of change throughout the project implementation. It must be made certain that the employees understand the nature and consequences of the changes about to take place and still feel motivated to work towards them.
Identified as having: Low probability of occurrence; Medium level of impact.
Even with a comprehensive planning system, actual costs may still exceed the budgeted figure due to inefficient efforts of the persons in charged of the tasks. This may then delay the project if more funds are not made available in time.
Strategy.
Allow - Ideally an amount of contingency funds should be set aside to deal with any acceleration in costs. However appropriate control should be carried out to ensure that expenditure is kept according to the budget as efficiently as possible.
While the impact of the risks mentioned above focuses primarily on the project, some do have an impact on the company 's performance. Failure in staff training, for example, could lead to failure in achieving the company 's strategic objective of providing excellent service to customers. As the nature of the project presents an innovative change to the current structure of the company 's operations thus proposing major risks to the company, critical consideration should be given in dealing with the project implementation.
Identification of other risks that are involved is crucial to ensure that the risks that remain after the project implementation are kept to a minimum and under control.
The chart below presents the suggested activities and their planned durations.
It is recommended that the project implementation should take six months.
Hence, it is recommended that the project pace should be of a medium one. This shall allow ample time for training purposes as well as proper and accurate development of the software system. However allowance should be made for an increase or decrease in flexibility or speed, if deemed necessary.
A 'pilot' phase is recommended for this project, with one month 's duration, consisting of two teams with their leaders, serving two separate geographical areas, and they have received training with regards to the insurance policies as well as I.T.
As presented above, there should be a combination of  'serial' and 'parallel' approaches in which the project is to be divided into stages with some control points at the end of key stages.
It is suggested that the project should adopt a progressive implementation pattern, with a 'vertical slice' approach. By setting up the teams in stages, better control can thus be exercised on the overall project and time could be utilised more efficiently by concentrating on a particular area at one time.
Generally each person in-charged of the work breakdown structure is suggested to take a 'consulting' approach.
Staff should be encouraged to offer their opinions and ideas in order to motivate them as well as to gain their commitment. Decision-making should be given to the leader to allow some control in planning and implementing a particular activity.
The initial notice regarding the project should be made known to all employees prior to informing their trade union representatives so as to form positive perceptions of the project.
As training is crucial, comprehensive and interactive training should be given covering each of the insurance policies (except Life) as well as the use of the internet communications software.
It is further recommended that a feedback box is made available to provide the employees with a means to offer their views or suggestions regarding the project.
In general trade unions should be informed of the progress of the project and consulted with regards to issues that concern their members, particularly training.
The issue of whether there is to be redundancy should be addressed in the early stages and whether it is to be voluntary or enforced. Consultation is suggested.
Negotiation is deemed highly necessary to work out if there is to be an increase in pay in relation to the extra workload as well as the broader skills that the staff will be gaining. This should also include discussions on team leaders' salary.
Consultation is suggested with regards to the amount of overtime that is to be taken and whether it should be voluntary or compulsory.
It is suggested that only the training for team leaders should be contracted out. It is deemed necessary to do so as the training department will then be able to focus on managing staff training.
A fixed-priced contract is recommended to prevent from incurring accelerating costs.
Project Manager.
I.T Manager (handles I.T training as well as Software Development and Installation).
Team Leader Training Contractor.
Training Manager (handles Staff Training and manages Team Leader Training Contractor).
Operations Manager (handles 'Pilot' Phase and Reorganisation).
It is recommended that a Steering Committee is set up and composed of the Managing Director, Finance Director, Operations Director, Human Resource Director, Physical Resources Director, Project Manager, and High-street Agent Representative.
Four control points are identified of which three are shown in the chart above. They are: after the 'team leader training', after the 'pilot' phase, after all the remaining groups have been trained, and one month into operation.
It is suggested that Gantt charts are used as a tool for planning, monitoring and reporting progress.
Review meetings should include the Project Manager and the Project Team.
Other relevant representatives should be invited to the review meetings at different stages of the project, for e.g. trade union representatives.
It is suggested that the review meetings are held once every three weeks.
This is considered most appropriate as it is frequent enough in relation to the project duration; allowing the project to be sufficiently monitored and controlled.
However discretion should be given to the Project Manager in deciding when to call for meetings whenever deemed necessary.
The following should be identified:
Actual activity performance compared with the original plan.
Percentage of activities completed within planned duration.
Estimated project/activity completion date and remaining duration of tasks.
Estimated project/activity overrun.
Review of the subsequent work package(s) should be done at the meeting prior to the planned start date of the particular work package(s).
Specific performance indicators could be identified by the manager of each work package subject to agreement of Project Manager. For example, the actual number of computers installed with the new software to date would be appropriate in monitoring the progress of the software installation activity.
The Project Manager will be responsible to communicate the outcome of the review meetings to the Steering Committee.
Each manager on the Project Team should relay information to their staff who are directly involved in the project.
Information of progress must be updated regularly to those involved in the project through the use of:
Mailing lists; by sending weekly updates.
Noticeboards; as reminders for everyone involved in the project.
Costs that are directly related to the project; i.e. the cost of overtime working and the cost of developing and installing the special software.
Commitment i.e. the training experts to be contracted for the project.
Earned value i.e. the value of work completed.
Recognition of overtime cost should be made monthly.
Recognition of costs regarding software development and installation is to be made at the end of each stage respectively.
Commitment regarding the specialist training contract is generated as soon as the first phase of training begins.
Earned value is recognised equivalent to the budget cost when the cost is incurred.
Generally only costs that are directly related to the project will be of concern.
Specifically, expenses to be incurred in carrying out training e.g. materials etc. should be identified as training costs and hence booked to the project.
Any expenses that are incurred to execute the particular tasks that are involved in software development and installation should be identified as  'software' costs.
Overhead costs are to be absorbed within the company 's overhead cost.
A work-based system is recommended for the budget system.
It should not be required to be broken down into time periods as it is deemed that the cost of implementing so is greater than the extensiveness of the project.
It is proposed that further complexity should not be added since the project time scale is relatively short.
A fixed type of budget is suggested to promote stronger commitment to the project.
This is assuming that no variation will occur in the specialist training contract.
Financial meetings should be part of the review meetings held every three weeks.
It is suggested that reports should be produced every other review meeting. This seems appropriate as it allows sufficient data to be collected and prepared.
Four variances are identified in order to complement the parameters suggested to monitor and control progress in Section 6.4. They are: Efficiency Variance, Cost Performance Index, Future Variance, and Variance at Completion.
This project will need the commitment and support from not only those responsible to make the change work but also top-level management as well as the operations staff themselves. Without the cooperation among these groups the project will not succeed in achieving its aim and objectives. The project manager and his team thus play an important role to ensure that tasks are carried out appropriately and according to plan.
From my reading, I have understood that in managing a project not only is control of expenditure important, control of revenue, where applicable, is also vital. Apart from ensuring that amounts spent and received are in accordance with the budget, cost management is also concerned about the appropriateness of the timing of each transaction. However I understand that for internal projects such as the CFS case study there is simply the need to keep expenditure within the budget authorised by the Steering Committee, rather than focusing on safeguarding profits.
Dennis Lock, Project Management, Gower Publishing Limited, 7th edition, p.543.
One of the things I find most interesting about this topic in relation to the case study is the part about earned value. At first I thought that it would be quite tricky to have earned value as one of the parameters since I feel that it is quite difficult to estimate the value of work done with regards to the nature of the project. Thus I considered not taking it on.
After doing some reading, I realised that earned value is actually a useful tool that is increasingly being used to evaluate the true performance of a project either in terms of deviations in cost or schedule. It is also one of the best methods to be used in estimating time and cost to complete. In a very interesting article, the author provides an analogy portraying the importance of earned value to a project manager with the importance of a carpenter 's square to a carpenter. The article was an eye-opener.
Jeffrey K. Pinto & Jeffrey W. Trailer, Essentials of Project Control, Project Management Institute, Inc., Vol. 2, p.112.
However I still feel that with regards to the case study some work packages such as software activities are far less straightforward and much more difficult to assess quantitatively in terms of progress achieved. Surely a manufacturing activity would not face this type of problem. From what I have read it seems that when applying earned value to cases such as the one in the case study, the best way to assess progress is to just ask for an estimate. Thus the main problem is that these are only judgements and people tend to provide an optimistic prediction which may turn out to be erroneous.
A simpler method suggested in another book is the Milestone analysis which is said to need a relatively modest amount of management effort to set up and maintain. Only two sets of data are required to set up a milestone plan; the planned date on which the milestone is to be achieved and the estimated cumulative cost for each milestone. By plotting an actual cost curve on the same axis as the 'planned curve', some degree of analysis can be made by comparing the project performance in terms of progress and cost.
Dennis Lock, Project Management, Gower Publishing Limited, 7th edition, p.557.
One of the weaknesses of this method is that it does not consider work-in-progress. Activities that have been started but not yet completed are not taken into account because the milestone has yet to be achieved. This I believe distorts the analysis somewhat and may lead the Project Manager to a wrong understanding of the project performance and hence the wrong decision on future actions to be taken. Another shortcoming of this method is that the information that can be used to control the project (e.g. overspending) is usually obtained after the damage has actually been done, something which I think the earned value approach tries to overcome by providing a more detailed analysis thus keeping the user more informed.
All in all, I believe that depending on the sort of financial control needed for a particular project, the financial system adopted must support those responsible for the work packages to monitor and take appropriate action where necessary. With regards to the Project Management module, I feel that it has shed a new and different light to my learning process. By allowing the students to work on a complete case study, many ideas were able to be brought forward and discussed in order to come up with a set of possible solutions or recommendations for the case study. This is where the knowledge learnt from other modules can be applied. For example I have found myself trying to relate what I have learned in Operations Management and Strategic Management Accounting to the Project Management module. Lastly, working on the case study and preparing a report for the board of directors have definitely given me the opportunity to gain some insights of the working environment.
