Sales price structure of the product is analysed and recommendations on the customer margins for three products are given as 10%, 12% and 12% respectively.
Financial appraisal of the project is carried out and the financial viability of the project is assessed using tools, which include: Payback, NPV, IRR.
Factors that may change over the 3-year life of the project have to be recognized. They include: - Reverse in market trend - Strategic change - Unforeseen events.
A wider range of factors are evaluated and a SWOT analysis of the project is produced.
Successful launch requires realistic assumption of competitor response which is presented in the form of Competitor Reaction Profiles.
The Cleaning System market has seen the launch of a new product from one of P&G 's competitors, which has left P&G with unsatisfactory sales. A 'new to the world' cleaning system product 'Powermop' is thus developed and it is suggested to be marketed under the Flash Brand. The price of the various products to the end consumer has been decided.
A financial appraisal of the launch has been requested by the management. Advice on customer margins and factors that may change over the life of the project is suggested. A SWOT analysis of the project and possible competitor reactions are presented and analysed in this report.
After analysing the price structure (see Appendix 1), which includes the calculations for.
It shows that different levels of customer margins will lead to different levels of profit. This would affect the revenue figure thus the overall profit. As our major customers are hoping for better margins, margins on the three products are suggested as below.
According to information provided by CBD (see Appendix 2), the suggested margins on Powermop will give a better margin on both Starter Kits and Solutions (  1.5311;   0.3054) compared to margins of Swiffer (  0.8502;   0.2545), the current cleaning system product offered by P&G, while the total margin (  1.9892) exceeds that of any products in the current market including other competitors.
It is likely that our major customers will respond to this increase in margin positively thus enhancing the prospect of a successful launch.
The project is only accepted when it is believed to generate a positive NPV for the organization in the future. Forecast on total cost of the project and future cash flow is produced (see Appendix 3) and the net cash flow figures are presented as the different between the turnover and total cost, where total cost is based on production cost, instore promotional cost and outside store promotional cost. Cost of Capital is assumed at 7%. (See Appendix 4).
Both NPV and Discounted Payback take the time value of money into consideration. NPV evaluates the project over its entire life of 3 years whereas Payback ignores receipts after payback period and the overall profitability.
IRR provides a margin of error indicating the project is able to afford a WACC of 28.2% before it is unprofitable.
However, IRR assumes reinvestment at IRR, which is not possible as there is no parallel project being developed. The NPV value will increase if it is possible to obtain finance with less Cost of Capital. But if discount rates alter over life of the project, IRR can no longer be applied.
In obtaining the above figures assumptions are made, which can alter during the course of the project:
Reverse in market trend of public moving away from carpets to tile flooring, hence overestimated sales volume and spare capacity.
Change in economic climate, declining buyer 's power; consumers switching to supermarket own brands.
Lack of positive response from consumers, hence overestimated demand.
Un expected change in raw material price in global market.
Unforeseen events such as fire, union strike.
With previous experience of successful marketing and launching of similar products, Powermop enjoys the benefit of being part of the well-established Flash Brand. This innovative product is new to the world, easy to use, convenient and is believed to able to attract a lot of consumers. Product loyalty among consumers can be easily established at this stage enhancing a continuous sale. It can be marketed to target various market segments from households to office building. Being part of the renowned P&G group is another strength not to be neglected. It offers specialisation in activities thus improves efficiency. Overheads, selling and administration, R&D and marketing expense are split between departments. The project can be financed internally and is also likely to obtain outside finance on better terms due to P&G 's worldwide presence and reputation. More capital can be devoted into product development, marketing scheme and customer service.
New product from competitors is expected to come in the market as soon as 1 year after the launch of Powermop. Therefore it has only less than 1 year to penetrate the market and enjoy the monopoly, within which time much market share has to be gained and secured to combat the early new entrants.
Being the first in the powered cleaning system market, Powermop is competing against many traditional products including its own product Swiffer, which will be expected to sustain at the same level of market share in the non-powered cleaning system market. It will also have much marketing expense such as introductory offer, outside store promotion to build consumers' awareness for this product and achieve product trust, of which the competitors will enjoy the benefit but avoid the cost.
The NPV of the whole project is not exceptionally high partly due to the high promotional cost (in and out store).
The product is sold as a kit so there will be much room to boost sales on refill solutions and pads. Development can be made on existing features to enhance the product differentiation. Alternatively, patent can be applied to protect market share and prolong monopoly. Taking advantage of the existing presence and distribution network of P&G, the product can be promoted in different regions towards different consumer groups, in order to achieve economies of scale thus improve profitability. At the introductory stage of the product, it can be offered at a discount rate or form part of the promotion of other Flash products to quickly enter the market. Once the product is established customer margins may be cut and lower cost of capital can also be attempted to gain a greater NPV value.
The market has a high degree of rivalry and this product is very likely to attract competitors to enter the market with imitating product as soon as possible. It is essential to maintain the competitive advantage by emphasising on the leading technology and innovation in the market. Despite efforts to defer substitute, it is possible that competitors already have similar product development underway or will be able to catch up very quickly. The consumers could be satisfied with traditional mops and are unwilling to switch. This requires frequent market survey and close monitoring of the market. As the existing product costs just over half of Powermop, it can be perceived as up-market, in which case it is not best marketed under Flash. Other threats include declining economy conditions leading to reducing buyer 's power, possible request of increase on customer margins by retailers.
A competitor 's capabilities and ability to increase capabilities can be analyzed using a SWOT analysis. However, it is fundamental to predict its likely responses to competitor move, namely its reaction profile (see Appendix 6). It is essential to determine the reasons for a competitor 's reaction or behaviour to learn more about its competitive advantages and vulnerabilities.
According to previous experience competitors are almost certain to retaliate to the launch of Powermop. On the one hand the process of development in new products will be hastened and launching will be planned; on the other hand if the competitor feel confident about its current market position and has the resources to defend it, it might cut price starting a price war or increase marketing expense on existing non-powered mop in an attempt to seize more market share and becomes market leader.
The competitor may also choose either to be passive towards the launch of Powermop and focusing on current market, or react to the new product by developing its own.
Alternatively, the competitor can wait until the product is reasonable accepted by the consumer and a ready market is established, then will they launch a more innovative product based on Powermop but offering more advanced feature.
In this highly competitive market, the competitor 's ability to react swiftly to change should be evaluated - seen be able to adapt and strike back quickly.
Other tools that can help to assess the competitors' capabilities, advantages, strategies and reaction patterns:
Porter, M.E., Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. New York: Free Press, 1985.
Following the gathering of information on competitors, attempts to identify each competitor 's strategy can then be made. Three common generic strategies are given below:
Porter, M.E., Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. New York: Free Press, 1985.
The result of the competitor analysis should be an improved ability to predict the competitor 's behaviour and even to influence that behaviour to P&G 's advantage.
The appropriate customer margins on Powermop Starter Kit, Pad and Solution would be 10%, 6% and 12% respectively. This will enable the project to generate a positive NPV whilst retailers obtaining a better margin. The project is assessed using both financial measures such as NPV and Discounted Payback, and non-financial measures such as SWOT analysis focusing on both internal and external environment of the project. A successful launching requires careful consideration of changing variables over the life of the project and competitor response. This will also help to identify competitors' strategies and enable the project to react strategically to achieve its overall success.
