This assignment is about discussion and application of production planning and control system knowledge by two different cases. Section one concludes and explains the strategy and objectives which used in simulation of module games. Then it discusses EOQ application for the game and finally produces MPS and material ordering plan for next 10 weeks. Section two concerns with forecasting approaches for two different type of customer 's demand in an automotive components manufactory' and finally it analyzes existing and potential capacity choices for increasing demand.
The Firm is a manufactory which produces electronic car aerials and sells them by a chain of distributors and Original Equipment Manufactories (OEM). It has one product which make up of three components and the sales revenue was about 12.7million sterling last year. As a manufacturing team' our group established strategy and objectives separately by financial orientated and customers orientated. The objective for finance is that achieving highly return on investment in short term. For customers' our aim is to optimize production planning and control system to meet customers' requirement. In a word' the firm 's objective is to make profit through satisfy customers' need.     Level 1 stage: Based on the objective and industry attribute' our strategy was to make to stock production planning. We forecasted next week 's demand by last year 's demand data. From analysis of them' we found that every four weeks there was a trend of peak demand resulted from the OEM customer 's order. We remained our buffer stock about 5000 finished products and kept regular production at 5000 units a week. Because of the delivery time and material and inventory cost of components are different' we order main body and aerial once a week in advance and the amount is about 5000 units separately. Due to the accessories material and inventory cost was low and delivery time was two weeks' we order them two weeks before production and stock them as inventory components. After calculated cost of different shifts' we adopted the day shift because of the cheapest cost and added evening shift for peak week production. During the first 4 weeks' we successful satisfied customers' demand and did n't have penalty at all.
Level 2stage: The following weeks' situation from 17 to 20 was slight changed by production lost. There were about 10% lost which included scrap 5%' rework 2%' and machine down time 3%. Our strategy was n't changed in level 2. After good feedback and cash return in level 1' we decided to stick to the strategy. One aspect need to be considered was that we add 10% more for our production planning because the above lost by scrap' rework and machine down time. That meant we kept 5000 finished products as buffer stock and produced 5500 units every week except the peak week. In week 18' we used day and 5 evening shifts to produce 6250 units for the peak demand. Meanwhile' we transfer part of our cash from current account to deposit account for earning 8.5% interest. At the end of week 20' we still earned money by satisfying customers' demand.
Level 3 stage: This 4 week 's analysis from 21 to 24 was really complicated than before. First of all' the company added a new product to production line' then the shifts of two products cost differently. We changed our strategy from keep safety stock to reduce the inventory lowest and make most cash flow. We forecasted the demand of standard and XL products by last year 's demand and added 10% more on them. The day shift was still the cheapest one and first choice for production. We also used night shift for peak time production. Because of the demand of accessories grew to double amount' we order them once a week and two weeks in advance. During week 23' we wanted to use out of our inventory and stopped to order material in a week. It caused that our products amount was less than customers' demand and large penalty.
In conclusion' our original strategy in level 1 and 2 was correct and brilliant. We defined a clear logical strategy which used "make to stock" production. It implemented well and made great effect for customer satisfaction and return on invest. We kept stable production and buffer finished goods stock for the regular circle peak demand and prevented us from penalty. We ordered most of raw material just in time to avoid inventory cost. But in level 3' we made a radical mistake for changing the strategy. Considered about the competition between different groups' we tried to use out of our inventory and made maximum cash flow to win the simulation game. That was the reason which caused huge penalty about 59'500 pounds. We failed to meet the customer focused and financial focused objectives successful finally. The following figure displayed the final situation of the company:
From this game' we learnt that a company should have a long term strategy and do n't change it if correct. An effective manufacturing planning and control system is the key to success of manufacturing company and can be competitive advantage for company. (Plossl' 1985) pointed that in inventory management the most important decision was that of balancing the inventory holding cost against the replenishment reordering cost. The detail explanation can be indicated in the following diagram.
From the above figure' some features can be noticed. The stockholding cost increases in a straight line while quantity increasing. Compared to the stockholding cost' the ordering cost decreased shapely at beginning and then slowly reduces while the quality increasing. It is easy to find that the point where the stockholding cost line and ordering cost curve cross is the lowest total cost point. That means the quantities of that point are the economic order quantity (EOQ). Another rule is that the total cost fluctuates smoothly around the EOQ point which indicates inventory management cost could n't be affected dramatically by the small change of order quantity around the lowest cost point. The relative batch size can be calculated by the following formula which describes the relationship between cost of ordering' cost of holding stock and batch quantity.
EOQ formula is just available and valuable under such assumptions. Firstly' the demand amount is stable. Then the costs of stockholding' ordering' raw material are constant. Secondly' the inventory capacity and production amount are not limited. Finally' replenishment is swiftly.
According to (Plossl' 1985)' EOQ does n't suitable for the following conditions.
Make to order production. This means that customer decide the batch size and production quantity such as automotive industry.
Production is restrained by inventory capacity or facilities' such as working procedures painting' sharpening and so on.
Products shelf life is short' for instance food.
The firm 's production background and situation almost meet the condition of EOQ' for example the demand of 4 weeks is constant and can be forecasted. All kinds of cost which includes inventory cost' ordering cost' per unit cost are known and stable. Delivery time is reasonable. Whether EOQ is appreciate for company is decided by detail calculation.
For instance the firm adopt first 4 weeks (AP1) in this year as a unit for pilot calculation. The necessary data are displayed:
After using the formula , the three main components EOQ are:
Compared to the firm 's original production planning and ordering quantity' it is seen obviously that the main body and aerial components quantities are near the EOQ but the accessories order quantities is far away from the EOQ. These results from the different unit cost of three components. Based on inventory Pareto analysis' the accessories are almost belonging to class C which cost lowest annual spend of whole inventory cost. (Waters' 2003) argued that class C should be ordered in large batch for high volume safety inventory. In addition' the firm has a peak week every 4 weeks. In that inventory building time' the EOQ does not apply.
To sum up' the main body and aerial component are ordered every week to avoid high inventory compare to the accessories. They are ordered by EOQ batch size for economic cost of inventory. (Volmann' Berry' Whybark' 2005) pointed that a reasonable diversification did n't result any serious lost of economics of EOQ. EOQ calculations are only a starting point and the company could arrange its production planning around it for many reasons' such as scrap losses' minimum quantities for ordering' and maximum limitation for production capacity and so on.
Forecasting is a part of demand management which supports master production scheduling by providing detail forecasts on a nearly persistent basis. It should be frequent' detailed and timely for supporting daily control operation decisions. There are two common short term forecasting approaches: moving averages and exponential smoothing. . (Vollmann' Berry' Whybark' 2005) Both of them are about transforming past demand and sales information to forecasts. Although there are many complicated forecasting methods' simple approaches are proved to be more suitable for detail forecasting especially in short period. The company compared the two approaches and found that the exponential smoothing forecasting is more practical and accurate for this case.
The exponential smoothing forecasting model uses an exponent to make older data affect lighter in forecasting process. The formula is showed as following: Exponential smoothing forecast (ESF) at the end of period t.
Note: a= the smoothing constant (O =a = 1) t= current period (which most recent actual demand is known).
ESF (t- 1) = exponential smoothing forecast made one period before.
It is proved that large "a" make more weight on recent data to impact forecast than small one and create more responsive result. The small "a" cause more stable forecasts which will reactive less for potential demand than large one. The company needs to balance the stability and reaction of forecasting.
From the simulation' the firm got the actual demand data in 24 weeks this year. Here they assume ESF (24) for standard product is 6000' and then got the following forecasting demand for week 21 to 24 by different exponential smoothing constant "a" to find the most accurate "a":
From the above table' the firm finds the "a"=0.7 is more suitable for this case. They use it for the forecasting for week 25 to 35 as following:
Master production scheduling (MPS) is the crucial module of whole manufacturing planning and control system and work on that whether company could achieve their strategic objectives or not. Efficient MPS helps company to sufficient use manufacturing resource' satisfy customers' delivery requirement' and solve trade offs between sales and operations plan. (Vollmann' Berry' Whybark' 2005) It can be defined at three levels: conceptual level' daily level and operational level. As a concept' the MPS transform sales and operations total plan to a detail production plan with requirement of time and volume. On day to day basis' MPS supply combinative information from sales and manufacturing. The times when products are ready for delivery from MSP are helpful for sales promise to customers. At operational level' the crucial issue is about the MPS record and update in time. Whenever products are available and used to delivery' the MPS record needs to be update. Generally it has regular review and update cycle called "rolling through time". The efficient operations of this review cause the manufacturing resources and throughout consistent with sales and operations plan.
The following figure shows the linkage between MPS and other company activities.
The ERP system linkage to MPS is indirect but important. All of major ERP vendors have MPS module in their package. Demand management provide all kinds of demand to sales and operations planning and booked customer orders send to MPS directly.(Chase' Jacobs' Aquilano' 2004) The sales and operations planning has the forecasting from demand management and cooperate them with summarize of the total output plan which meet the strategic objectives. This plan restrict the MPS amount because of the whole sum of MPS quantity should be equal to operations plan. Rough cut capacity planning is about the potential problem in capacity such as bottleneck. They need to be solved before execution of MPS. Finally' the MPS decentralize all input information to material requirement planning (MRP) system.
The business environment is about the production method which company uses. There are three basic approaches: make to stock' make to order and assemble to order. The environment affects the frame of MPS especially the selection of units which state MPS. In this case' the make to stock company produce in batch size' and have most of inventory for finished goods. The MPS concerns with the quantity and time when the end item to be produced. It is easy to choose MPS units by using end item category numbers.
In this case' the firm adopts time based record of MPS which displays the internal relationship between production throughput' forecast and anticipated inventory balance. The advantage of this record is that it 's easy to be produced by computer and compliant with MRP system 's format. The main parameters of this records are time' forecast' available (anticipated inventory balance)' MPS and on hand. The planning horizon is 11 weeks from week 25 to week 35. The MPS means completion of production units which available to meet forecast demand. The available (anticipated inventory balance) indicates expected inventory volume at the end of each week. The firm tries to keep the volume actively for some reasons. It is common that the forecast make some wrap and not exactly the same as sales planning and customers' demand. The positive expected inventory balance provides a reasonable range of tolerance for exceed sales fluctuation.
The firm 's manufacturing strategy is to make to stock and keep buffer inventory. The MPS have two kinds of strategy which called "chase" strategy and "leveling" strategy. The front one means the production schedule needs to be adjusted for meeting customers' demand and keep the stable inventory volume. The latter one mean keep stable production capacity and inventory varies by different demand. Considering the high cost of changing production capacity' the company prefers to use the leveling strategy to support the manufacturing strategy. The assumptions production planning of STD products are 6000 results from average demand of week 25 to week 35 while the XL products are 2900. At the beginning of week 25' there are 2280 XL and 3200 STD products on stock. Based on the forecast they calculated before and these assumptions' the MPS can be displayed as following:
Note: The MPS will use all shifts for full capacity requirement.
From this MPS' the firm will meet the customers' demand and not need to pay penalty at all. It achieves the goal for balancing the cost and benefits and support the manufacturing strategy and objectives.
The principle of material ordering plan is to meet the MPS requirement while keeping the inventory cost at lowest level. (Hill' 2000) Based on the EOQ calculation in the above part' the main bodies and aerials components are ordered every week for avoiding high cost of inventory. The quantities depend on the MPS requirement. Since the accessories are low inventory cost components and needed in high volume' they will be ordered around the EOQ point and two weeks in advance for delivery time. The assumptions of bodies' aerials and accessories are 9100' 9900' and 13400 separately. (12000 accessories will arrive at week 26) The detail material ordering plan is displayed in the following table:
Forecasting is prediction and estimate in advance for general definition. (Plossl' 1985) argued the important role of forecasting in manufacturing planning and control system. A company can survive and make profit only under the condition that it meets future customer 's need at the same speed or faster than its competitors. Forecast concern with the future customers' needs. For production function' its responsibility is to make manufacturing plan to satisfy future customers' demand. The demand forecast is the crucial factor for their preparation. The production manager needs the forecast to decide when and how many raw materials to order' the rate to manufacturing components and assemble finished goods. Meanwhile' the manager will plan inventory' capacity and safety stock depend on the demand forecast either.
There are four main general features of forecasting which are necessary to be mentioned before choosing any kind of approaches.
Forecast is possible to be wrong. The forecast is just starting point for company and changes always happen in actual situation. Companies should get ready for any changes.
Forecast should include estimate of error. When some errors happened' the production group can set up accidental plan to responsive and corrective them.
Forecast is more accurate for large groups of items and short term time. Understanding of these foundational features of forecasting helps company to make better use of forecasts. Forecast is not just a calculation of formula' but also a working process as following:
First of all' forecast of this case is used to production department. Then the production manager needs to collect and analyze historical data for selecting a forecast approach. The common method to select a mathematical approach is simulating how well the approach would perform on recent sales history. After application of forecast models' the manager will evaluate internal and external factors which may affect customer demand in future. For example' internal factors includes new product introduction' lead time reduction' price change and so on. External factors comprise of competitors action' new technology revolution' and social trend. All these factors need to be considered when developing a forecast.
There are two main customer types in this company: OEM and other automotive suppliers. The OEM 's weekly schedule is relative stable compare to the variety demand in time and quantity from other customers. Based on the different type of customers' demand' the manager analysis them separately by the above steps:     OEM customers.
The company provides assembled finished units for OEM regularly. It receive weekly schedule from OEM which always keep stable. From this background condition' the manager finds that forecasting approach prefers to use quantitative techniques because of the existing data. The quantitative techniques are more suitable for short term forecast such as weekly. These techniques have two main methods: casual module and time series methods. (Bowerman' O'Connell' 1993) Because of the forecast time unit is short like weekly and condition are static' the manager chooses time series methods for OEM demand forecast. It has been proved that the more complicated forecast' the more time and cost are needed. Considering the budget of forecast' the manager adopts moving averages module as detail forecast approach. This module smoothes historical demand data by averaging several past periods of data. It always uses most available recent period data to calculate forecast. The formula is as following: (Volmann' Berry' Whybark' 2005).
Moving average forecast (MAF) t= (Dt+Dt-1+Dt-2+...... Dt-n-1)/n.
The more periods number used in forecast' the more smoothing effect achieves. But it will decrease the response speed for changing of demand. The manager can choose different periods observation for calculation and compare them to find the best accurate periods number.     Other customers.
As a component supplier' the company provides plastic components direct to other automotive supplier without assembly. Demand from these customers fluctuate a lot and vary in time and quantity. Based on these characteristics' the manager still uses quantitative method for forecast. Due to the fluctuation of customers' demand' it 's more suitable to choose exponential smoothing approach. The approach uses an exponent to adjust the weight given to past old period data and recent period data. The older period data are' the lighter affection they have in forecasts. The exponent 's another function is balancing sensitivity and stability. The method to select exponent usually is applying different assumptive exponents to past data and finding the minimize tolerances one. However' every method is not perfect and absolute accurate. The shortcoming of exponential smoothing is hard to find optimum exponent if forecast budget and time are constrained and limited.
To sum up' all forecast approaches are n't perfect for special application. In the realistic situation' companies usually use combinative forecasting techniques and approaches for more accurate results. In this case' the manager can develop quantitative approach based on qualitative methods' such as personal insight' panel consensus and so on.
After the production get relative forecast' the production department arrange Master production planning (MPS) and operate it by Material Requirement Planning (MRP). For assuring sufficient finished goods to fulfill demand' the production department needs to set up safety stock to provide protection against contingent or uncertain customer demand. Meanwhile' it can allow to the tolerance of forecasting errors. In addition' it can satisfy customers' demand at once rather than keep customers waiting for their backlogged orders. The manager should adopt Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) and reorder point analysis for balancing the cost of inventory and protection against demand uncertainties.
Capacity planning is regarded as most important activity in manufacturing planning and control system. The main objective of capacity planning is to evaluate capacity requirements which include potential requirements in a relative far future. Other objective is execution of capacity should be successful and faultless. Deficient capacity would result bad delivery performance and increasing work in process inventories. (John' 1989) The choice of capacity measure includes machines-hours and labor-hours and depends on restriction of company 's need and resources. In this case' the production manager chose to ad labor hours for increasing demand. Considering the existing facilities and labor situation' some potential cost and problems are explained as following:     Labor cost: Due to the additional shift for production' the company will pay more for labor cost. If they use existing workforce to work overtime' they need to pay double wage for additional shift because of exceed time. That is lowest cost way to add new shift. If the company plan to recruit new part time workforce' the cost will include recruitment cost' new staff training cost and labor cost. The problem of this issue is that the new additional shift 's productivity is low and it may affect original productivity. If the existing workforces work overtime' they may exhaust and tried for long time working. That absolute decrease the efficiency of productivity. New workforce need time to be trained and familiar with equipments and working processes. It also a reason for low productivity. In addition' new shift will take high requirement to management skill.     Machine cost: For new additional shift' the production department may need to buy new machines. In this situation' the cost will be purchase machine cost' installation and debugging cost and technical training cost. If they add new shift by using original machines' the cost are mainly occur on the maintenance aspect. The over use of old original machines will cause the higher depreciation rate and maintenance time.
After the above analysis of additional shift' it is clear that many cost and problems would occur in operations. The production manager needs to consider other options for meeting the increasing demand.
In realistic manufacturing operations' the products demand fluctuation is always caused by seasonal' systematic or random effort. A good capacity level should trade off between the cost of unused capacity and cost of lost or late production. There are two main options to satisfy demand of resource. One is to provide effective modulation in capacity; the other one is to eliminate the need for modulation. Based on this case assumption' the company chose to provide effective adjustment in capacity for satisfying increasing demand. The first step in selecting a measure of capacity is to recognize urgent and short supply resource.
Then the next step is to define the units of measure. Since requirements of capacity management is not introducing additional shift' and "quick fix" to meet demand which means there are impossible to buy new machines' the key factor should be material and machines. The third step is to estimate available capacity by theory and practical aspects. (John' 1989) Theoretical capacity could be evaluated from specification introduction of machines and industrial engineering research method like time study of workforces by engineers. For this case' there several capacity options from material and machines measure units for solving increasing demand as following:
Outsourcing: it is a trend to decrease internal manufacturing and subcontract exceed workload to partners. The advantage of this option is that the company almost does n't need to invest capital in facilities for capacity development. The main benefit of it is the company 's ability to more flexibility responds to changing capacity demands. The company needs to pay more attention to procurement analysis' purchasing goods quality inspection' and technical communication with subcontract companies.
Rearrange delivery schedule: the company use Material Requirement Planning (MRP) for manufacturing planning and control system. Since the demand is increased in the past 18 months' the forecast and master production scheduling also changed to meet them. The delivery schedule should be rearranged by the MPS either. In addition' they set up a safety stock for raw materials as well as the components and finished products.
Modify work schedule: Engineers evaluates the available capacity by design introduction of machine and time study of workforce. Then the manager modifies work schedules for larger capacity' such as longer running time of machines' bigger batches production and so on.
Modify maintenance schedule for machines: from this case' the downtime of machines vary from 1% to over 30% and set up times from 30 minutes to 24 hours. Downtime is internal aspect of set up times. To maximum capacity planning' the downtime should be changed to off duty time' which means not in shift time. The better time for maintenance schedule are evening or weekend which do n't effect negatively on productivities.
To sum up' choice of capacity conducted by the objectives of production planning to meet customer 's demand. These options should be under the limitation of existing resources and achievable and reasonable.
The assignment focuses on production planning and control system theories and applies them into practical two cases. The first one case uses approaches which involves in EOQ' MPS and material ordering plan to analyze strategies and objectives' and then simulate more periods in module simulation games. The section two emphasizes on the methods about forecasting and capacity measures for an assumption of automotive components company. All the analysis and discussion need to be further studied and investigate when used in realistic circumstance.
