There is a general consensus among historians that the decades preceding the Great Reform Act witnessed great organisational changes in British politics, as the House of Commons grew in importance and political parties began to develop. The creation of a Tory Party had been hindered by the dominance of Pitt the Younger who strongly opposed political parties, believing instead that 'government should be formed from the best men of all parties' and that the royal prerogative should not be undermined. Therefore his death in January 1806 presented an opportunity for the Tory Party to move forward, and there can be little doubt that the evolution of what would become the Tory Party made considerable progress between 1806 and 1827. However, by 1827 a recognisable party with a cohesive policy, loyal membership and strong organisational institutions that extended to the grassroots had not developed. The illusion of its existence has been created by the willingness of contemporaries to believe that they had witnessed the growth of a political party and the determination of historians, with the benefit of hindsight, to trace back its development too far. Ultimately, a Tory Party would not come into being until after the Great Reform Act was passed in 1832.
Frank O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two-Party System 1760-1832 (London, 1982), p.51.
A key requirement of any political party is to have a cohesive ideology and policy programme which all members share and that is clearly different to those of other parties. There is some evidence to suggest that this did develop during the period in question. O'Gorman suggests that the 1812 Liverpool administration was 'united upon a basis of loyalty to the monarch, a belief in service to country and the defence of established institutions in church and state'. The repressive reaction to popular agitation such as the Six Acts and fierce opposition to parliamentary reform demonstrated this as did the uncompromising attitude towards O'Connell in 1828. This supports Coleman 's claim that people could be in no doubt a 'Tory government...stood for toughness in dealing with threats to the constitution and social order'. Although O'Gorman himself concedes that allegiance to the monarch inhibited the growth of the Tory Party, he believes that they 'had unquestionably surmounted Pitt 's own detestation of organizing a parliamentary following'. Indeed, many historians suggest that this policy platform was also distinctive to that of the Whigs. Hill suggests that the aftermath of Peterloo in 1819 saw both parties 'prepared to confront each other, each confident of a new sense of purpose'. The claim that the Tory reforms of the 1820s were introduced to 'dish the Whigs' is particularly significant. This suggests that the Tories were behaving as a party, aware of Whig criticisms and weaknesses and attempting to respond with measures acceptable to themselves and that undermined the Whig policy platform.
Ibid, p.57.
Bruce, Coleman, Conservativism and the Conservative Party in Nineteenth Century Britain (Great Britain, 1988), p.40.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.57.
B.W. Hill, British Parliamentary Parties 1742-1832: From the Fall of Walpole to the First Reform Act (London, 1985), p.204.
Ibid, p.234.
However, it would be generous to suggest that there was a cohesive policy platform uniting the Tories in the early nineteenth century. O'Gorman acknowledges that the policies of 'defence of the country, the landed interest, property, the established church and resistance to radicalism may have been so generalised that they scarcely amounted to a specific party programme', with issues such as 'Catholic Emancipation and the Slave Trade sometimes cut[ting] across political loyalties'. What O'Gorman fails to recognise is the significance of these issues, as these were the key debates of the period. Consequently if a political grouping is not united over how to solve them, it is hard to justify labelling it a party. The most prominent divide over policy within the group was that between the 'Ultra Tories' who included figures such as Wellington and the 'Liberal Tories' headed by Canning and Peel who advocated different amounts and speeds of reform.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.59.
Therefore, it is hard to claim that there was a distinct Tory Party ideology between the years 1806 and 1827. Although it may be argued that internal factions are an inherent characteristic of political parties, the differences in this period amounted to something more significant. Indeed, the fact that a key member of the leadership, Wellington, 'declared in 1828 that he could not see any difference between the Whigs and the Tories', suggests that a distinct party ideology was only to arrive after 1832. This lack of unity prior to 1832 can be demonstrated more clearly by studying voting behaviour in the Commons.
Sarah Richardson, 'Whigs and Tories before 1832', 23 February 2004.  (27th February 2004).
There has been a great amount of attention focussed on division lists from the early nineteenth century, as historians attempt to find definitive evidence for the existence of political parties. It is suggested that the long period of stable Tory rule, especially during the years of Liverpool 's Premiership, helped to 'establish habits of regular support and discipline'. Evans suggests that there were '253 firm government (Tory) supporters' with an additional '78 'waverers'' between 1812 and 1818, which between them account for 49.8 percent of MPs. If this statistic is combined with analysis from O'Gorman, which claims that '59 per cent of all MPs in the Parliaments of 1812 and 1818 voted with absolute and unvarying consistency...most of those who do change their alliance do so only slightly e.g. from support of...government to fringe support of...government' the case for consistent party voting appears persuasive. Indeed, O'Gorman strengthens his case that party loyalty did exist on both sides during this period by claiming that only 20 MPs 'voted both ways' in 1823.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.59.
Eric J Evans, Political Parties in Britain 1783-1867 (London, 1985), p.26.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.64.
Ibid, p.64.
However, closer scrutiny suggests that the validity of this claim is questionable. Loyalty towards the government does not, especially in this time period, signify party loyalty. Fraser cites Sir T.B. Martin as an example of the continuing deference towards the monarchy that remained in the Commons during this period. Martin was an MP who supported Liverpool, Canning, Goderich Wellington and Grey, claiming 'My Party is the King, and the persons he may think fit to appoint as his ministers will always have my support while I am in office'. Indeed, O'Gorman suggests that governments, unlike oppositions, did not need to create parties, because 'the symbols of monarchy and the gospel of service to the state were lofty aspirations which were enough to motivate men'. He estimates that one-third of MPs during Liverpool 's Premiership were indifferent to party, but scrutinising the figures suggests that this is a conservative estimate, and that party was not the primary motivation when MPs cast their votes. This is because Fraser reveals that Parliamentary attendance during the period in question was extremely low. He claims that 'the fact that attendance averaged about a third at...divisions...suggests that members were more prone to vote out of some positive conviction on the merits of the question that from a general feeling of obligation to support a party. Failing any personal conviction or interest they would not bother to turn up'. Using this information Fraser then studies the twenty-two full division lists for 1821-23, removes all those MPs who attended less than fifty percent of divisions and suggests there were just thirty two Tory 'party activists' outside the government, with nine of these from small boroughs, including Old Sarum. He concludes 'this was not a Tory Party of much national repute or credibility'. Therefore, it is apparent that there was no active, enthusiastic and loyal Tory party operating on a significant scale inside the House of Commons between 1806 and 1827. Despite this, many historians who endorse the concept of a Tory Party during these years suggest that there were organisational developments at Westminster implemented in an attempt to cultivate such a following.
Peter Fraser, 'Party Voting in the House of Commons', English Historical Review (1983), p.764.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.58.
Frank O'Gorman, The Long Eighteenth Century: British Political and Social History 1688-1832 (London, 2002), p.280.
Fraser, 'Party Voting in the House of Commons', pp.773-4.
Ibid, p.774.
An integral element of any political party is the organisations and institutions the leadership forms at its centre to ensure its effective functioning. Evans has argued that Liverpool had no choice but to begin this process during the decades preceding the Reform Act, claiming 'they [the Tories] could not keep themselves in office without party organisation' during the 1810s and 1820s. Indeed, there is evidence that the government made unprecedented attempts to organise its supporters to ensure measures were passed in Parliament, with O'Gorman claiming 'a more professional attitude was replacing the more languid ministerial habits of the eighteenth century'. This was a development that took place towards the end of the period in question, the main change being the appointment of the first government whips, Charles Arbuthnot and William Holmes, who by the 1820s had become salaried officials. They 'circulated letters to government supporters, advising them of the meeting of Parliament and the order of business, requesting attendance and advising them how to vote'. However, their role was restricted because the party was still developing, for example there was no method of coercing support from MPs, such as threatening to withdraw the whip and it should also be noted that these letters 'were less than routine' and were 'the government 's reaction to trouble or anticipated trouble'. It is because of the whips lack of powers that Arbuthnot 's position as Patronage Secretary is particularly significant. This involved 'the distribution and promise of offices and favours' and is clearly an attempt by the Tories to encourage and reward loyalty. It was however greatly undermined by Liverpool 's refusal to use patronage as a political tool.
Evans, Political Parties in Britain, p.24.
O'Gorman, Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.96.
O'Gorman, The Long Eighteenth Century, p.283.
O'Gorman, Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.96.
Ibid, p.96.
Ibid, p.96.
Ibid, p.95.
A more significant development was that the Tories appeared to overcome a major obstacle to becoming a party that had 'hampered them throughout the period of the 'Talents' ministry'. There had never been a Tory Party leader, mainly due to Pitt 's aversion to the title. The two appointments in quick succession of Portland and then Perceval quickly overcame this problem, with the party accepting the principle of a government based on parliamentary majority not royal influence. However, it was only the excellent leadership of Liverpool that had kept the 'party' united for the majority of this period, because the fact remained that the Tories consisted of loose factions grouped behind the party 's leading figures, who each commanded their own supporters. Indeed, the rivalry between these groups was so fierce that a clash over the conduct of the war in 1809 led to Castlereagh and Canning engaging in a pistol duel. The excellence of Liverpool 's leadership is shown by the party 's return to  'squabble' after his resignation. Seven ministers including Peel and Wellington resigned in 1827 from Canning 's government over Catholic Emancipation and his foreign policy. Therefore, study of the leadership and organisational structures of the Tory 'party' during the decades preceding the Reform Act indicates that although advances were made, they were not powerful or permanent enough for it to be concluded that a Tory Party had formed. The main reason for this lack of power was that the MPs did not have a dependence on these institutions, primarily because it did not have a significant electoral role.
Ibid, p.55.
Ibid, p.56.
Norman Lowe, Mastering Modern British History (Hampshire, 1998), p.10.
Ibid, p.24.
There can be no question that the rapid growth of the press which had been taking place during this period meant that national issues were growing in political importance. There was an increase from nine million stamps being sold on newspapers in 1760 to thirty-nine million in 1837, resulting in greater public participation in politics. This was illustrated by the 20,000 petitions sent to the government regarding Catholic Emancipation. These developments led O'Gorman to conclude that 'no Prime Minister had to endure the spotlight of publicity and the constant searchlight of hostile criticism that Liverpool had to put up with'. The government did respond to this, publishing in 1822 a pamphlet titled 'The State of the Nation', described by The Times as 'a sort of manifesto...understood to emanate from authority' in which Ministers gave a 'defence...for a long series of blunders and mal-administration'. The responsibility for general elections lay with the Government Whips, but they 'did not have many resources' the most they could do being to  'send a little money to a few friendly candidates'. In some areas local clubs did grow, but these were not permanent innovations, generally existing during a crisis and then disappearing. The Hampshire Tory Club that existed only between 1806 and 1807 was an example of this. The fact remained that until 1832 'most MPs brought themselves into Parliament and did not owe their return to centralized party institutions' but instead their own efforts or patrons. Therefore, there was no Tory party between 1806 and 1827 performing an electoral function, with local issues still predominant and many politicians who had 'donned a party mantle at Westminster...reluctant to wear it in their constituencies'.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.62-63.
The Times,11th March 1822.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.97.
Ibid, p.72.
O'Gorman, The Long Eighteenth Century, p.280.
O'Gorman, The Emergence of the British Two Party System, p.75.
Therefore, a Tory party had not developed between 1806 and 1827. There were undoubted advances as the beginnings of a party emerged following the death of Pitt, who had for so long prohibited the growth of a party. Despite this, the organisation that formed during the Premierships of Portland, Perceval and Liverpool was not a political party but a loose association that was simply a stage in a long evolutionary process. In 1827 there was still no clearly defined party with a cohesive ideology and regular, loyal support that played a crucial role in getting its members elected. Ultimately, the trigger for the growth of the party would be the Great Reform Act after which a distinct party emerged based at the Carlton Club, with registration societies in the constituencies and clear policy documents such as the Tamworth manifesto. The formation of the Tory Party was impending, but had not been achieved by 1827.
