This report assesses the current and future position and strategy of Jolly SU.
Current Position:
Current Stock Share price is 1019 with the volume of sales suffering a decline, especially the SULI brand.
All three distribution channels are being utilised, mass merchandise, specialist and department stores.
No outstanding loans or R&D projects.
Advertising accounts for approx. 60% of budget.
Operating solely in Sonites market.
Suggested Future Plans:
Marketing Strategy Lessons Learnt:
Carry out detailed analysis of market before launching R&D projects.
Divide management team into individual responsibilities for each element of marketing mix.
Do n't spend whole budget if returns do n't cover the costs.
Target market where a bigger profit margin is obtainable.
Forecasting is an inexact science and should be relied upon cautiously.
Need to target consumers on three dimension, psychological, functional and economic.
The current management team for Jolly SU has been in place for the last seven periods. Jolly SU presently operates solely in the competitive Sonite market but there is the potential to expand into the Vodite market. The company 's stock price index is 1019, having seen an increase of 1.9% since period zero. The peak stock price was in period four at 1223. Jolly SU is operating in the 2033 K Unit market with three brands of Sonites, SUSI, SULI and SUKA.
The function of this report is to outline and assess the present performance of the company and then to propose the marketing strategy for the next three periods to increase market share and profit.
This report will be split into three fundamental sections. First, an up to date analysis on the current market position and overall financial situation of the company. Second, the suggested plan for the next three periods for the company. Finally, a reflection on the key marketing lessons learnt from the previous seven periods. This will aid future decisions of the company so that the same mistakes are not repeated and conversely the positive aspects can be utilised at a later date.
Jolly SU is currently the third largest Sonite producer in the market with 21.8% of the retail shares. It is not competing in the Vodite market. There are no Research and Development projects in progress but there have been both improvement projects to modify and improve existing products (SUSI) and to develop brand new products (SUKA). Jolly SU has no loan history and therefore has no liabilities in the form of loan repayments. The average selling price of a Jolly SU Sonite is $184 which gives an average profit of $87.46 per unit sold as cost per unit is $96.54 on average across all three brands; resulting in a 90% profit per unit. The retail stores take their average mark up of 34.75%, as the average retail price is $282.
Markstrat Retail Sales Figures.
The current budget for both the previous period and this one is K$ 8700. The budget is usually 40% of the net contribution, that is 40% of K$20581 which equals K$8232.40 but if this value falls below K$8700 then it is automatically raised to K$8700. This outcome is due to the poor company performance in the last few quarters. This has resulted in the Growth Share Index for the Sonites market looking like figure 1 below:
K$ equates to $1000 throughout the report.
The semantic scales are close to the target segments (see appendix 1), except the SULI on price. Conjoint analysis denotes that price is very important so this should be rectified. A consequence of excess supply coupled with decreased demand for Jolly SU 's products are 19,000 units in inventory, which is costing money each period to store.
The remainder of this section is split into subsections to aid clarification and allow a more in depth study. The subsections are the three Sonites the market, SUSI, SULI and SUKA; the current Sales Force and Distribution figures and the present advertising position:
The Sonite SUSI sold 76,824units raising revenues of K$9705 in the previous period with a middle pricing strategy. This brings its cumulative total to 623,000 units and a contribution after marketing to K$22022. Apart from a peak in period 6 where 105,884 units were sold, unit sales have been steady, averaging 86,186 units per period. Usual production level is either 75,000 or 100,000 units as production levels are buffered by 20%, that is that production levels can be altered to either 20% more or 20% less than instructed, depending on the demand for the product. Therefore when the level is set at 100,000, if demand is only 80,000 or demand is 120,00 production is adjusted to either of these two values or any in between, depending on what the market dictates.
See Appendix 2 for calculation.
The brand perceptions in multi dimensional scaling are all very close as can be seen by the table below, Figure 2, except convenience which, as shown is different by quite a margin.
Scale is between - 20 and +20.
Advertising expenditure is at K$1725 but this has varied, often in line with budget constraints.
SUSI uses a concentrated targeting approach on the 'others' segment. This is because the ideal values that 'others' possess and the dimensions of the SUSI are very similar.
As a result the advertising is primarily targeted at 'others' (80%) and only slightly at Buffs (8%) and Singles (12%) (as there are some features close enough to their desired values that the wavering customer may be tempted by the SUSI). There are currently 666,000 others who hold 32.7% of the total market. Over half of these others, 51%, shop in mass merchandise stores.
SULI 's current production level is 100,000 units. With a recommended retail price of K$495 it is by far the most expensive sonite Jolly SU sell; and its most lucrative; it provides the largest contribution after marketing of the three brands at K$158,734 over the seven periods.
After two periods of impressive growth rates of 25.3% and 22.1% in periods one and two respectively, sales of SULI decreased by 19.6% in period four and have continued to decline since. This can clearly be seen in the fact that at its peak in period 3, SULI sold 180,172 units compared with only 89,876 in period 7.
This can be partly attributed to the fact that there has been only a moderate increase in the size of the professional market, which is the target market for SULIs over the past seven periods. The market is also set to take a down turn with forecasted figures showing that in five period professionals look set to decrease form 132 to 86, a 34.85% decrease. Professionals are the target segment because the SULI is most suited to their needs as shown in both the ideal values and MDS Brand perceptions table below, figure 3:
This was not always the case though. Up until period 4 a multiple segmentation strategy was used, targeting both the professional and hi-earner markets. It proved unprofitable as the two segments optimum values were too different and another company was better positioned to provide hi-earners with the perfect product and therefore Jolly SU avoided the potential majority fallacy. The professional market was far larger allowing more potential profit. A modest portion of the advertising (20%) is targeted at hi earners still, however as the SULI have enough characteristics similar to the ideal values that professionals want to warrant it. The other 80% is targeted at professionals.
The SUKA is a new project which was introduced into the market, after research and development by the current management team, in period 4. Since then demand has grown to 177,356 units in period 7. It was tailor made to target the single market, the ideal values held by the singles segment formed the basis for the research project, right down to the optimum price of $220. Price penetration greatly assisted the growth as a predatory pricing policy was adopted, that is it was priced below similar products from competitors. SUKA already commands 30.7% of the total singles market the bulk of Jolly SU 's total singles market (37.4%). This is why that the entire advertising budget is targeted at the singles. Advertising expenditure is K$1926 for period 7 but has previously been higher as it was a new product so brand awareness needed to be established. The average selling price for a SUKA is $145 with the unit cost being $92 it has a $53 profit per unit sold. This is not a vast amount which is why sales volume is very important for the SUKA. The MDS scaling display that the brand perceptions are very close to the singles market, figure 4:
Purchasing habits of singles are equally distributed between speciality stores and department stores both taking 34.5% of the sales with mass merchandise only slightly behind at 30.9%.
Jolly SU currently has a sales force of 101 spread across the three outlets, Speciality, mass merchandise and department stores. This is lower than the market average of 144 which is reflected in the fact that it has the lowest sales force costs in the whole market at $2558. The table below, figure 5 shows the distribution of sales force in the different outlets:
The number of sales force in each outlet reflects where each of the target segments purchase their Sonites and also how many of each brand of Sonite sold. Although Speciality Stores take 40% of the retail price and the other two only take 30%, they are assessed on the customers purchasing intentions not on the percentage mark up they have.
The current advertising budget is K$5250. This is lower than in previous periods but still makes up 60% of the total budget. This is because "Advertising is the life of trade.", it is the most visible area of marketing and the area that "most actively tries to tap into the consumer 's decision-making process". Advertising research, usually around K$ 200 a period was also reduced this period due to budget constraints. Before the start of period one, the advertising research budget was 5% of the total advertising budget. Although variable between periods to accommodate specific marketing strategies, in the long-term the average is 5.28% (see appendix 2 for calculation). Advertising research is perceived to be important because there is no point dedicating large sections of the budget to advertising if it is the wrong type of advertising for the target segments. The advertising is targeted at the key segments (see above) so that the advertising is reaching the key demographic and not being wasted on non-potential customers.
Calvin Coolidge, quoted in John P. Bradley, Leo F. Daniels & Thomas C. Jones, The International Dictionary of Thoughts, 1969, Chicago, IL: J. G. Ferguson Publishing Co., p. 13.
The Essence of Consumer Behaviour, J.Blythe, 1997.
That is a snapshot of the company as it stands at the end of period 7. The following section outlines the key marketing decisions that are advised for the next three periods.
Jolly SU is currently in decline. The next three months are crucial in order for Jolly SU to survive in this competitive market and to claw back market share and profit.
Figure 6 shows the Main Stages of Consumer Decision making.
Markstrat Information Booklet.
Achieving the optimal mix of these elements will encourage all Jolly SU 's products to be the selected brands in the customers' evoked set. It is these elements that shall form the basis of this section of the report.
Previously the level of advertising expenditure has been a case of 'as much as possible'. Now, however, a more cautious yet calculated management of the promotion variable should be applied. The advertising experiment shows that an increase of 20% in the advertising budget would result in losses for SUSI and SUKA but would increase the change in contribution after marketing to $286,000 for the SULI. Therefore the recommendation is that the advertising budget for the SULI should be increased by 20% from K$1725 to K$2070. The other two should be decreased by 10% each to accommodate this. Advertising research should be reintroduced into the budget at K$100 per brand (approximately 5% of total advertising expenditure).
Conducted in the Markstrat programme see appendix 3.
Brand awareness levels are below, figure 7. Awareness in target markets is adequate but could be improved, primarily via advertising.
The options available under the product variable of the marketing mix are to improve existing products, introduce a new product or shelve a 'problem child'. Demand for SULI is declining and the professional market is forecasted to fall further to 213, 000 units so it may be worth removing the SULI from the market if it begins to make a loss. The current products are as close to ideals of the target segments as can feasibly be achieved without investing much time and money. As there is likely to be little or no return on this investment, it seems wise to invest in an area with profit potential. This potential marketing opportunity may be found in the as yet un-entered Vodite market. Jolly SU is one of only two firms in the market yet to have a product in the Vodite market. Firm 'E' produced the first Vodite in period four and firm 'O' then followed suit in period 5. There are obvious barriers to entry and exit in contemplating the move into the Vodite market, not least that the current producers have already established a customer base. For instance firm 'O' has 58.4% of the total Vodite market. This apparent strength may be a weakness, however, if the other firms are caught in the competitive box. This may mean that if in period 8 research into ideal values for Vodite characteristics is carried out, the product could be developed in period nine and launched into the market in period ten. A loan would be needed but if the research is in depth then it would not be too much of a liability. Using the semantic scales and the segment size forecast the Vodite could be produced to the desired specifications for the target group preferably the one set to increase the most or have the highest number of purchasers. Obviously there is the development risk as with all new ventures especially as Jolly SU is not the first entrant in the Vodite market. Although a late entrant, Jolly SU can enter with a competitive advantage by knowing what the customer wants from a Vodite and therefore providing the perfect product.
Marketing Strategy and Management, M.J.Baker, 2000.
Kellogg On Marketing, D. Iacobucci, 2001.
The price variable in the marketing mix is always a complex issue. The prices of the Sonites should stay the same and the new Vodite one should reflect the target segments optimum price.
Whatever the demand for a product, if there is no adequate distribution channel through which to reach the consumers the company ca n't function. There are currently only 101 sales people employed by Jolly SU and, as can be seen by the results of the Sales Force Experiment (see Appendix 4), it would be profitable to increase this number dramatically.
On reflection of this experiment and other information, the sales force should be increased by a total of 30 with extra ten workers in each store, an investment in the people variable of the marketing mix. The sales force effort allocation by brand percentage should also be as close to the proportion of the target market that uses that outlet as possible. The distribution variable is primarily rigid in that all three products sell in all three outlets with slight differences but not significant enough to alter the distribution channels.
This is a difficult area to judge as the market is static and the forecasts' reliability seems to be variable but "good businesses see market change as an opportunity not a threat". Based on market forecast table below, Jolly SU is in an enviable position in that two out of the three Sonite brand target segments should grow rapidly over the next three periods (see figure 8 below).
Dr Nikala Lane, lecturer Warwick Business School, 2004.
Therefore marginal and cautious increases in production volume for the SUSI and SUKA products in the next few periods seem sensible. Sales volume should increase whilst taking into account the 20% production leeway.
There are infinite possibilities to consider when planning strategies, especially without the luxury of hindsight. The above are recommendations given the current and predicted future information and trends. Given that the Sonite market appears to be saturating it seems wise to put money in the promotion variable if the returns are satisfactory. Entering the Vodite market before brand loyalty develops for others and using all information about the current and future wants and needs of the consumers seems to be a viable idea.
Several key concepts have been learned. First, that the budget does not have to be spent in its entirety. There is no benefit to investment if the return or value gained in return (not necessarily monetary) is the same or equal to the input amount. This is particularly the case with advertising. This is where any extra budget was dispersed and too little or a detrimental affect. Therefore to succeed in a market takes more than just huge advertising expenditures. Promotion alone does not equal success, other factors from the marketing mix have to be incorporated.
The possibility of researching existing products with the view to lowering base costs is worth investigating, as Jolly SU would benefit from the extra profit margin.
It was also found that although market segmentation was more simple than multiple segmentation, it is crucial to appeal to the chosen segment in order to survive.
Target markets need to analysed and compromises have to be made. For example, the SUSI and SUKA markets have the potential to increase as both target markets, others and singles respectively, increase. But on the negative side these sectors have the two lowest average prices per unit at only $195 for others and $225 for singles. Therefore although the markets are advantageous in that the growth rates are impressive the profit margin and amount is lower and therefore the overall contribution by these products is lower.
More in depth analysis of the market research is necessary to improve the performance as all the 5 P 's affect marketing. This could have been achieved either by splitting the group into separate areas of the marketing mix or redressing the imbalance in workload of group members.
Product, Place, Promotion, Price and People.
The customer value model (see Appendix 5) shows how customers compare competing products and to be successful the company must have "a deeper understanding of customer value perceptions and preferences".
Kellogg On Marketing, D. Iacobucci, 2001.
Also the fact that research and development is a crucial element especially doing proper research before commissioning the development of a new product. The suspended PSUSU project, costing $100,000, occurred because the market conditions had not been analysed sufficiently. Based on a previous company product, the SUSI, the modifications were not exactly what the target segment required and therefore was scrapped. Another resulting lesson was sometimes it is better to 'cut your losses' and either do n't launch a product or remove it from the market.
Getting the perfect product by listening to customers pays dividends as can be seen by SUKA 's vast increase in sales in first few periods. Being first into a market is advantageous (E.g. Company E) but waiting till you have the perfect product pays off in the long run (E.g. Company O). Be aware of the product life cycle and how it affects not only Jolly SU but also all the competitors in the market. Taking risks should not be always avoided and a well thought through marketing plan can easily justify a loan. Also forecasting is not an exact science and should be taken as guidelines for a solid marketing strategy and not relied on precisely.
Many lessons have been learnt in the last seven periods, which will hopefully be built upon to strengthen a company with vast potential. Now is the time to invest in promoting flagging products, exploiting growing and investing in new markets. Jolly SU has had a disappointing last few periods but the company has the ability to strive if the right marketing mix strategy is applied. The "heart of modern strategic marketing can be described as STP marketing- segmentation, targeting and positioning" and if this is applied correctly there is a bright future for Jolly SU.
Kotler, 1994 p264 from lecture notes.
