Looking through the main content of the FACS Course, one of the most important aspects is how to evaluate the corporation performance on the base of analyzing annual reports. Generally speaking, it could be divided into five steps: firstly, learning the background of the corporation business environment; secondly, obtaining as much information as possible about the company (e.g. its annual reports and accounts, press releases, analysts' reports); thirdly, conducting a detailed analysis of corporation financial results, including analyzing three accounts by refereeing to reports of corporate main directors and calculating relevant important ratios; fourthly, working out what has happened to the corporation via an in-depth analysis of ratios; fifthly, giving the analysis results by providing some verifiable evidences and generating an innate 'feel' for what its future may be like (Dyson, 2004). The following interpretation structure will comply with the process mentioned above.
Founded in 1874, Hunting PLC is an international oil services corporation that provides support solutions to the world 's largest oil and gas companies. In 2005, its turnover in energy services exceeds   1 billion by focusing on the oil patch. The company obtains more than two-thirds of sales from subsidiary Gibson Energy that transports and sells crude oil in Western Canada. Gibson Energy also deals in natural gas collecting and processing equipments and distributes propane and natural gas fluids spread all over North America. Hunting 's oil field services sector supplies tubular goods and provides threading and other services to drillers. Its Tenkay Resources plumbs oil and gas in the southern US and Gulf of Mexico. Other businesses contain facility manufacturing, trucking, and propane retailing. It is the largest supplier of Tubular Goods to the North Sea and Gulf Mexico; the No.1 supplier of Accessories all over the world; the first transnational OCTG (Oil Country Tubular Goods) manufacturer in China 2000; the No.1 supplier of Drill Rods for Fiber Optics and Communications industries; the premier mud-motor firm in Rocky Mountain Region; the first Midstream firm established in Western Canada; owning 90 million barrels of energy product moved annually; the second largest propane distributor in Canada. Moreover, it is the foremost international Ship Brokerage (known as No.1 Oil & Gas Tanker Brokerage worldwide), and is traded on the London Stock Exchange. [Online].
Overview: Corresponding to the analysis procedure, the activity of interpreting corporate latest annual report covers the third and forth steps. According to common practice, it had better adopt trend analysis and horizontal analysis methods to make it easier to spot significant changes or movements when interpreting three financial accounts, while utilizing ratio analysis as the main technology to judge corporate financial performance.
Skimming through the P&L Account, several important profile data give us an overview of the positive corporate performance of Hunting PLC. Profit before tax increases from   21.1m to   25.2m, a 19% enhancement. The same situation is corresponding to Operating Profit with 22% increase. Turnover also has a 5% rise. Basic Earning per Share and Ordinary Dividend per Share add by 98% and 29% respectively. (See figure 1 & Table 1).
Hunting benefited from stable higher commodity prices and increasing customer demands in 2004, which led to turnover enhance directly and all the other profit items increase indirectly (Proctor, 2004, P4). Basic earnings per share and ordinary dividends per share all experienced significant rise for both the enhancing profit, and cancel combining with repayment of 8.2 5% cumulative convertible preference shares, which means the amount of shares decreases (Hunting, 2004, P2).
Accounting for Balance Sheet, Fixed Assets decreases from   228.2 in 2004 to   215.4 in 2003, a 0.06% decline. The same trend could be found in Current Assets, Creditors (Long Term Liabilities) and Capital & Reserves, with declining by 2.54%, 3.08% and 2 8.4% respectively. However, Creditors (Current Liabilities) has the increasing amount of   27.7m, an 18.8% rise.
There are two main things happened to Hunting related to Fixed Assets in 2004 that led to the alternation of its value: one is the Hunting PLC bought the 50% of Gibson Gas Ltd on Jan. 1 st; while the other is Hunting Energy Services sold its Tubular Products casing business on May 12th (Report of the Directors, 2004, P17). Canceling and repaying the preference shares is the main reasons for the sharp drop of Capital & Reserves' amount, for it lessen the value of Share Capital significantly (Notes to the Financial Statements, 2004, P5 6). Converting preference share into Ordinary Share by 29% reduced the Creditors (Long terms liabilities/debt) (Procter, 2004, P4).
Due to the corporation principal activities, cash amounts fluctuated, decreasing   0.9m during 2004 on the base of that of 2003. Comparing to the data from previous year, cash quantities mainly descended in financing, capital expenditure and financial investment, returns on investments and servicing of finance, equity dividends paid with figures   46.6m,   13.7m,   4.5m and   3.8m respectively. (See Table 2).
Net cash outflow from financing mostly came from the corporation using   47.9 to cover the cancellation and repayment of cumulative convertible preference shares. Capital expenditure in the year was   22. 1m (2003 -   28.2m), and an interim dividend was paid on 25 November 2004, which are another two main reasons for cash outflow. (Clark, 2004, P13).
Another important aspect when considering Cash Flow Statement is to compare the cash position between 2004 and previous year that situation is a little worse but acceptable, for the cash outflow items mentioned above (See Table 3). Cash position is core to corporation when comparing with profit, for a company may loss in profit for several times, while facing bankruptcy after exhausting cash.
Ratio analysis is a convenient way of comparing one figure with another figure, which is the key to the efficient evaluation of company performance. What need to be noticed is that the ratios utilized should be selective and logically grouped, mainly for two reasons: one is to simplify the calculations; the other is to make the presentation simple and readily understandable (Holmes, 2002).
As a common practice, ratios are classified when being analyzed. However, the standard of classification is diverse to different accountants and the adoption of ratios is distinct to different entities nature. Here, the ratios are divided conveniently into four categories. (Dyson, 2004) The headings are: profitability ratios; liquidity ratios; efficiency ratios; investment ratios. (See Figure 3).
The best way of assessing profitability is to calculate the ROCE ratio, for the profit and size of business are both concerned. In order to exclude the interference of interest coming from borrowing money, it had better recalculate by using the "Profit (Loss) before Interest" figure in the P&L Account. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
The raise of this ratio is the improvement signal of the corporate performance, which may be caused by either higher profitability or by better control (curtailment) of assets. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
Gross Margin enables us to judge how successful the company has been at trading. It reflects the relationship between selling prices and manufacturing costs for trading conditions will influence this ratio via prices. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
EBIT Margin demonstrates the relationship between selling prices and total costs. The factors affecting Gross Margin will also impact on this ratio. A small proportion alter in Gross Margin can have a significant influence on EBIT or Net Margin. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
Mark-up ratio measures the amount of profit added to the cost of sales with complementing Gross Margin. It may be reduced to stimulate sales volume, but this will lead to reduction of the gross profit to some extent. (Dyson, 2004).
Current ratio is usually expected but not definitely at least 1:1, which mainly depends on business type. Otherwise the company may not have sufficient liquidity resources to meet the immediate financial commitments. (Dyson, 2004).
Liquidity ratio is a better measure standard of corporate liquidity resources situation than current ratio, since it may be difficult to transfer stocks to cash in short term. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
The stock turnover ratio is expressed as a number. For example, a stock turnover of 6 would mean that the company had two month 's normal sales in stock. The greater this ratio, the more efficient the company would appear to be in purchasing and selling commodities. (Dyson, 2004).
The same logic with stock turnover ratio, the company will see an increase in this figure as an improvement that reflects better total utilization of resources, which may be caused by efficient use of capacity available from the fixed assets in the business, or by improved working capital management. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
Another important area to examine, an increase in this ratio suggests improvement coming from enhanced efficiency of capacity in terms of land and buildings, plant and machinery, vehicles etc. This may be caused by business improvement or rationalization and disposal of surplus assets. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
The higher Debtors turnover ratio, the quicker the company could obtain money form customers who trade on credit. This figure is also used to assist the cash flow analysis. The improvement may be led by better credit control, fewer potential bad debts, or fewer occurrences of payment delays. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
This ratio gives the same information and signals as the Debtors turnover ratio calculation above but is a more commonly used method and is usually easier to understand. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) Generally speaking, it had better analyze combining with the Creditors payment (days) ratio, which is ignored here for this true figure is not published external.
This ratio shows ordinary shareholders how much profit has been made after covering all business expenses, interest payments and tax liabilities for each ordinary share in issue. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) It is usually provided in the P&L Account directly by utilizing as an important financial highlight.
Another important financial highlights, which is also given directly by the company to attracts both available and future shareholders.
This ratio reflects the position of pre-tax profit remaining for shareholders after all the operating expenses and interest charges have been deducted. It is not commonly used by investors but still regarded as a valid relationship implying the potential return related to the value of Equity in Balance Sheet. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005).
The level of all kinds of Debtor or Borrowing (considered as the high risk sources of finance) is shown as a proportion of the Equity / Shareholder 's Funds (standing for a lower risk to the company) in Gearing ratio. While many UK companies and US companies regarded 30% - 40% as a reasonable target level, there is no absolute "correct" level for Gearing. And the company usually deducts cash in hand to reach a Net Borrowing figure for use as the numerator in the equation above. (FASC, WMG notes, 2005) What worth mentioned is that if the Gearing ratio is comparably higher, which reflects that the company finances itself from a high level of loans, then there will be a higher risk in investing in it, arising for two main concerns: one is that the company may have to pay more interest for the higher loan, and that may affect the corporate ability to pay an ordinary dividend in the future; the other is that if the company could not repay the high loan, the ordinary shareholder may not get any money back after it bankrupts (Dyson, 2004).
Interest cover ratio illustrates the extent to which current profits cover the fixed financing charges the company has to pay. It is more reliable than Gearing ratio for it overcomes the problem of year-end "manipulation" because of the annual interest charges based on the level of borrowing day to day throughout the year. The higher the figure, the better the corporate position. (FASC, WMG notes, 2005) illustration is still divided into four aspects: profitability, liquidity, efficiency, and investment, then following the summary.
Corresponding to the above interpretation structure of ratios, this part of ratios iilustration is still divided into four aspects: profitability, liquidity, efficiency and investment, then following the summary.
The company 's return on capital employed before interest and tax is taken into account has dropped from 7.60% in 2003 to 7.24% in 2004. There has been a similar decline when ROCE is calculated on a before-tax basis (from 6.05% to 5.11%). The ratio of return on total assets also decreased from 4.26% to 3.24%. Although these data are declined, which does n't really mean the profitability of Hunting is poor than before. For their numerator standing for profit does n't exclude the exceptional item 's interference in 2004. In addition, the corporate seemed to have better control on assets through two main acquisition and disposal of businesses in 2004 (Report of the Directors, 2004, P17), which reducing the denominator in the equation.
Both the Gross margin and Mark-up ratio are increased from 6.90% to 7.46%, 7.4 1% to 8.06% respectively, representing Hunting 's positive signs in all markets it served (Proctor, 2004, P4). And through the Mark-up ratio, what obviously is that Hunting 's enhanced sales volume is not contributed by the reduced gross profit (selling price). While the EBIT margin is reduced a bit (from 2.22% to 1.74%), which may be also caused by the interference of exceptional items.
Hunting 's current assets are more than sufficient to cover its current liabilities, although combining with a bit of decline by the factors of 1.82: 1 in 2003 and 1.49:1 in 2004. Even when stocks are excluded from current assets, the factors only fall to 1.18: 1 in 2003 and 1.06: 1 in 2004.
The efficiency ratios for stock turnover, net assets turnover, and fixed assets turnover all rose from 12.83 to 16.58, 3.43 to 4.17, and 5.24 to 5.83 respectively. The enhanced stock turnover is mainly caused by the higher commodity prices and increased spends of Hunting 's customers indicating the better trading conditions (Proctor, 2004, P4). Moreover, working capital management is improved for the amount reduced from   115.2m in 2003 to   93.3m, which is one reason for the improvement of net assets turnover. Another reason is that Hunting heightens its strong position in asset utilization, especially in Gibson Energy its main profit resource (Proctor, 2004, P4). To some extent, the ameliorative of fixed assets turnover largely comes from the disposal of under-performing assets, the tubular goods business (Proctor, 2004, P5).
The Debtors turnover decreased just a bit from 10.1 to 9.71, while Debtor collection days and creditor payment period, whose data may be not reliable, all extended. However, because of their little changes, the worse position here may not cause big problem to the cash flow situation of Hunting.
Both the basic earnings per share (from 6.4p to 12.7p) and ordinary dividends (from 3.5p to 4.5p) are enhanced sharply by 98%, 29% respectively. This marked improvement roots in the better trading conditions mentioned above. The return on shareholders funds is stable around 13%, which will win shareholders supports.
The gearing ratio enhanced around 50% (from 130.82% to 187.65%), which is mainly caused by Hunting pay   47.9m to fund the cancel and repayment of cumulative convertible preference shares (Clark, 2004, P13). The interest cover experiences a little drop from 4.91 to 3.41, but is still acceptable, containing some interference from exceptional items as mentioned above.
Hunting is more profitable in 2004 than it had been in 2003. Its turnover and gross profit rose to a large extent. Although there is some interference from the exceptional items leading to a reduction in profit before tax, it is still a reasonable operating one. Its return on capital employed dropped a bit but staying at a high level.
The indicator suggests that its liquidity position could be a cause for concern although the position in 2004 was just a little worse than that of 2003. As trade debtors and trade creditors are the major part of current assets and current liabilities respectively. Then clearly, Hunting has to balance the timing of its cash receipts carefully against its cash payments.
In terms of efficiency there was a slight upward trend for most of the indicators for 2004 compared with 2003. The exception was for the debtor turnover and debtor collection days. However, they are still in a reasonable level.
From an investment point of view, the investment indicators reflect a strong better performance during the year and the market appears to have given it a vote of confidence.
Looking through the five years financial records, whose data have been transferred to percentage here, it is obviously that these five highlights indicators are developing in a positive direction although fluctuating sometimes mainly for not excluding the exceptional items in 2001 and 2004 (See Table 4). If the extra payment for exceptional items was not covered in 2004, the position is much better (See Table 5).
The positive signs exist in all markets Hunting served. As the main profit resources of Hunting Group, Gibson Energy, focusing on the production of crude oil and natural gas, will have another busy and profitable year because of the robust commodity prices and customer demands expected (Interim 2005, P21-22). Hunting Energy Services disposed of its under-performing tubular goods casing business that will enable it to be more profitable via improved asset utilization (Proctor, 2004, P7). Its US-based exploration and production company, Tenkay Recourses experienced a 19% drop in turnover, since delays in new production coming on stream and unusually severe weather disaster in the Gulf of Mexico (Hunting, 2004, P2). So its profitability is also forecasted to enhance in 2005. As to other businesses of Hunting, the increased profit is expected according to their good performances in 2004.
Moreover, In August Hunting cancelled and repaid the 8.2 5% cumulative convertible preference shares that improved capital structure and returns to shareholders, and will benefit the whole group in the future (Hunting, 2004, P2). In addition, Hunting is believed to have adequate financial resources to continue in better operation for the foreseeable future, on the basis of current financial projections and facilities available (Clark, 2004, P 14).
To sum up, the corporate recent upward performance trend linking with the positive outlook on markets demand and commodity selling prices, should provide wonderful opportunities for Hunting 's assets, shareholders and employees in 2005.
Hunting PLC.
Hunting PLC Company Profile [Online] [accessed 3 Jan 06].
Perry, T. et al, WMG FACS module notes, 2005.
Hunting, R., Chairman 's Statement, Hunting Annual Report and Accounts 2004, P2.
Proctor, D., Chief Executive 's Review, Hunting Annual Report and Accounts 2004, P4-10.
Clark, D., Finance Director 's Review, Hunting Annual Report and Accounts 2004, P12-14.
Notes to the Financial Statements, Hunting Annual Report and Accounts 2004, P43 -62.
Report of the Directors, Hunting Annual Report and Accounts 2004, P17.
Interim Presentation 2005, P21-22.
Holmes, G., Sugden, A., Gee, P., Interpreting Company Reports and Accounts, 8 th ed., Prentice Hall, Harlow, 2002.
Dyson, J., Accounting for Non-accounting Students, 6 th ed., Prentice Hall, Harlow, 2004.
Blake, D., Interpreting Accounts: Theory and practice for accounting examinations,.
As one of most important signs of financial risks, cash is a very significant factor for the successful operation of a business. Thus, because of the importance of cash position in a business, managers often plans cash movements in advance, which enable them to be confident of adequate cash, or to have enough time to negotiate overdraft facilities. Oppositely, cash balances do not generate profits; therefore some managers would figure idle cash an indicator of inefficiency. The art of cash management is to keep a sufficient liquid balance to meet the needs of the business, while not over too much and wasteful of resources. (Pizzey, 1998).
As the purchasing manager in business simulation "Winning MarginTM", the main responsibilities are to purchase materials according to the production plans and give suggestions when setting down production budgets, capital expenditures, and loans amount etc. (Taking year2 as example):
In year2, our group had three Mark I ,one Mark II and two Markilimachines. According to the orders from commercial manager combining with other managers suggestions, the production manager decided to produce Terrier on Mark I and Mark II machines, while Tigers on Markilimachines. Then it is turn to the purchasing manager to fulfill these machines' capacities by framing the materials ordering plans. In order to enhance the profit and improve cash flow position, I tried my best to limit the materials ordering amount every quarter under the preconditions of satisfying production needs. So the amounts of orders are fluctuated. Moreover, in order to minimize the cash consumption, there are some materials safety stocks at the very lower level to avoid the extra expenditures of $2m in supply development for quickening materials delivery process. As to achieving this aim, I needed to be more careful when calculating materials ordering amounts, for I now ordered materials for the production two quarters later.
My effort influencing the cash flow position mostly exists in three figures: Profit before interest ($1 8m), cash tied in stock (increasing $1 3m), cash tied in debtors (increasing $32m), Although they are not positive to cash position.
In the real business, purchasing manager could improve cash position in three aspects (FACS, WMG notes, 2005):
Purchasing manager could enhance operating profit via reducing the direct costs and inventory costs, which could be achieved by negotiating material prices with suppliers, optimizing materials ordering amounts, considering investing in supplier development to benefit business in a long-term. What should be noticed is that when reducing materials orders, purchasing manager has to guarantee the materials is able to cover production needs, otherwise, it would cost the whole business much more.
As stock is the main roots for tying cash, purchasing manager also has the responsibilities to reduce stocks level by ordering timing, optimizing orders quantities. The key to achieve these is to communicate with production manager frequently.
This aspect is not considered in "Winning MarginTM", while very important in real world. For if purchasing manager could enlarge the amount of trade creditors and get the permits to delay the payment even longer, which could benefit the cash position to a large extent and the whole business could use the cash more efficiently.
Marginal costing (in the form of contribution analysis) is extensively used in short term decision-making, which could be effectively illustrated by "Winning MarginTM".
As Profit equals contribution deducting fixed costs, and the fixed cost is not responsible to volume in short term, so when making the decision in the short term, it just need to calculate the contribution (See Table 6). It 's obviously that the difference between best and worst is the figure of 3. In order to be more profitable, selling goods in the market with higher prices and producing goods with the machines with lower variable costs are definitely wise choices. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) So in the simulation, our team invested in the product support to win the higher price contracts and utilized Mark   to produce Tiger.
In the real world, Marginal costing is not normally employed in profit measurement while the excellent tool for decision making with the same logic utilized in "Winning MarginTM" mentioned above. The real business using marginal costing to calculate Break Even point, decide Make-or-Buy, determine marginal cost price etc., which are all helpful in making business decisions. (Millichamp, 1997).
The limitation of traditional methods promoted the development of ABC, which is crucial to the efficient operation of the business and the key to ABC application process is selecting activity cost drivers that link activity costs to cost objectives. Through ABC analysis, manager could understand where the profit is being generated and where lose is arising.
A simple ABC based process could be utilized in "Winning MarginTM" in four steps to show a clearer economic map enabling those more profitable products or markets have the priority to develop. Here the analysis is classified by market. (FACS, WMG notes, 2005) Skimming through the table shown on the notes, it 's easily to find the analysis is very specific and based on different calculation methods to guarantee the veracity. For instance, when apportioning administration, the calculation is based on volume (e.g. transactions, sales), while it is based on capacity utilization to the apportionments of depreciation and fixed production overheads. According to the data, our group will definitely focus on developing in Home and EU markets for the high net margin indicating the outstanding profitability.
When applying ABC in the real world, it is much complex, while the logic is the same with "Winning MarginTM". Generally speaking, the ABC will be utilized by variable manufacturers. However, although it is a more logical alternative to find the full-absorbed cost of the product, its adoption in industry is slow to develop because of the high analysis expenditure, time-consuming on the calculation, and the difficulty of administration (Pizzey, 1998).
