In question sheet, the manufacturer planed to convert process layout to more suitable and advanced cell layout. I, as a new managing director, has been asked to formulate a manufacturing strategy for the new body shop of lean manufacture, based on Hayes and Wheelwright 's elements [1], released in their well-known book "Restoring Our Competitive Edge: Competing Through Manufacturing", where they argue that the process of formulating a manufacturing strategy should involve in company 's structure and infrastructure, divided in ten decision areas.
Manufacturing strategy is dynamic, in different times firms have different strategy. A manufacturing strategy, on the one hand, should support corporate strategy which determines what businesses the division should operate, and on the other hand, should interact with other functional strategies such as marketing strategy and financial strategy etc.
Before the start of formulating manufacturing strategy, a clear understanding and assessment of market is necessary to help us to get competitive advantages through manufacturing. John Puttick 's market segmentation grid is the tool that is often utilized to define market position of product and show the link between the market and order winning criteria. The distinction between order qualifying and order-winning criteria is important. The order qualifying is a basic requirement which must be satisfied, and the order winning is your competitive advantage compared your competitors.
As what is indicated in the figure 1-1, for exhaust system product that is launched in a well-developed market, high complexity and low uncertainty are significant factors. The grid also implies that, in the third quadrant, delivery lead time and flexibility would be the order winning which could provide a competitive edge to gain sales in market place, rather than product quality and reliability which just are basic factors required to maintain a market share.
From market perspective, a noticeable trend has been seen that global car market is increasing gradually, especially in certain Asia areas including China, Indian, and South Korea, the growth is obvious. From the figure 1-2 [2], we can see that the sales in Asia increased from 4479 million units in 1998 to 7769 million in 2003, raised by 73%. With the development of technology and maturation of production system, many automakers start to increase variety of car models and reduce product life cycle for each model of car, actually Toyota has reduced its product life cycle to three years. Meanwhile, large automobile company have changed in their behaviour and structure such that they subcontract more to SME 's. Because a greater reliance on SME 's, they seek to integrate suppliers into their supply chain system through a series of certificate constituted by themselves. All above are signals that there are huge development room for automotive component industry with high flexibility and short lead times required. This is a great chance for Sun Company to recover.
Source: Standard & Poor 's DRI-Global Automotive Group.
Structure decision areas contain four categories Capacity, Facility, Technology and Vertical Integration. The decisions in each of category will have a long-term impact, and need a large sum of capital to expand capacity, rearrange plant layout, employ new n/c machines and robots for example, which maybe lead to financial problems if the decisions made in wrong way. We will analyze the four categories respectively.
Capacity strategy is a major element of a company 's manufacturing strategy, which consists of a set of time-sequence capacity decisions based on long-time market, economy environment, technology and behaviours of competitors. The most important decisions are the amount and timing of capacity changes in relation to demand changes at strategy purposes.
There are various ways to change the capacity. For example, overtime work and shift are convenience ways to increase or reduce capacity in a certain period; rebuilding machine shop layout to lean manufacture. Increasing new equipment and new plant also are commonly ways to expand capacity to meet customer demands in a long-term perspective.
As Hay 's statement [1], there are three generic type of capacity cushion when demand is expected to grow steadily. Firstly, capacity leads demand type, it indicates that capacity should exceed demand and keep in a reasonable range in order to avoid the likelihood of running short. The second type of capacity cushion is capacity in approximate equilibrium with demand, which suggests that company should attempt to match the capacity and demand as accurate as possible, although forecasting is difficult in reality. The capacity lags demand is the third capacity cushion which can achieve maximum capacity utilization.
Determining how much capacity we need to meet market demand is another problem. Tradeoffs between the economies of scale and diseconomies of scale should be done to get the optimal economic scale.
Although Sun Company has been steadily losing business and unused capacity generally is expensive, I still recommend expanding production capacity by using the first capacity cushion as the result of motor industry 's boom and economy cycle.
According to the analysis of industrial environment, the growth of market opportunities driven by Asian and African car consumption market has boosted many auto companies blooming again which imply that there would be a rapidly increasing needs for capacity of exhaust system to meet customers satisfaction. In a growing market, extra capacity is a strong and aggressive weapon to attract new customers who do n't get what they want from our competitors with capacity constrained. Actually, if a firm runs with the type of capacity lags demand, it seems as if maximum utilization of machines can be achieved and therefore provides a higher average rate of return on manufacturing investment than that would be possible with a lower utilization rate. However, company has to reject some order because of capacity-constraint; it means customers lost which is disadvantaged for further development.
Nowadays, the rate of interest is definitely low, although global economy has broken away from recession gradually and starts to recover. Investment at the bottom of economy will form large competitive advantage and put company into indefectible position.
The term of facility involves in number, size, location, specialization of plants, and organisation of individual plant. In a multinational corporate, how many different facilities should be utilized, how big should each be, where they should be located, and how should each be specialized, these questions are key structural decisions confronted by leadership. An optimal network of plants can provide core competitive edge to beat competitors. However, in this case, the Sun Company only has one plant with 200 employees in the machine shop. So, we focus on the choices of layout and process.
There are four basic layout types as follow:
Fixed position.
It is common to use this layout when the product is heavy or fragile and in this approach operators and raw materials come to the product itself.
Process layout.
In this layout, machines with similar functions are gathered in certain area to make a wide range of products.
Cell layout.
With this approach, areas of the plant are dedicated to particular product types in a cell of manufacture, machines are grouped together for a particular family of products.
Product layout.
Machines are dedicated to a small range of products and every stage is different from next.
Layout is just layout itself if there is no link with process. According to hill [3], there are five classic processes that a firm has to choose one or more: project, jobbing, batch, line and continuous process. The choice of process is the one best able to match the market requirement in which the company is competing.
Considering the assumption in the preceding, this company provides a large range of exhaust system for motorcar and motorbike companies. Small order quantities, high frequency delivery, high level of product 's variety are three significant characteristics of order from motor company in where lean manufacture usually is implemented. The company 's machine shop is functional layout now. In order to meet the customer requirement that small volume, flexibility and quick delivery, batch process associated with cell layout should be selected in the main process. It could be better to choose line process for the final assembly and packaging, because of the standard nature of these activities. Cellular organization is the heart of lean manufacture, and with the introduction of philosophy of lean manufacture, we can reduce manufacturing lead time, improve product cost, quality and delivery and create an atmosphere of employee involvement and continuous improvement. Indeed, in Japan, layout and investment in facilities has been made for flexibility and the ability to quickly shift to different product models or to different outputs of production, that is why Japanese companies can beat west in 90s.
Adapted from.
From figure 1-3 [4], it is easy to see that cellular layout reduce the flow of materials and information, each cell is self managed and responsible for different products.
The implementation of latest technology in manufacture does not mean the best performance. Technology by itself will not bring benefits to the firm unless it can be applied through know-how and experience which will provide advantage for the firm. In order to provide strong support to the cell manufacture we chose above, where a group of machines forms a cell in order to build a small range of products, Group Technology is best choice to fit the change from job shop layout where the company stay in, to cell layout where we wish to go.
According to Steve 's statement [5], successful implementation of group technology will result in a great performance of manufacture, demonstrated in figure 1-4.
How much automation to use is a big problem has to be determined by manager. Simply equipment could result in a loss of efficiency; while over automation will lead to capital waste and negative effect on affordability and reliability. We need adequate n/c machines and robots to reduce the load of workforce and increase productivity.
Vertical integration enjoyed a high popularity in 1980s, at that points many corporations enhance the degree of vertical integration. Over the past decade, however, horizontal integration has drawn more attentions. Outsourcing unprofitable activities and focusing on core competence have got a broad agreement. Take IBM, which produce its own computers and write its own software, for example, it sold whole pc and laptop divisions to Lenovo this year, one of the biggest computer manufacturers in the world, and focus on providing software solutions for its business customers.
The figure 1-5 shows clearly the relationship of vertical integration and horizontal integration.
As to sun company, it is necessary to confirm the boundaries of products, and take some actions to outsource the products, which is unprofitable, and focus on its core products which make large profits and profound in the future market.
In order to horizontal integrate to the whole supply chain, on the one hand, Sun Company should communicate with its customers frequently to learn what they need, on the other hand, it should prudently select its supplier, and train them to meet requirement itself.
Infrastructure decision areas include six categories: Workforce, Organization, Quality, Production Planning and Control, Performance Measurement and New Product Development. Infrastructure is an internal system which can provide strong support to structure.
Human resource management is now in lamplight, any successful implementation of decisions base on execution power of managers and collocation of staffs. Cell layout is self-contained, and requires every worker to be able to operate almost all the machines grouped in a cell. So, it is necessary to offer a long-term training course to not only leadership, but also employees. In fact, multi-skilled employees form the backbone of a firm. However, many companies, in default, consider the training as a cost, while Japanese companies usually support a large sum of fund to train their employees as a long investment, the most valuable investment. Employees sometimes are more important than strategy, because strategy is easy to copy by competitors, but employees are not.
In a job shop, there is little teamwork. In contrast, in a cell, all the workers are totally responsible for completing every job. Therefore, teamwork and communication among workers are essential. Team in the cell manufacture is also used as a method to solve production problem. When problem appears, all workers in a cell stop their work and to solve it, for every team is responsibility for their own equipment and quality inspection.
At present, there are about 200 employees in the machine shop, and split almost equally between fully skilled machinists and semi-skilled machine minders. It is inevitable to downsize the numbers of workforce during the changing of machine shop, but it is not a pretext to fire employees. In general, the ones who are cut down during the process of changing are excellent employees; they will form core power for the implementation of new project and new product line. So, Sun Company will not lay off any employees.
In functional layout, organization usually has developed through function department, such as test department, maintenance department, material department and quality control department. A cellular layout emphasizes product-based, and the organization should be built based on products or product group.
Cell organization simplifies the difficulty of management. Each cell has its own team leader who is in charge of both workers and machines. Cell manager should be responsible for daily operations such as forecasting, scheduling, inspection and maintenance. General Manager could be easily control the whole manufacture and operations through managing cell managers.
ISO 9000 defines quality as "degree to which a set of inherent characteristic fulfils requirements" [6]. A strategic view of quality is one which sees quality as a long-term competitive requirement, an ongoing, unending means of outperforming competitors. With the globalization, companies have to confront with the competition from all over the world, and customers also have great amount of choice for one product, these make quality become more important in strategy aspect.
The sun company often pulls products from finished goods and rebuilds them for custom orders that, further, lead to overdue of order and increase customers complaints and dissatisfactions. In order to change this situation, Six Sigma will be applied to improve our quality. Harris [7] claims that Six sigma is a disciplined, data driven approach, it concentrate on continually improving process quality and productivity. Although the process quality is not focus on reducing cost, cost will undoubtedly reduce in successful quality drives because of the eliminating of waste, excess and other non value-added activities. GE is a good example.
Six sigma improvement projects include five steps: Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, and Control (DMAIC). A set of tools (charter, TMAP, process map, measurement system evaluation, VOP, etc.) can be used to guarantee the successful implementation of DMAIC. We still need some employees as black belt and green belt who are trained individuals responsible for leading six sigma teams through the DMAIC process. Project team will be responsible for the improvement of quality and control.
Production planning and control aims to assure efficient and effective process of operation and manufacture of product as required by customers. Nigel [8] claims that how to reconcile supply and demand in terms of volumes, timing and quality, is the most significant purpose of planning and control. There are four over-lapping activities which should be considered during the process of reconciling volume and timing.
Source: operation management.
In order to make production planning and control system run effectively, computers have been used. According to Vollmann [9], planning and control system based on computer system can help manager to efficiently manage the flow of materials, effectively utilise people and equipment, co-ordinate internal activities with those of suppliers, and communicate with customers about market requirements. Generally, there are four types of control system that can be chose depending on firm 's operation environment: CAP, APS, MRP or MRP    , JIT. The diagram below shows the relationship between control system and certain environment.
Through analysis of the diagram, Sun Company could use MRP, MRP     and JIT system. MRP    is more complicated than MRP which only integrates material and engineering departments. MRP    also has higher requirements for supply network. So, initially, MRP system is a sensible choice and MRP     for future. There is also a caution that reliable suppliers are premises which is a key factor for the successful application of MRP.
This category includes financial and non-financial performance management and linkages to recognition and reward systems. Appropriate measurement system can help the manufacturing strategy implement successfully. Generally, there are five set of measurement indicators: quality, delivery performance and customer service, process time, cost, and flexibility. In machines shop, measurement indicators usually involve in percentage of scrap, set-up time, total lead time, labour hours required and stock level.
Recognition and reward system is an important method to improve performance and productivity. It should be quick, known, understandable and attainable as well as compatible with job measurements. If a reward system is unfair and unrealistic, it will have a negative effect on employees. Company 's profit should be shared by every workers, if company get high profit, workers can get high bonus, if the company not, workers not. Team reward system is becoming more and more important in order to promote teamwork in cell environment.
Sun Company will pay more attention to new product introduction as a weapon to gain market share. At the outset of a new product development project, a clearly assessment about market demand for the new product should be made. Once the market gap is understood, we should select and form new product development project team. Developing the product [10 ] have six steps: preparing for concept generation, concept generation, concept selection, product engineering and design, prototyping and pilot production and ramp up and market launch. Figure 1-8 shows the product development funnel.
According to the analysis above, we can easily draw a conclusion:
Manufacturing Strategy Statement.
In order to recapture the market share which we lost in the past, and provide customers high quality products with flexibility and fast delivery, we should take some actions as follow:
Rearrange the plant layout to cell layout so that we can reduce product lead time, improve products quality, cost and delivery. Leave enough spaces for expanding capacity in the future to meet customers' requirement.
Select products range and outsource unprofitable product to reliable suppliers who should pass the certification made by sun company and should be encompassed in company 's supply chain management.
Introduce the six sigma quality management to improve process quality and reduce cost.
Train all levels of employees in order to assure the successful implementation of cell layout and six sigma method. 5. Provide appropriate fund to support any requirement of the manufacturing strategy.
In order to successfully implement manufacturing strategy, a clear understanding of all the forces for or against decisions is vital. The force field diagram, which was developed by Kurt Lewin, is a simple but very effective tool to weigh pros and cons. Through drawing a diagram, it is easy to see the forces for and against the change, and identify whether the forces for change will become dominant.
Once one decision to carry out a project has been made, Force Field Analysis is helpful to work out how to improve its probability of success. Usually, there are three choices. First, increase or add new driving force. Second, reduce or remove the forces against the change. Third, change the direction of forces.
Each force will be assign a score to compare which forces is stronger, range from 1(week) to 5(strength).
The requirement from leadership (5).
The sun company has been losing business, if we do not take actions to change this situation, what we have to face is bankrupting. No one would like to be a loser, what the owner wish to see is profit not bankruptcy. So, the leadership has strong desire to pull the change. During the implementation of Six Sigma, the attentions from leadership will be useful too.
The requirement from customers (3).
Nowadays, automobile corporations pay more attention to their horizontal integration. They require supplier to employ new technology to meet what they need. So, as an automobile component manufacturer, we should integrate to their supply chain management.
Improve speed of production (4).
Reduce lead time could increase capacity and productivity as well as meet the requirement of quick response to customers.
Reduce scrape and rework (4).
Scrape and rework raise the material cost, labour cost and overhead, it is necessary to improve quality to maintain market share and attract new customers.
Simplify management (4).
Large and complex organization is usually difficult to manage effectively and efficiently because of the inconvenience of information flow. Work cell is a flat organization, so it is convenient and feasible to communicate quickly. Simplified organization is more nearby the product group, so it is possible to find problems existed in manufacture and solve them as soon as possible.
Fear to lay off (5).
Actually, many companies usually take action of firing employees when they start to reform or conditions become difficult. Because employees are worried about losing their job, there would be a strong force to resist reform.
Dissatisfy to increase workload (4).
New cell layout need one worker operates several machines at the same time in a cell. Staffs would be bored and dissatisfied to increase workload.
Poor skills (3).
Every one gets used to keep stable and reject alteration. Employment of new process technology and implementation of six sigma quality improvement project, need high skilled staff. Workers should enhance skills to know how to operate almost all the machines in a cell.
Cost for new equipment (3).
Rearrange plant layout and purchase of new equipments will cost a large sum of money which would result in financial problems in operation management, even a breakdown of cash flow.
Manager resist change (2).
It is very difficult to change organization structure. People who work in functional department resist change, because they may lose their position and have to work nearby product. Managers may be uncooperative if the change is forced on them.     Difficulty of integration of MRP(3).
MRP system requires high skilled computer professionals, certain database and integrated computer network. Meanwhile, demand management and supply management require raw material department and production department integrate completely.
According to the analysis above, it is easy to draw a force field diagram showed as follow. We can see that the balance of driving forces and restraining forces is 20:20 which means high risk to fail the project. So, we need some solutions to redraw the balance of forces.
There are different kinds of restraining forces, accordingly we have different solutions.
We can demonstrate company 's policy for employees to remove the scared feeling of no job. In fact, it is unnecessary to lay off anybody, although we do not need 200 peoples in machine shop. Because the people who would be seek out from machine shop will be ones who have an excellent performance in production, they will be members of new project teams, in which they are responsible for converting the process layout to cell layout as well as apply the six sigma quality improvement project as black belt and green belt. Indeed, the change of layout will provide new opportunities for everyone to promote. With the guarantee that no one lose job, it is feasible to remove the fear of unemployment. So, the score of this problem can reduce to 0.
With the reduction of number of workers in a cell and growth of responsibility for multi-function machines, workload will definitely increase, although cell layout can decrease the movement of material and staffs. It is impossible to remove the dissatisfaction for increase of workload, but it is possible to fall the dissatisfaction. For example, increase the salary, bonus and holiday based on job environment; show them the change is necessary for business survival for holding their job. The score of this problem may reduce to 3.
It is undoubted that training is the best choice for solving this problem. Employees should get adequate training course to learn specification of machines and correct operations. The training also can help workers to know how to communicate efficiently which is vital in teamwork. Then, the score reduce to 1.
There are two solutions. As for heavy, expensive and unusually used equipment, we can seek in second-hand market, or buy from some companies which have bankrupted. The second solution is that we can apply government 's grant and loans of low interest rate as a result of UK government 's manufacturing strategy in which it offers a large sum of fund to help SME 's to develop theirs career. The score can reduce to 2.
Dismissal as a short-term method is a good way to solve this problem. However, this method may hurt and has a bad influence on other employees' morale. Building company 's culture is a long-term method in which workers will be proud as members of Sun Company through a series of honour education. The score will keep 1.
It is very hard to reduce or remove the score of this problem. We can look for some consultant and IT companies to help us to implement MRP system, but the expense will increase. So the score should be level off on 3.
Through a series of activities to reduce or remove restraining forces, the balance between driving forces and restraining forces is 20:10, which indicates that we have a great chance to implement the strategy successfully, although we still have to do further analysis.
In order to successful implementation of manufacturing strategy, the overall project can be divided into 3 sub-projects: education project, layout transformation project, six sigma project. For each project, we need to appoint a senior executive as a captain, and a project manager in charge of integration of all resources. In every project, we will run a continual measurement in order to ensure achieving every target of the project.
This project should run firstly to build foundations for the implementation of other projects.
Target 1: Ensure that leadership understand clearly the importance of change, and get commitment.
Target 2: Ensure that every worker understand clearly the importance of change.
Target 3: Each machine shop worker must reach a level of skill and knowledge to meet the requirement of tasks.
Once the education project finished, transformation project will be implemented. This project is a main project and aims to achieve an efficient and effective change from process layout to cell layout.
Target 1: Build a work cell as test.
Target 2: Transform whole plant into cell organization completely.
Six sigma project aims to continually improve process quality and reduce defects, which can be applied when the transform project finished.
Target 1: Set up and train project team.
Target 2: Reduce defects to level of four sigma which means 6210 defects per million units.
The implementation plan will start in Dec. 2005 and complete in Dec. 2008. A simple timescale shows the schedule of each project.
