Company U 's aim was to achieve sufficient sales in the Sonite market during the initial periods to produce 2 Vodites as quickly as possible. We aimed to be first to market with a Vodite product to benefit from the advantages of this policy; "A sometimes insurmountable advantage gained by the first significant company to move into a new market" Our Sonite products were not ideally targeted to any segments and thus other factors of the marketing mix where to used to drive sales. [accessed February 7th 2005].
The company position will be analysed mainly on the basis of 4 Key Performance Indicators; Market Share, Retail Sales, Contribution and Shareholder Value (SPI and ROI).
Share Price Index (SPI) is considered the most important financial measure and is currently 2,286, placing the firm 2 nd. Figure 1 shows how company U had the highest SPI until period 6. A high SPI in period 4 and 5 (peak of 3153) was due to 100% dominance in the Vodite market.
Return on Investment (ROI) has grown 54.7% from period 0 (4.27) but is half of the leading company (E - 8.24). Cumulative Net Contribution is the highest in the industry at $420,151,000 but mainly due to significant earlier success. $75,721,000 was generated in period 7. Figure 2 show that contribution by brand has increased over 7 periods, and the current level of $15,144,000 is up 100.8% from period 1.
Overall market share is currently 25.4%, up 14.4% from period 0 and figure 3 shows how we sit roughly equal distance from the market leader, and the other companies.
The total market grew 256.9% but growth of Total retail sales was 309.4% from $69,757,000 in period 0 to $285,609,000 in period 7. Figure 4 shows 4 brands are in growth segments but range from strong to weak positions. SULI sits favourably in an ageing segment.
Graph 1 in the appendix shows that VULI, VUDU and SULI are the main contributors to company profits. Using Levitt 's ideas of product classification SUSI is 'yesterday 's winner' (now contributing little to corporate earnings). SULI and VULI are 'today 's providers' (backbone of corporate profitability). VUSI is 'tomorrow 's hopeful' (sales performance suggest good future profitability) and VUDU is a combination of both. The BCG Matrix (figure 5) shows that SULI and SUSI show 'dog' characteristics, low market share in low growth segments. Vodites in the Followers segment show 'problem child' characteristics, having relatively low market share but targeting a high growth segment. VULI and VUDU in the Adopters and Innovators segments show characteristics of both 'dogs' and 'problem children'. It would desirable to have products in the  'star performer' and then 'cash cow' segments.
Chisnall, Peter M, Strategic Business Marketing 3rd Edition pg 187.
There are 5 segments; Buffs, Singles, Professionals, HiEarners and Others. Current retail market is share 8.2%, down from period 0 by 22.2%. Retail sales have decreased 22.1% $54,373,000. Graph 2 (appendix) shows how contributions of SULI and SUSI increased until period 3 when the resources were allocated to the launch of Vodites, and hence sales suffered. The net contribution is currently $15,116,000.
Retail market share is at a low of 0.8% equating to retail sales of $5,018,000. Net contribution has been positive apart from period 5, currently standing at $53,000 down 97.5% from period 0. The performance of SUSI has been disappointing over the 7 periods as it was n't ideally suited to either of its target segments, Singles and Others. The Singles segment is estimated at 776,000 and will be approximately 831,000 in 1 period 's time. The Others segment is slightly larger at 781,000 and is due to grow to 885,000 by the next period. SUSI competes with SAFE and SEXY (segment market leader) in the Singles market, and SAMA, SIII (segment market leader) and SONG in the Others market but has lower market shares. SUSI has 3.1% of the Others market, 0.4% of the Buffs, Singles and HiEarners and 0.1% of the Professionals market. In period 0 SUSI had 16.3% and 7.6% of the Others and Singles markets.
SULI has performed better than SUSI, but badly compared with rival brands. Retail market share is 7.4% down 18.5% from period 0. This equates to retail sales of $49,355,000, down from period 0 by 14.9%. As graph 2 (appendix) shows, the net contribution was particularly strong in periods 2 and 3 and is currently $15,063,000, an increase of 14.0% from period 0. SULI showed initial signs of growth in the early periods but sales have since declined as resources were concentrated on the launch of Vodites. SULI 's targeted at Professionals (segment, 293,000) and HiEarners (segment, 221,000). Brand awareness for both these segments has decreased over the previous 4 periods and stands at 69.1% for Professionals and 75.7% for HiEarners. In the Professionals segment market share is 14.3% where it competes with SEMI (segment leader) and SOLD. In the HiEarners segment SULI 's main competition is SOUL (segment leader), SOLD and SEMI. SULI has 24.3% market share here.
There are 3 segments; Innovators, Adopters and Followers. Retail sales are $231,256,000, a market share of 50.0%. Although market share has decreased from period 4 retail sales have 113.0%. The market is estimated to grow 67.0% to 1,129,000 by period 8.
Since period 4, unit sales have increased 140.5% to 43,286. Retail sales have also increased, by 98.6% to $24,504,000. By unit sales market share is 6.4% and retail market share is 5.3%. Net contribution was initially negative but has increased to $2,352,000. The number of sales force has roughly doubled to 35 in a drive to dominate the embryonic market. VUSI is targeted at Followers in a segment size of 232,000. Brand awareness here has increased 115.8% since period 4 to 39.5%. VUSI competes with VENA (segment leader), VIRA, VULI and VUDU and has 17.2% of the follower segment.
From period 4, retail sales have only increased 0.9% to $97,092,000. Greatest sales were in period 5 when we monopolised the market. Market share is 21.0% by retail sales. Net contribution has stayed positive in all periods but has decreased 8.2% from period 4 to $30,566,000. Although targeted at Innovators and Adopters, sales in the Followers segment have been impressive. Market share in these 3 segments is 26.1%, 18.0% and 20.9%. Brand awareness is fairly even across the 3 segments although slightly higher in the Followers segment, 63.0%. Adopters brand awareness increased most since period 4, 303.4%. VULI 's 2 main competitors are VENA (segment leader) and VUDU.
Period 7 was a successful first period, but production was not sufficient to meet demand. By being more tailored to particular segments and enjoying a considerable advertising budget and sales force retail sales was $109,659,000. Targeted at Innovators and Adopters, VUDU achieved higher levels of brand awareness (36.3% and 33.6 respectively) than any other Vodite in its first period.
Porter stated that 'The essence of formulating competitive strategy is relating a company to its environment'. Marketing strategy can also be defined as "one that encompasses the selection and analysis of a target market and the creation and maintenance of an appropriate marketing mix that will satisfy those people in the target market". What stage products are in the product life cycle, the financial resources available, strength competition and market position both short and long term are important considerations. A SWOT analysis of Company U is useful starting block.
Porter, M. E. , Competitive Strategy, Macmillan, New York, 1980.
Dibb, Simkin, Pride and Ferrell, Marketing; Concepts and Strategies pg 16.
Chisnall, Peter M. , Strategic Business Marketing, pg 177.
SWOT analysis tells us that a strategy is required that will improve the saleability of Sonites and guard against threats in the Vodite market. The 'marketing mix' popularly known as the 4 P 's; product, price, promotion and place, will be the framework for strategy development.
We aim to develop new products, eliminate unprofitable products and improve existing products to give better satisfaction to customers. 2 frameworks that aid this process are the product/market matrix and product life cycle (PLC).
Ansoff 's matrix (figure 8) enables companies to assess their market situation and decide on a future strategy for products.
Ansoff, H. Igor, Strategies for diversification, Harvard Business Review, vol. 35, no. 5, 1957.
Applying this framework, a company may do the following:
What stage a product life is in the product life cycle (figure 9) is important when determining strategy for that product.
Dibb, Simkin, Pride, Ferrell., Marketing; Concepts and Strategies p.674.
Thus having products at different stages in the product life cycle is essential for the long-term success.
Figure X Product Life Cycle. Source: Dibb et alSUSI sales have declined each period since period 2 so is in the decline stage of the product life cycle. Faced with a failing product there management may make 3 choices.
Dibb, Simkin, Pride and Ferrell, Marketing; Concepts and Strategies pg 256.
Baker, M J Marketing Strategy and Management p.109.
As SUSI is n't well suited to either of its target segments, it is suggested the product be withdrawn next period, and new Sonite, SUDU introduced. A R&D project PSUDU is currently underway. SUDU will be solely targeted at Others as part of a 'niche' strategy.
SULI is in the decline stage of the product life cycle but makes a healthy contribution. Its target segments are in decline and are the 3 rd and 4 th largest segments. A niche market strategy should be adopted to modify SULI so it appeals to just Professionals as it has values that are more desirable them and is a greater segment size now, and long term. If modification is unfeasible a defensive strategy should be adopted to protect market share by manipulation of non-product elements of the marketing mix.
VULI and VUSI are in the growth stage of the product life cycle. However modifying these products may increase their appeal to their target segments. For example VUSI has a maximum frequency of 7 (the characteristic ranked second most important after price by Followers) but the value that gives Followers the greatest utility is 12. VULI should be modified to suit Innovators.
VUDU is in the introduction stage of the product life cycle and hence needs time to settle before any modifications are made. VUDU values hold appeal to Innovators and Early Adopters.
Chisnall, Peter M, Strategic Business Marketing, pg 188.
Figure 10 shows that is not necessarily the lowest priced product that achieves greatest market share.
Strategy will be based on 'contribution pricing' with sensitivity to marketing studies (e.g. conjoint analysis). We shall bear in mind that "Care should be taken not to make price the overriding Competitive Factor".
Chisnall, Peter M, Strategic Business Marketing, pg 191.
Lancaster, G. Massingham, L. (1997) Essentials of Marketing 2nd ed pg 213.
SUSI is to be withdrawn next period and replaced by SUDU. A 'penetration pricing' strategy would be initially appropriate to obtain enough market share to justify production. Pricing analysis in the appendix shows that a RRP of $205 should be set for its first period of production. Long term sales would have to increase so that the product makes a significant positive contribution.
SULI 's RRP should be increased to $490 so it appeals more to Professionals as part of the niche strategy to concentrate on one target segment. It will also sell at the 'going rate' (competitive parity), which is considered a prudent strategy.
Messages from production indicate the VUSI sales were n't maximised in period 7 and thus lowering the RRP by $20 (to make the product more appealing to Followers) should not have an adverse affect on revenues. Pricing analysis (appendix) shows that were sales to increase to 50,000units next period, the average selling price must be $325 for the product to breakeven.
VULI and VUDU should have different RRPs so that 'cannibalisation', whereby "brand sales are being achieved at the expense of another brand" does not occur. Pricing analysis (appendix) shows VULI must have a minimum average selling price of $212 ceteris paribus for net contribution to stay positive.
Stapleton, J. Hart, N. (1987) Glossary of Marketing Terms 3rd ed pg 30 "All other influencing factors are held constant". Source,.
If VUDU sales increase e.g. to 160,000 the minimum average selling price could be $288. VUDU 's RRP should be decreased over the next 3 periods by roughly $50 to make it more appealing to Innovators, to which it is better suited. VULI 's RRP should also be decreased over the next 3 periods by approximately $50 thus making it more appealing to Early Adopters. This would avoid product 'cannibalisation' and is a positioning policy of 'competitive pricing'.
Empirical observations suggest firms should base a promotional budget on 5 characteristics; percentage sales, competitive parity, budget, fixed sum per unit and objectives. Our strategy is to remain competitive with our rivals and to use the budget effectively while maximising ROI.
Baker, J. Michael. (2000) Marketing Strategy and Management 3rd edition, Macmillan pg 425.
Advertising expenditures should be kept constant for SULI as the advertising experiment in the market studies shows no discernible increase in market share as a result of increased spending. However once product modification has occurred, SULI should receive an increase in advertising expenditure to increase brand awareness and create brand loyalty. Once SUDU is launched it should benefit from a similar advertising expenditure to SIII ($2.2m) which is also targeted at Others.
An aggressive promotional strategy to increase brand awareness across target segments and create brand loyalty should be adopted in the Vodite market to stimulate primary demand for and secondary demand for VULI, VUSI and VUDU. The advertising budgets should be increased 20% for the next period and 10% for the following 2 periods if this is economically viable and is seen to be increasing sales. This should help to offset competitor actions and promote Vodite brands. adapted from Dibb et al (2000).
Baker, J Michael, Marketing Strategy and Management, pg 395.
Making sure that production is sufficient for demand and supply is distributed through the correct channels is important for success over the next 3 periods.
Half of the 40 SUDU sales force should be distributed to mass merchandising as this is where 52% of Others sales occur. 35% and 15% in department and speciality stores respectively. The targeted segments should be 80% for Others and 5% for all other segments. Assuming 15% of the Others segment can be taken in SUDU 's first period, 130,000 units should be produced.
SULI production needs monitoring to make sure inventory does not exist if the product is to be modified. SULI sales force effort should show bias towards distribution channels favoured by Professionals. Numbers should be increased in Mass Merchandising stores were shopping habits is over 30%. Sales force figures should be increased by 10 across each channel over 3 periods, as suggested by the sales force experiment.
For VULI to target the Innovators, it should be distributed mainly through Speciality Stores with a transfer of 10 staff from Mass Merchandise to increase the sales force figures here. The sales force experiment also suggests that increasing sales force figures across each distribution by 10 and this should be done over 3 periods.
Followers show a tendency to Mass Merchandise in their shopping habits and thus sales force effort should be greatest here for VUSI. Over half of Early Adopters shop in Speciality stores and this should be represented by the VUDU sales force figures here.
A summary of current sales force numbers and what is desired is figure 11 below.
Period 8 budget calculations (appendix) shows that the desired spending increases are feasible.
Our behaviour and rationale for decisions evolved as we further understood the tools at our disposal and enhanced our knowledge of effective marketing. The following lessons were learned.
Being first to market with a Vodite product was crucial in building strong sales and a position to compete with new entrants. Vodite sales make an important contribution to the overall position. 2 periods of unchallenged Vodite sales led to complacency in our pricing strategy and lack of anticipation of new entrants. Thus we lost significant Vodite market share. One cannot stand still in the marketing world as competitors are always trying to stay one step ahead.
It was soon realised that buying market studies must be justified otherwise they were an inefficient use of funds. Conversely maximising the benefits of purchased studies was crucial in staying ahead of competition and making brand decisions e.g. product modifications, pricing etc.
Reacting quickly and effectively to changes in the market was crucial to maintain the market position. For example when forecasts show rapid segment growth, ensuring you have sufficient production to meet demand. Occasionally production levels of Vodites were not sufficient to meet demand. Flexibility to change is also linked with the effective use of market information.
It was learned that throwing money at advertising will not always increase sales and that other facets such as brand reputation, type of communication and relationships with customers are important methods of gaining sales.
By retail market share we started as the 3 rd ranked company and finished as the 2 nd ranked. We aimed to be first to market for Vodites with the knowledge that "To lead the market you must take risks and make competitors follow". By concentrating efforts on Vodites, Sonite sales suffered. We have a strategy improve Sonite sales through better segment targeting (a new product) and product modification. We aim to ensure that the marketing mix we deploy is continually up-dated in order to serve customers' changing needs and differing growth rates of target segments. Figure 12 shows our aim of better market segmentation.
Davidson, H (1997) Even More Offensive Marketing , London: Penguin, pg 109.
I would like to thank my project team for their excellent work and thank our shareholders for their continued support in our company.
