The following essay explores the problems at 'Cox 's Container Company' (C.C.C.). Where, in response to the threat of increased competition, C.C.C. chairman, Harold Cox instructed his general manager, Erica Wilson, to formulate a change strategy. later employed, incorporating three new additions: John Straw, Simon Pedder and Eric Long. Upon analysis it is evident that there are a number of varied problems at C.C.C. Such issues primarily include structure, leadership, teams and power. However, the manner of change and resulting conflict has critical importance, all of which will be discussed during this essay.
The attempt made at C.C.C. to implement change, by means of a new budgetary and control system, has not been immediately successful; a number of reasons may explain this. Firstly for a change to be implemented successfully a sense of unity needs to be established in its favour. The "eight steps to transforming an organisation" (Kotter, 1995), outlines a series of necessities, defined as being crucial to any change effort being successful. In his analysis Kotter suggested that unless a "minimum mass is achieved early in the effort, nothing much worthwhile happens" (Kotter, 1995). At C.C.C. the absence of a strong coalition backing the change effort is clearly evident. Whilst their chairman backs change he fails to do so visibly to the organisation and Wilson, despite initiating the programme declines involvement. Furthermore Straw 's meeting to inform the senior team of the new system is greeted by compliance ("no objectives voiced"), but also obvious reluctance ("no one seemed very keen"). Kotter (1995) suggested that an organisation 's senior team should form the basis of a group leading change, should it be successful. At C.C.C. whilst most accept it, the senior team (minus their chairman), are not strongly backing the change. Inevitably, if such an influential core of the organisation fail to back change it cannot possibly be successful. As Grint (2000) suggests, without backing, change lacks real leadership; "without followers there are no leaders". The absence of Abdul Aziz from Straw 's meeting worsens the likelihood of this change being successful. Aziz is likely to be an influential figure amongst the majority of C.C.C. 's employees (over two-thirds in production). His refusal to comply or entertain the idea of the change is pivotal to implementation. "An unwillingness to discuss or accept changes that are perceived in some way damaging or threatening to the individual" (Huczynski & Buchanan, 2001: 599). According to this theory, Aziz 's attitude suggests he may feel threatened by the change, whilst the reluctant compliance of other departments raises a question over whether, whilst behaviour can be changed (i.e. accept new system), attitudes cannot (i.e. negative attitude towards system). Wilson (1992) suggested that whilst change is difficult, if not impossible to accurately define, with no one theory providing perfect explanation, a guide could be used to aid characterisation. This guide defines change at C.C.C. to be roughly 'cells' 1 and 2. In cell 1 the change has been planned (Cox Wilson Straw) and requires those leading the change (i.e. Straw primarily) to convince and persuade others to accept and support (Plant, 1987). Judging by the reaction at the recent meeting this does not solely involve Aziz. Cell 2 focuses on managing the implementation of the change. To judge exactly to what extent this is required Wilson suggested classifying the "level of organisational change". Level three of this theory best defines events at C.C.C., where a strategic change has taken place that requires a transformation in the current way of thinking amongst employees (Wilson, 1992). For such an achievement at C.C.C. the behaviour of individuals (i.e. Aziz) must be altered; potentially this could be achieved by means of Behaviour Modification (Wilson, 1992). This process firstly involves managers defining a vision, as done (albeit secretly) by Cox and Wilson. Secondly individuals within the organisation should be persuaded to buy-in to the new concept, by virtue of modifying their behaviour (Wilson, 1992). Unfortunately at C.C.C. this has not been achieved, with individuals merely informed of the change, devoid of any attempt to sell the idea. Without this being achieved, the third stage of implementation cannot be accomplished. As Wilson (1992) defined, with strategies of change such as that at C.C.C., much depends upon to what extent individuals must modify their behaviour. For Aziz the surrendering of such a level of power and responsibility as he presently enjoys, is very great. "If you're a hands-on guy and someone tells you to take your hands off, you're afraid the car will crash" (Giordano, 1990).
C.C.C. 's current management 'team' are not working together effectively towards achievement of a goal. The reasons for this ineffectiveness are varied, but defined to some extent by Belbin (1981). One factor identified as being a characteristic of unsuccessful teams was that of organisational personality, which Belbin argued, becomes a "moulding force creating a type of collective personality" (Belbin, 1981: 84). Belbin outlined that organisational culture encouraged either introvert or extrovert personalities. Using this analysis, the culture at C.C.C. can be defined as encouraging introvert personalities (i.e. prone to withdraw into themselves and aiming to achieve personal goals), an example typified by Aziz. Belbin (1981) also suggested that employees in such introvert organisations had often progressed through their speciality into management, and judging by the lack of externally recruited managers at C.C.C. during the last fifteen years, this certainly applies. Belbin (1981) argued that in such cases the individuals concerned "were still prone to act like specialists, failing to take a rounded view of the problems confronting them" (Belbin, 1981: 84). Such analysis would help explain Aziz 's somewhat naive approach to the broader needs of the organisation, as opposed to those of production.
Whether intentionally or not the new managers who have joined C.C.C. as part of Wilson 's change plan have installed into the organisation a rigid functional structure (fig. 1).
This current C.C.C. structure causes a number of problems. Firstly, in a functional structure accountability is limited - where is the problem and what shortfall or inefficiency has caused the slide in C.C.C. 's performance? Without any real means of measurement, departments revert to blaming each other and dismissing responsibility for the issue - certainly apparent with C.C.C. 's production department. This mindset also promotes a sense of rivalry between departments, similar to the 'typical' conflict between manufacturing and marketing (Shapiro, 1977). The work of Harris & Ogbonna (1998) suggested that different cultures exist at different levels within organisations (in relation to the hierarchical position). This theory can be related to C.C.C., with senior managers (i.e. Straw & Pedder), emphasising consensus, whilst not tolerating the non-conformity of others (i.e. Aziz). Other managers (i.e. production/shop floor such as Aziz) develop 'them and us' divisions (production versus central administration perhaps), making organisational culture difficult to manage. Such examples of conflict are encouraged and indeed more likely in this functional organisational structure. Specialist division at C.C.C. causes departments to turn inwards and concentrate solely on achieving their own goals, rather than those of the organisation. "The emphasis on narrow speciality detracts from attention to broader output. Individuals focus on their own needs, not the organisation 's broader ends" (Mintzberg, 1979: 125). When departments then need to co-operate (e.g. the production and central administration departments), conflict is inevitable. "Differing goals and internal environments of departments are a potential source of conflict" (Mullins, 1999: 819).
The attempted change effort at C.C.C. has resulted in a movement of the distribution of power within the organisation. The actual change concerns the accounting system and information system, particularly important to the distribution of power within organisations. "... The design and operation of an organisation 's information system...will affect the distribution of intra-organisational power" (Bariff & Galbraith, 1978: 15). Therefore any change to such control/accounting systems within an organisation, as at C.C.C., will affect intra-organisational power as "they collect and manipulate information used in decision making" (Markus & Pfeffer, 1983). Prior to central administration implementing this system Aziz probably enjoyed a level of power and personal autonomy. However, the threat of this decision making power being removed, posed by the new system and central administration is a potential reason for his resentment and reluctance to co-operate. "People who are accustomed to managing budgets, allocating resources, and being actively involved in projects are likely to take a dim view of re-designed processes that give cross-functional teams the decision making authority they had previously enjoyed" (Duck, 1993).
To implement the change at C.C.C., three people have been recruited from outside the organisation, in obvious contradiction to the company 's long-standing policy of promoting from within (no manager externally recruited in fifteen years). Therefore the new additions focused on driving the change could be described as external change agents (Buchanan & Boddy, 1992) whose role is crucial in leading and facilitating the change. Buchanan & Boddy suggested that the change agent should manage three parallel agendas:
Arguably, the process element of these agendas is most important, as the change agent should be able to negotiate and consult with managers and subordinates and most importantly be able to persuade people that the change is beneficial to them and the organisation. The external change agent at C.C.C. (i.e. Straw) fails to negotiate the change with the management team. Instead he arranges a meeting so that they can be "told" of the change, whilst any element of persuasion, particularly important if individuals are to be enthusiastic about the change, is lacking. Additionally when new recruits join an organisation (especially at C.C.C., where external appointments are rare), suspicion is often aroused. "... People do not usually like 'their' territory entered by someone they do not know, and whose motives are probably unclear to them" (Mullins, 1999: 819). This example is typified by Aziz, who appears to have become accustomed to his own territory and ultimately is reluctant to surrender it to individuals he does not know or, for now at least, trust. Any new leader, regardless of where they come from, should add skills such as enthusiasm and inspiration (Hickman, 1998). Unfortunately the new additions at C.C.C., particularly Straw, have failed to do this. Without Straw inspiring others and selling the idea of new system to fellow managers the chances of it being successful remain limited.
Handling resistance to change such as that expressed by Aziz can be assisted by use of the 'Force Field' analysis defined by Lewin (1951). Lewin 's model identifies a series of 'driving forces' (i.e. forces for the change) and a series of restraining forces (i.e. forces against). Amongst the list of drivers relevant to C.C.C., new personnel (i.e. Straw, Long & Pedder), changing markets and increased competition, all apply. Restraining forces against this change (Lewin, 1951) include loss of status (for Aziz), habit/fear of the unknown (little change for many years), strength of culture (strong traditions, long-serving employees), rigidity of structure (functional organisation) and strongly held beliefs (role of production department, recruitment policy, etc.) For the change to be successful, as Lewin (1951) defined, these forces must be balanced, by process of "quasi-stationary equilibrium", the first stage of which is for restraining forces to be removed. To address such issues at C.C.C., I would suggest communication is critical. The benefits of and reasons for change should be clearly explained to employees (i.e. because of a tougher market place - the change will safeguard the business and employment). More specifically for Aziz his crucial role in implementation should be explained and his involvement sought (addressing issue of power). However, such is the strength of C.C.C. 's culture and tradition, it may take considerable time to overcome deep scepticism.
To address the issue of implementation I suggest a review in the application of the change, designed independently and secretly by Wilson and implemented individually by Straw. To achieve this I suggest that adoption of a steering committee could be used to assist implementation. Duck (1993) suggested employment of a "Transition Management Team (TMT)". However, as Duck recommended this involves the organisations' C.E.O. (i.e. Cox) visibly championing for the project. Presently the two most senior members of C.C.C. (Cox & Wilson) have not an iota of involvement, which would have to change. Coupled with adoption of a TMT (or similar), more visible leadership from Cox and Wilson will assist implementation.
In order for the team to function correctly (and the new system to be implemented successfully), the issue of relationships between team members must be addressed (particularly Aziz and Straw). Belbin (1993), suggested that such problems could be classified into one of three groups, the second of which concerns a situation whereby an experience of the relationship has already been had yet it has "been found unsatisfactory for both parties in spite of trying" (Belbin, 1993: 67). At C.C.C. Straw expresses his exasperation at the existing relationship with Aziz. As Belbin suggested, the main problem this causes is that the problem is often overlooked - an oversight that proves costly in the future. By use of a neutral yet influential third party (e.g. Cox) Straw and Aziz must meet and overcome their differences. In doing this openly both individuals' criticism as Harrison (1972) suggested, could be put to constructive use. However, further secrecy (such as that involved in the formulation of the change plan), will tend to "eat away at the strength of an organisation and then to erupt when it is most dangerous to organisational health" (Harrison, 1972: 128). At C.C.C. failure to address the issue of relationships between Aziz and Straw (and their respective departments) will have the obvious impact that the new system fails to be implemented successfully and the business suffers, under threat of advancing competitors.
The current functional structure, where expertise are grouped, has caused individuals (e.g. Aziz) and departments (e.g. central administration) to become too focused on their own goals and activities. It is my suggestion that adoption of a different organisational structure (as outlined in fig. 2) would help address this issue. A product-based structure has the advantage of increasing responsibility and accountability so that should problems occur in the future they can be tackled directly, rather than departments aimlessly blaming each other. Ultimately this also removes the inter-departmental rivalry currently evident at C.C.C. and ensures all departments play a more active role in achieving the goals of the organisation. In a product-based structure "markets, not processes, get the employees' undivided attention" (Mintzberg, 1979: 127). A product-based structure also adds greater flexibility and permits a faster response to change (arguably, a slow response to changed market conditions has put C.C.C. in this position). However no single organisational structure is perfect and no one best suits C.C.C., therefore I would suggest that this proposed product-based structure also incorporates elements of matrix design (fig. 2). A matrix structure encourages teamwork, collaboration and consultation; all lacking between departments in the present C.C.C. organisation. Additionally in matrix design "different line managers are equally and jointly responsible for the same decisions and are therefore forced to reconcile between themselves the differences that arise". (Mintzberg, 1979: 170). Whilst such a change is radical and time consuming this type of environment would encourage the likes of Aziz and Straw to work collaboratively as opposed to inter-departmental rivalry.
Using the possible solutions outlined I would suggest the following plan of action for C.C.C.
In the short-term, concerning change implementation, I recommend adoption of a steering committee or TMT (Duck, 1993) and more visible leadership to back the change. If this effort is to be successful it is essential to gain support, which will only be achieved by virtue of involvement and persuasion by a team of influential individuals (i.e. management team & chairman). This team, also to include representatives from throughout the organisation, should then collaboratively implement the new system by taking into account the needs of each department in addition to those of the organisation.
In the long-term I believe a change in organisational structure is required if C.C.C. are to avoid similar problems repeating themselves. The suggested structure would address issues of departmental rivalry and ensure all departments work collaboratively to achieve organisational goals, removing the over-specialist approach currently evident. This process would require the backing and involvement of C.C.C. chairman and managers who can communicate clearly the reasons for the change to other employees.
