The investigation of project performance in the world 's largest construction project in Hong Kong - Hong Kong International Airport was carried out. The airport was completed in 1998 and 6 years was employed from planning to completion. The report consisted of investigation of the success and failures in the overall design and construction in the project, alternative factors including economical and political issues would also be described. The conclusion was drawn at the end to demonstrate the improvement of this US$20bn project.
Hong Kong International Airport, located at Chek Lap Kok (CLK) - north of the Lantau Island in Hong Kong, has commenced the operation since 6 July 1998. The idea of building a new airport was to replace the previous Kai Tak airport, which was opened in 1936.
Kai Tak was a non-24 hour airport, with an extremely short runway and had operated well over the initial design capacity in 1954. Although a variety of extension/land reclamation and development were conducted in order to ensure huge volumes of passenger/cargo could be handled efficiently, the available space was relatively limited. In the 1970 's, the economic in Hong Kong was rapidly grown due to its ideal location as an important regional logistic centre, passenger hub and gateway between eastern and western countries, which led to a large increase in cargo/passenger volume within the aviation market. Besides, the population in Hong Kong was largely boosted up in the 70 's and the land supply was consequently becoming a critical issue. Since Kai Tak was located within the urban area in Kowloon, most buildings on mainland Kowloon were restricted to below 50 metres (164 ft) and the limit was even lower near the runway, which potentially interrupted a number of urban developments. Moreover, the noise produced and the risk of aircraft crash to the nearby residents could not be ignored. Owing to those factors, the plan to construct a new airport was finally announced in 1989 by Sir David Wilson - the then Governor of Hong Kong.
Under the September 1991 "Memorandum of Understanding" [1] signed by the Governments of China and the United Kingdom, a new airport was proposed and to be completed to the "maximum extent possible" before Hong Kong reverting to Chinese control in July 1997. The new airport is the central project of the Airport Core Programme (ACP) including 10 different major infrastructure construction projects (Fig 1). As the airport is located away from the urban area, a number of roads, bridges and rails link to the airport were also proposed. However, the cost of such infrastructure projects were extremely high and hence a new town was also built nearby in Tung Chung in order to provide the logistical urban support for such a vast development as well as to assist meet the housing demand.
As one of the largest reclamation schemes in construction history, the airport project, as part of the ACP, covering 1,248 hectares (4 times the size of Kai Tak) and consisted of a range of contracts in the PTB, runways and taxiways, aircraft parking bays, attached and satellite terminal concourses, centralized terminal processing buildings, road bridges, aircraft maintenance facilities and support and ancillary facilities. Therefore reputed and high-talent organisations were essential in the project to ensure all aims and objectives can be fulfilled.
Provisional Airport Authority (PAA, before 1/12/1995) and Airport Authority (AA, after 1/12/1995) were established under the "Memorandum of Understanding". Both parties were to be responsible for putting through the whole airport project. PAA was reconstituted to become the AA (a statutory corporation) on 1/12/1995, under the "Airport Authority Ordinance". The status of AA is similar to a private corporation and is responsible for the development and operation in CLK airport. With a more commercial behavior than a government department, AA would be able to provide a more efficient performance to any fast-track development, without any direct funding assistance from the taxpayer. The key organizations involved in the project are outlined [2]:
ACP was initially established by the then PAA in Jan 1994 and endorsed by the Airport Development Steering Committee (ADSCOM). The New Airport Projects Co-ordination Office (NAPCO) was also one of the major parties in setting up the CLK airport. The core responsibilities of key parties are summarised as follows [3]:
Airport Authority (AA).
Responsible for the management and operation of CLK Airport.
Airport Consultative Committee (ACC).
Advised on issues related to the New Airport.
New Airport Projects Co-ordination Office (NAPCO).
Responsible for the implementation of the ACP which had to be finished on time and within budget.
Reported to the Airport Development Steering Committee (ADSC).
Airport Development Steering Committee (ADSC).
Monitored the progress of the New Airport.
The project was extremely complex by some technical or logistic standards in different aspects including land reclamation, dual-runways and a huge passenger terminal building (PTB), with a complex contract structure and an enormous international labor force. Nevertheless, the unique political context was the most complex subject of the overall ACP.
The airport project included building a Y shaped PTB, which houses passengers check-in hall, East and West Hall, departure lounges at 5 different zones, the escalators, lifts and staircases...etc. The project also included the roof structural steelwork and coverings, glass and curtain walls, cladding system, transport escalators and tunnel for fixed link bridges, boarding gates and undercroft.
The key stakeholders in the project were the Hong Kong Government, the People Republic of China Government, PAA, AA, and Mass Transit Railway Corporation (MTRC). 220 work contracts and over 100 other contracts had been identified (Appendix 1), a large number of international firms from various countries had been awarded construction or consultancy contracts in order to reflect the international nature of the ACP (Fig 2). Furthermore, due to the diversity in culture and time-zone, with the limitation in project execution time, the project complexity was further increased.
In the project, the total floor plan area in the airport is approximately 515,000 sq-metres. Within the PTB, 2.5 km of moving walkways, 94 lifts and elevators, 38 fixed link bridges and 248 check-in desks were introduced in the master plan. Massive amount of materials including 53,150 sq-m of glass cladding; 391,602 sq-m of floor finishes; and 5,000 sq-m of low-voltage cable were employed. The PTB has more than 100,000 light fittings, 5,500 doors, 12,500 seats and 115,000 sq-m of carpet, therefore the major challenge for contractors was to source such a large bulk of materials and components [4]. More importantly, the timescale of the overall programme was extremely tight due to the delay in reaching a final agreement between the UK and China Government and hence most of the project works were conducted concurrently from day one, with approximately 20,000 professionals employed from different parts of the world.
Fortunately, the production process could be carried out worldwide to improve the efficiency during manufacturing process as standard modules of 36m x 36m x 5m vaulted steel frames (roof), 9m x 9m reinforced concrete frames, with standard 1m-grid waffle floor were employed in most part of the PTB. Alternatively, the no. of details to be designed was reduced and some flexibility was provided for the client (AA) to review what was required during the design and construction stage, and throughout the life of the PTB.
Owing to the economic grow during 1990 's, five airports valued at US$24bn were planned and under construction in the Pearl River Delta spanning Hong Kong, Macau and Southern China regions including Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Zhuhai. Details of five airports in the Pearl River Delta are shown [5]:
Based on the design capacity and government long-term development strategy, only Macau and Guangzhou airports had been identified as the potential competitors to the CLK airport.
The idea to construct a new airport was initially planned to be carried out by 1984, as a joint-development project with the Government of P.R.China. Unfortunately, the project was deferred and delayed due to the then still doubtful conclusion of the Sino-British talks in 1983-84, and an economic downturn as well as political uncertainty in the early 80 's. The overall ACP was finally approved in Sep 1989, few months after the shock of Tiananmen Square in Beijing on 4/6/1989. The approval of ACP reflected a politically move by the British Government to restore confidence in Hong Kong 's future, after China regained sovereignty in 1997 [5]. Besides, building a new airport was also an optimal solution to reduce the unemployment rate in late 80 's. Therefore the overall ACP progress would be potentially affected whilst the political connection between the UK and China became worst. Due to the above reason, bankers in the world were unwilling to fund before the construction work was confirmed to be conducted and the "Memorandum of Understanding" was signed in 1991.
Approximately 6 year was spent from started to the completion of the programme, in which the overall ACP potentially became more challenging. The initial budget to cover the whole ACP was estimated at around US$7.4 billion in 1989 [6], and largely elevated to US$21 billion in 1994, principally due to the high annual inflation rate of 10-15% in the early 90 's.
As being a significant regional trans-shipment centre, passenger hub and gateway to other countries/cities, CLK airport is required to handle large amount of passengers and cargo everyday in order to maintain the reputation in such a fast changing aviation market. Owing to such reason, the airport was specially designed to comply with next generation of New Large Aircrafts (NLA) for the 21st century.
In Nov 1995, Macau International Airport - one of the competitors of CLK, commenced operation. 6 million passengers and 165,000 metric tons of cargo were anticipated to be handled annually. Similarly, the operation of Guangzhou Airport commenced in Aug 2004 in order to replace the old airport. Both airports were operated smoothly on Airport Opening Day (AOD), before the CLK airport opened. Such competitors might potentially challenge Hong Kong to be one of the busiest airports in logistic and commercial transportation.
The airport project was ruthlessly objected by China at the beginning but Britain speeded up its development after the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989. Beijing suspected Britain of trying to spend the monetary reserves before Hong Kong reverting to China. However, as the timetable slipped due to the political wrangling between two countries, Beijing realized that the airport would be launched under Chinese, instead of British colonial rule and enthusiasm.
The airport project, one of the biggest public works undertook in the world, had finally been completed and commenced operation on 2 July 1998, one year later than the handover date of Hong Kong - 1st July 1997. Delay was occurred as two main stakeholders - China and Britain could not make any effective agreement in the ACP in early 90 's.
Regarding the cost of the ACP, US$19.9bn was identified in 1998 as the total cost of the ACP, compared to an initial estimation of US$16.3bn in 1989 [7] and the revised cost of US$21bn in 1994. The rapid increase in the cost was mainly due to inflation.
The performance of the airport was evaluated in two ways - Airport Opening Day (AOD) and general operation. First of all, the AOD - 6 July 1998, was the first day of operation at CLK airport. Since the all equipments and resources had to be transferred in a dramatic overnight dash to CLK, once Kai Tak Airport was closed on 5 July and before the first flight arrived at CLK around 630 the following day. Although such a large airport movement constrained by extremely tight time was the first ever in the aviation industry, the overall operation in equipment transportation was a success. However, chaos and problems appeared and flights were led to delayed or cancelled on AOD, a number of problems arose on the day were summarized (Appendix 2).
Due to the large chaos on 7 July 1998, one of the key stakeholders - Hong Kong Government, was dissatisfied with the performance and hence a legislative council select committee panel was set up by the government to inquire into the circumstances leading to the problems surrounding the commencement of the operation of the new Hong Kong International Airport at CLK since 6 July 1998 and related issues. A number of key personals from related bodies including ADSCOM, NAPCO, AA, Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminal Ltd (HACTL), Civil Aviation Department, Aviation Security Company Limited (AVSECO), Board of Airline Representatives, Financial Bureau, Works Bureau, Environmental Protection Department and International Air Transport Association (IATA) were invited between 09/1998 and 12/1998 to attend the hearing of the select committee and were requested to provide evidence regarding the project planning as well as operation related issues of CLK airport in order to assist in further investigation.
A five-person consultancy team of Hong Kong University academics was also commissioned to support the panel on the technical aspects of the key information systems installed at the PTB of CLK airport. Such aspects included project planning and implementation, systems integration and testing. The scope of the inquiry covered the following aspects [8]:
After the chaos on AOD, the economy in Hong Kong was relatively damage. The Financial Secretary estimated conservatively that the GDP growth was reduced by 0.1% due to the incident. Moreover, the reputation as well as role of Hong Kong as the leading cargo handling centre had also been affected.
Regardless of the massive complexity on AOD, operational standards were met in flight and passenger processing before the end of the first week, with cargo operations resumed normal soon after. Further investigation regarding the delay rate was conducted and the average delay was significantly reduced 6 months after AOD [9].
On the other hand, surveys were carried out regularly after the opening to determine the customer satisfaction in CLK airport in different stage. Passengers were generally satisfied with overall services and facilities provided in the airport [10].
In parallel with the improvement of operation as well as stunning environment in the PTB, the CLK airport has been voted for a variety of awards and recognition, including "The world 's best airport in the world" for 5 consecutive years from 2001 to 2005 [11], and the "Top 10 Construction Achievements of the 20th Century" in 1999. Based on the awards, the performance of the airport project was evidently satisfied by most of the passengers.
The key activities related to the airport project are consolidated and summarised as a milestone in Appendix 3 (Sources: [12], [13], [14]). A simplified Gantt chart is employed to demonstrate the construction programme of CLK airport as built [12].
The airport was initially planned to be opened in June 1997, however, due to the deadlock of Sino-British negotiation between China and the UK. The AOD was postponed to 30 September 1997, April 1998 and finally 6 July 1998. Although AA reported that about 96% of the AA works were finished in the ACP Quarterly Report (Jan-Mar 1998), large amount of failures were still found in the New Airport infrastructure after AOD. Major problems in PTB were all computer software related and the scope of T&C works for all IT equipments and softwares might be limited due to the tight schedule.
According to the post-investigation report, evidence shown that progressive delays in the construction and T&C works were occurred in both the PTB and Super Terminal 1 (Cargo Terminal), and yet Airport Authority did not pay sufficient notice to the risks that various systems were just about ready for operation on AOD. Furthermore, no overall risk assessment was produced but only sketchy contingency plans, which caused a serious disorder in airport operation on 6 July 1998.
The overall PTB construction was outstanding, possibly due to a group of high quality QC/QA staff as well as consultants were participated to monitor the progress and standard of the project.
In project management, the main problem in the project was possibly the insufficient of preparation work. First of all, contingency plan should be the most critical components in aviation industry. However, contingency plans and risk assessments were not sufficient for a US$20bn project. Moreover, small-scale test run with only 4 planes and no passengers involved was not really practical compared to a busy international hub with an annual passenger capacity of approximately 45 million. Finally, the installation of computer back-up system was exceptionally late, which potentially led to a chaos in computer system on AOD.
In conclusion, the overall project performance was extremely excellent although chaos were found in most part of the PTB on AOD. However, the reason of chaos occurred were possibly due to the lack of time for further T&C work. Therefore the core problem within the CLK project was the project management skills employed as the airport could not be completed on time and within budget as initially stated.
The AOD was selected on 7 July 1998 have two reasons. Firstly, the AOD was on Monday, which enabled a smoother transport from Kai Tak to CLK during early morning on Monday. Secondly, which is the main reason, 7 July was selected as it was the first Monday after the 1st anniversary of the establishment of Hong Kong SAR after reverting to China, therefore the opening ceremony could therefore be held by the Jiang Zemin - the then President of PR China, few days before the AOD. However, such decision resulted into a dreadful reputation of Hong Kong airport.
In conclusion, the following point should be noticed in order to improve the performance of this US$20bn project:
AOD should be postponed once the specification was realized could not be completed on time.
The external economic environment including inflation should also be considered.
Build up a contingency plan in case of any emergency issues occurred.
Fully conducted T&C works for all IT equipments in order to ensure the performance of such equipments meet the specification.
Improve communication between AA, ACC, NAPCO, ADSC, airlines and other related bodies.
Performed a simulation as well as a more comprehensive test run which involve more flights and passengers.
