According to Miller (1994, p.1), 'The task of empirical science, like that of other investigative disciplines, is to separate as thoroughly and efficiently as it can the true statements about the world from those that are false, and to retain truths.' With this in mind, we must consider whether or not induction can play a part in this separation of true from false statements.
By referring to an inference as 'inductive,' we are referring to the process of moving from singular statements - such as observations or results of experiments - to universal statements such as theories and hypotheses. While this may intuitively satisfy our idea of how science is practiced, there is no logical justification to suggest that we can infer universal statements from singular ones in such a manner. In the analysis of induction and its relevance to science, it is important to also recognise that inductive inference is more concerned with weighing evidence and judging likelihood than it is with the actual proof of a scientific theory. This raises the question as to how we can make such non-demonstrative judgements and believe that they are reliable. Clearly, we cannot sanction the use of a method whose practice has not been justified and thus, the question of whether or not induction has a place in science is essentially the question of justifying it 's position as an acceptable scientific principle. The aim of this essay is thus to establish whether or not our inductive practices can be justified, and if not, if the inductive inference can be salvaged to play any role at all in our methods of scientific discovery.
Our desire to use these inductive principles stems from the fact that, in our scientific quest, we search for general rules to explain a set of seemingly linked observations. According to Chalmers (1999, pp. 41-58), 'General scientific laws invariably go beyond the finite amount of observable evidence that is available to support them, and that is why they can never be proven in the sense of being logically deduced from the evidence.' The failure of deduction to satisfy all of our scientific needs means that we require an alternative approach in our practice of science. For a long time, induction has presented itself as the most likely alternative and even Popper (1959, p.56) has recognised that, 'the empirical sciences can be characterized by the fact that they use 'inductive methods. ' According to this view, the logic of scientific discovery would be identical with inductive logic, i.e. with the logical analysis of these inductive methods.' The pervasiveness of our inductive methods is further emphasized by Reichenbach (in Popper 1959, p.426), who claims that the elimination of our principle of induction from scientific practice, 'would mean nothing less than to deprive science of the power to decide the truth or falsity of its theories. Without it, clearly, science would no longer have the right to distinguish its theories from the fanciful and arbitrary creations of the poet 's mind.'.
One of the main areas of concern with our inductive practices is the problem of underdetermination. According to Lipton (1991, p.412), 'A description of the evidence, along with a certain set of rules, not necessarily just those of deduction, may underdetermine what is learned or inferred.' That is, a unique solution is not guaranteed from information concerning initial conditions and rules applied. If an inference is inductive, then by definition it is underdetermined by the evidence and the rules of deduction. This problem of underdetermination also brings into question the problems of justification and description. Before accepting induction as having a place in science, it seems logical that we should consider exactly what principles that we are using, and more importantly, whether or not they can be shown to be good principles.
The problem of justification is concerned with showing that our inferential methods are indeed good methods. Here we must refer back to the earlier question of what we expect to achieve in our practice of science. We want our methods to be truth-tropic, that is, to take us closer towards the truth behind a given theory and would thus like to show that the inductive inferences we make are those that take us from true premises to true conclusions. The problem of justification is thus, 'to show that the arguments we judge valid are in fact so.' (Lipton 1991, p.414).
Hume provides one of the most commonly acknowledged sceptical arguments concerning the justification of induction. His analysis of the problem begins with the underlying problem of underdetermination, and the way that our observations do not entail our predictions. He claims that our inductive practice relies on the assumption that nature is uniform, i.e. the unobserved world is much the same as what we have observed. Because of this, Hume claims that the problem of justification is actually the problem of showing that nature is uniform. The claim of uniformity in itself incorporates a massive prediction, and thus, we cannot deduce it from our observations. The only other way we can argue for nature 's uniformity appears to be through the use of an inductive argument which would itself rely on the principle of uniformity. It is clear then, that the question is left begging, and Hume (in Lipton 1991, p.416) concludes that, 'we are addicted to the practice of induction, but it is a practice that cannot be justified.'.
While taking a slightly different approach in his consideration of the problem, Popper agrees with Hume that justification of our inductive principles is hampered by the problem of circularity. He claims that an appeal to knowing the truth from experience will lead to similar problems from a justificatory perspective. 'To justify it, we should have to employ inductive inferences; and to justify these we should have to assume an inductive principle of a higher order; and so on.' (Popper 1959, p.427) It is clear that an attempt to base the principle of induction on experience suffers from the same problems encountered by Hume in his attempt to argue for nature 's uniformity through use of an inductive argument.
To illustrate this problem further, we can compare two competing principles of induction. The first, 'More of the Same,' follows the principle of conservative induction and specifies that our strong inductive arguments are such that they predict the continuation of an observed pattern described in the premises. The second, 'Time for a Change,' follows the principle of revolutionary induction such that we should predict a change in an observed pattern described in the premises. Considering solely the track record of each of these principles would lead us to favour conservative induction. Most of the inferences from true premises using this method have led to true conclusions, compared to the principle of revolutionary induction, which has been conspicuous in failure. The problem here is that saying conservative induction will continue to work because it has worked in the past is an induction in itself. Perhaps more worrying is that, by revolutionary standards, conservative induction is likely to fail precisely because it has succeeded in the past, and the past failure of revolutionary induction bodes well for its future success. It appears that whatever inductive principles we use, their inductive nature is enough for the sceptic to show that they defy justification. The problem of underdetermination between observation and prediction means we have no way of showing that a particular inductive principle is any better than any other. The most prominent difficulty in satisfying Hume 's sceptical argument is that he casts doubt on our inductive principles as a whole, so that any attempt to use induction to justify induction is impossible.
Lipton provides us with some possibilities to satisfy this problem of justification however. He suggests that we should try justifying particular inductive principles rather than induction as a whole. One of his examples is the principle of inference that makes us more likely to infer a theory supported by a variety of evidence than if it is supported by a similar amount of homogeneous data. Lipton (1991, p.417) suggests that this may be justified by the more basic inductive principle that, 'we have better reason to infer a theory when all the reasonable competitors have been refuted, or that a theory is only worth inferring when each of its major components has been separately tested.' He also suggests that we may have more success justifying the principle that a theory deserves more credit from its successful predictions than it does from the data it was built to accommodate. While this is a preference most of us seem to have, it is not clear whether or not this thought process is rational. The appeal of justifying this principle stems from Lipton 's claims that it might be justified without circular evaluation.
Disregarding the problem of justification temporarily, even if our inferences are unjustifiable, one may feel that there is still something to gain by describing them as they stand. The problem of description is thus to describe how our inductive inferences work. While this may at first appear a trivial problem, Lipton is quick to point out how difficult it is to describe our inductive principles. He states that, 'It is not merely that ordinary reasoners are unable to describe what they are doing; at least one hundred and fifty years of focused effort by epistemologists and philosophers of science has yielded little better.' (Lipton 1991, p.419) The problem appears to be that, not only are we yet to capture all the details of induction, but the most popular accounts of induction vary wildly in comparison with our actual practice. One reason for our problems is the gap between what we can do and what we can describe. To illustrate this, Lipton (1991, p.419) refers to the work of Chomsky (1965) on the principles of language acquisition. It appears that, as with justification, underdetermination plays a significant role in complicating the description of induction. As our principles are not available to introspection, the task of description relies on a process of 'black box inference' in which we observe the superficial patterns of evidence and inference to describe the principle 's underlying mechanism.
Faced with the task of providing a general description of our inductive practices, Lipton again suggests that we should break induction down and begin by describing just one of its aspects. In this way, we can attempt to salvage the conservative principle by giving account of the case where we project a pattern into the future. Disregarding the problem of accounting for inferences to the unobservable and predicting change in this way leaves us with what is known as the instantial model of induction. Using this model, a hypothesis of the form 'All A 's are B 's' is supported by its positive instances, i.e. by observing A 's which are also B. Thus, if enough positive instances are observed with no refuting instances, we can infer the hypothesis and predict that the next A observed will also be B. The primary appeal of this model is that it satisfies Hume 's claim that we tend to extend observed patterns in our inductive practice. Unfortunately however, the instantial model has been shown to be massively over-permissive, due to the fact that many hypotheses are not supported by their positive instances. In Lipton 's example, observing only black ravens may lead us to believe all ravens are black. However, observing only bearded philosophers would be unlikely to lead us to the inference that all philosophers are bearded. The other major shortcoming of this model occurs when we consider the contrapositive of a particular hypothesis. Considering the ravens' example for instance, while black ravens support the hypothesis that all ravens are black, evidence such as green leaves support the contrapositive that all non-black things are non-ravens.
Faced with these problems, another account of inductive support is provided by Hempel 's hypothetico-deductive model. According to this model, 'a hypothesis is supported when it, along with various other statements, deductively entails a datum,' (in Lipton 1991, p.422) thus, a theory is supported by its successful predictions. This model seems appealing in that it allows for the support of hypotheses concerning the unobservable - providing much wider scope than the instantial model. Another advantage of this particular model is that it enables us to co-opt our better-understood deductive principles to provide an account for induction. Finally, the hypothetico-deductive model seems to provide a superior reflection of general scientific practice than the instantial model. Unfortunately, this model also inherits all the over-permissiveness of the instantial model. According to the hypothetico-deductive model, the hypothesis that all A 's are B 's, along with the premise that an individual is A, entails that it is also B. In this case, the thing observed to be B supports the hypothesis, and the model is thus confounded by the problem of unsupportable hypotheses as well as the previously discussed raven paradox. In addition to its over-permissiveness, this model also suffers from being too strict in its dismissal of supporting data. A hypothesis, along with additional premises may not entail data, which nonetheless provides support for it.
John Stuart Mill (in Lipton 1991, pp.423-424) provides one other account of the practice of induction in his discussion on the methods of experimental enquiry. His explanation of induction is based on the causal inference we often make when we are really interested in prediction. Causal inference refers to our inference of probable causes from effects, and it seems that the use of causal theory when moving from data to prediction accounts for many successful scientific predictions. Mill 's account of such causal inference is based on two central methods - the Method of Difference, and the Method of Agreement.
According to the Method of Agreement, when we find that there is only one factor that is shared by all the observed instances of an effect, we infer that it is a cause. According to the Method of Difference, when we find that there is only one prior difference between a situation where the effect occurs and a similar situation where it does not, we infer that the factor that is only present in the case of the effect is the cause. One example of this form of induction from a scientific perspective is the adding of sodium to a blue flame to make it yellow. We infer that the presence of sodium is a cause of the new colour, since this is the only difference between the flame before and after the sodium was added. When we apply the Method of Agreement, we hold the effect constant and try to vary the background as much as we can to see what stays the same. Conversely, when we apply the Method of Difference, we vary the effect, and try to hold as much of the background as we can to see what changes. Thus, both methods work through a combination of variation and retention.
Mill 's methods help to support the role of induction in science by referring to their popularity within our scientific practice. For instance, the controlled experiment is one widely used application of the Method Difference. Mill 's approach is also appealing in that it avoids some of the over-permissiveness suffered by the instantial and hypothetico-deductive models of induction. This comes as a result of the strong requirements on variation and retention in the practice of both the Method of Agreement and the Method of Difference. Unfortunately however, Mill 's methods also have their share of problems. The methods he describes cannot apply to unobservable causes or any such inferences where the cause 's existence, and not just its causal status, is inferred. Also, the methods place strong requirement on there being only a single agreement or difference in antecedents - something which is rarely the case in practice.
It seems that any attempt to describe or justify a particular inductive principle is plagued with problems and it may in fact be more productive to take on a more defensive stance in protecting our inductive practices from the sceptics.
Many, such as Reichenbach, attempt to defend our inductive practices precisely because they have controlled the process of scientific discovery for so long already. The fact that induction has already been unreservedly accepted by the whole of science, as well as the fact that it plays such a prominent part in our everyday thinking and intuition does work in its favour to a large degree. Russell (in Popper 1972, p.5) also appreciates how much the principle of induction is already ingrained in our scientific methods, and states that if it is rejected, 'every attempt to arrive at general scientific laws from particular observations is fallacious.'.
Another approach to defending our inductive inferences is to adopt the doctrine that while not strictly valid, they can still attain some degree of reliability or probability. Reichenbach (in Popper 1959, p. 428) is an advocate of this approach, stating that instead of using the principle of induction as a means for science to decide on the truth, 'we should say that it serves to decide upon probability. For it is not given to science to reach either truth or falsity... but scientific statements can only attain continuous degrees of probability whose unattainable upper and lower limits are truth and falsity.' Unfortunately, even this defence of induction has its sceptics. Popper details the problem that if probabilities are to be assigned to statements based on inductive inference; this method will have to be justified by invoking a new, modified principle of induction. It appears that, like any form of inductive logic, the 'logic of probable inference' approach also leads to an infinite regress.
Perhaps the most likely solution to the problem of induction is the principle of Falsificationism, as proposed by Popper (1972, pp. 1 - 31). He takes a different approach to the previously discussed attempts at justifying induction 's role in science. Rather than enforcing that a hypothesis must pass tests before it can be admitted into the realm of scientific knowledge, Popper subscribes to the view that a hypothesis need only be subject to tests once its has already been admitted to science. If the hypothesis subsequently fails any of these tests, it is removed from science, so the key feature of Popper 's method is that a hypothesis may be admitted to science only if it is falsifiable by experience. In summary, to discover something true, we propose conjectures and incorporate them into science without regard for any evidence in their favour, or any reason to think they are true. We must then go to rigorous effort to falsify these hypotheses and thus reject them from science. Not only must these theories be open to falsification by experience, but also our treatment of them must involve a determination to eliminate them if they are in fact false. Of course, many objections have been raised to this method of solving the problem of induction, but this approach seems a lot more promising than any previous attempts.
A detailed discussion of such objections appears in (Miller 1994, pp.14-57).
In conclusion, it seems induction is far too embedded in our scientific practice to discard completely. All traditional attempts to justify our methods of inductive inference have failed, but discarding induction completely will make it difficult for us to practice any science at all. Consequently, to allow induction to play a serious role in scientific discovery, it is clear that we need to change our view of induction such that we can abandon the search for a justification we can never achieve.
Even though our inductive practices cannot be justified therefore, the principle of induction could be rescued if we can bring ourselves to abandon the doctrine of justificationism. Falsification provides us with an alternative solution to the problem of induction and it is perhaps this practice that can save the role of induction in science.
