The legal status of trade unions in the United Kingdom was established by a Royal Commission in 1867, which agreed that the establishment of the unions was to the benefit both employers and employees. Since then, unions have been upheld as the traditional promoters of justice and fairness at the workplace.
Trade union membership experienced a meteoric rise from late 1968 to 1979(Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.139) However from 1979 till date unionism has been declining progressively.
The steady and continuous disintegration of collective organization in British workplaces since 1979 in terms of union membership, union density and collective bargaining coverage has been remarkable. Union membership shattered from its peak at 12.6 million in 1979 to 7.1 million in 1998, a significant reduction in membership density of the employed workforce from 56% to 30%.( Terry, 2003,p.459). Similarly, collective bargaining coverage fell drastically from around 80% of the workforce to a mere over a third in 1998. (Heery, Kelly and Waddington, 2000, p.79).
Decline has been the steepest in the private sector where membership losses ran from more than half in 1980 to as low as 19% in late 1999.The public sector recorded a fall from 84% in 1980 to 60% in 1999. (Terry,2003,p.459).Thus public sector aggregate membership is greater than that of the private sector with 3-employees-in-5 being members in the public sector but the corresponding figure for the private sector is fewer than 1-in-5.(Metcalf,2005,p.3).
These figures are disappointing for those who view strength of trade unions as an indicator of economic and industrial democracy. The recent years have witnessed the erosion of union influence over the government and employers, their diminished ability to attract members, financial crisis within unions and the shift from representative to direct voice mechanisms in nearly all new workplaces.
All this has led to the belief that decline in collective representation is now irreversible. (Metcalf, 2005, p.28).However there are some who still remain positive about the opportunities for union revitalization. (Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.169).
The purpose of this essay is to arrive at a possible conclusion on this debate of union revitalization by examining the various factors influencing it. From my study of the trend in collective representation, I would be steering the essay towards the provision of evidence which establishes that a reverse in the declining trend of trade unionism is unlikely. To predict the future of trade unions, it is essential to understand what led to their decline in the first place.
Thus in the first part of my essay ,I would be outlining the factors that shaped union decline since 1979.I aim to then consider the current scenario in terms of the legislative, compositional, sectoral and organizational constraints facing trade unions today. In the last section I would focus on the strategies employed by unions for revival and their potential for success in the future. Based on all these, my conclusion would be derived on the future of trade unionism in Britain.
Several explanations have been put forth to account for the decline of trade unions since 1979.Each of these can be studied as follows:
Green (1992) explains the decline of unionism since 1979 by viewing it as a direct consequence of a decline in employment in heavily unionized industries like coal-mining, dock work, ship building and steel-making and a growth in service sector employment, especially in the private sector where density levels are far lower. The growing feminization of labour in the late 1980s and the entry of part-timers have also been held accountable for the decline in union membership. (Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.141).
Though at present, the union density is identical for men and women. (DTI, 2003, Appendix Two: Union Density by Sex), unions still face tremendous challenges in attracting other non-standard workers like ethnic minorities and younger employees.
This refers to the cyclical changes which affect the incentives for workers to join trade unions and for employers to oppose unionisation. These include real wage growth, level of inflation and unemployment.
The lower the real wage growth and lower the level of unemployment, the higher is the incentive for workers to join unions and lower the tendency for employers to resist. (Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.143) However since 1993 unemployment has declined steadily and so has union density (Metcalf, 2005, p.5) which contradicts the above explanation of cyclical change.
State policies affect union membership directly by legislation aimed at promoting or hampering union security and indirectly by intervention and influence on the operating environment of employers and unions. The legislation passed during the 1980s Conservative government 's undermined collective representation by outlawing closed shop and check-off agreements. The government 's privatisation of public utilities programme also threatened union recognition. A series of acts endorsed company-based payment schemes of profit-sharing and employee share ownership to replace Fair Wage Resolutions and Wage Councils. (Metcalf, 2005, p.5).
These changes in the labour legislation were pivotal to the decline in union density in the 1980s.
Employers reacted opportunistically by derecognising unions formally as an impetus was provided to their managerial strategy of weakening unionism by state legislation. (Terry, 2003,p.459). However evidence shows that managements did not indulge in wholesale derecognition of trade unions. Some firms that have formally derecognised unions still use them informally while some others that provide recognition have, in practice," narrowed the scope of bargaining so that there has been a measure of implicit or partial derecognition"(Metcalf,2005,p.6).
Thus union decline in this case can be attributed to the growth in the number of small private sector firms which unions find difficult to gain recognition in.
The period between 1990-1998 also witnessed dwindling support for unionism among employees (Milward et al,2000,p.180) mainly due to the erosion of the average wage premium which was 10% in 1980s but now is low or zero.(Metcalf,2005,p.25).
The union 's own policies and structures also added to their problems. Traditional union policies have been accurately described as 'male, pale and stale'(Metcalf,2005,p.8) as unions did not follow strategic recruitment policies ,the concerns of female and younger workers, work-life balance and rights of part-timers were never prioritised and most importantly unions remained oblivious to the rapid rise in 'never membership' until now.
The capacity of unions to resurge in the future depends on identifying and reviewing the main causes that caused their decline and their ability to act on these in the future, i.e., areas of improvement and avoidance.
We now turn to consider the present day scenario and the constraints faced by unions today for revitalization in the light of recent changes.
Presently, there are two main legal mechanisms that enable the provision of collective employee representation and voice in the organization.
The ERA introduced by the Labour government in 1999 established a statutory recognition procedure for unions. However the ERA does not apply to firms with fewer than 21 employees which according to the TUC means that approximately 6 million UK workers located in small firms are denied a voice at work. (Eiro, 2005).
Even if the firms adopt the legal route to recognition, it is likely to lead to a net growth of 50,000 members annually into trade unions, which would be much lower than the estimated increase in overall employment figures. (Taylor, 2001, p.13).
The other major legal mechanism governing industrial relations at the workplace is the Information and Consultation Directive adopted in February 2002. This Directive too excludes workplaces with fewer than 50 employees and states that information and consultation can be possible through non-union employee representatives. (Eiro, 2005).This is in contrast with the TUC 's objectives issued in 2002 which emphasize a recognized union presence and a statutory fall back arrangement in the absence of a union for information and consultation. (Waddington, 2002, p.339).
The perpetuation of much of the Conservative government legislature, maintenance of extensive relations with employers, delay in the transposition of EU directives and increasing intervention of private sector companies in public services has also heightened tensions between the Labour Party and unions.(LRD,2000a:10,p.339).
Since the composition of workforce is now changing to encompass varied categories who have not been traditional union members like women, part-timers, ethnic minorities and younger employees, trade unions need to restructure their policies to appeal to the interests of these new categories of employees. Although several unions are already at this task through the use of 'equal opportunities' and 'level playing field' approaches (Wrench,2004,p.10),it is not turning out to be an easy task.
A mere 18% of employees aged between 18-29 were union members in 2000 as compared to 44% of that age in the early 1980s.In the private sector that density figure is now only 11%.(Taylor,2001,p.13).
Another obstacle faced by unions in the recruitment of these employees can be that they are mainly concentrated in private small sector firms where union density is low. In fact the proportion of women ,part-timers and non-manual workers increased by 5% points or more in the private sector employment from 1983-2001.(Bryson and Gomez,2005,p.76).
This refers to the change in the organizational management styles over the years that seek to undermine collective representation.
Along with the decline of unionism, there has been a big shift from representative to direct voice mechanisms. Direct voice ignores intermediate institutions like trade unions and works councils and management and employees interact directly through team briefings, regular meetings between senior management and workforce and problem solving groups such as quality circles (Metcalf, 2005, p.4).
Trade unions thus have to think of offering employees greater benefits and new services vis-  -vis those provided to them by the managements sophisticated 'union busting' techniques (Gall,2003b)The employer lobby opposes union involvement on the pretext of time constraints and a preference for informal employee relations.
Between 1984 and 1998, the number of workplaces with only representative voice mechanisms halved, while those adopting direct voice trebled. Nearly all new workplaces implemented these without recognizing unions. (Metcalf, 2005, p.4).
Britain 's workplaces are increasingly becoming union-free zones. This is typically characteristic of the private sector. Most private sector firms no longer have recognized trade unions nor are all those employed in such workplaces covered by negotiated wage rates and collective benefits. Even in rare instances where trade unions are recognized, they are devoid of a strong position in the employment relationship and the employer retains a strategic advantage over the workforce.
In growing sectors such as business services, retail, hotels and catering, union density levels are as low as less than 10% of the workforce (Taylor, 2001, p.14).
Thus in order for unions to resurge, either employment in unionized (public) sector of the economy has to grow substantially in relation to the non-union 'greenfield sites' (private sector) or unions will have to devise more intense strategies to organize these workplaces which proves to be a herculean task as it involves the problem of 3.3 million free riders and 14 million never members in addition to the servicing of the already existing 5.5 million members. (Metcalf, 2005, p.20-22).
It is unlikely though that any increase in the aggregate number of jobs will occur disproportionately in the unionized (public) sector. In contrast, it is likely that the share of employment growth in the next decade or so will occur in the private services. (p.20).
Thus scanning through all the above, we can arrive at an answer to why firms remain non-union. The reasons can be enlisted as follows:
Employees might be fearful to join trade unions as a consequence of employer resistance or hostility coupled with unfavourable legislation towards unionism.
Non-standard workers like women, part-timers, ethnic minorities and younger workers may not want to join a union due to traditional union policies of 'male, pale and stale', detachment from the workplace establishment, instances of workplace racism and indifferent attitudes towards unionism respectively.
Employees are satisfied due to the implementation of sophisticated HRM policies coupled with good pay and flexibility benefits and thus see no incentive for joining a union. It is known that union members tend to be less satisfied with their jobs and pay than non-union members. (Bryson et al 2002, Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.299).
Sectoral differences which reveal that public sector firms are more likely to be unionized than private sector firms. Also notable here is the size factor which is an offshoot of the sectoral differences. Smaller the company, lesser are the chances of it being unionized and vice-versa due to small firms constituting majority of the private sector and also due to their exclusion from ERA 1999. For example, less than 40% of firms with 25-49 employees recognize a trade union compared to 78% of workplaces with 500 or more employees. (Cully et al, 1992:92).
In the view of the above obstacles facing unions, we now turn to analyse the various strategies employed by unions for revitalization and their chances of success.
The two main union strategies employed by unions in an attempt to revitalize are 'Social Partnership' and 'Organizing' respectively.
Social partnership is defined as a relationship between employers, workers and unions based on high degree of co-operation and trust, ultimately leading to mutual gains (Ackers and Payne, 1998; Heery, Kelly and Waddington, 89) or integrative bargaining.
In Britain social partnerships are signed exclusively at the company level as a result of decentralized collective bargaining as compared to the rest of Europe. (Heery, Kelly and Waddington, p.89) The success of partnership is based on an agreement of employment security in exchange of flexible working to be adopted by the employees. Several unions like GMB, MSF, PCS, UNIFI, UNISON and USDAW have signed partnership agreements. (Heery, 2002, p.22).
It is important to note that partnership considers trade unions as secondary institutions. Among most employers it appears that partnership can operate in a union-free environment through direct interaction with individual employees. (Knell, 1999, Heery, 2002, p.25).
Partnership agreements entered into by unions with employers are a reflection of union weakness consequent to their steady decline as unions now seem ready to "re-brand themselves in the eyes of the employers as allies and not resistors to the implementation of business-initiated agendas"(Taylor,2001,p.7).The twin commitments to flexibility and business success are viewed by employers as entitling them to union support in managing change, against employee resistance.(Terry,2003,p.465-66).Also in the UK, partnership agreements and thereby employment security guarantees given by it have no legal force.(p.465).
Research studies reveal that partnership agreements do not make a difference to the level of pay, working hours and holidays or union membership. (p.464)Since partnership agreements exclude the mention of strikes, they can also be compared to the "no-strike agreements" concluded during the 1980s which denied the legitimacy of strikes and thus denied unions of their most powerful weapon of collective resistance.
Even the pro-partnership argument put forth by Guest and Peccei, 2001 accepts that the balance of advantage in partnership is highly tilted towards the management side of the organization. (Heery, 2002, p.22)Thus, despite the promotion of partnership as a union-revival strategy, it reiterates the need for union accommodation to an employer dominant reform process.
An organizing approach implies "empowerment of workers in the sense of stimulating activism and strengthening trade unionism in the workplace in order that workers can resolve their own problems without recourse to external representation" (Heery, 2002, p.27).
The dominant pattern in organizing is issue based bargaining where campaigns are built on current grievances amidst employees. Unlike partnership, organizing is 'oppositional' and adheres more to the traditional militant nature of unionism. It is founded on the premise of distributive collective bargaining.
Since the structure of collective bargaining is decentralized in the UK, organizing requires unions to build membership at the workplace level to enhance bargaining power and ensure effective representation of members. However the spread of organizing unionism is thin in the UK. The union resources devotes to organizing are low and attempts to build an 'organizing culture' are restricted to small or medium sized unions.(Heery et al,2000c).
This is due to the various internal and external constraints faced in organizing unionism.
Existing members may resist organizing as they lose out from the re-distribution of union resources essential to accommodate new members.
The number of trained organizers in the UK are few and those that exist resist organizing as they view it as an attempt to intensify their workload and as they are mainly skilled in servicing existing membership.
Organizers face difficulties in integrating younger and female representatives.
Inability of unions to gain access to unorganized sites.
Employer hostility reflected not through open aggressive anti-union tactics but through pre-emptive sophisticated HRM mechanisms.
Existence of inter-union rivalry allows employers to strategically heighten competition and tensions amidst unions which re-emphasizes the need for an employer-focused strategy. (Heery, Kelly and Waddington, 2003, p.84).
The future health of trade unionism rests on securing two goals, namely, (a) Employees, who are willing to join, actively participate in union activities and continue to be union members (b) Employers willing to recognize trade unions as bargaining agents for their workforce (Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.137).
Thus trade unions have to design an agenda that will appeal both to the interests of the employees and thus boost membership and to those of the employers to gain recognition as bargaining agents.
As far as recruiting new members is concerned, whether trade unions will be able to establish a foothold in the private sector service firms and non-union greenfield sites through strategies of organizing and partnership employed by them still remains dubious due to the various constraints prevalent in the employment of the same. The capacity of unions to develop 'organizational flexibility' (Taylor, 2001, p.12) to attract the new category of non-standard and contingent workers still remains unproven. The continuing rise of never membership across all segments of the workforce renders it difficult for unions to know where to focus their new recruitment and organizing strategies. (Bryson and Gomez, 2005).
Employer recognition of trade unions as bargaining agents has been extremely limited, especially due to the exclusion of small private sector firms from the ERA 1999.Presently only an estimated one third of all Britain 's employees have their pay and conditions determined by collective bargaining which contrasts with 70% in 1989 (Taylor,2001,p.9).
However even in workplaces where unions have managed to retain an institutional presence, the Workplace IRS reveals that it amounts to a 'hollow shell' marked by limited representation, bargaining coverage and influence over management policies (Heery, Kelly and Waddington, 1).
The legislation enacted by the Labour government has also failed to bring about any improvement in the declining union membership. Although unionism still remains pre-dominant in the public sector, the future of trade unions depends on securing a foothold in the private services where most of the jobs are now being created. Thus trade unionism in Britain still faces many insurmountable challenges which makes a significant revival in collective representation back to the levels of the 1970s when an estimated 58% of members were union members most improbable. As Metcalf suggests, perdition is indeed more likely than resurgence. (Metcalf, 2005, p.28).
