Ever played join the dots, only to find the lines spelled out a word? Don Eigler, a researcher for IBM, took that to extremes in 1989 when he spelled out the word IBM using only 35 Xenon atoms. The letters were about 5nm high, or 1/10,000 the width of a human hair. Each dot in the image shown is a single Xenon atom, placed there using the power of scanning tunnelling microscopy.
The technology is not limited to miniature advertising, however. Scanning tunnelling microscopy opens a gateway to the nano-scale world, it is invaluable for research into surface physics, and it will play a part in forming the next generation of nanotechnology.
What is scanning tunnelling microscopy? Often shortened to STM, it is a technique used to extrapolate images of a surface on an atomic scale. Invented by Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer in 1981, and earning them a Nobel Prize in 1986, it relies on the quantum mechanical principle of "tunnelling" to operate. STM allows researchers to compute the relative heights of a sample surface - in effect, the locations of atoms resting on top of a reference surface. It is also used to ionise or manipulate individual atoms, as seen in the IBM picture above.
Prior to the invention of STM, surface analysis was carried out using two main methods, X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. Both of these relied on the small wavelengths of the particles involved to produce diffraction patterns when scattered from a material. These patterns were then analysed, and from the results, an idea of the composition of the material could be formed. Unfortunately, for composite molecules, the patterns became increasingly complex, such that researchers could not agree on an interpretation of the data. The advantage STM holds over these predecessors is the ability to produce a real space representation of the scanned surface, even for molecules with complicated structures. This removes the problem of interpreting diffraction patterns to deduce a surface structure, replacing it with the simpler task of reading an electron density diagram.
The STM apparatus consists of a sharpened probe (ideally with the tip being a single atom) mounted about a nanometre above a conductive sample. A voltage is applied between probe and sample, causing electrons to "tunnel" or flow from the sample to the tip (or from tip to sample, depending on the polarity). This flow produces a current, which is exponentially related to the separation between the sample and the tip. As the STM tip is moved across the surface, the current changes in line with the sample height. Two methods exist to analyse this change.
The most commonly used technique is known as constant current scanning. The tip is mounted on a piezoelectric element, through which the current can be kept constant by adjusting the height of the tip through use of a feedback loop. From the raising and lowering of the STM tip, a physical map of the surface can be inferred.
Alternatively, the height can be kept constant, and the current variations can be measured. This method gives data on the electron density of the surface, and can be used to deduce information about the electronic configurations of the material. Constant height scanning is only practical for very flat surfaces, however, as on rougher samples the tip can impact on the higher regions of the surface.
The applications of STM are potentially diverse. In the research world, STM currently holds the title for the highest resolution of electron density data available at such a small scale. We interviewed Dr. of University, who uses STM in his research on 3-5 semiconductors (compounds of group 3 and group 5 elements). As it is highly dependent on electron density, he explains, the technique is better suited to semiconductor research, rather than scanning of metals where the electrons are less localised. Increased atom separation in the semiconductors also gives them the advantage over metals for high resolution scanning.
STM is by no means an easy tool to use, however. Generally, the process is highly sensitive to contamination, as a single atom deposited on the surface will produce a significant change in the topography. To that end, most STM procedures are carried out in ultra-high vacuum. This alone complicates the procedure, requiring special airtight chambers (see right) in which to carry out the scan, and a thorough cleaning of the sample before it can be analysed. McConville gives as an example the STM in , which operates under pressure of approximately 10 -10 millibars.
In addition to this, to ensure accurate readings, both the sample and the STM apparatus must be protected from vibrations of the same order of magnitude as the measurements being taken. Given the nano-scale on which the process works, this is no simple task! Even slight vibrations of the chamber can negate the validity of the scan. The way to prevent this, according to McConville, is through the use of a two stage dampening process. Initially, the test chamber is mounted on springs, in as stable an environment as possible, to reduce the impact of environmental vibrations. Whilst this would suffice for a typical experiment, STM takes it one step further, with the introduction of magnetic dampening.
Around most STMs, he explains, a series of permanent magnets and copper fins is arranged, such that any movement of the chamber disturbs the system. The movement of the fins, relative to the magnets, sets up "eddy currents" which then damp the vibrations. In effect, a vibration acts to reduce itself. This method, although not perfect, is sufficient to produce atomic resolutions; in other words, with a well-damped STM setup you can interpret, to a good degree of accuracy, the location of an atom on a surface.
STM has also been combined with other technologies to provide a more in-depth analysis of molecular structures. In order to analyse quantum dots, Tsukamoto Labs, in the University of Tokyo, have successfully constructed an STMBE device, combining the STM technique with the MBE technology. Molecular beam epitaxy is a method of creating perfect crystals from pure materials, one layer of atoms at a time. The problem with analysing these crystals is the difficulty in transporting them from the MBE growth chamber to the STM apparatus. To maintain the purity of the crystals, they must be kept in ultrahigh vacuum throughout the transfer. Whilst possible, the procedure is complex, and allows the crystals to warm up or cool down. In the STMBE, the STM is contained within the MBE growth chamber, allowing analysis without moving the crystal, and at consistent temperature. Furthermore, it is possible to scan before, after, and even during the crystal growth, and thus visualise the crystal forming.
That said, watching crystals is not the only use for STM, as shown by Eigler 's image. If, instead of measuring the tunnelling current, you pulse a small current through the tip, whilst keeping the sample at very low (about 4K) temperatures, you can excite the atom sufficiently to leave the surface. The atom then attaches itself to the STM tip, and can be placed elsewhere on the sample simply by moving the tip there and reversing the potential of the current. This technique, as McConville describes, has more applications than creating record-breaking logos. Eigler went on to position a set of iron atoms in various shapes, including a circle, triangle, and square. Inside these, he found and scanned electron waves reflecting off the other atoms, and even interfering with each other, as in the picture.
The ability to position atoms with such precision is not only of interest to researchers, however. Precise atom placement has tremendous ramifications in the field of technological advancement. Without STM, manipulation of matter at the nano-scale would be next to impossible. Nanotechnology is heavily reliant on STM and its associated techniques to further its own work. As a scanning technique, STM allows nanotech researchers to visualise the effects of their work. As a tool, STM invests researchers with the ability to build on a nano-scale. Already, Eigler has made simple sets of logic gates, the basis of computing, from iron atoms manipulated with STM. In the future, research into self-replicating nano-bots will require the power of STM to construct initial prototypes.
Nanotech is not the only beneficiary of STM research. McConville 's own STM research includes analysis of spintronic materials, where you can control not only the charge of an atom, but also the electron spin. This is currently of great interest to computer technology developers, who see it as the next step in data storage technology.
With the recent popularity explosion of computing, and the potential benefits to computing that nanotechnology promises, it is easy to see why the field is a hot research topic. As a cornerstone of nanotech research, STM is a valuable and useful tool in the development of next generation technology. As a technique, STM is also essential to improving our understanding of the world beyond the microscopic, and furthering of the nanosciences. And if nothing else, there 's always nanoscopic advertising.
This piece is written for the Mech-tech section of the New Scientist journal, aimed at an audience interested in science, particularly physics. The target audience would have A-level or higher physics knowledge.
The strengths of the article are an interesting introduction and amusing end, with good use of images and comparisons to other "hot" topics to interest the reader. The weaknesses of this article are the short length and lack of in-depth discussion of the topic.
