An evaluation of the work of the TRC requires us to remember, at the very outset, that reconciliation is a complex, multi-dimensional concept, and any attempts at defining and measuring the term should, therefore, be approached with a certain degree of caution. Towards this end, it is interesting to note Hamber and van der Merwe 's identification of at least five different understandings of the concept of reconciliation in South Africa, non-racial, intercommunal, religious, human rights, and community building; these ideologies may comfortably co-exist, but have been at the core of conflict between different groups during the process of the TRC. This theory is useful in our present context as it provides the basis of one of the ways in which the various grounds of criticisms levelled against the TRC may be categorised. The dissatisfaction that a particular individual, group or institution might express towards the work of the TRC, based upon its predominant ideology of reconciliation, does not necessarily translate into dissatisfaction with the performance of the TRC but possibly with one or more of the principles that it bases itself upon, such as its use of the language of Christian forgiveness, to name just one example.
Borer, Tristan Anne, Reconciliation in South Africa: Defining Success, 2001, Joan B. Krock Institute for International Peace Studies,.
Hamber and van der Merwe argue that "reconciliation is a complex and relatively new term for South Africans, and indeed for the world", and thus, "a uniform and populist understanding of reconciliation still appears to be a long way off." Hamber, Brandon, van der Merwe, Hugo, What is this thing calledReconciliation? Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation, Paper presented at the Goedgedacht Forum After the Truth and Reconciliation Commission Goedgedacht Farm, Cape Town, March 1998,.
The TRC arose in response to the need to find a method to deal with the legacy of the human rights violations committed within or outside South Africa between 1960, when the Sharpeville disaster took place, and the inauguration of Mr. Nelson Mandela as the first democratically-elected President of the Republic of South Africa in 1994. The process of expelling the ghosts of South Africa 's tumultuous past required not only an attempt to right individual wrongs, but also that this be done in a manner that was not incompatible with the nation 's peaceful entry into the new era, and the development of its fledgling democracy.
The situation under which the TRC was to work was certainly not devoid of constraints. As an institution, it cannot be denied that it had an important political role and presence, and it was a delicate task indeed to navigate the perilous path towards reconciliation in the midst of great political and socio-economic change, as the nation struggled to find its feet, and as its people became more self-aware. The colossal scale of the work it undertook in its short lifespan is in itself awe-inspiring. The TRC 's task, according to the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act, No 34 of 1995, was to broadly promote national unity and reconciliation in a spirit of understanding that transcended the conflicts and divisions of the past. It 's aims, as summarized by Boraine, were to give back to victims their human rights, to restore moral order, to record the truth, to grant amnesty to those who qualified, to create a culture of human rights and respect for the rule of law and ultimately, by so doing, to prevent the recurrence of the violations of human rights of the past. One can scarcely disagree that "The logistical problems alone of accomplishing such Herculean tasks in so large and diverse a country, facing material limitations and with 34 years of brutality to cover are awe-inspiring.".
Boraine, Alex, A Country Unmasked: Inside South Africa 's Truth and Reconciliation Commission, Oxford and New York, Oxford University Press, 2000.
Bennoune, Karima, University of Michigan Law School, Book Review, European Journal of International Law, Volume 3, No 2,.
In order to measure the degree of success or failure of the TRC in adhering to its aims, as set down in its mandate, it would be necessary to examine the impact of the work of the Commission as a whole, as well as that of its three committees, the Committee on Human Rights Violations, the Amnesty Committee, and the Reparations and Rehabilitations Committee.
The very breadth of the TRC 's mandate almost necessitated a vast amount of criticism from various quarters, including legal challenges. One of the most vociferous criticisms against the TRC was the charge that it has been overly lenient in its methods of bringing perpetrators to heel; many feel that amnesty was given too quickly and easily, in exchange for a mere recollection of one 's story, and that this amounted to letting the perpetrators of gross human rights abuses roam free. However, as Boraine argues, individual amnesty was granted only in exchange for full disclosure, and was subject to a number of conditions, such as that the offence in question was politically motivated and committed under the auspices of a politically known entity. Thus, of the 7,000 individuals who applied, the commission recommended amnesty for only 1,200.
In Azanian Peoples Organisation (AZAPO) v President of the Republic of South Africa, CCT 17/96 (1996), the Court upheld the Constitutionality of provisions that limited applicants rights to "have justiciable disputes settled by a court of law", and concluded that the amnesty provisions did not violate any International norms.
Editorial: South Africa / Honouring the work of the TRC, April 2003,.
Many, however, are of the opinion that "...justice was traded for truth, ... releasing hundreds of perpetrators (who applied for amnesty and met the criteria) from potential prosecution or the jail sentences they were then serving for political crimes." The Amnesty Committee 's approach to the notion of 'political motive' as applied in Amy Biehl 's case often seems to have the effect of protecting perpetrators of gross human rights abuse from criminal and civil liability, a fact that is, admittedly, often difficult to reconcile oneself with. However, the amnesty clause in the TRC Act was the result of a compromise, and a price was to be paid for a peaceful transition; "It was a case of neither too much nor too little justice." Andr   du Toit, departing from the views of Gutmann and Thompson, avers that moral determination should depend on context; the compromise that was represented by the TRC was justified by postapartheid needs and circumstances.
Mofokeng, Tlhoki & Hamber, Brandon . Contextualising Reconciliation and Reparations in South Africa, in From Rhetoric to Responsibility: Making reparations to the survivors of past political violence in South Africa, Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation,.
Villa-Vincencio, Charles, A South African Experiment in Justice, Paper Presented at the All-Africa Conference on African Principles of Conflict Resolution and Reconciliation, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, November 1999,.
Gutmann, Amy, in Rotberg, Robert I and Thompson, Dennis. eds., Truth v. Justice: The Morality of Truth Commissions, Princeton, PUP, 2000,.
Andr   du Toit, in ibid. ibid. and give the nation true closure. Some even suggest that criminalisation is better for public forgetting than amnesty, for it fulfils a desire for punishment, a bloodthirst. However, one of the founding principles of the TRC was to move beyond the desire for personal and historical vengeance. As suggested in the Post-amble to South Africa 's Interim Constitution of 1993, the TRC was based upon.
The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act 1993, s. 232(4).
If, instead of the TRC, Nuremberg-style trials for the leaders of the former apartheid government had been adopted at the insistence of the ANC, there would have been no peaceful transition to democracy, and if the former government had insisted on a blanket amnesty then, similarly, the negotiations would have broken down, and a bloody revolution sooner rather than later would have been inevitable.
Goldstone, Richard, The Hauser Lecture, New York University, January 1997.
As concerns the issue of resistance to its work, the TRC was thus.
Dyzenhaus, David , Judging the Judges, Judging Ourselves, Truth, Reconciliation and the Apartheid Legal Order, Oxford, Hart, 1998.
However,.
Wilson, Richard, The Politics of Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa: Legitimizing the Post-Apartheid State. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001.
An assessment of the work of the TRC necessitates an evaluation of the various methods by which the state may penalise criminal behaviour, at the core of which there is the much debated issue of which form of justice is 'most just'. It is interesting to note that where retributive justice, generally practiced by criminal justice systems, "begins ... with the notion of culpability and aims at a penalty, involving the infliction of stigmatising suffering upon the offender", restorative justice, on the other hand, "mainly directs its action towards the analysis of the damages caused by the offence upon the passive object of the crime (the victim) so that he/she is granted just reparation.". In other words, where retributive justice regards crime as a violation of the state and its laws, restorative justice regards crime as a violation of people and their relationships. This suggests a  'straight and relatively unambiguous dichotomy' between retributive and restorative justice, the most important distinction being, in the context of justice in post-apartheid South Africa, that "victims are central in the latter and peripheral in the former." The adoption of a model based on restorative justice to deal with the legacy of apartheid then reflects an awareness of an overwhelming need, particularly in a society in transition, to focus upon the restoration of victims' dignity and the promotion of healing and progress. "Perhaps most centrally, adherents of this approach are concerned that retributive approaches will undermine the transitions themselves and potentially lead back down the road to civil war or further human rights abuses by destabilizing fragile new regimes and crystallizing opposition to them among their old enemies.".
Beristain (1998), in Miers, David. An International Review of Restorative Justice. London: Home Office Research, Development and Statistics Directorate 2001, P. 86.
Miers, David. Ibid.
Boraine, Alex. A Country Unmasked: Inside South Africa 's Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 2000. Pp. xv, 445. Index.
Mason stresses "that restorative justice meets a community need, that it is beneficial to the community and that it is here to stay" However, even the leading proponents of restorative justice, such as Strang, are quick to acknowledge that there are shortcomings in robust evaluations of the durability of any positive effects. "Nevertheless, in terms of its impact on offending behaviour there is a consensus that restorative justice performs no worse than any other disposal." This serves to refute claims that justice was not done in South Africa owing to the method chosen to deal with perpetrators. "In terms of its affective impact on the victim 's sense of closure and well-being, and on the offender 's self esteem and acceptance of responsibility", there is evidence that restorative justice has a positive effect. Thus, before writing off the TRC 's methods of bringing perpetrators to justice as ineffectual (and consequently unjust), it must be borne in mind that evaluations in a number of jurisdictions suggest that restorative justice "offers much greater potential for achieving mutually satisfactory outcomes from positions of conflict that does the standard criminal justice response." Morris and Young assert that "conventional justice is very ineffective at addressing in meaningful ways either offenders' accountability or victims' needs - the very objectives stressed by restorative justice". They argue that restorative justice is a 'better' response to criminal conflict, firstly because "it is intrinsically good, (it treats victims and offenders as valuable in themselves and apart from any system or community benefits that may accrue)", and secondly because "it is instrumentally good (it encourages attitudinal and behavioural change in victims and offenders that benefit them directly, and the system and the community indirectly).".
Mason, A. Restorative justice: courts and civil society. In Restorative Justice: Philosophy to Practice, Strang, H.and Braithwaite, 2000, J., eds.), 1-7. Ashgate.
Strang, H. Restorative Justice Programs in Australia. A report to the Criminology Research Council, 2001.
Miers, David, op cit.
Morris, A. and Young, W. Reforming criminal justice: the potential of restorative justice. In Restorative Justice: Philosophy to Practice, Strang, H. and Braithwaite, 2000, J., eds, 11-32, Ashgate.
Certain theories, however, suggest "that so far from being in opposition, ... (retributive and restorative justice) are entirely compatible, the latter encompassing most of the characteristics of the former, with an added concern for the dignity and rehabilitation of both victims and perpetrators. Interestingly, this line of argument seems to have the effect, if considered in the context of our present discussion of justice in post-apartheid South Africa, of overturning arguments that claim that the TRC 's insistence on restorative justice did not sufficiently criminalize abusive behaviour and punish perpetrators.
Barton, C. Empowerment and criminal justice. In Restorative Justice: Philosophy to practice, Strang, H. and Braithwaite, J., eds.), 55-76. Ashgate.
The choice of basing the TRC 's work on restorative justice was part of the wider 'paradigm shift' in penalogical thinking from retributive to restorative thinking that many write of; the use of the non-prosecutorial alternative is very likely to have aided the process of achieving a full accounting of crimes committed against fellow citizens, which constituted an important part of the mandate of the TRC.
Fattah, 1998; Roach, 2000, in Miers, David. Op Cit, P. 86.
The work of the Reparation and Rehabilitation Committee has significantly helped to restore the dignity of a number of victims; however doubtful one may remain about the value of financial compensation in a situation of such loss of life and dignity, payments amount to a considerable R660-million, in addition to the R50-million that has already been paid out, as an interim measure, to victims identified by the TRC as needing urgent relief.
Statistics from Sebelebele, Matome, Grants for apartheid victims, April 2003, South Africa Info, The Official Gateway,.
One of the most invaluable achievements of the TRC was the magnitude of the research that it carried out, culminating in the massive seven-volume document which includes 22,000 case summaries of testimony from victims, witnesses and perpetrators of apartheid 's horrors. In collecting a vast body of information in the form of transcripts, audiovisual recordings of public hearings, and the original version of all statements and submissions made to it, the TRC has played a crucial role in helping to create a large base of primary resource material, laying the foundation for further study and analysis.
An important element of the TRC 's task was to "paint the backdrop" against which human rights violations occurred. The TRC 's Report on Institutional and Special Hearings attempts to analyse why such a large number of people working in "influential sectors and institutions" ignored the developments around them, and states that, "Without some sense of the "antecedents, circumstances, factors and context" within which gross violations of human rights occurred, it is almost impossible to understand how, over the years, people who considered themselves ordinary, decent and God-fearing found themselves turning a blind eye to a system which impoverished, oppressed and violated the very lives and very existence of so many of their fellow citizens.".
Truth and Reconciliation Commission Report South Africa, Volume Four.
In the final volume of its report, Findings and Recommendations, the Commission "gave serious thought to ways to ensure the transformation of society." The importance of this goal is parallel to that of restoring victim dignity and dealing with the past - for herein lies the answer to the prevention of further violations of human rights.
Ibid, Vol 4.
An evaluation of the work of the TRC must necessarily touch upon an assessment of the suitability of Truth Commissions in general as a method of dealing with histories of gross human rights violations at a time when the political and socio-economic landscape of a nation is undergoing a process of transformation. "The question of how best to contend with histories of gross human rights violations in the context of transitions spawned a copious literature at the close of the twentieth century.... non-judicial mechanisms of accountability and redress may better serve the interests of societies in transition for a variety of reasons.... they may be better equipped to elicit evidence, especially perpetrator testimony, that might not otherwise be forthcoming.... particularly... in the case of ongoing human rights violations such as `disappearances', where victims' families continue to search for information about the whereabouts and fate of loved ones. The line of argument in favour of truth processes also suggests that the limited resources of an emerging democracy might better be spent on building the new society rather than on a wild goose chase for perpetrators from the old.".
Bennoune, Karima, University of Michigan Law School, Book Review, European Journal of International Law,.
The first Truth Commission to be given the power to grant amnesty to individual perpetrators, to create a witness protection programme, to hold "highly publicised" hearings "across the length and breadth of" the nation, its largeness in terms of staff and budget, as well as the strength of its powers of subpoena, search and seizure unparalleled by any other such body, the TRC of South Africa has been, all things considered, "a worthy if imperfect instrument" for a society "seeking to say "never again" with confidence.".
Steiner, Henry J., Alston, Philip, International Human Rights in Context, 2nd ed, New York, OUP Inc, 2000.
Rotberg, Robert I and Thompson, Dennis. eds., op cit.
As a Dutch visitor once observed, "the TRC must fail. Its task is simply too demanding." Yet, she argued, "even as it fails, it has already succeeded beyond any rational expectations.".
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of South Africa Report, London, Macmillan, 1999, Volume One, Chairperson 's Forward, p.4.
