In 1999 Professor Ahmed H. Zewail was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for "his studies of the transition states of chemical reactions using femtosecond spectroscopy."() This meant that structural features of the transition state (denoted    ) could be eluded. Before this breakthrough only kinetic and thermodynamic information was known about the transition state. () Bratos, S. Actualite Chimique, 1999, (12), 8-9.
A transition state has a lifetime of less than     100 femtoseconds (1 fs = 1x10 -15 s)(). The transition state lies at an energy maxima of a reaction (see figure 1.1). The bond breaking and forming occurs in the transition state, on a time scale of 10-100 fs, which before the advent of femtosecond lasers was unobservable. () Zewail, A. H. Science, New Series; 1998, 242 (2886), 1645-1653.
It is only the development of the laser since it was first developed from the maser in 1960 that this has been made possible. The first laser was the ruby crystal solid state laser, followed shortly in 1961 by the invention of the gas Helium-Neon laser. Since their conception they have been used and revolutionised Science especially some areas of spectroscopy to the extent they are now essential. () Maiman, T. H. Physical Review Letters, 1960, (4) 565-566.
Spectroscopy is the branch of science devoted to discovering the chemical compositions of materials by looking at the light they emit. The origins of spectroscopy lie in quantum mechanics, and the implications it has for the energy levels in molecules. The Schr  dinger Equation is the fundamental equation to quantum mechanics and dictates that energy levels of a system (an atom or molecule), are quantised, and can only take discrete values.
From Young 's Double-Slit experiments it was shown that light possesses both wave and particle properties, this was further defined by Planck, when he theorised light was composed of photons possessing energy E; (Equation 1.1) where h is Planck 's constant = 6.626 x 10 -23 Js and    is the frequency of light in s -1 or Hz.
Absorption spectra show only a few discrete wavelengths of light are absorbed (or emitted) by atoms and molecules. This is since the incident photons interact with the atoms or molecules; exciting the system from one energy level to another. The energy of the photon absorbed is the energy difference between the two levels: (Equation 1.2) where E 2 is the excited energy level, E 1 is the ground energy level and   E is the energy difference between the two level. Hence only certain frequencies of light can be absorbed or emitted by atoms or molecules.
Part of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation allows these discretely spaced energy levels to be separated into three components; electronic, vibrational and rotational, (see figure 1.2 from ()). In electronic energy levels, electrons can be excited from one energy level to another, or relax from one energy level to another and emit a photon of the corresponding energy. However in vibrational and rotational energy levels the mode or frequency of vibration or rotation can increase or decrease by the absorption or emission of energy matching the difference between the respective energy levels. () Mackenzie, S. R. First Year Introduction to Molecular Energy Levels Notes; Warwick University, U.K. 2004.
The development of the laser has allowed the probing and discovery of the fine line structure of these energy levels, especially the vibrational and rotational levels, and their respective transitions governed by selection rules.
The remainder of this essay will look at the basic principles of lasers, their uses in creating high resolution Absorption Spectroscopy and the Raman Effect and how lasers have allowed us to use it for Spectroscopic purposes.
The word laser is an acronym for: Light Amplification by the Stimulated Emission of Radiation.
Lasers create intense, coherent (one wavelength of light), highly directional light sources of high intensity. In most cases however a narrow distribution of frequencies is produced (shown in figure 2.1 from()). Lasers can also create very short rapid pulses, used in femtosecond time resolved spectroscopy. All of these properties make them unique in comparison to normal polychromatic incoherent light sources. () Andrews D. L. Lasers in Chemistry; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1997.
The fundamental principle of a laser is the propagation of photons of the same wavelength by stimulated emission. Before considering stimulated emission, spontaneous emission must be considered: for example in a two level system, the ground state energy level E 1 and excited state E 2 are separated by E 2 - E 1. A photon with energy = E 2 - E 1 can be absorbed exciting the system from E 1 to E 2. (See figure 2.2). Excited states have very short lifetimes (10 -7 s - 10 -11 s)(5). This is due to the instability of being in an excited configuration, and the system will spontaneously relax to the ground state: emitting a photon with Energy = E 2-E 1, this is called Spontaneous Emission. (See figure 2.3).
Stimulated emission is only different from spontaneous because instead of the excited system relaxing at a random moment in time, the system is stimulated to relax by another photon of energy equal to the difference in energy between the excited state and ground state. The emitted photon will have the same frequency as the original photon and the probability of emission in one atom or molecule is made greater if other photons of similar or the same energies are already present.(5).
To generate a high intensity of coherent light, many photons of the same frequency are required, thus the effect just discussed must be amplified. This is achieved by creating a population inversion, whereby there are more atoms or molecules in an excited state than a ground state. The populations of these two levels are governed by the Boltzmann Equation: (Equation 2.1) where N 2/N 1 is the ratio of the populations of the excited state (N 2) compared to the ground state (N 1), g 2/g 1 is the ratio of the degeneracies of the excited state (g 2) compared to the ground state (g 1), E 2-E 1 is the energy difference between the excited and ground states, here E 2   E 1, k is the Boltzmann constant = 1.308 x 10 -16 J K -1 and T is the temperature in degrees Kelvin.
On inspection of equation 2.1, it is evident, since E 2   E 1, (ignoring g 2/g 1), that N 2/N 1 will be less than 1, thus the system requires energy supplying to it in the form of pumped radiation. In the first laser a Xenon flash lamp was used to do this.
Another requirement to create stimulated emission is that the excited state must be an extended metastable state. This means the excited state must have a longer lifetime than normal; this is to allow time for stimulated emission to occur. When all the atoms or molecules are in excited states, one atom with spontaneously relax, stimulating another atom or molecule to relax, and a "chain reaction" occurs, creating many photons of the same wavelength.
The basic schematic of the laser (figure 2.4 adapted from (5)), shows how the laser medium is contained within a cavity, with one totally reflective mirror, and a partially reflective mirror (only allowing light to pass through when a threshold intensity has been reached). The mirrors only allow the build up of stimulated emission parallel to the length of the cavity, so the photons all have the same alignment and coherence.
The basis of absorption spectroscopy and all spectroscopy is to see which wavelengths of light a sample or molecule will absorb, and relate this to its electronic, vibrational and rotational energy levels.
Before the advent of lasers it was still possible to conduct absorption spectra without using lasers as a light source, and other light sources are still used in many laboratories. Absorption spectra require polychromatic light sources to scan through all the possible wavelengths of light an atom or molecule may absorb at. Lasers however are principally designed to be monochromatic, but a special type of laser - dye lasers are polychromatic.
In all absorption spectroscopy a light beam is passed through the sample (atoms or molecules), then passed to a monochromator, that lets only a certain range of wavelengths at a certain time, scanning through predefined wavelengths through to the photodetector() that compares the original source of light and the light not absorbed by the sample, producing an absorption spectrum recorded by a pen recorder. (See figure 3.11 - adapted from (5)). () Demtr  der, W. Laser Spectroscopy: Basic Concepts and Instrumentation; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1981.
Pumped Radiation The laser absorption spectrometer works in a similar way, apart from instead of an incoherent light source being used a tunable dye laser is used, which scans through different frequencies hence "tunable". (See figure 3.12 - adapted from (5)).
Tunable dye lasers are a special type of laser, especially in their aim- instead of trying to create a very narrow range of frequencies emitted; the whole purpose of a dye laser is to create a broad spectrum of emitted frequencies.
So far, we have only examined a very simple two-level system laser, which in reality do not exist. Dye lasers use large polyatomic (normally aromatic) molecules as the laser medium. For example the dye: Rhodamine 6G (see figure 3.13 from(6)). This means they have many different electronic energy levels, instead of just two. There is also a strong interaction between dye molecules and the solvent (ethanol for Rhodamine 6G), broadening the electronic energy levels to the extent where they form an energy continuum giving a broad emission of frequencies (shown in figure 3.14 from(5)).
The schematic energy diagram of Rhodamine 6G dye is shown in figure 3.15 (from((5), (6)). This shows the excitation of electrons from ground state, S 0 to an energy level in S 1, to create a population inversion. The electrons then relax rapidly from the excited state in S1 to a lower level in the S 1 as a form of non-radiatitive energy loss. The electrons then relax (after an extended metastable state), from an S 1 level to S 0. Since this is a continuum it gives rise to many different wavelengths of light, and also because the electron does not fall the same distance every time. This process of excitation, rapid decay then emission is called Fluorescence.
However there are competing transitions that depopulate the S 1 state, reducing the population inversion and thus intensity of laser light emitted. These transitions include excitation from the S 1 level to the S 2 level, and also an intersystem crossing, from S 1 (a singlet state) to T 1 (a doublet state). This is a spin forbidden transition (by quantum mechanical selection rules governing transitions).
The triplet states can be "quenched", by means of collisions with other molecules, converting them back to the singlet states from the triplet states, examples are Dioxygen, Cyclo-octotetraene and in the case of Rhodamine 6G Dimethylsulfoxide.(5), (6)The laser is excited by using a pump monochromatic laser. For the Rhodamine 6G dye laser this is an argon gas laser with wavelength of 514.5 nm. This produces a broad emission of wavelengths between 570 - 660 nm (5), (6). For other wavelength ranges there are hundreds of dyes available, making the total absorption spectrum range 200 nm - 1   m.(5), (6).
Normal dye lasers are accurate to 0.5 cm -1, but a special state of the art ring dye lasers are accurate to 10 -8 cm -1, surpassing the accuracy of normal absorption spectrometers.(5).
Lasers are now essential to absorption spectroscopy, and help identify compounds (comparing to reference spectra), and also find other key information, such as bond lengths of molecules. An example is shown in figure 3.16 from (4).
The lines in rotational spectra are spaced by 2B, where B is the rotational constant, in wavenumbers: (Equation 3.1) where h is Planck 's constant: 6.262 x 10 -23 J s, c is the speed of light = 2.998 x 10 8 ms -1 and where I, in units of kg m 2: (Equation 3.2) where    is the reduced mass in units of kg, and R is the equilibrium bond length in m.
Thus from re-arrangement of equations 3.1 and 3.2, R is found to be: (Equation 3.3).
Raman spectroscopy has emerged principally out of the development of the laser due to the intensity of the light produced by a laser. It is another type of spectroscopy probing vibration and rotational energy levels of molecules, especially those with a permanent dipole moment (e.g. CO), and shows vibrations and rotations that would not be present on a Infra-Red Spectrum.
When light hits molecules, it can either be absorbed, or scattered. If the scattering is elastic- the photons are simultaneously absorbed and emitted (with no measurable time delay), and the wavelength of light incident is the same as the emission (see figure 3.21).(5).
However in 1 in 10 7 the scattering process results in the light frequency emitted from the atoms or molecules to be increased (Anti-Stokes Raman scattering, see figure 3.23), or decreased (Stokes Raman scattering, see figure 3.22), compared to the incident frequency.
Raman scattering involves transitions amongst energy levels that are separated by much less than the photon energy of the incident light. The energy levels in figures 3.21-3.23 might well be vibrational energy levels, and the incident and emitted photons are both in the visible range, meaning visible light can be used to produce a vibrational spectra, thus allowing normal optics and refractors to be used.
A Raman spectrum is presented as frequency shift from the incident frequency, known as the Rayleigh line. (see figure 3.24 from (5)).
Since this is such a weak effect, (only 1 in 10 7 photons produces the Raman effect), it requires a very intense monochromatic light source- hence this branch of spectroscopy only became viable with the development of lasers. The type of laser used is any monochromatic continuous laser, this way the sample cell can be bombarded with high intensity beam of photons. Typically since the shift seen in strokes is the same as in anti-strokes and the anti-strokes lines are normally weaker, they can be ignored. (5), (6).
It is important at this moment to compare Infra-Red spectra to Raman spectra. For a totally symmetric molecules with a centre of inversion (e.g. O 2), an IR spectra will only show gerade (symmetrical) vibrations, and a Raman spectra will only show ungerade (asymmetrical) vibrations. In more general terms Raman spectra shows vibrations of the most polarisable groups, whereas IR shows the most polar groups.() () Shreve, O. D. Anayltical Chemistry, 1952, 24 (11), 1692-1699.
In some cases it is impossible to identify the compound from an IR or Raman Spectra alone, but when used in combination a more conclusive answer can be produced. (See figure 3.25 from (5)).
With reference to figure 3.25; circled in red on the IR spectra of toluene at 726 cm -1 is a all in phase out of plane C-H stretch in an aromatic system, this corresponds to either a mono, or 1,2 di-substituted benzene ring.
Circled in blue on the Raman Spectra is shown the same stretch, but could be a mono, 1,3 or 1,3,5 substituted benzene ring. Hence, by utilising Raman spectroscopy and comparing the two spectra it is possible to determine the compound is a mono-substituted benzene.
Lasers have very special properties compared to conventional light sources. They create monochromatic, coherent light of a high intensity. These properties are the result of stimulated emission, the fundamentals of which lie in quantum mechanics.
The laser has allowed the probing of electronic, vibrational and rotational energy levels through absorption (and emission) spectroscopy to a greater level of resolution than previously available.
With the development of the laser came a new field of spectroscopy: Raman spectroscopy. The Raman effect occurs in only 1 in 10 7 molecules, thus a light source of high intensity is required to see this effect, the laser being ideal for this.
It is evident that the invention and development of the laser has revolutionised spectroscopy, Chemistry and Science as a whole. This can be seen by the sheer number of Nobel Prizes that have been awarded either for development of lasers, or by using them in a new and revolutionary ways.
There are many more applications of lasers than discussed here, for example; laser isotope separation, laser surgery, optical disc drives, and the monitoring atmospheric chemistry to name but a few.
This essay is presented in edited form at: .ac.uk/fac/sci/chemistry/ug/projectwork//page5/.
Alongside the references cited, the following were also useful as sources of information: classes/chem4538/raman.htm and (), (). () Silfvast, W. T. Laser Fundamentals; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, U.K., 1996. () Siegman, A. E. Lasers; Oxford University Press: Oxford, U.K, 1986.
