The insurance market in the UK is becoming increasingly competitive with the advancements first of telephone and more recently Internet sales. In a market where costs must be kept to a minimum, profit margins are increasingly tight and a decision has therefore been made to re-assess the company 's current structure. The study into the viability of the CFS Restructuring Project and ultimately this report were initiated by the Operations Director and produced by the Operations Group. The report will outline the aims of the project, the strategy for its implementation and the risks that may be faced. Details of planning and control of progress and budget will also be addressed. Recommendations and justifications will be provided where prudent.
One of the key issues to be addressed in any project is the identification and management of the stakeholders involved in the process. The beliefs and requirements of stakeholders will vary depending on the group and will often change during the course of the project. To this end, the management of each stakeholder will be different. An assessment of each Stakeholder 's influence and the impact of the change on the group can enable a successful management strategy to be formulated and the correct form of communication determined.
One key stakeholder group is the shareholders and this includes the Trade Unions who make up a 40% holding. The project is aimed at increasing turnover and profit and as such, the shareholders have a keen interest in its success. The money used to fund the project comes from here and therefore a tangible return will be sought. As the ultimate owners of the company they also have a lot of influence in any decisions made. It is vital that they are invited to participate in the project from an early stage, hence the importance of this report to the Board.
The employees of the company must also be considered. Team leaders will have expanded roles and all staff will have more responsibilities. They have little influence outside the Trade Unions who have proved relatively passive in the past. However, since it is their jobs that will be changing, it is important that there is no negative reaction to the project. The changes in 2001 led to a degree of employee resistance which remains a problem. Employees who handled one section of a single insurance type will now be responsible for all aspects of work for all types of insurance. Further change must not only avoid increasing the instability but seek to return satisfaction to the workers. Employees will be involved in the reorganised firm day to day and are therefore worth consulting on the project.
The High Street Agents would welcome an improvement in the links between themselves and CFS, enabling them to provide a more efficient service to customers. More and more emphasis has been placed on selling policies through these agents in recent times and as such, we must seek to optimise their effectiveness wherever possible. They have a moderate degree of influence and the changes will likely have a large impact on them. We would therefore seek to ensure that they are kept fully informed at each stage as well as being invited to participate, particularly in the areas most likely to effect there job day to day.
The reorganisation is aimed at improving the company 's performance and the one effective way of doing this is through the improvement of the service provided to customers. This stakeholder group is n't part of the firm itself and as such has little formal influence over the changes made. However, since it is important that the firm meets it needs they should be kept well informed and even consulted, possibly through market research or consumer feedback.
Project Management, Richard J Wheeler 2005. Pg 17.
In line with this we will seek to make a clear statement of the Aim, Objectives and Scope of the project. This project definition will be the focus of the project and the basis on which the evaluation of the project 's success will be made.
The project aim is a statement which identifies the overall purpose of the project. It will remain unchanged during the project and should therefore avoid unnecessary constraints. It must also be ensured that aim is n't so broad that it fails to restrict the project. The aim of the CFS Insurance project is therefore 'to enhance performance by streamlining operations and increasing the flexibility of individual members of staff.'.
The project objectives are more detailed statements of what the project is to deliver. They should be SMART, meaning they are; Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Timely. This will ensure the firm is focused and will allow for appropriate evaluation of the results.
The Implementation Objectives.
For the office to have been organised into open plan spaces for each of the regional groups. This will aid the flow of relevant information.
For the company 's improved technology systems to be installed (including the improved links to high street agents).
For the new training scheme to be in place for new and current staff.
For the Human Resources and IT Departments to become combined. This will allow for an improved training facility covering all aspects of employee knowledge.
The Operational Objectives identified for evaluation 12 months from the end of the realisation phase are as follows:
To have increased the range of policies individual members of staff can provide from 1 or 2 to all except Life.
To have increased the sales turnover by 40%.
To have increased the average number of policies per customer from 2 to 5.
To have increased savings in operation costs by 30%.
Evaluation must be carried out on each objective at stages in the process and especially at proposed review point. All objectives should be timed and in this case review is to be held after 6 and 12 months to gauge the project 's success and facilitate future improvement. The evaluation of the Operational Objectives is relatively simple as they are quantitative and easily measurable. All that is required is a comparison point from a period prior to the restructuring. The range of policies provided by members of staff can be assessed by those that have been issued between implementation and review. The Implementation Objectives are slightly harder to evaluate as they are largely qualitative. The office may have been reorganised, but if the flow of information has n't improved then the objective has n't been met. This can be tested through discussion with the employees and basic observation. As long as the new software has been properly installed, the main test is that the links to the High Street Agents are effective. The training scheme can be tested by sending through a test subject with no prior knowledge of the firm and tracking their progress through the scheme. This could also double as recruitment for future employees. There will always be certain difficulties in evaluation but as mentioned in section 2, consulting with employees at all stages can help focus improvements and avoid future difficulties.
As stated by the Managing Director, the company is breaking new ground with this project and as a result there is an inherent uncertainty involved. The best way to manage any risks or uncertainties is through a process of identification, assessment of probability and impact and finally the development of a risk management strategy. We have used a Failure Mode and Effects Approach to initially identify the causes of failure and the severity of their effects.
One of the most serious risks appears to be resistance to change by the employees. There is quite a high probability that this risk will cause the company a problem. We know that the employees are already suspicious of the operations group and were resistant to the previous set of changes in 2001. The new changes will increase the pressure especially on the managers and there is currently no suggestion of increasing their wages. They are also set to be made to work overtime to make up for the slowdown of operations during the implementation phase. If the employees decide to strike or are unhelpful to customers due to their grievances it is the company that will suffer. We suggest the company sits down with the Trade Unions and employees and works out a schedule for overtime whereby those who wish to do the overtime have the opportunity to do so as well as a formal review of the wage structure.
Another risk identified is the company 's new technology. There is a risk of data loss as well as loss of service. This will have a medium impact on the firm if it materialises, particularly in the short term and to current customers. Consumers will have a strong negative reaction if their details are lost or if the systems put in place to improve the service actually lead to poorer quality. The probability of its occurrence is also quite high as we know the company 's Training Department is currently weak on IT and it is dealt with by a different training area. It is therefore likely that an external firm will be brought in to handle the training and this brings with it an addition risk. Any work performed by external contractors is susceptible to poor quality and time over-runs. There is also a chance that costs will spiral. In some cases the best way to manage this risk may be to avoid it but this is n't an option given the importance of the improved technology and links to the High Street Agents. The best solution is therefore through a combination of mitigating and allowing for the risk. The risk is reduced through the preparation of an adequate training scheme, the vetting of potential external contractors and a test phase in the implementation stage discussed further in section 5. Contingency funds will also be set aside to cater for any possible problems and the old systems will be temporarily left in place as a back up.
The employees have previously focused on only one area of insurance and as such it is likely that they have become extremely experienced in that area. After the reorganisation they will be asked to work on all five insurance types and whilst they may develop a stronger relationship with their customers, it is likely the changes may dilute the knowledge base and expertise of the employees. This may not have too serious an impact because not all customers will want every type of insurance and some types may not require a high level of expertise. If the lack of knowledge does become an issue, it may lead to the customer 's going to another insurance supplier to get a better service. The probability of this becoming a serious risk is relatively low because even within the multi-purpose teams there may be an opportunity to specialise in certain areas. With a low to medium impact and a low probability of occurrence this represents a significant risk and as such the management strategy should be to mitigate and allow for the risk. This can be done through spending money on system whereby certain team members focus on customers with specific needs. There should also be a system for flow of information whereby if a member of the team needs knowledge he does n't have, he can request guidance from other members of the group.
The impact of the Trade Unions is a risk that needs to be considered. The risk of individual employees becoming unhappy is discussed above but the TU 's can act independently on behalf of the employees in general and must be considered separately. The Trade Unions hold 40% of the company 's shares and 60% of the employees have membership. The collective bargaining power could lead to the plans being scrapped if the TU 's put up too much opposition to the changes. The level of impact would therefore be of medium to high importance. The probability of the occurrence of this risk is also medium. In the past the Trade Unions have been reluctant to exert their power but given their level of control and the dissatisfaction of the employees mentioned above, this may be the time for them to 'flex their muscles'. This again highlights the need for a formal review and sit-down discussion.
Economic factors such as exchange rates and a downturn in the economy are a worry but unfortunately ca n't be predicted. Another area of uncertainty that ca n't be predicted is the impact of Terrorist activity. With this becoming an increasingly global problem evidenced by the London bombings in July 2005 the insurance industry has been significantly impacted. These factors will have an impact at any phase of the project, but would have an effect regardless of whether or not the project goes ahead. The only strategy is therefore to ignore the uncertainty and accept the consequences.
The major decisions about how the project will be conducted and its likelihood of success are taken at this stage. Ten variables are usually considered in the management of change however they may not all be relevant to our restructuring. 1) The Pace of change - The timescale of the project including the feasibility, realisation and implementation phases is approximately 6 months. A large expenditure of time will be used ensuring that the proper training is provided to all the staff to enable them to properly cope with the new technology. Whilst the changes are needed in order to improve the company 's performance they are not so urgent that they need to be rushed through at the expense of a reliable implementation strategy and adequate support systems. The aim of the project is to be able to provide customers with a more personal service, so the sooner the regional, multi-purpose teams are in position the better the service that can be provided. 2) Exploratory Phase - It is a sensible idea to make use of a 'Pilot Phase' for the first six weeks of the project. This will provide an indication to the likelihood of its overall success as well as providing an early indication of problems in the design of the project and its implementation. This will add some extra cost to the project, but its role in mitigating some of the risks identified earlier in the report make it a worthwhile venture. Since the reorganisation is separating the firm into 10 multipurpose teams performing the same tasks in different areas, it seems sensible to pilot the scheme on only one of the teams to limit the cost and the disruption involved. 3) Pattern of Activities - Where possible we will be using a parallel implementation pattern to minimise the time and maximise the interaction between activities. This may be more difficult to manage but represents a quicker and more cost effective way of bringing about the changes. The alternative, a serial approach, involves implementing each stage after the previous one has finished. This reduces the complexity of the implementation phase but tends to come at the expense of time and money. We feel that the project team at CFS can handle a parallel approach and reduce the uncertainty and disruption to customers. 4) Implementation Pattern - A progressive implementation pattern is best suited to this project due to the size of the Operations department in which it is being implemented. A simultaneous approach offers fuller coverage but is more expensive and requires greater resources. As mentioned above, it is felt that the project would benefit from being piloted in only one multipurpose team. In line with this, a vertical slice approach would best suit this project as it involves implementation at all levels but to a limited operational area. 5) Degree of Empowerment - This is the most important aspect to consider in a project of this nature because there is a lot of change for the people of the firm. As stated earlier, the employees will be taking on more responsibility and a larger range of skills. The higher the level of empowerment, the more likely the employees will warm to the changes and embrace the reorganisation. It is important for there to be a meritocratic atmosphere to make the employees to feel like they have a stake in the project and the company. 6) Support for Employees - As mentioned previously the support for the employees in the form of training will play a key part in the success of the project both in the implementation phase and for sustaining the company into the future. We have already mentioned the combining of the IT department and the Human Resources Group in order to form an all purpose facility for training the employees. It is mentioned that the IT training is currently weak. Since this is identified earlier as a key are of risk it is a point which must be addressed even if it is at a cost to the firm. As stated, the cost of any outside training will be booked to the job. 7) Trade Union Involvement - It will be necessary to adopt a strategy for dealing with the trade unions given their influence over the project. The most likely course of action will be to consult with the Trade Unions and some negotiating may be necessary when deciding on the wage structure given the new responsibilities that the employee will be taking on. 8) External Contractors - We will be required to engage and manage a number of external contractors during the implementation phase of the project. A firm will have to be employed who can install the necessary technology and who can provide a more advanced IT training. It may also be prudent to bring in a firm to handle the reorganisation of the office layout to accommodate the multi-purpose teams. 9) Project Team - Headed up by the project manager, the project team consists of all those involved in the design and implementation phases. They will divide the work into 'packages' described in section six and section leaders will be responsible for the control and review of these individual packages. Employee Training will be handled by the Head of Personnel and Training and aided by an external contractor. The office layout changes will be handled by a member of the Operations Group and the installation of the new software will be dealt with by the IT department in conjunction with an external contractor. 10) Strategic Control - Control of the project will largely come from the top down. Ultimate control will rest with the Operations Director. Control points will be set up at key milestones in the process and strategy review meetings will ensure senior members of the project team are constantly kept up to date.
Funding for the project is equally vital and will be looked at in section seven of the report.
Review periods need to be set so that any variation from the planned progress or expenditure can be rectified. In this case strategic control will be exercised by the Operations Director. The project will be broken down into work packages based on the project stages. These will form the work breakdown structure. Generally this process has four stages; Planning, Monitoring, Review and Control.
This planning starts in the initial review stage of the project. Progress is then monitored as the project unfolds, review identifies deviations from the plan and finally controls are put in place to correct these deviations.
There are three levels of Planning and Control; Strategic planning and control, Operational planning and control and 'day to day' monitoring. The Operations Director has control at a top level and is in charge of resource allocation but can often rely on the project manager to handle the lower level review. At an operational level the project manager is responsible for tracking progress and ensuring targets are continually met. If they are n't it is also his responsibility to make sure they get back to where they should be in time for the next 'milestone' review. It is also useful for individuals to monitor members of their group from day to day in an effort to meet wider time requirements. It is important that staff understand the plans and what is expected of them and is therefore a good example of why they should be consulted in the design stage of the process as mentioned earlier in this report.
An effective method for review is to break the overall project down into more manageable tasks with given time periods. These are referred to as 'Work Packages' and are considered to be much more manageable than reviewing the project as a whole. In order for them to be effective, work packages must be well defined and structured in a way that they can identify deviations in a timely manner. An important judgement to be made for any review behaviour is the frequency with which they are conducted. High level strategic reviews are obviously required less than operational controls and the project manager should be able to call for additional meetings whenever possible problems occur. The importance of reviews when things are going well should n't be underestimated as a way of helping employees feel good about the work they are doing and the progress they are making. Some projects such as the reorganisation of the office layout may be short and require only a review upon completion. Others such as the new training scheme will obviously take longer and therefore need interval reviews to monitor and review.
For this project the results of the project drifting from its specifications could be quite serious. The employees are taking on a lot of additional knowledge in a short period of time and if this process is n't properly managed could lead to further disruption for the customers. Given the fluidity with which consumers can change their insurance supplier in today 's industry this disruption must be kept to a minimum.
Ensuring that the project keeps to its budget is as important as tracking its progress. Over-runs can lead to penalties or disruption to customers and in many cases will lead to knock-on effects to later stages of the project. Sound financial planning will enable CFS to make accurate forecasts of the overall costs of the project and therefore allow the correct allocation of resources. In terms of accounting and cash-flow analysis the most important decisions to be made are at what point revenue and expenditure is recognised.
It is also worth considering which costs are relevant and where they will be allocated. Only direct costs need to be considered as the project is for the benefit of the firm itself. The cost of any external contractors will also be allocated to the project but staff overheads will be recovered through the charge to customers after the project is completed.
As mentioned above, the work is going to be split into work packages made up of specific tasks. It is therefore prudent to split the budget into similar packages and review them in the same manner as we will review progress. This will allow deviations from the budget to be ore easily pinpointed and corrected in the minimum time but given the complexity, will come at a financial cost. This is justified as allowing the project to go over budget will have more significant effects.
Whilst a revisable budget will allow the company a larger degree of flexibility to changes in costs we suggest a fixed budget method is adopted. This will enable more accurate forecasts to be made and avoid tying up excess cash-flow where it could be better invested. Since the project includes the installation of new technology extra costs may arise. If so, these will be unexpected and can therefore be treated as 'additions' to the budget where properly authorised.
Even within the specific work packages, milestone expenditures are required to track the progress of the project and monitor deviations. As mentioned above, this is especially important for the longer work packages such as training where the time to completion is longer.
A budget will be prepared by the project manager incorporating work package breakdown, allocation of costs and cash-flow analysis. A Gantt chart is useful in the visualisation of the project tasks and a final analysis of costs will be made when material and labour costs at each stage can be determined.
The aim of the project is to improve the company 's performance, enabling them to maintain a healthy profit margin whilst offering competitive prices to the people of the Midlands.
The project is expected to be completed within six months.
Stakeholder groups will be informed of the work being undertaken at each stage and consulted where possible.
The risks and areas of uncertainty identified will be managed through a range of strategies, using extra time and money to mitigate and allow for individual situations.
An initial pilot phase will be employed to test the suitability of the restructuring. This will be followed by a parallel implementation approach aimed at reducing the time lag and improving the coordination between the various tasks.
Progress will be monitored through a process of reviews and controls with 'Milestones' being used throughout the project to limit the impact of any deviations from time limits and budgeting.
We expect the project to yield strong results for the company and feel we have adequate contingency in place for all possible areas of concern.
I think it is a rash decision on the part of the company to ignore the internet as a means of selling policies. It will widen the target market and help to streamline the service offered. Internet firms already in the market place are able to offer a 10% discount on their regular price for customers who use the internet. They can do this and still maintain a healthy profit margin through the savings made on labour. CFS may pride itself on its personal service but the fact is that more and more customers prefer to pay less at the expense of personal contact. From the case, it seems that CFS made the mistake of not being earlier adopters of telephone insurance and were eventually forced to change their plans. It appears they are making the same mistake again.
A 'Failure Mode and Effects Approach' was used to identify the causes of failure (primarily from prior experience), the probability of occurrence and finally the consequences of these failures. The problem with this approach is that not all project teams will have the necessary experience to correctly identify failures and therefore strategies for their avoidance may be mismanaged. It also relies quite heavily on judgement which is a dangerous way to operate. As highlighted in the example of the technology risk, it is not always possible to follow the risk management matrix which suggests 'avoid' the risk in a number of situations. In many cases the project changes are necessary for the survival of the firm and as such some risks will be unavoidable. The matrix is a useful tool for developing strategy but I believe there is more scope for allowing the risk and developing contingency strategies than the matrix suggests.
I have studied the Critical Path Method of predicting project timescales and tracking progress through A-Level mathematics and Quantitative Methods of Analysis. Whilst it is a useful tool in many situations I felt its application here is n't entirely sufficient here given the complexity of the project and the mere estimates of time scales. Estimates carry with them an inherent uncertainty and whilst it does provide a logical progression it fails to take into account variations and possible inefficiencies in resources and labour. I think its application is more useful when combined with another method of project planning such as the Gantt chart which gives a better visual representation.
The types of process looked at in Project Management are similar in structure to those I have observed in many other modules throughout my course. The assessment of risks is a necessary part of the design of any product or service and identification of failures is an essential skill in the understanding of service operations management and supply chain management. The organisation of a given project from concept generation to implementation and evaluation is also extremely similar to that of the design of a new product and its subsequent marketing campaign. Project management requires a combination of both analytical skill and judgement. The birth of the product is similar to the identification by a company of the need to make changes and the quantitative and qualitative nature of evaluation is very similar to that observed in the market place.
