Initially seen in outpatients clinic on . Patient was wheelchair bound due to the pain he was getting from his knees due to osteoarthritis. Admitted to ward on for assessment, treatment and rehabilitation of his osteoarthritis.
Patient declared that he had 'ground to halt' from the pain in his knees and ankles due to his osteoarthritis.
The pain in his knees, particularly his right knee had been getting worse over the last 12 months and 8 months ago the pain was so bad he did n't like to weight bear on them. The pain was such a sharp strong pain it made him feel nauseous. He did n't get any pain when he was sitting and with his legs raised. Prescribed pain killers also took the pain away. The pain is worse in the mornings and it used to take him the first couple of hours to get washed, dressed and fed. The pain never woke him up from sleep unless he moved his legs very suddenly, which did n't happen very often. Before admission the patient was sleeping on the recliner chair rather than going upstairs to bed.
The patient said that he noticed difficulty from his OA about 2 years ago when he started getting pain from his right knee causing him to limp. Since this time many of his joints are effected including his elbows, shoulders, occasionally his hips (which he says is more to do with his bad knees), his wrists and hands. 1986 excision of a seborrhoeic keratotic skin lesion.
Inferior MI when he was 56/7.
Angina 1997 Essential hypertension haematemesis they performed an OGD which revealed a small hiatus hernia, no evidence of active bleeding or oesophagitis.
The notes state he has had OA since at least 01.
Chronic anaemia.
Currently has a right inguinal hernia 2004 had an operation on his right carpal tunnel due to median nerve entrapment.
Anaemia which has been investigated with an endoscopy and colonoscopy.
He has never had a stroke, diabetes or family history of diabetes, cholesterol he believes is normal, never had rheumatic fever or asthma.
Father had RA and eldest sister had RA.
No other significant family history.
The patient does not suffer from any drug allergies or any other kind of allergies.
The patient is currently on the following medication:
Lives in in , in an end of terrace house.
He is retired initially he worked as a coal miner for 20 years and then became a driving instructor which he did for 6 years until he had his heart attack.
Wife passed away 6 years ago, she had late onset diabetes.
Eldest son currently lives with him, he is a computer analyst, he has suffered with a frozen shoulder and a steroid injection cured the problem. He has 2 sons and a daughter.
He can go up the stairs if he uses the handrail. He can prepare his meals but it takes longer because of his hands.
He smokes 35 cigarettes a day and has done since he was 14 years old ???pack year history.
He does n't drink alcohol.
No breathing probelms.
Hands - MCP joints less swollen. Ulna deviation of fners in both hands, knuckles swollen. All fingers not the thumbs are stuck in a flexed postion (OT equipment) Some muscle wasting on the back of the hands. No pain at rest at the the moment, movement ok, right hand worse than the left.
Looked comfy.
Signs ?clubbing.
Pulse 72 bpm and regular.
Respiratory rate:
Eyes - clear.
Tongue - clear'.
Lips fine.
No lymphadenopathy no oedema.
Look:
Swollen, not red.
Feel:
Right and left knee - Painful to touch, Crepitus.
Move: Knees.
Right - flex to 45 degrees.
Left flex to 40.
Hips flex to 85 on right.
Flex to 80 on left.
Hip rotation no pain on right or left leg. Internal and external rotation normal HB = 8, CRP = 63, ESR = 49.
Suffered from OA for at least 5 years diagnosed with RA and OA with increased ESR/CRP, MCP joints boggy and ulnar deviation Bilateral knee injection depomedrone.
Microcytic anaemia.
Peripheral oedema to the knees.
Xray of hands and feet.
OGD and FOS.
PR.
Analgeisa.
Physio and OT.
Arrange a DEXA scan.
Dietician.
Dipstick urine.
FBC BP = 155/75 pulse rate 90 bpm.
Apyrexial.
Bloods on :
ESR 51, UREA = 93, Albumin = 33, WCC = 11.45, HGB = 8, Creatinine = 128, MCV = 75.1, plt = 589, CRP = 52 == Microcytic anaemia.
On HGB improved to 9.6, hands improved, swelling reduced on hands.
Start on bisphosphonates if no oesophagitis.
BP 158/72.
Results of OGD = 09/05 Oesophagus and duodenum normal. Stomach = mild linear erosive gastritis in prepyloric region evident.
Sigmoidoscopy = porr bowel preparation instrument only insewrted to rectum.
