This essay argues on the ambiguity of the realist critique towards liberal internationalism. The working definition of liberal internationalism used here is more inclusive, referring to the so-called "utopians" virulently criticized by E.H. Carr. The paper attempts to reveal that the core liberal assumption according to which ideas and morality matter in building an international society, has not been 'demolished' but rather capriciously 'borrowed' by realist thinkers like Carr. The arguments of this paper follow the core liberal creed that ideas and moral visions can influence politics. Moreover, the idea of harmony of interests has not been assumed by all idealists and deserves a more careful examination since it may not necessarily conceal vested interests. The paper concludes that the subtle fact of realists 'borrowing' core liberal assumptions renders their critique a rather ambiguous than a sound one. Carr mentioning of the need for utopia makes us think about the inevitability of consensus. Realism offers a simplistic account of how international relations should be shaped, which in the end is faced with the need of leaving room for normative thinking. Ideas do matter even for realists and eventually the 'planes' will meet.
Do states have common interests? To what extent can states have moral visions about how world politics should look like? Is cooperation possible? Is there any possibility to abolish war? These are the underlying questions, which have shaped the First Debate of International Relations, a debate between realism and liberalism, which is generally said to have been won by the realist team. However, many of today 's liberal ideas and practices in world politics have origins in the first writings of liberal internationalists such as the Enlightenment philosophy of Immanuel Kant with its ideal of creating a democratic and thus peaceful world order. While liberals like Adam Smith or Richard Cobden were supporters of the belief that free trade and laissez-faire lead to global welfare and hence to peace, Kant considers that peace need more than commerce. Republican constitutions and pacific federation of states are the key elements for a 'perpetual peace'. Furthermore, the demise of communism in 1989 has strengthened liberal internationalism as an influential theoretical tradition. That moment is said to confirm the concept of history as linear, progressive and perfectible, and prove a general preference for democracy, free trade and collective security. Fukuyama 's celebration of the 'end of history' regarded liberal democracy as an ideology without competitors and as a promise for the growing core of pacific states. The language of free trade, comparative advantage theory, and efficiency seems to have triumphed. Clear indicators of the growing influence of liberal internationalism in world politics exist: briefly, we witness a proliferation of free trade agreements worldwide and an increasing weight of international multilateral political organizations. Consequently, liberal internationalism "deserves serious investigation and intellectual engagement". The present paper will argue on the ambiguity of the realist critique of liberal internationalism, pointing out to the ceaseless relevance of liberal ideas. It attempts to reveal that the core liberal assumption according to which ideas and morality matter in building an international society (with its implications for democratic cooperation and harmony of interests) has not been 'demolished' but rather capriciously 'borrowed' by realist thinkers like Carr.
The paper will use the phrase world politics instead of international relations because the former is more inclusive and refers not only to the relations between nations (inter-national) but also to relations that transcend the nation (transnational). For more details see John Baylis and Steve Smith (eds), The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations (Oxford: OUP, 2001), p. 2.
See Scott Burchillal. Theories of International Relations (London: Macmillan Press Ltd., 2nd edition, 2001).
Burchill. Theories of International Relations, p. 63.
Throughout history, important normative ideals and ideas have always inspired future improvements and projects in world politics. Philosophers and thinkers elaborated doctrines, laws or theories sometimes centuries before their implementation, creating trends of ideas and influencing political decision-makers and important events in world history. Think of Hugo Grotius, for instance, whose ideas were debated at the Council of Westphalia or of Hans Kelsen, whose drafts for a new League of Nations circulated long before the creation of the UN. Humans and institutions could always strive for improvement and perfection. Still, feasibility requires commitment, perseverance and most of all willingness. On the one hand, liberal internationalists (idealists) believe that war is a tool for autocratic and unrepresentative leaders, and a reflection of the pernicious ideology of balance of power. Education in the spirit of democracy and the belief in the perfectibility of human nature can avoid and eventually eliminate the likelihood of conflicts. The prospects for international cooperation are genuine if we believe in the possibility of institutions and international law to promote and preserve it. There is no reasonable desire to wage wars since the costs are higher than the benefits. Having this belief in mind, during the 1920s the liberal architects have envisaged the League of Nations and the Briand-Kellogg Pact, trying to dismiss war as a justified instrument of foreign policy and to promote and maintain peace among nations. On the other hand, realists believed that conflicts are endemic because they reflect a fixed human nature characterized by constant desire for power. Even the ancient Gyges' myth told by sophists reveals that men would always commit wrongdoing and immoral acts if there were no prospects for punishment. We would all use a ring that can make us invisible in order to steal, cheat or kill. Starting with Thucydides, Thomas Hobbes, Nicollo Machiavelli, realism has upheld the idea that what characterizes relations among people as well as among sovereign states is an eternal struggle for power and a selfish competition for glory and material gains in a world of scarce resources. Anarchy (lack of central government) is what characterizes international politics and it can only be managed by balancing the power between states. Hence, Carr 's critique towards utopians' wishful thinking mentioned the danger of using preferences and desires in shaping international politics.
Plato. The Republic of Plato, translation by Allan Bloom (New York: Basic Books, 1968).
E.H. Carr. The Twenty Years' Crisis (London: Palgrave, 2001), p. 10.
By contrast to idealists, realists assume that human nature is essentially bad and there are no real hopes for perfectibility. Competition instead of cooperation and selfishness instead of altruism stand as the realist convictions. From a realist perspective, the necessity of pursuing national self-interest can sometimes ask for immoral and violent conduct which is excused in a Machiavellian manner. However, there may be a strong temptation for humans to act selfishly, as well as for states to cheat but there may also be second thoughts and eventually decisions for altruism and cooperation because states as well as people cannot live in the isolation of self-interest. It is not utopian to say that human beings are perfectible and that education is essential in cultivating morality and unselfish behavior. But educating people in the idea that pursuing self-interest is essential because we live in a selfish world, is in itself a "normative" act, which unfortunately can have negative outcomes and hence realism can confirm itself. Since it is wise to just accept ineluctable forces, is n't it frustrating to call yourself a realist? Is there any chance for peoples to induce any change in the system if we accept this deterministic and fatalist view? Booth strikingly evidenced that Hiroshima 1945 is a good enough reason to reject a traditional worldview that promotes selfishness and war as necessities. Booth prefers to advocate for a 'utopian realism', since a boat should not only survive the austere waters but also reach a destination. However, the subtle switch of ideas in Carr 's writings renders its critique a rather ambiguous one.
Ken Booth. 'Security in anarchy: utopian realism in theory and practice', International Affairs, Vol. 67, no. 3, 1991, pp. 527-545.
Carr. The Twenty Years' Crisis, p. 87.
What are the implications of his statements? Carr speaks about complete realists and complete utopians, admitting the sterility of a complete realist outlook but without offering a concrete alternative to the so-called utopians. Consequently, "It is rather curious that Carr remains celebrated for his staunch realist critique of idealism". One can say that the degeneration of realism started with Carr. As Legro and Moravcsik pointed out "(...) Carr and Morgenthau themselves denied that any argument they advanced was ipso facto realist", because for instance, Morgenthau also thinks about the role of domestic politics, ideas and institutions. The authors came to the conclusion that the diluted core assumptions of realism (especially contemporary realism) renders it an incoherent theory. One can say that the ambiguity of the realist stance has somehow been consolidated by the later development of neo-liberal institutionalism (the reason for the subsequent "neo-neo" consensus (or maybe compromise) between neo-realism and neo-liberal institutionalism). As Keohane would say, ideas have always shaped agenda and hence outcomes. In this respect, he offers the example of China where Soviet ideas and not Soviet power has influenced economic policies or the event of de-colonization, which did not reflect a lack of power but rather a will and desire for change.
Stefano Guzzini. Realism in International Relations and International Political Economy: the Continuing Story of a Death Foretold (London: Routledge, 1999), p. 22.
Jeffrey W. Legro and Andrew Moravcsik. 'Is Anybody Still a Realist?', International Security, Vol. 24, No. 2, 1999, p. 31.
Robert Keohane and Judith Goldstein (eds.). Ideas andForeign Policy: Beliefs, Institutions and Political Change, (New York: Cornell University Press, 1993).
Nonetheless, Carr 's critique of internationalism has especially focused on the idea of a natural harmony of interests promoted by Smith for instance through the concept of laissez-faire. For Carr, laissez-faire is actually a Machiavellian device invented by the privileged classes to defend and maintain their interests and domination. Of course, his critique may be sound to the extent that laissez-faire may produce a gap between the rich and the poor states (or peoples). One may reasonably point out to the problems of the contemporary era in terms of the global inequities: global markets may be detrimental for the poor countries that cannot access the benefits of globalization. That is because markets do not create public goods. But the critique may not look so sound if we take into account the potential of laissez-faire to create acceptable inequalities that work for a greater advantage of the least advantaged state. Moreover, laissez-faire is certainly not utopian because it does not generate a perfect situation. However, rejecting it entirely may be just another 'utopia'.
John Rawls. A Theory of Justice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971).
Furthermore, the idea of harmony is not necessarily upheld by all internationalists and, most of all it is not a given fact but rather a construction or agreement among states to harmonize their interests according to rational universally agreed values. " (...) Peace can neither be inaugurated nor secured without a general agreement between the nations; thus a particular kind of league, which we will call a pacific federation is required." More than a static situation, the harmony of interests is a natural subscription of rational individuals and of democratic states to a set of universal moral norms which can settle disputes and maintain peace. Consequently, a harmony of interests may not necessarily conceal vested interests as Carr suggested, since there are universally human goods (or interests) such as life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness, and peace to which any rational person would subscribe. Such universal values can be peacefully promoted at the international level so as to become the basis for cooperation and partnership among nations. In addition, liberal internationalists just as realists hinted to the idea of an anarchic international system because of the lack of a central government or authority to regulate states' conduct and mediate their disputes. As Osiander explains, idealists like Norman Angell, Leonard Woolf or Alfred Zimmern display certain 'realist' ideas that ask for a revised understanding of idealism.
Immanuel Kant. Political Writings, Hans Reiss (ed) (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), pp. 102-5, quoted in Baylis and Smith, Globalization of World Politic.
Andreas Osiander. 'Rereading Early Twentieth-Century IR Theory: Idealism Revisited', International Studies Quarterly, Vol. 42, no. 3, 1998, p. 423.
Another important liberal idea criticized by realists is that democracies do not wage wars with one another. Influenced by Kant 's ideas, Michael Doyle emphasized that democracies managed to create a "separate" peace that makes the possibility of international cooperation a real fact. International cooperation is the key element based on the recognition of the fact that states as well as peoples have mutually dependent destinies. The fundamental features of liberal democracies, namely the rule of law, individual rights and liberties, equality before the law, representative governments based on popular consultation and consent, facilitate the avoidance of conflict. Nowadays, the European Union is giving world politics a lesson about the possibility of fruitful cooperation in a region frequently affected by national conflicts. Consequently, by contrast to the realist critique, democracies can be said to be inherently peaceful to the extent that democratic states respect the national interests of other democratic states and hence do not engage in a selfish pursuit of self-interest.
Michael Doyle. Ways of War and Peace: Realism, Liberalism, and Socialism (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1997), quoted in Baylis and Smith, Globalization of World Politics, 2001.
However, critiques addressed to the liberal internationalist theory often reiterate the experience of the League of Nations, its weaknesses that failed to prevent Japan 's move into Manchuria or Italy 's invasion of Abysinia. Woodrow Wilson was arguing in his Fourteen points for the need of an international organization to secure peace at the international level, but Carr concluded that the ideal of collective security was just an instrument for the United States' vested interests and not a genuine path to cooperation. At this point, the critique of "utopianism" may be sound to the extent that it may warn us about the potential tyranny of a certain vision. Mussolini, says Carr, has also used rhetoric of peace to conceal desires for domination. This is of course, a sound reason for rejecting a theory that takes for granted certain so-called "standards". But that is why democracy establishes checks and balances, accepts changes and progress while the interdependence of our world makes it much more difficult for some states to dominate the world. Moreover, the lack of commitment to collective security, i.e. the stubbornness of some states in refusing to improve relations among states within a global regulatory framework, can also be responsible for the League 's failure. Or, as Angell argues "The danger of expecting too much of a mere "piece of machinery" the installation of which was not accompanied by a reformed perception of international problems." Moreover, until 1914, the "balance of power" principle, which viewed the world system as a self-regulatory system, also failed to prevent the First World War. Of course, realism has never claimed that it is possible to overcome war as an inherent feature of international relations. But unfortunate events in world politics should not result in merely a rejection of the possibility for democratic cooperation among states. On the contrary, these events should give us material for reflection on how world politics should be made more democratic. Realism offers a much more static perspective on the capacity of states to change their interests and to care less about power in selfish terms of relative gains and more about cooperation and absolute gains. States seem like torpid bodies incapable of inducing any fundamental alteration of the system (except another balance of power) which may actually be beneficial for them as well as for other states. This can be explained through the limited definition given by Morgenthau to international politics, as a "continuing effort to maintain or increase the power of one 's nation and to keep in check or reduce the power of other nations.".
Osiander. 'Rereading Early Twentieth-Century IR Theory: Idealism Revisited', p. 423.
Hans, Morgenthau. Politics Among Nations (New York: Alfred A Knopf, 5th ed , 1973), p. 231.
In conclusion, the idealist tendencies found in Carr 's writings are a proof for the limits of realism as a static and simplistic bias on the ways international relations ought to be shaped. Carr mentioning of the need for utopia makes us think about the inevitability of consensus. Not only that realism displays normative thinking (the claim of objectivity can be easily rejected because realism makes enough value-judgements about human nature that cannot possibly be neutral), but it is also confronted with the inevitable exigency of finding a way out from the deadlock by adopting an idealist stance. There are no winners of the First Debate in International Relations. Contrary to Carr 's prediction, the plane of realism will always meet the plane of liberals and the debate should always remain open.
