A stable and healthy-performing currency market is always beneficial for government and country as a whole. Being a crucial element in currency market, exchange rate is pegged by country, if it is possible. In today 's developing nations, a country may decide to peg its currency to create a stable atmosphere for foreign investment. In the world economy history, the global exchange rates used to be fixed under "gold standard" (between 1870 and 1914) and "Bretton Woods System" (from post War World II to 1971). Eventually, all attempts to move back to global exchange rate peg were abandoned in 1985. Krugman develops First Generation Speculative Attack Model in his work (1979) to analyse this issue, that is, the collapse of fixed exchange rate regime. The following essay consists of three sections, the first section illustrates the frame and main ideas of the first generation model; empirical examples are provided in part two and the limitations and possible extensions of this model are discussed in the last section of this essay.
Reem Heakal, February 6, 2003, Floating And Fixed Exchange Rates,.
Let Krugman 's word (1979) be the threshold of the first section:
Paul Krugman, A Model of Balance-of-Payment Crisis, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol.11, No. 3 (Aug., 1979), 311-325.
The main target of this model is to find out the timing of collapse of fixed exchange rate regime. Krugman 's word indicates that he would like to find out the timing of exhaustion of such instruments and hence obtain the timing of collapse.
Several assumptions will be made before establishment of the model: (1) Purchasing price parity (PPP) is hold in this model: ------ (1) where Pt and Pt* are respectively the logs of current (say, time t) domestic and foreign price, and et stands for the exchange rate at the same stage. (2) The government runs budget deficit, which is financed by "domestic credit"(that is, the bond owned by central bank) and "public bonds". This model also assumes that the borrowing capacity from public is exhausted. (3) The government is willing to peg the exchange rate as long as reserves are not exhausted. This assumption excludes uncertainty for the model. (4) All agents are assumed to be completely rational.
In addition to above assumptions, it is necessary to give a short introduction of the motive of speculative attack. Ross W. Jordan (2003) defines it as follows:
Ross W. Jordan, 2003, Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, 6th Edition, McGraw-Hill Higher Education, p.673.
Since those speculators intend to save money to obtain benefits from "favourable exchange rate fluctuations", the speculative attack should not be a graduate process, but rapid and aggressive.
This section is going to discuss the corresponding monetary policy with respect to government 's target exchange rate. The so-called monetary approach is used. Besides PPP, Uncovered Interest Rate Parity Condition (UIRP) and Money Demand Equation are needed: (2), URIP (3), Money Demand Equation where i and i* are domestic and foreign interest rates and is the change in exchange rate. In equation (3), Mt and Yt are money supply and domestic income respectively and all variables are in logarithm form. Substitute (2) and (3) to (1) and obtain: (4).
Then assume all exogenous variables to zero, i.e. . Therefore: (5) given rational expectations and no uncertainty in future, residents are able to correctly estimate the exchange rate in t+1, that is: (6) then substitute (6) to (5): (7).
Since this model assumes that government is pegging exchange rate, therefore . Denote this exchange rate as and substitute it to equation (7): (8).
Therefore the monetary policy is constant if the government plans to peg the exchange rate at .
It is time to explore how foreign reserve falls under conditions above. First break down the money supply as follows: ------(9).
In which D and R represent domestic credit and foreign reserves. Furthermore, according to assumption (2), the relation between the budget deficit and domestic credit and public bond is: where G stands for government spending and T is the tax revenue. G and T are in real terms therefore the increments of D and B are discounted by price level P. As indicated in assumption (2) that the borrowing capacity from public has already achieved its maximum level, B is not growing anymore and hence .
Now, because of and , . Assume that the rate of domestic credit expansion is equal to, which means and hence .
Recall the equation (8), if the government wants to peg the exchange rate at its long run equilibrium level, , it will have to hold the money supply at level of , therefore . Since M = D + R, it can be obtained that: . Now substitute to , it gives the reduction rate of reserves:
Based on this result, the country 's reserves will be exhausted sooner or later and hence its currency will be forced to devalue.
After the discussion in foregoing sections, it is time to investigate the most important part of this model: the timing of the collapse of regime. For simplicity, Flood and Garber (1984) solves this problem by introducing the concept of "shadow exchange rate". Copeland (2000) defines this term as follows:
Laurence S. Copeland, 2000, Exchange Rate and International Finance, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education Ltd, p.437 "S" is essentially equal to: (10) where.
Kt is the so-called "basic fundamental", in which represents the foreign money supply, is the real income relative to the foreign country and is the foreign interest rate. In this model, is set to be constant. For the equation (10), is the expected change in exchange rate in next period.
Now denote the timing of collapse as , and post-collapse period as . Under the condition of rational expectation, speculators have perfect prediction of exchange rate in , therefore: , and hence (11).
Also, because reserves are exhausted as soon as the collapse, money supply in post-collapse period would only consist of domestic credit, which implies: (12) where is the starting domestic credit level and is also the growth rate of . Also, recap the idea of equation (8) that: , which implies: . Since now , therefore (13).
Now substitute equation (13) and (12) to (11): (14).
Eventually, it is time to answer the crucial question of this model: the timing of collapse. According to Copeland (2000): "the crisis will occur when the shadow exchange rate is the same as the fixed rate." As both of the variables are ready, the timing can be derived as follows: (15).
However, this is not the end of story. A term of "collapsing bubble" needs to be introduced to equation (15) and hence this equation is finalized:
Why this term is necessary? Because speculators will not wait until government has run out reserves; instead, they tend to attack the financial market when reserves have fallen to a certain low point, this "bubble" term implies that collapsing point is always earlier than that reserves are exhausted.
In the next section of essay, some empirical evidences are given.
Two examples are discussed in this section. First comes the devaluation of the pound in 1967: On the night of 18 th November, 1967, the British government announced that it was lowering the exchange rate so the pound was worth 2.40$, down from 2.80$, a cut over 14%. This decision followed weeks of increasingly feverish speculation and a day in which the Bank of England spent   200m trying to shore up the pound from its gold and dollar reserves. The Prime Minister at that time, Harold Wilson, indicated that the only alternative was to borrow heavily from foreign governments. However, the only loans on offer were short-term ones.
On this day, 19 November, 1967,Wilson defends 'pound in your pocket,.
The devaluation of British pound in 1967 is considered to be a classical evidence of first generation speculative attack model, as it almost showed all the elements in this model. First of all, the British government was running an   800m budget deficit at that time; second, speculators had correct foresight: they knew the pound was weak and they decided to attack it; third, there was not any other choice for government but only buying pounds with its reserves; finally, the government could not hold the pound any longer and the currency depreciated.
Bretton Woods System was based on Bretton Woods Agreement, which was signed by 44 nations during the first three weeks of July in 1944. The U.S dollar was set to be in a core position in this system: it is the standard to which every other currency was pegged and it was the only currency directly convertible into gold for official purposes. The benchmark of gold price referred to the rate on 1 st July, 1944, which is $35 per ounce. Therefore, as the Bretton Woods system evolved, the reserves of most countries became a combination of gold and dollars. US dollar became increasingly more important.
However, during the period 1958-1971, the US experienced a persistent deficit in its balance of payments. The causes of these chronic deficits include:
E.Kwan Choi, 1996, , The Bretton Woods System.
In addition to this, the U.S currency market was facing two more problems. The first one was the combination of its reserves. At the beginning of 1958, US reserve assets included foreign currencies such as Yen, DM and British pound at first. However, by the end of the 1960s, the US international reserve consisted of mainly gold. Reserve is volatile if it mainly consists of a particular currency (it is gold in this case): when this kind of foreign currency suddenly depreciates, the real value of reserves will decrease.
The second problem faced by the U.S government was the dramatic increase in liabilities to foreign central banks. According to Choi (1996), by 1963, the US gold reserve still roughly covered liabilities to foreign central banks; and by 1970 the gold coverage had fallen to 55%, by 1971 22%. From the perspective of the U.S government, this fall in gold is equivalent to the fall in foreign reserves. In fact, from 1963, foreign central banks had tried to convert their dollar reserves into gold, eventually the US was forced to abandon gold convertibility, which is symbolised by President Richard Nixon 's indication on August 15, 1971, hence the eliminated the Bretton Woods System. Actually the post-collapse movements of exchange rate in some major countries (including the U.S) would enable this collapse to be a supporting evidence of first generation model. Choi (1996) gives the following figures: Yen appreciated 17%, Mark 13.5 %, Pound 9%, French Franc 9%; moreover, the gold price rose from $35 per oz to $38 per oz, which was equivalent to a dollar devaluation of 8.57%. The quarterly data of Yen / Dollar, Mark / Dollar and Dollar / Pound from 1971 to 1973 are plotted in Figures 1, 2 and 3 in appendix. It can be noticed that for Japan and Germany, exchange rates against Dollar gradually fell during 1971 and 1972, followed by a dramatic reduction in early 1973; performance in pound / dollar was different, but still, dollar depreciated more than 10% against British pound from 1971 till the first quarter in 1972.
Different from the first example, foreign countries somehow performed the role of speculator against the U.S in the collapse of Bretton Woods. The decreasing willingness of holding dollar directly forces foreign countries absorbed gold stock in the U.S. When the U.S had exhausted its gold reserves, the fixed exchange rate regime collapsed.
However, the financial crisis occurred in the 1990s, namely collapse of ERM in1992 and Asian Financial Crisis in 1997-99, can not be fully explained by this model as its inherent limitations. This would be discussed in section 3.
This model offers formal description of speculative attacks in currency markets and analyses the timing of collapse of fixed exchange rate regime from the perspective of balance-of-payment. Nonetheless, the model has two theoretical limitations, which are caused by the assumptions imposed. The first one is that this model wipes out all uncertainty in government 's policy. The government is assumed to abandon the fixed rate regime only if reserves are exhausted. This is the very reason why this model is inappropriate to explain the collapse of ERM in 1992, where, according to W. Aklia (1998), "the temptation to leave the ERM was high for the U.K. The same held true for many other struggling European economies like Italy, Spain and Portugal as well as for countries like Sweden and Finland to break off their fixed exchange rate system." This indication implies that by introducing uncertainty to government 's and speculators' decision making, speculators are not 100% committing attack and the government is not certainly holding the regime.
Weerapana, Akila (1998): The Performance of Simple Monetary Policy Rules in a.
Large Open Economy, Wellesley College, unpublished.
The second limitation is that this model only focuses on circumstances with budget deficit and accordingly unable to explain those speculative attack cases without apparent problems in balance-of-payment. For example, countries involved in 1997-99 Asian Financial Crisis were not having large budget deficits and some of them even enjoyed surplus, but speculators still attacked their currencies. Based on this reason, Copeland (2000) also argues: "this model (the first generation model) seemed to be no help in explaining the Asian Crisis.".
Laurence S. Copeland, 2000, Exchange Rate and International Finance, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education Ltd, p. 464.
Essentially the extensions of this model are derived from the limitations, therefore introducing uncertainty is a sensible one. As claimed in foregoing paragraphs, neither of ERM Crisis nor Asian Financial Crisis can be explained by this model, as paradoxes exist in both cases according to the assumptions of the model. Another possible extension for this model could be the removal of those limitations on government 's options of cutting budget deficit. Besides using foreign reserves, issuing Treasury bill to foreign banks is also a possible solution; even the emergency bonds could delay the timing of collapse and probably change the result. Therefore extensions can be introduced to such two aspects.
In conclusion, this essay outlines a version of the first generation speculative attack model. The target of this model is to find out the timing of collapse of fixed exchange rate regime in an economy. Based on several assumptions, this model offers formally describes concept of speculative attack and answers the timing question by numerical method. Empirical evidences of the devaluation of the pound in 1967 and the depreciated dollar in the end of Bretton Woods System are discussed in section 2. Because of the limitations inside, this model is not appropriate to analyse the ERM Crisis in 1992 and the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997-99. The final section not only discusses the limitations, but also the possible extension for this model. This paper argues that the introduction of uncertainty will enable this model to be more realistic and more effective.
