This Experiment has been conducted to find the values of the Moment of Inertia of 3 independent varying discs. These discs are known to have different Moment of Inertia values.
The results are presented and discussed in the report that follows.
The Moment of Inertia is the resistive force to rotate a mass on an axis, this can be applied to Newton 's 2 nd Law.
The Experiment will apply a load to a radius r (This radius is not the radius of the disc, although this has been outlined for future work to find the relationship between the Moment of Mass and Radius). The Force will be generated by a Mass on the end of a string. The spring will affectively create Torque at the radius. The name for the apparatus or method could not be found.
The only variable for each disc in this experiment will be the mass of the weight. In doing so, the force applied will be changed, and a relationship between Force and time taken for the mass to drop will occur.
This experiment will manipulate the values calculated from the falling the mass and use the known values from the Disc to obtain the values for the Moment of Inertia.
The purpose of this experiment is to find the Second Moment of Mass of three individual discs, of different weights and different radii. By applying knowledge from Newton 's 2 nd law and the "SUVAT" (Motion of a particle in a linear form) equations, we are able to determine The Second Moment of Mass.
Assumptions are usually reasons for unexpected results. It would be wise to expect the final values for The Second Moment of Mass to be inconsistent with the predicted values, however, the difference between actual and calculated values wo n't be large enough to render the results useless.
The Assumptions are that the acceleration is constant, there is no friction or air resistance that would slow down the disc rotating (e.g. friction in the ball bearings that the rotating force is applied), the string is light and inextensible, each repeated experiment is identical and there is assume that there is no Human reaction time.
The Assumption that the string was light and inextensible was a good assumption because it relatively was.
Good results will be obtained when I is large and m is small, because it takes longer for the mass to fall, the time will be larger, and therefore the percentage of human error time will be dramatically reduced.
The Experiment can be divided into 2 free body diagrams.
Newton 's 2 nd Law states.
Applying this to Motion of a disc:
Force=Torque.
So (1) (Found on Briefing sheet, page 3, see Appendix 1).
Where I is The Second Moment of Mass.
Equations for the Study of the Falling Mass:
When a is constant: (2) (3) (4) (Above equations found in University of Engineering Data book, page 55).
For the Rotating Disc:
So, applying equation 1 gives us. (5) (Found on the Briefing sheet attached on page 3).
Referring to the Mass Free Body Diagram:
If mass is falling, the following statement must be true. (6).
Applying equation (5) gives: (7).
Referring to the Rotating Disc: (8) (Stated in Holtzapple Reece, page 550, (21-16)) (9) (Stated in Holtzapple Reece, page 550, (21-20)).
So substituting equation 9 with equation 7 gives: (10) (11).
Referring to the Falling Mass Free Body Diagram:
Applying equation 2 gives (12) (13).
Substitute equation 11 with equation 13 (14).
Therefore a graph of m against would yield a gradient of the value (15).
If not already done, attach string to end of helix grooved cylinder, and tie a loop in the other end. Then place the weight holder 's (weighing 100g in this case) hook through the loop. Tightly wind up the string noting how many revolutions it took, then measure the length of the string that was used to wrap around n times. Use the equation: to find radius r. In this case 169mm was used up in 5 revolutions, so: (This value corresponds to 'r' in equation 15.).
Then, to set a start point from where the weight is released from, the weight needs to be wound tightly up to the point of release. Note that the point of release has to remain constant so the values of time compare correctly. When the weight is at the point of release, measure the weight 's displacement from the ground to that particular point. This is the displacement from which the weight will hit the ground from the starting point. Note the value down, this value corresponds to  's' in equation 15.
Select a desired weight on the weight holder, and attach through the hoop in the string. Wind up the string tightly, so the string does n't slip during the experiment. When the weight reaches the fixed release point, transfer the force holding the weight in equilibrium to the disc. This will reduce any unwanted Torque applied by the holder during the release. Start the stopwatch at the exact instant the weight starts to drop. Then Stop the stopwatch when the weight hits the ground (or passes an alternative fixed finishing point).
Record the time, and repeat the above procedure two more times, change the weight, execute 3 times and continue until all possible combinations of different weights have been through the experiment. Change the disc, and repeat the above procedure for the remaining two discs.
The Value of the Second Moment of Mass will be proportional to the gradient of a mass against t -2. The method to how this is derived is in the Theory section. The graph is expected to deviate from the line of best fit the more mass that is applied.
The gradient will be in terms of:
So the gradient will need to be manipulated: (kg.m 2) (Note - that the 'line of best fit' function in Excel is appropriate for the graph that is created, enlarged graphs will show the line of best fit (see appendix 2)).
There were no unordinary observations to report.
The prediction that the graph would bend was n't necessarily correct. The multiple points do n't really deviate below or above the line of best fit. Apart from the results shown on the graph of disc 2, but the deviation of the 200g weight ca n't be relied upon to justify that there is in-fact a curve. The graph with the less scatter on the repeated readings was undoubtedly the graph of disc 3. This probably had something to do with the fact that it was lightest, and therefore the time for the weight to travel the set displacement would be more than that of a heavier disc (Disc 1), suggesting that the person operating the stopwatch would have ample time to prepare themselves. It might have was more to do with getting used to the experiment and doing the experiment so many times that it was practically standardised, as disc 1 was the first to be experimented on and disc 3 last. This Explanation reflects the data in the Tables. This could also explain the reason why there are more anomalies on the graph of disc 1 compared to the graph of disc 2, and the graph of disc 2 had more anomalies compared with the graph of disc 3.
It 's been decided to exclude the error of the human reaction time, for the reason stated below:
The experiment conductor 's reaction time (eye to hand) = +0.35s. [Bearing in mind, the conductor 's reaction time would be better than   0.35s because, sub-consciously, the person could probably tell when the weight stopped, by estimating when the weight hit the ground. In this experiment, to obtain the best results only one person did the experiment, because he/she could actually tell when the weight started to drop (i.e. when the grip was released), so as soon as the grip was released the stopwatch was started.
I'm not taking this into account because of the assumption that reaction time is negligible, and that I do n't know the reaction time from the weight hitting the ground to the stopwatch being stopped, because of human physiological elements.] Hence, the human reaction time would be very difficult to get a real value, so the error calculation in itself would have an error, which would render the value useless.
The error of the ruler was to 0.0005m.
The value for g is 9.81ms -2, rounded off to 2d.p, which means there 's an error of   0.005 ms -2.
The value for r is 0.00538m, rounded off to 5d.p, which means there 's an error of   0.000005m.
Putting that into the equation:
Note, that the gradient error does n't include the error (misjudgement) of plotting the line of best fit because the line is calculated by the Microsoft program; Excel. (The gradient value was calculated on Excel, see the sheets attached; appendix 2).
Disc 1 gradient=4.3429(kgs2) kg.m 2.
Disc 2 gradient=2.2063(kgs2) kg.m 2.
Disc 3 gradient=0.9173(kgs2) kg.m 2.
The measuring rule was the main contributor towards the error results, especially when the error margin was a relatively high percentage of the length of the string.
The reason why the values for Moment of Interia are so small is because the masses of the weights were small.
Unfortunately, errors occur, and assumptions have been made to simplify the experiment, the factors that have been assumed 0, do tend to affect the system in some way.
Major assumptions overlooked are, for example; the assumption that acceleration is constant throughout the experiment and that friction is negligible. Unfortunately friction will always occur in some form in an experiment that has moving parts.
The design of the experiment was indeed relevant and useful to find the Moment of Inertia. The moment of inertia could not of been found by a more simple and effective way.
To improve this experiment, consider using laser beams for marking the start and stop point of the weight. The idea being; that when the laser beam is broken by the mass of the falling object, the stopwatch is either started or stopped, thus removing any human error associated with the stopwatch.
To improve it even further; a robot can wind up the string and release the mass, to ensure that each repeated experiment is exactly the same.
However, the improvements stated above would be expensive to implement and might not be worth doing.
The design of the experiment was indeed relevant and useful to find the Moment of Interia. If I was to design a better experiment, it would probably have the disc rotating from rest with a controlled constant acceleration up to a point where terminal velocity (measure the time taken to get from rest to terminal velocity), where past the terminal velocity, it would be unsafe. This Apparatus would be hard to construct, because to maintain acceleration, there would have to be a control/feedback mechanism.
As stated in the Analysis, the predicted shift of the results of higher mass was n't present. This could be the result of not enough friction being produced, or some sort of human error.
Using laser technology, you could place laser beams intermittent of the displacement, to plot the change in acceleration in further experiments.
Further work might also see what happens when the disc is used to store up electricity, like a dynamo. Or investigate flywheels, modelling them as discs, and how the friction decreases with time and speed. You could also find the relationship between different radii of discs to the Moment of Inertia, the radius would have to be the only variable.
In further Experiments, consider using a more accurate rule, maybe a digital rule.
Although major assumptions have been taken, a value for the Moment of Interia has been found. This Experiment used the theory of Newton 's Second Law, and the theory of Moments (Torque). The values obtained for the Moment of Interia are satisfactory, the level of error calculated is more than satisfactory to verify that the results are relatively accurate. As discussed before, it is mainly the error of the measuring rule that has increased the error value. This cannot be helped because no other source was available or indeed feasible at the time to measure lengths more accurately than a rule. If a strong recommendation was to be made, it would be to use a more accurate form of a rule (to improve results). This would be because of the small values for the Moment of Inertia in this experiment. It would be satisfactory if a rule of the same accuracy was used when there would be a high Moment of Inertia.
All results agree with previous discussed theories, i.e. the heavier the mass and larger the radius, the more the value for the Moment of Inertia.
