To minimise costs, 320 metres of cloth should be made internally and 180 metres externally.
I recommend purchasing 80 hours of carding and combing time each week from another division for a maximum of   120, to enable internal production to increase to 520 metres per week.
Gaining the 20% cost negotiation would save a substantial   756 per week or enable external production to increase by 45 meters. However, it would not change the optimal output solution.
I would not recommend switching suppliers for a 30% reduction if the 20% negotiation is gained, because of their unreliability. Although, depending on their performance, this reduction could be more beneficial due to the price competitiveness of the industry than none whatsoever.
The current and possible future costs and resources were analysed using solver in Excel to find the best method to minimise production costs for the yarn manufacturing division, run by Amanda Zellerman.
The main objective is to minimise the total costs of production (i.e. Minimise   15.I +   21.E).
The decision variables are:
I = The number of metres of standard width cloth produced internally per week.
E = The number of metres of standard width cloth produced externally per week.
The objective is subject to the following constraints:
Internal production must be at least half of the total amount supplied, (i.e. I - E  = 0, so, I  = E).
The total output supplied must be at least 500 metres per week, (i.e. I + E  = 500).
The 3 machines are all constrained to the amount of hours available for their use (these three constraints are shown in the table below, taken from an Excel sheet).
Assume 'non-negativity' (as you cannot produce negative amounts) and a 'linear model.'.
Assume vat A and vat B are used as one machine, as they both perform the same, identical task.
If the available time for the vat machines A and B decreases by 700 hours, the resources available (hrs) for the vats would exactly halve. The reports show that both the slack and the allowable increase would reduce by 700 hours, and the status is still not binding. This would not cause any major effects, but if vat use wanted to increase in future by more than 30 metres per week, there would be a lack of vat capacity.
At present, the resources for carding and combing (C&C) have no spare capacity (or no slack), making it a binding constraint. This lack of machinery is minimising internal production to 320 metres per week, since the other two machinery types have spare capacity. Therefore, more capacity should be bought in. Since the twisting machine has a slack of 100 hours, 20 extra metres of cloth can be made internally per week. This will enable 80 hours of C&C time to be bought in, so the twisting machine has no spare capacity and production can increase. (The allowable increase of the twisting and C&C machines are infinite hours and 80 hours, so the non-zero decision variables (I and E) will not be affected, making this capacity increase possible). The shadow price tells us that an additional hour of C&C time will improve (decrease) total production costs by   1.50. Hence, pay a maximum of   1.50 for each extra hour of capacity. Therefore, if C&C capacity rises by 80 hours, the total cost should be at most   120.
Assume the 20% cost negotiation with A-Z Cloth 's original supplier succeeds, assuming all other things constant. This cost reduction will enable the quantity of bought in yarn to increase up to the amount that would make 45 metres of cloth, (if it is decided that production should increase after the six month review). Or cost savings of   756 could be gained, if production remained at 500 metres per week. Still, the quantity of bought in yarn should minimised because it is   1.80 per metre more expensive than producing cloth internally, so I and E remain at the same quantities. Even if the cost of fibre increases by   1 per metre, it would still be cost effective to minimise the amount bought in.
The shadow price of the C&C constraint had increased to -0.45, (providing the C&C capacity does not increase by more than 80 hours), implicating that for an 80 hour capacity increase, a maximum of   36 should be paid to the other division.
There will be more implications if the new supplier is appointed, since the 30% reduction will mean that it is   0.30 cheaper to buy in the yarn than to make it. Thus, to be cost effective, as much yarn as possible should be bought in. If half of the total amount made is bought in (i.e. enough yarn for 250 metres of cloth is bought in), substantial cost savings of   1,155 would be gained. Since 70 metres more cloth would be produced externally, there is the spare capacity to increase internal production by 70 meters per week if production increased after the six month review. Hence, no extra C&C machine capacity is required saving   36 per week if the 20% negotiation is achieved or a maximum of   120 if it is not.
However, the reliability of the alternative supplier should be looked up from their past behaviour. To what extent are they unreliable? Does this unpredictability of supplies cancel out the cost reduction offered? What is the quality of the yarn they supply? What are the administrative costs and the effects on the workforce of switching suppliers? Is the new supplier based locally? Are there any hidden, extra costs involved such as a delivery charge? Qualitative and quantitative factors must be considered.
It is assumed that the increase of   1 per standard metre of cloth only applies to A-Z Cloth and not the suppliers. If the 30% reduction is gained by switching suppliers, it would be cost effective (saving   1.30 each metre) for the company policy regarding the proportion of bought in cloth to be changed, to enable more yarn to be bought in. However, any unused machine capacity would create an opportunity cost. The possibility to rent out spare machinery would reduce this opportunity cost.
In part A, B, C and E: the shadow price of the total output constraint is   21. Internal production cannot increase without buying extra capacity. External production can increase by up to 140 metres per week (except for C where the allowable increase is 180 metres), adding   21 to the total costs of production each time one extra metre of cloth is bought in. In part D1: if the 20% reduction is negotiated, an additional bought in metre would cost   16.80. In part D2: the 30% reduction from switching suppliers creates a good opportunity to increase internal production as 70m extra could be made per week. If 80 hours of C&C time is bought from another division (pay as less as possible for this as external production is now cheaper then internal production), then internal production can increase by a maximum of 90metres per week. This increase in I is also still feasible if the 700hours of vat use is required in the future.
Only one coefficient can change at any one time in the linear programming model. The linear program must be reformulated and solved again if multiple changes are required.
