Using an audio oscillator and pickup to induce oscillations, the standing waves produced in a fixed length of two different wires were investigated. The velocity of the waves on a thin wire was found to be from harmonic frequency measurements, which compares favourably to a value of calculated from a graph of frequency against harmonic number. Measurements of the fundamental frequency for increasing lengths of a thin wire described a proportional relationship between the fundamental frequency and the reciprocal of length, as predicted by theory.
Measurements of the fundamental frequency for increasing applied tensions were made for both wires, and the velocity of the standing waves found to be proportional to the square root of the tension. The masses per unit length were found to be 2.61    0.08 x 10 -4 kg m -1 for the thin wire and 7.83    0.10 x 10 -4 kg m -1 for the thick wire, in agreement with the respective values of 2.48    0.12 x 10 -4 kg m -1 and 7.60    0.22 kg m -1 calculated from diameter measurements and a value for the density of steel of 7.9 g cm -3 [2].
Measurement of the harmonic frequencies of a thick wire showed a deviation from the simple relationship predicted by basic theory, indicating that the elastic force was significant. Young 's modulus for the thick wire was calculated to be 6.07    1.25 x 10 11 Pa was calculated, in poor agreement with the accepted value for steel of 2.00 x 10 11 Pa [1].
A wave is any form of periodic disturbance of a medium that changes in form as time progresses. The medium itself does not travel on the macroscopic scale, but undergoes small scale vibrations and displacements from the normal position. These waves may be either longitudinal, along the direction of wave propagation, or transverse, at right angles to the direction of wave propagation, and the displacement of any point on the wave from its equilibrium position can be considered to vary simple harmonically with time. In this experiment we are primarily concerned with the common case of transverse waves on a taut string, although the case of longitudinal waves in an elastic rod will also be considered.
Figure 1 shows the basic case of a sinusoidal transverse wave on an infinitely long, taut string, with several common variables indicated. From these variables a general expression for the wave can be derived, of the form [1].
Or alternatively, in complex notation, [2].
The longitudinal velocity of the wave is given by [3].
In this experiment we are also interested in the transverse, or phase, velocity of the wave. This is the velocity of the transverse displacement of each point on the string from its equilibrium position. If the string experiences an applied tension T and has a mass per unit length m, then the transverse velocity of the wave (assuming that the amplitude of the wave is very much less than the wavelength) is given by [4].
This can be derived from first principles by considering the forces acting on an infinitesimal section of the string, but such a derivation is too long to present here (For details of the derivation, refer to [4] or [5]). The important point is that equation [4] is a consequence of the wave equation [5].
The form of a wave can be altered through interactions of the medium with boundaries that impose certain conditions upon the form of the wave at that point. An example is the case of a fixed end of string, towards which a wave pulse is travelling. The displacement of the string at the fixed end must always be zero, and hence when a wave pulse arrives at the fixed end it exerts a force on the fixed point. The point then exerts a Newton 's third law paired force on the string, producing a reflected wave pulse. Since the paired forces act in opposing directions, this reflected wave pulse is inverted. Alternatively, this situation can be considered in terms of the principle of superposition.
The principle of superposition states that, for two waves y 1 and y 2 present in the same position at the same time, "y1+y2 is a possible solution of the wave equation, with the total displacement equal to the sum of the two displacements due to each of the sources alone". [4] Hence if the total displacement at the fixed end is to be zero, then the reflected wave pulse must be the inverse of the incident wave.
This can be extended to the case of a continuous, travelling, sinusoidal wave with the form given by equation [1]. In this case each point of the wave that is incident on the fixed end is inverted as it reflects, producing a second wave that travels in the opposite direction to the incident wave and has a displacement of equal magnitude but opposite sign at all points. The two waves will superpose to produce a resultant wave as shown in figure 2.
Figure 2 shows that the superposition of the two waves produces a resultant wave that appears to vibrate in place. This superposition is known as a standing wave, and can be described by an equation of the form [6] a derivation of which can be found in [4] or [5]. This expression requires the definition of two new variables.   , angular frequency of the wave, equals 2  f, and k, the wave number, equals . It can be seen from this expression that, since the displacement, x, and time, t, functions are no longer explicitly associated, the wave does not propagate through the medium (along the string in this case) as time progresses.
The points on the standing wave at which the displacement is always zero are referred to as nodes, and are situated at half wavelength intervals. The midpoint between each pair of nodes is referred to as an antinode, and is the point at which the displacement of the standing wave varies periodically between a maximum and a minimum. The energy of the wave is a maximum at the antinodes but zero at the nodes, and so there is no net energy transfer along a standing wave as energy cannot be passed through the nodal positions. Compare this to a travelling wave which is, at one level, merely a method of transferring energy from one place to another.
The concept of standing waves produced by reflection at one boundary can be further extended to the case where both ends of a string are fixed. This gives the string a fixed length, and means that the displacement of the string at both of its ends must always be zero.
Combining equation [1] with the definitions for    and k provides an alternative expression for a sinusoidal travelling wave: [7].
Or [8].
Using this exponential form and the principle of superposition, remembering that the amplitude of one travelling wave is the negative amplitude of the other travelling wave, the exponential expression for a standing wave can be shown to be [9].
Or [10] when the boundary condition y=0 at x=0 is considered. However there is another boundary condition imposed on this wave, namely y=0 at L=0. Inserting this condition into the above expression gives or [11].
This limits the angular frequency (and hence the frequency, since the two terms are often interchangeable when considering waves) to specific values given by [12] where n is the number of the harmonic frequency.
These frequencies are known as the normal modes, or harmonic frequencies, of the vibrating string. One consequence of this expression, and of the boundary conditions, is that the string can only support whole numbers of half wavelengths. Hence the value of n is also the number of half wavelengths present on the string at that harmonic frequency. The case n=1 is referred to as the fundamental frequency of the string.
Since there is no energy transfer in a standing wave, the string must be supplied with energy by an external source in order for it to oscillate. This external source can be, for example, plucking of the string, or the use of an audio oscillator attached to a pickup to produce sound waves which cause the string to vibrate when incident upon it. The damping effect of air resistance causes the string to lose energy as time progresses, and so the oscillations of the string will die away with time. In order to maintain the oscillation of the string a continuous input of energy is required, and hence the second method mentioned here is more useful for an extended investigation into the harmonic frequencies of a vibrating string.
The waves produced by the pickup will produce forced oscillations of the same frequency in the string when incident upon it. This driving frequency will not necessarily coincide with one of the natural harmonic frequencies of the string, and if this is the case then the amplitude of the forced vibrations of the string will be very small. As the driving frequency approaches one of the natural harmonic frequencies, the vibrations of the string will begin to increase in amplitude, reaching a maximum when the driving frequency equals one of the natural harmonic frequencies of the string. This effect is known as resonance, and it is this effect that can be used to identify the harmonic frequencies of the wire as the peak in the amplitude of the forced oscillations can be easily detected.
In order for this method to work satisfactorily, both the pickup and the device to measure the amplitude of the forced oscillations must be placed at antinodal positions along the wire. If the pickup is not placed in such a way then the standing wave will not be produced, or will have a smaller amplitude as the energy input would be partly at a nodal position where it cannot be used to produce a wave. Placing the detecting device at an antinodal position means that it receives the most powerful signal from the standing wave, and hence will be able to detect any amplitude changes more easily.
Substituting the definition for    into equation [12] and rearranging leads to the expression [13].
This can be used as the basis for several investigations into the properties of standing wave harmonics. It can be seen from this expression that if the value of successive harmonic frequencies are measured whilst the length of the string is kept constant, then a graph of f n against n will yield a straight line through the origin with gradient . This allows the velocity of the waves on the wire to be calculated. It can also be seen that if the value of the fundamental frequency is measured for different wavelengths then a graph of f against should be a straight line through the origin. In both cases the string must be kept taut, as pure standing waves will only be produced if there is no slack in the string. Therefore the tension applied to the string must be sufficient for this to be the case, but should not be too large as applying too large a tension can cause nonlinear stretching of the wire to take place, which would also affect the form of the standing waves produced.
The theory discussed so far assumes that the waves are being produced on a taut string. However there is no reason that a wire cannot be substituted for the string, as the basic theory remains unchanged. There is however one modification that must be made.
Equation [4] shows the simple relationship between tension, mass and velocity for waves produced on a taut string. When a wire is used instead of string to produce the standing waves, this relationship is only strictly true for completely flexible, ideal wires. Real wires experience another force in addition to the applied tension owing to the fact that they are, in effect, metal rods with a very small diameter. This extra force must be taken into account if an accurate description of the behaviour of the wire is to be produced.
This extra force is known as the elastic force, and is responsible for the production of longitudinal waves in the solid rod or wire. This force is proportional to Young 's modulus, E, which is specific to the particular material under investigation, and to the radius of the wire, r, to the fourth power. If this force is included in the description of the wire 's behaviour then the equation for the velocity of the waves produced on the wire becomes [14].
This equation indicates that the velocity of the waves on the wire depends upon the wavelength of the waves, unlike equation [4] which indicates no such dependence. This relationship is therefore a far more complex one than that shown previously. This equation can be combined with equation [13] to eliminate v and   , giving [15].
Considering the form of equation [13] for the fundamental frequency gives . If it is assumed that, for the fundamental frequency, equation [4] is a valid approximation then the square root term in equation [15] can be substituted for this equation for the velocity of the fundamental frequency. The resulting equation can then be rearranged to give [16].
It can be seen from this expression that if the values of the harmonic frequencies of a thick wire, in which the elastic force is likely to be significant, are found whilst L and T are kept constant, then a graph of as a function of n 2 should be the straight line until the elastic force becomes significant, at which the point the graph will become a straight line with gradient . If only these points are plotted then the graph becomes a straight line with gradient that has a y-axis intercept of 1. A value for E for the particular metal from which the wire is made can then be calculated from the value of the gradient of the graph.
The experimental setup for all of the investigations is shown in figure 4. The wire was clamped in a fixed position at one end, and attached to a pivot from which masses could be hung at the other. The length of the wire under investigation was defined by the two moveable knife-edges, but note that as the wire was not fixed to the knife-edges these points only approximate to nodes. However the approximation required can be ignored for the course of this experiment. Forced oscillations in this length of wire, forming standing waves, were produced by an audio oscillator attached to a pickup positioned on the magnetic strip underneath the wire. This pickup will henceforth be referred to as the "driver". The oscillator output was connected to both the Y 2 input of the oscilloscope and the frequency meter. A second pickup, henceforth referred to as the "detector", was connected to the Y 1 input of the oscilloscope, allowing the oscilloscope to compare the signals from the driver and detector in order to produce the waveform on the scope.
The driving frequency was controlled by altering the oscillator output frequency, which could be varied using an analogue dial on the external casing of the audio oscillator. This dial had a range of 0.1 to 11 with a multiplicative factor of 10, 100, 1000, 10k, or 100 kHz, and increased the frequency in a logarithmic fashion. The oscillations of the wire were picked up by the detector, and translated into a waveform on the oscilloscope screen, the amplitude of which could be changed by varying the amplitude of the audio signal produced by the oscillator using the 'fine amplitude' analogue dial on its outer casing. The speed at which the waveform moved across the oscilloscope screen could be changed by altering the time-base of the oscilloscope. This was set at a value such that the waveform appeared stationary.
The tension in the wire was controlled using the pivoting system shown in figure 5. For a body in static equilibrium [17].
That is, the sum of the torques on the body must equal zero. Since the magnitude of the torque is the magnitude of the force, F, multiplied by the perpendicular distance, l, between the point at which the force acts and the pivot: [18].
From figure 5 this gives , which can be rearranged to give [19].
Hence the requisite maximum and minimum masses for each investigation could be calculated from the suggested tension ranges in [3], and the masses required for a suitable number and range of readings could be decided upon. For the equipment set being used, x = 0.020m and l = 0.080m.
The harmonic frequencies were found in one of two ways depending on the particular investigation being carried out.
The first method, used for all investigations, was to slowly increase the oscillator output, noting the value at which the amplitude of the oscilloscope signal was a maximum whilst still remaining a pure sinusoidal wave. When using this method it was found that listening to the wire helped to locate this frequency, as the resonance of the wire at the harmonic frequencies, particularly when using the thin wire produced an audible hum. The y-divisions setting on the oscilloscope could be altered in order to make the trace appear larger, allowing the change in amplitude at the harmonic frequencies to be seen more clearly. If the trace was not a pure sinusoid, indicating a superposition of more than one harmonic frequency, then the amplitude of the oscillator output frequency was varied or the frequency itself was changed slightly in order to give the purely sinusoidal signal sought. The frequency was then evaluated using the frequency meter, with the range set so as to give the maximum possible precision of reading whilst still allowing readings to be readily taken.
Whilst testing the equipment it was decided to take the frequency readings using the frequency meter rather than the oscilloscope when using this method, as it was felt that the frequency meter would be more accurate. Using the oscilloscope required the estimation of the number of scale division that were equal to one wavelength of the trace, and it was felt that this would be inaccurate owing to the inherent thickness of the trace signal. Hence all values for the harmonic frequencies were recorded from the frequency meter.
The second method for finding the harmonic frequencies, used for the first investigation only, involved using the Lissajous figures produced by the comparison of the signals from the driver and detector by the oscilloscope. In order to view the Lissajous figures, the oscilloscope timebase was switched to the X-Y position. When the wire was vibrating normally, the Lissajous figure produced was not steady, fluctuating in size, orientation, and in the width of the figure. The frequency was then increased from zero until the Lissajous figure became a stationary circle or ellipse. The successive frequencies at which this occurred gave the values of the corresponding harmonic frequencies. The frequency was then read off from the frequency meter, as the oscilloscope timebase could not be used to estimate the frequency in this case due to the circular nature of the Lissajous figures.
The length of the thin wire was set to be 0.60    0.000707m, as this was the maximum length that could be conveniently used. The position measurements for the two knife-edges used to define the length were made using a fixed metre rule with well defined, regularly sized divisions, and the knife-edge stands had a clear, well defined edge. The metal knife-edges were also placed on a magnetic strip, and so were not free to move. It was felt that the combination of these factors meant that the error in each position measurement was   0.5mm, leading to the error in the length given above when the two position measurements were combined. [3] gives the tension required for this investigation as 2-3N, but it was felt that this was insufficient tension to keep the wire taut. Therefore a mass of 100g was used to provide a tension of 3.924N. The error in T was not evaluated in this case, as the value of T played no part in the analysis of the results.
The driver and detector were initially positioned in the centre of the wire in order to place them at the antinode of the fundamental vibrations of the wire. The frequency of the oscillator was then slowly increased from zero, and the value of the fundamental frequency determined using both methods outlined above. These values were used to predict the values of successive harmonics, and the actual frequency values for the 2 nd to 10 th harmonics were found using both methods outlined above. Before each new harmonic was found the positions of the driver and detector were changed so that they were always in antinodal positions, but as close to the centre of the wire and each other as possible. As the number of antinodes increased it was found that this often required placing them in adjacent antinodal positions, as the distance   /2 decreased to the point where it was not possible to place the two stands under the same antinode owing to their finite size.
The frequency meter was set to the kHz scale and three decimal places range for this investigation, as it was felt that this gave the best balance between precision and ease of use. Increasing the number of decimal places increases the precision of the reading, but also increased the time taken for the frequency meter reading to settle. It also made the meter more sensitive to small changes in frequency. Hence 3dp was chosen as a compromise, whilst the kHz scale was chosen due to the magnitude of the frequencies being used.
It was noted whilst this investigation was underway that the detector was very sensitive to interference caused by background noise. To try and minimise this effect, spurious noise was kept to minimum and readings were only taken when the area around the experiment was clear of people. The frequency readings were also only taken after it was certain that the frequency meter reading had settled on the frequency for the harmonic just found.
The tension set for this investigation was 3.924N (see section 2.2 for the reasoning behind this). Again, no error evaluation for this value was made as the value of T played no part in the analysis of the results.
An initial experiment was carried out to determine whether it would be better to increase or decrease the length of the wire, and to find out the number of readings that could feasibly be taken. It was found that increasing the wire 's length made the fundamental frequency of each length slightly easier to find, and it was therefore decided to find the values of the fundamental frequencies for increasing length. The increase in length between readings was set as 0.05m, as this seemed to give a large number of results for the length range used whilst maintaining a reasonable level of accuracy.
The smallest length that could be used was dictated by the width of the driver and detector stands, which were 0.027m thick each. The finite size of these components meant that the smallest length that could be used was 0.10m. The maximum feasible length was unchanged from the previous investigation, and hence the evaluation of the error in L was unchanged as the method of measurement remained the same. Therefore eleven readings from 0.10    0.000707m to 0.60    0.000707m were taken.
To increase the length each knife-edge was moved 0.025m from its previous position towards the end of the metre rule. The knife-edges were kept equidistant from the centre of the wire at all times, as this maximised the proportion of the energy provided by the driver that was actually used to oscillate the length of wire under investigation.
The fundamental frequency for each length was found using the first method outlined above, with the same attention to minimising background noise. It was found that listening and watching the wire were especially helpful when trying to find the points of resonance, as the amplitude of the oscillations of the wire could visibly be seen to increase and a humming noise could be heard.
Both the thick and thin wires were used for this investigation. The length of each wire was set to the maximum possible length as found in previous investigations. See section 2.2 for details of the evaluation of the error in L.
When using the thin wire it was advised that the maximum tension used should be no more than 20N in order to prevent the wire from snapping under the tension. This corresponded to a mass of approximately 500g, and so a maximum mass of 400g was chosen in order to provide a safety margin. Using equation [19] therefore gives the maximum tension applied as 15.696N.
It was decided to increase the mass in 50g increments, starting from the minimum possible mass of 50g in order to give a sufficient quantity of data. This gave a total of eight readings over a tension range of 1.962 to 15.696N, which were taken in order of ascending mass.
When using the thick wire it was advised that the tension range should be between 15 and 40N. The masses corresponding to these tensions were calculated, and then the maximum and minimum masses used taken to be the nearest convenient values. This gave a mass range of 400g to 1kg, and a tension range of 15.70 to 39.24N. It was decided to increase the mass in 100g increments in order to ensure that the quantity of data acquired was the same for the two wires.
The error in T was calculated using a partial derivative formulation of equation X. Hence the error in T depended upon the evaluation of the errors in l and x. These quantities were found using a standard ruler, with clear, well defined and regularly sized divisions. It was felt that the magnitudes of l and x could be found quite accurately in this fashion, and so the error in each quantity was evaluated as   0.5mm. This led to an error in T of   0.245m.
The diameters of the wires were found using an analogue micrometer. Since the wire diameters would not necessarily be identical at all points on the wires, several readings were taken at regular intervals, and the diameter taken to be the average value. The micrometer was carefully zeroed before each reading was taken in order to eliminate the 'zero error' as a possible systematic error source. The micrometer is a very accurate and precise piece of equipment, and so the error in the measurements of the wire diameters was evaluated to be   0.0005mm, or half of the smallest significant figure to which the micrometer could measure.
The length of the thick wire was set to be 0.25    0.00707m in the centre of the length of wire for the reasons outlined in section 2.3. Refer to section 2.2 for details of the evaluation of the error in L. [3] states that a tension of approximately 15N should be used. However it was advised that a tension of 10N would be more appropriate for the set of equipment being used. This corresponds to a mass of approximately 250g by equation [19], and so this was the mass used, giving a precise tension value of 9.81N.
The values of the harmonic frequencies were then found using the first method outlined in section 2.1. It was noted that the values of the harmonic frequencies were very hard to find, particularly as n increased. Several attempts had to be made to find some of the harmonics, and so the number of each harmonic could not be confirmed until the investigation was complete. It was found that the precise position of each harmonic frequency depended on whether the frequency was being increased or decreased approaching the resonance point, and that decreasing the frequency seemed to provide more accurate results. The harmonic frequencies were therefore found by decreasing the frequency in the vicinity of the resonance point.
Listening for the rise in volume of the note produced by the vibrating wire proved particularly helpful when finding the resonance points during this investigation, as at higher frequencies the amplitude peak of the oscilloscope trace was often small. It was also noticeable that the frequency meter readings seemed to fluctuate over a much greater range during this investigation than during previous investigations.
Figure 6 is a graph of f n as a function of n for the thin wire, on which are plotted the data obtained through observations of the oscilloscope trace, as it was felt that these data were more reliable than the data obtained through observations of the Lissajous figures. No intercept point has been plotted, as the 0 th harmonic should occur at 0Hz.
The gradient of the graph is , and a least mean squares plot using the graph plotting package "Origin" gives a value of.
The intercept of the line on the f n axis is -3.9, which is significantly different from the value of zero expected.
There is very little scattering of the points about the line of best fit, and so a linear fit to the data set seems completely appropriate. The error bars are very small, but visible, and are all intersected by the line of best fit. Since the error bars are so small, and the correlation of the plotted points with the line of best fit is so good, the error bars are consistent with the data.
Figure 7 is a graph of f 1 as a function of , on which are plotted the data obtained from the measurement of the fundamental frequency of the thin wire at increasing lengths. No intercept point has been plotted, as the fundamental frequency of a wire of length zero should be 0Hz, and so the graph should pass through the origin.
The graph is a straight line of constant gradient, and hence demonstrates that the velocity of the standing waves is proportional to the reciprocal of the length of the wire.
The correlation of the data points with the line of best fit is excellent as the line appears to pass directly through almost all of the data points, and hence a linear fit to the data is appropriate. The small size of the error bars is consistent with this correlation, and every set of error bars is intersected by the line of best fit.
Figure 8 shows a graph of v as a function of T 1/2 for the thin wire on which are plotted the velocities calculated from the measurement of the fundamental frequency for increasing tension. Equation X predicts that the graph should be a straight line through the origin, and so no intercept point has been plotted. The gradient of the graph is , and a least mean squares fit using the graph plotting package "Origin" leads to a value for the mass per unit length of the thin wire of.
Figure 9 shows a graph of v as a function of T 1/2 for the thick wire on which are plotted the velocities calculated from the measurement of the fundamental frequency for increasing tension. Equation [4] predicts that the graph should be a straight line through the origin, and so no intercept point has been plotted. The gradient of the graph is , and a least mean squares fit using the graph plotting package "Origin" leads to a value for the mass per unit length of the wire.
The scattering of the points about the line of best fit appears to be randomly above and below the line for both graphs, and so a linear fit seems appropriate for both data sets.
The error bars on figure 8 are very small but still visible, and the majority of them are intersected by the line of best fit. The size of the error bars seems consistent with the standard deviation of the graph. Every set of error bars on figure 9 is intersected by the line of best fit, and the size of the y-error bars seems consistent with the y-distance between the plotted data and the line of best fit. However the x-error bars appear to be too large for the quality of the correlation obtained.
Figure 10 shows a graph of as a function of n 2 on which are plotted the data calculated from the measurements of the 9 th to 15 th harmonic frequencies of a thick wire. Equation [16] predicts that the graph should be a straight line with an intercept on the y-axis of one. The gradient of this graph is , and a least mean squares fit using the graph plotting package "Origin" gives a value of.
The scattering of the points about the line of best fit does not seem entirely random. The readings at either extremity are positioned below the line whilst the central data points are above the line, a pattern which suggests a slight curve to the data set. It might be that a curved fit might be more appropriate, but a linear fit has been used in order to facilitate the analysis of the data.
The error bars are clearly visible on the graph and all but one set are intersected by the line of best fit, but it is noticeable that the error bars are considerably longer than the average distance in the y-direction between the plotted points and the line of best fit.
Equation [13] predicts that a graph of f n as a function of n for the thin wire should be a straight line through the origin with gradient . When plotted the experimental data do lie along a straight line within experimental error, but the intercept of the graph with the y-axis is -3.9 and so it cannot be considered to pass through the origin. The value of the intercept is small compared to the value of the gradient however, and so the theory discussed in the introduction can be applied in reasonable confidence in order to calculate the velocity of the standing waves on the thin wire. This gives a value of.
A second value for this velocity can be calculated from the value of each harmonic frequency using.
This gives a wave velocity for each harmonic frequency, and the average velocity for the harmonic frequencies can be calculated. This is found to be.
These values do not agree, but they are very similar. This seems to suggest that equation [4] can be applied to a thin wire in which the elastic force is negligible, but only as an approximation as noted in the introduction.
The uncertainty in the value of v calculated from the graph arises from the uncertainties in the gradient, and hence in f n, and in L, whilst the error in the value of v calculated from the harmonic frequencies depends on the errors in f and   . The disagreement between the two values of v suggests that there may have been an initial misevaluation of one of these uncertainties.
The error in the value of L was evaluated to be   0.707mm, owing to an error in the position measurement of each knife-edge of   0.5mm. It is possible that this evaluation was slightly optimistic, but the error in each position measurement could not be more than   1.0mm, as the divisions on the rule were uniform in size and clearly defined, whilst the clearly defined edges of the knife-edges provided a precise measurement point. If the error in the measurements at either end of the length was indeed   1.0mm, then the error in L becomes   1.41mm. Taking this increase in the error in L into account, the error in the value of v obtained from the graph can be recalculated. This gives a new value of.
The error in f n was evaluated as   0.5Hz, as the frequency meter reading was felt to be highly accurate and the readings given by the meter did not fluctuate very much. It was felt that, due to the instability of the Lissajous figures, the error in the frequency readings taken from the Lissajous' would be much larger, possibly up to   2.0Hz due to the difficulties encountered when attempting to locate the frequency at which the Lissajous figure became stable. This decision, as well as the assessment of the error in the frequency meter readings used, seems to be justified when viewed in the context of figure X, as the size of the error bars is entirely consistent with the quality of the correlation obtained.
The fractional error in    is the same as the fractional error in L, as    is merely a multiple or factor of the length of the wire. Hence the re-evaluation of the error in L affects the error in    as well. Since the evaluation of the error in f n appears justified, this means that the re-evaluation of the error in v frequencies will be affected only by the change in the error in L. This recalculation leads to a value of.
Note that the change in   L was not great enough to affect the error in v after rounding. These re-evaluations do not bring the two values of v into agreement, but increasing the random error in L to a value greater than   1.0mm would seem to contradict the accuracy to which the value of L could be measured using the available equipment. It is unlikely that the error in L was greater than this value therefore, and so it appears that there was a source of systematic error present in the experiment that was not initially identified. This conclusion is supported by the fact that the graph has a negative intercept on the y-axis, when theory predicts that it should pass through the origin.
The most likely source of systematic error is in the measurement of the harmonic frequencies. It was noted in section 2.2 that the oscilloscope trace was very sensitive to interference caused by background noise such as the movement of people around the laboratory, or the proximity of a conversation to the experiment. Every effort was made to keep this interference to a minimum, but it was not possible to eliminate it entirely. This interference would affect the values obtained for f n, hence affecting the intercept of the graph and both of the values of v obtained.
Another possible source of systematic error, again linked to the frequency values, is the possibility that the driver and detector were not placed in the optimal positions to produce the maximum resonance amplitude of the forced oscillations of the wire. This would reduce the intensity of the signal transmitted to the oscilloscope, making it harder to find the harmonic frequencies and possibly leading to a misjudgement of their positions. It is unlikely that this was the case however, as before each reading was taken the necessary positions of the driver and detector were calculated, and the two units carefully positioned in order to eliminate this possible source of error. It is also unlikely that this would give an error to each reading of a magnitude such that the overall correlation was so good.
A third possible source of systematic error relates to the experimental setup. It was noted in section 2.2 that the knife-edges, and the driver and detector stands, were positioned on a magnetic strip in order to ensure that they did not slip whilst the experiment was in progress (this measure itself eliminates a possible systematic error source). This magnetic strip would produce a magnetic field, which would interact with the wire and induce a current in the wire as it vibrated. This induced current would in turn affect the oscillations of the wire. However it was felt that the magnetic strip was sufficiently weak and at a sufficient distance from the wire that the interactions between the field and the wire would be of negligible magnitude, and so this possible source of error can be discounted.
Equation [13] predicts that a graph of f 1 as a function of should be a straight line through the origin. When plotted the experimental data do lie along a straight line within experimental error, but the graph intercepts the y-axis at -3.21    0.46, in conflict with the predictions of theory. The value of the intercept is small compared to the value of the gradient however, and so the theory discussed in the introduction can be applied in reasonable confidence.
The theory predicts that the harmonic frequency of an oscillating wire should be proportional to the reciprocal of the length of the wire. The straight line graph obtained for this investigation confirms this prediction, but only for a thin wire in which the magnitude of the elastic force is negligible.
The error in the gradient of the graph depends on the errors in f 1 and L. The excellent correlation between the plotted data and the line of best fit, and the appropriate size of the error bars in figure 7 suggest that the initial evaluation of these errors was correct. This is interesting, as the evaluation of the error in L was the same as the evaluation for the previous investigation, in which it seemed that the error in L had been underestimated. However the re-evaluation of the error in L to its maximum feasible value had little effect on the agreement between the two velocity values obtained in the previous investigation, and so it may be that the initial evaluation of the error in L was in fact correct. This supports the conclusion that a systematic error was present in the previous investigation.
Although the linear correlation seen in figure 7 supports the theory behind the investigation, the fact that there is a y-intercept value suggests that there was a systematic error acting on the system that was not initially identified. It is interesting to note that the value of the intercept in figure 7 is very similar to the value of the intercept in figure 6. This suggests that a similar systematic error was acting in both cases, since both are investigations into linear relationships. It is therefore likely that the intercept value of the graph is due to a systematic error caused by interference originating from background noise.
It is interesting to note that, with one exception, the resonance points in this investigation were generally easier to find than in the previous investigation. This may have been due to the fact that this was the second investigation carried out, and substantial experience had been gained in the used to find the resonance points. The one exception was the resonance for L = 0.10m, which was extremely difficult to find. It is unlikely however that this difficulty was sufficient to produce a result that deviated from the correct value by a magnitude sufficient to produce the intercept seem in figure 7 whilst maintaining the quality of correlation observed.
Equation [4] states that a graph of v as a function of T 1/2 should be a straight line through the origin with gradient , assuming that the magnitude of the elastic force in the wire is negligible.
When plotted, the experimental data for both wires do lie along a straight line within experimental error. However, both figure 8 and figure 9 have y-intercept values. In both cases the magnitude of the intercept is small compared to the magnitude of the gradient however, and so equation [4] can still be applied to both sets of data in order to determine whether the elastic force is significant in either wire.
The value of m for the thin wire obtained from figure 8 is which agrees very favourably with the value calculated using the diameter measurements and a value for the density of mild steel of [2]. This calculated value is.
The value of m for the thick wire obtained from figure 9 is which agrees with the value calculated using the diameter measurements and a value for the density of mild steel of [2]. This calculated value is.
The uncertainties in the values of m obtained from the graphs depend upon the uncertainties in the values of r and the gradient, and hence depend upon the errors in f 1,    and T. The evaluation of the error in f 1 has already been discussed in section 4.1 above, and since the frequency meter readings were once again reasonably steady there is no apparent justification for changing this error evaluation.
The error in    is dependant on the error in L as stated in section 4.1 above. The re-evaluation of this error carried out in that section has been taken into account in the calculations of the errors in the different values of m, as any error re-evaluation affects all results calculated using that value. since neither the error in    nor the error in f 1 has been re-evaluated, the error in v is judged to be of an acceptable magnitude. This assessment is supported by the size of the error bars on figures 8 and 9, as in both cases the size of the y-error bars seems consistent with the standard deviation of the graph.
The error in T depends on the errors in the values of l and x (see figure 5). The error in these quantities was evaluated to be   0.5mm, as they were measured using a standard ruler with clear, well-defined and regularly sized divisions and it was felt that this was the level of accuracy that could be obtained using this method. These evaluations seem justified when the size of the T 1/2 error bars on each graph are considered. In both cases the error bars seem consistent with the average distance along the x-axis between the plotted data points and the line of best fit; although in the case of figure 9 they could be deemed to be slightly large. However it is felt that this was the maximum accuracy that could be obtained using the method used to measure x and l, and hence the error in T 1/2 will not be re-evaluated.
The value of r was calculated from the measurements of the wire diameters that were made using an analogue micrometer. This piece of equipment is highly accurate and precise, and so the error in the value of d, and hence r, was evaluated to be   0.0005mm. There is no apparent reason to change this evaluation given the excellent agreement between the two calculated values of m for each wire.
It is interesting to note that the two values of m for the thick wire agree so well. Equation [4] is only strictly true for wires in which the magnitude of the elastic force is negligible. The excellent agreement suggests that the magnitude of the elastic force in the thick wire is negligible when considering the fundamental frequency, although it may become a factor at higher harmonic frequencies. An alternative explanation is that the same systematic error that produced the y-intercept also acted on the values of f 1 obtained in such a way as to produce the agreement between the two values of m, although this seems unlikely.
Equation [16] predicts that a graph of as a function of n 2 should be a straight line with gradient and a y-intercept of 1 provided that equation [4] is a valid approximation for the fundamental frequency. This can be assumed to be the case from the results discussed in section 4.3. The graph will only be valid for n greater than approximately 8, as up to this point the magnitude of the elastic force is small as seen in the previous investigation for the fundamental frequency.
In this case the values of f n began to deviate substantially from the values predicted using the fundamental frequency at , and so only data from the harmonics has been used to plot figure 4. The plotted data do lie along a straight line to within experimental error, but the appropriateness of the linear fit is questionable as the data points seem to form a shallow curve. Despite this, the value of the intercept on the y-axis is 0.907    0.043, close to the value of 1 predicted by the theory. The theory discussed in the introduction will therefore be applied to the data in order to determine a value for Young 's modulus, E, for the thick wire, but the conclusions reached will not necessarily be valid owing to the aforementioned questionability of the linear fit.
The value of E calculated from the gradient of the graph is.
This agrees poorly with the accepted value for steel of 2.00 x 10 11 Pa [1]. This poor agreement suggests that there has been an overoptimistic evaluation of one or more of the random errors acting on the system.
The error in E depends on the errors in the gradient, and hence in f n, and the errors in r, L, and T. the error in r has already been discussed in previous sections, as have the errors in L and T. The errors in T and r were judged to have been evaluated correctly, and the error in L was re-evaluated. This re-evaluation has been taken into account when calculating the error in the value of E quoted above. Therefore it seems as though the error in f n must have been misevaluated.
During this investigation, the values of f n were much more difficult to find than in previous investigations as noted in section 2.5. The frequency meter readings were also observed to fluctuate over a wider range than in previous investigations, again as noted in section 2.5. These two factors led to a re-evaluation of the error in f n from previous investigations.
It was felt that the combination of the two factors outlined in the previous paragraph led to a range of frequencies in which each harmonic could lie of approximately 8Hz. It was therefore decided that the error in the values of f n obtained should be   4.0Hz, or half of the possible range of frequencies within which f n could lie. Figure 10 was plotted using this initial re-evaluation of the error in f n. However the discrepancy between the accepted value of E and the value obtained suggests that the error in f n must be re-evaluated once more.
The error in the value of E obtained through experimentation must be larger if the two values are to agree, suggesting that the re-evaluation of the error in f n was still too low. However if the size of the y-error bars on figure 10 is considered, it appears that the error in f n has been overestimated as the error bars appear too large for the standard deviation of the graph. Since these two factors directly contradict one another, it must be concluded that the evaluation of the error in the values of f n was in fact reasonable. Therefore the discrepancy between the calculated and accepted values of E is likely to be due to a systematic error.
A possible source of this systematic error is the way in which the harmonic frequencies were found. It is stated in section 2.5 that the values of the harmonic frequencies appeared to be different depending on whether the frequency was being increased or decreased in the vicinity of the resonance, and that it was decided to obtain all of the results by decreasing the local frequency. It is possible that this was the wrong decision, and that the values obtained through the increase of the frequency in the vicinity of the harmonic frequency would have yielded a more accurate value of E. Why this might be the case is not certain, but it is a possibility that must be considered.
Another factor that might have produced a systematic error was the interference caused by background noise. This was a particular problem during this experiment as the amplitude peaks in the oscilloscope trace were often very small, and would therefore have been swamped by background noise. Listening to the wire would have helped in this situation, but would not have completely compensated for this effect. Although plausible, it is unlikely that this possibility is the source of the systematic error, as particular care was taken to minimise the amount of background noise, and to try and take results during quiet moments, in this investigation, as it was recognised that it would be a particular problem once the small magnitude of the amplitude peaks was realised.
A third possibility is that the driver and detector were not in the optimal positions along the length of wire under consideration in order to cause and detect forced oscillations in the wire. The driver and detector were not moved from their starting positions during the course of this experiment, and it was only once the investigation was concluded that this was realised. In order to produce a pure standing wave pattern, the driver must be positioned in an antinodal position, and the detector must be in a similar position in order to pick up any changes in the forced oscillations. The wire length used, 0.25m, would have resulted in movements of the driver and detector of only a few centimetres each time, but it might have been an important factor in the quality of results obtained.
This might also explain the shallow curve to the data plotted on figure 10, as the antinodal positions would have moved away from the driver and detector before moving towards them again as the value of n increased and the number of half-wavelengths within the length of wire under investigation increased.
Once the difficulties involved in the location of the harmonic frequencies using the first method outlined in section 2.1 had become apparent, or once the full set of data had been taken, it might have been prudent to attempt to find the harmonic frequencies again using the second method involving Lissajous figures outlined in section 2.1. Although the Lissajous figures would have been very unstable due to the highly sensitive nature of the equipment during this investigation, and hence the frequencies would still have been hard to find, this would have provided a second set of data and allowed any possible anomalous results to be identified. It might also have proved to be slightly easier to find frequencies at which the Lissajous figures became stationary than to find the frequencies at which the oscilloscope trace underwent a very small amplitude increase.
The experimental setup was generally sufficient for the investigations being undertaken, but the sensitivity of the frequency meter and oscilloscope sometimes became very problematic. In order to try and compensate for this sensitivity, the experiment could be carried out in isolation. Performing the experiment in a separate room would help to minimise the effects of background noise on the frequency meter reading and oscilloscope trace.
The other problem encountered whilst carrying out these investigations was the small magnitude of the amplitude peaks in the oscilloscope traces observed at the harmonic frequencies, which often made the harmonic frequencies quite difficult to pinpoint. As mentioned in section 4.4 this might have been offset by utilising the Lissajous figures for the final investigation. However in general it is difficult to see how this problem could be addressed without substantial changes to the experimental method, although the use of a more precise audio oscillator might help. Improving the resolution of the oscilloscope might also go some way towards addressing the problem.
By setting the length of a thin wire to a constant 0.60  0.000707m and measuring its harmonic frequencies, a value for the speed of the waves on the wire of was found. This compared favourably to the value of found through direct calculations utilising the basic relationship between frequency, wavelength and velocity. The initial evaluation of the error in the frequency readings was judged to be correct, but the original evaluation of the error in L was judged to have been an underestimation. The subsequent corrected value for the error in m was still insufficient to account for the discrepancy in the value of v, and so a systematic error owing to the interference caused by background noise was suggested. Systematic errors owing to misplacement of the driver and detector, and due to the magnetic field of the small magnetic strip were considered, but dismissed.
By measuring the fundamental frequency of the thin wire for increasing lengths of wire, it was shown that the fundamental frequency of the wire was proportional to the reciprocal of the length of the wire, as predicted by theory. However the straight line did not pass through the origin, contradicting the predictions of theory, and so a systematic error arising from interference owing to background noise was once again suggested.
By measuring the fundamental frequency of a fixed length of both the thin and thick wires for increasing applied tensions, values for the mass per unit lengths of both wires of 2.61  0.08x10 -4kgm -1 and 7.83  0.10x10 -4kgm -1 respectively were found, in excellent agreement with the values of 2.48  0.12x10 -4kgm -1 and 7.60  0.22x10 -4kgm -1 calculated from the measurements of the wire diameters and a value for the density of steel of . The initial evaluations of the errors in T and r were judged to be correct, and the re-evaluated error in the value of L was judged to be appropriate for this investigation as well as for the first investigation.
By setting the length of the thick wire to 0.25  0.000707m and measuring its harmonic frequencies, the point at which the values of the harmonic frequencies began to deviate from the standard linear relationship was found. By plotting a graph of f n against n for these harmonics, a value for Young 's modulus of 6.07  1.25x10 11Pa was found, in poor agreement with the accepted value for steel of 2.00x10 11Pa [1]. The errors in L (as re-evaluated), r and T were judged to have been evaluated correctly, but the appropriateness of the evaluation of the error in f n could not be assessed Possible systematic errors owing to the method used to find the harmonic frequencies, and to interference caused by background noise were suggested.
