On , was taken to his sisters house by 2 policemen on a section 136, he was then brought to by his sister and was admitted informally. is known to have schizophrenia. was interviewed on Ward on . was brought to by his sister as she was concerned about his mental state and safety. was involved in an argument and fight at a local club and had consequently been removed from the premises by 2 security staff. had been talking to a friend and his wife who then started to shout at him for no apparent reason, he asked them to stop shouting and to leave him alone. was reluctant to come into hospital initially as he did n't feel he had done anything wrong. felt angry and let down by his friends who had 'backstabbed' him. was taken to his sister 's house by two policemen on a section 136, he was then brought to by his sister and was admitted informally. stated that he had been feeling low over the past few weeks. complains of having a poor appetite and waking during the night. For the past few months, has had no motivation to eat or care for himself (showering/brushing hair). feels slightly anxious at the moment and is worried about himself - he does n't know why he feels quiet but knows that it will get better with time. said that he feels shy and wants to spend time alone in his room. was diagnosed with severe depression in 1976 and was admitted to hospital in during this time. described things as "being bad" and stated that his family were 'crying all the time' but would not elaborate on this. recalled hearing derogatory voices at the age of 21 but was unable to describe whether the voice was male, female, single or multiple voices. The voices told him to kill himself and consequently set fire to his pyjamas. described himself as being "brain dead" at the time and wanting to 'end it all' but is glad that he did n't succeed now. has not heard the voices since this time. In 1985 was diagnosed with Schizophrenia and described himself as having a "problem with his brain". was unable to describe the changes in his mood etc that occurred around this time. described himself as having a healthy body but a "problem with his brain". had a skin graft on his right leg in 1979 after setting fire to his pyjamas but described no other health problems. stated that his parents had a good relationship and were happily married for 50 years.  's father died on and his mother died on of stomach cancer. stated that his dad was sometimes protective over him - 'in a good way'. misses his parents and thinks about them a lot. There was no history of abuse or neglect. has 5 brothers and 2 sisters who are all married: 52, 50, 44, 42, 39, 38, 32. stated that he gets on well with all of his brothers and sisters, especially who tries to help him and encourages him to get better - "Come on ****". and assist with  's activities of daily living and help him to manage his finances. stated that his brothers and sisters understand his problems but his nieces and nephews do n't. There is no family history of contact with the mental health services.
There are no known pregnancy or birth problems although stated that he was an 'early baby' (premature). did not recall any problems with his early milestones and stated that he had a 'good time' at home as a child. enjoyed his time at infants school but was bullied at Junior school when he was approx 6 or 7 years. described being 'kicked in the stomach' and 'pushed into a brick wall' and believed this was because people were jealous of him. had a good relationship with his teachers and friends and described himself as being a quiet, average student. left school at the age of 15 to work in a local dairy, whilst there he was bullied and described being 'clipped round the head' by people he did n't know. thinks that his "problems" started at the dairy and described himself as being  'shy' during this time. left the job at the dairy and has been delivering papers for many years, this position ended 2 months ago "due to a fight". was unable to give accurate dates or reasons for leaving employment and appeared to be confused when recalling this information. stated that he enjoys work but does n't think he could cope with working at the moment and said, "my brain is stopping me". stated that he has 'lots of friends' and has had a few relationships with ladies but is currently single and described himself as "not being a lover". In 1998, had a relationship with a lady (), which ended in 2000. described this as being a happy relationship but stated that he 'never took her home' and simply 'liked her company'. could not say why the relationship ended. currently has a "good relationship" with a lady who he met at the day centre and has known for 12/13 years. stated that he "loves her" and looks forward to her visits, he was disappointed that she had n't been to see him at . stated that he did not want any children.
Gastrointestinal System - loss of appetite, no changes in bowel habits (no constipation).
Other systems - no significant findings smokes approx 15 cigarettes/day and could not remember how long he had smoked for. stated that he has the occasional shandy but avoids alcohol as it 'messes with his tablets'. currently lives alone in a 1 bedroom council owned flat, he is able to prepare a meal for himself but his sister does all of his shopping, cleaning and pays the bills. stated that he has no financial problems and likes to "splash out" with his money on friends in the pub. stated that his brother says "people are taking me for a mug". There is no history of or current illicit drug use as believes it will mess with his medication.
Nil describes himself as having a "nice personality" and being a "real good friend". enjoys watching "flying birds" and reading about them in books, but said that he does n't enjoy this as much at the moment. used to be a rambler and enjoyed walking stating that he had 'walked the earth'.  's religion is but he only attends church for weddings and funerals. stated that he is not himself at the moment, that he is usually 'ever so friendly and polite' and stated that 'nobody knows him at the moment'. If things are getting on top of him he copes by "just trying to breathe".
There are no known allergies. was aware that he was taking medication but could not recall the names. stated that his medication was in the form of injections and tablets and that he had been taking them for years and did not mind taking them as they "keep him alive". stated that he had made a plan to end it all and had a written a letter to this effect. A nurse on the ward had 'talked him round' and was now trying to drive the ideas out of his mind. would not elaborate on his plans and would not say if he had put any of these into action. has never had any thoughts of harming others. to self - high.
Medium build, tall male. was casually dressed, unshaven and unkempt with evidence of neglect of self-care.
Polite and willing to talk, moderate rapport established. No suspicion or guarding although was unable/unwilling to elaborate on certain parts of the history. Eye contact variable with moments when  's eyes were downcast. displayed mannerisms - repetitive crossing of legs and folding of arms and had a slight tremor in his hands.  's low motivation tends to isolate him from the ward.
Volume and intonation normal. Speech - generally slow but episodes of rapid speech with vagueness of content which made it difficult to grasp the meaning of what was saying. Often long silences before answering questions.
Subjective - Low, quiet and shy. Objective - appeared to be of low mood and slightly worried with a flattened affect. stated that he is not like this all the time - normally very friendly. felt that his mood would change but that he has to change it himself. feels angry with himself at present because he does n't know why he feels like he does. displayed negative thoughts of the world and himself stating that people do n't understand and that nobody knows him. sometimes has paranoid feelings that people are talking about him but does not think that people are out to hurt him.
Form: Occasional loosening of associations - There was a general lack of clarity and profoundness in  's responses. Occasionally moved between topics and did n't complete thought trails before changing topic.
Stream: No abnormalities detected.
Suicidal Ideation: Present, although stated that he was glad the nurse stopped him.
Delusions/Grandiose Ideas: Mild - referred to himself as being a great footballer and an excellent cricketer. also feels that people are jealous of him - evidence of self importance.
No auditory pseudohallucinations since age 21. No illusions.
No somatic/auditory/visual/olfactory/gustatory hallucinations.
Moderate - is aware that he has a mental illness and states that it is a "problem with his brain". is also aware that he needs medication and does not mind taking it. was orientated in time, place and person.
Points to look for on physical examination would be signs of endocrine abnormalities e.g. hypothyroidism, which can mimic symptoms of schizophrenia and depression. As has been assessed as having a high suicide risk it is important to look for evidence of self-harm attempted suicide e.g. cuts. As has stated that he has a poor appetite it is also important to monitor his weight and to look for evidence of malnutrition. As has been on long term antipsychotics it is important to look for extra pyramidal side effects of medication on physical examination.
Sister was concerned about  's mental state and safety was wound up easily, not his usual nature.
Becoming aggressive and verbally abusive even to family members, threatening to kill people.
Distracted easily and agitated, not engaging with family.
Perceived by others to be hyperactive and eccentric.
Pressured speech - mumbling to self, Grandiosity and self importance " I am superman", " I should be climbing buildings", Persecutory Delusions, Irritable,.
Sexually Inappropriate - "I'm vagina man".
Self Harm - wanting to cut his penis off, "I'm going to burn my legs".
Has been managing well in the community for a number of years.
Concerns re: behaviour and interaction within the community.
Paranoid of people taunting him resulting in aggressive outbursts.
Prior to admission - Depixol (Flupentixol decanoate) injection 500 mg every three weeks.
History of long term typical anti psychotic use including Haloperidol and Flupentixol decanoate.
From the history and mental state examination is a 46-year-old man who was diagnosed with schizophrenia in his late twenties. is currently experiencing symptoms of depression.
This is supported by the history of poor sleep and appetite, anhedonia and low mood. The severity is indicated by  's suicidal ideation and inability to perform daily tasks. may have had a recent  'stressor' in his life which has elicited these depressive symptoms. From the history, the only possible trigger to this episode is the disagreement with his friends on the night of admission and recent anniversary of his parents death. Although is displaying many of the psychological symptoms of depression - low self esteem, hopelessness and pessimism, he does not appear to have any physical symptoms (weight loss or constipation), characteristic of a depressive disorder. Many of the features of a depressive disorder are prominent in other psychiatric illnesses such as schizophrenia. It is likely that  's current symptoms are associated with his schizophrenic diagnosis. - Symptoms of depression that displays commonly occur in both acute and chronic schizophrenia. The "negative features" of schizophrenia have clinical similarities to the symptoms associated with depression and are often difficult to differentiate. It is therefore important to establish whether has a history of such symptoms related to his schizophrenia or whether this is a new depressive episode. Collateral information would identify the subtype of  's schizophrenic diagnosis, he occasionally has paranoid feelings (people talking about him) and this may support a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia.
Collateral information indicates that had psychotic symptoms on admission. The depressive symptoms is displaying may be a result of him gaining insight into the psychotic events surrounding admission. This is supported by some of the symptoms displays i.e. Ideas of self-harm, disturbed sleep, poor appetite. In such a diagnosis, schizophrenic symptoms (positive or negative) must still be present. Although does not currently display any of the first rank/clear cut symptoms of schizophrenia, there is still a loosening of associations, blunted affect and deterioration in social behaviour to support this diagnosis. Again, the rejection from his friends in the nightclub or the recent anniversary of his parents death may have over stimulated and precipitated the relapse of his schizophrenia. The relapse could also be due to a change in compliance with his medication and so this would need to be investigated. in which definite schizophrenic and affective symptoms are present simultaneously and are equally prominent. Changes in  's affect have been noted in the history - "feeling low, worried". Although was not currently experiencing any hallucinations or formal thought disorder ('positive' symptoms of schizophrenia) he did appear to have a flattened affect and was displaying a loosening of associations in his thought form which transcribed as vagueness in his speech. Other symptoms include social withdrawal (preferring to spend time alone in his room) and self-neglect. These 'negative' symptoms are typical of the chronic syndrome of schizophrenia which would support a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. However,  's depressive symptoms appear to be more prominent than his schizophrenic symptoms which does not meet the criteria for this diagnosis. - characterised by depressive episodes and at least one authenticated hypomanic/manic, episode in the past. The symptoms of depression have been identified in the history so far. stated that he likes to splash out his money on his friends - this could indicate a degree of disinhibited behaviour indicative of hypomania. There was also a minor element of self-importance in the history - jealous of me, great footballer. However,  's low mood and reduced activity levels were not characteristic of patient with mania.
A diagnosis of post schizophrenic depression is the most likely choice given the collateral information at this time. However, an organic cause for the depressive symptoms cannot be ruled out. It is important to confirm that had not taken any illicit substances preceding admission e.g. amphetamines or cocaine, as these are more likely to bring on a relapse of schizophrenia and can quickly exacerbate symptoms. It is also important to consider Endocrine causes of depression such as Hypothyroidism or Diabetes.  's medication should also be investigated to rule out an iatrogenic cause for his depression through use of sedatives, steroids etc. As has not reported any sexual relationships or illicit drug use it is unlikely that his depression could be due to an infection such as HIV or syphilis. has been assessed as a high suicide risk as he has recently expressed a desire to 'end it all'. The history of attempted suicide, recent plan and letter to this effect all indicate a greater risk of a further fatal attempt. During the psychotic episode, displayed ideas of harming others. However there are no current ideas to this effect and is assessed as being a low risk of harm to others. is a pleasant, placid individual with a long history of psychiatric illness. This has led to a certain level of dependency over time, initially on his two parents and now his two sisters. is an impressionable man who seems to have superficial relationships resulting in a degree of social isolation. In view of his past schizophrenic history, it is likely that the relapse of  's schizophrenia was triggered by a high level of expressed emotion and overstimulation due to recent social factors i.e. disagreement with friends, recent anniversary of parents death. is aware of his diagnosis of schizophrenia but was unclear why he had been admitted to hospital and this should be explained to him. During the interview, did not mention any of the psychotic symptoms he had displayed on admission and would only describe his state as "not being himself" and a "problem with his brain". It should be explained to that the symptoms he was experiencing are a result of his illness and the reason he takes long-term medication. This may help to reduce any problems with non-compliance, increase his insight and help him to recover from the depressive symptoms he is currently experiencing.
To exclude an organic cause for the depression or relapse of his schizophrenia:
Information should be sought from medical notes regarding previous admissions, treatments and reactions to medication and to confirm the history. Confirmation of suicide attempt should also be sought from nursing staff on the ward.
Before pharmacological intervention is applied, it is important to confirm that has been compliant with his medication to ensure that this was not a precipitant for his relapse.  's long-term antipsychotic medication should be maintained to prevent any further relapses of his schizophrenic symptoms. A short-term antidepressant would help to lift  's mood during his inpatient stay and relieve his depressive symptoms. As has been assessed as having a high suicide risk it is important to prescribe an antidepressant that has a low toxicity in case of attempted overdose e.g. Sertraline. Sertraline also has good anxiolytic properties, which would help with  's mild anxiety.  's disturbed sleep pattern may have been causing his lack of energy and consequent anhedonia. A short-term benzodiazepine e.g. Lorazepam, may help to alleviate this sleep disturbance but should not be considered for prolonged use due to the risk of addiction. As has been on medication for his schizophrenia for a long time and believes that it "keeps him alive", he may be apprehensive about changes and so these would need to be explained to him.
Equally as important if not more so in the case of is intervention at a social level. During  's inpatient stay it is vital that he is encouraged to participate in activities. This will help to avoid further social isolation and time spent contemplating suicidal ideas, therefore improving his psychological well-being. It will also help to avoid a dependency on the ward and future admissions. A change in environment e.g. activities outside, should be encouraged as under stimulation can exacerbate the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. However, the amount of stimulation and expressed emotion in the hospital environment must be carefully balanced in order to avoid a relapse of his schizophrenia. should continue to receive his schizophrenic depot medication to reduce the risk of a relapse. During the interview, had a slight tremor of his hands which may be a result of the long term use of typical anti psychotics. Monitoring of these side effects should be incorporated into  's long-term management plan. If the side effects reach an unacceptable level, the medication should be changed from a typical to an atypical antipsychotic [1]. Regular monitoring of blood pressure, pulse and temperature should be observed in long-term antipsychotic treatment and can be carried out as part of primary care by the GP or CPN [2]. has managed well in the community for a number of years with the help of the community mental health team. As has a diverse range of service requirements, a "care program approach" would be an effective way of initiating and maintaining contact with services to ensure a high level of care. is currently living in independent accommodation and relies on his sisters to help with activities of daily living etc. may benefit from supported accommodation/friendship housing that provides 24 hour support for patients with mental health illnesses living in the community. A full assessment of  's support needs by the social worker would ensure that suitable accommodation and support could then be applied for. This would help to alleviate the pressure on his sisters so that they can spend their time with in a more recreational way.
The social worker would also ensure that is receiving all benefits he is entitled to which is vital now that he is unemployed. will have little to occupy his time now that he is unemployed which may exacerbate his depressive symptoms. An occupational therapist could help to organise a structured program of activity to maintain and improve  's social and occupational skills. Reorientation and rehabilitation in this form may provide a supported stepping-stone back into mainstream work, which enjoyed, and promote social inclusion.
Day centres run by voluntary organisations such as Rethink or SANE would provide with a ready-made social network and a range of leisure activities and general support. CBT (cognitive behavioural therapy), may help to improve  's insight and coping mechanisms when he becomes anxious by focusing on his current thoughts, feelings and behaviours. Such interventions require active participation from the patient and the probability of this would have to be assessed before a referral was made. An advance directive (agreement) should be developed and recorded in  's care program to identify the treatment he would prefer to receive if he became too unwell to look after himself.
It may be beneficial to refer  's family members to a carers group where experiences and coping strategies can be shared. They may also benefit from family therapy sessions which teach family members how to recognise and reduce expressed emotion, and therefore the risk of another relapse.
In terms of prognosis, has a very supportive family who can recognise changes in his mental state and refer him to the mental health services for acute management. They are also available to assist with his return to the community and activities of daily living. However, a multidisciplinary approach to  's care in the community must be applied in order to reduce the risk of a further relapse of his Schizophrenia. is still an inpatient on Ward at . is becoming more isolated, he stays in his room all day but will get up later in the evening when the other clients have gone to bed. appears to be scared of the other clients who can be very loud and 'opinionated'. is also reluctant to go out with his sister who he has a good relationship with.  's appetite is improving slightly although he now eats his meals in his room. There is no real improvement in his psychological symptoms and he has now started to develop somatic symptoms (constipation), which may indicate that his depression is becoming more severe. did venture outside to play football with members of staff and other clients and appeared to enjoy this but on return to the ward his low mood quickly returned. Unfortunately there is no opportunity at present to move to another ward where he may feel less intimated by other clients due to bed shortage.
Schizophrenia is viewed as a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by an interaction of genetic and environmental factors. The neurodevelopmental hypothesis suggests that "factors acting during gestation may increase the risk of schizophrenia through an effect on intra uterine brain development" [4]. Such factors include viral infection in utero and obstetric complications. Genetic factors are also thought to play a role in schizophrenia and several susceptibility genes have been identified [5]. Altered neurotransmission is considered to play a key role in the expression of schizophrenic symptoms. It was initially thought that a high level of dopamine transmission in the mesolimbic area of the brain, was responsible for the positive, psychotic symptoms seen in schizophrenia. Imaging and post mortem findings have led to the development of a dual hypothesis in which a reduced level of dopamine activity in the prefrontal cortex is associated with the negative and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia [6].
The course of schizophrenia varies, approx 10% of patients never recover from their first schizophrenic episode and approximately 80% do recover [6]. In most cases schizophrenia has a remitting/relapsing course and a depressive state normally follows the resolution of an acute psychotic episode. However, there is little research on the aetiology, course, prognosis or treatment of post schizophrenic depression. As depression is associated with a high risk of suicide, the management of such symptoms is an important part of improving prognosis in patients with schizophrenia. The depressive symptoms are usually treated with antidepressants, however, there is no substantial evidence to support their use [7] and further research is obviously needed in this area. was prescribed Olanzapine for his psychotic symptoms on admission. This atypical antipsychotic has also been shown to reduce depressive symptoms in patients with unipolar psychotic depression [8] and so may reduce the severity of post schizophrenic depressive symptoms. An important part of management is to reduce the risk of further relapse and it has been shown that psychoeducational approaches can help to reduce readmission rates compared with standard care [9]. A multidisciplinary team approach must be taken to ensure that all factors contributing to potential relapse are managed.
Taking a full psychiatric history and the importance of obtaining collateral information to confirm features of the history and past psychiatric illnesses etc.
The difficulties in trying to diagnose a patient within the ICD 10 classification system as patients may have complex cases with symptoms applicable to a range of diagnoses.
It is important to identify the most prominent symptoms in order to reach an appropriate diagnosis and develop an effective management plan.
The importance of social and psychological inputs into a patient 's management plan and the various methods of achieving this.
The risk of patients becoming dependent on the ward.
