A Company Strategy is a specific step which enables a company to accomplish a required goal. Making Strategy involves a continuous process of research and decision-making. Knowledge of yourself and your company is a vital starting point in setting objectives.
A manufacturing simulation exercise "Aerials" was very useful in understanding the significance and application of tools used in manufacturing industries for planning and control. At the end of the game the total final cash left with our group "Falcon" was   277,071 and final worth   302,176.
Since we took over the firm in the thirteenth week and were told that sale is through a chain of distributors we at the beginning of the game by mutual planning set ourselves two objectives:
In order to achieve these objectives we made following strategy.
We tried to keep our production costs low by utilizing capacity and using different shifts when necessary by precise forecasting and efficient inventory management to ensure on-time delivery. The way we used logistics and operations management tools to help us achieve our objectives are described below.
Forecasting is predicting or estimating before hand. It plays a very important role in capacity planning and inventory management and also provides valuable input to other functions of the organisation. Forecasting is based primarily on two main methods.
Selecting the forecasting technique was a difficult task for our company (Falcon). With brief discussion and thorough understanding of the market and data available for forecasting it was decided that "Moving Averages" forecasting technique is useful and perform better for our company. We used this technique because it is the simplest way of smoothing past data that is used for forecasting. Most recent data is most relevant in forecasting short-term demand because it reveals latest trends better than data several years old. It is necessary to analyse the data after removing trends and seasonality from the set of data and incorporating them afterwards.
Average sales for the first 12 weeks this year was 5416 units compared with last year 's 4670 which is approximately 15% more. This helped us establish this year 's weekly aggregate demand at 6250 units or 25000 in a month. Based on this approach our strategy was to forecast for four weeks and accordingly place orders for the raw materials so that we never run out of our raw material stock.
We were reactive and chasing demand as it occurs, in 14 th and 15 th week we did n't order any raw material because demand was too low, lower than past year 's average. We were concerned with the cash flow so that in an attempt to order lots of raw material we may not run out of cash and go bankrupt. In the first level after gaining some profits we transferred money from current account to deposit account and earned some positive interest. In 16 th week we did n't produce any aerial so our unit cost for this period increased to   37,000 which was much higher than the lowest unit cost   37 in the day shift. The reason for this we thought we have enough finished goods inventory to supply next week. By this chase strategy we paid huge fixed cost which could have been avoided by utilizing a shift.
Before starting this level we calculated break even analysis which came 3000 units every week so that we may not again miss the opportunity of utilizing capacity and pay the fixed costs. We became proactive rather than reactive since our demand was fluctuating. In the trend there was a rise in the demand and the peak period comes gradually with modest peak in third week followed by highest peak in fourth week. In order to meet this demand we decided to build up stock to buffer against supply problems and finished goods stock to buffer against fluctuations in demand keeping in view the next peak period.
We insisted on make to stock because cost of holding inventory in the game is only 0.5% compared to 12 % penalty of the sales value of under delivered goods. We accumulated finished goods stock than depleted in the peak period and made profits. In this level we added 10% more to our forecasted demand because of scrap, rework and machine down time. By the end of this level i.e. in weeks 19 and 20 we ordered more raw materials due to introduction of a new model XL which requires two units of accessories in addition to the other components, keeping in view one raw material has greater lead time.
During the third level with the introduction of the XL model, the break-even point stood at 2560 units for XL models but was pushed a little higher to 3200 units for standard model per week. A 3200 units figure, being a conservative out of the two, was picked up as a break-even point by our group. It was primarily due to an increase in semi-fixed costs. However, the reason for drop in the break-even units for XL model was increase in the contribution as a result of increase in the selling price. There was a very marginal increase in the cost of the product but the rise in the labour cost was covered by the increase in contribution per unit. On the whole break-even point was a useful tool to monitor our progress during the game.
In a group we decided to keep a healthy stock of 'accessories' because they would only cost   1 and had a two weeks' delivery time. Although being cheap this component was equally important for the production. Increased usage of this component in production of aerials for XL model in level 3 was another reason to keep high inventory of this component in the later weeks. Keeping a stock of 'accessories' did not put much burden on our finances and ensured the availability at all times. We decided to reduce the stock of 'main body' and 'aerial' as these were expensive items to keep in stock and would also increase our cost of holding inventory. Shorter delivery time was another reason to reduce the stock for these items. The only time that we would increase the stock for these items was a weak before expected rise in demand to enable us to increase our finished goods stock.
By looking at the trend last year it was detectable that every fourth week there is a rise in the demand and peak period comes gradually with modest peak in third week followed by highest peak in fourth week. In order to meet this demand we decided to build up stock to meet customers demand in these peak periods.
It can be seen from the figures 1.1 and 1.2 below we had inventory cost almost throughout the three levels and the total at the end of 24 th week was   13,671 compared to   51,620 penalty cost which we had only five times. Initially we were only focused on meeting customers demand and ordering a lot of raw materials so had inventory costs but after looking at bank conditions we started forecasting more accurately to avoid cost of holding inventory also. Than we tried our best to do accurate forecasting but forecasting is never accurate and we had penalties, especially at the end of game in 23 rd and 24 th weeks. I think our group under forecasted a little as overall we satisfied 88% of our customers demand and had penalties for the 12% orders we missed to deliver.
To get the right product to right place at right time and for right cost it is necessary to schedule activities in an effectual manner. Because no matter how good scheduling methods are it is unlikely that supply and demand will be in accord. Supply chain then require batching of materials for efficiency. To get the full advantage a balance must be achieved with quantities that promote efficiency and to avoid disadvantages of tied up inventory and money.
From customer 's view point the order winner for our product is on time delivery since any shortages in supply are not carried forward. Since the demand is rising which is 15% more than last year we made every effort not to miss the peak in demand where greatest profit were available and not responding late when capacity exceeds demand, increasing inventory and further loss in profitability. In an attempt to satisfy most of our customer 's demand we emphasised to keep more finished goods than raw materials as the cost of holding inventory is same 0.5% of the value for both raw materials and finished goods.
Capacity is the ability to produce. The overall aim of capacity management is to match the level of demand with the level of production. Less production than the demand means missed opportunity in terms of sales, turnover and profit. It also results in dissatisfaction among customers as a result an organisation looses market share. Over capacity means under utilisation of assets. Therefore, capacity management is another important area in operations management that needs to be carefully worked out.
We operated our production system on 'made to stock'. Our total production capacity was 10,350 units per week against an average weekly forecast of 6250 units. Running a Saturday shift was not a feasible option in which a unit cost was   47.6, more than the selling price of   45, and which could only produce 600 units. Our strategy was to keep our unit cost at the lowest so that we could earn a reasonable profit from our sales. Based on this strategy we decided to produce at least 5000 units per week running a day shift to take advantage of low labour cost and decided to keep the unsold goods in stock for a peak demand period. It kept our unit cost at   37.0 per unit and helped us earn a reasonably good profit. As a contingency measure we also decided to run a night shift (E37.3) once in four weeks to reach 25,000 units in a month approximately so that we do not miss the peak week.
If a firm could order merchandise or raw materials and carry inventory with no expenses other than the cost of these items, there would be no need to be concerned about what quantity to order at a given time. However inventory costs are affected by both the cost of purchasing and the cost of carrying inventory i.e.
Total inventory cost = total carrying costs + total ordering costs.
Carrying cost increase as inventories increase in size as it is sum of storage costs, insurance premiums, costs of money tied up in inventory, loses due to obsolescence or spoilage, opportunity cost, deterioration cost and other expenses. Ordering costs also known as purchase cost or set up cost, this is the sum of the fixed costs that are incurred each time an item is ordered. These costs are not associated with the quantity ordered but primarily with physical activities required to process the order include expenses associated with preparation and processing of purchase orders and expenses related to receiving and expecting purchase items. [1].
Inventory is held to avoid the nuisance, the time and the cost etc. of constant replenishment. However, to replenish inventory only infrequently would necessitate the holding of very large inventories. It is therefore apparent that some balance or trade-off or compromise is needed in deciding how much inventory to hold, and therefore how much inventory to order. There are costs of holding inventory and there are costs of re-ordering inventory and these two costs need to be balanced. The point at which unit cost of preparing the purchase order for a quantity equals to the unit cost of carrying the materials in store is known as Economic Order Quantity (EOQ). The purpose of the EOQ is to minimise the total costs of inventory.
When determining how much to order at a time, an organisation will recognise that as order quantity rises, average stock rises and the total annual cost of holding stock rises and the number of orders decreases and the total annual re-order costs decrease. The point at which cost is minimised is the EOQ. This cost behaviour is illustrated by the graph in Figure 2.1.
The first curve is drawn to show the acquisition or procurement costs. This curve can be expected to fall from left to right as the quantity to be bought on each purchase order is increased. This effect arises from the supplier 's quantity discounts and, to smaller extent, from administrative savings made as a result of having to prepare purchase orders at less frequent intervals. The second curve is for stock holding costs. It will rise from left to right, as increased amounts are purchased and the cost of inventory investment and storage grow. The third curve is the result of adding first two curves together. This gives a curve of total procurement and stockholding costs. The minimum point of this curve corresponds to the intersection of purchasing and inventory curves. This minimum point indicates the economic order quantity. [2].
The way to address demand distortion caused by order batching is to find ways to reduce the cost of order processing and transportation. This will cause EOQ lot sizes to get smaller and orders to be placed more frequently. The result will be a smoother flow of orders that distributors and manufacturers will be able to handle more efficiently. Ordering costs can be reduced by using electronic ordering technology. Transportation costs can be reduced by using third party logistics suppliers (3PLs) to cost effectively pick up many small shipments from suppliers and deliver small orders to many customers. [3].
The basic EOQ formula assumes that the purchase price per unit will be the same regardless of the number of units ordered. However, vendors often lower the unit price as the quantity ordered increases, because the lowered unit cost of shipping and handling the order. When quantity discounts are offered, such savings reduce unit acquisition costs still further as the order size increases. [3].
The economic order quantity is the replenishment order quantity that minimizes the combined cost of inventory maintenance and ordering. Identification of such a quantity assumes that demand and cost are relatively stable throughout the year. It also requires some stringent applications that constrain its direct application. The major assumptions of the simple EOQ model are.
One of basic assumptions of EOQ is stable demand so that raw materials can be ordered in fixed quantities every time ensuring efficient inventory control and reduced costs. Our syndicate company (Falcon) had a very unstable demand but with a trend involved. Every fourth week there is a peak week gradually with a moderate peak in third week which can be easily seen on the graph below.
In such a situation where demand is totally unstable EOQ cannot be used to represent the best buy quantity. There was also a limit to the maximum overdraft available which restricts the quantity of raw material to be ordered. Comparing ordering costs only   50 per order with cost of holding of holding inventory 0.5% of the value for both the raw materials and finished goods, so it was better to order every week when in need to satisfy customers demand rather than using EOQ and not ordering every week ultimately holding inventory and paying its value.
EOQ could have been used to order raw materials if the demand was stable and without seasonality. In this situation we know how much to produce every month and so how much raw material we will be in need every month. It could save the inventory carrying costs when the inventory is in idleness.
Master production schedule translates the sales and operation plan of the company into production plan for producing specific products in the future. Sales and operations plan provides an aggregate statement of the manufacturing output required to reach company objectives while the MPS is a statement of the specific products that makeup that output.
An effective MPS provides the basis for making good use of manufacturing resources, on time deliveries, and to attain firm 's strategic objectives as reflected in the sales and operations plan. It specifies how product will be supplied to meet future demand. It is a statement of production and not a statement of demand or a forecast. It is only the statement of planned future output. [6].
Demand will be 15% more than last year 's sales in respective weeks.
Raw materials; Aerials and Bodies arrive on time i.e. one week after ordering and Accessories in two weeks time c) Taking into account 5% scrap, 2% rework and 3% machine down time so actual production will be 90% of the total.
Forecast is an important input into the planning process that determines the master production schedule. The MPS, although based on forecast differs from the forecast in many ways. It takes into account capacity limitations, the costs of production, other resource considerations and the sales and operations whereas in forecasting these are not considered.
The average demand of last year from = 5415.
The average demand of last year from weeks 1 through week 24=4712 This year average sales from weeks 1 through week 24= 5504.
This year sale for standard model is 14.376% greater than last year sales so there is a growth factor of approximately 15%. So aggregate demand can be expected to be 4712 x 15% increase = 5419 or 5400 approximately.
Taking into account scrap rate, rework and machine down overall 10% 5419 x 10% = 5961 or 6000.
Total production should be 6000 per week in order to satisfy the demand of 5400.
Since there is no last year 's data available for XL model so using simple moving averages for calculating the demand.
Average sales per week this year from weeks 21 to 24 = 2675 or 2700 approximately Total production 2675 x 10% = 2942 or 3000.
Total production of XL model should be 3000 per week in order to satisfy the demand of 2700.
On the basis of this forecast data master production schedule is developed.
The total production capacity is 12,700 units per week against an average weekly forecast of 9000 units, 6000 STD and 3000 XL. Running a Saturday shift is not a feasible option in which a unit cost is   86 for STD and   87 for XL, more than the selling price of   55, and which could only produce 1000 units. Evening shift is also not a better option since per unit cost in evening shift is more than in day and night shifts and it produces only 340 units per shift.
The projected demand for STD model is 6000 units per week which could be manufactured in day shift having the lowest per unit cost of   39.33. Demand for XL model is 3000 units per week or 12000 units per month. The next feasible shift is night shift having per unit cost of   49 for the XL model with a capacity of 4000 units per week. Making 3000 units in the night shift every week can waste the capacity. To utilize capacity efficiency night shifts could be used three times a month fulfilling the monthly demand of 12000 rather than 3000 every week. In this way capacity will be fully utilized and savings would be made in the semi fixed cost and labour cost by not using the night shift once in a month and still satisfying the customer 's demand. It will increase the inventory cost, but compared with semi fixed cost of night shift is very low.
In the starting 25 th week with such high inventory levels the proposed strategy is to reduce raw material inventory by producing the maximum 9100 units utilizing the day and night shifts. To reduce finished goods inventory in the 26 th week make enough STD and XL model to meet customer 's demand and not utilizing the full shift and holding inventory. Later on in the 27 th and 28 th weeks as it was assumed that demand is stable so producing 6000 STD model and 4000 XL model and ordering raw material accordingly. The demand for XL is 3000 units per week so by 30 th week there would be much inventory of XL to meet demand and there will be no need for producing in that week. Accessories for XL which will not be required in 30 th week are not ordered in 28 th week, keeping in view the lead time for accessories is two weeks.
Since the demand is stable and producing the exact quantity, there is no inventory for the raw materials and finished good STD, a very little inventory cost for XL model. As the inventory of XL builds up in three consecutive weeks there is no need for producing in the fourth week so in 30 th week there will be enough inventory of XL to meet the demand. As a result raw material for XL, main body and aerial is not ordered in 29 th week which have a lead time of one week.
The same strategy continues in following weeks from 33 to 35.
Fulfilling the fluctuating product demand is critical to any supplier, manufacturer, or retailer. Forecasts of future demand will determine the quantities that should be purchased, produced, and shipped. Demand forecasts are necessary since the basic operations process, moving from the suppliers' raw materials to finished goods in the customers' hands, takes time. On the other hand inventories provide a level of product or service availability, which, when located in the proximity of the customer, can meet a high customer service requirement. [5].
Forecasted demand can be classified as either dependent or independent. Dependent demand is represented by the vertical sequence characteristic of purchasing and manufacturing situations. The company manufactures plastic components that will be assembled to form finished goods in the automobiles. In this dependent demand situation, plastic components requirements depend on the automotive assembly schedule. [4].
Orders received from original equipments manufacturers OEM are quite stable so simple Moving Averages technique can be used to predict future market demand. This technique is the simplest way of smoothing past data that is used for forecasting. Most recent data is most relevant in forecasting short-term demand because it reveals latest trends better than data several years old. [6].
Since the demand is stable for first customer so EOQ is suitable to use for raw material supply which minimizes the total cost of ordering and carrying inventory. Due to an increase in demand in the past few months a new shift is also introduced so producing regularly can fulfil customers demand without any need to stock.
Orders from other customers vary and have unstable demand therefore to satisfy this customer made to stock policy is better.
Company should n't wait for demand to emerge and then react to it. Instead, the company must anticipate and plan for future demand so that can react immediately to customer orders as they occur. In other words, company should adopt the strategy of "make to stock" rather than "make to order" and then deploy inventories of finished goods.
Moving Average is a good technique used in the forecasting but the biggest disadvantage is that it gives equal weight to old and recent data. This problem is solved in 'exponential smoothing' technique that gives more weight to the most recent observations which reflects most recent trends. By using this technique more accurate forecasts can be made. Therefore, it is recommended that this technique should be used in future to satisfy the second customer. The Times series forecasting technique provides great benefit of understanding and meeting customers fluctuating demand and in this way the demand can be fulfilled to earn goodwill in the corporate world.
Adopting the collaborative forecasting, the retailers would share their demand forecasts and their current order plans with the manufacturer, and the manufacturer would aggregate these data to construct and verify its forecasts. Discrepancies between the retail order plans and the manufacturer forecasts would be identified and resolved. The final result would be improved forecast accuracy, less total inventory in the system, and a smoother deployment of the goods into the retail channel. In this way the company can definitely fulfil the fluctuating demand.
There is an increase in overall volume in the past 18 months due to which an additional shift is introduced. The following problems may likely to occur;.
Labour cost will be increased.
Semi-fixed cost of additional shift will be added to the trading accounts.
Per unit cost of product will be more in the additional shift.
Due to over use of multi purpose machines, wear and tear will be more and machine reliability will decrease.
Machines having setup time more than 30 minutes, probably in many hours cannot be used in additional shift.
Raw material will be needed to order in larger quantities so tied up capital.
Due to additional shift inventories of finished goods will be more if it fails to replenish in time.
To hold high level of finished goods greater space is required so warehouse problem will occur i) Floor Space problem will gives rise to product storage congestion and excess material clutters aisle, impeding flow of workers and material.
To meet the increase in demand rather using additional shift other options might be:
One option is to decrease the setup time, even if setup time is part of standard, no parts are made while the equipment is being setup. The way to maximize standard hours is to avoid setups-run as much as possible. By inference, this puts an extremely high cost on setup time, it encourages supervisors to produce as much as possible even if it is not needed and also encourages to run the machine constantly to earn highest ratio of potential hours earned versus actual hours worked. It discourages setups. In practice, it does not generally encourage supervisors to put much effort into refining the skills and practices for setups. [7].
Workforce should be multi skilled so they can help the operators removing and replacing tool sets of preparation. This will increase the speed in changeovers. Single minute exchange of die (SMED) methodology can be used very successfully in reducing setup times.
Loss of production due to machine reliability can be overcome by decreasing downtime, avoiding any breakdowns, scrap and rework. Production rate for old machines can be corrected by proper maintenance.
If the firm has sufficient funds than it is beneficial to install new machinery. This in turn will attain efficient actual production rate.
If additional shift cost are high and company has no sufficient funds to buy a new machinery subcontracting helps to fulfil the customer 's demand in time. \TMI is a more advanced form of subcontracting. It is a set of process to enable vendor-driven replenishment and can be implemented over the web. It increases the visibility of information exchange across supply chain thus improving planning and reducing inventory.
More workforce can be hired rather using an extra shift to overcome holidays, illness and absenteeism to maximize production. In this way products can be manufactured in machine idle time.
Productivity can be improved by closely monitoring the process initially, periodi reviews and continuous improvement.
Inclusion of factors such as training and motivation has an important role to play in designing jobs that are interesting and responsible. A contented, secure work force will perform far better than a work force that feels threatened and abused. By training people, maximum utilization of human resources can be achieved where everyone works in the same direction and thinks inline. This would increase productivity in a single shift so minimizing the need for an additional shift.
