'The Beefeater' is a traditional English pub, located in Cascais, Portugal, a popular tourist location and a busy city centre, both during the day (for its proximity to a number of beaches) and during the night (as it finds itself in the heart of the city 's nightlife activity). It caters primarily to the English residents (many of which choose Cascais as their new home because of the large existing English community), and to the many English tourist which flock in during the summer season. The targeting of the predominantly English customer base is clear, especially when we observe that a large proportion of the staff speaks only English, and little or no Portuguese. 'The Beefeater' differentiates itself from other surrounding bars by offering a traditional pub atmosphere from 'back home', playing all the English football league matches and providing typical pub meals and English beers, often hard to find in Portugal.
The pub 's main organising idea and the emotional drive for the owners' entrepreneurial pursuit, is to provide the English community from Cascais with a familiar and friendly atmosphere, to help the adaptation of newcomers and to strengthen the bonds within the community. Most of the customers are regulars and are recognized by the staff by name. The higher prices in the pub ensure a slightly older customer base, with greater purchasing power, paying a premium for their English imports. 'The Beefeater' functions like most other pubs, opening everyday between 1p.m. and 1 a.m., and is primarily looked to for their assortment of beers. There is no table service (except during the summer season when the outdoor patio is opened), so customers order, pay for, and collect their drinks from the bar counter.
This study will focus in on the currently employed staffing system, in relation to the pub 's capacity management, specifically for the process of serving drinks during the evening. This is a very different process from that of the day, where meals are also served, and requires a different strategy to its management. In doing so, it will look at strategies for integrating capacity with demand, to provide for a more efficient use of critical resources.
This study was built for the most part on primary data, collected through observations and personal experience as a past employee. Interviews were conducted with Mr. Wood, one of the managers/owners and informal conversations were held with other employees regarding their opinion on the current staffing system and possible improvements. Customers were also casually addressed on their views on the pub and their perceptions of the offered service.
With regards to the analysis of information, quantitative evidence was collected to support claims on the service volume, staffing levels and the efficiency of the use of the staff resource. Some charts and diagrams are also provided to help in the visualizing of information and some of the most pressing issues.
In order to draw out their capacity management strategy, the managers determined their aims early on, "Our clients are mainly regulars, slightly older than the average bar customer in this area... they are not prepared to wait great lengths for their drinks, and expect a certain speed and type of service as a reward for their regularity and the higher prices they pay here." These expectations were confirmed through casual discussions with customers, who when questioned about what their expectation of the service, named promptness and friendliness as their top concerns.
Mr. Wood, interview (14/12/2005).
The average perceived 'fair waiting time' for the 20 customers questioned was a mere 141 seconds or 2 minutes and 21 seconds (see Appendix A for a breakdown).
The capacity management task is made easier in winter/autumn, as the pub is virtually only frequented by regulars during these seasons, and demand can be accurately forecasted in advance. A predominantly chase capacity approach was deemed appropriate by the managers, and this approach has been pursued for the past few years in determining the staffing levels of the pub. With a chase capacity strategy in mind, the managers need to make sure that they can provide rapid access to the service, matching capacity to demand. This approach is important to ensure that customers remain satisfied with the service (and that their particular concern with the waiting time is met), so as to retain their preference of 'The Beefeater' over other similar nearby English pubs. The managers have attempted to build some volume flexibility through the staffing system to better manage unforeseen demand. The current coping system is an informal one, based only on the willingness of the staff, who due to the positive work relations with the managers/owners often accept coming into work in unscheduled nights (receiving in payment in exchange for the extra hours). This does not prove to be a problem in winter, where demand is usually accurately forecasted, preventing this coping system from really being put to the test; however, during summer, the tourists add a large unknown to the equation. The casual capacity control system employed over winter does n't fulfil its function over the summer, which calls for the implementation of a formalized coping system. This will be further discussed in the 'Recommendations for Improvement' section.
No formal studies however have ever been conducted by the managers (who rely primarily on observation and their deep knowledge of the business) or by hired professional on the optimum staffing levels or demand in the bar during different times or days. Nonetheless, as a whole, the current system (see Appendix B for current staffing system) appears to work well as customers rarely complain about the wait time and the pub remains a profitable enterprise for the last few years. This study will attempt to examine if the staffing resource could be further optimized to lower costs and improve resource utilization.
Simple observation made evident that managers were occasionally keeping staffing levels unnecessarily high, due to a preoccupation that demand would not be met, particularly on very busy nights (i.e. Premiership Match nights). In these instances, where the number of staff members on duty was high (generally 5/6 staff members), two bottlenecks could be observed, illustrating some inefficiencies in the resource usage. The main bottleneck surfaced in the process taking of orders. The key reason behind this inefficiency is the limited counter space, which the server must approach to collect the order from the customer. Queues emerged on the serving side of the counter, where staff would be found queuing to be able to approach the counter/customer, a sign of capacity leakage. This is a clear demonstration of expensive resources, namely the staff, being underutilised. This can be further verified in the data collected over different nights, comparing the average time taken to serve the customer against the number of staff on duty. If we look at the graph below, we can observe that beyond a certain number, the additional benefit brought by an extra staff member is lost, and the serving time actually begins to increase due to the bottlenecks.
For the creation of this chart, twenty different reading were taken for each of the 4 night, during the same time period (20:00 - 21:00), with the exception of the Sunday match data, which was collected during halftime, at approximately 16:40. Readings were taken from all staff members to obtain an average.
The second main bottleneck that needs to be addressed is the limited space for the preparation of the drinks (see Appendix C for a sketch of the bar area). Particularly on busy nights, when many staff members are working behind the bar, movement becomes restricted and serving time is unnecessarily delayed. Although this study will not delve into much detail regarding the layout of the bar (as further research and expertise would be needed), a redesign of the area for the preparation of drinks would be beneficial in enabling staff to work to their full potential. The most pressing issues with the layout are the location of the glasses (under an already crowded and limited counter area) and the location of the fridges (which require space to be opened, a luxury almost inexistent on busy nights and which only serves to further restrict the movement of other staff members) (see Appendix C for illustration).
An added difficulty to the capacity management in the pub stems from the nature of the service and of the service process. The duration of the serving process/purchase transaction varies tremendously depending on the specific customer (i.e. some expect lengthy conversation and interaction, which is crucial to ensure that the 'familiar' and 'friendly' part of the service concept) and on the staff member (depending on their personal ability and work experience). This makes the job of managing the capacity a very complex one, due to the numerous variables that need to be taken into consideration.
Following on the discussion on the nature of the service, it is widely expected that the busiest hours and the most popular with customers are late evening/after dinner. This means that many staff members whose shift begins before this peak are often unoccupied at times, and then overworked at others. This could have a detrimental impact on staff morale. Demand management techniques could possibly be employed to manage this, like perhaps the offer of a 'happy hour' at less popular times, with some price incentives. Social events to further integration in the English community and to help with the adaptation of new members, like Portuguese conversation practice groups, are another idea. Lastly, the managers could also take advantage of the English firms and associations in Portugal which bring a large number of their staff from home (i.e. British schools in Portugal, most of which are not located far from the area). They could be offered the venue to hold their social events, at discounted prices during the off-peak hours.
The management is currently looking into altering the offered service slightly, by putting into operation a table waiting service at the pub. The main doubt still lingering in the minds of the managers is the fact that this strays slightly form the original service concept of creating a traditional pub, where table service is not usual. However, this could probably be a very favourable move for the pub. If managed correctly, it could further the aims of providing a 'friendly' service, as staff members could offer the customer a 'personalized' greeting (particularly important for regular customers) and provide them with increased attention, which is made difficult by a busy counter area. Similarly, this might avoid the creation of physical queues, which are more stressful to customers than this 'invisible' one at the table. The wait would also be more comfortable, and possibly with company, which is preferable to the common uncomfortable and stressful queuing, which only contributes to the increase the perceived waiting time.
This might be counterbalanced by the fact that some tables may get their orders before others who might have placed their orders earlier, due to the different complexity of drinks. This may be perceived by unfair by some customers and cause some dissatisfaction.
This is a measure that could be suggested to the managers, to ensure their chase capacity strategy is better accomplished. It is of great importance, particularly during the summer season, as the unknown tourist factor could mean longer waiting times for regulars and hence dissatisfaction. This coping system could possibly be in the form of new, shorter part-time shifts during peak hours or even through the implementation of an on-call rotation during the summer months. Managers could require that each staff member be 'on-call' during two separate weeks of the summer months, simplifying the task of the task of deciding who to call in the case of an unexpected peak at the bar. However, this may be received negatively by the staff, and would most likely have to be negotiated.
This re-design would attempt to eliminate the bottlenecks, ensuring a more efficient use of the staff resource. The most obvious suggestion would be to increase the counter space, the main culprit in the creation of the first bottleneck mentioned in the above section; this could be done in two ways. The first would be a remodelling of the counter area, which would prove costly and would mean lost revenue from the pub being closed during the works. The second would be to knock down the unnecessary side wall (to the right of the serving area, which only prevents contact with customers at that end of the counter) and to use the gained space as an additional serving area (see Appendix C). Although small, perhaps if used in conjunction with a service process re-design (by maybe separating the processes and limiting this as the 'till'/'payment' area), it could prove very beneficial.
The negative effects brought by second bottleneck, which stemmed from the bar layout, could possibly be minimized by a division of tasks and a process re-design. The separation of the processes of order collection, payment transaction and drink preparation (which is currently followed through by the same employee) would allow for greater specialization on the part of the staff, who could become more proficient in their areas, like the till operation. It would also avoid the movement difficulty created by the limited space behind the bar, while removing complexity from the process and avoiding capacity leakage. Again, this could have a negative impact on staff motivation, as it would remove a great deal of variety from their work, making it somewhat repetitive and dull.
Another option to increase the serving rate without removing variety from the staff 's functions would be to provide additional training to the staff, teaching more efficient ways to complete tasks and possibly even better training them to better convey the 'familiar' approach of the pub to its customers.
The busiest peak period encountered in the pub is half-time on game nights, where a large flow of customers attempt to get drinks during a short 15-minute break. Staff members become visibly stressed, as do customers, who expect to receive their drinks in the average wait time they experience on regular nights. A likely strategy to cope with this surge in demand, would be to take pre-orders before and during the match, so that these could be prepared by half time. This would cut the drink preparation time and hence 'fast-track' the serving process.
Another previously mentioned 'imbalance' in demand, now on the opposite end of the scale, are the unpopular dinner hours when the pub is often empty. Demand here could be encouraged through promotions, like 'happy hours' with cheaper drinks, to attract customers. However, this approach could possibly have adverse effects on the service concept, by attracting the 'wrong' crowd to the pub and taking away from the image that the pub attempts to convey to their customers.
The social and business events would altogether sidestep this problem, and seem to be a good option as it 'fits' with the owner 's original intent to bring together and help in the adaptation of English residents.
One of the greatest difficulties in concluding this study was the lack of secondary data, which often serves to verify results or hypotheses, and is frequently compiled by professionals or people more knowledgeable in specific areas. This is often the case with small businesses though, as professional services are often not justifiable and just too expensive. This data could have also served as a basis for comparison, to perhaps study the impact of past capacity management/staffing decisions.
Obtaining information from customers was also somewhat challenging, as people are not particularly interested in filling out surveys while trying to relax at a pub. The collection of customer data had to then be done through casual conversation (so as not to bother the customers), which limits the amount of data that can be collected.
The quantitative data collected in the study is presented merely as illustrative material, as too many variables that could n't be taken into full consideration were present, making it difficult to guarantee accuracy in the collected figures. The nature of the service and its numerous variables (i.e. speed of particular staff members on duty and respective job experience, the time taken to serve a regular customer vs. a non-regular, a discrimination of serving times for different drinks and their respective demand, etc.) make it difficult to calculate and build a solid capacity model, or to accurately simulate the effect of changes on the total process duration using tools like linear equations, which only function in the 'controllable' world of manufacturing.
