The so called 'permissive revolution' has become a metaphor for contemporary social conflict. Ushered in during the 1960s, the term permissiveness can be explained in two ways; it can be seen as a political change in that particular legislative movements were passed, and also in a sociologically way in that there was a wider set of changes, culturally, economically and in social opportunities (Weeks, 1981, p250). Yet the public division that this era caused was hugely significant. For progressives it was heralded as a time of liberation and development which accompanied much needed social change, in the civil rights movements, women 's liberation, and gay & lesbian liberation to name but a few. It was also a time of great optimism as issues that the Victorians had swept under the carpet were now entering the public domain (Marwick, p148). For conservatives however, it has become a scapegoat to blame many contemporary problems upon. Issues such as pornography, marriage breakdowns, drugs and youth crime are all seen as having their origins in the 'permissiveness' of the sixties. Prime Minister Tony Blair recently made the statement that suggested that the 1960s and the promotion of new freedoms was to blame for the 'lack of personal responsibility'. Despite such criticisms, the year 1967 was something of an explosion as far as liberal legislation in the sphere of sexual behaviour and morals was concerned. It can be argued therefore that in the 1960s, British society broke out of the straightjacket of conformity and regulations.
To illustrate such conflicting arguments of the sexual revolution, I have chosen an article that has accumulated a number of opinions on the 1960s sexual revolution. What interested me about this article is the fact that it was not just one subjective opinion recounting the events of the sexual revolution; the article editor had chosen nine people, all of which played an influential part in the 1960s, and asked them to defend the claim illustrated above made by Tony Blair. From this collaboration of views, it provided me with a number of ideas that in some cases, suggested that there was no revolution to be had at all. I will now turn to these statements in the article and where possible, support or contrast them with my wider reading. 1. The first opinion of the sexual revolution comes from Richard Hoggart. He appeared for the defence on the Lady Chatterley trial in 1960. Mr Hoggart states how the sexual revolution emerged after the war and was the first freedom that many people had, away from restrictions and austerity.
One of the first public signs of a significant relaxation in the Victorian moral code was the result of this trial for obscenity in 1960 of the publishers of Lady Chatterley 's Lover. Although the Obscene Publications Act of 1959 was designed to 'provide for the protection of literature and to strengthen the law concerning pornography', television, stage and film remained to chaff against restriction (Sutherland, 1982, p2). However, despite this breakthrough, de-censorship in literature had been anything but smooth; the legislation laws on theatre and film were not at the same time as that for print. Liberalisation was held back by British institutions such as libraries and bookshops (Sutherland, 1982, p8).
Consequent changes in entertainment as a whole were hugely influenced by the youth of society; the youth had spending power and thus dominance over music, entertainment and leisure. One major shift that had resulted from such an increase in spending power was a move from production to consumption (Weeks, 1985, p22). There was a distinct destabilising of the rigid boundary between the private family and the individualistic orientated public realm; the increased commercialisation and commoditisation of sexuality through pornography and mass media was clearly an evident feature of this increasing consumption model. Pornography was growing steadily from a hole in the corner specialist to a multi-million pound industry illustrating the move to eroticism and away from procreation (Sutherland, 1982, p4). There was the commoditisation of pleasure; sex aids, recreational drugs and sex manuals were expanding dramatically by the 1980s (Weeks, 1985, p24). Yet with the boutique stores that were increasingly emerging, it allowed both women and men to browse their goods and thus seeing the sex market as respectable and commercially legal. Society was going through a massive upheaval and as Marwick illustrates, 'the ideas, the images, the literature all showed much of the old cosiness being transformed into trendiness'. In this sense, the 1960s proved to be a true cultural revolution' (Marwick, p123). 2. Celia Birtwell takes a more conservative approach. As married to Ossie Clark, a famous rock star designer, she was very much involved in this changing culture and fashion that Hoggart describes. However, she argues that the 1960s was not a period of sexual liberation and the ideas that were connected with the liberal 1960s, were around long before this period; 'independent-minded people across the centuries have espoused tolerance and understanding'. This has been a common approach to the sexual revolution. It has been argued that the 1960s was when the key legislative pieces were passed; yet people had been campaigning for homosexual and divorce rights for decades. To see the 1960s as an era of progressiveness and liberalisation would be incorrect as the fight for such legislation had already been fought. 3. Arnold Walker, a famous play author, takes a similar approach to Celia Birtwell. He argues how the 1960s was a very moral decade and not responsible for ending personal responsibility. He argues that one decade cannot possibly be blamed for causing a decline in values. This view surprised me at first when reading the article. I would have expected a play author to perceive the 1960s as more liberal than any other decade due to the 1968 Theatre Act, allowing more nudity and liberal performances on stage. 4. Tony Benn sums up the 1960s as a period of hope and liberation. He analyses the movements that emerged during this time- the feminist, peace and environmental movement. This shows liberation in the 1960s.
Liberation in the 1960s was, according to Benn, about expressing oneself and beliefs. One major experience of self expression was in relation to sexual behaviour; bringing the public sphere out into the public domain. The 1960s saw radical changes in attitudes to sex and in sexual behaviour, starting with the Kinsey Report in 1948. This was a nine year study of human sexuality which opened everyone 's minds to the diversity of sexual behaviour. Encouraged by Kinsey 's work, Masters and Johnson courageously took the next step of observing sexual behaviour in the laboratory. A ground breaking study called Human Sexual Response in 1966 revealed the nature and scope of the sex practices of young Americans. This open discussion of sex as pleasure and descriptions of sexual practices and techniques was truly revolutionary. As Ferris concludes, 'the national mood had changed- discussing sex in public became a non-stop activity to which everyone could contribute... we were all our own sexual masters' (Ferris, 1993, p183). Topics that were once seen in the Victorian era as taboo subjects were being talked about like never before. 5. Shirley Conran was the author of Superwoman- this in itself showing the move from a passive female, to a strong and more masculine femininity. She argues that the 1960s was not to blame for the loss of personal responsibility and cannot in any way be blamed on the parenting or upbringing of those children.
As Conran illustrates, the 1960s saw a move from the passive housewife to a stronger female identity fighting for rights and reform. Women now wanted the right to chose if and when to have children in or outside of marriage and yet still have the opportunity to have an occupation. Besides a rise in divorce and remarriage due to the Divorce Law Reform Act in 1969, the 1970s thus saw a rise in cohabitation and delayed marriages and a decline in marital fertility (Hall, 2000, p183). 'Later marriage' as Halsey illustrates, 'is now often preceded by cohabitation and extramarital child-bearing, and of course many cohabit with no intention to marry' (Halsey, 1988, p71). This change in marriage behaviour, may have been due to the socio-economic changes arising out of the enhanced opportunity for women to follow careers and for married women to continue to work' (Halsey, 1988, p71). Women were now demanding what they saw as a right of theirs; a definite move towards a stronger and more masculine femininity. However, although this appeared to be a decade of great optimism in which women were able to divorce and remarry, there was increasing scepticism over the usefulness of such legal reforms and suspicion over the malevolence of the state towards women. The legal reform of income maintenance enabled men to retain the dominant position in the family and for women to be economically dependent on the male (Smart, 1984, p148). There were evident changes in the law regarding divorce and women 's right to motherhood, yet the nuclear family continued to be seen and idealised by the government as the family norm. 6. Al Alvarez edited the influential Penguin anthology-'The New Poetry' in 1962. This was seen at the time as a significant review of the post war scene in English poetry. He saw that the greatest change in the 1960s was not political, but it was pharmaceutical. The introduction of the contraceptive Pill led to the greatest change in society. The 1960s was a period of great freedom that it had deserved and was an altogether positive era.
Contraception is the one topic that I feel could divide the population on whether the 1960s was an era of liberation or further subordination. As illustrated below, the provision, supply and the contraception itself has advantages and disadvantages. The Family Planning Act 1967 enabled women to have free advice and supply of contraception through the National Health Service (NHS). This was seen as a positive breakthrough and represented the boldest advance in the 1967 family planning legislation (Leathard, 1980, p139). Although seen primarily to liberate women, the NHS, through the provision of contraception, had the ability to facilitate natural and uncontroversial heterosexual sex (Hall, 2000. p174). As Foucault emphasises in his study of sexuality, 'power and discourse' are closely enmeshed. The NHS used their power and language to define what counts as sex and what constitutes the problems and solutions in this area (Brunt and Rowan, 1982, p167). The term sexual revolution implied that something new and different was taking place; however, with the emphasis on heterosexuality, it appeared to be reinforcing the existing framework that already existed in society.
As Alvarez illustrates above, the contraceptive Pill (available in the UK from 1961) was seen to be the biggest event to liberate women from their designated roles as housewife and mother. It allowed women to have sexual intercourse without concern about unintended consequences. As Grant illustrates, 'the pill was the first reliable, effective contraceptive method over which women had complete control, putting the power of reproduction back into their own domain' (Grant, 1994, p61). On the other hand, women lost the freedom to use pregnancy as an excuse to refuse to have sex and could feel the pressures to have coital sex (Hall, 2000, p183). It can thus be seen by feminists that the sexual revolution was by definition a male orientated one which subordinated women more tightly to the heterosexist norm (Weeks, 1985, p19). Alvarez saw the pill as beneficial, leading to what he saw as an altogether positive era; yet for feminists, it was a different story altogether; contraception, as illustrated above, has never been so diverse. 7. Alexander Goehr viewed the 1950s as a period of great hope. There was an 'explosion of cultural activity'. However, despite such an optimistic view, he questions whether there were too many revolutionaries that would eventually knock everything down, only to be remade again. What he saw as new ideas were being embraced only by the small minority and not by the larger majority.' The assumption was that the world had changed, but it had n't. What is interesting about this view on the 1960s is summed up in the last sentence of his statement. Goehr describes how the 1960s gave the impression of a start to a revolution; however, in reality, it appeared to mark an end to a progressive kind of thought. 8. Vanessa Redgrave saw the 1960s as a period far from liberating. She states how Joe Orton was sent to prison for being homosexual and how Lord Chamberlain censored playwrights and productions.
The Sexual Offences Act-1967 decriminalised homosexual activity between consenting adults in private. This was initially seen as liberating and a step forward in society. However, although this was a remarkable breakthrough, the age of consent still differed from that of those involved in heterosexual relationships. As Vanessa Redgrave states, the 1960s may have had legal changes, but was an era far from liberating. It is claimed that this reform led to a revolution in attitudes; the legal harassment was removed, yet the law did not alter the national attitudes and stigma towards sexual deviants; it merely altered the framework within which the law operated; in reality, 'the Sexual Offences Act of 1967 did nothing to eliminate the hard core of bigotry and hatred' (Davenport-Hines, 1990, p328).
It is evident that all of the reforms of the late 1950s and 1960s marked a retreat from the social controls imposed in the Victorian era. Yet on reflection of both the article and further literature, it appears that the sexual revolution was like a rose with thorns (Ferris 1993, p186). In some ways, there was a distinct move to liberation and progression. In reality however, such progression was not without drawbacks.
What appeared to be radical legislative reforms all encased a contradictory nature. As Weeks illustrates, there were two key points to the problems of such reforms that were passed in the 1960s. Firstly, each reform was argued for on its own merits, as support was needed form the government for each reform, the chief concern was to obtain a parliamentary majority vote. Thus, nothing too radical would ever be proposed in fear of rejection. Secondly, there was a distinct limited nature of reform. The homosexual law reform did not legalise homosexuality as such, it narrowly decriminalised certain aspects of male adult behaviour in private (Weeks, 1981, p267). There were evident changes in the law, yet did these translate to liberalisation?.
What is evident from the above article is that the sexual revolution has meant different things for different people. For some people, it was an era of great optimism and liberation, yet for others, it just subordinated women further and exploited the consumerism market. As Abbie Hoffman states, 'revolution is not something fixed in ideology, nor is it something fashioned to a particular decade. It is a perpetual process embedded in the human spirit'. (Abbie Hoffman. Date unknown). Perhaps to fully understand this, and to realise that liberation could just be on an individual level, is indeed the greatest revolution of all.
