Employers' organisations, alongside trade unions and the state (the influence of which is defined by the country-specific system of industrial relations) constitute the institution of  'social partners' - the major actors in providing the framework of employment relations in European states. Employers' organisations (or associations) are described according to an EIRO comparative study as the 'bodies designed to organize and advance the collective interests that employers have in the labour market' (EIRO 2004:1, emphasis added). This definition builds on the fact that there are generally three types of organization structures of employers - the already mentioned 'pure employers' associations', 'pure trade associations' (promoting and defending the purely business interests of its members) and 'mixed (dual) associations' (combining the activities of the other two). This essay will explore only the features, roles and impact of the organizations that in Myrdal 's (1991:192) words 'have companies as members and which are mandated by their members to deal with matters which have to do with the relationship between employers and their employees' - the 'pure employers' associations and the dual associations.
The interest of IR academics and practitioners (Sisson 1991, Traxler 2004, Hornung-Draus 2002, 2004) in employers' organizations has been prompted by several reasons. First of all, the systems of labour relations and the actors involved in them (including employers' bodies) are interdependent and have a continuous influence on each other (see also van Waarden 1995b). Secondly, although the strength and the above mentioned influence may not seem as guaranteed as these of the trade unions (due to the asymmetry within the employment relationship and the greater need employees have for collective action), Crouch notes that even if employer organisation has often emerged due to pressures of labour organisation, 'once goaded into action by labour, employers often set the pace for subsequent organizational development' (1993:114). Last but not least, interest in exploring the institution of employers' organizations is determined by the changes in the focus of their activity, brought about by increasing pressures for decentralization of collective bargaining in Europe, search for organizational flexibility and the growing internationalization of business (see also van Waarden 1995b).
By looking more closely into the characteristics and activities of employers' organisations in three European countries - Germany, Sweden and France, this essay will try to demonstrate that, although collective bargaining in them follows (if to a different extent) the trend for decentralization and is increasingly done at company level, there is still a role for the employers' organization in these countries, as well as more generally. This role may be changing its focus and venturing into new territories, which will be explored in greater detail below, but it is still a significant one and has become more diverse and complex than ever before. The three above-mentioned countries have been chosen because, although all are located geographically in Western Europe, each of them represents a different 'cluster' of countries with regard to industrial relations traditions - Germany belongs to the 'Rhineland' cluster, France - to the 'Latin' one and Sweden - to the 'Nordic' one (Marginson and Sisson 2004). In this sense, it would be interesting to explore how strong the similarities (due to the common European or 'Continental' context) or differences (due to the cluster influence) prove to be with regard to employers' organization and focus of activity in them.
The text will first look into the national context of each of the above countries with regard to the organization of employers, will outline the traditional and emerging domains of activity of employers' associations in them and will finally provide an evaluating conclusion. In doing so, it will predominantly concentrate on the so-called peak organisations in the countries, which work on a national and cross-sectoral basis (and more specifically, these of them that organize in the private sector), as this would make the discussion more feasible, but lower-level employer organisations will also be paid attention to as, in many cases, they have an important role in industrial relations as well.
Germany has a single national employers' peak association (NEPA), called Bundesvereinigung der deutschen Arbeitgeberverb  nde (BDA). By contrast, France and Sweden have multiple NEPAs - 4 in France and 5 in Sweden. France has one general peak association - Movement of French Enterprises (Mouvement des entreprises de France, MEDEF) and the other three organizations are demarcated on a sectoral (Federation of Farmers' Unions organizing in the agricultural sector) or firm-size basis (2 associations catering for the interests of small and medium-sized firms - the General Confederation of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises and the Craftwork Employers' Association). Sweden also has one general peak association - Confederation of Swedish Enterprise (Svenkst N  ringsliv, SN) and other four, demarcated on a sectoral (finance services) or firm-size (SMEs) basis, as well as special peak organisations affiliating cooperatives and non-for-profit organisations.
Fuctionally, the general peak associations in the three countries also differ - BDA in Germany is a pure employers' association, while MEDEF in France and SN in Sweden (created after the merger of the Swedish employers' and industrial associations - the Swedish Employers' Confederation (Svenska Arbetsgivaref  rengingen, SAF) and the Federation of Swedish Enterprise in 2001) fall within the category of the dual associations.
Below the level of NEPAs, in each of the three countries there are narrower associations which are either affiliated to the peak organisations or not affiliated to them, often in cases when they are created to represent the interests of specific occupational groups (especially in Sweden where smaller employers' organizations look after the interests of employers in the newspapers, broadcasting, theatre, hairdressing, some local public transport industries, etc.). The system in Germany is also particular because its branch associations at the level of regions are affiliated to both cross-sectoral regional (L  nder) associations and sectoral national associations, and are direct members of BDA.
After having looked briefly at the nature and structure of peak- and below peak-level employers' associations in Germany, France and Sweden, the essay will now concentrate on their functions in each of the countries and will more specifically try to trace the shift of their focus from traditional to relatively newer roles.
Sisson (1991) underlines the role of employers' associations as 'bargaining agents' as key in both their relations with labour counterparts and member companies. It must be noted though, that in all the three countries of consideration national peak employers' associations are involved in collective bargaining not by way of directly negotiating collective agreements with trade unions (which is the prerogative of lower-level employers organizations, enjoying quite substantial autonomy in the process), but rather through coordination of the affiliates' activities (see also EIRO 2004).
In Germany, BDA is not a bargaining agent (see also Keller 2004) - bargaining is organized at sectoral level and as Marginson and Sisson (2004:65) note 'more unusually, there is no national-level agreement in (...) most (...) sectors, the negotiations taking place at Land level'. Usually national organisations follow up on regional agreements further on.
In Sweden in 1990 what was then SAF decided to withdraw from central pay bargaining (largely due to employers' pressures to reduce wage increases) and pass responsibility in this area to its affiliates so that nowadays bargaining over national sector collective agreements is carried out at the level of member associations. As Myrdal notes 'the 1990 decision implies that SAF will retain a coordinating role during wage negotiation but no longer constitute a negotiating employers' organisation in the traditional sense' (191: 202, emphasis added).
Traxler (2004:54) observes similarities of SAF 's re-orientation in position to the move, made by the French general national peak association CNPF, which 'has underscored its shift in priorities from central level bargaining to the political promotion of business interests by renaming itself in (...) MEDEF in 1998'. Currently, MEDEF has only a limited role in collective bargaining, following the announced official policy to reduce its influence in negotiations, so that it now only participates in a limited number of negotiations over multi-sector agreements on labour market issues (see also EIRO 1998a).
Clearly, the role of NEPAs as bargaining agents in the three countries examined has been traditionally non-existent (in Germany), delegated to member associations from a certain moment onwards (in Sweden) or deliberately reduced and restricted (in France). It could be then concluded that although Traxler suggests that 'bargaining decentralization has most strongly questioned the role of peak-level employer associations' (2004:53), it does not affect the role of national-level associations that strongly, because most of the collective bargaining in the three countries nowadays happens below that level. This argument is present in Myrdal 's analysis on Sweden as well, where he points out that even though the role of peak organisations in direct wage bargaining has been abolished or reduced 'this does not, however, prevent [them] from having other very important functions in promoting and defending the interests of their member enterprises' (1991:207). Moreover, the coordinating role that the NEPAs in Sweden, Germany and France have is no less significant than the direct wage bargaining task. As van Waarden (1995a:104) puts it 'employers' associations would still play an important role, namely as a forum for the coordination of labour market policies behind the scenes, and as an advisor for (...) branch associations engaged in collective bargaining'. This point is reinforced in the EU Industrial Relations in Europe 2004 Report, which claims that 'coordination, based on shared understanding and mutual trust, may be more important than centralisation of wage-setting' (2004:56). This clearly demonstrates that national peak-level employers' associations do play a key role in the process of collective negotiations, although their involvement is not the one of direct participation in wage setting.
It would be then justified to suggest that trends for the decentralization of collective bargaining would and actually affect the direct participants on the employers' side (representative sectoral employers' associations in the three countries) more than NEPAs. Evidence that such decentralization is taking place in Sweden, Germany and France is present in the analyses of several authors (Katz 1993, Locke and Kochan 1995, Parsons 2005, Thornqvist 1999). Yet an EIRO comparative study of 2005 (EIRO 2005) confirms that the sector level is still the most important level for wage determination in Germany and Sweden (even some recentralization trends noted by Kjellberg (1998) in the latter) and while company level bargaining is increasing in significance for large companies in France, the sector level still plays a dominant role for collective bargaining for small and medium-sized enterprises. This would suggest that the actors at sectoral level - the employers' associations involved directly in collective bargaining retain their key role in the industrial relation systems in the three countries examined. In addition, and in referring to an earlier study from 2001, Traxler points to the fact that 'in most countries [the] decentralization of bargaining had taken the form of a decay of central-level, interindustry bargaining (in favour of combined bargaining at sector and company level) rather than a radical move from multi- to single-employer bargaining' (2004:53). This would mean that even in countries where several levels of collective bargaining take place with equal importance (the already mentioned sector and company levels in France, the latter level strongly boosted by the Auroux (1982) and Aubry (1998/99) laws), the sector level maintains its considerable position, as do the actors engaged in the process.
The participation of peak employers' associations in various statutory bodies is another significant role of theirs in industrial relations in Germany, Sweden and France. The role that Sisson (1991) names 'pressure group' complements the strength of employers' organisations (primarily peak ones) as it allows them to have a say in major employment issues, such as social security (in France and Germany), bargaining/industrial relations (Germany) or mediation initiatives and occupational accidents/illnesses cases (Sweden). Although the EIRO report on employers' organisations notes two cases when MEDEF (2001) and SAF (1990/92) have deliberately withdrawn from some representative bodies to avoid 'excessive corporatism', it still maintains that 'little has changed in practice since many NEPA officials have continued to serve on governing bodies, but now as personal representatives (EIRO 2004:14). In addition, Vatta (1999) advances the argument of the importance of the participation of peak organisations in statutory bodies through drawing attention to its overall significance for their access to decision making processes in the countries. She points out that this access can be 'demonstrated by (...) their presence in specialized bodies or agencies (bi- or tripartite) and their involvement in the implementation of policies' (1999:247). Another point the EU Industrial Relations in Europe 2004 Report makes in this regard is that in Sweden representative tasks 'are now shared with sectoral (...) employer federations' (2004:53), a fact which concerns the level of actors, involved in representation, but does not diminish the significance of that role, quite on the contrary, increases its legitimacy and relevance. It can be then concluded that the representative role of NEPAs (and their affiliates in the case of Sweden) in the three countries researched is still a very important aspect of their activity and actually promotes their role.
Limiting the influence the state has in regulating industrial relations is present in the prerogatives of peak employers' organisations in two of the countries examined in this essay - Sweden and especially France. This position is a logical consequence of the very central role the state plays in the industrial arena in France and to a lesser extent in Sweden (more so since the 1970s and 1980s), in the same way as the absence of such an activity on the part of the German NEPA reflects the comparatively less direct state intervention in Germany.
France and its NEPAs are especially indicative in this respect. Parsons (2005:83) draws attention to the fact that 'for [MEDEF], in order for companies to be able to survive in a globalised economy, the regulation of social relations (...) should be a matter for the social partners. The role of the state should be limited to providing a safety net of 'public assistance''. The author goes on to refer to the 1999 proposal MEDEF made for a new French  'social constitution' (the 'Refondation Sociale' project), which in his reasonable assessment was 'born with the express intention of marginalizing the state from the establishment of social norms' (2005:84). This point is advanced by an EIRO commentary (EIRO1999:5) which says that this  'social constitution' 'can be viewed as the culmination of the project by the employers' confederation to limit government stewardship in the area of industrial relations'.
In the case of Sweden, Myrdal evaluates SAF 's role after its withdrawal from collective bargaining in 1991 and defines it as directed 'to defend its member firms against excessive legislation and interference (...), both against open attacks or intervention (such as the wage-earner funds) and against measures which are gradually undermining the market' (1991:203). In addition to that, Vatta (1999) finds historical evidence of the attempts SAF has undertaken to curb the state 's influence in employment relations, providing example of its strong opposition to the 1976 co-determination law (MBL).
Despite the dubious end results of the policies to marginalize the role of the state in industrial relations, especially in France (see also Parsons 2005), these are clearly on the agenda for peak employers' associations in France and Sweden (although not in Germany) and contribute another facet to their activities and complement their role.
The political lobbying function has been reinforced as becoming an increasingly important and strengthened area of activity of employer organisations in Germany (Hornung-Draus 2002, 2004), Sweden (Vatta 1999, Hammarstr  mal. 2004) and France (EIRO 1998a, Hornung-Draus 2002). Reviewing the tasks of SN in Sweden Hammarstr  m et al. point out that they cover a broad field but 'focus in particular on influencing opinion leaders (...) and preparing proposals for the creation of a better business climate (2004:272). As far as France in concerned, Hornung-Draus (2002:215) notes that MEDEF has 'oriented its action towards activities with a high political visibility' like summer university for entrepreneurs, political marches against the 35 hours week, etc. Moreover, political lobbying (and information dissemination) on the side of employers' organisations in Europe (including the researched countries) have also moved to a higher European level - as the EU Industrial Relations in Europe 2004 Report points 'in addition to affiliation to their European peak associations, national (...) employers' organisations have also chosen to establish their own offices in Brussels for the purpose of representation, information exchange and lobbying (2004:27). It is visible that the aspect of political lobbying continues to form a significant part of the role of employers' associations and will probably gain additional strength in the future, with regard to European-level processes.
This aspect of the role of employers' association has been mentioned by Sisson (1991) in his analysis and has been advanced by Hornung-Draus as one likely to become more prominent in current environments - she claims that employers' associations are increasingly moving towards an 'image of providing services to companies, [services which] could be related to labour law counseling, mediation, courses in professional training for SMEs, etc.' (2002: 214). This provision of 'collective goods' to members (see also Behrens 2004) maintains its significance in an environment where legislative frameworks are becoming more complicated in a lot of European countries and where concepts like Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) emerge as posing new challenges to employers. In the case of CSR in Germany, employers' organisations have started providing guidance to members on mechanisms for implementing and monitoring universally agreed labour practices, demonstrating adherence to some of the core principles of CSR (Hornung-Draus 2004). It then becomes clear that this new facet of employers' associations' role starts to occupy a substantial position in helping companies deal with changing conditions and new concepts.
Aspinwall and Greenwood (1998) note that with the increase of EU competencies in certain areas, grows the potential and strength of interest representation in them, especially with regard to spheres like the institutional balance of power, state-society relations, social policy, etc. In this sense and on a more operational level, Hornung-Draus (2004) promotes the idea of new roles for employers' associations (including in the three countries considered) in implementing voluntary framework agreements, prompted by EU legislation (e.g. lifelong learning framework or teleworking agreement), monitoring their introduction and participating in signing collective agreements on the possibility for opting-out of some European directives (e.g. working time). This adds yet another key perspective to the role employers' bodies have in serving and maintaining the interests of their members.
One new role that has emerged for employers' associations in Germany especially has been the creation of a special 'Ohne Tarifvertrag', (OT) membership status, whereby some companies still receive the benefits of being a member of the association but do not comply with the industry-wide agreement, concluded by it (EIRO 2002). A variation of this phenomenon has been the formation of parallel employer organisations (Allgemeine Arbeitgeberverb  nde) on the side of some sectoral and regional bodies in Germany. These parallel associations are again placed outside the binding collective agreements, providing  'safety valves' for companies in crisis or restructuring (see also Hornung-Draus 2004), but are created in 'attempt to allow [these companies] to stay close to the negotiating structure and to keep the door open for them to re-enter into the 'real' employer' organisation.' (Hornung-Draus 2002:215). A new mechanism has been introduced through the 'mandatement' option in France as well, which allows for employers to still be able to negotiate and sign agreements with an employee, delegated by a union, in workplaces with no union delegates - an option facilitating employers (and their representatives in the form of employers' organisations), as well as defending workers' interests (see also EIRO 1998b).
Another new facet of employers' associations' roles in Europe more generally and in the three countries examined specifically is the fact that they have begun organizing in new areas. The EIRO (2004) study draws attention to the fact of new employers' organisations being created in the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) industry in Sweden and in the temporary employment industry in Germany. In addition, Hornung-Draus (2002) provides examples of organisation in the software and mobile phones companies, as well as in newly-privatized (formerly state-owned) sectors in Germany (e.g. Argetel affiliating privatized transport, energy and telecommunications companies). Behrens (2004) complements the argument by referring to the German Employers Association for Private Broadcasting, founded in the 1990s.
In summary, employers' associations have found new roles in both implementing novel mechanisms for retaining members and in organizing in emerging sectors. It is clear that this aspect of their activity is increasingly significant in dealing with change and combating uncertainty and re-affirms their position as key players in industrial relations.
By looking into the nature and activities of employers' associations (at peak and below-peak level) in Germany, Sweden and France, this essay has tried to demonstrate that they still maintain their important role in the industrial relations arena in the three countries. Decentralisation of collective bargaining has affected employers' organizations in the countries inevitably (if at different levels and to a different extent), nonetheless, as van Waarden (1998b) agues this does not necessarily reduce their authority or significance.
Indeed, employers' associations have a dynamic role, one that is moving from traditional to newer areas of activity and adapting to altering circumstances to serve their members adequately. Hornung-Draus reinforces that 'while their existence is no longer questioned today, the change in functions and profile seems to become a lasting one' (2002:220). This fact, however, does not diminish the importance of employers' associations' various roles, but rather confirms the need for activities that are relevant to and acknowledging changes in contexts and environments.
