At the dawn of the 21st Century, nations are more economically integrated than at any other point in human history. This presents businesses with unprecedented opportunities and challenges. The opportunity to sell to global markets rather than a single national market increases the potential profitability of business activity. Today, every organisation wants to have presence in the foreign markets, either to expand its operation and make use of economies of scale production or to protect the home market from domestic and foreign competition. There are different ways in which a company can do international business such as exports, licensing, joint ventures, mergers, FDI, etc. Many nations now consider international trade essential for economic growth and development. As a result, most of the countries have lowered most of their trade barriers to have an open economy for trade. Export can be considered as a first step to enter any foreign market. Now even small businesses do engage into exporting activities and there 's lot of support been given by many governments. But at the same time, there are difficulties associated with exporting. The following explains some of the difficulties that overseas firms face when exporting to the United Kingdom and discusses their possible solutions:
Before entering a new market, a detail market analysis of the suitability of the product is required to be done. For foreign firms being away from the UK market and no experience of operating in UK, to do the correct market analysis is difficult. Sometimes, even after lot of market research, firms do commit some basic blunders. Like, "Kellogg 's Pop-Tarts failed in Britain because the percentage of British homes with toasters was significantly lower than in the United States, and the product was too sweet for British tastes." [1] So, the exporters need to have the knowledge about the consumer tastes and preferences and should modify its product to suit the UK market. One way tackling the problem is by hiring a consultant having sound knowledge of the UK market.
Branding plays a key role in the purchase decision of the UK consumer. [2] They are very conscious about the brand of the product they use as people in UK very much relate themselves to brand and consider it as a status symbol. So, for any exporter to be successful in the UK market will have to first create its good brand image. This incurs huge marketing expenses which have to be included in the product cost thereby losing the cost competitiveness.
One of the ways in which a foreign exporter can hope to sell its product successfully in the UK market is by joint venturing with an existing local UK firm, who already has a very good brand image. Tata Motors, an Indian automobile manufacturer launched its most successful car Tata Indica in the UK car market by partnering with M G Rover. In spite of designing the car for UK customer needs, it was unsuccessful as the customers saw it as a cheap Indian import.
Exporters should be mindful that, in addition to the EU mandatory and voluntary schemes, UK national voluntary labelling schemes might still apply. [3] These schemes may be highly appreciated by consumers, and thus, become unavoidable for marketing purposes particularly for food products. The labelling guidelines are very comprehensive and are required to be adhered very strictly in the UK. Especially, food packaging needs to have information like nutrition value, salt content, and portion sizes, etc. For example, Pataks, a leading importer of Indian foods and spices in UK, have planned for changes in the product labelling in order to serve the UK customers in a better way. All Pataks branded products will carry 'Big 8' nutrition information and will include a highlighted panel communicating the fat, calories and salt per serving by 2006. [4].
An exporter has to comply with theses requirements and often does not have adequate resources to test product to include the nutritional information, etc and may lose the order. This difficulty can be resolved either by taking resource and technology help from the UK importer or by investing in resources. Also it involves using different packaging for products made for UK market which again add to the production costs.
As in most developed nations, the product or service quality expectation of the consumer in UK is fairly high and stringent. They even put lot of emphasis on the production process quality. So the exporters to the UK have to adopt and follow the high quality standards. Tata Auto Plastics Systems Ltd., an injection moulding company in Pune, India used to supply Air Vents for M G Rover cars through Intier Automotive (UK). A very high quality standard was expected from the Indian supplier. When the final samples for product approval were submitted, there was a quality issue of noise during fins movement. The noise was such that it could only be heard if the ear is placed very close to the vent. The project was delayed for four months due to this problem. This would have never been an issue if it was for an Indian customer. Even for parts segregation, parts identifying machine was used which otherwise could have been done manually. Since, quality requirement is customer given, customer 's support in implementing product and process quality standards will be helpful. Also individual agencies offering technical support can also be used. [A].
An exporting company that sells products with its own brand names runs an additional risk of managing its promotional activities in the foreign market. Different countries have different advertising rules. EU regulations on advertising are stringent compared to others like US. Exporter needs to be wary of using the same promotional strategy in the UK as in their home country. "The Advertising Standards Authority oversees the practices of the advertising industry and enforces the provisions of the British Code of Advertising Practice (CAP)." [3] "Britain 's strict rules banning product placement would not allow Heinz to use its name during the show "Dinner Doctors" on Channel Five even though Heinz was the sponsor of the programme and its products were used in the recipes. Heinz has to be content with sponsor 's credits at the start and finish of the show and a   2m campaign promoting the programme in supermarkets with special labels on Heinz tins." [5].
The exporter has to understand the advertising regulations of UK. An external advertising agency or consultants managing the promotional activities of the exporter can ensure that such mistakes are avoided. Alternatively the exporter may choose to partner with the distributor to manage product launches.
Promotional communication of the product is an important element of the marketing mix. Branding, product names, advertising, punch lines are aspects that have to be carefully considered by an exporter in a foreign market. There have been instances of misinterpretation of language and communication, ending in disasters for the company 's marketing efforts. Kellogg 's made an error when they launched Coco Rocks, a spin-off of the company 's popular cereal Coco Pops. "Coco rocks" is a street slang used to describe dark brown crack cocaine made by adding chocolate pudding during production. The company later realised its mistake and re-branded the cereal "Kellogg 's coco pops coco rock". [6].
Seasonality affects customer purchasing in UK. [2] The consumer purchasing of clothing and footwear is directly affected by the different weather conditions. "The UK consumer increasingly regards an item of clothing or footwear as a disposable item, rather than an investment and this coloured their approach to purchasing decisions. Quality remains important, as an item must be fit for use but fashion styles play a much greater role in everyday purchasing than previously, so that a piece of clothing may not be expected to last longer than one season." [2] So, it becomes difficult to forecast market trends for a season. A peculiarity of the UK is that there is a considerable difference in seasons with each season lasting approximately 3 month. A product has very limited time in the market. At the end of the season, old stock has to be cleared, as there is little chance that the same product will have the same kind of sales in the forthcoming year. This increases the risk in keeping inventory. Particularly for an exporter who is new and away from the UK market, these changes are difficult to predict. The exporter can overcome the seasonality problem by following the domestic competitor and having better consumer understanding using market reports, etc.
In almost every business there 's some risk involved. But, particularly in export risk is comparatively high as compared to working locally, as customer is far from home country. Risk includes many factors like financial stability and credibility of the customer, transportation uncertainty leading to delivery failures, etc. Tata Auto Plastics (TAPS), when entered into exports of M G Rover automobile components to UK, had set up a fully dedicated automated injection moulding plant for exports, investing a large amount on the infrastructure and manpower. But, when M G Rover gone burst, which was very unlikely for such a big group, the production at TAPS stopped and ran into huge losses. This kind of risk can be reduced by investigating the present and future financial stability of the UK customer. [A].
Every country has its own way of doing the business, which is the characteristic of its national culture. Hofstede study classifies different countries based on cultural differences along five dimensions. There 's major difference between UK and Japan working culture. UK people, like other westerners are more tasks oriented and believe in individual work and success. On the other hand, for Japanese people while doing business relationship and loyalty to group is critical. [7] This poses problems due to difference in the way of conducting business and can be resolved by hiring people having international work experience.
The UK is the world 's fourth largest economy with foreign trade accounting for approximately 28% of GDP. [3] The UK market is a mature market with major multinational companies having their presence. This makes the market competitive, making difficult for new players to enter the market. Breaking into the market is one of the major challenges faced by new exporters.
The UK government and consumers in the UK are health conscious. This explains the need for specifying nutrition details on food packages. The government has made a great deal of effort to improve the diet of UK citizens; there has been a major escalation in concern over the health of UK citizens. "Sugar and salt content in food has come under particular scrutiny, and soup makers including Heinz and New Covent Garden received very unwelcome press coverage suggesting that the salt content in some products was roughly equal to that of sea water." [8] Foreign firms while exporting must be careful in adhering to the requirements set by the government.
Exchange rate is the price at which one currency is bought and sold for another. There exist both the positive and negative effects of exchange rate volatility on the trade flows for the exporters. To assess the potential effects of exchange rate fluctuation, consider if the value of pound depreciates with respect to the home currency of the exporter and gets the payment in pounds then the exporter will be incurring loss or get less money for the trade. Also if the exporter is paid in its home currency then the UK importer is at loss. "As a result, risk - averse exporters may be expected to reduce their trade volumes, in response to uncertainty generated by greater exchange rate variability, since profits from trading internationally decline in line with unanticipated exchange rate changes." [9] Also the UK customer will always prefer domestic supplier to avoid the exchange rate uncertainty problem. Thus it is difficult for the exporter and importer both to settle on pricing terms.
The study done by Doyle, E. [9], explains how exchange-rate volatility affected Ireland 's export to its most important trading partner, the United Kingdom, from 1979 to 1992. Normally, the pre- fixed international trade contacts are long term and for constant volume. So, if the currency value changes, it is difficult for the exporter to change volume. Also if the credit period for payment is more, the fluctuation will have more negative effect. For example, the exchange rate between pound sterling and US dollar changed from 1.82 in Jan 2004 to 1.92 in Dec 2004. This shows that with respect to dollar, pound fluctuates considerably and any exporter from US will have to consider this volatility while exporting to UK.
One way of solving the problem is to work on short term, renewable contracts, or on single shipment one. Also the exporter should try for short credit period. This will reduce the exchange rate uncertainty effect on export to a large extent.
Tariffs or Import duties are the taxes on the imported goods. They raise the price to customers and make them less attractive. "The EU Common Commercial Policy constrains any unilateral protectionism on the part of the Union members. As a member of the European Union, the UK treats non-EU countries imports under the EU Common Customs Tariff. There are no duties on goods from other EU countries and on industrial goods from member states of European Economic Area. The UK, like the rest of the EU, levies tariffs on the cost insurance freight (CIF) value of imports. The rates vary depending on the product and the country of origin. EU import duties (0-20%) apply to goods shipped from third world countries to the UK." [10] Thus, the international trade policies of UK are such that the UK importer will prefer to buy from the EU supplier rather than going outside EU, unless the price offered from the third country supplier is less after including the duties and taxes or the product quality and technology is better.
Also, UK has no special import incentive scheme. Importers of capital goods to the UK can only hope to exploit the interest subsidies, by the export credit agency of the foreign supplier 's country. [10] All this makes it very difficult for the exporters from the non EU countries to enter the UK market and compete with the EU competitors. Thus, tariff barriers increase the cost of trading. For example, a tariff would mean the exporters will have to price the UK firms and consumers more for the export of raw materials or consumer goods, making themselves less competitive. There 's nothing much that can be done to avoid tariff barrier as these are governed between countries and individual businesses have no control over it.
In accordance with the GATT negotiated reductions, EU has lowered tariff on wide range of manufactured goods but however non-tariff barriers to import has proliferated and tends to be targeted more on sensitive imports like textiles, etc. "According to World Bank, non tariff protection has been increasing much faster in the EU than in other developed countries." [11] As UK follows EU trade policy, this increase in non-tariff barriers applies for UK also. The non tariff barriers make it difficult for the exporters to trade with UK as to overcome requires lot of extra work to be done and sometimes not possible. Some of the non tariff barriers for the UK market are as follows:
The Multi Fibre Agreement has been a major discussion point at WTO talks. It restricts the import of textile products into the UK. Exporters from developed countries face the problems of discontinuous demand due to such quotas. [11].
The EU has been protectionist in applying the anti dumping laws. While dumping in itself is unfair practice, the administration of anti dumping laws may make export unattractive. The future uncertainty due to such measures may result in disinterest in exporting.
Recently, China has been accused of flooding European markets with cheap products, threatening local producers who have a more expensive workforce and higher costs. A rise in imports had been expected but dumping, however, is a more serious situation whereby Chinese producers sell their slippers and shoes at less than cost price in order to win market share. Some EU leaders have asked for anti dumping duties to be placed on Chinese footwear. An increase in duties makes the product uncompetitive in the market hence resulting in a loss for the exporter. [12] Therefore, the exporter should try avoiding such unfair business practices.
For certain category of products, obtaining import permits is rather difficult and arduous task involving many government departments and excessive documentation. [11].
Thus, from above it can be concluded that even though UK economy is considered very open for international trade, still foreign firms have to face many difficulties while exporting to the UK. The difficulties may be market related or trade related. Some of these difficulties can be overcome easily by doing market research or by consultation while some like import taxes and duties can not be solved. This requires national government to completely open the doors for trade which will lead to the economic growth and development of all nations.
While planning the marketing strategy, the marketing managers have to take some major marketing decisions. These decisions play a very important role in the success of the strategy and are generally referred to as the marketing mix decisions or the 4 P 's of marketing. The decisions that the marketers take can be classified into one of the following four categories:
The firm always attempts to generate a positive response in the target market by blending the above four marketing mix variables in an optimal manner. During the Marketing Game, the marketing mix decisions taken by our team had a significant impact on our business operations. The following discusses in detail, the importance of those decisions during the four year period of business.
The product is the physical product or service offered to the consumer. Product decisions include aspects such as function, packaging, appearance, warranty, etc. In this game, decisions to be taken were on product features such as number of special commands [C], error protection [E] and ease of learning rating [L]. To decide on the product features, a target market segment is to be chosen. From the market analysis report, we got the rough idea of the average profit per unit in each market segment and the most profitable market segments that could be targeted, if we sell the product to the customer at their perceived value. We wanted to aim the segment which none of our competitors choose so as to get its major market share. In the first year, since we were not aware of which market segments our competitors are aiming, we decided our product features to be C - 10, E - 4, L - 5, so as to play safe and decide later on the target market. This decision paid off and we made the highest profit. The importance of playing safe at the start was we got the reasonable amount of market share in each segments due to our product features nearly appealing to maximum customers. Also competitors marketing decisions also helped to achieve the good sales and profit.
For the next three years, we decided to target the typists with product features as C - 12, E - 6, L - 7 in year 2 and C - 12, E - 8, L - 8 in year 3 and 4. This was because typists market was 25% of total and we had already achieved maximum market share in first year in the typists market which was found from the market share by segment report. Thus, we took the decision to make the product which is ideal for the typists.
Price decisions should mainly take into account the profit margins, the probable pricing response of the competitors, discounts, etc. In the game we priced our product high, as compared to the ideal price perceived by the target customers. The whole sale price of the product was $ 125 in year 1, $ 150 in year 2, $ 160 in year 3 and 4. If we had reasonably priced our product, we could have achieved better sales. But at the same time in year 2, 3 and 4 we spend considerable amount in sales promotion which helped us to increase our sales during that periods.
Place decisions are those associated with the channels of distribution that serve as the means for getting the product to the target customers. Distribution decisions include market coverage, logistics, channel member selection and service level. In the first year of the game, since we were not sure of the target market segment, we decided to give equal importance to both the channels of distribution with ten sales representatives giving the little exclusive distribution exposure level in each channel. In year two, we added two more sales representatives in channel two to move towards intensive distribution. In year three and four, the target market decided was typists who preferred to buy more from channel one (80%) than channel two (20%). Also other buyer segments like writers, managers and parents preferred channel one. So, we decided to make the distribution more intensive in channel one and more exclusive in channel two to get better sales results. Therefore, six sales people were transferred from channel two to channel one in year three and two more in year four. So, in year four the exposure goal was six in channel one and one in channel two. This finally resulted in achieving higher sales. Also the commission to sales people was kept constant at 5% for all four years in order to motivate them to work more efficiently and achieve better sales results.
Promotion decisions are those related to communicating and selling to potential consumers. It is very useful to know the value of the customer in order to determine whether additional customers are worth the cost of acquiring them. Promotion decisions involves advertising, personal selling, public relations, etc. Starting with advertising, if used properly, it is the most effective way of making the consumers aware of the product features and driving them to buy our product. So, to increase the sales we spend $ 250,000 in year one and $ 350,000 in year two on advertising. Also we used pioneering advertising in year one and two to build primary demand and also to create awareness about the product among different users. Since word processor awareness was already created in year one and two, we focused on direct competitive advertising in year three and four to get immediate increase in sales. Also advertising expenses were increased to further increase the sales, which is evident from the year end results. We also started with sales promotion in year two with $ 10,000 and $ 30,000 in channel 1 and 2 respectively. This was mainly done to have more sales through channel 2. But later on, we realized that majority of out customers like buying through channel 1 so we decided to have $ 20K and $ 50K worth of sales promotion in channel 1 in year 3 and 4 respectively and none in channel 2. Thus, promotion decisions helped us to achieve better sales.
From above it can be concluded that a good combination of marketing mix decisions can lead to good sales and profits. We made profit in all the four years but we could have still made more sales and profit if better marketing decisions were taken. There are many combinations of marketing mix decisions possible; the aim of strategic marketing is to find out the optimal combination.
The marketing game which we played is a simulation model based on the real marketing environment wherein we as marketing managers had to take several decisions based on the data available as which is normally the case in real business settings. The decisions taken affect the short or long term performance of the company. Since the scenario of the game resembled the realistic one, many good practical lessons were learned. The main learning points of the game are as follows:
While planning the marketing strategy, decisions taken about the product features, price, distribution and promotion affects the business performance. The marketing mix variables should be properly controlled to best satisfy the customers in the target market.
In the game we knew the ideal product requirements for each market segment. This information helped us to make informed decisions for making the product modifications to suit particular customer needs. So, for any successful marketing strategy, understanding and satisfying the customer requirements are of prime importance.
In a competitive business, only knowing the customers is not sufficient, understanding competitors strategy is also very important. A successful marketing strategy should also consider the competitors information 's like which market they are targeting, how much they are spending on promotion, what distribution channels they are using, what is their market share and profit, etc. A detailed analysis of such factors should be done before developing the final strategy, as competitive forces also determine our sales and market share. This can be inferred from the fact that the profit made by our company in the first year was mainly due to our competitor 's strategies.
Information present in the market reports can be very useful in making strategic decisions. Like the report on market share by segment can be used to get an idea of the company 's market share in each market segment and decision regarding which market segments to target can be made.
The channels which are preferred by the target customers should be used for distribution of products. If the customers require more support and personnel attention while buying the product more intensive distribution channel should be used by employing more sales people and vice versa. Like more sales in typists, writer and managers segment can be achieved by employing more sales people in channel 1.
In the game, we worked as a team to make business decisions, like what happens in real business settings. I learnt the importance of team working. Also how team working helps to generate different solutions for the same problem. We used brainstorming technique to analyze each possible solution and finally arrived at the best possible one through discussions and debates. Since the team members were from different cultural background having different experiences a wide array of perspectives were discussed. I also realized that conflicting thoughts can be used effectively to come up with optimal solution for the problem.
Working in team with conflicting ideas takes time to resolve and come to final solution. Most of the time our group was late in submitting the market strategy plan which was due to slow decision making. In real scenario, late formulation and implementation of marketing strategy may result in loss of opportunities. Also we might not get the complete benefit from the strategy.
