The document contains two parts:
Part one offers guidance to companies involved in making resource decisions. Outsourcing or insourcing can encompass a wide range, from a particular project to a functional area to all activities. Each situation requires a different understanding of priorities, measures, costs, and benefits. The paper discusses the reason to outsource for companies and the benefits the companies can get. It also mentioned about the impact of outsourcing on the revolution of supply-chain management and its own management. Finally, methods will be given on how to make an appropriate outsourcing decision.
And part two shows how the lean and agile paradigms may be selected according to marketplace requirements. These are distinctly different, since in the first case the market winner is cost, whereas in the second case the market winner is availability. Agile supply chains are required to be market sensitive and hence nimble. This means that the definition of waste is different from that appropriate to lean supply.
Outsourcing is the act of transferring some of a company 's recurring internal activities and decision rights to outside providers, as set forth in a contract (Greaver,1999). Because the activities are recurring and a contract is used, outsourcing goes beyond the use of consultants. As a matter of practice, not only are the activities transferred, but the factors of production and decision rights often are, too. Factors of production are the resources that make the activities occur and include people, facilities, equipment, technology, and other assets. Decision rights are the responsibilities for making decisions over certain elements of the activities transferred.
The average Japanese manufacturing company spends an equivalent of 70 percent of their manufacturing costs on the purchase of goods from other companies. The resulting supply system produced in Japan is not only vital to the viability of the manufacturer but, it is the conduit for the downward cascade of Japanese style manufacturing practices. It is this latter phenomenon that is the reason for the excellence in the Japanese outsourcing system.
In order to understand how outsourcing works, reference should be make to Figure 1. (Peter,1994) A company is faced with a simple choice for all of the products and their individual parts; it can either make them in house or buy them in. Of the bought-in parts there are two different types: made to order parts and off the shelf parts. Made to order parts are those components that have been made specifically and uniquely for the customer and are therefore not sold to other customers. This type of component is termed a subcontracted part by the Japanese.
There are many "top five reasons to outsource" surveys floating around at any one time, each giving somewhat different results. This is not surprising. The populations surveyed vary, and how one ranks the reasons to outsource often depends on which chair one sits in.
A list of reasons to outsource and the benefits sought are given below:
Obtain Expertise, Skills, and Technologies.
In a fast-evolving market where new technologies are emerging, the knowledge and skills of individuals are very limited. The technologies themselves may be proprietary and not available on the open market. If organizations can attract the knowledge and skills base or technologies, they have an advantage.
Outsourcing allows these organizations to obtain the knowledge skills base or technology. The provider can and has attracted the base because the provider 's current and future core competencies match that of the knowledge skills base. The provider is attractive as a long-term employer because the provider can offer a career track and higher future compensation for successful performance. The provider has the technology and is willing to effectively rent it long term, at a price, if it can deliver the service.
Improve partnerships.
Partnerships allow companies to plan beyond the short term, which allows them to understand each other 's needs better and to align themselves in a more coordinated manner.(Harrison and Hoek,2002) This allows waste in the supply chain to be removed, and opportunities to add value to be identified and applied.
Balance the scale of economies.
For decades people believed that only mighty corporations could do certain things, such as making automobiles, aircraft and consumer goods. This is still true in the sense that small operators on their own cannot make such things, as they lack the economies of scale. However, outsourcing means that small operators can participate in products subject to economies of scale. What has happened is that the advantages of economies of scale have been balanced by what might be called 'paralysis of movement' as bureaucratic management structures have made creativity and flexibility difficult to achieve. New processes, such as the flatting of organizations, the removal of buffers and closer links with suppliers, have helped to ensure that the buy it decision can be more favorable than the make it, except where gigantic economies of scale are involved, as with automated factories, steel mills and shipyards.
Shared information and front technology.
Another positive result of the decision to buy outside can be the creativity and sharing achieved at the design stage of a new product. IBM, for example, finds that, as it can now telescope a process by working in parallel with a number of outsiders, design times are greatly reduced.
A thorough understanding of business processes within the organization is necessary before making the decision regarding whether to outsource.
Choosing either external or internal resources is simply a question of determining what available option best enables the agency to accomplish its business objectives. Business objectives will differ based on whether you are evaluating global, sectional, or transitional outsourcing.
Identifying Needs.
The first step in the decision-making process is to identify needs. These needs set the framework and priorities for activities.
Decision Flowchart.
To identify whether or not outsourcing is appropriate, several background questions must be answered. Figure 2 (Austin, 1998)(See Appendix A)illustrates the analysis process that helps to ascertain if outsourcing is an option, or if in-house staff represents the best use of human resources.
Establishing Analysis Criteria.
Once it has been determined that the use of external resources may be an option that would meet business needs, a cost-benefit analysis should compare both the internal and external resource option. A major problem with external and internal staffing decisions happens when the decisions are based on a lack of understanding of expected benefits.
Knowing and comparing agency costs and benefits at the start enables the agency to make the best decision and act efficiently upon its decisions. It is important to compare costs as equally as possible, although confusion can arise for several reasons. Some of the problems and solutions are detailed in Table 1.
Cost-Benefit Analysis.
Cost-benefit analysis enables decision makers to account for the full costs and benefits of outsourcing and insourcing options. The analysis helps to prove or disprove whether a project supports agency goals and outcomes in the most effective manner. Its value stems form its inclusion of both quantitative and qualitative measures. A simple cost comparison will not show all of the true benefits or costs of a staffing decision, although quantified dollar costs should always be included in the analysis. An outsourced solution may prove to be more costly or require more time, but may still be the best solution to meet the needs. Such as decision, however, must be fully documented with a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis in order to be justifiable.
Table 2 has been included to provide examples of costs and benefits to consider when attempting to isolate specific costs and benefits important to the project.
Outsource What You Know.
Often areas that are poorly understood or projects that use unfamiliar technologies are targeted for outsourcing. This puts an added burden on staff to manage a contract and a vendor dealing with technologies that they do not understand. If an activity is not understood, how can the agency establish appropriate success measures for the vendor, verify vendor results, or take over after implementation? It may be worthwhile to spend the time and money to train staff on new technologies, so that familiar, well-understood, and well-measured activities can be outsourced, making contract management much easier.
Decision-Making Bottom Line.
The cost-benefit analysis requires identifying, weighing, and evaluating all costs and benefits associated with an IT project. The costs and benefits presented here are only starting points for criteria identification. After the analysis is completed, compare and total all of the information gathered.
The key to a successful staffing decision is the cost-benefit analysis. Identifying the best option for obtaining project success also stems from an understanding of the project processes: do you want the project done better, faster, or cheaper? The staffing decision is based upon the best use of agency resources, according to its needs and priorities.
The Next Step.
If the agency chooses outsourcing as the best option to meet identified needs, implementing and managing the arrangement is the next step. Outsourcing can best be viewed as a cycle, beginning with the decision-making process and ending with the re-examination of the outsourcing contract, where you select again from available alternatives. Figure 3 (Autsin,1998) illustrates the steps in the outsourcing process.
Agility is a business-wide capability that embraces organisational structures, information systems, logistics processes and, in particular, mindsets. A key characteristics of an agile organisation is flexibility. Indeed the origins of agility as a business concept lie in flexible manufacturing systems (FMS).
Agility should not be confused with "leanness". Lean is about doing more with less. The term is often used in connection with lean manufacturing (Womack et al., 1990) to imply a "zero inventory", just-in-time approach. In practice Minimum Reasonable Inventory (MRI) is a more relevant philosophy (Grunwald and Fortuin, 1992). Paradoxically, many companies that have adopted lean manufacturing as a business practice are anything but agile in their supply chain. The car industry in many ways illustrates this conundrum. The origins of lean manufacturing can be traced to the Toyota Production System (TPS) (Ohno, 1988), with its focus on the reduction and elimination of waste.
We shall now further explore the commonalities and differences between these two paradigms. The paper ends with a historical description of the transformation of the PC supply chain. From this the transition from "traditional" to "lean" and then "agile" may be clearly identified.
Hill (1993) has earlier developed the concept of "order qualifiers" and "order winners" against which it is advocated that manufacturing strategy should be determined. As these labels suggest, it is important for every business to understand what the baseline is for entering into a competitive arena - these are the "order qualifiers". To actually win the order requires specific capabilities and these Hill termed the "order winners". The definition of order qualifiers and order winners then logically leads to the specification of the appropriate manufacturing strategy.
We can borrow from these important ideas to develop a wider supply chain oriented concept of "market qualifiers" and "market winners". The notion here is that to be truly competitive requires not just the appropriate manufacturing strategy, but rather an appropriate supply chain strategy. As Christopher (1997) has pointed out "it is supply chains that compete not companies".
The connection between these ideas of "qualifiers" and "winners" and "lean" and "agile" is critical. At its simplest the lean paradigm is most powerful when the winning criterion is cost; however, when service and customer value enhancement are prime requirements for market winning then the likelihood is that agility will become the critical dimension.
Figure4. illustrates the crucial differences in focus between the lean and agile paradigm depending upon the market qualifiers and the market winners based upon the work of Mason-Jonesal. (2000).
Source: Mason-Jones et al, 2000.
One helpful model in taking these ideas forward is provided by Johanssonal. (1993) who sought to express the value delivery of a business in terms of a simple equation:
This equation is particularly helpful as it emphasises the futility of improving one performance measure at the expense of worsening another. Additionally it is possible via the four components of the equation to make a major distinction between lean and agile supply in terms of the qualifiers - winners concept as shown Figure 4.
Whereas quality, service level, and lead-time are market qualifiers for lean supply, with the market winner then being cost, the latter benchmark is merely an important qualifier in agile supply. The market winner herein is service level because as Fisher (1997) has indicated, the total costs for the Product delivery process (PDP) are given by a further formula showing that:
Where "Physical costs" includes all production, distribution, and storage costs and "Marketability costs" includes all obsolescence and stockout costs.
Both agility and leanness demand high levels of product quality. They also require minimum total lead-times defined as the time taken from a customer raising a request for a product or service until it is delivered. Total lead-time has to be minimised to enable agility, as demand is highly volatile and thus difficult to forecast. If a supply chain has long end-to-end lead-time then it will not be able to respond quickly enough to exploit marketplace demand. Furthermore effective engineering of cycle time reduction always leads to significant bottom line improvements in manufacturing costs and productivity (Towill, 1996).
Lead-time needs to be minimised in lean manufacturing as by definition excess time is waste and leanness calls for the elimination of all waste. The essence of the difference between leanness and agility in terms of the total value provided to the customer is that service is the critical factor calling for agility whilst cost, and hence the sales price, is clearly linked to leanness. However, whereas the Total Cycle Time Compression Paradigm (Towill, 1996), when effectively implemented, is a sufficient condition for achieving lean production, it is only one necessary condition for enabling agile supply.
Table 3. illustrates the comparison of attributes between lean and agile supply. In the volatile unpredictable marketplace for "fashion" goods, both stockout and obsolescence costs are punitive.
Source: Mason-Jonesal. (2000).
Consequently the purchasing policy moves from placing orders upstream for products moving in a regular flow to that of assigning capacity to finalise products in rapid response mode. As Fisheral. (1994) have indicated this means forecasting via "intelligent" consultation so as to maximise inputs from "rich" marketplace insider sources. Mason-Jones and Towill (1997) argue that "information enrichment", i.e. immediate sharing of marketplace data throughout the chain is not merely desirable, but obligatory. This must be achieved in a process integration scenario as we move towards the Seamless Supply Chain (SSC) in which all "players" think and act as one (Towill, 1997).
The challenge to supply chain management is to seek to develop "lean" strategies up to the material decoupling point but "agile" strategies beyond that point. In other words by using generic or modular inventory to postpone the final commitment it should be possible to achieve volume-oriented economies of scale through product standardisation. The flow of product up to the decoupling point may well be forecast driven; after the decoupling point it should be demand driven. A good practical example is to be found in the PC supply chain. This has been well documented during its various phases of development, including the Hewlett-Packard (Lee and Sasser, 1995; Davies, 1993), IBM (Beal, 1988; Laurent, 1992) and Dell (Dell and Fedman, 1999) supply chains. Relevant generic models describing dynamic behaviour according to the various stages of re-engineering such PC supply chains have also been verified (Hiebeler et al., 1998).
Dell in particular has become the master of the vertical distribution channel by being the sole distributor of its products and services (Dell and Fedman, 1999). A customer initiates the sales process by contacting the company via telephone or the Internet. There are three ways of selling: face-to-face; ear-to-ear; and keyboard-to-server. A customer can order from Dell on-line 24 hours a day or by phone from early morning until late in the evening. A Dell representative is available to make suggestions and help customers determine what systems will best meet their needs. Through the Web site, customers can access product information and receive price estimates instantaneously. Dell then confirms the order and verifies the financial credit charge. Usually the representative promises that the computer will arrive within five business days although the customer often receives the product quicker than this. The Dell factory receives a printout of the order and begins manufacturing within hours. Each computer is customer-built and put through several hardware and software tests in less than one day. After a final inspection the computer is boxed by Dell and sent to a distribution centre that ships it by carrier in time to arrive with a monitor that is built ahead of time by a separate supplier.
Thus customer orders are satisfied by an agile execution-based, direct model driven business operation without any finished inventory. One way Dell Computer beats its competitors on prices is by also keeping component inventories to a minimum. Vertical integration has helped the company further reduce costs. Monitors, for example, are relatively standardised and built by an agile supplier. So today Dell may need as many as 8,752 monitors from the suppliers; tomorrow they might need as few as 962. One of their carriers simply picks the monitors up at night, matches them up with the PCs by purchase order, and the next day delivers them to the customers. The rule on working with suppliers is to keep it simple, with fewer than 40 vendors providing 90 per cent of material needs. This justifies close working relationships and reduced cost and further speeds up new products to market. A financial analysis showed that "supplier proximity pays". Hence as Dell became a global manufacturer their preferred suppliers were expected to follow suit.
Fast feedback from customers' enables Dell suppliers to rapidly change product mix and maintain their inventory velocity. To make the required breakthrough on supply strategy, Dell shares its goals and objectives with suppliers. By shipping as required (hourly or daily depending on the product), Dell has bought more components and assemblies from the suppliers faster and paid them quicker, so everyone benefits. The company has totally integrated the distribution channel by clearly identifying its markets and by designing products and services to fit the needs of its customers. Hence the direct contact with customers gives Dell minute-by-minute input from the largest customer down to the individual purchaser in terms of what products they want and what new services they would like to see Dell develop. This information on present demand and future requirements is shared with Dell suppliers in a real-world example of effective supply chain partnering and is a key enabler in achieving agility.
The lean paradigm requires that "fat" be eliminated. However the agile paradigm must be "nimble" since sales lost are gone forever. An important difference is that lean supply is associated with level scheduling, whereas agile supply means reserving capacity to cope with volatile demand. Whereas information transparency is desirable in a lean regime, it is obligatory for agility. Lean forecasting is algorithmic, but agile forecasting requires shared information on current demand captured as close to the marketplace as possible. Real world supply chains are cyclical in character. This means that this year 's market winner is next year 's market qualifier. Hence lean chains are under pressure to become agile, and in some markets, such as the personal computer, further pressure to become customised. As we have seen from the migratory model, the challenges during each transition are significantly different.
