This shot breaks up a previous montage of shots. The two are right of centre frame, and with the sun setting in the middle of the frame, behind some buildings, causing a slight camera flare. The lighting is darker than previously and the ironically titled Its Alright Ma (I'm Only Bleeding) by Bob Dylan provides the soundtrack. This plus use of the flare, seems to be an attempt to make clear that this scenery, unlike the previous landscapes, cannot be romanticised in the same way, it is too different, too bare and ugly.
A close up of a front wheel of one of the bikes suggests that its rider is falling behind. The next shot reveals that this is Billy. The medium shot to the side of the bikes shows the two riders, both without helmets and Wyatt without his jacket. The backdrop of a construction site contrasts with the previous splendour of the mountains. This close up/medium shot format is repeated.
The next few shots appear to be an action replay of one similar shot of Billy falling behind Wyatt. However after 3 repeats of this Billy yawns, and this yawn continues into the next shot, suggesting to the audience that these were in fact 3 different incidents. Again this reflects the idea that they are going nowhere but also predicts that it is Billy who will fall behind first, as indeed he does. The yawn also suggests that their journey has lost its excitement.
The next shot shows the two travelling towards the camera, with the sky in the background as grey as the bridge they are crossing, which cuts to a tracking shot of again of the landscape, but instead of being from the biker 's point of view, the camera swings round to the left, showing that it is in fact ahead of them. They camera no longer has to keep up with their pace, they are moving slower, suggesting again a lack of excitement and a sense of lethargy. The journey is clearly coming to an end and the audience is being prepared for some sort of finale. However this slower pace heightens the shock of the abrupt death of the main characters, something which the audience is not prepared for.
Here a crosscutting technique is used again, this time of a tracking shot looking out over the river and of the previous tracking shot from behind the bikes, which has been used already. Repetition of shots has already occurred and the audience is now perfectly aware that this voyage is going absolutely nowhere. Another new shot from in front of the bikes shows them passing yet another construction site, which although new, seems like it has already been shown.
Some lengthier tracking shots follow, this time of new landscape which appears to be a riverbank edged with forest. The use of zoom here gives another feeling of indistinction, or pointlessness. A cut to a new medium tracking shot of the road and Wyatt drives into shot from the bottom left hand corner, the camera falling behind to eventually show Billy, who drives into shot much later. As they drive on the music fades, replaced by the sound of the motorcycle engines, the lack of the music adding to the sense of tedium.
Cut to a close shot of two men driving a truck, framed by the windscreen. There are clearly guns in the back window; the driver is dressed in a white shirt and cowboy hat, the other in a black shirt with wonky teeth and an unsightly lump on the side of his face. They are clearly stereotypical 'rednecks'. Suggesting they scare the bikers, the passenger takes a gun and points it out of the window.
The next shot appears to be from the point of view of the truck as it passes close to Billy. It cuts back to the truck; the passenger threatens Billy then laughs. Cut back to Billy, still tracking, who gestures with this middle finger and then ignores them. Cut to the truck, the passenger yells at Billy to 'get a haircut'. Billy continues to ignore them. This less than violent retaliation makes the following shots a lot more of a shock. Cut back to the truck, as smiling, the passenger shoots and the camera moves away from the truck as if falling with Billy.
The camera follows as he skids to the ground. We cut between the truck and Billy as the driver asks what happened and then see a point-of-view shot from the truck as it passes Wyatt. Then comes another shot of Billy on the ground, followed by a fairly low angle shot of Wyatt driving towards Billy. We cut back to the truck as the killer looks out of the window. Back at the roadside, Wyatt runs to Billy, who is visibly bleeding and kneels by his side, Billy still muttering 'I'm gonna get 'em'. Cut to the truck, and the killer suggests they go back, the audience presumes, to help. Wyatt picks up his jacket to cover Billy 's wounds, dropping the helmet on the way. The camera lingers on his images as he drives into the distance to get help. Perhaps to suggest that he is, unwittingly, leaving Billy for good.
There is now a long shot of the truck moving towards the camera, alternated with a shot of Wyatt coming the other way. Finally Wyatt passes out of frame and we cut to the truck passing us to the left, where immediately we are blinded by a flash of white then red light as a shot is fired. Almost exactly at this point, a shot of Wyatt 's bike, rider-less and alight at the engine flies through the air, the wheel separating and the wreckage falling onto the grass. The camera lingers on this image briefly before a split-second shot of the bike in flames, coupled with the sound of an explosion, crosscuts with a well-paced crane shot, moving up and away from the wreckage, which burns in a ditch at the roadside. This shot continues as the credits roll.
To view this ending as simply conservatism winning out over the rebels would be too negative and leave the audience dissatisfied. Luckily the viewer is saved from complete despair by the glorious explosion of the bike. You never see Wyatt 's body mangled and degraded on the roadside, the audience is led to believe that something of Wyatt, his essence, perhaps even his soul, is ascending with it, transcending the society which has kept it down. It also seems fitting that they should die on the road, the only place they were truly 'free'. They are clearly not welcome in towns and even when they stop in the commune, there is a feeling of tension towards them as outsiders. Rather than further lose faith in the freedom the country has to offer, Wyatt dies in the one place which, in his mind, embodies this. In this way it is the 'rednecks who ensure ideological containment in narrative closure'. Surely this is a more satisfactory ending than having him completely disenchanted and pathetic on a never-ending journey to nowhere?.
Laderman, David Blazing the Trail: Visionary Rebellion and the Late-1960s Road Movie in his Driving Visions: Exploring the Road Movie (Unversity of Texas Press 2002) pg. 78.
Unfortunately, this almost saintly status does lend a sense of narcissism to his counter-culture attitude. There are other factors which might also give rise to this interpretation, for instance the close ups of Wyatt apparently deep in thought but looking totally blank. Luke Askew 's character (credited as stranger on highway), his dialogue and Billy 's mocking response to it 'you been saying that all day' also suggest he cannot be taken seriously because he has an air of arrogance that almost makes the audience feel negatively towards the commune he talks about before they are even introduced to it.
Easy Rider therefore appears to offer two different perspectives on America 's counter-culture. This is also reflected in the sudden change of scenery in the final sequence. Throughout the film the landscape has been stunning, as the travellers point out staggering rock formations shadowed in beautiful sunsets. In the final travelling sequence the landscape has changed dramatically. This is not the America they expected to find. This does not totally destroy the myth of the American landscape because, as Barbara Klinger suggests 'the presence of hippies does not automatically derail the nationalistic symbolism so intimately associated with the grand scenery." Herein lie the traditional American views to which Wyatt seems to be eternally attached via the flag blazoned on his bike and jacket. However Klinger also suggests in the same article that the change in scenery at the end reflects a 'revisionist assessment of the nation' that was going on at the time. For this to be true, to me this suggests that the film is just as confused about its stance on what America should be as its main characters are. It simultaneously upholds and destroys the traditions of Americas past and via the change in scenery, looks to its future with uncertainty.
Klinger, B The Road to Dystopia: Landscaping the Nation in Easy Rider' (1997) in Cohan & Hark, The Road Movie Book (London & New York: Routledge, 1997).
Wyatt quite clearly reinforces this reading. His attachment to 'America' is made clear from his costume, his partner even referring to him as 'Captain America'. But the removal of his jacket in the final sequence suggests an uncertainty about this previously strong attachment. He is not so keen to be associated with something he has discovered to be fundamentally flawed. Similarly he wears a very hippy-style white shirt at the start of the film, but by the end this has been replaced by a rather busy-looking, standard style shirt. The hippy lifestyle does not seem to have suited him either. He is caught somewhere in between and is not entirely sure where that is. This could be seen to show an America in transition, unsure of itself and its own identity, experimental, full of change and could even be said to represent the crisis of identity faced by the US over the Vietnam War.
The entire film, and in particular the ending and the character of Wyatt reflects an America struggling in times of change. Some sections appear to uphold a traditional nationalistic view of the country; others seem to point to a picture of an America which is not as clean and shiny as it appears in the travel brochure. It clearly points to America as a nation trying desperately to move forward, but finding itself unable to leave behind the images of its traditional past, perhaps because it has used them so fiercely to define itself for so long, and cannot find a sufficient image to replace it with.
