Capital investment decisions are critical as they entail substantial amounts of cash and time that are usually irrecoverable. They reflect the long-term strategy of the firm.
Compotech Industries Plc is facing a choice between three capital investment projects involving either an expansion of a current plant in Santa Clara, the conversion of a phased out one in Waltham or the construction of a new one in Ireland.
A critique of the net present value model used to evaluate each alternative is put forward whereby the most significant advantages are its use of cash flows, its account of the time value of money and its value-additivity and ranking properties.
The most highlighted disadvantages are the uncertainty in the estimation of cash flows and the difficulties in obtaining an appropriate discount rate.
In a 5 year span, using a 20% discount rate, the NPV  s of Santa Clara, Waltham and Ireland are -$1.14m, $6.38m and - $29.1m respectively.
In a 5 year analysis and applying a 10% cost of capital, the NPV  s for Santa Clara, Waltham and Ireland are $4.55m, $11.3m and - $25.6 respectively.
Using a 10 year time horizon and a 10% opportunity cost of capital, the NPV  s for Santa Clara, Waltham and Ireland are $40.9m, $40.1m and $62.5m.
Solely on financial grounds, Ireland should be selected in a 10 year analysis and Waltham in a 5 year one. - Prior to making a decision Craig Thomas should engage in more detailed cost benefit analysis exploring issues such the experience of operating in Santa Clara, the complexities of building a greenfield plant, the uncertainty of operating abroad, the reliability of the variable inputs (demand, price and variable cost), inflation and tax implications and the possibility of applying other capital appraisal techniques.
Capital budgeting decisions are critical because they are irreversible, (or costly to do so), they involve large amounts of cash outlays for a considerable number of years and are effectively the implementation and evolvement of the firm 's long-term strategy.
Unless they include real options, as will be explored later.
Compotech Industries Plc (CIP) wants to expand production in order to cater for the increase in demand for the Flexi-Connector. It can either expand the plant where production currently takes place at Santa Clara, or can convert the manufacturing technology of another plant in Waltham or build a Greenfield plant with a novel and more efficient technology that is being Beta-tested.
These three alternatives will be considered under three different scenarios using net present value (NPV) as the financial analytical tool to aid in the decision making process. NPV is the difference between the present value (PV) of the future expected cash flows and the initial investment outlay.
The NPV method is a sound tool for project appraisal because it considers all expected future cash flows during the life of the investment and takes account of the time value of money (TVM). Cash flows are more verifiable and less open to manipulation than profits and they are also observed in other corporate finance issues. The NPV method acknowledges that a pound today is worth more than a pound in the future because of inflation, risk and the opportunity cost of investing that pound today at the real interest rate. such as dividend payments, other capital budgeting methods and interest payments.
All cash flows apart from the initial investment are assumed to occur with certainty at the end of the period. A firm will have accepted all projects that offer a return greater than the cost of capital in such way that any other interim cash flows could only be reinvested at the cost of capital. Cash flows that occur during the year will be rounded to the closest time period and henceforth discounted. Conversely, the cash flows rounded to the beginning of the year will be overestimated when discounting and vice versa for those rounded upwards.
The return available from an equal risk portfolio of securities traded in the financial markets.
Accurate and reliable prediction of cash flows is crucial for a serviceable NPV result. Not only does the inherent risk in predicting future cash flows pose a problem but the potential conflicts of interest between manager 's performance measurements and cash flow estimates. Given that managerial and company performance is evaluated on a short-term basis, managers are likely to opt for projects that maximise their rewards in the short run. Similarly the fear of deviation from forecasted results may lead to the rejection of acceptable projects.
The choice of a discount rate is another area subject to judgement especially if the firm is not quoted. The weighted average cost of capital (WACC) is the correct discount rate to be used for projects of average risk. The cost of debt is simply an average of the interest payments paid to debtholders, however the cost of equity is more difficult to calculate. If the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) is used the firm 's beta is required, as well as the market return and the risk free rate. These latter variables are difficult to calculate although the risk free rate can be approximated using t-bills. To derive the beta for a quoted enterprise, the return on the firm 's shares and the return on the market portfolio have to be known. In practice, industry betas are used as estimates for a firm 's own beta, as the potential error in the estimation of a single beta is much greater than that of a portfolio of securities in the same industry. the responsiveness of a security to movements in the market portfolio.
Problems are further accentuated if the firm is not quoted, (not the case of CIP), as its equity beta has to be inferred from the average asset beta of similar quoted firms in the industry, leading to greater margins of errors. It is often assumed that a firm only holds riskless debt. In reality, firm 's hold risky as well as risk less debt and assuming a debt beta of 0 would not provide an accurate estimation of the firm 's asset beta. Another way to obtain the cost equity is by computing the PV of the firm 's expected dividend payments, but then again an estimate of the firm 's dividend yield and growth would be required.
Weighted average of the equity beta and debt beta.
Once a firm 's cost of capital has been attained, it has to be adjusted upwards for projects of greater risk than the average risk project and vice versa. Subjectivity again arises in the determination of how risky a project is and the resulting arbitrary upward/downward adjustment. In addition, perfect capital markets are assumed in the way for NPV cash flows are reinvested at the cost of capital and for IRR at the IRR. The IRR assumption seems more realistic than the NPV one because IRR is greater than the cost of capital; firms would find it harder to survive if they could only invest at the cost of capital. IRR provides managers with a relative percentage intrinsic rate of return for the project, whilst NPV offers an absolute figure that is difficult to understand in isolation.
In the absence of comparative and/or past information.
Other criticisms include the complication in calculating and interpreting NPV, especially if tax and inflation are taken into account as discussed later, although this is not justified considering today 's technological advances. The NPV method is static, it assumes the project is now or never, thus it does not incorporate any real options such as the option to expand, abandon or defer investment into the future. In addition NPV`s long term orientation may not be beneficial for firms with liquidity problems and/or new growing firms that would prefer a less risky and more certain earlier payback.
Despite these problems, NPV is useful as it allows for multiple discount rates over the years to account for possible changes in a firm 's cost of capital. Furthermore, NPV possesses the property of value-additivity in that the value of the firm rises by the NPV of the project. The NPV`s of multiple projects within a firm 's divisions can be totalled to obtain the aggregate value added to the firm, this is useful when capital is rationed as projects that would be independently rejected may appear favourable in combination. As NPV is absolute, it permits the ranking of projects and takes account of the magnitude/scale of the cash flows regardless of their timing. The annual cash flows throughout the project 's life are appropriately discounted to their present value enabling comparison between projects with unequal lives. However for mutually exclusive projects such as those concerning the replacement of equipment, it would be more useful to compare the alternatives over equal time horizons. This can be achieved by converting the time period into the lowest common denominator so that a series of replacements occur until the common time period elapses. Alternatively, the cash flows for each project over the common time period can be converted into an annuity figure using the annuity formula and henceforth compared.
Nevertheless when capital is rationed the ratio of present value of cash flows to investment should be used to rank projects.
Equivalent annual cash flow equals the present value of cash flows divided by the annuity factor for N years at the required rate of return.
In contrast to other models the assumptions of NPV are not too unrealistic hence its popularity. A sensitivity analysis of the project provides a meaningful way of locating potential areas of risk and in combination with NPV outweighs other capital investment techniques.
The NPV results for the three alternatives under each scenario is summarised below, further details are exposed in the appendices 1-9.
The NPV analysis for scenario 1 concludes that converting the Waltham plant seems the financially best alternative to pursue, as it will add $6.38m to the firms   value. Expanding the Santa Clara plant creates a loss for the firm of $1.14m and a greenfield construction in Ireland an even greater loss amounting to $29.1m. (See appendices 1, 2, 3 for detailed calculations).
The Santa Clara alternative, which is on the margin of acceptance, is the second best alternative in financial terms. However one should account for other qualitative benefits that exist for Santa Clara and not for Waltham. Such factors include: the experience of operating in Santa Clara, the provision of more accurate estimates (based on past data) for the incremental fixed cost and/or maintenance of the current selling price and variable cost, the ease of expanding (integrating compatible technology into the existing one) which is less risky than converting manufacturing technology and the enhanced economies of scale.
In the light of the results for scenario two, the alternative CIP should be inclined to undertake is Waltham again solely on financial grounds, as it will add more than double the value Santa Clara would, $11.3m as opposed to merely $4.55m. The obtained value for Ireland presents a loss of $25.6. (Refer to appendices 4,5,6). The differences between Waltham and Santa Clara for scenario 1 and 2 are $7.52m and $6.75m respectively. Thus as the discount rate is lowered from 20% to 10% the more attractive Santa Clara is becoming.
The values for all the options have increased, making them more attractive, because of the lower rate of return expected from the shareholders of CIP. The PV of the cash flows has increased because the future cash flows are discounted by a lower rate obtaining a higher NPV. The level of risk involved in the projects is not 20% but 10% as the shareholders would only require a 10% rate of return from a diversified portfolio of equal risk securities.
As the time horizon increases so do the future prospects for Santa Clara. In 10 years and using a 10% discount rate Santa Clara will be worth $40.9 whilst Waltham will be worth $40.1. Jack states he has bad news for the others, because Ireland has become the most attractive investment providing added value worth $62.5m. The greater initial outlays for Ireland take time to be recovered by the project, but eventually it provides a better return to the firm and its shareholders.( Refer to appendices 7,8 and 9).
Capacity will become a constraint in 1998 for the first two options and only 3 years later, in 2001, for Ireland. In addition, Ireland has a greater contribution per unit than the rest of the alternatives due to its lower variable cost, $0.655 in contrast to $0.595. Furthermore, Ireland is being equipped with more efficient technology, which will enhance future benefits.
It should be noted that these projects should not redirect resources from any superior projects, discourage development of future products, alter the firm 's risk profile or affect the enterprise 's reputation or goodwill. The projects should adhere to CPI  s long-term strategy and to its recent global marketing strategy. Although Ireland is the most economical option, its terminal value at the end of the 10 years may not be in line with the firm 's objectives or CIP may no longer have an interest in being close to European customers. Craig Thomas should develop more detailed cost benefit analyses for each of the alternatives before opting for Ireland.
Opening a plant from scratch is risky, the costs may be greater than expected and the Irish government may withdraw its help. Operations abroad may be complicated and may aggravate the supply of the Flexi-Connector to customers. The probability of demand remaining strong or the potential entrance of competitors reducing CIP`s market share should be investigated, maybe using Flexi-Connector product 's life cycle, since it is critical for the final decision. Ireland seems more profitable in the long run whilst the first two alternatives present superior short run investments.
The sensitivity analysis exposed in appendix 10 demonstrates that Waltham seems most promising, as it is the least sensitive to changes in the variable inputs. Santa Clara suffers from small changes in the inputs; similarly Ireland needs significant changes in the variables to augment its NPV to zero in the 5 year analysis and is very dependant on an accurate forecast of demand in the 10 year one. The longer the time span the more uncertain the future cash flows become, this could be overcome by making an upward adjustment to the discount rate to reflect this added risk, as Elisabeth purports, or by increasing the forecasted outflows and reducing the inflows (or in other situations by reducing the expected life of risky projects).
If the cash flows and the required rate of return are subject to the same rate of inflation then the project 's NPV will not be affected by changes inflation hence real or nominal NPV will be equal. However the latter is suggested because not all cash flows inflate at the same rate, cost of labour inflates faster than cost of materials and capital allowances on new equipment are not index linked. The incremental tax cash flows should be incorporated, by discounting the after tax cash flows by the after tax discount rate. Ignoring tax is likely to overstate the value of the NPV unless there are significant capital allowances.
If CIP has any employees, it must be aware of the possible negative behavioural implications as a consequence of the selected option. Similarly, the firm should place attention on the terminal values of each alternative as they affect the long-term direction of the firm. In addition, CIP could use other financial tools such as payback period if it suffers from liquidity problems or is a new growing firm in need of cash. The accounting rate of return may be useful as it reconciles with reporting conventions, considers the whole projects   life, serves as a performance measurement tool and ensures that certain accounting ratios are not adversely affected by the project.
If demand for the Flexi-Connector will remain strong for 10 years and CIP`s actual cost of capital is 10% then the Ireland option should be selected, otherwise if considering a shorter time span Waltham seems more promising. This decision assumes that no other factors will adversely affect it. The limitations of NPV are pertinent when making a decision and attention should also be directed to the non-quantitative benefits arising from each alternative. An appraisal of each project employing an alternative financial tool is recommended. Lastly, the project chosen should be aligned to firm 's overall objectives and strategies.
