Classical trade theory explains that the cause of trade lies in countries' differences in comparative costs in production. Swedish economists, Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin, challenged this proposition in the 1930s by identifying an alternative explanation for the basis of trade. Their model, also called the factor-proportions model, builds on Ricardo 's theory of comparative advantage by predicting patterns of trade and production based on the differences in relative factor endowments between countries. Their results are summarised in the Heckscher-Ohlin Theorem: A country will export those commodities that intensively use its relatively abundant factor. In this essay we will analyse the model and its underlying assumptions in order to study the relevance of this model for modern policy-making.
In its simplest description, the Heckscher-Ohlin model (to be called H-O model hereafter) deals with countries that use identical factors to produce identical goods using identical production functions, which show constant returns to scale. These assumptions are necessary (but not sufficient) to result in the equalisation of factor prices throughout the world. For this essay, we will use the basic 2x2x2 approach to describe the model; we will assume there are only two countries (Country H and Country F), two commodities (goods X and Y) and two factors of production (labour and capital). Here we observe a first fundamental difference between the Ricardian model and the H-O model, the inclusion of a second factor of production, capital.
Lancaster, K. (1957), "The Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Model: A Geometric Treatment", Economica 24: 19-39, p.20.
More formally, these are the set of assumptions in which the model and the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem rely upon:
Lancaster, K. (1957), "The Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Model: A Geometric Treatment", Economica 24: 19-39, pp.24-25.
Countries H and F produce the same two commodities, goods X and Y, using the same two factors (labour and capital) and same production technology. Good X is labour-intensive in production and good Y is capital-intensive.
The production functions for both goods involve the use of both factors, are homogeneous, convex and with constant returns to scale.
There are fixed total supplies of the two factors, which are perfectly mobile between industries within each country but perfectly immobile between countries.
The production functions are such that the relative factor intensities are the same at all factor prices which are the same in both industries. That is, the labour- intensive good remains the labour-intensive good throughout.
There is perfect competition in all markets and full employment of resources.
There are no market distortions. That is, no transport or similar costs, no tariffs or other trade barriers.
The relative endowments of the two factors vary from country to country. We will assume Country H to be capital-abundant and Country F to be labour-abundant.
Consumer preferences are identical in both countries.
Before going any further in our analysis is important to clarify the definitions of factor-intensity and factor-abundance. Good Y is said to be relatively capital-intensive and good X is said to be relatively labour-intensive if the capital-labour ratio used in its production is higher in the former sector:
Markusen, J., Melvin, J., Kaemper, M. and Maskus, K. (1995), International Trade Theory and Evidence, McGraw-Hill, Singapore, p.101 (Equation 1).
The concept of factor endowments is defined, specifically, in terms of the ratios between capital stocks and labour forces in the two countries. Thus if the capital-labour ratio in country H is greater in country F, country H is said to be capital-abundant and labour-scarce, whereas country F is said to be labour-abundant and capital-scarce.
Markusen, J., Melvin, J., Kaemper, M. and Maskus, K. (1995), International Trade Theory and Evidence, McGraw-Hill, Singapore, p.100 (Equation 2).
Thus the production possibility frontier of Country H will be biased towards the Y-axis and the production possibility frontier of Country F will be biased towards the X-axis, as shown in the following diagram:
Since we are assuming that both countries have identical demand patterns, is sensible to expect relative factor prices to reflect factor endowments. Thus in autarky, Country F would have relatively inexpensive labour and Country H would have relatively inexpensive capital. Given, the two production possibility frontiers and identical community indifference curves, in autarky the two countries will in equilibrium at points A h and A f, where the price ratio line will be steeper in Country H than in Country F, as shown in figure 3 below:
Because the slopes of the indifference curves are the same along any ray from the origin, in autarky the equilibrium price ration line will be steeper in Country H than in Country F where (Equation 3).
With free trade the equilibrium points for both countries will change. Due to the differences in prices, consumers in Country H will want to purchase Good X from Country F, and consumers from Country F will want to buy Good Y from Country H. These changes in the demand patterns for both good in both countries will start a price adjustment process that will continue until excess demands and supplies for both commodities in both countries have been satisfied. Production will continue to change until trade has equalised price ratios in the two countries at some intermediate level p*. Thus is important to observe that trade will result in the equalisation of commodity prices in the two countries. This price equalisation happens at points of equal slope (marginal rates of transformation) on both production possibility curves, points labelled Qh and Qf, which also demonstrate than in free trade both countries will generally produce both goods.
Markusen, J., Melvin, J., Kaemper, M. and Maskus, K. (1995), International Trade Theory and Evidence, McGraw-Hill, Singapore, p. 105.
Free trade in the H-O model provides aggregate gains from trade for each country as both nations end up consuming on indifference curves outside their production frontiers. In equilibrium, Country F exports the labour-intensive commodity X and the capital-abundant country H exports the capital-intensive good Y. This result follows the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem: Given the assumptions of the model, a country will export the commodity that intensively uses its relatively abundant factor.
The theorem holds however only on the basis of its strict and unrealistic underlying assumptions. In the real world, firms often experience economies of scale in production, markets do not follow perfect competition and product differentiation is used to gain competitive advantage. Total supply of factors of production is not fixed over time; their supply varies due to factors such as population growth. In addition, nations have different tastes and hence different demand patterns. There are also market distortions like barriers to trade and transportation costs, and production factors can move across nations, although with certain limitations.
When challenging the assumptions, some appear more fundamental than others, suggesting that the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem is only robust to its underlying assumptions up to a certain extent, given that it allows for some of them to be relaxed. Non-constant returns to scale will clearly invalidate the notion that country size is irrelevant for trade patterns and allowing arbitrary international differences in technology would also render the theorem generally invalid. With scale economies, trade can arise between countries that do not exhibit a pattern of comparative advantage, for example between two identical economies. As shown in figure 5, identical economies with identical production frontiers would still experience gains from trade if Country H specialises in the production of commodity Y and Country F specialises in producing commodity X. Both countries will end up consuming at a higher indifference curve, thus experiencing welfare gains. In the presence of increasing returns to scale countries will turn towards specialisation and the pattern of trade could be determined in a rather arbitrary manner. For example, it could be determined by First Mover Advantage, if that country entered that particular industry first.
Markusen, J., Melvin, J., Kaemper, M. and Maskus, K. (1995), International Trade Theory and Evidence, McGraw-Hill, Singapore, p. 107.
Whether the Heckscher-Ohlin holds in the presence of market distortions will depend on their specific type, suggesting that the theorem is not as robust as it first appeared. In the case of monopolies and export subsidies, the theorem will not hold if their effects are strong enough to offset the comparative advantage given by factor endowments. An export subsidy, for example, would enable a labour-abundant country to export a capital-intensive commodity; the extent to which the country can afford to export this commodity will depend on the size of the government subsidy. Import restrictions, on the other hand, although reducing trade will allow for any remaining trade to follow the H-O model predictions. Thus the theorem still holds in the presence of import restrictions. The following diagrams show the effect of import restrictions on trade, figure 6 shows the case of free trade and figure 7 shows the case of tariffs, where trade has been reduced as a result.
Finally, given the differences in relative factor prices between nations, it is possible for the same commodity to be capital-intensive in a capital-abundant country and labour-intensive in a labour-abundant country. This case will provide a practical problem for the Heckscher-Ohlin model, since according to its predictions both countries should export the same good.
In conclusion, the Heckscher-Ohlin model makes a series of strong assumptions in order to isolate the effect of relative factor endowments and show their significance as a cause of trade. Despite some of its assumptions being highly unrealistic, the notion that differences in factor endowments provide a significant explanation for comparative advantage and global trade patterns is undeniable. The model suggests that policymakers should focus on supporting the exportation of those goods that can be produced with resources in which they are naturally abundant. Hence, developing countries would benefit from exporting natural resource-intensive items such as raw materials and labour-intensive goods. Moreover, the implications of the model are more far reaching in terms of supporting the notion of free trade. Trade restrictions tend to lower the welfare of a country, as it constrains access to a greater choice of goods and better prices. Governments therefore should refrain from using these protective mechanisms. A final key implication for policymakers, specifically for those in highly populated countries, is that they should promote investment in human capital (in terms of better education, better health and nutrition) as to increase the productivity of their labour force.
Markusen, J., Melvin, J., Kaemper, M. and Maskus, K. (1995), International Trade Theory and Evidence, McGraw-Hill, Singapore, p.108.
