The following report consists of an experiment carried out in the laboratory to find the moment of inertia of three given disks of different sizes. This was done by using different masses and by calculating the time taken by each mass to reach the table. All the readings were tabulated and graphs were plotted. The moment of inertia was calculated using the gradient of the graph. Since most of the points on the graph were going through the best fit line we can say that the value obtained for inertia is quite accurate. And since necessary precautions were taken while carrying out the experiment such as to repeat the experiment to minimize human error would have resulted in getting very accurate reading for the inertia.
Newton 's First Law of motion states that "An object at rest tends to stay at rest and an object in motion tends to stay in motion with the same speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force." It is normal for an object to resist its change in motion. This tendency to resist changes in their state of motion is described as inertia. The lab was carried out to further analyze and understand inertia.
The aim of the experiment was to investigate the moment of inertia of three metals disks of different sizes which had the same axis of rotation. The experiment was carried out in the laboratory in groups of two. Where the time taken by a given weight to travel a specific distance was noted for the three metal discs provided. Multiple readings were taken when doing the experiment to make the obtained values more accurate. Having two members in the group helped out with taking readings and setting up the apparatus and doing many other different tasks simultaneously. The average time taken was calculated and graphs were drawn which made the final value for the moment of inertia accurate. The theory used is illustrated below.
The following theories were used to do the calculations carries out and the readings that were taken.
Circular acceleration Mass used Radius of the threaded metal rod Distance moved by mass Time taken for the mass to go the distance 's'.
Since the left hand side is the same in both the equations.
Which is in the form.
Where.
The equation that was derived above will be the most important equation that will be sued to calculate the moment of inertia of each disk. This will be done by plotting the appropriate graphs and then by calculating their gradient.
Shown below is a simplified version of the apparatus that was used when conducting the experiment at the laboratory.
The apparatus that was given is listed below.
According to the equation derived to calculate the moment of inertia the values of the following should be known. The distance  's', the radius 'r' of the threaded metal rod and the time taken 't'. All of these are unknowns. The value of 'm' should take the following 0.1Kg, 0.12Kg, 0.17Kg, 0.22Kg. And the value of the universal gravitational constant 'g' was taken to be 9.81.
The experiment carried out included winding up the string with the mass attached to it up to the threaded metal rod. Then it was allowed to fall down under gravity from rest (initial velocity zero). And the time taken for the mass to hit the table was tabulated with the use of a stop watch.
The following illustrates the steps carried to measure the time 't'. It was very helpful to have two people doing the experiment. Because when one person was in charge in sending the thread around the threaded metal rod the other person was in charge in measuring the time taken for the mass to hit the table. The two members in the group kept alternating within the two tasks which made it more accurate.
Steps followed.
The small disk was fastened on to the back of the metal disk using the metal bush and the screw nut.
The mass loader was connected to the other end of the string and then it was winded until the mass loader (0.1kg) reached the threaded metal rod.
Then the metal rod was released allowing the mass unwind and hit the table.
The time taken for the mass to travel from top of the stand (the level of which the metal rod is at) till it hits the table was calculated using a stop watch.
The experiment was repeated to take four readings. And then was again repeated with the following masses 0.12kg, 0.17kg, 0.22kg.
The readings were again obtained and the experiment was repeated with the medium size disk and the large disk.
And the readings were tabulated.
The unknown  's' of the equation was found by measuring the distance between the threaded metal rod and the table ( The distance the mass travels before coming in contact with the table) with the use of the half meter ruler provided. This was done by keeping it between the two points. The value of s=30.6 cm.
The other unknown 'r' the radius of the threaded metal rod was calculated using the following method.
The thread that was given was woven around the threaded metal rod up to 5 turns. Then string was set lose and the length of the string was calculated using the meter ruler. It was repeated three times to make sure that the reading obtained was accurate.
The following readings were obtained 17.5, 17.3, 17.4.
The average length.
Therefore the length of one turn.
After all the readings were tabulated, the average time of each of the four readings was calculated and for each mass the value of was calculated. This was done for all three disks. Then a graph of 'm' (mass) versus was plotted for each disk. From the equation.
We can see that this is in the form of a straight line with equation.
Therefore.
The gradient of the graph.
Therefore the moment of inertia of the disk is given by.
The distance  's', the height between the centre of the threaded metal rod and the table. (accuracy of the meter ruler used to measure this value was 0.001m).
The radius 'r', radius of the threaded metal rod which was used as the axis of rotation. (accuracy of the metal ruler used was 0.0005m).
The time 't', the table below shows the results of the times taken for the masses to travel from the centre of the metal rod to the surface of the table (The accuracy of the stop watch was 0.01s).
The values that were obtained may not be accurate due to errors that would have occurred while conducting the experiment. The error that would have affected the reading are listed below.
Time error - The time taken to start and stop the clock.
Friction - The friction between the bearings would have also effected in the reading not being accurate.
Inertia - Even though we need to calculate the inertia of the disk according to the experiment carries out we are finding the inertia of the whole system.
Air Resistance - The air present around the experiment area would also affect the reading.
Worn out equipment - The value of the masses may not be the value that they are supposed to be because they might be worn out due to being used consistently. There for the actual mass might be less than that stated.
The value of was required to sketch the graph. The table below shows the values used to plot the graph. A graph of 'm' versus was plotted for each table the results obtained is shown below.
After drawing the graph in order to calculate the inertia the gradient of each line was to be calculated. This process is shown below. 1. Gradient of line of small disc: 2. Gradient of line of medium disc: 3. Gradient of line of large disc:
The gradient of each line was found to be equal to .
The moment of inertia was found by substituting the values obtained for the gradient in the derived equation.
Gradient =.
For the small disc:
For the medium disc:
For the large disc:
The calculated answers carry a certain uncertainty due to errors that would have occurred during the experiment that are mentioned under section 4.2 and due to rounding off of numerical answers.
It is also recommended as a second method to pick out the minimum and maximum value of the four readings obtained by repeating the experiment. (Finding out how long the mass takes to travel from the centre of the metal rod until it comes in contact with the table), Then calculating the value of for the minimum and maximum reading of each disk and plotting a graph of the mass versus for the minimum values and the maximum values. Then by comparing the minimum and maxim graphs we can interpret the results for the inertia.
Since the experiment was carried out by a group all precautions were taken to make sure that the apparatus was set up in the most precise and accurate manner. Tabulations and readings were taken very carefully so as not to jeopardize the accuracy of the experiment.
Since almost all the points plotted are on the best fit line. And the experiment was repeated and the necessary precautions were taken, we can say that the calculated value of the moment of inertia is accurate.
