The objective of the report was to investigate the feasibility of implementing a low cost barcode reader for a sales counter. Many user requirements were considered and a system specification was developed. The functions considered were transaction operations, quantity input and barcode reading, decoding, processing and database matching. When designing the system these factors and functions were taken into account.
A system was preliminary designed which currently meets the user requirements and system specification.
In total it cost   500 for all the hardware requirements and   8760 for software development. For 100 hundred systems the cost per system would be   588. The performance speed is suitable at 9ms and the memory burdens are not high at 16kb. The software for the system could be written and fully tested within 45 days. The user requirements and system specification will need to be revised in order to produce a better, more efficient, barcode reader system.
The implementation of a low-cost barcode reader for sales counters is feasible.
This report will investigate the feasibility of implementing a low-cost barcode reader at sales counters in a high street shopping area.
Many stores or shops have a large number of items that they sell, some stores selling tens of thousands of products. This makes it difficult for staff to remember all the prices of each individual item. Most of the product information, including its price, is stored on a computer somewhere within the store where the price can be accessed with ease. However it would take a long time for a staff member to enter the name of each product to find out its price. It would be better if there was a system in which a computer itself could identify the product and then give all the necessary information relating to that product. This system would be the barcode system.
The barcode system involves each product being labelled by a series of lines varying in width. E.g.
These lines represent bits which can be read by a high-resolution barcode wand; the black lines represent logic 1 and the white spaces represent logic 0. The barcode can be scanned by the wand, giving a bit pattern which corresponds to an item in the database.
In theory this works well however when dealing with a real time system there are other factors to be considered. The system would need to work well with the database of the store; it would need to be fast enough so that customers are not left waiting for too long; the system has to be cheap.
Overall the barcode system should be able to read a barcode, convert and send it to a database where it is matched and then related information sent back to a display where the user can obtain all the information needed.
This report will investigate the factors involved and decide whether it is feasible to implement a low-cost barcode reader for sales counters.
The system is to be used in a store or a shop. Therefore the requirements of this system will have to be most suited for a store or a shop. The focus of the system will have to lean towards customer efficiency, low cost and customer satisfaction.
The system will use the barcode reader as the input. However to perform the functions described below the barcode reader would need to have the following controls:
ADD button : Button indicating products will be added to the current bill.
WITHDRAW button : Button indicating products will be removed from the current bill.
SCAN button : Button used to begin scan. 10 digit Number pad : Number pad would be used to enter quantity of items.
The outputs from the system are mainly through displays presenting product information.
LCD screen : This would be a LCD screen on the barcode reader displaying the quantity of items to be scanned.
Audio tweeter : To be used as feedback during successful and unsuccessful scans.
Display Unit : A CRT or TFT screen displaying information related to the product scanned. It would also display the current shopping bill and the related details.
Transaction - The system will be able to carry out two main operations when encountering businesses. These are selling and returning goods. To put these into the context of the system they can be described as adding an item to a current bill and withdrawing an item from a current bill.
Quantity - The system would be able to allow users to enter a quantity to be associated with the product being added or withdrawn. This will speed up transactions of repeat items.
Scan - The system will be able to scan, decode and process barcodes. These barcodes will be matched up with data in the servers and the appropriate information will be sent back to the user. This function would be used in conjunction with the functions mentioned above.
Hardware requirements - The hardware requirements of the barcode system will involve:
Within barcode system:
The barcode wand or reader - Used to read or scan barcodes. This should be accurate enough to read the narrowest bars of 0.19mm.
An audio tweeter - Used as feedback during successful and unsuccessful scans.
Direct communication with barcode system:
Display Unit - The information relating to the product would be shown on a display unit. The display unit should be able to receive information from the server, through the barcode system, and display it appropriately. The display unit would typically be a CRT (Cathode Ray Tube) or TFT (Thin Film Transistor) display.
A server - This would contain the database of products with their bit pattern recognition. It should be able to interface quickly and efficiently with the barcode reader and the display unit.
Software requirements - The software requirements of the barcode system will involve:
Written in a high level language - Using C, Ada or Modula2 which have been fully tried and tested languages and are frequently used for hardware interfacing. High level languages also use less code and are more flexible than assembly code.
The code should be well written and tested thoroughly - If the code is badly written it could cause the entire barcode system to hang in the middle of operation. This could have disastrous consequences for a business.
The barcode system should process barcodes in real time - The barcode system will receive the input of a barcode bit pattern, through the barcode wand, match the pattern with the product in the database, and return the associated information to the user. This will involve interfacing with the server, sending data via cables and displaying the information on a display unit. All of this has to be done within a 1 or 2 seconds so that customers and staff are not left waiting. Desirably, as soon as the barcode is scanned the information is displayed.
The system should be compatible with all variations of barcode - There are different formats of barcode including UPC, JAN and EAN. There are variations in the space between the lines, the narrowest being 0.19mm. The barcode system should be able to process the barcode of any format.
The barcode reader should be robust - The barcode reader will be handled on a constant basis meaning that it may be dropped or take some knocks during normal use. The reader should be able to sustain small damage, for example, dropping it, and still function at near full efficiency.
The barcode system should be simple to operate - The user should not have to input any lines of code or use a command prompt operation system: this would take a long time and can also be quite complex. One of the key factors of this system is the speed with which it can operate. By allowing the user to do a minimal amount of work will speed up the process. The user should only select a button desiring to scan and then scan the barcode. This will remove human error from the system while also increasing speed with which operations can be performed.
The barcode system should have a backup - If the something went wrong, perhaps the barcode wand broke, there should be an alternative method of number entry so that operations could still be carried out. This could be in the form of a keyboard at the counter or a special barcode reader which had a keypad on the reader itself. Also if the server was to breakdown there should be a backup server to take its place while the main server was being repaired. The backup server could also act as a data backup where all the product data could be backed up once a week.
There are a few constraints to the system discussed so far:
The system can only send one barcode at a time - It would be good if many barcodes could be scanned and then all sent together at the same time. This would speed up counter transactions however it would add to the complexity of the hardware and software.
The user will have to wait for the feedback before scanning a new item - If the user scans too many barcodes before the previous ones are returned the system would slow down, increasing usage time which would be unacceptable. A possible solution to this would be to increase memory and store barcodes in a temporary memory area but this would increase costs.
With more research it could be possible to perform all store operations from the barcode reader. This would include functions such as update of stock, returning of goods through customer representatives, current bill calculation etc. The barcode system could be in constant communication with the server and automatically order new stock, through an internet connection, when stock levels are too low. There are many features that could be added however it would add to the complexity of the system.
This section will go through how the barcode system should operate and its functions.
The barcode system will have the following operations:
The system will have the following inputs:
The system will have the following outputs:
The ADD and WITHDRAW operations are fairly similar with the exception of which buttons is pressed to initiate the command and the result of the operation. Because of this they will be treated in the same manner under the TRANSACTION operation.
During a TRANSACTION:
The ADD or WITHDRAW button is pressed. The system then waits for the quantity value to be entered using the keypad on the barcode reader. If there is no quantity value entered the default value of 1 is used. Otherwise a quantity is entered and this number appears on the LCD display screen on the barcode reader. The scan point is then placed over the barcode to be read. When the SCAN button is pressed the barcode is read by the barcode reader. If the scan was unsuccessful then the barcode will emit three short beeps. The process will then have to be started from the beginning. If there is a successful scan then the barcode reader emits a single short beep.
During a successful scan the barcode input is decoded. The decoded data is sent with the ADD or WITHDRAW command and the quantity to a temporary memory area of the barcode system. The memory indicator will light up showing one memory slot is taken. A maximum of three barcodes may be processed at the same time. This will allow for the possibility of scanning barcodes more quickly. The earliest scanned barcode is taken from the memory and sent to the main server via high speed cables. The decoded data is matched in the database server and the item is then added to or withdrawn from the current bill. The quantity value will determine the number of items to be added or withdrawn. The information will be sent back through the system and shown on the display unit.
The TRANSACTION operation (from successful scan to sending information back to displays) should be completed normally in 1 second; it must never take longer than 2 seconds.
To carry out these functions the barcode reader must be specially designed. The barcode reader would have a 10-digit number pad on the top of it, three buttons, and a small LCD display screen. One button would be an 'add product' button and another would be a 'withdraw product' button. The final button would be the  'scan' button. On the side of the reader would be an indicator, showing how many barcodes are stored in the temporary memory area. There would also be an audio tweeter inside the reader.
The display unit would be a monitor or some sort of screen where information about scanned items and current shopping bills could be displayed.
These are the basic functions and operations that can be carried out by the staff member. This is a fairly simple process with few steps to be performed by the user. To make operations this simple the software and hardware of the system will have to be designed very well. The hardware will have to be able to scan the barcodes efficiently and accurately; the software will have to be able to decode the barcodes and match them quickly with the database values.
There are a few environmental and physical constraints to the system discussed so far. The main problems are with the barcode reader. The barcode reader may become damaged to due water or humidity. If the internal circuits were to come into contact with any moisture the circuits may become short circuited and therefore become unusable. Heat can also affect the barcode reader. If the reader were to be left in direct sunlight, or placed next to a heater, the plastic could melt damaging the circuits. The final problem with the barcode reader is that if it is not designed well it could become too heavy for regular use. Staff members would not be able to use the reader over extended periods of time making it useless.
If the barcode reader ever did malfunction there needs to be an alternate method of data entry since a store would be unable to sell goods. This should be in the form of a keyboard which had a connection, direct or indirect, to the server. The keyboard could be used to load up some software which would take barcode numbers and match them in the database as usual. This would be slower however it does provide a backup when emergency situations arise.
A system block diagram represents all the inputs and outputs of a system and how they relate to each other.
Designing this sort of system will take time and money. Because in all projects there are deadlines and budgets it is important to have an estimate of time and money so it can be considered whether a project is feasible or not.
The total hardware cost estimate is   500.
First we must calculate the total number of operands and operators. This can be calculated from the following equation: where N is the total number of operands and operators and k is the sum of the individual operators and operands.
In the requirements it was stated that the code be written in a high level language. For a typical high level language there are about 30-40 distinct operators. To make this a safe estimate we will assume there are 40 distinct operators.
From previous lab work it was found that the system will at least require the following operands:
This gives a total of 120 operands. However this is probably a conservative estimate considering it was based on a small amount of lab work. To make this estimate more useful we should add 50% making a total of 180 operands.
Hence, k = 40 operators + 180 operands = 220.
Therefore, N = 220 (0.5772 + ln 220) = 1313.6 (total number of operands and operators in software).
There are approximately 3 to 5 operators and operands per line of code.
Approximately,.
Number of lines in program = N/3 = 1314/3 = 438 lines of code (can safely say between 300 and 600 lines of code).
On average it costs   20 per line of code and there are only 10 lines of code produced each day. These maybe seem like a high price and take a long time, however, a requirement was that the code was highly tested and well written. These prices and productivity includes all design, testing and all process related to the writing of code.
Under this price and time system the software would cost: 438 x   20 =   8760.
The time taken to produce this software would be: 438/10 = 43.8 = approx 45 days.
Memory:
In a high level language each line takes 5 to 20 bytes. A worst case estimate for the proposed system would be: 20 x 438 = 8760 bytes.
Add to this 500bytes for the storage of barcodes in the temporary memory would give a total of 9260 bytes or 9kb. A system with 16kb of memory would sufficient to run the system without any program hanging.
Execution speed:
For a high level language it would take between 5 to 20   s to perform each line of code. A worst case estimate for an 8-bit processor would be: (20 x 438)/2 = 4.4 ms.
The system may perform some floating point calculations when calculating prices therefore the performance speed may be reduced by up to half in some cases. This would give a worst case estimate of system execution speed of 9ms.
After considering the system design, performance and costs it can be seen that a relatively useful system can be made within a good cost and time boundary. The execution time is very fast suggesting that there may not be a need for temporary memory storage of barcodes.
The design of the system may be finalised after a thorough review of the user requirements and the system specification. This may reveal more capabilities and may remove redundant requirements.
However a preliminary design of the system would have the software written in Modula 2. This was chosen over Ada or C because 'Of the three, Modula-2 is the smallest, easiest to read, easiest to learn, and cleanest designed, both syntactically and conceptually.'[ ] This will allow for the best program design and most efficient use of memory. If the business requiring the system were a chain store and had many stores the software costs would be divided across all stores making the system cheaper than first realised. [].
The hardware is all relatively simple and cheap. The barcode reader may need some designing however, there are currently many similar barcode readers already available on the market.
The implementation of the device into the desired environment can reveal more changes that are needed to the system.
The system would have to be installed by professionals into each individual store. The business would need to supply their own server of data and ouput screens. The setup would involve connecting the server and outputs to the system and the barcode reader. Each store would require as many barcode readers as there are tills thus increasing the price of the hardware costs. However the system could be run off the same software keeping the software costs the same. If the system was to be implemented there would need to be consideration for wires and cables. There would be many cables going from barcode reader to system controller to server. Any of these could become damaged if not carefully arranged and precautions taken.
The report covered many factors and aspects of implementing a real time barcode system into a business. The user requirements and system specification have been fulfilled thus far; the design suggests they will still be fulfilled at completion of project. In total it cost   500 for all the hardware requirements and   8760 for software development. If many systems were to be produced the software cost would be divided across all systems made. For 20 systems the cost would be   938 per system. For 100 hundred systems the cost per system would be reduced to   588. The performance speed is suitable at 9ms and the memory burdens are not high at 16kb.
The implementation of a low-cost barcode reader for sales counters is feasible.
