The University of library has in excess of twenty five thousand users - students, lecturers, researchers and external visitors. In addition to providing access to one million printed volumes, ten kilometres of archives and five thousand printed periodicals, the library serves as a self-study facility accommodating 1600 study spaces and 150 computer workstations.
Each year approximately one million loans are issued and one hundred thousand reservations made. At the heart of this sizable operation lies the main issue desk located on the first floor.
The summer examination season is one of the busiest for the library with up to seven thousand users entering each day. This dramatic increase in activity places a huge burden on the issue desk and, consequently, the period is traditionally associated with lengthy queues and prolonged service times.
Based on statistics submitted by the library to the Society of National, University and College Libraries (SCONUL) for the year ending July 2003.
Earlier this year, six new self-service machines were installed in an attempt to reduce the load on the issue desk and free up valuable human resources.
The aim of this project was to assess the effect that these machines were likely to have on service times during the summer period and to evaluate a range of possible strategies for coping with the anticipated increase in demand. Discrete event simulation techniques were employed to build a computer model of the system, which was then used to conduct the necessary experiments.
The main issue desk and the operations associated with it occupy a considerable amount of floor space. There are six counters where customers can check out, renew and return items, collect reserved copies and settle fines. There is also a seventh counter specialising in document supply. Customers are served by librarians, typically two or three at present, who also handle occasional transactions over the phone.
The six new self-service machines are located opposite the desk and can only be used to check out, renew and return items. Customers can also return items though drop boxes located at the entrance to the library.
There are two separate queues - one for the desk and one for the machines. At present, the queue for the machines is usually empty and there are rarely more than two or three people waiting to be served at the desk.
The aim was to keep the model as simple and efficient as possible without compromising the validity of the results.
Four experimental factors were identified:
The number of counters at the issue desk was not included as an experimental factor since adding additional counters would be a comparatively expensive and disruptive exercise.
Seven response variables were selected:
Based on the chosen inputs and outputs, a small number of core components were identified:
Phone transactions were also initially included on the basis that they can interrupt other transactions and potentially tie up librarians.
The issue desk and self-service machines associated with the short loan collection were not included since they operate independently on a distinct set of loans. Similarly, the document supply counter at the end of the issue desk was excluded because it handles a completely unrelated set of transactions and has its own, usually non-existent, queue.
The drop boxes at the entrance to the library were omitted on the basis that their effect on transaction numbers would already be accounted for in the sampling of inter-arrival times.
The differing nature of individual transactions was deemed very important - a simple renewal or return is likely to take much less time to complete than the collection of a reserved item. Furthermore, since the self-service machines can only be used for certain transactions, the route taken by a customer through the system is determined, in part, by the nature of their transaction.
The time taken to complete each transaction is unlikely to be directly proportional to the number of items involved. Therefore, instead of modelling the number of items involved in each transaction explicitly, it seemed more appropriate to incorporate the associated variability in the sampling of transaction times.
Acceptance of the new machines, and, in particular, the willingness of customers to use them was identified as an important experimental factor. It was decided that the most efficient way to model this was to have two distinct types of customer: the self-service adverse, who always go to the desk, and the indifferent, who join whichever queue is shortest.
Although librarians regularly attend to other tasks around the library, only those based at the issue desk have a direct bearing on the modelling objectives. Furthermore, since librarians regularly step-in for each other, the number manning the desk remains essentially constant. It was therefore unnecessary to model staff breaks and shift patterns.
Machine breakdowns are rare and data describing their frequency and duration is neither obtainable, nor observable. Similarly, although the return boxes placed next to the machines require regular emptying, the process is reasonably quick and usually takes place when the machines are not in use. Both types of stoppage were therefore omitted from the model.
Perhaps the riskiest assumption made was that arrivals occur randomly, independently and at a constant average rate. In reality, a surge of activity could be expected during the last few minutes of each hour, when students leave in large numbers to attend lectures and seminars. Given the importance attached to the arrival rate as an experimental factor, together with the potential for a large discrepancy, it was necessary to reassess the validity of this assumption following the data collection exercise (see section 4.1).
It was also assumed that the time taken to complete a transaction at either the issue desk or the self-service machines is independent of the length of the corresponding queue. This is unlikely to be true in practice - librarians will often process transactions faster when they see a queue building up and customers tend to spend less time at the machines if others are waiting behind them. Nonetheless, accurately modelling this behaviour would not have been easy and omitting it was unlikely to significantly affect the performance of the system.
In real life, customers may abandon a queue if their patience runs out. However, given the considerable hassle involved in returning items to the upper floors, extremely long queuing times would be required for there to be a significant number of customers choosing to do so. Since one of the objectives was to minimise service times, sufficiently long queues were unlikely to build up in the chosen scenarios and so it seemed reasonable to disregard this possibility. Similarly, given the substantial amount of free space available between the desk and machines, it was assumed that there is effectively no constraint on the maximum length of either queue.
Each transaction is composed from five basic actions: check out, renewal, return, reserve collection and fine payment. Treating each of the thirty-one possible combinations individually would have made the model somewhat unwieldy. It was therefore decided that transactions should be categorised into two abstract types: type A for those that can be carried out at either the issue desk or the self-service machines, and type B for those that can only be completed by a librarian at the desk (i.e. those involving a reserve collection or fine payment).
During the early stages of data collection, the volume of phone calls made to the issue desk was much lower than anticipated, to the extent that these calls had little or no effect on service times. It therefore seemed appropriate to simplify the model further by removing them from the system entirely.
Furthermore, a significant number of customers were observed rejoining the queue for the desk after having used the self-service machines. It transpired that over 10% of the transactions attempted at the machines are unsuccessful - sometimes due to damaged barcodes and unrecognised library cards, but also because the machines cannot be used to return items that have been reserved by another user. Given the relatively large proportion of transactions affected, and the considerable amount of time lost as a result, it was important to add this detail to the model.
Diagrams of the conceptual model are given in Error! Reference source not found. .
A substantial amount of empirical data was required for the verification of assumptions, estimation of parameters, fitting of distributions and validation of output. This was collected during the first two weeks of the Easter break and is included in Error! Reference source not found. .
As discussed in section 2.5, there was some uncertainty as to whether or not arrivals occur independently and at a constant average rate. To help identify any trends, a histogram was produced for each hour-long record of arrivals. The first (Figure 1a) exhibits some periodicity whereas the second (Figure 1b) suggests a relatively constant rate of arrival. In the absence of a consistent pattern, the assumption was maintained.
Let A be shorthand for "transaction was of type A", D for "queued for the issue desk" and S for "queued for the self-service machines". From the data collected: , , ,.
Since D and S are mutually exclusive, the proportion of transactions that were of type A is given by: = = = = =.
The proportion of customers with type A transactions that chose to carryout their transaction at the desk was estimated in a similar manner: = = = = =.
Since there was barely ever a queue for the machines, this was assumed to equal the proportion of customers that were self-service adverse.
Of the 167 self-service transactions observed, 22 were unsuccessful, implying a failure rate of 13%.
It was decided that parametric distributions should be used throughout the model since, unlike distributions based exclusively on empirical data, they are easy to adjust and able to produce occasional extreme values.
Since arrivals were assumed to occur randomly, independently and at a constant average rate, they could be modelled using a Poisson distribution. In other words, inter-arrival times could be sampled from a negative exponential distribution. The two lists of observed arrival times were combined to produce a single sample of 248 inter-arrival times. The sample was then imported into StatFit, a distribution fitting package, which recommended a negative exponential distribution with mean 28.
Service times are typically sampled from a triangular, normal or lognormal distribution. In each sample there were a few values that were significantly higher than average. These extreme values represented the occasional transactions that threw up complications. Based on this observation, a lognormal distribution seemed to particularly appropriate.
Estimates for the distribution mean and standard deviation were obtained using StatFit and are presented in Table 1.
A plot of each distribution, together with a histogram of the empirical data used to fit it, can be found in Error! Reference source not found. .
The computer model was developed using Simul8, a visual interactive modelling environment geared specifically towards discrete event business simulation.
Named distributions and global values were used to keep the simulation data separate from the logic. Structuring the model in this way ensured that distributions and constants could be adjusted quickly and easily.
Four labels were assigned to each customer: one for recording the customer 's transaction type, another for their choice of queue, one for the outcome of their transaction and the forth to implement the label based sampling of transaction times at the issue desk.
Complex routing and timing rules were implemented using Visual Logic. A dummy work centre named 'Choose Queue' was required to implement the queue selection routine since Simul8 's work entry points do not support label based routing. Routines relating to the sampling of service times were assigned to storage bins, instead of individual work centres, in order to avoid code duplication.
Simul8 's memo facility was used extensively to describe the role of each component in the model and comments were added to Visual Logic code where appropriate. Some of this documentation is included in Error! Reference source not found. .
Because one of the main experimental factors was the customer arrival rate, the average inter-arrival time remained constant throughout each run. The model was therefore non-terminating, essentially simulating just one period in the day. Appropriate initial conditions would have been very hard to determine, especially since they would have depended on the model inputs. Giving each run a warm start was therefore not an option, and so a suitable warm-up period had to be found.
Simul8 's time check feature was used to record the value of three key response variables at sixty-second intervals. The data obtained from three separate runs was then exported to Excel and plotted. The most valuable plots were of the average time in the system and are given in Error! Reference source not found. . In each case, steady state was reached within thirty minutes and so the warm-up period was set to 1800 seconds.
Steps were taken to verify the model throughout the development cycle. Simul8 's step function was used to follow individual customers through the system, the utilisation of individual work centres was monitored to check that they were all receiving work items, and a number of extreme value tests were carried out. These tests are listed in Table 2.
In addition to validating the conceptual model (see sections 2.7 and 4.1), it was necessary to check that the computer model simulated the real system with sufficiently accuracy.
At an informal level, the simulation was run at reduced speed with Simul8 's animation facilities enabled. The overall behaviour of the model, including the build up and clearing of queues and occasional bursts of high activity, was very similar to that observed in the real system. In particular, there was hardly ever a queue for the self-service machines, and when there was, it was cleared within a few seconds. Similarly, there were rarely more that two or three people waiting to be served at the issue desk and, as in reality, there were occasions where the entire system remained idle for up to two or three minutes.
For a more formal assessment, response variables relating to the time spent by customers in the system were compared against equivalent statistics for the empirical data collected from the real system. As shown in Error! Reference source not found. , there was the averages were in close agreement yet there was an extremely large discrepancy between the maximums. The latter was probably due to the relatively small sample of times taken from the real system rather than a fault in the model - the empirical maximum was taken over nineteen values compared to nearly eight hundred for the simulation maximum.
With up to seven thousand users entering each day, the library is approximately three times busier during the summer term than it is now. Assuming that demand on the issue desk and self-service machines is roughly proportional to the number people using the library, as many as 450 customers could be expected to enter the system each hour during peak times.
Given the large number of scenarios potentially worth simulating, it was necessary to concentrate on just a couple of factors, namely the number of librarians on duty and the number of machines available.
The scenarios chosen are listed in Table 3.
The relationship between the number of replications per trial and the accuracy of results is illustrated in Figure 2. Similar plots were produced for three of the five scenarios. In each case, the desired level of accuracy was achieved with ten or less replications.
In order to minimise the variation between scenarios, the same random number streams were used in each trial.
Results for each scenario are included in Error! Reference source not found. , a summary is provided in Table 4.
The first and fourth rows of Table 4 suggest that the addition of both librarians and self-service machines generally has a positive effect on the performance of the system, which is quite intuitive. The reduction in the average time spent by customers in the system achieved by having five librarians on duty instead of four was particularly striking. This is clear to see from Figure 3. The comparatively long queuing times for the issue desk in scenario 1 are consistent with idea that there were not enough librarians on duty.
Although the figures given in Table 4 are useful for obtaining a feel for the results, in the absence of any significance tests, the statistical validity of any comparisons made is not assured.
According to the Bonferroni inequality, in the case of ten comparisons, individual confidence intervals of 99% are required for an overall significance level of 10%. With this principle in mind, Excel was used to find 99% confidence intervals for the average difference in the average time spent in the system between runs for each pair of trails. The results are given in Table 5.
As expected, putting additional librarians on duty cut the average time spent by customers in the system quite considerably. Again, particularly worthy of note was the improvement between scenarios 1 and 2 corresponding to an increase in the number of librarians from four to five. The difference between scenarios 2 and 3 was less pronounced, but nonetheless significant.
The results also show that adding self-service machines had a somewhat limited effect on the time spent by customers in the system. Indeed, the improvement between scenarios 1 and 4, corresponding to the addition of one self-service machine, was found to be statistically insignificant whereas the effect of adding two self-service machines (scenario 5) was significantly less than that of adding a single librarian (scenario 2).
The validity of the results was somewhat undermined by vague nature of the assumptions made during the estimation of future demand. The library 's Customer Service Manager was contacted and enquiries were made concerning the existence of historical records and future projections for the number of loans issued over the summer. Unfortunately, no such data was available.
Based on the results obtained from the computer model, scenario 2 appeared to represent the optimal trade-off strategy between system performance (service times) and efficiency (librarian utilisation). The results also showed that there were no significant gains to be made from the installation of additional self-service machines.
