This report follows up our recently approved internal development project, ORANGE (Detail can be found in internal report- ORANGE No. 1) As the manager of this project, I proudly present you this concise management report- ORANGE No. 2, which covers the following:
Identify, classify the main project stakeholders and consider how to manage them.
Prepare a statement of aim and objectives with proposals for the evaluation of objectives.
Review the risks associated with this project and recommend appropriate risk management strategies.
Prepare a statement of project implementation strategy.
Recommend a system for planning and control of progress and cost.
Annex that gives a critical appraisal of the concepts and techniques used.
Brief introduction of PRINCE 2 and decide its compatibility or suitability to the project.
This report includes recommendations and is subject to approval.
It is important to define ORANGE aim and objectives at early stage of the project as it helps focus project team on specific goals and everyone concerned know what tasks to be performed in order to achieve the goals. Its importance becomes even more obvious when a customer outsource the work to a different company (this applies to an in-house project) as it gives an idea to the contracting companies what they are bidding, what they are expected to achieve and their commitments would be. Project definition takes place when a customer first conceives the idea of a project2. It is essential that their ideas are filed, understood and accepted by all parties involved in decision making of the project at this early stage. Extra details, i.e. specifications, can be added as projects go on.
Six Weeks To Strategic Excellence, Hodder and Stoughton.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, project definition should be decided by a group of key individuals, such as board of directors, senior management, project manager, work package manager, etc. Therefore, the definition provided in this document should only been seen as a recommendation and by no means should be used to provide the basis for project planning decision making until it has been reviewed, challenged, modified if necessary, understood, accepted by the key individuals concerned.
After thorough understanding of the proposal, I propose the following project aim.
Aim:
To enhance the quality of customer service and maintain a much closer working relationship with high street agents at a reduced cost by restructuring CFS 's operations department through creating 10 multi-purpose geographical teams and increase individual 's flexibility to deal with all types of insurance policy except Life.
Control is a key management process to predict what will happen if present conditions continue and there are no management changes in the project. Suitable changes to comply with the plan can then be made by the project group. To make the right decision, it requires monitoring and evaluation to measure, examine and appraise of how project progresses. Defined project objectives can be used as a measurement of how well the project is progressing towards the set goals. It can be done by deciding how each objective should be evaluated. Table below shows proposed ORANGE objectives and how they can be evaluated.
Project Management, Fourth Edition, Cleland and Ireland.
Stakeholders are those people who have an interest in a project. According to Obeng, 'Project success is and can only be defined by stakeholders'. One way to manage stakeholders is by allowing different level of involvement in the project, depending on the stakeholders' interest and power level. Below is a stakeholders analysis conducted for ORANGE to evaluate different stakeholders interest and influential strength.
The Project Leader 's Secret Handbook- All Change!, Obeng.
The way this analysis is conducted is similar to what Wheeler1 suggests. The scores in the stakeholders analysis will not be further evaluated as the assigned scores are self-explaining. A involvement-strategy can be developed using the result of the analysis.
Project risks focus on future events that could prevent the project from reaching its stated potential and they are usually caused by uncertainty. Managing uncertainty simply means managing risks. FMEA is a very common uncertainty assessment tool, which highlights potential problem areas, the probability of their occurrence, and the level of impact on the project. Full FMEA is completed with the consideration of how to take corrective action. A full FMEA on the uncertainties of the project has been produced and presented below:
The Practice of Project Management, Frigenti and Comninos.
To ensure project to be successful, it is important to manage the risks identified in FMEA analysis. Risks in theory are managed in the way to decrease the possibility of occurrence and their impact on the project 1. Project risk analysis matrix is usually used together with FMEA to assist risks management. A set of risks management solution is proposed as followed:
The Practice of Project Management, Frigenti and Comninos.
Regarding the potential problem with software development, a sharing strategy is recommended according to the risks management matrix. I suggest that we should outsource the IT part of the project to an expert IT company. Research has showed that our IT department may not be advanced and skilful enough to run this project on their own. By negotiate the right contract terms, we also share the risk if issues arise due to the software 's faults.
Risks management matrix suggests the unhappy employees issue is critical and should be either mitigated or shared. I recommend a mitigating approach by introducing a new bonus or/and promotion scheme for outstanding individual members. Their voice should always be heard in any project 's decision. This will divert the attention and staff members will strive to improve in order to be noticed.
The quality of our staff members is our assets and our frontline with our customers. As I propose to allow adequate training and staff members are required to take up exams before they are reallocated into different teams. An experienced mentor can be allocated to each team.
It is certain that in some geographical areas CFS attract more customers and thus different area teams may have different work loads. It is important that resources (work force, budget) should be allocated in the way that the resources allocated depend upon on the work load. I advise that a thorough research should be conducted on the insurance business in areas CFS serve to avoid inappropriate allocation of resources. This will serve as a reference when human resources and budgets allocated to each geographical team.
ORANGE is a project aiming to reduce costs, improve service and efficiency while maintaining the company 's family oriented style. It is aimed that ORANGE will take a year to complete. It would allow sufficient time for project planning, software design and installation, adequate staff training and for CFS employees, customers and high street agents to be prepared and familiar with the change without affecting the general company 's operation. CFS should conduct a pilot phase to keep the risk of the project and staff members, customers concern as low as possible. It is recommended that CFS should outsourcing an assessment sub-project to an outside IT company to evaluate what kind of software, etc is suitable for CFS. Project activities should be carried in a serial-parallel hybrid pattern to make project control more effective. Implementation pattern in the organisation should adopt a simultaneous approach as it is believed it can encourage communication between teams. However, I believe this factor may not be too relevant to ORANGE.
To make the full use of expertise, project will be broken down into smaller work packages and will be headed by experienced or professionals from the respective field. Breakdown of work will follow 'Work Breakdown Structure' manner. As we are hoping to maintain CFS status as a family oriented company, CFS are going to offer as much support as possible to our employees. CFS will encourage and offer over time to employees to take up training programme run by our training section outside office hours to keep the effect at minimum. A special supportive team will also be available to answer any question staff may have during the project implementation. ORANGE should conduct a participative approach to make sure opinions are listened. We will regularly inform the trade unions the project progress. They will not be involved in project planning. However, they should be consulted or even participate in some of the activities, such as encouraging staff to take up paid training outside office hours, monitor and evaluate project 's progress. CFS will conduct a DIY approach in all areas of ORANGE apart from IT as it will be outsourced to a single, turnkey contractor. Through outsourcing the major part of the software development and installation activity, our IT staff members will benefit from learning invaluable skills through working with our contractor and have more spare time to take part in staff training.
We are pleased to announce our project team composed of people from a wide variety of background. This includes the board of directors, senior management, functional managers, the project manager, different work package managers and our contractors at certain stages of the project. Strategic control should be exercised at set key milestones, such as at the end of certain activity. Control will be exercised by the Board of Directors.
Planning is known to some project managers as creating a list or visual display when all project activities have been subjected to estimating, logical sequencing and time analysis. In other words, it means project has to be broken down into activities and their duration has to be estimated. I recommend a detailed precedence network analysis combined should be conducted with a parallel resource allocation approach. Monitoring and evaluation is an essential part of progress control. It determines if the project is proceeding according to plan , if not, how much it is behind/ahead by. These data will then be looked at in review meetings. The purpose of review meetings is to keep a periodic check on the project progress, and to take corrective action, if necessary, through discussion within the project group. The usual control parameters monitored and evaluated are:
The Essentials of Project Management, Second Edition, Gower.
The practice of Project Management, Frigenti and Comninos.
The frequency of review meetings depends upon the nature of the project, duration and complexity. According to Gower, projects of medium to long duration should have regular review meetings monthly. He also suggests that (operational) meetings at junior level can be backed up by infrequent meetings held at management (strategic) level.
I propose that review meetings should be held regularly as suggested by Gower, as well as having few milestones review meetings that set in the middle of significant activities. The reason having extra milestone meetings is that corrective action can be taken immediately in the middle of those significant activities. If having it at the end of the activities or leave it until monthly meetings, issues may become irreversible and 'uncorrectable'. Any project group member can also call a special review meeting if they feel necessary. Strategic review meetings should be attended by members of senior management level in the project group, such as board of directors, etc while operational meetings should include different package managers, contractors, etc. Project plan should be updated regularly to reflect decision made in both strategic and operational level and all project workers should be notified all the key points from the meeting through notification on the staff notice board.
To carry out ORANGE, a budget has to be prepared for the execution stage of the project. Like progress planning, it is good practice to have a financial control. I suggest we should assume cost as the primary parameter in our financial control system as it allows direct comparison between costs incurred and the value of work done in terms of its budget cost, which is known as earned value. Cost should be recognised when a service or product has been received and commitment is generated when the proposal of order, etc has been accepted and given a go-ahead. Because of the nature of the project, overhead cost is not relevant as the project is carried out within the organisation. As far as budget planning is concerned, it should be a complex based budget system as that allows actual performance at the end of each period to be compared with budget and thus more control over the project. However, it is understood a complex system may be proved difficult in certain work package, such as IT, if it is outsourced as suggested. I recommend in that certain work package, a functional work based budget to be used.
Project Management, Richard Wheeler.
Accounting for Non-Accounting Students, Sixth Edition, Dyson.
Project Management, Richard Wheeler.
As far as the project concerned, it is an internal development of business, therefore I propose a fixed budget should be used. Flexible budget is not appropriate as variable cost should not be too much of an issue. Functional budgets for each work package can be prepared by.
Functional budgets can then be added together to forma master budget. The proposed budget should be used as a detailed plan for future action as well as a control system. A budgetary control system can monitor the activities of the project closely. It is done by comparing the actual performance with the budgeted performance. Significant variances should then be investigated in review meetings and correction action may then be taken. It is ideal to plan and control budgets at key milestone, as well as using a fixed time interval. By using complex budgeting system, there are 6 control comparisons to be used such as actual cost to date vs budget to date, earned value to date vs budget earned value to date, commitment to date vs budget commitment to date, total projected cost based on actual cost to date vs total budget, earned value to date vs actual cost, actual cost+ current commitment vs total budget.
It is important that ORANGE planning involves everyone in the project group as it draws commitment and expertise from every individual member. Stakeholders management, definition of the project, implementation strategy, risk management, progress and expenditure planning are issues that have to be considered during the appraisal and preparation phase of the project. Control is an important issue during the implementation phase of the project. It is project manager 's responsibility to monitor and evaluate project progress in terms of actual progress and expenditure. The data is then presented to the group in review meetings. These meetings should be held at different stages and milestones of the project so progress is monitored closely and corrective action can be taken immediately. I believe if practiced successfully, ORANGE will be of great impact to the future of CFS and I, therefore, ask everyone, from the board of directors to general staff members, to commit themselves to changes brought by ORANGE.
FMEA is a good risk management tool in project planning. However, it has a weakness as it is incredibly difficult to put a value for both level of impact and probability to happen. And therefore it may result in a wrong risk management strategy. Risk assessment list may be able to solve the problem. It requires risk assessor ticks which statement in each category most closely describes the project being assessed. The risk scores can then bed added together to produce an overall risk figure. This helps project managers to decide what value to put for level of impact. However, as far as I am concerned, there is still no other tool in probability assessing though it may help managers by looking at relevant statistical data.
Project Management, Field and Keller.
Sharing a risk is no doubt a very good risk management solution. However, it is not always effective. For example, by outsourcing the software development and installation part of the project to a single, turnkey contractor, it does not offer as much protection to CFS as it is supposed to. It is simply due to the fact that the contractor may be held responsible for any damage caused by the software fault and contribute to compensation but they do not share the damage to CFS reputation. As an example, if customers detail got stolen because the software was not secure enough and such burglary caused our customers financial loss, the contractor might be responsible for the compensation but it does not change CFS image as a untrustworthy insurance company to customers.
Project Managers rarely have the chance to select project team members in real projects. The mix of skill therefore may not be complete or lack a particular skill from the usual composition of project teams. Project managers should try exerting their influence in the project team composition process. It can be done by obtaining right of veto but such move may be resented by seniors and should be carefully thought over. To avoid direct conflict with seniors, project managers can define the functions of the group or by drawing up a specification of the right person for the team. However, project managers may have no control over who is chosen at the end but by drawing up a specification and function, it is more likely they will be given the right characters they want.
Project manager should ensure their project teams of the right size and good interpersonal mix. For example, by having a large project group, it may slow down the project progress even though it draws commitment and expertise from a larger group of people and thus costly. Good interpersonal mix is important as individual members will react. Team selection is based on understanding individuals preferred roles to make sure that a balance group is chosen. But as mentioned earlier, this is often not possible as project managers do not often have the right to pick their teams. So if there are roles that are not covered in the project team due to that, project team should be encouraged to address them. According to Belbin, there are 9 different kinds of team members. They are implementer, Co-ordinator, Shaper, Plant, Resource Investigator, Monitor Evaluator, Team Worker, Completer-finished, Specialists.
Project Mangement, Wheeler.
PRINCE, short for 'Projects in Controlled Environments', is a project management methodology for the organisation, management and control of projects. It was initially developed as a UK government standard for IT project management by the CCTA (Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency) in 1989. Its application soon extend beyond the IT boundary and in 1996, it was released as a generic management method and has been increasingly popular within and outside UK.
PRINCE2 is seen as a process based approach to project management and usually consists of the following eight high level processes:
Processes such as Starting up, Initiation and Closing correspond to specific phases in a project while implementation phase in project life cycle is split into 3 processes- Controlling a stage, Managing product delivery and Managing stage boundaries. However, there are 2 processes that extend beyond phases, e.g. The process Directing a project applies for the length of the project, while Planning applies for all phases apart the final one - Closing a project.
To understand how PRINCE 2 works, it is essential to understand each process element.
This is a pre-project process that evaluates if the project would be worthwhile before gong further. Project Mandate identifies the major project stakeholders and the composition of the project group. The project aim, objectives and scope is also decided at this stage and presented in a document called Project Brief. The project approach and risk analysis (implementation strategy) are usually decided and done at this stage, as a blueprint for the initiation stage.
This process defines the power of the Project Board who are responsible for the project. Their function includes authorising appraisals and execution. The project manager keeps the Project Board informed with regular reports and report progress in scheduled review meetings. This process is similar to control, that is carried out through the project life cycle. However, one should notice that PRINCE 2 has a special characteristic feature in terms of the role of the project group. PRINCE 2 is a process management approach by exception, which in other words mean project group only make corrective decisions when the project is predicted to fail achieving targets and goals.
Proper planning of the project is needed to persuade project group to authorise go-ahead to the project. It contains details of how the project would be done, how much the cost would be i.e. budgeting, how to minimise risks, etc. It should also contain basic information on project progress and financial control. All these planning should be presented in a proposal called Project Initiation Document, which must be approved by the Project Board before implementation can start.
Prince 2 encourages breakdown of projects into manageable stages so they can be managed and controlled more easily. Each stage has its own detailed plan and plan for the upcoming stage. Next term cannot be started until the current stage has been completed.
PRINCE2 is a product based system. A product can be a physical thing like a book, or it could be a more intangible thing like a service agreement. In fact everything created by PRINCE2 including documents is a product. Products can be created by anyone including external suppliers. This process creates the products of the project and is where most of its resources are used.
As PRINCE 2 encourage division of project into stages, each stage has to be clearly defined. Each stage has to be completed and approved by the project group before the next stage is started.
Projects implementation must be closed down in a controlled and orderly way, according to PRINCE 2 principles. This involves evaluating the project 's result in post project review. Experience learnt is then recorded. PRINCE 2, unlike traditional project life cycle, does not include the operation part of projects and it takes the end of implementation part as the end of the project.
PRINCE 2 provides a model organisation for undertaking projects. The structure of the organisation is based on a customer and supplier, which is supposed to be suitable for most projects. So it is suitable to apply PRINCE 2 to ORANGE. By applying PRINCE 2, ORANGE can benefit from:
According to the OGC website, PRINCE 2 methods can be easily tailored and scaleable to satisfy our needs.
As project is divided into different manageable processes, it enables efficient control of resources and regular progress monitoring throughout the project.
The various roles and responsibilities for managing a project are fully described and are adaptable to suit the size and complexity of the project.
PRINCE 2 uses management by exception, which allows project manager to do their job without undue interference while enjoying the benefit of obtaining help from higher level managers when things go badly off specification.
PRINCE 2 concentrates on product-based which mean the project plans are focused on delivering results but not planning when the various activities on the project will be done.
PRINCE 2 is a standardised process and therefore is a transferable skill.
Control throughout the project.
Even though I think it is suitable for the project, I need to stress my concern. There have been case studies of companies misuse the methodology and result in project failure. Therefore, if it is ever to be used, I recommend all senior management understand the key principles of PRINCE 2, which has not been covered fully in this report. It has also come to my attention that it needs extensive tailoring in order to suit a specific project or else it will be create too much work for the project.
In my opinion, PRINCE 2 has it pros and cons. It is no doubt suitable for our project but I personally prefer the traditional method as it involves more participation from other experts and thus draws commitments out of them to the project, which may seem more appropriate if CFS wants to maintain its image as a family-oriented insurance company.
