With increasing globalisation and rapid growth in number of multinationals, companies needs to be more aware of the complexities of all the environments involved in foreign countries, such as cultural, social, economic, political, regulatory, legal and technological forces.
Every country has got its own distinct culture which needs to be followed in order for a company to succeed across national borders. Therefore the role of the firms is to adapt their marketing mix (Product, Place, Price, Promotion) to meet local needs.
The aim of this work is to discuss the issues of culture which a firm may encounter, for this purpose, the world 's largest cosmetics company L  Or  al has been chosen. In order to discuss cultural aspects, there is firstly a need to define what a culture is. According to Dibb and Simkin (2005), culture is "the concepts, values and tangible items that make up a particular society. Culture is passed on from generation to generation and is a kind of blueprint for acceptable behaviour in a particular society".
Dibb,S., Simkin,L., PrideW.M., Ferell,O.C. (2005) Marketing Concepts and Strategies. 5th edition, Houghton Mifflin, p.130.
As L'Or  al has a presence in most parts of the world, namely in North America, Latin America, Europe, Middle East, Africa, Asia, South Pacific or Oceania, where perceptions of beauty vary from one country to another, it has to face factors such as ethnicity, different requirements for skincare or different climatic conditions, thus it has to offer a wide range of products and brands to match with personal diversity.
Although all of the L' Or  al brands have a basic image, Softsheen Carson of haircare products are dedicated for people of African descent, Lanc  me and L'Or  al Paris epitomizing European tastes and traditions, Shu Uemura a bearer for Japanese style, Maybelline New York and Redken, trendsetters for the US, or Armani in Italian style, they are still sligtly modifying their marketing mix to get closer to local customers of each continent.
Using the five dimensions of the Cultural framework established by T.C. Melewar, which takes into account the different aspects of social heritage constituting culture, this includes Material culture, Social institutions, Humanity and the Universe, Aesthetics and Language, each aspects is going to be examined with reference to L' Or  al.
This includes Technology and Economics factors. In terms of technology to create goods, L'Or  al has placed research laboratories in America, Europe, and Asia in order to come closer to the local market to reflect on local tastes and conditions. A new Research centre has been opened in Pudong in China, or the L'Or  al Institute for Ethnic Hair and Skin Research in Chicago for research on products for people of African descent.
Looking at Economics, which includes disposable income and expenditure, L'Or  al may face a factor that every country has different average level of income. Thus the same product is priced at a different level according to the local economics factors, e.g. the price of the Elvive shampoo is roughly the same for Europe, but about 3 times more than in India. Also in the Middle East, bottles of shampoos are sold in smaller sizes so that they are affordable by the local customers, whereas in the US the product range includes big value bottles for a whole family.
In terms of advertising in emerging markets, where there are wider disparities between income levels, L'Or  al will need to place their adverts in different places according to the target market, e.g. in Bangkok, the advertising messages placed on the side of the bus adjacent to the footpath (for people with no car) are different to those on the rear of the bus .
Melewar TC and Richard Fletcher, The complexities of communicating to customers in emerging markets, Journal of Communication Management, 6, 9-23 (2001), p. 18.
L' Or  al is operating mostly in developed countries, such as Japan, Korea, France, UK etc., where the market already exists, so there is more competition to face. If it wanted to expand to emerging markets, it needs to consider that there is low infrastructure, however it may be able to gain support from the local government, and also in new emerging markets, there will not be many strong competitors.
There may be different requirements from people at different social classes, e.g. people who require more special luxury brands, or average consumers demanding easy to use, convenient products. To match with individual styles, L' Or  al is offering different levels of products, i.e. Consumer, Professional and Luxury products which differ both in price and availability (professional products are sold only in saloons, and luxuries mostly in department stores only).
In terms of Education, when consumers are generally unfamiliar with products from another country, their perceptions of the country itself may affect their attitude towards and adoption of its products. Most of L'Or  al brands represent a certain country "image", for example or L'Or  al Paris, Lanc  me Paris, Giorgio Armani (Italy), Maybelline New York, the adverts and products themselves are mostly kept exactly at the same theme (more in Aesthetics).
Looking at ethnicity, L'Or  al has to deal with different perceptions of beauty across continents, thus it should make some different arrangement for different demands. The most significant one comes from the desire of people in Asia to have a white skin whereas in the US and Europe to have a tanned skin. Because of this, L'Or  al Paris is distributing in Europe and USA sunless tanning collection Sublime Bronze, whereas in Asia, the White Perfect Peel cr  me has been recently introduced in Japan, the White Perfect L'Or  al Paris make-up and powder in Taiwan or the Blanc expert Neurowhite by Lanc  me in Singapore.
In addition, the True Match series have been launched in 24 skin-true shades to match up with every colour of skin, being sold in North, South and Latin America, Asia, Middle East, and Europe. In addition, brands Softsheen Carson and Mizani have been specially dedicated for people of African descent.
As the basic idea of brands are kept the same, the firms may get closer to the local market by supporting local events, advertising with local stars or sponsoring local sports teams etc., an example from L'Or  al includes Lanc  me signing to be the official make-up sponsor for Singapore Fashion Festival 2006.
Moreover, to prove to the responsiblility to the local and national community, brand Kiehl has made a strong community roots by involvement in charitable endeavors to support the company 's key causes, AIDS, children, education, and the arts.
L'Or  al is using the same aesthetics for every country, without changing colours or themes (e.g. even for China red being the favourite colour), only in few occasions are local celebrities acquired to advertise on the brand, like in China or Korea.
As each brand has got a separate website for every country, they all have the same artistic expressions and styles, this may be due to personalizing each product to a particular country as stated above.
The brand image is embodied by the world 's most glamorous women of different origins, including Beonce Knowles, Fernanda Tavares from Brazil, Aishwarya Rai from India or Ziyi Zhang from China. The Maybelline also injects the New York elements and its "multi-ethnic dream team" are featured in advertising shots taken on the streets of New York.
In terms of Language, except for website and descriptions, all L'Or  al brands are kept at the same names without translation. Every brand has a specific website for each country in their home language.
Overall, the framework is well structured and accounts for all aspects of culture which a firm may encounter, thus it could be applied to many industries. However, as for L'Or  al, few aspects could not be related.
It can be seen that the model works on issues such as Material culture (excluding the system of government), Aesthetics or Language. In terms of Social Institutions, the factor of Social organization was directly relevant here, however Political structures could not be used since it does not affect a cosmetics company in a direct way. Education factor was also not directly related, since regardless of the literacy rate, people still need to use toiletries. However in terms of advertising, L'Or  al advertising messages are mostly conveyed via aural and visual affects, which should be understandable for the majority.
Human and the universe aspect was crucial to this firm, since few products have been modified (self - tanning and whitening cr  mes) to match with local tastes. However Religion, Superstitions do not affect any consumers, except for people who live in isolation, thus it was not discussed further.
According to Onkvisit and Shaw (1990), an advertisement is global only if it is virtually unchanged in all countries except for translation. Thus for L'Or  al, where the concept is kept the same, it can be said that except for the slight cultural adaptations already mentioned, most significantly being the skin products, there were no complete or fierce changes in terms of culture. This is proven by global hair care brands Reken, Matrix, Kerratesse or toiletries brand Garnier being the same across the world regardless of culture.
Companies operate internationally for either growth or survival. In order to succeed they need to adapt at least partially to the culture of the host country where they are operating in.
In the case of L'Or  al, its global activities have been discussed and compared to the T C Melewar 's cultural framework. Despite the company counting on its global reputation and brand image based on a particular country, and most products can be said to remain mostly the same, some changes were still made to meet the requirements of the local culture.
The research centres were also opened in few countries to (among other factors such as labour, taxes etc.) come closer to local market and reflect more on local tastes.
Therefore, as a general rule, "as far as culture is concerned, the message should be sensitive to social issues, as well as to religious mores, ethical behaviours, morality and business customs, practices and hierarchies".
Melewar TC and Richard Fletcher, The complexities of communicating to customers in emerging markets, Journal of Communication Management, 6, 9-23 (2001), p.17.
