Mathematics has long been labelled the 'language of science' and it 's continued involvement in developing sciences helps to keep mathematics fresh and original. Mathematical biology has become a very exciting and fast growing field, which will continue to develop for the foreseeable future. A very large area of mathematical biology is concerned with population growth. It is a topic in this area which we will seek to study in this paper, the topic being Predator-Prey population interaction. This concerns how two species in an environment may interact and coexist when one predates off the other.
In this paper we aim to study the interaction of two species of this type, to look at the growth of the two populations with respect to one another, and to see if an equilibrium where the two coexist can exist. There are many established models which can be used to describe predator prey interaction. In this study we will use the Rosenzweig-MacArthur system (1963). The main reason for this choice of model is the hope of solutions which may include local bifurcations. Another model could be the Lotka-Voltera System, as described by Braun (1978). We do not use this system because it is considered to be structurally unstable. The Freedman-Wolkowicz system (1986) and the Conway-Swollor system (1986) also describe predator prey interaction. However, both these systems exhibit global bifurcations. To use either we would have to study trajectories over a wide expanse of phase space. We do not wish to do this in this paper.
The mathematics we will use to analyse the model will be relatively simple. The main techniques will involve determining and classifying stationary solutions of differential equations, and plotting phase trajectories in the plane. Stationary solutions will be found by determining nullclines and their intersections. The main method of characterising stationary solutions will be by finding the matrix of partial derivatives and calculating its eigenvalues.
Imagine a stretch of desert occupied by two species, coyotes and roadrunners. The coyotes are carnivorous predators, feeding off the roadrunner population. The roadrunners are herbivores, which feed off the plants and greenery of the environment. This is an example of predator prey interaction, one of the most common population interaction models in mathematical biology. Using this model, we can study the growth and survival of the two populations, with respect to one another.
To study only the growth behaviour of our two species, we must make some modelling assumptions. Firstly, we look only at the two species we wish to study, we assume no species other than coyotes prey on the roadrunners and the coyotes have no other source of food. We assume that the roadrunners compete only with their own kind for food, that there are no other species feeding off the same sources as them. Another assumption we make is that both populations are disease free. We also neglect to take seasonal and environmental changes into account. Although these modelling assumptions seem to limit the accuracy of our model, they can be added in once the simpler model is established. (We will not seek to do this in this study.).
Now we have decided which factors to leave out, we can set up the model. As previously stated, we will use the Rosenzweig-MacArthur System (1963). The growth rates of the two species, (let us refer to them as predator and prey), can be modelled by the following two equations.
Equation (1) describes the growth of the prey population, denoted N, with respect to time. The first part of the equation, r 1 (1 - N/K) N, describes the positive growth of the prey population. The constant r 1 is the birth-rate per capita of the prey population. K, also constant, represents the 'limited carrying capacity of the environment'; this is the maximum number of prey that the environment has sufficient living space and food to support. The prey 's mortality rate is represented by the second part of the equation, .
It is obvious here, that the mortality rate of the prey depends not only on the existing number of prey, but also on the number of predators, (and on some constant, a).
Equation (2) describes the population growth rate of the predators, denoted P. The constant r 2 is the mortality rate of the predator population per capita. The second term, , describes the birth-rate of the predator population. This term depends on the existing number of predators, on the amount of food available, i.e. the size of the prey population and also on some constant, b.
Before studying the limiting behaviour of equations (1) and (2), let us take a look at how the two populations would grow in the absence of one another.
In the absence of predation equation (1), which models the growth of the prey population, becomes;.
This differential equation exhibits logistical growth, with stationary points at N = 0 and N = K. The phase plane looks like this:
As we can see from the phase plane above, dN/dt is positive below the line, dN/dt = 0 and negative above it. This gives us an unstable solution at N = 0 and a stable solution at N = K. All trajectories in the plane will tend, in the limit, to the point N = K. Ecologically, in the absence of predation, unless the prey population starts at zero, it will grow until it reaches the limited carrying capacity of the environment. This is a reasonable conclusion, without predators to eat the prey, the population will continue to increase until the environment can no longer sustain it.
NB: If the prey population is at zero it will remain at zero infinitely.
In the absence of prey equation (2), which describes the growth of the predator population, becomes;.
This differential equation is an example of exponential decay, with solution; , where C is simply a constant of integration. This can also be presented as; , where A is now the constant of integration. A diagram of the function is shown below.
From the diagram above it is obvious that in the system P tends to zero. Ecologically this is accurate. In the absence of prey, the predator population has nothing to feed off and will die out.
Let us now study the stability of the whole system we have modelled. The first step here will be to nondimensionalize the two equations. To do this, we first divide equation (1) by r 1K and multiply equation (2) by a/(r 1 2K), to get;.
Let us now group together some of the terms to give us two much simpler equations. Let;.
We are now left with following dimensionless equations: (4).
Although the parameters of the equations are dimensionless, this does not render them meaningless. The dimensionless groupings give relative measures of the effect of dimensional parameters. The parameter u, as defined above, is the ratio of the size of the prey population to the limited carrying capacity of the environment. In size, u is always less than or equal to one. Disreguarding all other factors, u will increase so long as u is strictly less than one, i.e. N is strictly less than K. We have already seen this to be accurate c.f. 2.1.1. Another interesting dimensionless parameter is   .    is the birth-rate of the prey population multiplied by time. It tells us the number of prey to be born up to time t.    is the ratio of the birth-rate of predators to that of prey.    less than one and    greater than one have definite ecological meanings; with the later meaning that predators are reproducing at a faster rate than the prey. In non-dimensionalising the system, we have reduced the number of parameters, while grouping them in an ecologically meaningful way.
Now, we must find the stationary solutions of the system. We do this by finding where the nullclines, zero solutions to the two equations intersect. There will be four nullclines in total, two from each equation. Let du/d   = 0 and we get nullclines;.
Then letting dv/d   = 0 we get; v = 0 (iii) and.
Looking at the intersections of these nullclines we see that there are three stationary points:
NB: With this third fixed point, a bifurcation occurs when   c=  -  . In this case the third fixed point reduces to (1,0), the same as the second fixed point. This type of bifurcation is known as Hopf Bifurcation.
The stability and behaviour of the three stationary points depends on the value of;.
There are three cases to be studied here, and we will endeavour to take each one separately.
In this first case only two fixed points exist, a at (0,0) and b at (1,0). To classify these two stationary points we must look at the matrix of partial derivatives, with respect to u and v, or the Jacobian, of equations (3) and (4). This matrix is shown below, labelled M.
In order to determine the stability of each stationary point, we calculate the eigenvalues of M with the coordinates of that point substituted in. At point a, M looks like this;.
The eigenvalues of M(a) are;   1=1 and   2= -  . We have two real eigenvalues, one positive and the other negative. (   is positive by definition.) This indicates a saddle point. At the point b M takes these values;.
The eigenvalues of M(b) are;   1= -1 and   2= -  +  c/(  -  ). Again these are two real eigenvalues, but now they are both negative. (With   c   -   it is easily deduced that   2 is negative.) This indicates that b. is a stable stationary point. The phase plane of the system is shown below.
As can be seen from the phase plane above, nearly all trajectories in the plane tend to the stable solution b, (1,0). Only trajectories starting on the line u=0 will end up at point a, (0,0).
We can interpret the two stationary points of the system ecologically. The saddle point at a tells us that only when u=0 will the two parameters u and v end up at zero. u=o implies that N=0, by definition and v=0 implies that P=0. So, only when the prey population starts at zero will both populations die out. This we already know from section 2.1.2. The stable point at b tells us that whenever the system starts with the presence of a prey population we end up with u=1 and v=0. u=1 implies that N=K, which is where the prey population has grown to the limited carrying capacity of the environment. With   c   -  , we have that the predator population dies out and the number of prey becomes sufficient to saturate the environment. If we start with a zero prey population, both populations become extinct in our environment.
With these conditions, the system has three fixed points. The first fixed point, a, is the same saddle point as it was in section 2.2.1. We therefore do not need to study this again. b is still a stationary solution, but it is no longer stable. The matrix of partial derivatives M(b), calculated at b is as in section 2.2.1 and the eigenvalues are the same. With the conditions of this case, the value of the second eigenvalue,   2, is positive. The matrix, M(b), has one positive real eigenvalue and one negative real eigenvalues, which imply that b is a saddle point. In this case the third stationary point, c, comes into the system. M(c) is shown below;.
The two eigenvalues of this matrix take the form;.
These two eigenvalues are either real and negative, or complex with non-zero real parts. If the eigenvalues are real and negative, c is a stable fixed point. If they are complex with non-zero real parts then there is a stable spiral at point c. All trajectories, starting away from u=0, will travel to point c.
As can be seen from the diagram above, nearly all the trajectories in the plane tend to point c and stay there. The only trajectories entering point a are the eigenvectors of the stable eigenvalue, -   , these take the form u=0, which is a result we have seen previously. Trajectories can only approach point b if they are vectors corresponding to the stable eigenvalue, -1. These are of the form v=0 and they will reach b; (1,0).
Ecologically, with the conditions of this case, we see a system where both populations can survive. There exists an equilibrium size of both populations where predator and prey can coexist and this is at point c. The values of N and P are lengthy expressions of the original variables that we will not seek to enter here. Point a defines what happens when the environment does not have a prey population, c.f. 2.1.2 and 2.2.1. In the absence of predation the prey population grows until it reaches K. This we have already investigated in section 2.1.1. This situation is shown in point b.
With this condition there are still three fixed points. The first two stationary points, a and b, behave in the exact same way as was shown in section 2.2.2, with the same matrices and eigenvalues. The Jacobian matrix evaluated at c is the same as previously, c.f. 2.2.2. The eigenvalues take the same form as before; it is their value which may change. Firstly, the eigenvalues may take real values, in which case c is an unstable fixed point. Where the eigenvalues are complex with non-zero real parts there exists an unstable spiral. If the eigenvalues are complex with zero real parts then the system exhibits a centre. Overall, the system will have a type of periodic solution known as a limit cycle.
Trajectories tend, in the limit, to a period orbit around the point c. This orbit is relatively stable and, once there, trajectories remain in this orbit. To study this behaviour further, we construct a more detailed image of the limit cycle:
Looking at the diagram above, we can see how the system behaves in the limit cycle around c. Trajectories can only leave c from the two shaded regions. The system, in the limit, orbits c in an anti-clockwise direction. The values of u and v and, therefore, N and P are bounded in the cycle and have definite maxima and minima, as labelled.
Starting at 1, we will travel around the limit cycle detailing the ecological interpretation of the system: At 1, the predator population, P, is at a minimum. With relatively small predation, the prey population, N, grows at an increasing rate. As this occurs, the amount of food available to the predators increases and the population begins to expand. Both populations increase to 2. Here the increased predation is enough to account for the birth-rate of the prey population, which has, therefore, reached its maximum. Beyond 2, the prey population begins to decrease as the predation rate has grown greater than the prey 's birth-rate. There are still more than enough prey for the predators to feed off and so this population continues to increase. With the number of prey decreasing and that of predators increasing the system reaches 3. Now the numbers of prey have dropped and the predator population has grown sufficiently for the predator population to have reached its maximum value. After 3, the predators begin to run out of food and their numbers begin to decrease, although they are still large enough to keep the prey population decreasing. Now both populations decrease until 4. Here, with the predator population in decrease, the predation rate is equal to the birth-rate of prey and the prey population has reached its smallest value. Beyond this, the prey birth-rate is greater than the predation rate and prey population begins to grow again. The predator population will continue to fall until there is sufficiently enough prey for them to feed off. This will not be until the system is back at 1.
In this paper we have studied the interacting growth of a Predator-Prey model. Using the Rosenzweig-MacArthur system (1963) we have investigated how the two populations can coexist. We looked at the general conditions for coexistence and saw that this occurs where   c    -  , we saw a stable solution with only the prey population surviving.
It would be interesting to go through the same problem using a different model, the Freedman-Wolkowicz system (1986) for example. We did not seek to do this in this paper as phase plane analysis would be over a much larger expanse. It would also be of interest to reinsert into the model the variables we took out in our modelling assumptions. A far more accurate model would be constructed this way. The Rosenzweig-MacArthur system, however, gave realistic and interesting solutions, and its choice is justified.
