was referred to secondary care dermatology services by her GP with a year 's history of severe dandruff, itchy scalp and hair loss/alopecia. She was seen initially as an outpatient at a paediatric dermatology clinic on the and attending a follow-up appointment on the . had been experiencing increasing amounts of dandruff over the year prior to presentation at hospital. This appears to be unrelated to hair products, exacerbating or ameliorating factors. Her hair loss has occurred over the same time period and has been quite extensive in quantity. It continues to cause a degree of upset and anxiety prompting the current referral. She has experienced severe itching of her scalp also, which is present both during the day and night. She had been prescribed 'Selsun' shampoo but this offered little benefit. Her mother reported her daughter 's scalp to be scaly but found this difficult to distinguish from dandruff. - seen in dermatology clinic for post-inflammatory pigmentation of the upper chest and wrist. The presenting diagnosis at this time was suspected to be blisters secondary to bullous impetigo.
No diabetes, epilepsy, hypertension, asthma, jaundice, strokes, heart attacks, rheumatoid or osteoarthritis, cervical arthropathy, obstructive sleep apnoea, acromegaly or thyroid disease.
No significant findings to note.
None on presentation takes no other alternative or over the counter medication. none known.
No known significant family history. lives in with her family who originate from Zimbabwe. The family visited Africa in the summer of . is a happy healthy child who has well developed social and academic capabilities. She has many friends at school none of which have similar problems with their scalps or hair loss.
Tinea capitis - a highly contagious dermatophyte infection of scalp hair follicles and surrounding scalp skin. Causative organisms may derive from species in the genera Microsporum and Trichophyton. Occurs in all age groups but is particularly common in children. Preponderance in childhood is thought to be due to alteration in fatty acid constituents of sebum around puberty. Postpubertal sebum contains fungistatic fatty acids.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis - the scalp is the most common site of infection. When mild manifests as diffuse scaling with dandruff-like scaling however is usually only present in infants under 18 months. Extensive scalp involvement. There is in addition commonly positive family history; this is not the case here.
Psoriasis - involvement of the scalp is fairly common, may occasionally be confined totally to the scalp. However, scales tend to heap on top of each other producing a 'lumpy' texture. Psoriasis is however uncommon between the ages of 5-10 years.
Alopecia areata - relatively common disorder. Unlikely however, as typically round or oval area of baldness is seen, this condition is non-scaly. presents with scaling and multiple areas of alopecia.
Alopecia folliculitis.
Atopic dermatitis - scaling with itching is a typical feature however, the scalp is an uncommon affected site.
Trichotillomania - patchy hair loss, underlying scalp is typically normal. However, no hair pulling behaviour had been described. Often transient in childhood, may be an indication of significant psychopathology in adults.
Malnutrition - unlikely, appeared of average height and weight for her age. She demonstrated no additional physical pathology.
On physical examination, tinea capitis produces one or multiple patches of hair loss on an otherwise normal scalp. The scalp is typically scaly, and may be similar in appearance to dandruff. Hair may be broken off just above the surface producing a stubbly feel. Inflammatory variants of tinea capitis may be associated with painful regional lymphadenopathy and pusutle formation. Eruption of itchy papules may occur around the outer helix of the ear commonly coinciding with the introduction of systemic therapy. Occurring as a reactive phenomenon or 'id' response this may easily be mistaken for a drug reaction.
A young girl who appeared fit and well. She was not obviously jaundiced, cannulated or required any respiratory or mobility aids. She was fully conscious, cooperative and talked clearly and freely. She appeared of average height and reasonable weight for her age. had her hair tightly plaited in corn rows.
No positive findings on general examination of the hands, face and mouth. No indication of anaemia e.g. pale palmar creases or palpebral conjunctivae or other major systemic disturbance e.g. jaundice.
No lymphadenopathy - lymphadenopathy may be associated with inflammatory variants.
Apyrexial - absence of current systemic infection.
For the purposes of this portfolio I have chosen to concentrate on a dermatological examination as this patient was clerked in an outpatient setting and this proved to be most appropriate. Clearly, for the sake of completeness, future examination of the abdominal, cardiovascular and respiratory systems would be ideal and this should be carried out at a future date.
No other visible indication of further skin disease e.g. bacterial/fungal infection, eczema, psoriasis, urticaria or skin cancer.
Tinea capitis. Various clinical patterns of tinea capitis may be seen including diffuse scale - widespread scaling with a dandruff-like appearance (as seen here), grey patch (circular patches of alopecia with obvious scaling), black dot (alopecia patches with broken hair stubs), diffuse pustular (lymphadenopathy usually present) and kerion (boggy tumour with pustules). Differentials for the diffuse distribution of scale seen here are:
Tinea capitis is however such a widespread infection in children that it should remain the most likely diagnosis in this case until dismissed by negative mycology on laboratory testing.
Epidemiology: Tinea capitis predominates in preadolescent children and is rarely found in adults. Until recently, its prevalence in the UK has been relatively low, particularly in urban areas however, this is now increasing particularly in children of Afro-Caribbean extraction. was not questioned as to her place of birth but she had visited Africa prior to development of her presenting symptoms. Antropophilic organisms account for dominant pathogens, over 90% of cases currently in the UK and North America are attributable to Trichophyton tonsurans 1. Disease transmission between school children and family members is common and may be exacerbated by processes such as hair plaiting/corn weaving (as seen with ), shaving the scalp and the application of hair oils. Other rarer causative organisms in the UK are Microsporum canis from puppies and kittens and Trichophyton verrucosum from cattle.
Physical-:  's scalp infection has caused extreme itching that has become quite distracting for her on occasions. She is physically fit and well otherwise and has experienced no other associated problems with her health.
Psychological-: Her alopecia has caused a degree of stress and upset as she is of an age where appearance and how she is perceived by her peers becomes important. The psychological impact of constant itching or pruritic should n't be underestimated. It is both distracting and also again something other people notice.
Social-: is popular with her school friends and enjoys an active and full social life. Her scalp infection has had no impact on her relationships with either her family or friends.
Skin scrapings - blunt scalpel used to collect affected hairs, broken-off hair stumps and scalp surface scale. Scrapings are packaged in folded paper. Other methods of harvesting samples such as plucking are less preferable due to the inevitable collection of uninvolved hairs.
Microscopy - positive microscopy i.e. scales and hair were shown to be invaded by spores or hyphae confirmed a diagnosis of tinea capitis. Scalp scales and hair stumps containing the root section are mounted in a potassium hydroxide solution and viewed under the light microscope. Microscopy provides the most rapid means of obtaining a diagnosis.
Culture - Trichophyton soudanense was identified as the causative organism. Medium such as Sabourauds 's is suitable in which to culture scales, hairs or hair stumps obtained. Culture is more sensitive than microscopy but may take up to a month to provide results.
Wood 's light examination - of limited use for most of the current endothrix infections in the UK as they appear negative under Wood 's light. This type of examination is particularly useful for some ectothrix infections such as those caused by M. canis, M. rivalieri and M. audouinii.
We believe that the hair loss your daughter has been experiencing is a result of a scalp infection caused by a type of fungus which we have isolated from the samples of skin and hair that we took from her scalp. The fungus is called Trichophyton Soudanense and is relatively rare in this country. It is far more common in parts of Africa and it is possible you could have picked this up in Zimbabwe when you were there last year. Scalp infections are extremely common amongst children and there is absolutely nothing serious to worry about. We will start here on some treatment both an ointment and a special shampoo, which have been proved to be particularly effective against this type of fungus. Once the treatment is started, her hair loss should n't progress much further but we will follow her up at regular intervals as an outpatient to monitor her progress. This type of scalp infection is commonly transmitted between children so it is advisable that other children at school and TA 's siblings are checked for similar symptoms as they too may require some treatment. Should you have any questions at any point please do n't hesitate to ask.
Terbinafine 125mg OD (body mass 20-40kg) - antifungal used in the management of ringworm infection.
Capasal (Dermal) shampoo - coal tar 1%, coconut oil 1%, salicylic acid 0.5%. Management of scaly scalp disorders including psoriasis, seborrhoeic dermatitis, dandruff and cradle cap. Daily use.
Daktarin ointment - miconazole nitrate 2%, imidazole antifungal used to treat fungal skin infections.
Emulsifying Ointment, BP - to be applied to the scalp to smooth, soothe and hydrate the skin. Indicated for all dry or scaling disorders. will be followed on regular intervals at a paediatric outpatient dermatology clinic to monitor her response to treatment. She should n't require inpatient treatment at any point. Further harvesting of residual scalp scale and hair in the future will aid assessment of treatment efficacy. Manipulation of her treatment regime may be required to optimise treatment efficacy. She is well nourished and hydrated and does not require any supplementation or further treatment interventions at this time.
GP - monitoring and support, prescribing repeat medication.
Dermatologist and associated dermatology nurse team - collection of scrapings, diagnosis, implementation and administration of treatment regime.
School nurse - monitor  's progress once treatment has been established, monitor and limit infection transmission within a school environment.
Regularly moisturise scalp and skin to maintain adequate level of skin hydration.
Cleanse hairbrushes and combs with disinfectant.
Wash bed sheets regularly to avoid risk of spore transmission.
Avoid use of hair oils and regular plaiting of hair.
Advise school as to the appearance of tinea capitis so that surveillance programme can be set up and implemented. should be followed up as an outpatient in a specialised paediatric dermatology clinic to monitor response to treatment, treatment efficacy, emergence of side effects and patient satisfaction. She should be discharged only when a mycological cure has been established i.e. when there is no further mycological evidence of dermatophyte infection on light microscopy rather than simply a clinical cure. Follow-up with repeated scrapings should be performed at the end of the standard treatment period (4 weeks) for children with tinea capitis and subsequently monthly until microscopic evidence of mycological clearance (as above) has been obtained.
Pathogenesis: 3 pathological patterns of infection are demonstrated in tinea capitis, endothrix, ectophrix and favus. Favus gives rise to a pattern of hair loss rarely seen in the UK, it is mostly confined to eastern Europe and Asia. The causative organism is T. schoenleinii. Arthroconidia/spores are characteristically found within the hair shafts in endothrix infections, they do not breach the cuticle. Contrastingly, cuticle damage is seen in ectothrix infections where hyphal fragments and arthroconidia are found outside the hair shaft.
Concerning general treatment of tinea capitis, the aim is to produce both a rapid clinical and mycological cure.
Topical: topical treatment alone has not generally been recommended for the management of tinea capitis 2 as topically applied antifungals are unable to penetrate and become incorporated into hairs. It does however, have a role early on as an adjunct to systemic therapy in reducing the risk of transmission to others. Data has shown transmission of viable spores and thus infectivity can be reduced by use of either selenium sulphide or povidone iodine shampoos twice weekly 3. After a preliminary course of Griseofulvin, continued to use Miconazole nitrate ointment to reduce risk of transmission.
Oral - Griseofulvin: Griseofulvin has both fungistatic and anti-inflammatory properties and acts to inhibit nucleic acid synthesis, stop cell division at metaphase and impair cell wall synthesis in fungi. It is the only licensed treatment in the UK for scalp ringworm with recommended dosage of 10mg/kg per day 4. Duration of therapy is variable and set at between 8-10 weeks; variation is dependent on causative organism. Side effects are experienced in 8-15% and include nausea and skin rashes.
Oral - Terbinafine: Effective against all dermatophytes, the fungicidal action of terbinafine is derived from its action on fungal cell membranes. It has equal efficacy to griseofulvin and is particularly effective in the treatment of tinea capitis due to Trichophyton species as is the case here. Randomised controlled clinical trial evidence has shown if the causative organism is Trichophyton, a treatment period of 2 weeks is recommended. However, 50% of patients included in this trial were successfully treated with terbinafine within a week indicating the likelihood that factors such as patient age, dermatophyte species and extent of disease which will all impact on response to treatment could function as selection criteria when allocating patients to a treatment type and duration in the future 5. Microsporum species are less responsive to both antifungal drugs and terbinafine. It is thought this is due to the ectothrix infection pattern demonstrated by microsporum as opposed to the endothrix pattern associated with trichophyton 6. Antimycotics have decreased accessibility to fungal spores with an ectothrix infection pattern. For microsporum infections, response to treatment is only demonstrated with either a higher dose or a longer duration of treatment e.g. an additional months treatment of terbinafine following an initial 1-2 week course (total  4 weeks). Dosage of 3-6mg/kg per day is recommended. Gastrointestinal complaints and skin rashes are experienced in 5 and 3% respectively.
Itraconazole demonstrates both fungistatic and fungicidal action dependent on the drug concentration present in tissues. Fungistatic action is concerned with disruption of cell permeability caused by depletion of cell membrane ergosterol. To achieve equal efficacy to both griseofulvin and terbinafine in children dosage of 100mg/day for 4 weeks or 5mg/kg per day is required 7. Major disadvantages include numerous side effects such as nausea, abdominal pain, pruritus, urticaria and angioedema. There is little available trial data concerning dosage in children and this is certainly an area, which needs to be addressed in the future. Both Fluconazole and Ketoconazole have been assessed for use in the management of tinea capitis but there is little published data concerning their use. Their use is associated with significant numbers of side effects such as liver damage and thrombocytopenia. Studies have shown Ketoconazole to be inconsistently superior to griseofulvin and the associated risk of hepatotoxicity limits its use in children 8.
Failure to respond to treatment may be multifactorial and is most common with T. tonsurans and Microsporum species. Reasons for treatment failure include reinfection, poor or non-compliance, suboptimal drug absorption and insensitivity of the organism to the drug used. Solutions are to increase the dose of the original drug used or to incorporate an alternative antifungal into the treatment regime.
Tricophyton soudanense is an anthrophilic dermatophyte associated with the fungal scalp infection tinea capitis. It is most common in Central and West Africa and occasionally a causative organism in Europe, South America and the United States. Tinea capitis was a common childhood infection prior to the 1960s. Introduction of oral griseofulvin and increase in awareness and surveillance in schools in the 60s decreased incidence of new cases significantly. Since 1994 however cases have begun to increase again. Tinea capitis is becoming a major public health problem in the UK, Afro-Caribbean children are particularly affected.
Tricophyton tonsurans has adopted the position of predominant causative organism currently in the UK having exceeded the number of cases caused by Microsporum canis. T.tonsurans like T.soudanense is an anthropophilic fungus and causes infection, which can be spread from child to child both within the home and at school. The reason for this change is unclear but spread is thought to be increased by shaving the scalp and hair weaving or plaiting. The concern with a predominance of an anthropophilic fungus is the significant potential for transmission and mass infection. Arrival of new immigrants to the UK carrying dermatophytes endemic to their country such as T.soudanense and Africa is thought to add to the diversity of species found causing infection rather than raising total infection rate 9.
Key public health measures to controlling tinea capitis infection within the community are improving awareness and surveillance of infection within schools and treating emergent infection with a combination of griseofulvin and adjuvant treatments.
Exclusion from school and associated disruption to a child 's education is clearly far from ideal and certainly not recommended in tinea capitis infection. Although there is a significant risk of infection transmission between school-aged children once the appropriate systemic and topical therapy has been initiated a child should return to school. Transmission is also common within families and recommendation from various studies concerns screening family members and other close contacts for both tinea capitis and corporis regardless of the absence/presence of clinical signs 10. Transmission risk and propagation of infection can be lowered further by cleansing all hairbrushes and combs with disinfectant.
