Mr was admitted to the General Hospital on following a collapse at home. Mr was brought into hospital by the paramedics.
Mr presented with a sudden collapse with no associated loss of consciousness. He was found on the floor of his home by his neighbours. Mr was unable to get himself up from the floor due to a weakness in his left arm and leg.
Mr  's collapse was a sudden episode, which had not happened before. The collapse came without warning; Mr awoke feeling weak in his left-side and described feeling his face change and mouth "droop". His neighbours described Mr as "confused and slightly disorientated" when he woke. There had been no headache prior to his collapse or on waking from the collapse. No visual disturbances were reported. Mr had not experienced any chest pain or palpitations. Mr had no associated change in his smell or taste following the collapse. There was no bladder or bowel incontinence. There was no change in Mr  's speech despite his mouth drooping. There was no change in sensation or paraesthesia.
Aspirin - 75mg od - on admission.
No known allergies.
There was no significant family history.
Mr lives with his wife and prior to his collapse was an independent man. Mr has one son. Mr does not smoke and drinks no alcohol. Mr uses 2 sticks to mobilise at home.
Based on the acute symptoms Mr presented with, the differential diagnoses of collapse with one-sided weakness are:
Stroke: Rapid onset of focal neurological signs from an ischaemic infarction or a bleed in part of the brain whereby symptoms last longer than 24 hours.
Transient Ischaemic Attack (TIA): The sudden onset of focal neurological signs due to temporary occlusions of the cerebral circulation whereby symptoms fully resolve within 24 hours.
Physical examination will look for signs of neurological deficits, including upper motor neuron signs of hypertonia, hyperreflexia, babinski reflex, rigidity and lower motor neuron signs of hypotonia, hyporeflexia, loss of power in muscles and muscle fasciculations. Sensation and signs of hemiparesis will also be assessed in the upper and lower limbs.
A cranial nerve examination will be performed assessing each cranial nerve I-XII, with particular attention to any possible visual field defects and assessment of the gag reflex (CNXII) for assessment of a brainstem stroke.
On general examination, Mr was confused but alert. There were no signs of clubbing, cyanosis, lymphadenopathy, jaundice or anaemia. Capillary refill was  2 seconds.
A left facial palsy was noted, with sparing of frontalis, confirming an upper motor neuron lesion i.e. a stroke.
Cranial Nerve Examination unremarkable.
History and examination confirm the initial possible causes of Mr  's presentation. Mr  's neurological signs remained for longer than 24 hours without resolving and therefore favour a diagnosis of stroke over that of a TIA. Neurological assessment indicated a left-sided abnormality. The signs on examination supporting the diagnosis of stroke are the unilateral left-sided facial palsy and the slight weakness of the left upper and lower limbs.
By the , Mr  's left-sided weakness had improved and he was mobilising with 2 sticks. He remained confused but the improvement of his weakness over 6 days indicates that he had a mild stroke. The most likely cause of this stroke is an ischaemic event.
Physical - Physically Mr found it very difficult to mobilise himself when he was first admitted. His left-sided weakness limited his ability to stand, which he cannot do unaided since his collapse. Mr  's left upper limb had also been affected and he is unable to raise his left hand fully preventing him from carrying out day to day tasks. During his stay in hospital Mr  's weakness improved and his regained some of the function in his left side. Mr right-hand side remained intact. With physiotherapy it is hoped that his left-sided weakness will improve further.
Psychological - Mr became progressively more disheartened by his stay in hospital and was struggling to deal with the loss of function in his arms and legs. Mr was a previously independent man and was upset that he was going to have to rely on his wife more at home. Mr and his wife had previously refused a package of care at home feeling that he was not in need of it.
Social - Mr was previously independent at home and managed his tasks of daily living by himself and with the help of his wife. Following his collapse, Mr  's social circumstances may benefit from a care package drawn up for himself and his wife in order to help at home. Mr is medically stable and requires help in improving his left-sided weakness.
Mr  's blood and biochemistry results were all within the normal ranges.
Urine tests - Blood ++, Protein Positive, Nitrates Positive.
Mr  's ECG showed a right bundle branch block and sinus rhythm. This could be a normal variant and is likely to be and is likely to be insignificant without any other cardiac symptoms.
To appropriately reassure Mr I would say: "As you know, you have experienced some weakness in your left hand side and a slight weakness on the left side of your face. The most likely reason for this is because you had a stroke, which has affected the left side of your body. After examining you, we are pleased that you have improved over the 6 days you have been here. We would like to carry out some blood tests and get a CT scan of your head in order for us to assess the damage that has been caused by this stroke. Whilst you are in hospital we will also arrange for you to see the physiotherapist to help you to mobilise again and build up your strength".
To explain the nature of the disease: "There are a number of reasons why people have strokes and as you get older the risks of having them do increase. When your brain has reduced oxygen supply it can cause some ischaemic damage in the brain which manifests itself as the limb weakness and facial problems as you have experienced. Risk factors for having these strokes include high blood pressure, cardiac problems, having had strokes in the past, a high cholesterol level and a family history, we are looking into all of these causes whilst you are in hospital so that we can aim to modify them and reduce your risks of having further strokes. An increase in your blood pressure and cholesterol can cause narrowing of your arteries which leads to reducing the blood and oxygen supply to your brain. It might be possible for your weakness to remain indefinitely but with therapy and help at home we hope that you will regain the use of your weakened limbs".
To describe the management plan: "Whilst you are in hospital we will start you on some medication that will thin your blood and some medication that will help to reduce your cholesterol levels. We will arrange for the physiotherapists, occupational therapists, dieticians and swallowing and language therapists to assess your abilities. We will arrange for you to have a CT scan of your head so that we can see any damage that has been caused by your stroke, although sometimes the scans do not pick up all brain injury. Once we are medically happy with you on the acute stroke unit we will arrange a transfer for you to the rehabilitation unit where you will receive further input from the therapists. We will devise a package of care for you when you are ready to go home that will help yourself and your wife manage once you are discharged".
On admission Mr was prescribed 300mg aspirin for 7 days, to be reduced to 75mg od for life. Mr was started on simvastatin. Mr went into acute urinary retention following admission and was fitted with a suprapubic catheter.
Following admission Mr progressively regained strength in his left side and began to mobilise again with 2 sticks. Mr remained confused whilst in hospital and requires monitoring regularly to check if his confusion gets more severe. In the elderly, confusion is often due to a change in surroundings and unfamiliarity and with Mr  's history of dementia, the in-patient stay at hospital is likely to have exacerbated this. It is important to rule out any systemic infection, as this can manifest as confusion. A UTI is a common cause of confusion in the elderly. Observations need to be continual to assess Mr regaining strength and mobilisation. Assessments of his self-care ability are also paramount to helping him get back his independence. Swallowing assessments are important in order to make sure the Mr is able to eat and drink safely.
Mr was referred to the physiotherapists, occupational therapists, SALT Team and the dieticians and a package of care was drawn up for his discharge. The medical team and the therapists all work together in order to assess Mr  's progression and his care is discussed at a multi-disciplinary meeting. Liaisons are also made between himself, his wife, staff and social workers in order to arrange a care package that gives them enough help at home. It is important that all of these agencies discuss Mr  's progress in an MDT meeting in order to manage Mr maximally. Target setting in the MDT also allows goals to be set for subsequent meetings and are a good way of assessing progress.
Mr should be advised that he is at risk of further strokes/TIAs and to help reduce the chance of another he will be prescribed medication consisting of aspirin, anti-hypertensives and a statin of which he will have to take for the rest of his life. It is important to advise Mr that his compliance with medication will help reduce his risk of further problems.
Mr remained in hospital for over 2 weeks whilst he became medically stable and his package of care was organised for his discharge. Mr  's left-sided weakness gradually improved during his stay in hospital and he was transferred off the Acute Stroke Unit. Mr received input from the physiotherapists, occupational therapist and had a social referral to organise his care package.
Stroke represents the third most common cause of death in the UK and developed countries, accounting for 12% of all UK deaths (1). The incidence increases exponentially with age, rising from about 3 per 10,000 in the third and fourth decades to about 300 per 10,000 in the eighth and ninth. Total prevalence is estimated at 5-8 per 1,000 over the age of 25 years. About 16% of all women and about 8% of all men are likely to die of a stroke (2). The cumulative risk of recurrence of a stroke is high; between a third and half of survivors are likely to experience a second stroke within 5 years (2). Stroke is the third biggest cause of death in the UK and the largest single cause of severe disability. Each year more than 110,000 people in England will suffer from a stroke which costs the NHS over   2.8 billion. The Department of Health recognised the importance of developing better stroke services by including specific milestones, targets and actions in the National Service Framework (NSF) for Older People launched in March 2001. Following on from this, the Government has announced an 18 month work programme to produce a National Strategy to modernise service provision and deliver the newest treatments for stroke. By 2010 the Government aims to reduce the death rate from Stroke, CHD and related diseases in people under 75 by at least 40%.
The clinical features of a patient presenting with a suspected stroke can help indicate the area of the brain that has been affected. In strokes involving an infarction, focal brain damage may reflect the distribution of the affected artery, but sometimes collateral supplies make the diagnosis of the lesion site, based on the clinical features, more difficult. Using the Bamford classification of strokes, infarctions can be divided into four classes: total anterior circulatory (TACI), partial anterior circulatory (PACI), lacunar (LACI) and posterior circulatory (POCI) infarcts (3).
TACIs represent 20% of all strokes and refer to either an embolism or a thrombosis in the anterior circulation of the brain. This comprises of the anterior cerebral artery and the middle cerebral artery that supply the anterior two thirds of the brain. Depending on the exact site of the occlusion, the clinical features vary, but in general terms all of the following criteria must be met in order to classify a stroke as a TACI.
Contralateral Weakness at least two of three body areas must be affected e.g. arm, leg, face +/- sensory defect.
Homonymous Hemianopia.
Higher Cerebral Dysfunction usually dysphasia or dyspraxia.
PACIs represent 35% of all strokes and encompass more restricted cortical infarcts such as occlusions in the braches of the middle cerebral artery rather than the middle cerebral artery itself. If the upper division of the middle cerebral artery is occluded then the patient usually has no visual field defect whereas a patient with an occlusion in the lower division usually has a negligible motor or sensory defect. The same criteria are used as for TACIs and if two out of the three are met then a classification of PACI can be made. A PACI classification can also be made if a motor or sensory deficit is restricted to one limb or to one hand or the face for example. If the patient suffers higher cerebral dysfunction alone then this can also be classified as a PACI.
LACIs represent 20% of all strokes and, as the name suggests, involve the lacunes. These are small fluid-filled cavities less than 1.5 cm in diameter, which are found in the basal ganglia, thalamus, internal capsule, pons and the cerebral and cerebellar white matter. LACIs are the result of infarction secondary to the occlusion of the small penetrating branches of the major intracranial arteries. LACIs are associated with a number of clinical presentations as they tend to affect multiple lacunes.
Pure Motor (commonest):
Complete/incomplete weakness of one side involving the whole of two out of three body areas e.g. arm, leg, face.
Sensory symptoms, dysarthria or dysphagia can also occur.
Due to infarction in the posterior limb of the internal capsule (60% of LACIs).
Pure sensory:
Sensory symptoms and/or signs in the whole of two out of three body areas e.g. arm, leg, face.
Due to infarction in the thalamus (10% of LACIs).
Sensorimotor.
Combination of the above.
Ataxic hemiparesis.
Hemiparesis and ipsilateral cerebellar ataxia.
Due to small infarcts in the basal ganglia and pons (rare).
POCIs represent 25% of strokes and involve an infarction affecting the brainstem, cerebellum or occipital lobes. POCIs have a very variable and complex presentation due to extensive collateral supply. Features include [1]:
There are numerous papers published regarding clinical evidence of medical management in cerebral infarctions particularly on the usage of antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapies. One systematic review in people with ischaemic stroke confirmed by CT scan, found that aspirin taken within 48 hours of stroke onset reduced death or dependency at 6 months and increased the proportion of people making a complete recovery compared with placebo (4). Systematic reviews provided evidence that systemic anticoagulation reduced the risk of symptomatic deep venous thrombosis in people with ischaemic stroke, but increased the risk of intracranial haemorrhage or extracranial haemorrhage (4).
There is also evidence on the prevention of further strokes by reducing risk factors, hypertension especially as this is thought to be the most powerful risk factor. One systematic review and two subsequent large RCTs found that blood pressure lowering treatment reduced stroke and other major vascular events in people with a prior stroke or transient ischaemic attack, whether or not they were hypertensive (4). If the systolic pressure falls by between 6 and 9 mmHg, the chance of having a second stroke drops by about a third. This is also true if the diastolic pressure falls by 2 to 4 mmHg (5, 6). The benefit of lowering blood pressure holds true regardless of age or the presence of hypertension. Therefore, it is beneficial to treat blood pressure in patients who have already suffered a stroke even if it is within the normal range. Evidence suggests that it is safe for the diastolic blood pressure to drop as far as 80 mmHg (7).
Important issues raised in this case include the level of care required when Mr is discharged and how to assess his confusion. It is important to take into account how his confusion may lead to his physical progress being slow because he may be unable to comprehend what he needs to do. His confusion may settle when he is at home again and in his own surroundings. Health care delivery should include advice and help to his wife and family about MR  's care and how they can be involved. Including them in making his care plans helps them to understand the level of care Mr may need and helps to take the pressure off the family to care solely for him.
Acute presentation of unilateral limb weakness.
Short-term management of stroke.
Multidisciplinary approach to rehabilitation following stroke.
