This report details the modelling of experimental data obtained relating to the characteristics of road tyres. The aim being to model data describing both the longitudinal and lateral force characteristics of a road tyre and then to evaluate the linear and non linear models used to analyse the data. .
A mathematical computation tool called MATLAB was used throughout, and to achieve this process. An intuitive program and language developed for complex visualisations and analysis for engineers, mathematicians and physicists; it provides 'core mathematics and advanced graphical tools for data analysis, visualization, and algorithm and application development.'.
The Math Works, Inc..
The experimental data from the was modelled using two models; A linear and a non-linear model, for both the lateral and longitudinal forces was used. These models, detailed in the appendices, were applied to the data and visualisations produced using MATLAB, the resulting plots evaluated against the original plots, and against each other to determine their usefulness and any range for which these models could approximate the initial data.
When the linear models were applied to the data, they appeared to give an accurate representation of the data over a small initial range, up to and including a slip angle of 2.5 degrees and slip ratio equal to 0.03 (giving less than +/- 5% deviation). Above these values, the model ceases to provide a suitable model for the data, and fails to make sensible predictions for the data, as the linear model calculated values of the applied forces progressively deviate from the raw data values for these forces. .
The non-linear models were later applied, which resulted in the forces being more accurately predicted from the model at higher values of slip angle and slip-ratio. A good correlation was observed and accurate predictions were at last able to be drawn, as these models took into account the gradual loss of adhesion at the road-tyre contact patch. The non-linear models were equal in accuracy for early values as the linear models; therefore the linear models serve no purpose excepting only their ease of application, made a minor issue with MATLAB 's powerful engine.
The investigation was to analyse and model the longitudinal and lateral force characteristics of a road tyre using actual physical test data.
MATLAB, an intuitive program and language developed for complex visualisations and analysis for engineers, mathematicians and physicists, was used for this task. The MATLAB programme carries out complex calculations and data analysis. The output is used in turn in the advanced Graphical part of the programme package to provide a visualisation of the results of these calculations. Thus the detailed analysis and visualisation allows conclusions to be drawn for various data inputs and different modelling techniques (such as linear or non linear models) to be evaluated. This ability to carry out rapid and complex computational analysis allows for greatly increased accuracy resulting also in reduced calculation times with the result that less manpower is tied up and costs are reduced.
A linear and a non linear model were designed and MATLAB used to analyse both the longitudinal and lateral force data for each model. Graphs of the outputs were produced (see Tables and Graphs).
The appendices A1 and A2 detailed later contain the theory behind linear regression and illustrate the forces recorded on the tyre.
The theory in Appendix 1 shows how the slip angle and slip ratios are calculated from the tyre velocities.
The theory of linear regression is expounded simply in Appendix 2.
The modelling was carried out using MATLAB and test data of longitudinal and lateral force data on road tyres. Two sets of calculations (one for each model) were carried out.
The initial data contained slip angle readings with corresponding lateral force readings, and slip ratio readings with corresponding longitudinal force readings.
This data is contained in Table#s 1 and 2, and visualisations of these can be found on Graphs 1 and 2.
Graphs 1 and 2 indicate that for low values, the relationship between force and slip angle/ratio appears quite linear. This relationship thus can be described as:
Values for C( Cp were obtained via linear regression, with MATLAB carrying out the calculations based on the theory detailed in Appendix 2.
Table# 3 collates the data obtained where three values of C were used to model the data linearly - 800 Ndeg -1, 1200 Ndeg -1 and the value calculated by linear regression. This data from Table# 3 was visualised as 3 separate plots on Graph 3.
A similar expression can be used to model the longitudinal force data.
MATLAB was again used to calculate the two coefficients C s and C q via the same linear regression. The data collated was plotted in a similar manner for three values of Cs; - 90000 N, 150000 N and the value calculated by linear regression. The data is collated in Table# 4, and plotted on Graph 4.
Whilst this linear expression provides a satisfactory 'guide' at low values, the usefulness of the model for larger values of slip angle and slip-ratio diminishes, so a different model must be used.
The lateral force data can therefore be modelled by the relation where is a sliding factor which accounts for the gradual loss of adhesion at the tyre - road contact patch and Fz is the vertical load on the tyre modelled using a mass of 500 Kg.
The corresponding effect on the adhesion is determined by.
Table# 5 contains values calculated using the new model, and this data is visualised in Graph 5.
Similarly, the longitudinal force data can be modelled by the relation where is a sliding factor which accounts for the gradual loss of adhesion at the tyre - road contact patch, and the corresponding effect on the adhesion level is determined by . remains the vertical load on the tyre, modelled using a mass of 500 Kg. The value for calculated originally for the linear modelling was used, and the data collected in Table# 6, and plotted on Graph 6.
Table#s 1 and 2 contain the physical test data used for the investigation.
Graphs 1 and 2 are visualisations of the raw data.
Table# 3 contains linear model values generated from the lateral force tyre test data for the three different values of C mentioned previously, 800 Ndeg -1, 1200 Ndeg -1 and the value calculated by linear regression.
The values for C and Cp calculated by linear regression with the aid of MATLAB were:
Graph 3 shows the plot of the linear model against the raw data for the different values for C, illustrating to what degree the model correlates with the actual data.
Table# 4 contains values generated using the linear model from the longitudinal tyre test data for the three values of C s mentioned earlier, 90000 N, 150000 N and the value calculated by linear regression.
The values for C s and C q calculated by linear regression with the aid of MATLAB were:
Graph 4 shows the plot of the linear model against the raw data for the different values for C s, illustrating to what degree the model correlates with the actual data.
Table#s 5 and 6 contain values calculated using the non-linear models for both lateral and longitudinal data.
Graphs 5 and 6 are visualisations of the non-linear models on the same plot as the raw data, allowing evaluation of the model as an accurate model for the data.
Graph 1 clearly shows that lateral force, Fy increases approximately linearly with slip angle (), up to about 2.5 degrees. Lateral force then increases at a decreasing rate with a continued steady increase in slip angle.
The slip angle, ,is determined by .
As v y increases, representing the lateral velocity component of v, the value for increases, and therefore as the Graphs illustrate, an increase in slip angle would be accompanied by an increase in lateral force with a corresponding increase in the component of acceleration in this same direction.
Graph 2 plots the relationship between longitudinal force characteristics and slip-ratio (s). An approximate linear relationship is observed till around a 0.03 slip-ratio, and then the rate at which longitudinal force increases for a steady increase in slip-ratio start to decrease.
The slip-ratio, s is given by ,.
If s equals to zero, then and there will be no slipping at all, as the lateral component (vy) is equal to zero. As , then . As r is defined by r = r2 f, then f is the only variable, so as , . Therefore an increased longitudinal force corresponds to a decrease in the rate of rotation of the wheels.
Overall the Graphs show the weaknesses and strengths of the comparative models. Whilst the non-linear model may be more complex it is evident that the range for which the model can provide acceptable results is much greater than that for the simple linear model.
The linear models provide only a very limited idea of the relationship between force on the tyre and slip angle/ratio. Only for very small values can they provide any useful values, as illustrated in Graphs 3 and 4(slip angle () up to about 2.5 degrees, and slip ratio up to 0.03). However non-linear models continue to provide useful predictions for much greater values and so more accurately predict the behaviour of the tyre. Graphs 5 and 6 illustrate this point with the predictive curve correlating much more closely with the data obtained from tests, taking into account the gradual loss of adhesion of the tyre on the road 's surface.
Clearly the linear models fall short of providing any useful prediction to the data, and although the non-linear model does provide a much more acceptable model, accuracy could still be improved. This problem really results from the small amount of data presented in the test results. If more readings had been taken, rather than the eight recorded in Table# one, a more accurate model could be developed. This is a problem in both the longitudinal, and lateral force results, and further experimentation could resolve the problem.
The main conclusions that can be drawn from this investigation relate to the mechanics of a tyre and the relative merits of the simple linear model and the more complex non linear model used to calculate the forces applied on the tyre for the differing slip angles and slip ratios.
This investigation has shown that lateral force increases as slip angle increases. The relationship is fairly linear for small slip angles, until about 2.5 degrees, then the rate at which lateral force increases, decreases with a steady increase in the slip angle.The lateral force can be linked to the lateral velocity of the tyre, and the resulting acceleration of the tyre in that direction as adhesion gradually decreases.
The investigation has also shows longitudinal force increases as slip-ratio increases. As with the relationship between lateral force and slip angle, a near linear relationship occurs for small values of slip-ratio and then the rate at which longitudinal force increases decreases, for steady increases in slip-ratio. The increase in longitudinal force corresponds to decreases in the frequency of rotation of the tyre. This is reasonable since a decrease in rotation requires an increased braking force to oppose the rotation.
The non-linear models have been shown to be more useful, as they provide greater accuracy over a wider range of slip angle and slip-ratio readings than the simple linear models. With no benefit for using the linear models over lower values either, they become defunct as MATLAB 's computational power makes complex analysis instantaneous.
