The human skin provides an essential barrier to the environment, preventing the transport of substances to and from the human body. In order to extract blood for the purpose of sampling and diagnosis, the skin 's natural barrier must be overcome. As a relatively painless alternative to hypodermic injections, microneedle arrays have been fabricated using microstereolithography (MSL) techniques, which may be capable of penetrating the skin and increasing its permeability. This is expected to facilitate the extraction of blood and allow efficient transfer of drugs across the skin.
In this study, a number of needle designs were fabricated from a biocompatible photopolymer, with a variety of needle geometries. Using finite element simulations, and experimental techniques, the performance of each design was determined by modelling the force required to fracture the microneedles. Experimental data estimated a range of failure forces from 0.205 - 0.292 N and these forces were shown to depend primarily on the radius of the needle tip.
By fabricating the microneedle arrays using a single photon STL process, this study provides an economical means of producing microneedle arrays for the process of blood extraction and/or drug delivery.
Blood sampling is a vital medical procedure, and is used for many different purposes, from assessing liver and kidney function, to controlling substances such as blood glucose and hormones. Traditional methods used to sample blood and deliver drugs to the human body can be inefficient and often painful. The use of hypodermic needles is a common choice however this procedure can cause significant pain to the patient and in many cases, is not acceptable when the rate of drug release needs to be accurately controlled.
There are many safety concerns associated with the use of hypodermic needles, with needle injuries accounting for 16% of reported incidents by NHS staff, totalling approximately 100,000 injuries per year 33. As a result of these concerns, alternative technologies have been investigated. The transdermal patch is a popular alternative, as it not only allows a steady delivery of drugs at most sites of the human skin, but overcomes many of the pain issues associated with intravenous injections 27, and is inherently safe. However, the tough outer layer of the skin (the Stratum Corneum) provides a highly effective barrier against most compounds and as a result, the transdermal patch method is limited to the transport of small, soluble molecules.
With the introduction of microstereolithography in 1993, three dimensional structures can be fabricated with micron scale geometry 34. In the past, a number of microneedle designs have been proposed, using a variety of materials such as metals, silicon and polymers 13, 2, 5, 8. Although silicon is able to produce highly accurate microneedles, it is not only expensive but also brittle. Metal microneedles however, provide much greater strength and previous results have shown that skin permeability increased by a factor of four, with the application of solid metal microneedles 2.
The development of polymer microneedles has been shown to provide a more cost-effective means of production and due to its inherent biocompatibility with the skin; is a viable alternative to metal and silicon 13.
In previous studies, microneedle arrays were produced using techniques most commonly associated with integrated circuit fabrication and MEMS (micro-electro mechanical systems) devices, such as deep reactive ion etching 12, and LIGA (lithography, electroplating and moulding)3, 14. Although many microneedles have been produced using these methods, the techniques used give very little control over the geometry of the designs, as the design form is driven by the manufacturing processes used.
In this study, microstereolithography (MSL) techniques have been used to produce arrays of micro-needles, which have been fabricated to puncture the Stratum Corneum and hence, substantially increase its permeability. This should allow the efficient transport of blood and/or drugs across the skin, with the minimal amount of pain to the patient. This aim of this project is to produce a number of microneedle arrays, using a single rapid prototyping process based on photopolymerisation. This enables the rapid and relatively cost effective fabrication of a variety of microneedle designs directly from 3D CAD data. In addition, the performance of each microneedle design is tested using a combination of computer simulations and load cells, to determine the optimal design parameters, and to assess the ability of each design to pierce the human skin.
The purpose behind the microneedle is for the painless sampling of blood or for drug delivery.
Interest in the area began in the early 1990s and since then, significant research has been performed to enable the concept to be realised. Many issues have been addressed, with the majority of research focussed on the fabrication methods and material choice, with less emphasis on the design form and shape of the microneedles.
L. Lin, A. P. Pisano, R. S. Muller, "Silicon processed microneedles", Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Solid-state sensors and actuators (Transducers '93), pp.237-240, 1993.
The Georgia Tech institute has undertaken research into both hollow and solid microneedles, in a variety of materials such as glass, silicon and biodegradable polymers 2, 9, 10. Metal microneedles were produced through electro-deposition onto laser drilled moulds, and glass microneedles were produced by a glass-drawing method. The fabrication of silicon microneedles however, was inspired by the microelectronics industry, utilising Silicon micromachining techniques. The microneedles which were formed, have typical lengths varying from 1-1000   m, and were shown to increase the skins permeability to particles up to 50 nm in radius. By altering the different stages of the fabrication process and etching chemistry allowed the geometry of the silicon needles to be changed. By casting the silicon needles into moulds, other materials such as polymers and metals were produced, by metal electro-deposition, or by polymer injection moulding.
D.V. McAllister, P.M Wang, S.P. Davis, J Park, P.J Canatella, M.G Allen, M.R. Prausnitz, "Microfabricated needles for transdermal delivery of macromolecules and nanoparticles: Fabrication methods and transport studies", PNAS, vol.100, no.24, pp.13755-13760, 2003.
Another fabrication method was proposed in a publication by the department of mechanical engineering, at the Korea advanced institute of science and technology. This publication highlights the inability of silicon-based etching techniques at producing long needle shanks, and proposes a fabrication method using deep x-ray exposure. This method involves first producing a column array, by exposing PMMA (polymethylmet-acrylate) to vertical x-ray lithography, followed by a second, inclined exposure which produces a triangular pyramid array. The shape of the needle and the tip geometry is varied by altering the second exposure angle, with the mask and substrate. The publication indicates that a number of designs have been produced using the inclined x-ray exposure method, with varying shank length, hole diameter and needle base (see table 1).
S.J. Moon, S.S. Lee, "A novel fabrication method of a microneedle array using inclined deep x-ray exposure", J. Micromech. Microeng. 15, pp.903-911, 2005.
As a novel alternative to conventional materials, members of the Ritsumeikan University along with the Hirosaki university school of medicine in Japan, proposed the development of microneedles fabricated from sugar, which could be used as a transdermal drug delivery system. The paper describes a similar etching technique as shown by the Georgia Tech institute, which was used to produce needles varying from 200  m to 2mm in length. The difference however, is that the paper proposes that the drug to be delivered is mixed with powdered maltose, and is cast into the microneedle mould. Upon insertion, the needle would be snapped, and left in the epidermis/dermis, where it could dissolve, and as a result, deliver the drug which is contained. The experiments performed indicate that the system was a viable means of drug delivery.
T. Miyano, Y. Tobinaga, T. Kanno, Y. Matsuzaki, H. Takeda, M. Wakui, K. Hanada, "Sugar microneedles as transdermic drug delivery system", Biomedical Microdevices, 7:3, pp.185-188, 2005.
Further publications indicate a similar combination of deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) and micromachining as a fabrication method, where the designs are controlled by the degree of under etching, and the position of photolithographic masks. (See ref 2, 8-11) Table 2 indicates the typical properties of these microneedles :( see ref,, ).
B. Stoeber, D. Liepmann, "Arrays of hollow out-of-plane microneedles for drug delivery", Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol.14, no.3, pp.472-479, 2005.
E.V. Mukerjee, S.D. Collins, R.R. Isseroff, R.L. Smith, "Microneedle array for transdermal biological fluid extraction and in situ analysis", Sensors and Actuators, A 114, pp.267-275, 2004.
A. Rodriguez, D. Molinero, E. Valera, T. Trifonov, L.F. Marsal, J. Pallares, R. Alcubilla, "Fabrication of silicon oxide microneedles from macroporous silicon", Sensors and Actuators, B 109, pp.135-140, 2005.
H. J. G. E. Gardeniers, R. Luttge, et.al, "Silicon micromachined hollow microneedles for transdermal liquid transfer", J. Microelectromech. Syst. , vol.12, no.6, pp.855-862, 2003.
P. Griss, G. Stemme, "Side-opened out-of-plane microneedles for microfluidic transdermal liquid transfer", J. Microelectromech. Syst., Vol.12, no.3, pp.296-301, 2003.
B. Stoeber, D. Liepmann, "Fluid injection through out-of-plane microneedles", Proceedings of the 1st annual International IEEE-EMBS Special Topic Conference on Microtechnologies in Medicine and Biology, Lyon, France, pp.224-228, 2000.
K. Chun, G. Hashiguchi, H. Toshiyoshi, H. Fujita, "Fabrication of array of hollow microcapillaries used for injection of genetic materials into animal/plant cells", Jpn. J. Apply. Phys pt.2, vol.38, no.3A, pp.L279-L281, 1999.
The problem with these fabrication methods, namely deep reactive ion etching, micromachining, and deep x-ray exposure is although the methods produce highly accurate microneedles, with extremely sharp tip geometry, the design of the microneedle array is only controlled by the different stages in the fabrication. For instance, the inclined deep x-ray exposure method 2 can produce slender or thick designs by changing the exposure angle of the x-rays (See Figure 1 2):
Similarly, the publication by Georgia Tech 1 demonstrates that the cylindrical master moulds are produced with bevelled tips by controlling the etching stage of the fabrication process, thus providing the required geometry. As a result, these fabrication methods allow very little control over the shape and form of the microneedle design, as changes in the design are driven by the different stages in the process. In terms of material selection, the fabrication of micro-moulds demonstrated in ref 1, allows deposition of Ti/Cu to produce metal microneedles, or the melting of polyglycolic acid to produce polymer microneedles. Thus, the use of reactive ion etching to produce micro-moulds allows a greater compatibility with different materials, and so strong designs can be obtained with desirable material properties. The use of inclined deep x-ray exposure however, does not offer this advantage since the material is fixed by the fabrication method.
The production of silicon microneedles is very popular in the literature (see 1,4,5,6, ) as its use is inspired by the field of micro-electronics. However, silicon is not a proven bio-compatible material, which if broken off during insertion could cause harm. This could include allergic reactions to the silicon, irritation, and possibly infection. This concern was addressed in ref.5 which indicates that although the silicon is not biocompatible, it oxidises quickly in air, producing glass which is non-toxic. However, insertion tests indicated mild itching and redness in the skin after repeated insertion of a silicon microneedle array. The use of biodegradable polymer microneedles has been implemented by Georgia Tech, which involved using previously demonstrated methods to produce moulds, from which biodegradable polymer microneedles can be formed. The publication indicates that the use of biodegradable polymers to produce the microneedles, were strong enough to pierce the skin without breaking. The paper also indicates that a broken needle left in the skin would safely degrade and disappear, without causing harm.
S. Henry, D.V. McAllister, M.G. Allen, M.R. Prausnitz, "Microfabricated microneedles : a novel approach to transdermal drug delivery", Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, vol.87, no.8, pp.922-925, 1998.
J. Park, M.G. Allen, M.R. Prausnitz, "Biodegradable polymer microneedles: Fabrication, mechanics and transdermal drug delivery", Journal of Controlled Release, 104, pp.51-66, 2005.
The research performed by the Ritsumeikan University 4 was also focussed primarily on the issue of biocompatibility and by moulding microneedles using maltose, they were able to produce fully bio-degradable microneedles.
In order to determine the strengths/weaknesses of a particular microneedle array, the designs are tested in the publications by a number of different methods. For instance, ref.6 provides confirmation of skin puncture, by applying the microneedle to the author 's skin and subsequently applying a dye to the location. By using an in vivo microscope, it was determined if the dye had penetrated the outer layer of the skin. Results showed that the dye was able to pass through the outer layer of the skin, after microneedle arrays were applied to the skin surface. This approach is also adopted in ref.13, in which the authors used hydrophobic dyes to determine if the skin permeability had been increased. The difference in this study however, is that the authors used heat stripped epidermis from human cadavers, and placed the epidermis on tissue paper to provide support. The disadvantage with this method is that the use of tissue paper as a support may not be adequate to simulate the actual support of the skin. An actual skin puncture test as shown in ref.8 is far more accurate, in terms of needle insertion mechanics.
In ref.2, the authors tested the ability of the microneedles to deliver transdermal drugs. This was achieved by microinjecting insulin to diabetic rats, and subsequently monitoring the blood glucose level. This study confirmed the ability of hollow microneedles to deliver insulin to diabetic rats, by inserting a single needle for 30 minutes, and applying an insulin flow pressure of 10psi. The results showed that 32  l of fluid could be flowed, however the skin in rats is expected to be one-third thinner than human skin 13, and so the results may be inaccurate. The study also fails to address the amount of pain which may be experienced from needle insertion.
The authors of ref.3 demonstrated needle insertion using a more crude method, which involved using human subjects, and by piercing the skin with extra-long microneedle samples, designed to penetrate deep enough to rupture blood vessels. This enabled the authors to determine if penetration had indeed occurred, since the pressure in the vessels of the epidermis forced blood to the surface. This study allowed the authors to perform tests at different locations on the bodies of two subjects, where skin thickness varies. The microneedle array used in the insertion tests were 900   m in height with 270   m bases, and 750   m spacing. In both cases, the test subjects were able to confirm that the insertion was painless.
The use of finite element modelling in assessing microneedle mechanics is rare in the literature, although a study by Georgia Tech does makes reference to the use of finite element modelling to determine needle fracture forces. Each design has a force applied iteratively until the sum of stress (Von Mises) reaches the strength value of the material. Although this method does not require additional test equipment, it is believed that the simulation underestimates the fracture force. Although the force results are smaller than would normally be observed, this method still provides meaningful results as the forces can be considered to include a safety margin.
S.P. Davis, B.J. Landis, Z.H. Adams, M.G. Allen, M.R. Prausnitz, "Insertion of microneedles into skin: measurement and prediction of insertion force and needle fracture force", Journal of Biomechanics, 37, pp.1155-1163, 2004.
The use of the finite element method at modelling the needle insertion force has not been demonstrated in any of the recent publications, although models of the human skin have been investigated to some extent 15-16. For instance, members of Philips research laboratory and Eindhoven University of Technology defined the skin as behaving as a non-homogenous, anisotropic, non-linear material. By using a Mooney-Rivlin material model to characterise the non-linear stress strain relationship, the paper demonstrates an ability to simulate the behaviour of the skin when indented. In another publication by a French faculty of medicine, the authors attempt to determine the mechanical properties of the skin, by using a suction method. However, this study assumes the skin as an isotropic elastic membrane, as opposed to the Philips research laboratory study 15 of a multi-layered non-isotropic material. In ref.16, the Young 's modulus of the skin is found to be 129+/- 88 kPa. However, the young 's modulus calculated in other studies varies greatly, for example another suction cup experiment estimated the young 's modulus to be 5.1 MPa. This variation in Young 's modulus is observed in many experiments, and the ranges of typical values are summarised in table 3:
F.M. Hendriks, D. Brokken, C.W.J. Oomens, F.P.T. Baaijens, J.B.A.M. Horsten, "Mechanical properties of different layers of human skin", MATE, pp.N/A.
S. Diridollou, F. Gens, L. Vaillant, D. Black, J.M. Lagarde, Y. Gall, M. Berson, "In vivo model of the mechanical properties of human skin under suction", Skin Research and Technology, 6, pp.214-211, 2000.
L. Pedersen, B. Hansen, G.B.E. Jemec, "Mechanical properties of the skin: A comparison between two suction cup methods", Skin Research and Technology, 9, pp.111-115, 2003.
Grahame R, Holt PJL, "The influence of ageing on the in vivo elasticity of human skin", Gerontologia, vol.15, pp.121-139, 1969.
Sanders R, "Torsional elasticity of human skin in vivo", Pflugers Arch, vol.342, pp.255-260, 1973.
Alexander H, Cook T.H, "Variations with age in the mechanical properties of human skin in vivo", Kennedi RM, ed. Bedsore. Biomechanics, pp.109-118, 1976.
Agache P, Monneur C et.al, "Mechanical properties and Young 's modulus of human skin in vivo", Arch Dermatol Res, vol.269, pp.221-232, 1980.
Escoffier C, "Age related mechanical properties of human skin: an in vivo study", J. Invest Dermatol, vol.93, pp.353-357, 1989.
Barel AO, Lambrecht R, Clarys P, "Mechanical function of the skin: state of the art", Skin bioengineering techniques and applications in dermatology and cosmetology, Curr Probl Dermatol, chap.26, pp.69-83, 1998.
Panisset F "Le stratum corneum: sa place dans la fonction mecanique de la peau humaine in vivo", MD thesis, Franche-Comte University, Besancon, France, 1992.
The observed variations are primarily due to the large variation in skin composition, which may suggest that a non-isotropic model would provide a more consistent representation of the human skin.
As well as providing research concerned with the skin 's mechanical properties, some publications provide experiments to determine the puncture mechanics of the skin. For example, a publication by the department of chemical engineering at the university of California used high speed jets to pierce skin samples taken from the human abdomen, and from the skin of pigs. As well as indicating that the stress-strain curve for the skin is non-linear, the experiment determined that the critical stress for failure varied from 0.46 to 5.8 MPa. This range coincides with the value given by another study performed by members of the University of Calgary, which indicated the pressure required to pierce human skin as 3.183 MPa. By combining this puncture stress with a finite element model of the human skin, a computational skin puncture test can be performed, which could indicate that microneedles will puncture the skin, when this stress value is achieved.
J. Baxter, S. Mitragotri, "Jet-induced skin puncture and its impact on needle-free jet injections: Experimental studies and a predictive model", Journal of Controlled Release, 106, pp.361-373, 2005.
P. Aggarwal, C.R. Johnson, "Geometrical effects in mechanical characterising of microneedle for biomedical applications", Sensors and Actuators, B 102, pp.226-234, 2004.
To conclude, there has been a large amount of research performed on the subject of microneedles, and a large number of designs have been successfully fabricated. In nearly all of the previous studies, silicon micromachining and deep reactive ion etching techniques have been employed to produce the arrays. Although successful, these methods require multi-step processing and clean room facilities which makes the process expensive, and time intensive. The machining techniques used give very little control over the design and geometry of the microneedles. The geometric shapes of microneedles will play a significant part in determining the overall strength and performance, and the choice of needle shape are restricted by these processes. Silicon and metal microneedles have been shown to provide high strength structures, but issues with biocompatibility tend to suggest that polymer microneedles may provide a cleaner and safer alternative.
Hadgraft, J., Guy, R.H., Eds. Transdermal Drug Delivery: Developmental Issues and Research Initiatives; Marcel Dekker: New York, 1989.
The microneedle arrays were designed using the SolidWorks CAD package. A total of six designs were modelled, and are shown below in figure 2:
The designs shown in figure 2 were chosen to offer a range of structure, to enable an optimal design to be established. These designs were modelled with a variety of geometry, namely:
The typical range of microneedle specification is shown below in table 4, along with some values taken from previous research. The chosen microneedle geometry coincides with the specifications from previous studies:
There are a number of design parameters which can be controlled in order to influence the failure force, and hence the performance of the microneedle array. The tip radius, and bore diameter were altered using the SolidWorks CAD package, as these parameters were believed to have the greatest influence on the fracture force. This assumption is coherent with previous studies on needle mechanics 14. Separate SolidWorks files were generated for each of the above designs, each with varying tip radius and bore diameter. Using the integrated Finite Element package within SolidWorks (COSMOSworks), these array models were subjected to an incremental force at the tip, until the stress reached the materials ultimate strength. At this point, needle failure was assumed. Figure 4 shows the pre-processing conditions which each model was placed under:
Each design was subjected to the same simulation and by analysing the performance of each, the effect of tip radius and bore diameter on the fracture forces were established.
In order to determine the effect of tip radius and bore on needle failure force, the six basic designs (fig.2) were subjected to an iterative force using the finite element package, COSMOSworks. By modelling each of the designs with a variety of tip radius and bore diameter, their effect on the failure force of the needle array was simulated. The material chosen for the simulation is a typical photopolymer with material strength, 4.78E+007 N/m 2. Tables 5-10 show the failure forces (Newtons per needle) for each of the six designs, as a result of the simulations.
The tables show that for each of the six designs which were modelled, the cylindrical design showed the greatest failure force, followed by the conical design, the stepped cone, and the inverted trumpet. Failure forces were shown to vary from 1.4N to 0.03N depending on the geometry of each design. The tables also show that the Tip radius had the greatest influence on the failure force of the microneedles, and as the tip radius varied from 15 - 60  m, the failure force increased by as much as 22 times in the case of the conical design. In terms of the effect of the needle bore, this was shown to have no real significance on the needle failure force, except in the asymmetric designs, such as the asymmetric pyramid, in which the presence of the bore caused a sudden drop in needle failure force for a microneedle with a 60  m tip. This observation is coherent with previous studies on microneedle mechanics (ref.14) in which statistical analysis showed that needle failure force depended primarily on tip radius. The effect of the tip radius and bore diameter on failure force is better observed graphically, and is shown below in graphs 1-6:
The graphical representation shows an approximately linear relationship of needle failure force, with respect to tip radius. The graphical data also shows the effect of the bore on each of the designs. The symmetric designs (cone, inverted trumpet, pyramid) showed that the bore had no significant effect on the failure force, where as the asymmetric designs (asymmetric pyramid, elliptical) were affected far more by the presence of the bore. In this study, the results suggest that a greater tip radius is the optimal choice for microneedles, in terms of fracture force. However, in order to minimise the insertion force, the tip radius should be kept small. Since the EnvisionTec Perfactory machine is limited to a resolution of 30  m, a 45  m tip radius was elected as the optimal choice, since it does not exceed the limitations of the fabrication process, and should provide adequate strength. The results suggest that the Elliptical design offers the greatest strength, however it is expected that the large area at the tip would make insertion difficult, therefore the optimal designs were chosen from the remaining 5. The inverted trumpet and stepped cone designs offer excellent performance at smaller tip radiuses and as a result, were elected for fabrication and testing.
EnvisionTec Perfactory Mini - Technical Data -.
As well as assessing the performance of the microneedle array designs with respect to the force at which they will fail, an analysis was performed in order to model the interaction of the microneedle array with the human skin. Due to the elastic nature of the skin, the application of a microneedle to the surface causes the skin to distort around the tip before failure occurs and hence, this effect should be taken into account. In order to assess whether or not the chosen microneedle designs would penetrate the skin, a finite element simulation was performed using a non-linear skin model, which expresses Mooney-Rivlin behaviour. The non-linear model used is similar to previous studies on non-linear skin modelling (see ref.15), and was obtained by inputting the material properties of the human skin into the COSMOSworks material database. The thickness of the skin was based on the dimensions given in ref.15. Using SolidWorks, an assembly was set up with each of the chosen microneedle array designs placed in the same plane as the skin model. A reduced size array of only several needles is used due to restricted computer memory. The typical arrangement is shown below in figure 5:
Mooney-Rivlin Material Model - Definition -.
A non-linear finite element study was performed, by restraining the base of the skin and controlling the displacement of the array. A contact set was defined, which models the interaction between the needle tip and the skin surface, in order to calculate the stress. By auto-stepping the displacement in 10ms intervals, the level of stress was monitored. Once the maximum stress in the skin model reached the experimental value found in ref.26 (3.183MPa), skin penetration was assumed to have occurred. The elected optimal design was tested using this method in order to model the interaction with the skin, and judge the ability to puncture the skin.
The optimal design was modelled using COSMOS, to assess the interaction of the microneedles with a model of the human skin. The inverted trumpet design was chosen for the study (see fig. 2f) and the results of which are shown below in figure 6:
Figure 6 shows the stress distribution in the skin and the needle tips as a result of the simulation. The results show that the stress in the top layer of the skin reached approximately 3.8 MPa, while the needle stress was shown to be approximately 24 MPa. Previous research on the failure stress of the skin suggested that skin failure would occur at 3.183 MPa 26 and as the above results demonstrate, this value has been reached. The microneedle array was modelled as a Perfactory resin with ultimate strength of 47.8 MPa 31. The results indicate that the needle stress did not reach this critical value which suggests that the microneedle array may be strong enough to penetrate the human skin, however due to the highly non-linear behaviour of the skin, a definitive conclusion cannot be made without actual skin testing.
By modelling six chosen microneedle designs using the COSMOSworks software package, the performance of each microneedle design was established by evaluating the failure force of each model. The results indicate that the strength of the microneedle design depends primarily on the outer tip radius, and that the presence of a hole only has a significant affect on the strength of asymmetric designs. This observation is consistent with previous studies on microneedle mechanics, (see ref.14) where a statistical analysis was used to conclude that the failure force of a microneedle only significantly affected by the outer tip radius. The use of finite element techniques provides a useful alternative to actual testing, since results can be obtained before any building takes place, and this greatly reduces the costing involved in the project. However, the finite element method calculates the stresses on a point by point basis, and not as a perfect continuum, therefore the analysis also underestimates the failure force of the microneedle models. Although this error can be reduced by refining the finite element mesh, the technique is often limited by the high demand on computer memory. Similarly, the simulations performed, were based on reduced size arrays, of only several microneedles, since an actual sized array would far exceed the available computer memory. However, an actual sized array is expected to show similar behaviour and thus the reduced size model is considered to be satisfactory. Although there are some errors associated with the finite element modelling, the analysis does provide valuable comparison between the effects of changing design parameters such as tip radius and bore diameter. The results of the skin modelling provide some indication of the stress distribution in the top layer of the skin, and suggest that needle insertion may be possible. However, due to the non-linear behaviour of the human skin, the finite element analysis may not be able to provide accurate results, which suggest that the ability of the microneedles to pierce the skin could only be assessed precisely by an actual insertion test.
The observations made during the study allowed an informed choice to be made as to what would be the most desirable parameters to include in the final models. However, although a smaller tip radius would certainly reduce the necessary force to break the skin, the choice of geometry would also be limited by the fabrication process.
Microneedle arrays were created using a microstereolithography technique, employing photopolymerised resins. An EnvisionTec Perfactory system (Mini SXGA Multi Lens) was used to fabricate the microneedle array designs, and this process is illustrated below in figure 7:
Perfactory Process Description -.
The fabrication process can be controlled by altering a number of parameters in the above process. For instance, the layer thickness can be controlled to give greater accuracy at the expense of build time, and the speed at which the resin tray is tilted (peeling speed) can be reduced to protect fragile components, and maintain the structural integrity.
There were a number of resins available for use with the EnvisionTec machine, namely Y8, R5/R11 and E-Shell 100. The material properties of these resins along with a two other methylacrylates are show below in table 11:
Material Properties Data Sheets -.
E-Shell 100 -.
Y8 -.
R5 -.
E-Shell 100 and R11 were chosen for fabricating the microneedle arrays, due to their high strength and stiffness. As shown above, the E-Shell 100 is the optimal material which is compatible with the fabrication process, as it has a Young 's Modulus of 2360MPa, which is almost three times as stiff as Y8. In addition, material data indicated that E-Shell 100 was bio-compatible with the human skin in terms of both skin irritation and skin sensitivity.
EnvisionTec Material Properties Data Sheet - E-Shell 100 - 33 Hazards Publications Ltd, Report on Needle Stick Injuries, pp.4-5 34 Microsensors, MEMS and Smart Devices, Gardner. J, Karadan. V, Awadelkarim. O, "microstereolithography", pp.179 35 Schneeberger Linear Technology -.
In order to optimise the prototyping process, microneedle arrays were fabricated with a variety of needle geometries and process parameters such as resin peeling speed and layer thickness, in order to determine the limitations of the Perfactory machine. A number of experimental arrays were modelled using the SolidWorks CAD software. Test builds were first fabricated with heights ranging from 200-1200  m, in order to determine the smallest needle height which is achievable. This was performed using 2 layer thicknesses (25   m and 50   m), and 2 peeling speeds (1000   m/s and 500   m/s), in order to discover the effect of each parameter on the build accuracy. After selecting the optimal needle height and layer thickness, a test array was fabricated with needle spacing varying from 500-800  m. This helped to enable the constraints which the process places on the array density. Each test build was then scanned by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), in order to visualise the result of each test build.
Initially, microneedle arrays were produced with heights ranging from 200-1200  m. These models were produced with default process parameters (a peeling speed of 1000  m/s and 50  m layer thickness). The SEM photographs of the first test build are shown below in figure 8:
Figure 8 shows a complete failure in the first build attempt, when the needles were fabricated using a layer thickness of 50  m, and a peeling speed of 1000  m/s. The photographs clearly show areas of polymer which have been cured by the prototyping process however the structure of the needles is virtually non-existent. The mode of failure also shows a number of craters which have been left behind, as a result of the peeling process. The speed at which the peeling process occurred is believed to be responsible for the failure, as it may be stripping the fragile tip from the base of the needle. The build failure was also largely attributed to the layer thickness, since the layer thickness is large with respect to the needle heights. To explore this possibility, the same test build was repeated using a layer thickness of 25  m. The results of the second build are shown below in figure 9:
In figure 9, the photographs show the results of decreasing the layer thickness to 25  m. As is clearly visible, the structure of the needles became far more defined. Although the needles remain incomplete, the effect of reducing the layer thickness is clearly beneficial to the accuracy of the design. In order to ascertain the effect of peeling speed on the build accuracy, a third test build was fabricated with heights ranging from 200-1200  m, with a slower peeling speed of 500  m/s. The results of the third build attempt are shown below in figures 10 and 11:
Figures 10 and 11 demonstrate a much more successful build, as a result of the slower peeling speed. Figure 10 indicates that microneedles were able to be fabricated at a range of heights and needle spacing from 1200  m - 400  m. Figure 11 shows a close up view of some of the microneedles. Images (a) and (b) represent a 400  m tall needle, where as images (c) and (d) represent a 200  m tall needle. The results show that there is a clear limitation in the height of microneedles which can be achieved, with some of the quality of the build beginning to degrade in images (c) and (d). As a result, the arrays which are produced for testing should be no smaller than 400  m tall. In terms of the optimal design, the inverted trumpet and stepped cone showed excellent build accuracy across the range of needle heights, with very little deformation apparent from the SEM photographs. In order to provide greater accuracy during the build, the results from figures 8-11 confirm that the layer thickness should be minimised, along with the peeling speed. The results also show that the minimum needle height is restricted to 400  m by the fabrication process. After optimising the process parameters for building microneedle arrays, a final test build was performed using a layer thickness of 25  m and a peeling speed of 500  m/s. All of the needles were 400  m tall, and were fabricated with a spacing of 750  m. The results of the final build are shown below in figures 12 and 13:
By producing a number of test builds, the fabrication process was optimised by experimenting with a number of layer thicknesses, needle spacing, and resin peeling speeds. The results indicated that the peeling speed should be minimised, as the first observations (figure.8) suggest that the peeling process is stripping the needle structures from the base. By reducing the peeling speed, the structural integrity of the models was greatly improved. The optimisation process also indicated that the height of the microneedles was limited to 400  m, as the smaller models showed structural defects. The 400  m tall microneedles which were successfully fabricated, correspond with the heights of microneedles produced in previous studies (see table.2) in which needle heights varied from 30-500  m. The results of the machine optimisation indicate that the process parameters have a great affect on the build, in terms of minimising structural defects, and producing accurate models. For instance, the extent at which the final product conforms to the shape of the initial design depends on the layer thickness which is used. The accuracy of the build could have been improved by reducing the layer thickness further; however this may exceed the limits of the EnvisionTec machine, and would greatly increase the build time. Reports on the thickness of the skin show that the outer layer of the skin (the stratum corneum) is only 40  m thick, where as the epidermis is approx. 130  m thick 15. Therefore a 400  m microneedle would easily penetrate deep enough for the extraction of blood and/or the delivery of drugs.
In order to quantify the performance of the microneedle arrays, the optimal designs (inverted trumpet, stepped cone) were tested, using two different methods. The microneedle arrays produced for testing were fabricated using R11 resin (see table 11). Both methods of testing aim to assess the performance of each design based on the failure force, and the first of these tests was based on a finite element analysis.
A CAD model of each microneedle array was produced, and using COSMOS, each array was subjected to an axial force at the needle tip. Once the maximum stress in the needle tip reached the strength of the resin, failure was assumed. The arrangement of the array prior to simulation is shown below in figure 14:
To compare the performance of the chosen microneedle designs, each array was tested to failure by a simulated axial load. Failure was assumed to have occurred once the maximum stress in the structure reached the materials maximum strength. The results of the simulations for both the inverted trumpet and stepped cone designs are shown below in figure 15, 16 and table 12:
The stress distribution plots for each design are very similar, with both showing maximum stress near to the peak of the needle, with stress levels reducing towards the base. The maximum force levels for each design are shown below in table 12:
Table 12 indicates the per needle failure force for each of the two optimal designs. The failure forces which are observed are very similar, with the stepped cone design proving to be only marginally stronger than the inverted trumpet design, with a failure force of 0.212 N. As was discovered earlier in section 3.3, the radius of the tip has the greatest affect on the strength of a design, and since the tip geometry was identical in both cases, this is responsible for the similarity shown. By increasing the applied force beyond the maximum level, COSMOS can be used to demonstrate the typical failure mode for each of the designs. Figures 17 and 18 indicate the deformed shape of each design as a result of an excessive load:
Figures 17 and 18 indicate that at an excessive load (10X the material strength) the failure mode for both designs was similar, with both figures demonstrating the tip deforming into the base. Due to the ductile nature of the photopolymer used in the fabrication process, this type of failure was expected, making needle breakages uncommon.
As an alternative to the finite element method, and as a means of comparing the simulated data, a spring loaded test rig was assembled and used to apply an axial force to the microneedle arrays which were fabricated. The test rig is shown below in figure 19:
Figure 19 shows the arrangement of the force test rig used to assess the performance of the fabricated samples. Each test sample was placed into the sample site (1), and the displacement of the Schneeberger table (3) was controlled by the attached screw thread (2). As the spring load compresses, it applies a force to the microneedle test sample. The spring was calibrated to provide a force of 2.27 N/mm. The degree at which the spring was compressed was monitored by the TESA sensor (5) and by recording the numerical displacement output (6), the force on the structure was calculated, by multiplying the displacement by the spring stiffness (2.27 N/mm). The point of failure of the microneedle samples were determined by inspection of the needle tips, using an optical microscope (7). The failure force was measured as the force required to significantly deform the microneedles. 14 microneedle array samples were fabricated using R11 Resin (see table.11), with the same design specifications as used for the finite element testing. The test specifications are shown below in table 13:
The performance of the fabricated microneedles were determined by testing the arrays using the spring loaded test rig shown in figure 19. The needle tips were monitored under an increasing load, until deformation occurred. 14 samples were tested, and the average failure force for each design was determined. The results of the tests are shown below in table 14:
The results in table 14 indicate a similar average failure force in both designs, with the inverted trumpet design showing a slightly greater average failure force of 0.263 N. This observation is dissimilar to the simulated results shown in table 12, which indicate that the stepped cone design offers the greatest strength. The failure forces observed during the spring loaded tests are at a higher level than was observed in the simulations. This observation was expected since the finite element analysis calculates stresses on a point-by-point basis, and as a result, the inaccuracy leads to underestimated failure forces produced by the simulations. The results in table 14 also show considerable variation between different samples. This observation is shown below in a graphical representation of the results:
The graphical representation of the results in graph 7 and 8, show the comparison between the measured values of the failure force, and the simulated failure forces. The results also show that the measured values, obtained using the spring loaded test rig, have considerable deviation from the average value (shown in blue). The reason for the large diversity is due to inaccuracies in the force test rig. Since the microscope was mounted above the sample, only the first outer row of needles were visible. This meant that the full array of needles could not be examined for failure. Observation of the test samples after testing indicated that some needles in the array failed more catastrophically than others. This was due to the spring load providing an uneven load across the array, causing some of the variation in results shown above in graph 7 and 8. The majority of needles observed during the test underwent a crushing mode of failure, which is consistent with the deformed shape simulated in figures 17 and 18. However, some of the needles in the array exhibited a bowing failure at the tip, caused by an imperfect axial load being applied by the spring loaded test rig.
The microneedle arrays which were produced for testing embody all the optimal variables which have been investigated through the finite element simulations and the test builds. The stepped cone and inverted trumpet (figure 2.d and 2.f) were chosen as the optimal designs based on the results of the machine optimisation and modelling studies. To enable a comparison between the two designs, each was tested to discover the failure force, when an axial force is applied at the needle tip. This was performed using both COSMOSworks, and a spring loaded test mechanism (see fig. 19). The CAD model was restrained at the base, and an iterative force was applied at the needle tip. By monitoring the calculated stresses, needle failure was assumed to have occurred when the maximum stress reached the maximum strength of the material (R11 Resin). The results of the simulation enabled a comparison to be made between the two designs, and showed the stepped cone to offer the greatest strength. However, there is some uncertainty with the simulations, since they do not take into account buckling as a mode of failure, and this suggests that needle failure may have occurred at a smaller force than was predicted. However, the studies on microneedle mechanics (ref.14) concluded that buckling should only occur when the wall thickness was less than 2  m. Since the microneedles which were tested had a much greater wall thickness, it is safe to assume that buckling would not occur. In contrast, the spring loaded test results produced a greater average failure force, than was predicted by the finite element simulations. These simulations calculate stresses on a point by point basis, by modelling the structure as a number of connected elements. Since the analysis does not treat the structure as a continuum, the results produce underestimated failure forces, as was shown by the results. Despite this, the finite element analysis has shown to provide an economical means of testing, and the results may be useful as a means of predicting a safe working load.
Graph 7 and 8 indicate considerable variation between the different samples used in the spring loaded tests. There is some error associated with the method, primarily due to the way in which failure was assumed. Microneedle failure was judged by observing the tips of the needles as the force was applied. However, the entire array could not be examined for failure, as only the first row of needles were visible by the microscope. Observation of the samples after the tests indicated that 2 modes of failure were occurring. In most cases, the microneedles exhibited a crushing mode, similar to the simulated deformation shown above in figures 17 and 18. However, some of the samples showed that the microneedles were bowing at the tip, caused by an uneven load during testing. Although the uneven load produces inaccuracies in the results, it does provide an indication of how the arrays could perform, if they were used commercially. Since microneedle breakages did not occur in the tests, they would be safe in the environment, and would minimise the risk of injury. In both types of test, the results have shown that the performance of one design is similar with respect to the other, and no significant data suggests one design as the optimal choice. Despite the designs being considerably different in form, the tip radius of each remained constant, which suggests that this factor has the greatest influence of the strength of a design. This is consistent with previous studies on microneedle mechanics (ref.14), which has shown that the tip radius is the primary factor in determining the strength.
This study demonstrates that microneedle arrays can be fabricated using a single STL process, to produce a variety of microneedle designs directly from 3D CAD data. A finite element analysis was performed to determine the optimal design parameters. The strength of a design was found to depend primarily on the radius of the needle tip, and the presence of a bore was found to only marginally lower the failure force. The finite element analysis was also applied to model the interaction between the microneedle arrays and a human skin model. Results have shown that the polymer microneedle arrays may be able to penetrate the skin before failing, however due to the non-linear nature of the human skin, a precise assessment could not be made without an actual skin insertion test. By optimising the parameters of the fabrication process, microneedle arrays were able to be produced efficiently, with a variety of geometry and features. These microneedle arrays were tested by both computer simulation, and by a spring loaded test rig. The failure forces observed varied from 0.205-0.263 N. Due to the ductile nature of the polymer used in fabrication, needle breakages were found to be uncommon indicating that the microneedles are safe, and would carry minimal risk of injury.
The study which has been presented has provided a means of addressing the problems with conventional blood sampling. This was achieved by applying a novel fabrication process to produce arrays of needles, with micron scale geometry. Due to practical nature of the project, there are a number of expenses involved. The following table provides a breakdown of the costing associated with the project:
