Five experiments were carried out to investigate the properties and uses of ultrasound waves in solids. Longitudinal waves were passed through two metal blocks to determine their longitudinal moduli, M, and Poisson 's ratios,    . For the aluminium block, M was (101  1)GPa, and     was 0.33. For the mild steel block, M was (264.5  3.1)GPa and     was 0.24. The echoes of longitudinal waves were also used to detect and size defects in an aluminium block, which proved successful as four defects were found. Shear waves were then produced from reflected longitudinal waves and were measured to have a velocity of (3500  400)ms -1, just fitting the expected value of 3100ms -1. Their angle of reflection and velocity were then tested against a version of Snell 's Law, which proved inconclusive. Longitudinal waves were totally internally reflected to produce surface waves, the velocity of which was measured to be 2860ms -1, matching the theoretical value within experimental error. The wavelength of a surface wave is proportional to energy, which is related to the depth of the wave, so by passing the waves through a slot of varying depths, its wavelength was found, with a value of (0.98  .05)mm.
Sound with a frequency greater than 20kHz is known as ultrasound. This experiment investigated the properties and some uses of the three types of ultrasound waves that travel in solids: longitudinal waves, shear waves and Rayleigh waves (see fig.1).
Physics, Alonso and Finn, Addison-Wesley 1992.
In this experiment, the wave pulses are produced by transducers, whose mechanical vibrations (causing the ultrasound) are made by the Piezoelectric effect. More about this effect, regarding transducers, can be found in reference 2. Liquid couplant coupled the ultrasound from the transducers into the solid samples. Although all three types of waves travel through solids, only longitudinal waves can travel through liquids. Therefore longitudinal pulses are the only ones that were generated by transducers in this experiment.
Ultrasound Physics and Instrumentation, Hedrick, Hykes and Starchman, Mosby 1995.
A longitudinal pulse can be converted into shear waves can be produced by means of reflection and refraction, as figure 2 shows.
As Rayleigh waves only travel on the surface of a solid, they are also known as Surface Acoustic Waves, or SAWs. They are produced by setting    i in figure 2 at the critical angle for total internal reflection for either the reflected shear or longitudinal wave, giving an angle of reflection of 90 o, leading to a surface wave.
SAWs travel with a retrograde elliptical motion (fig. 1), and have exponentially decreasing energy as they get further from the surface (fig. 3).
This investigation comprises five experiments, each with specific aims.
Bulk ultrasound waves can be used to determine properties of solids. Consider this equation for Young 's Modulus: (1).
The density of material is easy to measure, so if a longitudinal wave were passed through a material, its Young 's modulus can be calculated. Notice however that equation 1 is only effective for a 1D object, so for this experiment, where 3D solids were used, the equation gives the longitudinal modulus, M, instead of E.
Poisson 's ratio,    , is another property that can be calculated. Poisson 's ratio is defined to be "the ratio of the contraction strain normal to the applied load divided by the extension strain in the direction of the applied load"iii and is given by equation 2. Due to the    sign in (2) it is important to know that     is positive for all materials that get thinner when stretched.
Poisson 's ratio website (2).
This can be solved by using M from the previous part of the experiment and the theoretical value of E.
The second part of the experiment investigated the conversion of longitudinal waves into shear waves (fig. 2) by testing their properties against two given equations.
Firstly, an equation was given linking the distance the pulse has travelled as a longitudinal wave, dl; the distance the pulse has travelled as a shear wave, ds; the time taken, ts, for the shear wave to travel it 's distance; the velocity of the longitudinal wave, vl; and the velocity of the shear wave, vs: (3).
The second equation is an arrangement of Snell 's Law: (4).
Where    2 is the angle of reflection of the shear wave and    i is the angle of incidence of the longitudinal wave.
Equation 3 can be used to calculate vs and if the value is correct and a shear wave has been located, equation 4 should apply.
The third aim was to use  'sonar' properties of longitudinal ultrasound to detect, locate and size defects within an aluminium block. Detection can be achieved quite simply by knowing the velocity of a wave and the time it takes for the wave to reach the defect.
Once a SAW has been generated (see 1.1.2) their velocity, cr, can be calculated by making time and distance measurements.
Theoretical value of cr is given by: (5).
Finally, by measuring the energy of the wave at different depths in a block, an estimate of the wavelength of the SAW can be found (see 1.1.2). If this situation is inverted, it can be seen that knowing the wavelength of a Rayleigh wave is therefore very useful in finding surface cracks and their depth.
The following section goes into more depth on how the aims of this experiment were achieved.
In each part of the experiment, an ultrasound signal generator was connected to a PC oscilloscope (so the signal could be seen) and a transducer. For many of the experiments an additional 'receiver' transducer was connected to another channel of the oscilloscope, which picked up the pulse once it had travelled through the sample. The transducers and the samples were assembled as shown in figure 5.
The delay-time facility on the oscilloscope enables the time between wave transmission and reflection to be determined. The pulse was set at slowest rate so that the subsequent transmitted pulse was n't shown on the oscilloscope before the first reflection. All time errors in this investigation are due to the pulse having multiple peaks (fig. 6). Also, the errors were based on the accuracy to which it was possible to read from the oscilloscope so try to and minimise the error the timebase was set to the smallest readable value.
All distances measured in the experiment were generally measured using vernier scale callipers as these are more accurate than a ruler. All distance errors were based on the callipers' accuracy, unless otherwise stated. In graphs, the errors for the gradients were all calculated in 'Origin'.
Throughout the experiments the velocity = displacement/time relationship was used if velocities, lengths or depths needed to be found.
Two types of transducers were used (but never together in one experiment): 5MHz longitudinal wave transducers and wedge transducers. The former were cylindrical, with a circular base juxtaposed with the sample. The latter were as shown in figure 7.
The time for   , 1... 4   pulses to travel was noted from the oscilloscope readings. Repeat readings were also taken and then averaged to try and smooth out any anomalies. The length of these pulses (multiples of the block length) was measured to enable the velocity of the pulse, vl, to be calculated. The metal samples were also weighed, using digital scales, and measured so that their density could be calculated and thus the longitudinal moduli and then the Poisson 's ratios could be obtained.
The graphs shows vl, to be (6173  11)ms -1through aluminium and (5814  34)ms -1 through mild steel.
The actual value of vl (aluminium) should be 6400ms -1 so the gradient of figure 8(a) should be steeper. Since the time measurements all seemed quite accurate, increasing by sensibly even amounts, then the problem must lie in the distance measurement. A possible reason for this is that the thickness of the liquid couplant was n't taken into account, so the distances should all be slightly greater, which would give a steeper graph.
Fundamentals of Ultrasonics, Blitz.
The actual value of vl( steel) should be 5500-6000ms -1v, therefore the value obtained experimentally was within the expected range.
The density of the aluminium was calculated to be (2643  10)kgm -3 and the density of the mild steel to be (7824  10)kgm -3.
Substituting these values into equation (1) (adapted for M) gives: (Errors based on a square root of the sum of the squares of the fractional errors formula).
Theoretically, M aluminium=110.3GPa vi and M steel=278.6GPa vi. Both values are larger than the experimental ones, which should be expected from the fact that vl for aluminium is too low and vl for mild steel could be too low. Also, it shows that the above errors have been underestimated.
The theoretical value for Young 's modulus is 70.3GPa vi for aluminium and 211.9GPa vi for mild steel. Putting this and the experimental value for M into equation 2 gives.
Due to the small errors in M, these both have negligible errors, despite them not quite matching their theoretical values of 0.345 vi for aluminium and 0.291 vi for mild steel.
The longitudinal wave hits the metal-air interface at    i = 45 o then a shear wave is reflected at angle    2. In this case, a distance was measured by means other than vernier callipers as distance dl was measured using trigonometry. Sin   2 was also measured using trigonometry by using distance ds and the height.
Both the reflected longitudinal and the reflected shear waves were detected, but were far enough apart to be distinguishable. All the waves are actually divergent beams, so it was important to ensure that the peak of the shear wave had been located.
Referring back to equation 3, on insertion of the measured values of dl and ds, the observed value of ts and the known value of vl iv the velocity of the reflected shear wave turned out to be.
Error was calculated using standard error formulae.
The actual value for vs for aluminium is 3100ms -1 so the experimental value was just accurate within error.
Testing equation 4, sin   2 was found to equal 0.21. Looking at the right hand side of the equation, substituting in 3500ms -1 for v s and known values of sin45 and vl gives 0.39.
The fact that the two sides are not equal might well be due to vs being too big.
This experiment could be improved by using the oscilloscope to test if some of the longitudinal wave was picked up as well, and repeating readings at different points to find if the equation does hold at any point.
In this experiment the 6dB drop-technique method was used:
Ultrasonic Methods of NDT, Blitz and Simpson.
The 5MHz transducer is moved around the block until a defect is found (the amplitude of the pulse will increase). Once found, the transducer can find the centres (where the amplitude is at a maximum) and edges (the point at which the amplitude of the ultrasound pulse has decreased by 6dB, equivalent to one half of the maximum). By moving the transducer across the whole of the block all of the defects can be found.
The plotted points for the defects, as seen in figure 12, were measured from one edge of the block to the middle of the transducer. Finding the centre of a defect proved tricky as the amplitude at a point would fluctuate from one frame to the next, so an estimation of maximum/ half amplitude had to be made, resulting in a larger than usual distance error.
When calculating the depth, the theoretical value for vl for aluminium iv was used with the observed times.
All of the defects were small in relation to the size of the transducer, leading to an important error, shown in the following diagrams:
A better method would be the 20dB drop technique (reference v gives more information).
To find the critical angle of a Rayleigh wave in mild steel the following arrangements of Snell 's Law were used: (6) (7).
Values used:
From Tables of Physical and Chemical Constants, Kaye and Laby.
To produce surface waves    l and    s must = 90 o    i is set to 63 o, which is fairly close to    i for the shear wave so this will be the one to turn into a Rayleigh wave.
The graph shows that the experimental value of v is (2860  60)ms -1.
The theoretical value for a Rayleigh wave (by using equation 5 and the above values for the v2 (l) and v2 (s)) works out as 2900ms -1. Therefore the experimental result is correct within experimental error.
It might be useful to see if using a combination of materials where the critical angles of the samples match exactly would give an even better result.
The depth at each point could be measured by knowing the gradient of the slot and the distance the transducers were along the block.Four amplitude measurements were made for each depth. The average value of the amplitude was then taken, with its corresponding error being the standard deviation of all the amplitude values at that point.
When energy = E/e (at the point where the depth, x, will equal    ) the equation becomes (8).
Simplifying and rearranging this gives (9).
Therefore,                                        mm.
Methods for finding the velocity of longitudinal waves were tested and found to be fundamentally correct; however the value for aluminium was slightly lower than the theoretical value. This could be due to too small distance measurements, which could have been because the distance of the liquid couplant was n't taken into account.
The longitudinal moduli and Poisson 's ratios were all slightly lower than the expected values, which reflects the possible low values of both the velocities.
Longitudinal and shear reflected waves were detected, with the shear wave having the smaller angle of reflection, as expected.
The velocity of the reflected shear wave vs in aluminium was found to be (3,500  400)ms -1 so was fairly accurate considering it should have been 3110ms.
Snell 's law was tested for the shear waves. From the experimental results the equation did not seem to hold. This could have been due to not finding the correct position of the shear wave, which could be why vs (taking value without error) was slightly too large. Therefore, testing to see whether the equation was true proved inconclusive.
The size, shape and depth of defects were found using ultrasound waves and their reflections through an aluminium block. As all four defects were found, the 6dB drop technique method proved to be useful, however the sizing of the defects was probably incorrect due to the fact that relative to the transducer the defects were small.
Surface waves were generated using total internal reflection of shear waves. The angle of incidence was set by the wedge transducers used and was close to the angle calculated using Snell 's law for Perspex/ mild steel.
The velocity of the Rayleigh waves was calculated to be... Equations were used to find the theoretical value (approx 2900ms) and the results matched within error.
Distance between transducers had error due to it being tricky to ensure that they were exactly in position, as they slid easily on the liquid couplant.
There is a systematic error, as time for waves to travel through Perspex had n't been subtracted from final times, however, this will not affect the gradient, which is all that is of interest.
The amplitude of Rayleigh waves were measured as the passed through an aluminium slot of varying depths. The square of the amplitude is proportional to the wave energy. It is known that at 1/e times max energy the depth of slot there will equal the wavelength of the Rayleigh wave.
From the graph,     was found to be (0.98 0.05)mm The graph was a fairly good straight line ln graph, showing that the energy did decrease exponentially with slot depth.
Difficulties here were firstly with the block: anomalous results in a first attempt suggest that the slot was not smooth and the couplant might be filling it.
Overall points to note.
The PC oscilloscope was used throughout the experiment to make time and distance measurements. Often peaks jumped with amplitudes varying significantly from one frame to the next, so affecting distance measurements. Also it was hard to measure the time due to multiple peaks (ass figs 13 and 14).
Overall the PC oscilloscope seemed as if it would be a better instrument than the traditional oscilloscope as it has cursors, which avoids human measurement error. Also, values for time, volts/div etc. can be shown on the monitor so reading them off by eye is no longer a problem. Its one disadvantage is hat the PC and cables introduce noise into the system, which the other one would n't.
