Nordau defined degeneration as a 'morbid deviation from an original type'. Once degeneracy has taken hold of an individual they are no longer capable of fulfilling their original role in society. Both he and Lombroso believed that degeneration showed itself in physical characteristics as well as via a particular psychological disposition. It is my aim to illustrate the many examples of this "social disease" that appear within the novel The Picture of Dorian Gray and to explain how they relate to the ideas espoused by such individuals as Lombroso and Nordau.
Nordau, Max Simon, Degeneration (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1993), p.16.
In terms of physical degeneration, Dorian 's character is perhaps the most complex. Both Lombroso and Nordau believed that degeneracy could be seen via physical characteristics such as a lack of symmetry in the face, irregularities in the teeth and a skull that tends to be notably larger or smaller than average, to name a few examples. This seems to suggest that a person is born destined to be degenerate due to their inherent difference; yet Dorian, as the archetype of male youth and beauty at the opening of the novel, displays none of these characteristics. As Dorian becomes increasingly morally corrupt, the signs of his physical degeneracy appear on his portrait because of a prayer he made early in the novel. It seems likely that, at least in the physical sense, Wilde is suggesting a reverse schema of degeneration to Lombroso and Nordau in that Dorian is not born physically debased but becomes so, at least in the portrait, as a result of his behaviour.
Lombroso Ferrero, Gina, Criminal Man: According to the Classification of Cesare Lomboroso (New York, London: Putnam, 1911), p.10-17.
However the same notion remains that those who succumb to degenerate behaviour ought to show signs of such on the physical person. There is a constant reiteration of the idea that it is Dorian 's beauty that hides his wrongdoing and allows him to maintain his status. In illustration, despite Basil 's warnings that society 's elite question his reputation, Dorian is never ostracised. Basil himself right up until his death refuses to believe the rumours concerning Dorian 's behaviour because 'Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man 's face." In this society, it is the purity of Dorian 's outward appearance that allows his continued pursuit of pleasure, and thus Wilde seems to be noting the influence of theories concerning degeneration and its outward attributes.
Wilde, Oscar, The Portrait of Dorian Gray (London: Penguin Books, 2003), p.143.
Continuing in terms of the display of degeneration on the physical person, the Jewish manager of the theatre at which Dorian meets Sybil Vane appears to symbolise all that degeneration was believed to entail. He is described as 'hideous' with 'greasy ringlets', perhaps an indicator of the deterioration that Dorian is able to avoid due to the portrait. He is essential in providing the reader with an example of what society expected in a degenerate, and also in demonstrating another form of degeneration, that is the racial form. Although only a minor character in terms of space in the novel, the Jew is critical in that at the very end of the novel we see that Dorian is identifiable only by his rings: it is he who is the "cultural" Jew.
Wilde, The Portrait of Dorian Gray, p.49.
The other side to degeneracy discussed in detail by Lombroso and Nordau is that of the psychological self, the moral and emotional deterioration. While the physical signs of Dorian 's degeneracy are hidden from the world upon the portrait locked away in his home, his lack of morality is clear to see. Nordau believed that degenerates lack a sense of right and wrong, satisfying their impulses without consideration or even realisation that others might take offence at their actions. In many of his actions Dorian displays such a disposition, a good example being in his dealings with Sybil Vane. While he does undergo a period of remorse on returning home, in dismissing her after her poor performance Dorian seems to have absolutely no conception of the hurt he is causing Sybil. Initially she had satisfied his desire for all that is beautiful in the world, but once her acting has lost its unique quality she is discarded. Her death also reflects the pride and vanity seen to be characteristic of the degenerate: Dorian goes on to claim with unconscious egotism that 'She had no right to kill herself. It was selfish of her.'.
Nordau, Degeneraton, p.18.
Lombroso, p.35.
Wilde, The Portrait of Dorian Gray, p.97.
Dorian is not the only character to display such a lack of thought concerning the effect of actions. Lord Henry, and perhaps also Basil Hallward to a lesser extent, can be said to be suffering from this sort of moral degeneration. Lord Henry is a man whose theories are exotic and enticing but also often dangerous, yet he has little conception of their practical application. He proclaims hedonism as a way of life, yet lives a rather mundane life himself, seemingly fulfilled enough by the London social scene. It seems then that whilst his intelligence and wit are evident, his understanding of the human soul is distinctly lacking and thus he has no sense that his desire to 'dominate' Dorian is immoral. In fact he takes an almost perverse pleasure from observing the effect his words have upon the vulnerable Dorian in the scene just after the painting is finished. It is Lord Henry who induces Dorian 's fear of losing his beauty and youth, yet Basil is also partly responsible in that he fails to realise the corrupting effect his adoration of Dorian might exert. However this is perhaps less a sign of moral degeneracy in Basil as his actions are at least set out upon with good intentions, and his concern for Dorian 's welfare later in the novel redeems his reckless idolisation.
Ib id, p.38.
The degeneracy that takes hold over Dorian as a character is symbolised in other aspects of the novel. Of course the picture itself is the most obvious example here in terms of its physical deterioration in line with Dorian 's mental state. It acts as an emblem for Dorian 's conscience, which eventually does teach him to 'loathe his own soul' as it 'taught him to love his own beauty'. Perhaps the evident corruption of the portrait is designed to mirror the notion that art itself is capable of corruption. This danger is evident from the effect that Lord Henry 's book has upon Dorian, consuming him almost completely. These aspects together make all the more ironic Lord Henry 's comments that 'Art has no influence on action'. It is suggested that this idea arose from Wilde 's own desire for art to be freed of purpose and allowed to represent nothing other than beauty. Had the painting not served the purpose of showing Dorian his beauty then its danger would not be present.
Ib id, p.89.
Ib id, p.208.
Like the portrait, the colour white is used in the novel more subtly to chart Dorian 's progression from purity to corruption. Initially Dorian himself is discussed in terms of the colour white, looking as if he were 'made out of ivory'. Once he has been corrupted by Lord Henry 's words however the colour is transferred outside of Dorian 's character, thus later when he orders flowers he asks for there to be no white ones. By the end of the novel Dorian is no longer evocative of whiteness, with emphasis instead upon the  'scarlet dew' spotting the hand of the portrait figure. The colour of innocence and purity has been foiled as Dorian 's degeneracy reaches its peak.
Ib id, p.6.
Ib id, p.211.
The portraits in his family gallery are critical in representing the hereditary element of degeneration that is discussed by Lombroso. His mother, with her 'wine-dashed lips', presumably connoting alcoholism, represents a history of addictive behaviour, emphasising the ready gratification of desires characteristic of degeneration. Although Dorian shows no signs of alcohol addiction, his endless pursuit of beauty is nonetheless equally as consuming.
Ib id, p.176.
The opium dens are used to perhaps reflect the novel 's content in its setting. Entering the story when Dorian has reached the peak of immorality after having killed Basil, they reflect the sordid quality of the degenerate. Perhaps crucial is that Dorian can evidently no longer find adequate escapism in surrounding himself by beauty as he has up until this point. They might well be symbolic of a turning point at which Dorian 's real degeneration, seen in the picture, begins to overpower his masked appearance.
The novel itself seems to act as a symbol of the fin-de-si  cle disposition that Nordau discusses in terms of contemporary degeneration. This condition was linked to the notion that modern society was "too much", that it over-stimulated the individual and left them in a constant state of apprehension and fear for the future. Dorian often exemplifies such characteristics as the fin-de-si  cle individual with his constant desire for new stimuli and somewhat feverish and despairing behaviour. He continually searches for different objects of beauty and has a fascination with religion that suggests his discomfort about remorse and redemption.
Nordau, Degeneration, p.1.
In summing up then it is clear that there are many aspects of degeneration in The Picture of Dorian Gray. There are many instances where characters in the novel display characteristics that both Lombroso and Nordau associated with the degenerate individual. Dorian, for example, appears outwardly to be everything the degenerate is not, but his psychological condition cannot be escaped via its presence on the painting. He and Lord Henry share the sense of immorality and desire the thoughtless gratification of their lusts at the expense of others that characterised the degenerate. Lord Henry 's careless corruption of Dorian ultimately leads to his death in the same way that Dorian causes the suicides of Sybil Vane and Alan Campbell by entangling them in his desires.
The novel 's choice of settings adds to the general sense of degradation, with the opium dens reflecting the pinnacle of Dorian 's amorality and his need to escape. Victorian London is similarly important in terms of being a time when values were reassessed and morality became a public rather than private issue. It also represents modernity in the sense that Nordau felt was the cause of degeneration via its cultural over-stimulation. Degeneracy also appears symbolically throughout the novel through such devices as the fading use of the colour white and the family portrait gallery connoting the hereditary quality of this "disease".
Thus in conclusion I would argue that the novel is indeed about degeneration as both in terms of character and symbolism one can clearly see ideas that reflect those of authors like Lombroso and Nordau who discussed and defined the condition.
