The weaknesses of the current ABC system includes: heavy reliance on past data, cost allocations are inevitably arbitrary and product focused.
Alternative method to customer profitability: Extension of ABC towards focusing on customer cost and Balanced Scorecard.
Extension of ABC - focused towards customers, using the whale curve to understand profitable customers and to identify segments.
Balanced Scorecard - Market share and customer loyalty and satisfaction is observed to see its potential in increasing market share and profitability; Life cycle profitability analysis is used to measure outcome of loyal and satisfied customer. However, BSC maybe hard to implement because managers are used to measuring performance using financial measures.
It is recommended that new methods are adopted to improve market share and profitability. However, further information is needed.
The current Activity Based Costing (ABC) system arises to close the gap between strategic objectives of Large plc to focus on customers and management accounting system. The ABC seeks to recognise that it is activities which cause cost and helps in reducing costs and identifying non-added value activities. However, its weaknesses are analysed to understand why Large plc 's has been losing market share and having lower product profitability despites attempts to use the ABC.
One drawback of the current ABC system is that it relies heavily on historic data. Hence, affecting the accuracy of product 's full cost. It is arguable that since products are priced basing on past data, it will not ensure the true competitive price in market terms. This in effect, lowers the product profitability as true costs are not generated.
Another flaw with the ABC system is that cost allocations are inevitably arbitrary. It is observed that not all costs are directly attributable to activities and from there to products. This is especially true in relation with the 'facilities sustaining costs'. This for instance includes audit, research and health and safety cost. Because these particular costs are subjective in its allocation, it impairs the true full cost and would affect the product profitability.
Creating a satisfied customer is the only valid definition of business (Drucker, 1954). However, it is observed that the current ABC system is product focused. It does not seek to allocate activities according to customer segments. In reference to the Emma Restaurant seminar, it is observed that the ABC system produces different costs results from having focused to customers instead of product. Hence, because current ABC system is not customer-focused, Large plc may have lost its market share to competitors who understands their customers better.
Because of the weaknesses identified in the current ABC system, (i) alternative methods for calculating customer profitability and (ii) its evaluation are as follows; (i) Having recognised that current ABC system is product focused, it is suggested that the ABC can be extended to having a more customer-focused approach. An important step in carrying out Large plc strategic vision is to use ABC to allocate overhead expenses to different categories of customers. This ensures a way to improve profits by growing sales and without growing costs. Besides that, it allows Large plc to identify "hidden profits" and "hidden loss" customers (small volumes, special order customers). (ii) By using this ABC method, an output from this analysis is the called whale curve (Appendix 1) which plots cumulative profitability against customers. Cumulative sales usually follow 20/80 rule. However, a whale curve typically reveals that is not unusual for some of the largest customers to turn out being the most unprofitable. The largest customers are usually most profitable or most unprofitable and are rarely in the middle. Therefore, to restore Large plc 's market share, Large should focus on managing the customers on the left section of the whale curve. For instance, managers should be prepared to offer discounts, special services to retain the loyalty of these customers if competitor threatens. This avoids Large plc from losing market share to its competitors. Furthermore, its effectiveness is shown from the analysis of Kanthal case study (2). It is contended that, Kanthal 's number of profit customers increased from 150 to 170 after implementing this strategy: to give up shares on low profit customers which turns out to be their 2 largest customers.
Furthermore, the current ABC system should seek to extend its analysis from product lines to channels to locations or from brands to customers and regions. With this, managers are able to see the profit made by locations and customer which provides insights to understanding the product market and customer segments. By being closely in touch with segments, marketing department can respond quickly to even slight changes in what target customers want and also, the kind of competitive advantage to seek. This gives Large plc a high potential to restore its market share through identifying which of the activities that are adding value by customer and region.
Furthermore, it is contended that ABC identifies to a certain extent the value adding or non-value adding activities. However, this is highly subjective and will depend upon the perspective of the person doing the classification. (i) Balanced Scorecard approach emerges from the need to link both financial and non-financial measures of performance and identify key performance measures. Particularly with having a more customer-focused approach, it is contended that BSC provides a comprehensive framework for managing customer relationships (4). This is in line with Large plc 's strategic vision.
Using this method, managers are to identify the customer and market segments by developing performance measures that tracks Large plc 's ability to create satisfied and loyal customers in each targeted segments. Performance measures typically include market share, customer retention and loyalty and new customer acquisition.
It is vital that Large plc is able to segment its market accordingly and understands the customers to ensure that it is identifying and exploiting different market opportunities besides increasing its market share. (ii) Evaluating the potential of restoring Large plc 's market share, BSC ensures this by having performance measures relating to market share. For example, market share can be measured in terms of sales revenues, unit sales volumes or number of customers. By having this, managers can indicate whether strategy adopted is achieving the expected results in targeted market segments or otherwise. In this instance, it is possible that Large plc has not recognised the strategic segment to market its product. Therefore, it is observed that overall market share falls because there is a possibility that Large plc 's product appeals to a segment which have a relatively small market.
Using the BSC approach, Large plc is able to understand for instance, whether loyal or satisfied customers are profitable (5). It is suggested that the manager may use 'average duration of customer relationship' to recognise loyal customers and 'customer response cards' to understand customers satisfaction. Consequently ensures that excellent customer service (in terms of time and cost) is given adequately to both loyal and satisfied customers and hence, profitability is increased.
Furthermore, it is observed that above measures suggested are only means required to achieve to measure customer profitability but not the outcome. Hence, it is suggested that Large plc should incorporate the life-cycle profitability analysis to determine whether the focus should be on retention or on abandoning customers. With specific reference to Custom Research Inc. example (5), CRI uses the lifetime profitability analysis to manage and therefore recognise profitable customers and able to do comprehensive screening, mentoring and promoting of individual customers. Its success is proven as CRI had 36 clients who provided 86% of sales and 96% of profits. If applied sufficiently within Large system, higher profitability can be achieved by understanding customer profitability.
However, it is argued that both BSC and ABC must be used hand in hand. Referring to Appendix 2, managers are able to identify what actions to take in terms of managing customers. For instance, unprofitable, targeted customers should be transformed to make them profitable through pricing, process improvement and relationship management actions. This model gives insights about where opportunities exist to transform attractive, but money-losing customers into long term profitable relationship (5).
Moreover, it must be noted that the recognition of profitable customers is subjective and depends upon managers' point of view. Mention the word "performance", and many managers immediately shift their thinking to measures related to some type of financial result (6). This is simply because; many managers are formally trained to measure performance through financial accountability which provides the easiest way to demonstrate progress and productivity. Hence, the success of adopting the BSC to ensure a customer-focused approach is highly dependent on managers' abilities to see the clear objectives of having this method imbued in Large plc 's system.
It is recommended that either both methods are suitable for calculating customer profitability. However, it would be more useful if further information is given to ensure the most appropriate method to ensure good judgement. For example, it would be more useful to know the culture within the organisation as this may affect the likely method taken. It is vital to know whether organisation is receptive to changes or not. Hence, in this instance, maybe the extension of ABC towards customer cost maybe more suitable as it does not include an entirely new system like the balanced scorecard for all levels of organisation to adapt to.
Moreover, it is imperative to weigh the cost against the benefit. It is argued that employing a new system may involve a hefty financial cost and resources in terms of staff training. It would not be viable if the cost exceeds the benefits. Subsequently, it is vital to know whether competitors are moving towards customer-focused approach or not. This is because, Large plc may enjoy significant head start in understanding customer relationships if competitors are not moving towards these approaches yet. Hence, immediate action should be taken to counter the negative effects towards market share and profitability.
