This article attempts to analyze the relevance of concept of 'Developmental States' and 'Competition States' in the East Asian States. It firstly defines the meanings of these two concepts. Then it investigates the role of state in East Asia State in the early stage of development and shows that they are the 'Developmental States'. And it notes that 'Developmental State' are being transformed in the globalizing world by investigating the international and domestic effect. It therefore concludes that the transformation from the developmental state to competition state is the best description and the change is diverse in different countries due to their different economic structures. In addition, it gives some limitation of the competition state concept.
Between 1960s and 1980s, East Asia was the most fast-growing region in the worlds. To explain the growth in this region, the concept of developmental states which emphasizes on the importance of role of states is popularly used. In 1993, World Bank used this explanation to appreciate East Asian Miracle. But after the Asian Crisis, these states faced the economic recession. In 1997, the World Bank changed to criticize the outdated state intervention of East Asia. In fact, the international organization changed their attitude, because the state is being changed by globalization.
See World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy (Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1993).
See World Bank, World Development Report 1997: The State in a Changing World (New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1997).
There are hot debates in contemporary IPE concerning the role of states in the globalizing world, and the states in East Asia are the popular case study. In this debate, there are two schools of thought: Hyperglobalizers and the Skeptics. The former (such as Strange) finds that the growths of global production and markets cause the retreat of state. And the latter school (such as Cameron, Garret, Swank, Rodrik & Weiss) argues that the state increases its intervention (such as social insurance) to offset the increase of the risk in the globalizing world.
But the former and latter overemphasizes the international force and domestic force respectively. The former ignores the historical background of state including the state-society relations; while the latter neglects the nature of structure and the contribution of the globalization. Therefore, to study the effect of globalization, we should deploy both International Political Economy (IPE) and Comparative Political Economy (CPE) into analysis.
This paper uses the transformationalist school of thought (concept of competition state invented by Cerny) to find the way of state transformation and prevent the prejudice on either decrease or increase of state intervention. But before describing the transformation, the paper defines the concept of developmental state and competition state. Then it shows the way and reason of the transformation of role of state by using IPE and CPE framework and applies into three countries (Singapore, Korea and Japan). Finally, it concludes that the competition state is the best concept to describe current situation in East Asia but it still has some limitations.
Apart from United States and Europe, the East Asian States show the successful story of the economic development in the world in the post-war period. Between 1965 and 90, the average growth of GNP per Capita in these states was about 5 percent which was higher than that amount in the OECD economies (about 2.5%) and the Latin American countries ( about 2%). So the explanation of successful stories in the East Asian States is worth studying. Chalmers Johnson firstly invokes the concept of developmental state to show the importance of Japanese state in the extraordinary post-war economic development. Then, many comparative political economists (such as Weiss, Haggards, Wade and Evans) expand the concept of the role of state into other East Asian States including South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and China.
World Bank, The East Asian miracle: economic growth and public policy. (Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1993, XVI &pp.2).
See Chalmers Johnson, 'The Developmental state: Odyssey of a concept', in Woo-Cumings, Meredith, eds., The Developmental State (New York: Cornell University Press, 1999), pp.32-60.
Evans points that the states in this region are 'developmental' comparing with the 'predatory' Latin America and Africa. That means the leaders of these states have the commitment to develop their economy after the devastation of World War II. In order to achieve the development purpose, the states promoted the export-led industrialization (growth) strategy. They employed a variety of intervention -  'selective protection, subsidies, state-owned enterprises - to achieve their investment, export, and industrial objectives'. The state, therefore, had the close relationship with the business group to achieve the economic growth. This business and state relationship may cause some state intervention problem such as rent-seeking activity and corruption. But many East Asia study scholars are confident about the state intervention and think that the state intervention problem can be overcome by the state 's capacity. They generate the ideas of 'embedded autonomy' (Evan), 'governing the market '(Wade), and 'governed interdependence' (Weiss) to argue that the state policy is not affected by the societal groups. Therefore, the concept of Developmental State is mainly about the importance of the state capacity in the economic development.
Peter Evan, Embedded autonomy: states and industrial transformation (Princeton, N.J. : Princeton University Press, 1995), pp.12.
Stephen Haggard, The Political Economy of the Asian Financial Crisis (Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 2000), pp.217.
See Evan, Embedded autonomy; Robert Wade, Governing the Market: Economic Theory and Role of Government in East Asian Industrialization (Princeton University Press, 1990); Linda Weiss & John Hobson, States and Economic Development: A Comparative Historical Analysis. (Polity, 1995).
When the growth of East Asian States showed the model of 'developmental state', another concept called 'Competition State' was emerging in the global level. This concept is to explain the decrease of state intervention in the global level. In fact, starting from 1980s, Anglo-Saxon states (such as United States, United Kingdom) led both of developed and developing world to abandon the idea of embedded liberalism and Keynesian Economic policy which requires the state intervention and to embrace the neo-liberalism which emphasizes on the small government. They carried out several transformations such as trade liberalization, financial deregulation and privatization.
To explain this phenomenon, the concept of competition state is used. Many ideas of 'Competition State' are based on the works of Cerny. He points that the competition state is formed to embrace the transnational dimension, because the intense competition in the global economy driven by flexibility and open Anglo-Saxon Market (or economic globalization) has already happened. And this is a new concept of national interest and a way of maintaining national competitiveness in trend of globalization. Every state in the world is undergoing the process of political structuration or globalization. .Under this political structuration, 'the shaping of the playing field of politics itself is increasingly not within insulated units.... rather it derives from a complex congeries of multilevel games played on multilayered institutional playing fields." So the state intervention is undermined, and the state policies have three kinds of change:
Philip G. Cerny, 'The infrastructure of the infrastructure? Toward "Embedded Financial Orthodoxy" in the International Political Economy', in Palan Ronen P. and Barry Gills (eds), Transcending the state-global divide: a neostructuralist agenda in international relations. (London: Lynne Rienner, 1994), pp.225.
Philip G. Cerny, 'Paradoxes of the Competition State: The Dynamics of Political Globalization', Government and Opposition, 2 (1997), pp.253.
Philip G. Cerny, The changing architecture of politics: structure, agency, and the future of the state. (London: Sage, 1990), pp.205.
But he thinks that there is 'dialect of divergence and convergence at work, rather than single road to competitiveness'. The political globalization is the sign of convergence, but it is also a path-dependent process. Different countries decrease the state intervention in different ways and speeds. And the process is moved to multiple equilibrium points.
Cerny, 1997, pp.265.
Ibid, pp.257.
In addition, the concept has some limitations in explaining the extent of competition state. The most competition state, United State, still has and expands some intervention. However Cerny thinks that the government intervention of the competition states is ad hoc. The commodification or marketization (privatization) of the state activities and structure rather than decommodification (provision of welfare) is a main trend of state 's policy. But, generally, the concept of competition state can explain that the states started to give the authority to the other sector (such as privatization and deregulation) in 1980s to seek or fight for the competitiveness.
Cerny, 1990, pp.237.
Cerny, 1997, pp.273.
In addition, the concept of Developmental State and Competition States are mutually exclusive. The former emphasizes the importance of the state intervention in economic development. While the latter claims that the less state intervention can make the national economy more competitive. These two opposite ideas should not exist in the same period of time. In fact the Developmental State can be shown in the early development of East Asia. But the concept of developmental state is to explain the success of economic development in East Asia. When the states faced the economic recession caused by globalization, the developmental state concept is outdated. Indeed, the states are transformed into other form. The following sections show the reason and the way of transformation of developmental state in East Asia and conclude that the competition state is formed in the current situation.
In the early stage of development, most of the East Asian States' leaders had the commitment to develop their economies. One of the best examples is founding father of modern Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew. In the 1960s, he committed to develop his state 's economy by imposing the strict law to preventing the corruption. Although the strict law prevents the business affecting the state policy, the Singapore actively worked with them, especially foreign investor. They provided the superb infrastructure such as telecommunications and gave the subsidies such as tax holidays to Multi-national enterprise in order to attract the foreign capital. Therefore, Singaporean government can show the embedded autonomy of the Development State. Other East Asian States also had this concept. Japanese State (including the Liberal Democratic Party and Bureaucratic) closely collaborated with the large industrial conglomerates (Keiretsu) to drive the economic growth, this relationship is known as 'Iron triangle'. Because of the legacy of Japanese Colonial development, the Korean States and Taiwanese States also had the close relationship with the large business group (Chabeol) and the small and medium size company respectively. Korea provided the state-directed credit to increase private investment and create big industrial conglomerates; while Taiwan gave the tax credit to private sector. Furthermore, Malaysia, Indonesia and China also follow the Japanese Model because of the economic success of that country. But we should not ignore that some of the countries such as Thailand and Hong Kong are the exceptional case. These two states did not have close relationship with business group. Because the former has the low social cohesive culture and the latter 's colonial government has 'positive non-intervention' ideology. But their economies are still successful, especially for Hong Kong. Therefore, the concept of developmental state is not applicable to all of the East Asian States.
W.G. Huff, 'The Developmental State, Government and Singapore 's Economic Development since 1960', World Development, 22, (2000), pp.1428.
So the problem of the concept of developmental states is its failure in explaining the diversity of state intervention in the East Asia. In fact, this concept is described as institutional fetishism which overemphasizes the domestic state capacity but ignores the other factor in the developmental policy. Jayasuriya points that policy capacity recognizes that 'the state is not an 'entity', but a complex and constituted set of relationships between frameworks of political authority and the international political economy, domestic social forces, and the broader ideational notions of authority or stateness." Therefore, Thailand and Hong Kong 's exceptional example can be explained by its ignorance of other factor such as international factor.
Kanishka Jayasuriya, 'Beyond Institutional Fetishism: From the Developmental to the Regulatory State', New Political Economy, 10 (2005), pp.383.
So far, the developmental state concept can explain most of the East Asia States in its early development (between 1950s and 1980s). But it ignores the international dimension. It has the problem of CPE concept which overemphasizes the domestic politics. Starting from 1980s, the international factor is becoming more important. The political globalization has transformed the developmental state into competition states. Competition state concept describes the international effect and domestic effect in state which is more applicable now. So the next section describes the transformation from developmental state to new competition state empirically.
East Asia is also a part of world, the concept of competition state is supposed to be applicable in the East Asia. When Cerny mentioned the concept of competition state in case of East Asia in 1990, he found a certain amount of liberalization and the revaluation of currency in this region, but he did n't think that the international force or globalization can affect the East Asian States to carry out some reducing size project such as privatization and deregulation at this time. Therefore he concluded that competition state is not applicable in this region and the Japanese model (developmental state) is still alive and well. In fact, the developmental state started to transform to competition state from 1980s. In 1980s, Singaporean government did n't think that the heavy state intervention can make them competitive. The only way is to reduce the state intervention by carrying out privatization, liberalization and deregulation in 1986.His mistake may be caused by the unobvious transformation at that time. But after Asian Crisis, several states (such as Korea, Malysia) found the problem of excessive intervention and carried out several kinds of restructuring (such as deregulation) which made a significant transformation. Many scholars (such as Hall, Jayasuriya, Pang, and Shaw) claim the end of state-led development after these events. So we should start to investigate the decrease of state intervention from 1980s and focus the transformation in three countries: Singapore, Korea and Japan.
Cerny, 1990, pp.229.
See Rodney Bruce Hall, 'The Discursive Demolition of the Asian Development Model', International Studies Quarterly, 47 (2003), pp.71-99; Jayasuriya, 'Beyond Institutional Fetishism: From the Developmental to the Regulatory State', pp.381-87; Pang, Eul-Soo, 'The financial crisis of 1997-98 and the end of the Asian developmental state', Contemporary Southeast Asia, 22 (2000), p. 570-94; Shaw, Martin, 'The State of Globalization: Toward a Theory of State Transformation', Review of International Political Economy, 4 (1997), pp.497-513.
Before 1980s, the Singapore government used the Keynesian economic (or fiscal) policy and macro-economic intervention to maintain the economic stability. They interfered in the wage levels of private sector. In order to deal with the inflation caused by oil crisis in 1979 and promote the labor into higher skill level, the Singapore National Wage Council doubled the Singapore 's real wages between 1978 and 1980.But the large-scale increase of wage eroded the Singapore 's international competitiveness. As the wages increased, the cost of Singaporean goods became less attractive than the other competitive East Asian States' goods especially for the Chinese goods. Therefore, Singapore faced the problem of recession in the first half of 1980s. Apart from the high wages caused by over-regulation, other heavy state interventions such as high company tax rate, rising statutory charges, and a high Central Provident Fund contribution rate were also the reason of the recession.
Newman M. K. Lam, 'Government Intervention in the economy: a comparative analysis of Singapore and Hong Kong', Public Administration and Public Policy, 20 (2000), pp. 404.
The state responded to the economic downturn by recognizing the problem of excessive intervention. They think that the reducing of state intervention can maintain the competitiveness. Singapore 's Ministry of Trade and Industry provided three main recommendations: (1) minimizing regulations to prevent abuse and over-regulation; (2) divesting the government from companies that could prosper on their own; and (3) relying more on private sector initiatives and enterprises to generate growth. So a number of the measures was introduced by the Singaporean government in 1986, such as tax concession; tax incentives and grants for research and development; a reduction of the Central Provident Fund Contribution rate; freezing overall wages; minimizing trade restrictions; introducing incentives to encourage the fund management industry; and education improvement.
Ministry of Trade and Industry of Singapore, The Singapore Economy: New direction (Singapore: Economic committee of Ministry of Trade and Industry, 1996), pp.83 ,quoted by Lam, (2000), pp. 404.
But the two most important measures are: the adoption of the flexible wage system and privatization. In 1987, the Wage Reform Committee introduced a flexible wage system that emphasized using productivity incentive rather than strict wage control. The privatization was initiated in 1985. Singaporean government relaxed the role of statutory boards, public corporations and government companies in economic development. In fact, in the early economic development, Singapore did not have enough capital to develop and the local business group was not competitive enough. The state used some intervention, for example, subsidies to attract the foreign capital and establishment of the state-own enterprise to help the development. The intervention was in market-friendly way. But as the economy grew in 1980s, the foreign capital was well-developed as well. The state intervention became less useful and not friendly to market. Therefore, in order to keep the friendly image to the foreign enterprise, the government closed down the State-Owned Enterprise (SOE). As a result, the contribution of SOE to GDP was reduced to less than 10% in 1995..
Stephen Haggard, Pathways from the periphery: the politics of growth in the newly industrializing countries (London: Cornell University Press, 1990), pp.101.
Huff, 'The Developmental State, Government and Singapore 's Economic Development since 1960', pp.1429.
The reduction of state intervention increased the productivity and decreased the production costs for the Singapore 's economy. Between 1974 and 1986, Singapore had a budget deficit every year. But, since 1986, its budget surplus has been produced .After 1988, the economy was recovered and aimed to compete with Hong Kong as a financial centre. But the decrease of state intervention does not stop. For example, after economic recession in 1998, the Singaporean government found that their wage system is flexible in allowing companies to link performance to rewards, but it is not flexible enough to enable companies to make quick adjustments to their wage costs in response to a sudden and severe business downturn. So the state gave more flexible to private sector to adjust the wage. But the state still controlled 70% of the wages.
Singapore government, 'Workforce Recruitment & Management', . Accessed on 08/05/2006.
Therefore we can see that the Singapore government has the strong reason in decreasing its intervention to maintain its competitiveness in global economy. The concept of national interest in Singapore has been expanding to embrace the private sector i.e. transnational dimension, because the multinational enterprise is relatively strong (comparing with domestic sector) in Singapore 's economic structure.
The Korea 's transformation is mainly caused by the Asian Financial Crisis. Pirie thinks that the crisis stemmed from the changing in the global production structure, the irrationality of Korean State and rise of global financial market. For the production structure, he finds that the transportation cost decreases globally and Research and Developmental (R&D) cost increases in Korea because of the economic globalization. But the Korean state still irrationally invested in the high cost of R&D. Apart from it, the state also allowed that major conglomerates (chaebol) which had already relied heavily on debt finance to grow their liability. At the same time, as the capital market liberalization, the financial market is vulnerable to be attacked by foreign capital. The poor performing business is easily attacked by the speculator. So the Asian Financial Crisis happened in Korea because of irrationality of Korean State in 1997.
Iain Pirie, 'The New Korean State', New Political Economy, 10 (2005), pp.28-31.
Similar with the Singapore 's economic recession, the crisis is the opportunity for Korea to change. After the crisis, the International Organization (IMF) and the Korea leader started to think that Korea has to eliminate the close relationship between state and business. Former Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus criticized the Korea government which did not invite market friendly policies and interfered in markets.'. Kim Dae-jung who just elected as Korea president after the crisis committed to change the business-government relations. He has the strong reform attitude, because he has strived for democratization since 1960s. In addition, the state and business relations worsened after the democratic reform. Kim pointed out that the crisis 'would not have taken place if the political, economic and financial leaders of this country were not tainted by a collusive link between politics and business and by government-directed banking practices' Therefore, both the International and domestic sector reached the consensus that state intervention should be undermined to prevent hurting its national interest. There are two main transformations in state intervention in Korea -- Central Bank Independence and the creation of independence financial regulator.
Michel Camdessus., 'The Asian Financial Crisis and the Opportunities of Globalization'. Remarks at the Second Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, New York, 31 October 1997, quoted by Hall, 'The Discursive Demolition of the Asian Development Model', pp.84.
Kim Dae Jung., 'Let Us Open a New Era: Overcoming National Crisis and Taking a New Leap Forward'. Inaugural Address by Kim Dae-jung, the 15th-term President of the Republic of Korea, 25 February 1998, quoted by Hall, 'The Discursive Demolition of the Asian Development Model', pp.89.
Pirie, The New Korean State, pp.28.
On 31 December 1997, under the influence of IMF and the reformer of Korean State, the new Bank of Korea (BOK) Act was passed. This act enhances the authority and autonomy of national monetary authorities (central bank).It is a significant shift in macroeconomic policy-making responsibility away from politicians to autonomous technocrats. Furthermore, the Governor of the BOK who is a civil servant replaced the Minister of Finance and Economy as head of the MPC after this act.
Ibid, pp.31-4.
The effectiveness of central bank reform should be coupled with a comprehensive a corporate governance system. So the Financial Supervisory Commission (FSC) or Financial Supervisory Agency (FSA) was formed in the end of 1998. The FSC is famous to impose budget constraints on the two (Daewoo and Hyundai) of the five major chaebols because of their refusal of corporate restructuring (such as the merger and acquisition). It caused the collapse of these two conglomerates. On the other hands, the other conglomerates are also forced to carry out other kind of restructure by this independent body. If the conglomerates agree to replace founding family members in management position with professional executives, the FSC will offer high credit- ratings to them. Therefore, the establishment of independent regulatory decreases the traditional linkage between conglomerate and government. Furthermore, the subsidies given by state were based on performance rather than protection.
Linda Weiss, 'Guiding globalization in East Asia: new roles for old developmental states', in Weiss, Linda, eds., States in the Global Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp.254.
But some of state-institutionists think that this news kind of state power will be formed despite the weakening business and government relations. Weiss thinks that the states intervention and regulation in Korea are not weakened but strengthened, because the locus of policy making from autonomous FSC is within the Korean state. So she describes the state transformation in Korea as the 'prince who leaps like a frog'. But if we look back the background of formation of FSC, we will see that this body is under the international influence. Before its setting up, Korea signed with IMF to agree the establishment of autonomous financial regulator. So after its establishment, the FSC follows the norm of international organization and the international standard. For instance, when preparing public financial statements, financial institutions must use the International Accounting Standards. The state power is then decreasing under the international influence.
Weiss, States in Global Economy, pp.256-8.
So, in the case of Korea, the state found the importance of embracing the norm and standard of international organization to maintain the competitiveness in the globalizing world. This change was caused by international organization IMF and deterioration of state and business relations.
The Japan 's economy has encountered the economic stagnation for more than ten years after the bubble economy in 1990. The Japanese states used the various measures such as the expansionary fiscal policy and the loose monetary policy to solve the economic recession. The measures only prevent some possible serious damage to the economy, but it did not help the recovery of economy. In 1996, Japan Prime Minister Hashimoto found that the main cause of the economic stagnation is the economic structure.
In fact, the problem of economic structure did not emerge in its early development. But as economic was developed, the Japanese economy was also liberalized. The economic structure of Japan was not competitive enough during economic liberalization. As a result, the economic bubble was burst. For instance, Japan persistently had had trade surplus with US since 1970s which caused the growing pressure to revalue the yen from US. In 1985, the Plaza Accord was signed among G5, and Japan voluntarily appreciated the value of yen. After this change, the Japan 's goods lost its attractiveness in the cost in East Asia, and many businesses became non-performing. The businesses are supposed to restructure. But the 'convoy system' in Ministry of Finance (MOF) still existed in 1980s and 1990s. The MOF still protected the poor-performing and corrupt financial institution from failing. Similar with the Korean case, the protective financial system in Japan is vulnerable to be attacked by foreign capital. As a result, the financial crisis happened in 1990s and the economic recession has been persistent for a long time.
William W. Grimes, Unmaking the Japanese miracle : macroeconomic politics, 1985-2000 (New York: Cornell University Press, 2002), pp.202 31 Ibid, pp.205.
In 1996, Hashimoto identified that the government official (MOF) engaged in the banking system is a problem. Therefore, he carried out several kinds of fiscal structural reform including set up an academic committee called the Central Bank Study whose report echoed for Bank of Japan (BOJ) autonomy and transparency. Through this Neo-liberal project, he expected to mobilize anti-bureaucrat feeling, which was widespread because of the scandal of MOF official. Under this atmosphere, Diet (Japan 's Congress) approved a reform of BOJ law which gave BOJ more autonomous from MOF in June 1997. Along the BOJ revision, the diet also passed the set up of Financial Supervision Agency (FSA) to take over MOF 's role as supervisor of banking sector in June1998. 32 Ibid, pp.196 33 Ibid, pp.207.
But due to the tight fiscal policy and Asia Financial Crisis, the neo-liberal project did not go smoothly. Japan 's economy faced another round of recession after 1997. Hashimoto 's structural fiscal reform proved to be counterproductive. US president, Clinton, urged Hashimoto to stimulate through a drastic reform. But at home, the rival of Hashimoto is more conservative to oppose neo-liberal reform. The bureaucrat such as Ministry of International Trade and Industry and MOF which still had strong linkage with the business opposed the neo-liberal reform. As Pempel described the Japanese Economic policy is domestic based. If there is conflict between the international force and domestic force, the leader will bias toward the latter one. Under the domestic pressure, Hashimoto government amended the Fiscal Structural Reform Law. The target set in the Reform was pushed back to 2005. MOF did not give much regulatory power to independent organization, FSA. The independent organization is still required to bargain with MOE perpetually to get power from them. The deregulation process is very slow. So Vogel concluded that this is the case of freer markets and more rules. But he ignores the possibility of losing power of MOF in the future. If the recession period is ended, the bargaining power of independent organization will increase and the deregulation will start again. In addition, the unreliable image of MOF caused by scandal is prevalent in the public. Therefore the neo-liberal project is still irreversible in Japan and it can be further shown by some recent events.
Hideo Otake, 'Developments in the Japanese Political Economy since the mid-1980s: the Second Attempt at Neoliberal Reform and its Aftermath', Government and Opposition, 28 (2000), pp.390.
T.J. Pampel, 'Japanese foreign economic policy: domestic-based', in Peter Katzenstein, eds., Between Power and Plenty (London: University of Wisconsin Press, 1978), ch.5 36 Stephen K Vogel,., Freer Markets, More Rules: regulatory reform in advanced industrial countries. London: Cornell University Press, 1996, pp.167-95.
The reduction of state intervention, in fact, has still been progressing since 1996. For example, the change in employment laws in 2003 led to the end of 'lifetime employment system'. The previous employment laws restricted the temporary employment. But after facing the problem of the cheap labor cost in the other East Asian States, the Japanese realized that the employment should be flexible enough to compete with them. This new labor flexibility has contributed to boom in company profits and ease the debt problem in business sector. Recently, the neo-liberal reform is more rapid. After winning election in 2001, Prime Minister Koizumi drafted a privatization of postal saving plan which has gained the popular support. In 2005, both houses of diet passed his plan which further implements this privatization of this world 's largest bank. And the bank could use its saving more efficiently after this reform. At this moment, it is doubtful that the Koizumi 's plan is successful. Because his leadership term will end very soon and his rival is conservative, we do not ensure that another failure of Hashimoto 's structural reform will happen again. But we can be sure that the neo-liberal project is still the main trend of reform in Japan, and the speed of implementation depends on the support from the domestic politics.
Schotle said, 'We live in globalizing rather than completely globalized condition'. Under the trend of globalization, the concept of developmental state which focuses on state-led development is necessary to transform to the competition state in order to maintain the national interest, but it cannot be completely transformed. After the fast economic development, the three above countries found that the heavy state intervention is needed to decrease: Singapore found the problem of state-owned enterprise after the economic recession in 1980s; Korea and Japan leaders used the way of de-regulation to solve its problematic economic structure after the Asian Financial crisis and Bubble Economy respectively. But the neo-liberal reform has not completed yet in these states. As shown in Japan, the MOF still do not give the regulatory power to the independent organization FSA, but the other neo-liberal project such as privatization is necessarily progressing because of the outdated state intervention. In Singapore, the flexible wage system keep improving, the state gave more flexible to the private sector to decide the wage from 1986 to 1999, although state still controlled 70% of wage. But the concept of competition state can be seen as a destination of the East Asian State.
Jan Aart Schotle, 'Global Capitalism and the State', International Affairs, 73 (1997), pp.432.
From the three cases, we can find that the speeds of the neo-liberal reform are different in every state. The privatization and flexible wage system in Singapore and deregulation in Korea went smoother than the deregulation in Japan. As explained by Cerny, because of the different economic structure, the three countries carried out the convergent political globalization in the path-dependent way. Due to the great influence of foreign investor in Singapore and International Organization (IMF) in Korea, the reform carried out more quickly in order to make the market friendly environment. On the other hand, because of long history of protectionist, the conservative domestic politics, and the incident such as Asian financial crisis, the reform in Japan was carried out more carefully to prevent hurting the domestic 's interest. From this, we can see that the merit of combining the IPE (international factor) and CPE (state and society relation). This gives us a full picture of political globalization of different states in the world and shows the divergent and convergent of the process.
In addition, the privatization in Singapore and the deregulation in Korea and Japan can show Cerny 's transformation approach: shift from the macro-interventionism to micro-interventionism. In the case of Korea, the financial institution gave the subsidies based on the performance rather than protection (adopted in the past) which can show shift from intervention based on comparative advantage to intervention based on competitive advantage.
But the East Asian state can not show the shift from welfare state to competition state, since there is no any significant change in social expenditure in these states. In fact, the developmental state was not a welfare state. Since the states including three above cases feared the spread of communism after providing the egalitarian environment during the cold period, they tried to reduce the welfare burden in the early development. For example, Japan is described as 'Liberal Welfare states' which relied more on the family and the community on the welfare starting from early 1970s. At the same time, Singapore introduced the Central Provident Fund which shifted the welfare burden to the community. So the shift claimed by Cerny is not applicable in East Asia. He invoked the competition state concept, because he wanted to demonstrate the decrease of welfare in Nordic countries. He did not expect that the Nordic countries are different from developmental states in the provision of welfare.
Duane Swank, ' Withering Welfare? Globalisation, political economic institutions, and contemporary welfare states', in Linda Weiss, eds., States in the Global Economy, pp.58-82.
The concept has some limitations too. As discussed before, Cerny admitted that there are some paradox of competition state which means that the political globalization 'does not lead to a simple decline of the state but may be seen to have some expansion of state intervention and regulation in the name of competitiveness and marketization." He thinks that state would use its visible hand (such as social welfare) occasionally to offset the increase of social risk caused by the globalization. But the state policy would not be like the Polyani Double movement which substantially increases or decreases the state intervention. In the case of Korea, the state gave financial support to the high technology industry in short term to recover the economy after the crisis. But Cerny is optimistic for the maintenance of competition state, because his main assumption is the dominance of Neo-liberal idea in the world. In fact, not every part of the world is dominated by Neo-liberal idea. For example, the Islamic World has strong economic nationalism ideology which opposed this idea. But most of the East Asian States do not have strong reason to completely deny neo-liberal idea now, because their economies still perform well under this ideology.
Cerny, 1997, pp.251.
See Dani Rodrik, 'Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?', Journal of Political Economy, 106 (1998), pp.997-1032.
The concept of competition state is applicable to the East Asian State generally. Because of the geographical proximity and close economic relationship, other East Asian countries also face the similar kind of crisis such as Asian financial Crisis and the intense competition within the region. They are also being transformed to competition state from developmental state. Similarly with Korea, several Asian countries such as Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand were demanded to move away from 'Crony capitalism' by IMF. Taiwan decreased the subsidies to strategic industry because of preparation of joining WTO. China 's state-own enterprises were closed down after the open policy. Non-developmental state, Hong Kong, also carried out the privatization to solve the problem of budget deficit.
From this paper, we can see that the globalization is not simply about the retreat or enhancement of state. As described by World Bank, East Asia states are flexible to change to maintain its competitiveness. Under the dominance of neo-liberal ideology in the global market, they carry some market-friendly reform to maintain its competitiveness. But if they find that the drastic reform pose threat to its economy, they will use the intervention to offset the risk.
World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press for the World Bank, 1993, pp.86-7.
