Fraud is increasing dramatically with the expansion of modern technology and the global superhighways of communication, resulting in the loss of billions of pounds worldwide each year. Although prevention technologies are the best way to reduce fraud, fraudsters are adaptive and, given time, will usually find ways to circumvent such measures. Methodologies for the detection of fraud are essential if we are to catch fraudsters once fraud prevention has failed. Authorisation and Validation of online payments has always been a week process. In this project, my aim was to design a new model to carry out online transactions in a most secure and user-friendly environment. It includes strong authentication and fraud detection capabilities aiming to detect fraudulent transaction at early stages. It also provides a transactional management system aimed to provide transaction management features to merchants.
Keywords - Fraud detection, fraud prevention, statistics, machine learning, money laundering, computer intrusion, e-commerce, credit cards.
The report documents the design, development, testing and deployment stages of the model Secure Transactions Framework. This report is detailed account of how the project was conducted and the chronological stages of the software development process. This report is not a manual for the correct use of the model parts but a scientific document that outlines the development of the project from beginning till the end.
The report firstly explains the e-commerce and online shopping background and moving further to what do we understand by the terms Fraud, Fraud Prevention and Fraud Detection techniques. The report then shows information from various sources to provide the reader with the necessary information to appreciate the need of this new system. The report then proceeds to describe the current transactional model and the new transactional model designed in the project. It also discusses the technology used behind implementation of the model.
The report then outlines the database design used in the project, providing design views of each database structure. It then proceeds on discussing the online system, fraud management system and security features implemented in this project. It then provides information on features designed in desktop application for the merchants.
The report closes with a self-assessment of the planning, management and overall development of the project. This sheds light on what has been learnt throughout the project in terms of developed skills, acquired knowledge and the personal opinion and perspective of the modern day computing that has been challenged.
In recent years, the online computing environment has afforded exciting new opportunities to buy and sell goods and services for both businesses and individuals. In the United Kingdom, the number of people making Internet card payments (using credit or debit card) increased 50 percent between 2003 and 2004 to 20 million (APACS 2004). Nearly 15 million people in the UK now use the Internet to access their bank accounts, and millions more regularly shop online. This growing customer use of the Internet and credit cards has provided businesses with chance to expand their customer bases provide quicker and more efficient services and reduce overheads.
With such a dramatic uptake of online shopping, however, have come increased risks of online credit card fraud. In particular, businesses that provide online shopping are more vulnerable than ever before to the risk of credit card fraud and associated loose. According to Card Watch the Plastic card fraud losses on UK-issued cards from 1995 - 2004 have risen to   504.8 million.
The financial cost to cardholders of card fraud is largely borne by the banking industry, but the personal cost in time, inconvenience and frustration while an incident is investigated - being without cards, waiting for fraudulent expenditure to be reversed or offset, the sense of violation - is immeasurable.
So, I believe there is a need for a new system which could reduce the amount of money lost due to online fraud and make online shoppers more confident while doing online shopping from anywhere in the world.
Even as innovative business models and impressive advances in technology fuel industry 's vision of the Internet as a dynamic medium of commerce and communication, security issues continues to weaken confidence in online business. One of the most vexing and serious security issues is related to identity verification. If users and devices accessing the networks are not properly identified, enterprise risk exposure to threats like fraud, identity theft etc.
The project aims to solve this problem by offer strong authentication methods using Windows Forms and SMS technology to identify the user. After in-depth research Neural Networks algorithms combined with Data Mining has been used to identify fraudulent transactions at early stages.
To accommodate diverse usage scenarios, enterprises frequently deploy multiple authentication and detection mechanism. Because these solutions rely on proprietary hardware, protocols and middleware, they do not interoperate easily with other products. The project aims to offer an interoperable solution to online problem, so that solution can easily be integrated with any other solutions to further extend the model.
Financial sector and the use of technology in that sector has been a personal interest since I was a kid. I have always been impressed with the way technology have transformed this sector from those fish-market like trading floors to tranquil floors. I have also been interested in technical challenges the financial industry been facing these days.
The project idea was conceived when I was working in British Telecommunication. For academic year 2004-2005 I did an Industrial placement, which has been a great learning exposure for me. The year gave me sufficient time to decide upon my project topic and work on something in which I had genuine interest. Another motivation while working was to do a project which in some ways provided solution to some current problems prevalent in the market.
Having keen interest in transactional modelling and especially authorisation phase of the process that involves authentication and identity checks of the users, I started to research the market and closely understand the problem. It was after that research I realised that the credit card fraud problem is not just for UK but the situation is even worst in countries such as Australia, United Stated of America etc.
So, It was the time when I knew what I wanted to do for my final year project and come up with a solution which is practical and with right amount of resources and funding could be implemented in real-life scenario.
My next aim was to design the project in a most sophisticated and state of art technology. While doing my research I came across various technologies that I could have used but I went with .NET because of it 's benefits and its upcoming attracting in financial firms.
After all careful considerations I decided to implemented the project in .NET technology supported by SQL Database. Before starting the final year I did an intensive course in .NET for three months to have in-depth understanding of the technology and successfully gained the accreditations of Microsoft Certified Solution Developer. The technology aspect is covered in more detail in Appendix B.
The purpose of this project is to demonstrate the advantage of bringing together various methods together to design a single model to carry out online transactions in a most efficient manner.
The following are the objectives to be achieved by the end of the project -.
Design a new model for electronic commerce with high speed and efficient verification and strong authentication mechanisms that would allow legitimate users easy access to carry out online shopping payments and thwarting fraudulent transactions attempt by others. The project aims to provide reliable and a user-friendly environment involving various phases. This feature has been covered in Section 3 of the report.
A Fraud Detection Engine built in modules using the concept of "Neural Networks" and "Data Mining" where fraud detection rules with certain general characteristics are included in standard model and modules with merchant requirements are added as needed. This feature has been covered in Section 5 of the report.
Reduce the probability of fraud, by sending a random four-digit number on to customer 's mobile phone in order to identify the real customer. The implementation would make it difficult for fraudster to successfully complete the transaction, as with stolen card they would also need that person mobile phone to clear to initial validations process. This feature has been covered in Section 5 of the report.
Design a transaction management application for merchants to manage transactional activities. This involves the system for manual review of the transactions that being referred by the system. It provides all essential features, which would be present in a management application in real-life scenario. This feature has been covered in Section 8 of the report.
Reduce major security threats available in Online Transactional Model such as spoofing, unauthorised disclose, unauthorised action and data alteration by implementing authenticated Secure Socket Layer (SSL) digital certificates to provide crucial online identity and security to establish trust between parties involved in online transactions over digital network. Also including Encryption of data, process of transforming information to make it unintelligible to all but the intended recipient. It also includes other security features such as code-access, database and web-service security implemented in .NET, IIS (Internet Information Service) and SQL Database. This feature has been covered in Section 9 of the report.
The system was developed based on software development life cycle, which is outlined by the following phases:
Problem identification: Establishing why there is need for the system.
Requirements determination: Specify what the system needs to do and what information it needs to store.
Feasibility study: Ensure the system is a feasible option.
Systems analysis: Determine the functionalities of the system and create a model of the system processes needed to meet the requirements.
System design: Define the classes and methods needed to meet the system functionalities.
Construction: Write and test the code, modify as required until testing reveals no errors.
Implementation: Put the completed solution into use.
Maintenance: Make any changes, corrections and additions to the system. This stage was not included as this is not a real life project.
Evaluation: Verify that system meets the specification.
In this section the effort (labour required to complete a task) and the schedule (time frame required to complete the task) for each phase of the systems life cycle are calculated.
Since the project report was due in on 28 th April 2006 and the project presentation was in first week of March. It was essential to have the project completed and tested by 28 th February. I split the project into following milestones in order to ensure the project was completed on time.
I also created a project website which was useful in keeping the supervisor informed about the project progress at all time (..ac.uk/~csuchj).
An online store allows you to be open for business 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Not only is this an important convenience for the customers, it also means more revenue for the merchants. Many merchants say that 20% of their revenue is through online stores. Another benefit that merchants gain from online store is the reduction in overhead costs, as the merchants do n't need to employ staff to take orders. With the right payment processing tools, these functions are all done automatically. And lastly an online store helps merchants to reach markets across the countries. It 's often seen customers from United Kingdom doing online shopping from merchants based in United States of America or other parts of Europe.
The most important part of selling online is accepting payments from customers. Online payment processing offers customers the convenience of submitting their card details on the merchant website and get there goods delivered at their door steps.
But, as e-commerce has been an extra source of income for online traders, it has also been a source of income for people who make revenue by using stolen cards and information. Fraud is increasing dramatically these days with expansion of modern technology, resulting in the loss of billion of pounds each year. Revenue lost through Credit Card fraud in the United Kingdom has been growing rapidly over last five years with   504.8 million lost in 2005 (Report by Association of Payment Clearing Services, London APACS).
The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines fraud as "criminal deception; the use of false representations to gain an unjust advantage." Fraud is as old as humanity itself and can take an unlimited variety of different forms. However, in recent years, the development of new technologies (which have made it easier for us to communicate and helped increase our spending power) has also provided yet further ways in which criminals may commit fraud. Traditional forms of fraudulent behavior such as money laundering have become easier to perpetrate and have been joined by new kinds of fraud such as mobile telecommunications fraud and computer intrusion.
Credit Card fraud can be divided into two types: Offline and Online Fraud. Offline Fraud is committed by using a stolen physical card at storefront or call center. Online Fraud commonly known as cardholder - not present fraud occurs, when the transaction is made remotely, which means customer is not physically present at the merchant 's shop but either is doing a telephone purchase or an online transaction. In an online transaction, no signatures or card imprints are required, only need is of a valid payment card details. Online Fraud accounts for most proportion of money lost because of Credit Card Frauds. It 's due to week authentication methods, which makes it easier to commit online fraud as compared to Offline fraud where new technologies have really helped in reducing the amount of revenue lost each year.
To undertake Online Fraud it is necessary to obtain the details of the card without the cardholder 's knowledge. There are various ways through which card details can be obtained illegally:
Skimming: This is the most common way of getting someone 's details where employees illegally copy the magnetic strip on a credit card by swiping it through a small handheld card reader. Skimming could be done quiet easily in shops and restaurants without customer 's knowledge.
Shoulder Surfer: They are the one who enter card details into a mobile phone while standing behind a purchaser in a queue.
Scam Companies: Very often we hear the news these days of people posing as credit card company employees taking details of credit card transactions from customers over the phone.
Counterfeit cards, currently the largest source of credit card fraud in the United Kingdom (source: APACS), can also be created using this information.
Transactions made by fraudsters using counterfeit cards and making cardholder-not-present purchases can be detected through methods that seek changes in transaction patterns, as well as checking for particular patterns that are known to be indicative of counterfeiting.
Financial institutions are unwilling to accept the additional risks associated with online credit card fraud. This means that the losses associated with fraudulent online purchases are borne by online traders who accept payment for goods online. When a cardholder claims that a purchase was fraudulent and not undertaken by them or an authorised party, their financial institution generally takes them at their word and the retailer is required to submit to a charge back (a refund of the price of the goods from their bank account to the cardholder 's) even though they do not receive the goods back in return. The only recourse for online traders who receive a charge back is to try and pursue the matter privately with the customer - a difficult, costly and time-consuming process.
Today nearly 15 million people in the UK use the Internet to access their bank accounts, and millions more regularly shop online.
Resources tell that:
One in eight online shoppers have failed to log out when shopping online, leaving there financial details available to others.
One in four online shoppers do not check whether a website is safe and secure.
The extent of credit card fraud is difficult to quantify, partly because companies do n't like to reveal the exact amount of money lost on their online stores as this might lead to lack of confidence in the online buyers in doing future shopping on their websites and partly because the figures changes over time. Various estimates have been given. Total looses through credit card fraud in the United Kingdom has been growing rapidly over the last 4 years [1997,   122 million; 1998 135   million; 1999   188million; 2000   293 million Source APACS]. The amount of money lost for 2004 been reported as   504.8 million.
Fraud prevention outlines measures to prevent fraud from occurring in the first place. These include elaborate graphics, fluorescent fibres, multitone pictures, watermarks, laminated metal strips and holographs on banknotes, personal identification numbers for bankcards, Internet security systems for credit card transactions, and passwords on computer systems and telephone bank accounts. Unfortunately, none of these methods are foolproof and, in general, a balance has to be reached between cost and inconvenience (e.g., to a customer) on the one side, and effectiveness on the other.
One of the commonest reasons for all the losses is weak fraud prevention methods partly blamed onto the customers. Many customers are not very confident in progressing steps in order to carry out transactions online, Until their card has been misused they are unaware of the stronger fraud prevention techniques which should be adopted.
The most basic form of fraud prevention is electronic authorisation. This process verifies that the credit card being used to purchase goods is valid and has sufficient monetary funds attached to it. That said, there are significant limitations connected with this process, principally that it provides no assurance that the person using the card has authority to make the purchase. Technology is being rapidly developed to ensure retailers have added protection.
For credit card transactions conducted in person, a system involving microchips and personal identification numbers (PINs) has now been adopted in the United Kingdom. This has utilizes a microchip attached to bank cards to ensure data securely, and the inputting of a PIN as opposed to a signature at the point of sale (APACS). This procedure has necessitated traders to install special terminals to implement the chip and PIN system. The occurrence of over-the-counter credit card fraud should be substantially reduced with this process. Credit card transactions conducted over the internet, are however still prone to problems of card and cardholder authentication. Chip and PIN cards should have the potential at some point in the future to utilise more secure transaction technology by using readers and PIN pads attached to computers. At this early stage, however, their application is very limited. In the UK and USA, two extra online fraud prevention strategies have been developed in conjunction with financial institutions and card issuers:
The AVS uses information obtained through the cardholder 's issuing financial institution. It ensures that the billing address provided by the customer crosschecks. This process is not totally accurate. For example, there could be instances where the customer has moved and changed address but has n't updated the details with the financial institution. This has the potential to cause problems when a genuine transaction is referred or classified as fraudulent. It is nevertheless a tool which can be used by traders to determine their risk in processing any order.
In a similar way, online traders can request that the customer confirm or enter the CVN, usually a three- or four-digit number now printed on the back of the majority of credit cards. Again, while this does not necessarily prevent fraud, it should reduce the likelihood of fraud occurring by the provision of additional information which is available only from viewing the card itself and is never shown on items such as discarded receipts.
A further option currently available to online purchasers is payer authentication. This is offered through both MasterCard ('MasterCard Securecode') and Visa ('Verified by VISA'). These are password-based programs that permit registered cardholders to verify their order by entering a password in a pop-up box on the computer screen. This does, however, require the cardholder to register for the program with the participating card issuers. It also requires businesses that trade online to be registered and to be able to utilise a "Verified by Visa or MasterCard" securecode merchant plug-in installed on their processor.
Currently, there are a number of ways in which retailers can authorise a credit card payment for an online purchase. One way is to use a web link to a bank-operated Internet payment service (AIIA 1999). This is where the card details are entered direct onto the web site of the company and the details of the purchase are automatically submitted for bank authorisation. Authorisation is given almost instantaneously, and, if approved, the customer can receive an approval notice while they are still online.
Alternative methods include electronic authorisation where the credit card details are entered onto the retailer 's web site and the details are later entered into an EFTPOS terminal; or where the retailer contacts the bank or a merchant authorisation service to obtain appropriate authorization for the purchase.
However, there is also the likelihood that some online traders may simply take the credit card details for the purchase at face value and not seek further verification or bank authorisation.
Instead of utilizing more technologically advanced prevention techniques, online traders are generally provided with numerous recommendations for fraud prevention strategies by their financial institution. These are intended to reduce the risk to those businesses of accepting fraudulent online transactions.
Retailers are also warned about:
Orders comprising duplicate items (which could be sold on);.
Orders placed hurriedly or with immediate delivery (fraudsters are not bothered about delivery costs and want the items quickly);.
Cards that have been fraudulently used previously; and customers who provide an email address from a free email service (Tomlinson 2002).
In addition to being careful when these 'warning signs' occur on an order, online traders are recommended to:
Verify the order with the customer over the telephone or by email.
Confirm the address with the financial institution, recent telephone directory, or another address verification system.
Establish a database with a record of good and bad customers (to ensure speedy approval and without unnecessary screening).
Request information from the customer that only the individual cardholder would know eg: address, digits on back of card, bank who offers the card, etc.
Fraud detection is identifying fraud as soon as possible after it has been perpetrated. Fraud detection becomes necessary once fraud prevention has failed. In practice, of course fraud detection must be a continuous process, as one will not often be aware when fraud prevention has failed. Individuals can attempt to prevent credit card fraud by guarding their cards diligently, but if in spite of this the card 's details are stolen, then the ability to detect, as soon as possible, that fraud is imperative.
Fraud detection is continuously evolving. Whenever criminals become aware that one detection method is in place, they will adapt their strategies and try other methods. Of course, new criminals are also constantly entering the field. Many of them will not be aware of past fraud detection methods that have been successful and will adopt strategies, which can lead to identifiable frauds. This means that the earlier detection tools need to be applied as well as more recent strategies.
The development of new fraud detection methods is hampered by the fact that the exchange of ideas in fraud detection is severely restricted. It makes no sense to detail fraud detection techniques to any extent in the public domain, as this enables criminals to work out what strategies they need to evade detection.
Many fraud detection problems involve huge data sets. For example, the credit card holders with Barclaycard carry out approximately 350 million transactions a year in the United Kingdom alone (Hand, Blunt, Kelly and Adams, 2000), The Royal Bank of Scotland, which has the largest credit card merchant acquiring business in Europe, carries over a billion transactions a year and AT&T carries around 275 million calls each weekday (Cortes and Pregibon, 1998). Processing these data sets to identify fraudulent transactions or calls requires more than mere novelty of statistical model, and also needs fast and efficient algorithms. These numbers also indicate the potential value of fraud detection: if 0.1% of a 100 million transactions are fraudulent, each losing the company just   10, then overall the company loses   1 million.
Fraud detection methods may be supervised or unsupervised. In supervised systems, samples of both fraudulent and non-fraudulent records are taken as examples on which to construct models. These allow one to reclassify the examples into one of two classes. Of course, this requires confidence in trying to classify the original data used to build the models. In order to plan a supervised model, both fraudulent and non-fraudulent example transactions would be required, so that the model could be trained to classify between the two models. The only drawback of supervised models is that they can only be used to detect fraud of a type that are already known.
In contrast, unsupervised methods simply identify those accounts etc., which differ most from the average transaction.
This means that the fundamental point is that we can rarely be certain, by the sole use of statistical analysis, whether a fraud has occurred. Rather, the analysis should be regarded as a tool which alerts us to the fact that observations are anomalous, or more likely to be suspect than others, so that they can then be investigated in more detail. One can consider the objective of this statistical analysis as being to allocate a suspicion score (where a higher score is regarded as more suspicious than a lower one).
Suspicion scores can be given for each record held in the database and these scores can be constantly reassessed. These scores can then be put in order and can be further investigate those with the highest scores or on those that indicate a sudden increase. It is too expensive to undertake a detailed investigation of all records, so for cost-effectiveness investigation is concentrated on those transactions considered most likely to be fraudulent.
The diversity of fraudulent activity as indicated by the numerous types of fraud makes the detection of fraudulent behaviour an important task. At most banks, to identify potential fraudulent at source, part of the review process of applications for new credit cards involves routine information checks. (In some cases, the scrutinising of application forms for telltale types of handwriting has led investigators to identify fraudulent applications submitted by organized criminal groups. A number of fraudulent applications submitted by a Nigerian fraud cartel have been identified in this way.).
Following issue, however, most banks depend upon periodic scrutiny of account behaviour to assess if there is suspicion of fraud. In particular, banks have devised a series of rule-based checks against which all portfolio activity is reviewed. Such checks could specify a ceiling on the number of transactions that should reasonably be expected to occur in a single day. Thus, an excessive transaction report might also be utilised to count the number of transactions above some threshold on purchase amount.
These guidelines have been developed as a result of analyses of historical fraudulent behaviour in the portfolio. However, most banks tend to use only the most basic of statistical analyses to develop these guidelines, meaning that in most cases the rule sets consist of a set of simple threshold conditions on account variables. It follows that the use of more sophisticated technologies for fraud detection can result in dramatically improved results and detection. In particular, when pattern recognition is utilised, the problem of fraud detection is an obvious application for an appropriately chosen neural network solution.
Some of the techniques used for fraud detection:
An outlier is an observation that deviates so much from other observations as to arouse suspicion that it was generated by a different mechanism. Unsupervised learning approach is employed to this model. Usually, the result of unsupervised learning is a new explanation or representation of the observation data, which will then lead to improved future responses or decisions. Unsupervised methods do not utilise the prior knowledge of fraudulent and non-fraudulent transactions in an historical database, but rather identify changes in behaviour or unusual transactions. These detection utilise a baseline distribution that indicates normal behaviour and then identify observed cases that show highest variance from this norm. Outliers are a basic form of non-standard observation that can be implemented used for fraud identification. In supervised detection methods, a system is in place to discriminate between fraudulent and non-fraudulent behaviour so that new observations can be classified. Supervised detections require accurate identification of fraudulent transactions in historical databases and are only able to detect frauds of a retrospective type. An advantage of using unsupervised methods as opposed to supervised methods is that previously unknown types of fraud may be identified.
A neural network is a set of interlinked nodes devised to mimic the functioning of the human brain. Each node has a weighted link to several other nodes in adjacent levels. Individual nodes receive input from linked nodes and use the weighting as an integral part of a simple function to compute output values. Neural networks come in a variety of types and can be devised for supervised or unsupervised detection. The user can specify the number of hidden levels as well as the number of nodes within each specific hidden layer. Depending on the application, the output layer of the neural network may contain any number of nodes.
The typical Internet Payment Processing systems have following actors:
Acquiring Bank: In the online payment-processing world, an acquiring bank provides Internet Merchant Accounts. A Merchant must open an Internet Merchant Account with an Acquiring Bank to enable online credit card authorisation and payment processing.
Credit Card Association: A financial institution that provides credit card services that are branded and distributed by customer Issuing Banks, Example include Visa and MasterCard.
Customer Issuing Bank: A financial institution, such as a bank, that provides your customer with a payment instrument. The issuer is responsible for the cardholder 's debt payment.
Internet Merchant Account: A special account with an Acquiring Bank that allows the merchant to accept credit cards over the Internet. The merchant is typically pays a processing fee for each transaction processed, also known as discount rate. A merchant applies for an Internet Merchant Account in a process similar to applying for a commercial loan. The fees charged by the acquiring bank usually vary.
Payment Gateway: A service that provides connectivity among merchants, customer and financial networks to process authorisation and payments. The service is usually operated by a third-party such as Verisign.
Processor: A large data center that processes credit card transactions and settles funds to merchants. The processor is connected to merchant 's site on behalf of an acquiring Bank via Payment Gateway.
Payment processing can be divided into two major phases:
During authorisation phase, verification is made that the credit card is active and the customer has sufficient credit available to make the purchase.
Authorisation Steps:
Customer decides to make a purchase on a merchant 's Web site, proceeds to checkout and input credit card information.
The Merchant 's Web site receives customer information and sends transaction information to the Payment Gateway.
The Payment Gateway routes the information to the Processor.
The Processor sends information to the Issuing Bank of the Customer 's credit card.
The Processor routes transactions result to the Payment Gateway.
The Payment Gateway passes result information to the Merchant.
The Merchant accepts or rejects transactions and ships goods if necessary.
The second phase is the settlement phase during which money is transferred from the customer 's account to the merchant 's account.
Settlement Steps:
Merchant request the Payment Gateway to settle a transaction.
The Payment Gateway sends all transactions to be settled to the Processor.
The Processor sends settlement payment details to customer 's credit card Issuing Bank: at the same time the processor sends payment details to merchant 's Acquiring Bank.
The Issuing Bank includes the Merchant 's charge on the Customer 's credit card statement while the Acquiring Bank credits the Merchant 's account.
Figure 4 shows various methods that have been adopted in order to reduce the fraud. Facts infers, that the methods which are being used are not sufficient enough to bring down the fraud rate, but helpful in detecting fraud.
The new Internet Payment Processing systems have following new actors:
An application server is a software platform that delivers content to the Web. This means that an application server interprets site traffic and constructs pages based on a dynamic content repository. This content is typically personalized based on site visitor information, such as the content he/she has viewed up to that point, his/her past buying history, or preferences he/she has set during previous visits. These changes based on site visitor preferences and buying history fall under the classification of site Personalization. An application server mainly manages the connection between the database and other components such as web-service. In this model the application server provides a method of communication between the merchant and the buyers. It offers a web-based application through which user provides their payment details. To better understand the concept of Application Server lets look at a small example:
Let 's say that you have found an exclusive designer shirt which you would like to buy for yourself on a website. You go to the website fill out the shipping and billing information and click on the button to confirm the purchase. That click sends the message from your machine through an application server to the merchants inventory and accounting system. It then feeds all the transaction details into the merchant database and do the authentication. At this stage, one of the many things the application server is doing is managing the connection between databases. The information from the inventory system along with the information that you submitted pass through the application server and you see the message on the screen that the transactions is complete and goods would be dispatched in usually 1-2 weeks time.
XML Web services are a category of software components that provide functionality over the network. Interaction with XML Web Services is usually performed using standard Internet Protocols. These include well-established Internet standards such as TCP/IP, HTTP, HTTPS and XML. An XML Web Service is rarely a complete application and is most frequently a functional component of a larger solution. As such, XML Web services are primarily oriented toward program-to-program interaction.
With an XML Web service the information is available through a well-defined interface and is accessed using standard protocols. Any device or program regardless of platform or implementation languages, can communicate with the XML Web service across the network to access the information. This was the main motivation behind implementing web-service as it helped making the model robust and platform independent in terms of information sharing.
Whether it 's a Windows Machine or Unix or a handheld device such as PDA, XML Web services could communicate with all of them. The Web- Service server is the server where the web-service physically exists. The Web application on the Web server communicates with the Web-service to request user details and send all the transaction details to the database.
In simple terms web-services is providing a bridge between the client browser and database that increases the database security. The web-service only provides definition of the implementation of all the methods and hiding all the process that is designed in accessing the information.
The database Server used in this model is the Microsoft SQL Server that is a comprehensive database platform providing enterprise-class data management with integrated business intelligence (BI) tools. The SQL Server database engine provides more secure, reliable storage for both relational and structured data, enabling to build and manage highly available, performance data applications. The Database design is discussed detailed in Section 4.
The new transactional model has been designed to overcome the weaknesses present in the current model. A lot of effort has been put into selecting one of the best possible solutions to the problem.
The new model aims to offer a transactional model with strong authentication and fraud detection capability alongside with implementation of security features make it least vulnerable to any sorts of attack.
The new authorisation process includes more steps as compared to one already present. It was essential to introduce more stages in the authorisation phase to achieve all the objectives.
