Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the virus, which causes, Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). HIV infects and destroys CD4+ lymphocytes, which are the bodies' immune cells. After a long incubation period, on average 10 years the individual acquires AIDS which is a state of immunosuppression. "This defect of cellular immunity leads to susceptibility to infection with opportunistic agents" Miller et al (1987). The period of infection may last for several years but eventually becomes overwhelming and death ensues. Transmission of HIV requires close contact and occurs by one of three routes, blood, birth or sex. "Casual contact does not lead to disease transmission" Fan et al (1998).
The current global situation is that "HIV/AIDS has been reported from every inhabited continent and from every country" Barnett & Whiteside (2002). The disease has changed the lives of individuals, ruined their health, caused their deaths and left survivors to mourn. The prevalence of the global epidemic is difficult to measure, as obtaining accurate statistics is highly problematic but the most recent estimates show that in "2003 5 million people were newly infected with HIV and 3 million people died as a result of AIDS. Globally the number of people living with HIV/AIDS is 40 million". HIV and AIDS statistics (2003).
Since the "recognition of HIV in 1981, it has aroused deep human responses, a persistently negative societal response has played and continues to play a critical role in the experiences of individuals infected with the virus" Alonzo & Reynolds (1995). This essay will look at stigma and why it is associated with HIV/AIDS, the effect this has on the individual throughout the disease course, and how this influences health care of HIVAIDS patients.
There are many varied definitions of stigma Alonzo & Reynolds (1995) provide a good working definition. "The stigmatised are a category of people who are pejoratively regarded by the broader society. They are devalued, shunned or otherwise lessened in their life chances and in access to the humanising benefit of free and unfettered social intercourse". Stigma ultimately creates outsiders, which results in social boundaries between normal and the stigmatised. This reduces the life chances of the stigmatised and they are perceived by society as "high risk" groups.
The function of stigma can be thought of as a way of reinforcing social norms, it achieves this by defining deviance, and deviant behaviours. Taylor (2001) suggests that "it is an exercise of power over people and a means of control by marginalising or excluding a group from the wider community thereby reinforcing societal values". If society can stigmatise certain individuals or groups in society which it considers to be "at risk" it can excuse itself from the responsibility of caring for and looking after such populations for the reason that they have brought on the disease themselves by acting deviantly. This is supported by Sontag (1991) who suggests that "HIV is a metaphor for "sinful" and "evil", it is therefore discrediting an individuals claim to be a moral character and one of us". An example of how stigma associated with high-risk groups is reinforced is seen with the policy of blood transfusion in the UK. Any gay man who has ever had sex with a man, even "safe sex" is prohibited from donating blood. This discrimination prevents all gay men from donating blood. Taylor (2001) states that this "reinforces the notion that it is "others" who are at risk from HIV". Such beliefs may result in people who do not fit into one of the "risk groups" presuming that they are at no risk.
According to Taylor (2001) "medical conditions which attract stigma are those that tend to be associated with negative attributes evoking strong emotional responses such as fear and revulsion". HIV/AIDS most certainly fits these, criteria. Nettleton (1995) takes this further by suggesting "that it is because a new disease like HIV, may be transmitted through the most intimate of human contacts that it strikes at the heart of social interactions, revealing the fragility of social order. It is the threat to social order, which generates the fervent moralising".
Alonzo & Reynolds (1995) have defined six reasons why individuals with HIV/AIDS are stigmatised.
HIV is associated with deviant behaviour, both as a product and as a produced of deviant behaviour.
HIV is viewed as the responsibility of the individual.
It is tainted by religious and moral beliefs that lead some people to believe that having HIV/AIDS is the result of a moral fault, which deserves to be punished.
HIV is perceived as contagious and threatening to the community.
HIV is associated with an undesirable and unaesthetic form of death.
HIV is not well understood in the lay community and is viewed negatively by health care providers.
It is for these reasons that people infected with HIV/AIDS are subjected to unfair discriminate behaviour from others. Adding to this Fredriksson & Kanabus (2003) have suggested that laws, rules and policies of some societies can increase the stigmatisation of people living with HIV/AIDS, such as legislation, which demands the compulsory screening and testing of perceived "at risk" groups. This serves two purposes of fuelling the stigmatisation of certain groups and of creating a false sense of security among individuals who are not considered high risk.
Denial fuels stigma by making those individuals who are affected appear abnormal and exceptional. Fredriksson & Kanabus (2003) suggest that "failing to respond to the needs of those living with HIV and failing to recognise growing epidemics in the belief than HIV/AIDS can never happen to us are some of the most common forms of denial".
The "risk groups" for acquiring AIDS are considered to be homosexual men, female sexual partners of infected men, children of infected mothers, IV drug abusers, Haemophiliacs, blood transfusion recipients and people of Haitian or central African origin. It is at these groups that the majority of stigma is directed. However some population groups are also more likely to be regarded by the broader society as innocent victims of HIV/AIDS. Individuals in these groups are infants of HIV positive mothers and transfusion recipients and thus they may be treated less harshly.
Although the stigma associated with HIV/AIDS is overpowering, Alonzo & Reynolds(1995) suggest "individuals with the illness do not necessarily experience the same degree of stigma". An example of this is that individuals with strong ties to the gay community may perceive less and experience less gay and HIV related stigma than an individual with stronger ties to non gay communities. Therefore the impact of stigma upon each individual is different.
An effective way of looking at the impact of stigma was shown by Alonzo & Reynolds (1995). They studied stigma throughout the disease trajectory, which allowed them to create a stigma trajectory, which conceptualises what an individual may feel and go through. There are four phases to the stigma trajectory.
In this phase the individual perceives themselves or is perceived by others to be "at risk", but the individual has not yet been tested. Individuals in this phase are aware of their risk or perceived risk and may potentially feel stigma for this. It is sometimes termed as pre-stigmatic risk as they are living with the idea of what may happen to them, the "worried well" state.
A positive diagnosis is a profoundly disturbing realisation for all those involved. Individuals at this stage are adapting to their newly emerged status and its consequences, such as the possibility of a shortened life span. At this phase the individual has to deal with the consequences of discovery or disclosure of HIV positively. Individuals at this stage may have already seen and felt HIV/AIDS related stigma and must manage information carefully under much stress and tension.
At this stage although the individual is HIV positive they are seemingly healthy. The disease is asymptomatic and concealable. However in this phase there remains the potential for felt stigma in terms of rejection, alienation and isolation. The majority of people who can conceal their status will do so to protect their self-esteem and avoid stigmatisation. However concealing their status is emotionally exhausting for the individual and deprives them of the social support from their social network.
In this phase individuals begin to develop clinical conditions linked to HIV. These early manifestations can precede the acquisition of an AIDS-defining condition. At this point the individual is developing revealing stigmatising signs and symptoms, which pose the threat of exposure. As HIV/AIDS begins to make itself evident it is accompanied by severe feelings of stigma and an inevitable decline in health status.
In the developing world it has been seen that, the impact upon women is particularly acute. " Men are likely to be excused for the behaviour that resulted in their infection whereas women are not" Fredriksson & Kanabus (2003). The families of the infected are most likely to be the primary carers although their responses are not always positive. The infected family member can find themselves stigmatised and discriminated against within the home.
The HIV status of an individual also has an impact upon their employment, "if people with HIV/AIDS are open about their infection status at work they may well experience stigmatisation and discrimination by others" Fredriksson & Kanabus (2003). A positive status could also be used to terminate or refuse the employment of an individual.
Caring for people with HIV/AIDS is complex. This is due to the complexity of the physical manifestations, the need for infection control and the associated stigma. Caring for patients with HIV/AIDS is not easy for health care professionals it is mentally and physically tiring, watching the deterioration and death of mostly young patients is distressing. However there is no excuse for stigmatising behaviour towards individuals with HIV/AIDS and Kelly et al (1987) has shown that "unreasonable stigma and prejudicial attitudes associated with AIDS have been identified amongst practising physicians and medical undergraduates". Robinson (1998) has shown that "negative attitudes towards people with HIV/AIDS may affect the quality of patient care, or may result in a refusal to treat". Patient satisfaction is a key measure of quality of care. Beedham & Wilson-Barnett (1995) found that "amongst HIV/AIDS patients satisfaction was high but prejudice was experienced".
Problems which, affect the care of patients with HIV/AIDS have been highlighted by Robinson (1998), There is a fear of becoming infected which, is shown by an unwillingness to care and the absence of touching the patient. Homophobic and religious attitudes of health care workers will also affect the care they give. There is also the problem of "burnout" a term, which is associated with people who work with high demand populations and are subjected to intense stress. These problems all bar burnout are stigmatising resulting in inadequate medical care.
To provide adequate, respectful, compassionate and dignified care to HIV/AIDS patients Lindsey (no date) suggests "care givers must examine their own beliefs, values, assumptions and attitudes towards HIV/AIDS". Educational programmes based upon sound, medical, social and psychological knowledge is needed to bring about changes in negative attitudes.
In conclusion, stigma is an attribute, which is significantly discrediting to an individual. It is a social label, which changes the way an individual views themselves, and is viewed by society. Due to its epidemiological nature HIV became a disease of which certain groups of sufferers were highly stigmatised and discriminated against. They were singled out in society as "others" their infection being the result of their own deviant behaviour. Stigmatisation has a profound impact upon an individual. To avoid stigmatisation an individual may conceal their HIV positivity, which not only denies them vital social support but also subjects them to intense stress and the worry of being "found out". Towards the end of the disease when outward signs of HIV infection become evident, individuals can fear stigmatisation so much it forces them into isolation. Within the medical community stigmatising behaviour widely exists which, can not only prevent individuals from seeking help in the first place but can also stop them from receiving adequate treatment and care. There is an intense fear of becoming infected when treating an HIV positive individual. Changes can only be brought about through strong accurate educational programmes which, quash ignorance and promote a more understanding and caring attitude.
