The purpose of this essay is to establish the extent to which the Downs model of voting can be used to explain the result of the General Election of 2005. It attempts to answer whether the outcome can be explained by use of the median voter theorem and concludes that this is the case in as far as the predictions that result from implementing the theorem are as vague as the variables that it considers. The General Election of 2005 was, in comparison to those of 1979 and 1997, a fairly lacklustre one and in this respect, the median voter theorem fairs well when analysing it.
The economic theories devised in Adam Smith 's magnum opus The Wealth of Nations gave rise to the political paradigm of rational choice. The concept of self-interested individuals persuing maximum utility, and thus resulting in collective welfare, was one that could be applied to politics as effectively as Smith applied it to economics. Though Smith himself denied the importance of his economic theories in a political light, later developments and technical conceptualizations of his work proved both resultant and influential.
Smith, A. (1976). The Wealth of Nations. Edwin Cannad (Ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Originally published in 1775).
A key protagonist of the economic approach to politics was Anthony Downs; his median voter theorem has proved consistantly useful in analysing voting behavior despite changing ideologies. As with many of the models to rise from economic principles, the theorem relies on the key assumptions of the rational choice paradigm:
Downs, A. (1957). An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.
Actors pursue goals.
These goals reflect the actors' perceived self-interest.
Behaviour results from a process that actually involves concious choice.
The individual is the basic actor in society.
Actors have preference orderings that are consistent and stable.
If given options, actors choose the alternative with the highest expected utility.
Actors possess extensive information on both the available alternatives and the likely consequences of their choices.
Monroe, K. R. (1991). The Economic Approach to Politics: A Critical Reassessment of the Theory of Rational Action. New York: Harper Collins.
Thus, once one is aware of an actor 's preference orderings and goals, judgements and projections can be made as to how the actor will respond in a given circumstance. From this, Downs established the main characteristics of a single-member district plurality election according to his median voter theorem: 1. There are only two parties. 2. Voters' preferences can be mapped on to a one-dimensional space. 3. Parties can move to and occupy any point in this space. 4. Parties are vote maximises. 5. Voters vote for the party closest to them in political space. 6. Voters' preferences are fixed. 7. There is perfect information.
Hindmoor, A. 'Reading Downs: New Labour and An Economic Theory of Democracy', The British Journal of Politics & International Relations, 2005, vol. 7, 402-417.
Downs' assumptions indicate that in order to achieve electoral success, a party must move to the centre of the distribution of preferences where, owing to the unimodal structure, the majority of voters reside. This indicates that in the run-up to a general election, a political party should form policies that match those preferences of the median voter and thus capture the majority of the electorate.
This approach undoubtedly worked for New Labour in the General Election of 1997; by reaching out to the Worcester Woman and the Mondeo Man, the apparent median voters, the election was won with a 10% swing from the Conservatives, double that of the previous highest. There are, however, more factors in the outcome of an election than the ability for a party to move to equilibrium. In particular, Major 's Conservative party made the error of leaving the election until the latest possible moment in hope that the "feel-good factor" following economic prosperity would turn around Tory fortunes in the polls. The subsequent lack of recovery, coupled with flaws in the Conservative campaign such as sleaze and party divide over Europe ensured that Labour faced a weak opposition.
Downs' model of voting does not incorporate such events and it is perhaps the simplicity of the theory that has prevented it from becoming anachronistic. However, there are shortcomings in the model that prevent it from being precise. There are those, such as Herbert Simon, that argue that actors seek not to achieve maximum utility but are satisfied by a minimum level. As well as this, criticisms have been made regarding the lack of attention paid to phenomena such as the existence of habit, tradition and socially imposed norms that would otherwise affect the actor 's preferences. In essence, the simple nature of the model is both a help and a hindrance. Though the conclusions drawn when using the model are reliable to a certain degree, the few variables used when constructing the initial hypothesis allow for criticisms to be made as to the precision of the findings.
Simon, H. A. (1982). Models of Bounded Rationality, vols. 1-2. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
By using Downs' median voter theorem when analysing the result of the 2005 General Election, observations regarding the extent to which the theory can be applied to a real event can be made. In the election, Labour maintained government with a 64 seat majority and gained 35.2% of the electorate throughout the UK. This was a decisive third victory for Labour and the median voter theorem would conclude that the result illustrated that their centre policies were most in line with those of the median voter on the continuum. . Accessed 13 November 2005. 6 Grant, W. P. (2005). Three Ways of Modelling Voting, lecture notes distributed in Introduction to Research Methods PO 102 at the University of Warwick, on 26 th October 2005.
Figure 1 illustrates party ideology as of September 2005, four months after the general election. One point that can be made when looking at the graph is that the median voter (X) is positioned to the centre right of the ideological continuum. The spectrum places the Labour Party (La) closest to the median voter with a slightly less right position, whereas the Conservative Party (C) and the Liberal Democratic Party (Li) are more polarised, with the former benefiting from the rightward leaning median voter.
In order to achieve the greatest share of the electorate, a party must adapt their policies to coincide with the preferences of the voter at point X. When using Downs' model of voting, the ideological spectrum would suggest that Labour, being the party closest to the median voter, could gain the majority of the electorate at the time of election, followed by the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats respectively. When looking at the election results, it is clear that on the most fundamental level, the Downs' model does indeed apply. With 9,552,436 votes (35.2%), Labour had a simple majority of 64 seats (355 out of 646). The Conservatives gained 8,784,915 votes (32.4%) which equated to 198 seats, whereas the Liberal Democrats managed 5,985,454 votes (22%) giving them 62 seats 7. 7. Accessed 20th November 2005.
In An Economic Theory of Democracy, Downs states that "[t]heoretical models should be tested primarily for the accuracy of their predictions rather than for the reality of their assumptions." 8 Therefore, the aforementioned assumptions of Downs' median voter theorem, though vague, can be applied to the 2005 General Election and used to justify the outcome. Moreover, the deductive hypothesis formed by Downs - that in a single-member district plurality system, parties will gravitate towards the preferences of the median voter - appears to be true insofar as Labour 's position on the ideological spectrum resulted in electoral victory. 8 Downs, A. (1957). An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.
When analysing individual issues, Labour was ahead on the two most important issues. In a MORI survey 9, 67% of those polled indicated that health care was an important issue in the 2005 election and 36% suggested that Labour 's policies were most in line with their preferences, whereas only 22% thought the Conservative Party would best manage health care and 10% trusted the Liberal Democrats. The issue of Education, second in the list of most important issues, also indicated electorate trust in Labour, where 35% stated they had the best policies in that area, over 20% for the Conservatives and 10% for the Liberal Democrats. Only on less important issues such as Immigration and Iraq did the Conservatives and Liberals make any ground. 52% of those surveyed agreed that the Conservatives had the best immigration policy and 39% backed the Liberal Democrats' Iraq policies. 9 Worcester, R. (2005) Explaining Labour 's 'Landslip'. MORI.
On the most important issues, Labour certainly appealed to the median voter and though the Conservatives' immigration policy appealed to many, the issue was clearly not high enough in the voters' preference list to greatly affect the result of the election. It is a known fact that when the economy is doing well, as it was at the time of the 2005 General Election, immigration is not a great concern; the fact that 53% of those surveyed trusted Labour 's economic policy perhaps alleviated the impact of the popular Conservative immigration policy.
It became apparent shortly after the party campaigns began that Labour would attempt to highlight the success of the economy under their time in government whereas the Conservative Party would advocate their immigration policy whenever possible. However, the controversial nature of the issue ensured that the Conservatives were quickly labelled "The Nasty Party" by their opponents and, whilst consolidating their core vote, disengaged a lot of people in the process. In contrast, Labour 's economic platform was successful in that they had an 8 year history of being capable managers of the economy, something that the Conservative party lost in the ERM crisis of 1992 and are still trying to regain.
Downs' median voter theorem implies that the most important factor in determining the electoral result is party policies and the degree to which they are aligned with that of the voter. However, there are other factors that affect the way people vote. When a MORI poll asked "what it is that most attracted you to the [insert party name] party", 31% of those surveyed stated that 'Leader Image' was the most important deciding factor and 24% 'Party Image'. Though the rest agreed that "Issues" was the most important factor, this evidence illustrates that Downs' theorem is limited by the extent to which the electorate vote on issues alone.
Another limitation to the use of Downs' model of voting is the rise of the Liberal Democrats as a viable third party. The model is less effective in multi-party systems; by gaining 22% of the electorate (up 3.8% from 2001) and 62 seats, the Liberals are finally showing that, despite the biased electoral system, the rise of a three party system in the United Kingdom is not completely out of the question. This would add another dimension to the Downs' model of voting and it has yet to be seen whether the theorem can withstand such a development. It is clear that smaller third parties, such as the Green Party and the British National Party, would not win election by adopting median policies; in some cases, it is not even in the party 's interest to win the general election but rather to stand on a single issue in a single constituency as more of a protest to the actions of the government. The Respect Party in particular, where the election of George Galloway in Bethnal Green and Bow on an anti-Iraq-war ticket, demonstrated that Downs' assumption, that the single goal of election is pursued rationally by the political party, is in fact not consistently true.
Another assumption made by Downs can be contested. The view that voters' preferences are fixed was perhaps not the case in the General Election of 1979. The Conservative candidate Margaret Thatcher 's revolutionary policies of privatisation and restructuring were not at the time shared by the electorate but through careful campaigning and electorate education, Thatcher managed to realign the entire contemporary political ideology and thus undermine a fundamental principle of Downs' theorem. However, when regarding the 2005 General Election, it appeared that no politician was ready to take such bold action and it was only in the aftermath that the Tories, whilst returning to opposition, decided to modernise in an attempt to move closer to the ideological centre by electing a new leader.
This tactic certainly worked for New Labour in 1997, when Tony Blair fronted a revamped party that 're-wrote Clause IV, promised to abide by Conservative trade union legislation, abandoned its outright opposition to grammar schools, committed itself to the 'golden rule' and the Conservative government 's spending plans and pledged to leave income tax unchanged." This move to the centre right of British Politics was, in the opinion of authors such as Pippa Norris, an attempt to capture the median voter. This came as a harsh blow to party activists such as Tony Benn who saw the shift more as a sacrilege of traditional Labour values than an attempt to compromise. It seemed that at the time, the efforts made to woo the electorate since 1979 had been abandoned and Labour had fully accepted the Downs model.
Hindmoor, A. 'Reading Downs: New Labour and An Economic Theory of Democracy', The British Journal of Politics & International Relations, 2005, vol. 7, 406.
Norris, P. (1999) 'New politicians? Changes in party competition at Westminster', in G. Evans and.
P. Norris (Eds.), Critical Elections: British Parties and Voters in Long-Term Perspective (London: Sage).
The Downs model has become increasingly popular owing not only to its contemporary ability but also because of the decline of viable alternative models. The sociological model is dependent on class and there has been, since the decline of manufacturing industries, a substantial fall in party links with classes, as well as there being a general decrease in the class system itself. For instance, the disaffiliation of the working class from the Labour Party has resulted in the traditional core Labour voter no longer identifying with New Labour 's right-wing policies. The Psychological model has also become anachronistic since the recent fall in party identification, resulting in a more fluid electorate who seek to maximise their utility over committing to a party ideology. The economic model of voting has thus become more prevalent in recent years when concerning General Elections.
Downs' model of voting has been, to some extent, accurate since its formulation in 1957. The extent to which it can help to explain the result of the British General Election of 2005 depends on the level of detail that one seeks to acquire. In the pre-election polls, Labour seemed ahead in regards to health care and education, the two most important policy areas. Also, the overall ideological position of the party was closest to that of the median voter. Therefore, when looking at the major parties' policies and ideologies, the Downs' model can be applied and should produce similar results to those seen in the General Election. However, there are a number of flaws in Downs' theorem such as its inability to accommodate for factors other than "issues" such as events, personality and whether the party leader has the ability to change individuals' preferences to the extent of provoking an ideological shift. This is becoming more prevalent with New Labour 's use of Spin Doctors such as Alistair Campbell who seek to advocate policies that may not be in line with the median voter. Yet Downs' deterministic theory survives due to its lack of variables and can therefore unintentionally accommodate for such factors by not considering them when formulating predictions.
