It is often said that, 'money is the mothers milk' of American politics. Many sceptics claim that money permeates the entire political system, especially in two key areas, election campaigns, and interest group influence. These claims are backed up by some incredible statistics. For instance, in the 2004 election cycle, all but four of the Senate elections were won by the highest spending candidate, and in the House, this was all but ten; therefore, out of 469 Congressional elections in 2004, 455 were won by the highest spender. Although it is incredibly difficult to prove that money is the overriding influence in US politics (although the upcoming trial of Jack Abramoff could make this inference more accurate) it is widely regarded as true that, without money in US politics, you barely stand a hope of influencing the system in any way, and exceptions to this rule are highly sporadic. However, it would be wrong to claim that, 'money is everything'. Money cannot guarantee success in US politics, even if it can make it much more likely. Money is crucial to success, but it cannot guarantee it.
The Center for Responsive Politics, Accessed 6th February 2006.
When discussing money in the American political system, elections tend to be the first thing that comes to mind. Whereas in the UK the two main parties spent around   15,000 each in 2005, the federal elections in the USA in 2004 (Congressional and Presidential elections) cost a total of $2.05 billion, spent solely by parties and candidates. In America, elections are particularly expensive owing to the larger area over which to campaign, as well as the incredible length of the campaign. For instance, Howard Dean had started actively campaigning and fundraising for the November '04 election in early 2003. Without money for advertising, travel and other major campaign expenses, nobody in the USA can possibly be hope to become an elected official at the federal level. For these reasons, it is obvious that money is an important resource in winning an election. This would not be a problem, if it did not appear that raising the most money guarantees electoral success, which would create an elitist political culture in America, excluding the poor from the political process, and giving more influence to large campaign donors, and rich candidates who have the necessary contacts and ideology to attract them.   15,690,032.31 spent by the Conservatives,   15,227,697.00 by Labour. Data available at Accessed 20th February 2006 i.e. not including money spent by 527 Groups etc.
However, despite the obvious necessity of money, the trends that are seen in US elections, that the highest money raiser wins, may be skewed. The largest counter-argument to this is the 'incumbency factor', particularly in House elections. With an incumbency rate of 98.5%, it is apparent that, for reasons such as experience, contacts and possible success in office, incumbent candidates are likely to win in House elections. As such, groups that are looking to buy influence in Congress will donate large sums of money to that likely winner. Therefore, it may be that winning candidate raise large amounts of money because they are going to win, rather than winning due to the large sums of money that were raised. Although this is not conclusive, it nevertheless shows us that American federal elections may not be as dominated by money as is commonly supposed. It is also crucial to point out that spending a great deal of money is no guarantee of success, if the candidate lacks media support, charisma, or a major party label. In 1992, Ross Perot spent $60 million on his campaign, and even though he gained 19% of the popular vote, he won no electoral college votes, as the winner takes all system was inherently biased against a third candidate. This is an example of how money can, to an extent, bring about a great deal of success, but, in isolation, is no guarantee of it in US politics.
Money is also highly influential on policy making in government, not just in who wins office. In the past, it has been very difficult to conclusively prove whether money is the single biggest factor for interest groups to push their agenda in Congress. Certainly, interest groups without money to hire professional lobbyists and media consultants are at a huge disadvantage to their wealthier counterparts, usually concentrated in business groups. However, there is another side to money in decision making. If hiring political lobbyists and organising slick media campaigns indirectly affect decision making, than political corruption and bribery are ways for money to have a direct impact. It has often been supposed that Washington is filled with corruption, and this argument has a renewed legitimacy with the current Abramoff scandal. For example, it is reported that Congressmen Bob Ney was given a trip to the Superbowl, The Marianas Islands and a golfing trip to Scotland in exchange for support in Congress for Abramoff 's employers. The Abramoff scandal has shown that money indeed does have a huge effect on Capitol Hill, although it is unclear how deep this corruption runs into the legislative process. "The hum you is from the Lobbyists", Accessed 21st February 2006.
However, tales of political corruption are fairly uncommon; it is more usual to talk of 'payback' from campaign donations from various industries and groups, than to talk of direct political bribery. For instance, in the 2004 election cycle, the energy sector as a whole contributed $50.6 million to candidates, 75% of which was to Republicans. In August 2005, President Bush signed into law a bill allowing for oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, which was previously banned for environmental reasons. In contrast, the environmental lobby with limited funds, donated $1.9 million in the same period, 88% of which went to Democrats. Although it is impossible to conclusively state that money was influential in this case, it does seem that the energy sector has reaped the rewards of its contributions in 2004, with the incentive of further contributions in following elections for favourable legislation. If this is the case, it is a cause for alarm, as the big industries with huge resources can push their agenda through at the expense of smaller interests. Again, although this link cannot be proven, it seems reasonable to suggest that campaign contributions can lead to favours in government; if this is in doubt, it is only necessary to look at the list of Bush 's ambassadors in 2000 along with their campaign contributions. The most famous example is John Price, who was made ambassador to Mauritius, which may or may not have been connected to the $685,987 he contributed to the Republicans in 2000. . Note that Price has no experience of diplomacy or government, being the CEO of JP Realty Inc.
Of course, there are exceptions to this rule, examples of poorer groups having real influence on policy. Perhaps the most famous one being the civil rights movement where grass roots activism culminating in historic change, specifically the Civil Rights Act (1963). However, it should be noted that the Brown vs. Board of Education for Topeka case that arguably started the mass movement was brought to the Supreme Court by the NAACP, which is itself a wealthy organisation. Without this, it is questionable as to whether the movement could be as successful as it was. Nevertheless, grass roots activism can be highly influential, but this tends to be only in exceptional circumstances, and on single issues, and can take a long time. The civil rights movement was highly active for nine years before the Civil Rights Act was passed, involving abuse, imprisonment and physical danger for many that took part in it. Although this grassroot option is open to people, it is a long arduous task with no guarantee of success. In comparison, big business groups can employ full time lobbyists, who can cost up to $300,000 a year each, and have an on-going influence in government on a variety of issues relating to their group. Although examples exist where influence has been given despite of a lack of money, this is not the norm in US politics. Interest groups often have to seek influence through media advertising, court action and direct lobbying in Washington, all of which are incredibly expensive, with a    page advert in the 'Washington Post' costing up to $15,000. It is difficult not to agree that, in US politics, the odds are stacked against those without access to huge sums of money. "The hum you hear is from lobbyists", Accessed 6th February 2006.
Unfortunately, when discussing the role of money in US politics, a lot of conclusions must be inferred from the evidence available. It is impossible to say whether candidates win elections because of money; we can only show that there is an overwhelming connection between money raised and winning elections, and certainly, incumbency may partly explain this correlation. It would however be wrong to suggest that a candidate without media backing, a party identification and broad popular appeal could win an election simply by outspending other candidates. A similar connection exists in the policy making process. The passing of the Energy Policy Act (2005) may not have been connected to the $50.6 million given by energy sector groups in 2004; we can only suggest a link. However, it is fair to say that, whether running for office, or simply trying to influence office holders, money is extremely important. A candidate who cannot afford advertising, travel and media time simply will not win a federal election; an interest group who cannot afford lobbyists, media campaigns or full time staff cannot compete with the opposing interest groups who can. It is not true to say that spending the most money guarantees success in American politics. However, it is true that, without a huge amount of resources, success is made much more difficult to obtain in the political process.
