Mrs is a 73-year old retired barmaid who suffers from undiagnosed illness, possibly disseminated carcinoma. She has lived in for twenty years. has three sons and one daughter; however, until recently the only family member she related to was her daughter-in-law, , who is also her main carer and power of attorney. The patient lives alone in a council house, and receives a pension and attendance allowance which covers for her expenses. The house management, payment of bills and shopping have been done by for fifteen years.  's health started deteriorating a year ago, when she suffered from strong headaches and occasional blackouts. In February 2005, Dr , her GP, was asked for advice on  's health by . Until then had never been seen by a Doctor, due to a phobia of healthcare professionals, following a traumatising event during her childhood at the time of her mother 's illness and death. In June 2005 scolded her right leg. She did not call for help, being found days later on her sitting-room 's floor. The untreated burnt resulted in septicaemia. Her leg should have been amputated, but the patient refused treatment and admission to the Hospital. After this episode has been bed bound and presents with altered levels of consciousness and mental confusion, rarely recognising people. has lost much weight in the last months, is doubly incontinent and may have a recto-vaginal fistula. Additionally, she has a heel sore and bruises very easily. In October 2005 was having episodes of postural hypotension and agreed to have a blood test. Her health suddenly deteriorated that week and health professionals thought she would perish the following weekend. Nevertheless she survived and recovered slightly. Possibly the visit of her youngest and favourite son, has given her a motivation to live. Furthermore, following the death scare, her son 's wife, , who is a professional carer, has been training and helping caring for . has been caring for the patient almost full-time since she became dependent.
The patient seems unaware of her condition even though she has been told that she is very ill. If confronted with such fact, she promptly denies it.
According to a good day would be one in which imagines she is working at the pub and she would be helping her out.  's ill-health has impacted in her family in several ways, the first and most evident one being in relation to her daughter-in-law and main carer, . has been helping for fifteen years, and spending time with her daily. They have a close relationship which contrasts to the rest of the family who have not talked to each other after a family row, fifteen years ago. Following  's mother death, she transferred the wish to have taken care of her and to have been closer to her to , deciding to fully care for her. She learnt how to care for the patient from the carers, the district nurse (DN) and from . She is present whenever the carers visit ensuring that they provide her with the best care. She also decides how much care is needed from the agencies, and assesses the need for extra painkillers. Since the death scare, does not only spend the days with but also stays overnight five nights a week. has got a family of her own, taking care of her husband and daughter, adding up on her workload.
Conversely,  's husband is in sick leave, due to a kidney problem which requires surgery. During convalescence special care will be needed, so they decided to postpone the procedure until dies, to enable to fully care for him then. But if the patient survives for a long time will be faced with a difficult dilemma and may have to decide to stop caring for .
The patient 's illness has contributed to a better family environment, revealed by the recent involvement of youngest son and in supporting and caring for the patient, regardless of previous misunderstandings. was referred to the DN by her GP in June 2005, to receive treatment on her burnt leg at home. The patient was found sleeping on a settee in her sitting-room, from which she would often fall off. She was not using her legs, moving herself on all-fours on her bum. Subsequently, she developed a pressure sore to her bum which was also treated by the DN.
The patient was offered care at home and a chair-raise, to enable transfer from the settee to the commode. It is thought that if had accepted physiotherapy, she might have recovered mobility.
The current role of the DN is to monitor the pressure areas twice a week, to provide incontinence pads, to advise, support and informally train . She liaises with other agencies and arranged for their services. In cooperation with the OT, a bed and a pressure mattress were organised and delivered in the space of five days.
Dr is the gatekeeper in  's care. He visits the patient on request and provides support for . He has won both the patient 's and the carer 's trust. He has not been able to fully examine , due to lack of consent and has respected her wish of not being sent to Hospital. He believes that in the long-term, the fact that she has not been admitted to Hospital or submitted to investigations has not affected the course of the disease substantially, considering the late involvement of the GP, the supposed extent of the disease, the psychological/emotional negative effects that an admission to Hospital would have had on the patient and the invasive nature of some investigations. The GP 's respect for  's wishes should be highlighted. He faces the difficult dilemma of opting for the 'hands-off approach' thereby respecting the patient 's wishes, versus establishing the diagnosis and being able to offer the best treatment available.
The GP 's prime concerns regard controlling the symptoms and dignifying the patient 's death. This involves pain management, currently achieved with morphine patches and painkillers, and the control of mental confusion. The neurological symptoms (fluctuation of consciousness and mental confusion) are thought to be caused by oedema of brain tumours.
Another aim is to avoid an autopsy once dies. The issue of a death certificate is difficult without an established diagnosis and the Coroner must decide whether a post-mortem is required. Dr hopes dies of bronchopneumonia so that an autopsy will not be mandatory.
He is also concerned about the responsibility and workload on , and possible implications on her husband 's health and married life.
Hospice at Home is part of Mary Ann Evans Hospice. Nurses and healthcare assistants are trained to deal with terminally-ill patients and their families. They provide relief and support for in the form of respite care for two hours, twice a week. Their aim is to increase their input, including a night shift, and to be present at the death bed, helping the family with the funeral arrangements. They communicate with the DN and can also liaise with the Macmillan nurses.
The involvement of social services has not been well accepted by as she believes they want to send into a hospice and to get hold of her house and bank account. This has made her reluctant to receive them. It is their responsibility to assess whether a package of care is required, and whether is entitled to it.
Homecare is delivering maximum care: thirty-minute visits in the morning, lunchtime, a single carer in the afternoon, and two at night. They wash and move .
Realistically, the proposed level of care is available, depending solely on  's acceptance. Conversely, respecting the patient 's wishes may be difficult if she survives for a long time, depending on how much longer her son 's surgery can wait, and can endure caring for her.
Key points in this case:
Traumatising experience in patient 's childhood and subsequent phobia for doctors and hospitals impacted on her health negatively: her condition cannot be diagnosed and treated for adequately;  's care and dedication have been providential, enabling to receive care at home as wished;.
GP 's tactful approach and respect for the patient enabled the building of bridges and the establishment of a trusting relationship allowing the provision of the best medical care in these circumstances and support for ;.
Care was readily available and specialised equipment was quickly provided, contributing for the patient 's comfort and the minimisation of further injury (pressure sores);  's case illustrates how patients' beliefs and Dr-patient relationships can impact on health.
