Levi Strauss & Co, which was "founded in 1853 by Bavarian immigrant Levi Strauss" is "one of the world 's largest brand-name apparel marketers with sales in more than 100 countries". Its success is such that there is no other company "with a comparable global presence in the jeans and casual pants markets". The trademark, Levi 's   and their very first product, 501    Original Jeans are well recognized around the world and is registered in more than 160 countries with its headquarters in North America, Europe and in Asia. As stated by Peter Drucker, "The purpose of a business is to create a satisfied customer"; in order to suceed in today 's competitive marketplace the company must be customer-orientated, where they must be able to successfully recognize the needs and wants of the customers. The Levi Strauss & Co managed to establish high standard customer value with long term customer relationship where they were effetive in using various marketing strategies.
Vrontis, D. and Vronti,P. (2004). Levi Strauss: an international marketing investigation. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. vol 8 (4). p389 ibid. ibid.
The most succesful marketing strategy the Levi Strauss & Co have adaopted would be promotion, the main factor which allowed the Levi Strauss & Co to maintain its Brand leadership. Levi Strauss & Co has a high promotion spending, especially on TV commercials, which are considered to be the main contributor in advertsement strategy. For example, the company put   5 million on an iconic TV advertisement showing "a group of young people twisting and contorting their limbs into strange positions", which led to a rise in the market share from 10.6% in 1999 to 11.1% in 2000. The dominant role, which TV played was that it allowed 501    Original Jeans to establish and maintain its brand leadership by shaping up the consumer perception. ibid.
Consumer perception is greatly influenced by branding and successful brand must be able to create "feeling of confidence that brand is of higher quality or more desirable than similar products from competitors". Once this brand leadership is reached, people are willing to pay higher price for it even though the other competitors offer a better deal.
Doyle, P. (2002). Marketing Management and Strategy. 2nd ed. University of Warwick: FT Prentice Hall. p158.
Once the Levi 's   established its brand, the price of 501    Original Jeans became inelastic, where even though the price increased the demand fell only slightly since high price signified high quality. Also, as a leading brand, Levi 's   worked to sustain its brand image successfully. For example it did not allow Tesco from selling 501    Original Jeans since it undermines its brand image. Instead, Levi Strauss & Co introduced discounts Jeans with a brand called Signature, which is sold in Wal-Mart Store in America.
The fact that the Levi Strauss & Co is able to establish and sustain its brand leadership and maintain high profit from selling 501    Original Jeans is also due to its successful tactics against the competitors by constantly "comparing its products, prices, channels of distribution and promotional methods" to identify areas where it can gain a competitive advantage. Levi 's   is a market challenger and these are the main areas, which allowed the 501    Original Jeans to achieve a competitive advantage over the competitors.
Proctor, T. (1992). Essential Marketing. 1st ed. London: Collins Educational Ltd. p 82.
Lees Jeans is one of the main rivals of the Levi 's  , where both of them are associated with American west, designed and priced similarly. However, Levi 's   has a higher market share, where perception of Levis being more "powerful and vivid" led the consumers to choose Levi 's   over Lees Jeans, especially teenagers and young adults, the main targets of the Levi 's  . However, it could be stated that the advertisements are too iconic, where it only targets teenagers and young adults. Since signature is introduced in Wal-Mart, a common supermarket, advertisement would need to appeal to a broader base including people in their 30s and even 40s.
Financial Times. (1999). Mastering Marketing. Complete MBA companion in Marketing. 1st ed. London: Prentice Hall. p 8.
As Levi Strauss and Co have stated in their mission statement, under empathy (one of the main four core values the Levi 's uphold), they focus on analyzing consumer needs and wants; "Understanding and appreciating needs - consumer insight - is central to our commercial success". An example of Levi 's   focusing on the customer value is one to one marketing, where Levi 's introduced personal pair system to design 501    Original Jeans according to individual customer 's measurements. They use what is called, "the 'Original Spin' program, an in-store computerized kiosk to let the consumer select between specific models, fabric, leg openings, buttons and colors. Then a sales associate measures length and waist size". When this personal pair system was introduced, there was 38 percent repurchase rate, where there was an increase of 16 percent. Also, "they have expanded their made-to-order jeans from 10,000 different sizes for women, to 1.5 million customized styles for both sexes.".
Levi Strauss and Co.About LS&CO. / Values and vision. [Online]. (URL ).
Zeiger,D. (1999). Customization nation. Incentive. Vol 173 (5). p35 ibid.
Levi 's   did attempt to extend its brand by selling men suits under its name but it failed dramatically since Denim was perceived as "informal, denim association ". This is also a failure in perceiving market opportunities where they failed to recognize the benefits consumers look for from the products. However, Levi 's introduced Docker  , a very successful brand where for example, "Dockers   Khakis quickly became the No. 1 khaki pant brand in the United States and still holds that leadership status today". Also, in march 2005, Levi 's   entered into "a licensing relationship with GMI Europe to manufacture and sell men 's and women 's lifestyle footwear under the Levi 's   brand name in the U.S., Canada and Latin America", which was based on the consumer appeal of the Levi 's   brand footwear in Asia. However, there is always a risk of stretching its brand too much, where it might lose its core market and objective, which is producing fashionable and quality denim.
Doyle, P. (2002). Marketing Management and Strategy. 2nd ed. University of Warwick: FT Prentice Hall.p175.
Levi Strauss and Co. Our brands / Dockers   brands. [Online]. (URL).
Levi Strauss and Co. Levi Strauss and Co. signs license with GMI Europe. ands. [Online]. (URL).
Well-Segmented market is another factor, which allowed Levi 's   to gain a competitive advantage over its competitors. Segmentation is advantageous in that firstly, it can provide higher satisfaction to customers and secondly, it can enhance profits since customers have different attitudes towards the price and lastly communication targeting can be carried out more efficiently.
Levi 's  , which adopted mixture of differentiated and concentrated marketing strategy are divided into three segments in demographical terms; Women, men and Kids. The style of the Jeans is different for each segment; for example, the Jeans for men are loose where as for women it is usually tight on the hip and flare at the bottom. Levi 's   however focuses its market on teenagers and young adults as they have more disposable income and tend to be more in to the fashion. In order to get closer to the youth market, not only Levi 's   produces iconic advertisements but also Levi 's   introduced 'Antidote' with digital agency, Lateral. Antidote is an user-generated content, "a living, growing snapshot of what people are thinking and doing across Europe, which aim to "actively try to link different groups together with similar interests, or common themes". Even though this might help to promote Levi 's   brand to the youth groups, the company should always focus on the effectiveness and quality of the site, where it is possible that it will undermine the brand. In regards to geographical factor, Levi Strauss & Co has headquarters in North America, Europe and in Asia as "products do not always occupy the same stage in the life cycle between different countries" and also the wants of the consumers can be distinctive in each area due to various factors such as climate and culture. For example, Jeans in America are in mature stage, where as it is in growth stage in eastern countries and Europe. Moreover, recently as the European market is falling down in the women 's market including the profit made from 501    Original Jeans, Levi Strauss & Co tries to focus on its premium repositioning.
Levi Strauss and Co. Antidote. [Online]. (URL eu.levi.com/antidote).
Vrontis, D. and Vronti,P. (2004). Levi Strauss: an international marketing investigation. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. vol 8 (4). P389.
Levi Strauss & Co was able to achieve 'customer intimacy', where they were able to segment and target markets precisely to fulfill the demand of each sector and maintain 'product leadership', where they offered superior services such as one to one marketing and thus was able to create "superior custom value". "Levi was successful in meeting customer need economically and conveniently and with effective communication", where they were able to maintain customer satisfactions and create long-term customer relationship more effectively than the competitors. Even though it could be argued that recently the market seems to be driven by fashion rather than brand and thus brands such as Kelvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger seem to gain more attention from the teenagers and young adults, it continues to benefit from "economies of scale, global uniformity and consistency with the mobile consumer" and maximizes its competitive advantage across the world market.
Piercy,N.(2002). Market led strategic change. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. p77 ibid ibid, p76.
Freeman, J, et al. (2005). Business and management: selected readings for Non-Business Students. Volume 1. 2nd ed. Essex: Pearson Education Ltd. p98.
Vrontis, D. and Vronti,P. (2004). Levi Strauss: an international marketing investigation. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. vol 8 (4). p389.
