This essay provides evidence that social capital in the way that it is currently formulated is not an analytically useful concept in relation to development. The main claim is that, most of the time, social capital theories ignore the role of state and institutions in their analyses of network connections, trust relations and cooperation among people. When the social capital of a community is tainted (e.g., cronyism), state intervention can be efficient to reshape trust relations, not the other way around. Regarded as the 'missing link' by the World Bank, social capital misses a fundamental link concerning development. As some empirical data show, most of the time, strong institutions, not social capital, is the real 'missing link' to development.
The purpose of this essay is to provide evidence that social capital in the form that it is currently formulated and propagated is not an analytically useful concept in relation to development. The main point of our argument is that social capital ignores the role of state and institutions in most of its analysis of network of connections, trust and cooperation among individuals within the social environment.
We believe that this new term is a reinvention of something that historically was always there. Because capital is a social concept, opposing economic and social capital makes little sense. In our view, the term  'social capital' was created to make the economic approach more palatable to its critics. Paradoxically, we shall show, the idea just added confusion to the theoretical framework of development.
We begin by summarising the concept of social capital, emphasizing that the vagueness of the concept makes it a weak tool for development policies, not least because it is difficult to quantify. Next, we analyse two case studies, seeking to show that the concept is not useful because it does not embrace the role of state and institutions.
Defining social capital is a challenging task. The concept has a wide range of definitions, all of which are somewhat vague. As a consequence, the concept fits many sizes and may serve different agendas. When put together, the very words  'social' and 'capital' attract immediate criticism. Ben Fine (2001, 25) argues that the concept is an oxymoron, since we would have to assume the existence of capital that is not social. According to him, capital is social and historical in content, in particular in the way it is embedded within capitalism. By contrast, social capital supporters claim that there are other forms of capital beyond the economic one.
In this essay, we will restrict ourselves to the definitions given by three authors (Bourdieu, Coleman and Putnam), who have fostered the use of the term  'social capital', and the definition used by the World Bank, as it is related to development studies, the focus of this essay.
For Bourdieu (1986, 242), the economic definition of capital is reductionist if taken alone in the analysis of the structure and functioning of the social world. In his view, it is necessary to introduce capital in the 'the immaterial form of cultural capital or social capital' (Bourdieu 1986, 242). He defines the latter as 'the network of connections possessed' by an agent (Bourdieu 1986, 249). But what kinds of connections count? How a connection to the local government is different from the connection to the local mafia?.
A more precise definition of social capital is given by Coleman (1988). According to him, explaining social interactions in terms of the self-interested economic man is not enough; one has to take into account the social structure within which the economic man resides. Following his reasoning, a greedy salesman would fare well in the City whilst badly within a community used to frugality. He examines three forms of social capital: obligations and expectations, information channels, and social norms. The key element of obligations and expectations is trust, a variable broadly disseminated throughout the social capital literature. But how does one measure trust apart from asking people to state it verbally? It is possible that people say they trust each other, even though high levels of trust are only held up by a strong local authority, falling to pieces as soon as the authority ceases to exist. Indeed, that was the case in former communist countries, such as Russia and Ukraine (Rose 1998, 16-8). It is possible already to glimpse at the important role the state plays in  'social capital'. Both Bourdieu and Coleman, however, do not mention it explicitly in their framework.
An alternative definition of social capital is given by Putnam (1993). He considers social capital to be all kinds of 'civic engagement' and  'social and political networks organized horizontally, not hierarchically' (Putnam 1993, 2-3). His emphasis on the importance of 'association' in case studies about Italy and the United States has been bombarded by criticisms. Yet he is one of the few authors that recognise the state in the analysis of social capital: 'Social capital is not a substitute for effective public policy... [It] works through and with states and markets, not in place of them' (1993, 7).
The fourth definition comes from the foreword to the Social Capital Initiative Working Papers (World Bank 2000, iii) and can be considered a summary of all other definitions that we can find in the literature of social capital:
For the World Bank, social capital constitutes the 'missing link' in development. But why? The Bank policies evolved basically from modernization (a state-led approach) in the 1970s to the Washington Consensus (a market-led approach) in the 1980s, arriving at the current stage, the post-Washington Consensus, in which the state is back in. The return of the state to centre stage, however, is now limited by the assessment of social capital. People are told to be organised in associations, connected to each other and able to exert their civic rights. The present discussion about 'good governance' embraced by the Bank fits well with the idea of social capital - if there is civic engagement, the monitoring of a government 's transparency and accountability will be stronger, which leads to a good environment for the action of markets. For Harriss (2002, 81), the attractiveness of the idea of social capital is self-explanatory: 'it brought in the ' 'social'' (or the ''non-economic'') from the cold, while still assuring the hegemony of economics'. This suggests that the post-Washington Consensus is simply the old Washington Consensus plus the so-called social capital.
As to development policies, social capital is a hazardous concept, since it involves quantifying qualitative variables such as trust, civic engagement, horizontal associations and network of connections. Despite some attempts of measurement, some argue that these variables should not be quantified at all.
The current measurement of social capital consists of unsystematic evidence from many sources using different definitions. So, our effort to show that social capital is not an analytically useful concept in relation to development has to proceed through speculations about the results already available. Our findings show that, if it is important to 'put the social right', as has been propagated by international institutions that adopted social capital as their main approach, it is even more important to 'put strong institutions right' in developing societies. Moreover, state and citizens are complementary, not exclusive. We report two case studies where state and institutions play a central role in development.
The first case comes from Judith Tendler 's work in northeastern Brazil. Tendler (1997, quoted in Harriss 2002, 66-8) studied a government health reform in the state of Ceara. Although the state citizens can hardly be regarded as an example of civic engagement, they possess connections and relations that are important for their daily lives. Contrary to the normal assumption, however, the social capital in this case was not truly beneficial, for the connections and trust relations in which those citizens were involved were bounded by parochial loyalties, especially in relation to public services.
To counter that, the central government shifted power from local authorities to the state sphere. Mayors and local politicians lost the power of booking health appointments, a measure designed to avoid political cronyism and rent-seeking. More than 7,000 health agents were hired by the state government and treated as private-sector employees (following a customer-centred and problem-solving approach) and performance results received media publicity. The public knew what they should expect from a health agent and had channels to make complaints in case of failure. The agent, on the other hand, was publicly praised for his effectiveness and was no longer dependent on local power-holders.
This example shows that decentralisation is not always the best solution to development: a central state may be necessary to the success of policies. The government played an important role in changing aspects of the social capital owned by people in order to promote more equal access to public health service. Rather than using the existing social structure, the state implemented policies that, in the end, reshaped the structure of social capital. New relationships of trust between government and citizens were built based on efficiency and accountability.
The second case illustrates the importance of institutions to promote trust relations and thus  'social capital'. Knack and Keefer (1997, 1251-2) analysed World Values Surveys' indicators of trust and civic norms from 29 market economies. First, they found that membership in formal groups, one of Putnam  s measure of social capital, is not associated with improved economic performance. So, this measure of social capital is not instrumental in analysing developmental data. Second, they found that, unlike membership in formal groups, trust, another measure of social capital, is associated with growth. This could suggest that social capital is a useful tool to analyse development after all. However, they also found that trust is associated with strong institutions, mainly if they are responsible for constraining government arbitrary actions (Knack and Keefer 1997, 1279). Taken together, the last two findings imply that strong institutions are associated with improved economic performance, which is to say that trust, as a separate variable, plays no explanatory role in the analysis, since it co-varies with institutional strength. Therefore, both trust and membership in formal groups are not necessary to explain development data.
In short, the previous studies show that development policies should focus more on building strong institutions rather than in social capital. Improvement in trust relations and civic engagement will be the result of successful establishment of institutions that can at least provide people with mechanisms for reliable enforcement of contracts, assurance of property rights and access to an impartial judicial system. In developing countries, most of the time, strong institutions, not social capital, is the 'missing link'.
We provided evidence that social capital in its current form is not an analytically useful concept in relation to development. The attractiveness of the concept is understandable. Those who believe that markets work better without state intervention have in social capital a good ally, propagating civic engagement as a way to promote transparency and accountability. The concept is also useful for bottom-up and grassroots movements that defend development through decentralisation and local empowerment.
However, it is the very broad characteristic of social capital that makes it a weak concept in the analysis of development. Social capital is context-specific and does not allow broad generalisations; in other words, it lacks explanatory power. We even find some features of post-modernist relativism in the way that it has been applied to a wide range of situations. Although the rejection of singular explanations in favour of multiple and sometimes overlapping interpretations of the facts is a characteristic of the post-modern practice, it comes in handy here in the analysis of the concept of social capital.
While some see its 'ability to mobilise diverse interests' as a  'strength' (Wallisal. 1998, 253, quoted in McAslam 2002, 138), others believe that one 'cannot built development out of a bunch of anecdotes, metaphors, or heuristic devices' (Fine 2001, 199).
To conclude, we emphasize the fact that social capital ignores the role of state and institutions in most of its analysis of network of connections, trust and cooperation among individuals. As empirical evidence has shown, if development policies are to be long-lasting and sustainable, state and institutions are important and cannot be left out. Therefore, the concept of social capital misses two crucial links to development.
