This essay will first provide a brief synopsis of the sublime as formulated by Kant and as formulated by Burke. We will then see how, despite some apparently obvious and significant differences, at their core the two accounts are relatively similar.
Kant begins by explaining that we are grammatically incorrect to label an object or phenomenon as sublime. The sublime instead lies within the subject, as an experience which arises out of a particular state of the mind; what we call the sublime object is the cause of this mental process. Kant separates these sublime experiences into two categories: the dynamical and the mathematical, and we shall address both of these in turn.
We call those objects or phenomena in nature which cause an experience of the mathematically sublime when they evoke an idea of infinity within us; whether spatial or temporal. Something is mathematically sublime if it is 'absolutely great', or, in other words, without comparison. Classic examples include a vast plain, the sky at night or the Grand Canyon. Usually to cognize the greatness of an object requires some other magnitude to compare it to, but this is exactly what is lacking in the absolutely great. Despite this lack of a standard against which to measure an object as presented to us, our reason is able to form an idea of the infinite; even though our imagination is unable to comprehend it. Thus when we are confronted with an absolutely great phenomenon a conflict arises within us: reason generates an idea of infinite magnitude for which the imagination is inadequate. This conflict causes displeasure. And yet at the same time pleasure arises at the realisation that our reason is superior to our sensible faculties: reason legislates to the sensible imagination even though the imagination is inadequate for the task at hand. We become aware of the power of our own super-sensible faculties, and their superiority over the easily overwhelmed senses and imagination.
Phenomena that cause a dynamically sublime experience affect us with their power rather than their magnitude. The dynamical sublime in nature occurs when we are confronted by the threatening power of, for example, a stormy sea but are able to regard it from a position of safety. It is frightful but we are not afraid of it. We are aware of how easily nature 's power, when materialised in the form of a storm or similar, can destroy our body. This causes displeasure similar to that of the mathematical sublime; but in this case it is a despair at our inability to resist nature rather than to comprehend it. And yet at the same time a pleasure arises as we feel the superiority of our own super-sensible reason over nature - no matter how powerful it may be. Kant writes:
The dynamically sublime object plays the role of forcing us to confront our super-sensible nature and hence our autonomy independent of nature. No matter how easily the world may destroy my body there remains something independent of nature that is always superior. By making us aware of our super-sensible autonomy the dynamical sublime also acts as a reminder of our responsibility to act morally.
For Burke, what makes an object sublime is its obscurity. It is a fear of the unknown that triggers a sublime experience within us. Burke writes that this experience is astonishment:
Although Burke 's use of words like terror and horror suggests that the sublime is almost a purely negative feeling, he also writes:
Already this suggests a mental state not vastly different from imagined by Kant.
Burke 's examples of sublime phenomena focus almost entirely on literature; and poetry in particular. It is poetry that is best able to express the terrifying obscurity that is the key to the sublime. As an example he gives poetic descriptions of Death and Hell and contrasts these to paintings of the same subjects. The paintings, in Burke 's view, are almost ridiculous because they can "only affect simply by the images they present" (p58) whereas the poetry, with its use of mixed and conflicting metaphors, causes the mind to be "hurried out of itself by a crowd of great and confused images". (p57).
It is questionable whether Burke would say the same thing today given the existence of modern art that expresses far more than simply a presentation of images.
Now that we have an all-too-brief introduction to the theories of both Kant and Burke we can identify some apparently obvious differences between them. However, we will see that as the differences are investigated they will turn out to be largely trivial. In fact, we will see that on a fundamental level, particularly with regard to the nature of the first stages of the sublime experience in the subject, they are very similar. We will identify and address three issues in order.
Firstly, Kant, whether intentionally or not, limits his examples of the sublime to phenomena existing in nature. He does not mention painting or poetry. Burke, on the other hand, as well as occasional references to stormy seas and animals, introduces example after example of sublime literature. This difference can be reconciled if we can show that Kant 's conception of the sublime, whether mathematical or dynamical, can be applied to artwork.
With the obvious and mysterious exception of the Pyramids.
Kant 's account of the dynamical sublime deals exclusively with natural imagery. Can art be dynamically sublime? There are two reasons why it would seem not. Firstly, the dynamical sublime deals with representations of threatening power, and it is due to being confronted by this power that the sublime experience arises. Although there are works of art that do attempt to convey threatening subject matters, as in horror films or the descriptions of Death mentioned earlier, we are concerned with a dynamically sublime response to art generally, not to any particular subject matters.
Secondly, the dynamical sublime is primarily for Kant a relation to morality. A threatening power reminds us of our supersensible nature and rational autonomy. However, it would be unrealistic to claim that every piece of art makes a reference to morality and evokes moral feelings when we view it.
But what of the mathematical sublime? Can a work of art be mathematically sublime? There are again two arguments against this possibility. The first points out that objects are mathematically sublime only with regard to their magnitude and the second argues that because artwork is created by an artist it cannot possess the boundlessness required to arouse feelings of the sublime. Reason can never form and legislate an idea of the infinite with regard to an artwork because the subject is always aware that it is a finite object created for a purpose by another finite mind. However, we can show that both of these issues are resolvable, and that in fact Kant 's conception of the mathematical sublime does allow for sublimity in art - just like Burke 's. Let us look at the two problems in order.
As we have seen, the mathematical sublime exists due to the imagination 's inability to comprehend the magnitude of an object. It is this inability that creates an unboundedness, a disjointedness, in the mind. However, it may be possible that there are properties of an object, other than its formlessness, that invoke the same sublime feeling. In other words, there may be other sources of unboundedness. A rich work of art that defies our efforts to determine the whole of its possible meaning provides just such a source. In this case it is the complexity of the imagination 's task of comprehending the artwork that is overwhelming.
The work of David Lynch, and in particular his film Mulholland Drive can be used to illustrate this point. In traditional Kantian terms this would not be considered sublime in either the dynamical sense or mathematically with regard to magnitude. And yet, due to the intentional complexity and confusion woven into the film by its creator the imagination is unable to comprehend it in its entirety and is rendered inadequate in exactly the same way as when presented with a vast magnitude. There are numerous other examples of similar complexity in novels or poetry evoking a sublime feeling.
Let us now turn to the second argument against the possibility of mathematical sublimity in artwork. No matter how overwhelming an artwork may be Kant argues we can never experience the feeling of contra-purposiveness necessary for a sublime feeling because we know it has been created by an artist and is therefore determined by a purpose. We are too aware of its boundaries for it to possess the boundlessness necessary. Similarly, it is for this reason that Kant denies that animals can be sublime; their very concept carries with it a determinate purpose (CJ 253), an issue which we will address later.
However, Kant himself argues that we approach art independently from its creator 's purpose in an aesthetic judgment; in fact we can even abstract from knowledge we already have in order to engage aesthetically. Sublime art is therefore possible if it is only subtly purposive. If its purpose is too obvious, as in the case of political art, then we will never be able to get beyond this purpose to a sublime experience. Additionally, we can perhaps suggest that in cases such as Lynch 's Mulholland Drive the work is not just subtly purposive but presented to us as contra-purposive due to our inability to understand its complexity.
Pillow, page 76.
We have seen how, despite some difficulties that needed to be resolved, there is no conflict between Kant 's account of the mathematical sublime and the acceptance of sublimity in artwork. All that is required is a rejection of magnitude as the sole source of an overwhelming of the imagination, and, as we have seen, sufficient complexity provides a convincing alternative. What was apparently a very significant disagreement between Burke and Kant is thus close to being resolved. Through an examination of the ideas of complexity and purposiveness in relation to Burke 's notion of obscurity, we will now show how their view of sublimity in art is surprisingly similar. This examination will also illustrate the similarity of purposiveness and obscurity in more general terms.
The possibility of sublimity in artwork for Kant, as we have just seen, relies on a level of obscurity as to the nature of the sublime object. A mathematically sublime experience is possible because the imagination is unable to comprehend the object in its entirety. This inadequacy of the senses and imagination is similar in nature to Burke 's idea of a state of the soul "in which all motions are suspended". In both cases there occurs a suspension of our normal modes of thought caused by a failure on the part of our faculties to comprehend an object because its nature is obscured. Similarly, in both cases this experience leads to a feeling of displeasure followed by a feeling of respect. For Kant this respect is coupled with a feeling of pleasure, whereas for Burke the respect comes with a feeling of astonishment or even terror.
We can see evidence of the true similarity between these two views of the sublime through an identification of sublime objects. Complexity as the source of the sublime means that for Kant poetry, novels and film would provide far more sublime experiences than paintings. Similarly, Burke 's emphasis on obscurity as the key to a sublime experience means that poetry and novels are also more sublime than paintings.
Additionally, we can examine the sublimity of animals. Although this may seem like a trivial point, it serves well to illustrate the importance of obscurity in the sublime. It is also another example of an easily resolvable difference between Kant and Burke. For Kant an animal can never be sublime because we are always all too aware of its purpose. We know exactly why an animal behaves as it does and why it appears frightening, and as such our imagination never loses its comprehension of the phenomena. Burke believes animals can be sublime, but only an unknown, wild animal. When it comes to domestic or harmless animals Burke and Kant agree completely: an Ox is not sublime because it is easily presented to us as domesticated and docile. A wild tiger on the other hand is sublime for Burke because its behaviour is obscure and threatening enough for us to be shocked into mental suspension. The obscurity is terrifying because we do n't know what the animal is or what it is for. In other words, we are ignorant of its purpose. So while in theory Kant and Burke differ in their view of animals, the difference is due to a practical disagreement about the level to which an animal 's purpose is obscured. For Kant we are always aware of its purpose, for Burke it is obscure.
We have seen that although there are seemingly major differences between Kant and Burke 's sublime, such as the possibility of the sublime in artwork, the role of fear and the role of animals; most of these differences are largely trivial, and even those that are n't do not prevent an evident similarity between the two views, particularly regarding the sublime experience.
