With increasing competition in their home market, companies often strive to seek growth opportunities abroad. Establishing alliances with local partners is a common route of expansion, with joint-ventures as the favoured form of alliance (Lial. 2001). In this paper, we will analyse reasons why companies choose to establish International Joint Ventures (IJVs), the advantages of IJVs over other alliances forms. Given the high "failure" rate of IJVs, we will discuss the means to increase the likelihood of a successful outcome. Our focus will be on IJVs established in the 80s and 90s by Western countries in Asia unless stated otherwise.
Scholars disagree on many definitions and we will provide the definitions used for our report.
International Joint ventures can be defined as legally and economically distinct organizational entities created by two or more parent organizations that collectively invest capital and other resources to pursue certain strategic objectives (Pfefferal. 1976); one parent is headquartered outside the venture 's country of operation (Geringeral. 1991).
IJV Performance: Scholars disagree on the variables associated with IJV performance (Geringeral. 1991) and are unclear about what an indicator of performance is ("output") and what a determinant of performance is ("input"). Employee satisfaction is often used as an indicator of a high performing organization (output) but others classify satisfaction as a cause of performance (input) and still others state that it is neither an input nor an output.(Anderson 1990).
For this paper, we will consider, like many executives, any package of inputs and outputs defined by a partner to evaluate its IJV performance, which is similar to the objective and subjective measures of performance (Glaisteral. 1998).
Success and failure:'IJV success' is the accomplishment of the parent firm 's strategic goals from the venture (Luo 1998). "Financial and objective measures may fail to adequately reflect the extent an IJV has achieved its short- and long-term objectives" (Geringeral. 1991). Despite poor financial results, liquidation or instability, an IJV may have been meeting or exceeding its parents' objectives and thus be considered successful by one or all of the parents. Conversely, an IJV may be viewed as unsuccessful despite good financial results or continued stability (Geringeral. 1991). 'IJV Failure' in the literature often means its dissolution. Even when the IJV is acquired by one partner, it has 'failed'. For this paper, we will use that broad definition as long as this acquisition was not part of the goals of the partner analysed.
Trust is Trust is the mutual confidence that no party to an exchange will exploit another 's vulnerabilities (Sabel, 1993).
Alliances can come in a bewildering number of forms-including acquisitions, mergers, joint ventures, keiretsus, consortiums, minority holdings, technology transfer agreements, market development contracts, or other types of inter-organizational dependency that often stretch across national borders (Fedoral. 1995). Our purpose is not to contrast and compare each alliance with IJVs but to provide some key rationales and advantages of IJVs over any other alliance type.
There are many reasons why companies may engage in IJVs. We will group those reasons in two groups: Strategic and Economic. Unless the reason is also the implicit benefit expected from the firm, we will analyse the advantages for each reason.
Complementary of resources and assets (firm-specific factors): Firms can set IJVs because of the lack of specific resources or assets strategic to their expansion. GM formed an IJV with Toyota with assembly lines in the US but plant design and product engineering are under Toyota 's responsibility (Reichal. 1986). Smaller firms who have developed a new technology or patent, sometimes venture with larger firms who have the distribution and/or manufacturing capabilities; Hence, providing each partner with a potential increase of, or access to, the overall market (Beauchampal. 1995). Parents engage in IJVs for the potential of learning from each other, about manufacturing processes, technologies, market and so forth.
On one hand, building competitive capabilities from scratch is not always feasible because key resources can be controlled by local competitors (mining rights, suppliers etc) and it is costly. On the other hand, acquisitions are also costly and do not guarantee complete transfer of competitive assets. Those reasons make the IJV more attractive to the foreign firm.
IJV is also attractive to local firms which can extend existing capabilities to cover a wider product line without full investment in production facilities (Chenal. 2002). However, Chinese firms cite the access to technology (better transfer with IJVs) and to foreign market (Daniels, Krugal. 1985).
Country-specific factors are probably the major reason for firms to set up an IJV. Russia, for example, is an important market (population of 148m+) and has attractive resources (inexpensive and highly educated workforce, natural resources). In general, a firm is more likely to cooperate with "indigenous" firms when the economic, political and cultural systems of the foreign country differ from the local country (Luoal. 1995).
For example, the country is the world 's largest producer of oil and second largest steel producer. (Fey 1995).
In China, personal relationship (guanxi) binds millions of Chinese into a social and business web and heavily influences Chinese social behaviour and business practises. The Chinese can use their "guanxi" to promote products through sales-force marketing (Luoal. 1995). However, guanxi alone cannot ensure venture success at all and is not a substitute for basic organizational fundamentals.
Trade barriers mitigation and macro-economy: In the 1980s, the Japanese firms built several IJVs with US firms, hoping to mitigate the future trade barriers by investing in the US with local allies, e.g. National Semiconductors and Hitachi. From 20% in 1981, US import restrictions protected 35% of manufactured goods in 1984. For the Japanese, the trend was a clear signal [to invest locally] (Reichal. 1986).
Moreover, in some sectors, several countries like India or China governments may have strict rules ('the stick') for foreign investment, giving no choice other than setting IJVs (Hall 1984). Access to local markets might require local equity participation. Moreover, through incentives ('the carrot'), the Chinese government encouraged IJVs setup to conserve foreign exchange, increase efficiency and create jobs (Luoal. 1995).
Reduce costs for better competitiveness: In the 1980s, many US managers considered that the US-Japan IJVs made good business sense. Faced with seemingly unbeatable foreign competition, many US companies decided that it is more profitable to delegate complex manufacturing to their Japanese partners: e.g. Bendix (Machine Tool Company) can produce a small turning machine for $85,000 in the US; the same machine produced and shipped by the IJV with Murata (MT company in Japan) cost only $65,000 (Reichal. 1986).
To reduce costs currently, there is also the opportunity for IJVs to mix and assemble bulk materials shipped [from high to low costs], for final distribution. Also, government special incentives helped firms opening IJVs (Danielsal. 1985).
Developing new products and penetrating new markets are too expensive for a company to always go it alone. For example, ICL (UK computer firm) could not develop mainframes without Fujitsu (Hamelal. 1989). Costs or risks sharing confer benefits through joint projects in areas characterized by extremely high development costs and uncertain demand or short product or technology life cycles (Jeongsukal. 1991). These economic rents can be the result of risk reduction, economies of scale and scope or production rationalization (Luoal. 1995).
Market value of partners: IJVs formation has a positive and significant impact on the market value of the parent firms, (Jeongsukal. 1991). Can we still suggest that some companies engage in IJVs to exploit those benefits? Most probably, the financial market shows interests in the potential economies of scale. Parents forming joint ventures in the identical and related-complementary categories reported higher gains in abnormal returns than those forming other types of ventures (Jeongsukal. 1991).
Despite these expected advantages from IJVs, the failure rate is important. Depending on studies, IJV failure rate is between 50% and 70% (Seungal. 1996). To benefit from IJV advantages, we will need to understand the actions required for a successful outcome.
Not only IJVs are caught in the competition but they also deal with parents' intervention and conflicts. To increase likelihood of success, parent firms need to work out the following areas linked to the IJV lifecycle.
Paramount importance of Trust: Parents need to spend time building and consolidating [the right] trust. Trust and time are positively correlated: collaboration length between partners leads to superior overall performance and in particular to risk reduction, export sales and profitability (Luo 1997). Parkhe (1998a) suggests different levels at which trust must be built: organizational, functional and individual. In successful alliances, trust is often touted as a prerequisite, a necessity, an absolute must (Byrne, 1993). In Russia, trust proved to be the Key Success Factor that had the greatest ability to differentiate between IJVs with good or poor performance (Fey 1996). The reverse is also true: a major contributor to failed alliances is lack of trust (Parkhe 1998b). Developing trust reduces risks (Dasal. 2001) and facilitates conflicts management.
Knowing what you [do n't] know: companies often underestimate their ignorance: cultural differences, language barriers, infrastructure, institutional and legislative differences, different consumer preferences, and so forth. Together, these points are called the "liability of foreignness" (Vermeulen 2001). Due diligence must be done to find evidences for all important assumptions.
Partnering skills and experience: Partnering skills require the "ability to cope with constant compromise and give-and-take that successful IJVs require; the ability to sit back and let someone else be in the driver seat, when necessary" (Vermeulen 2001). These skills can be learnt even though prior experience between partners is not necessarily a predictor of IJV 's success (Inkpen 1999).
However, for some IJVs, experience is key; in the Samsung venture, BP made sure it was responsible for all the marketing from the plant, where its experience elsewhere in the world has proved crucial (Young 1994). Another example, Peugeot, not used to share control over its manufacturing plants, was forced to wind down its IJVs both in China and India (Vermeulen 2001).
Alternately, local partner 's market and international experience are both found to have a favourable influence on the IJV 's risk reduction, market development and accounting return (Luo 1997).
Partner selection: Selecting the right partner appears to be an important variable in the formation and operation of IJVs, since the specific partner chosen helps determine the mix of skills and resources, operating policies and procedures, and overall competitive viability of an IJV (Geringer 1991).
Partners strategic, organizational and financial attributes are all crucial to IJV performance (Luo 1998). Foreign investor cannot, nor will it need to, find a local partner possessing superior attributes in all of the above. The importance of specific attributes within a category is dependent on what the foreign company wants to pursue from the venture. To paraphrase with an example, "The [China] market is a pond full of hidden delicious food. A new fish in the pond can starve to death because it does not know how to locate the food. Your local partner is an old fish who knows where every plan and plankton is" (Liangal. 2004). As a late entrant in China, Toyota dealt with First Automotive Works", China 's biggest automaker, to move even faster than it had planned (Treece, 2002).
E.g. marketing competence, relationship building, market position, industrial experience, image etc.
Leadership, rank, ownership type, learning ability, foreign experience, and human resource skills profitability, liquidity, leverage, and asset efficiency.
Alignment of goals and objectives: Finding the right partner involves aligning goals. In Russia, a common disagreement arises because the Russian [local] partner wanted to conduct some research and development, but the foreign firm was interested in the venture only as a sales representative (Fey 1995).
The primary motivations for the Chinese in entering a JV are to obtain technology, capital, management expertise, and short-term success. The aim of foreign investors, however, is to gain market access to China with a potential for long-term growth. Partners particularly need to insure that the IJV processes will allow them to reach their compatible goals: e.g. technology knowledge or gain market share.
Timing issue: Entry timing is an important part of an effective joint strategy, especially in today 's environment where changes are occurring constantly. It is the firm who moves quickest that will gain the access to better partners and will in turn provide a competitive advantage over anyone who enters late (Beauchampal. 1995). We would argue that the smarter move is more efficient than a quicker one.
Negotiations (part of due-diligence): Prior to any IJV establishment, all partners need to negotiate critical terms of the contract, covering the objectives for all stages of the IJV lifecycle. Areas of negotiation include objectives (e.g. value creation, market share, technology transfer etc), IJV strategy (including the exit), cultural compatibility and organizational fit, equity ownership, people involved in management, risks management (Inkpen 1999).
Moreover, the firms must endeavour to predict the potential behaviour of the partner in case of markets changes or new opportunities. Yet, no negotiation will cover all scenarios. Firms have to distinguish what 's essential from what 's negotiable. These basics should prevent early failure and help to build relationship. The negotiations should take as long as required and should not replace the due-diligence (market research, independent and reliable assessment of partner reputation). It took Mc Donald 's 12 years to start its IJV in Russia.
Fair value of contributions: Where the parties contribute cash or cash equivalents, the relative contribution by each party can easily be measured. Where contributions are made in lieu of cash, the parties may disagree on the 'value' of the contribution. To avoid problems down the road, parties should agree on the 'value' of the intangible and tangible assets to be contributed at the outset or during the joint adventure and should stipulate that agreement in writing (Johnson 2000). For example, Chalk contributed too much, given its stake in the Cheese-Chalk IJV (Condon, 2006).
Agreement on conflict resolution: the joint venture agreement should provide for a practical and efficient dispute resolution mechanism. No contract can be so complete as to anticipate all of the issues that may arise over time. Consequently, a dispute resolution mechanism that is perceived as fair by all parties can help in reducing the risks of an unfavourable outcome (Johnson 2000). Conflicts between joint venture partners can significantly hinder joint venture performance as illustrated in the "Cheese and Chalk" case study, with supervision conflicts (Condon, 2006).
Quality of management: IJVs, as any firm, need good management (not sufficient but necessary) to become successful. Moreover, managers need special training about negotiations, culture, conflicts resolution and communication methods. In the "Cheese and Chalk" case study, management training has been clearly a constant issue (Condon, 2006). For example, managers need to understand the role of "implicit communication" (gestures, facial expressions, and other non verbal messages) in which foreign managers are well-versed.
Control and performance: There is a huge amount of literature about the link between control and performance. Most of the scholars do not agree on the correlation between control and performance. For example, while Ding (1997) reports that dominant partner IJVs tended to be more successful than are shared management ventures, Luoal. (2001) states that, in China, it does not when the local partner has a majority stake. Also, data from Bleeke & Ernst and McKinsey indicate a 60% success rate for 50-50 joint ventures and a 31% success rate for ventures with an uneven split of ownership (Young 1994).
Culture and performance: Many studies have tried to find the correlation between culture similarity and performance. For example, Linal. (1998) and Pothukuchial. (2002) argue that cultural similarity between partners is a critical antecedent for IJV success. The greater the cultural similarity between IJV partners, the better the IJV performance. Yet, Lial. (2001) show that IJVs that were established by firms from East Asian collectivistic cultures failed to achieve a better performance than those from individualistic cultures, suggesting that a similar culture was not always the most valuable resource affecting firm performance.
These studies not only consider specific contexts at specific times but also have different definitions of performance. We argue that it is unproven that the control stake or the culture similarity has any systematic and direct link whatsoever on the likelihood of success. Yet, there might be exceptions for some IJVs in particular environments.
Regular reviews of changes: Frequent reviews of the IJVs are needed to determine how changes by either partner impact the IJV. Just as basic strategy and internal management processes impact the cultural fit between the partners going into the IJV, changes in these factors determine the ongoing value and feasibility of the relationship (Fedoral. 1995).
Trade-off benefit/cost of control: The critical issue for parents is to exercise control, in terms of mechanisms, extent and focus, over an IJV in such a manner that will enable it to successfully implement its common strategy without incurring a level of administrative or organizational inefficiencies which outweighs gains from its IJV. However, the extent of control that the foreign partner attempts to exercise may limit the autonomy and flexibility of the IJV and its local management, hindering the venture 's ability to respond to local market demands and generating a level of transaction costs that may offset the strategy 's potential benefits. (Geringeral. 1989).
Exit strategy: By their nature, many joint ventures have a finite life. If there is no specified termination or renewal date, the partners should consider how their relationship can be terminated (if desired) at the outset, and to provide for that eventuality in the agreement (Johnson 2000).
However, an issue that sometimes arises is one in which a third party purchaser acquires one of the parties holding an interest in a joint venture, leaving the remaining parties with a new 'partner.' This may fundamentally change the dynamics of the joint venture, particularly if the other parties to the joint venture perceive the third party acquirer as a competitor. To prevent such an occurrence, the agreement should provide the parties with the right to terminate the joint venture upon a change in control of one of the joint venturers, or to buy the interest held by a partner that is acquired by a third party (Johnson 2000). Liberalization in the 1990s has been detrimental to Indian local partners, when their foreign partner pulled out from the IJVs to set up their own subsidiary, e.g. Tata (with IBM), Godrej (with P&G) (Kale et al., 2006).
IJV study is closely related to many factors like the period of observation, the location (e.g. emerging market or not), the industry (technological or not, capital intensive or labour intensive etc). All cited studies have their own limitations (industry range, performance definition, country studied, etc). Thus, generalising about the findings, as we did in this paper, limits somehow the validity of the arguments. Yet, scholars agree on requirements like due-diligence or trust to increase the likelihood of success.
In summary, any recommendation is valid in a context (period, country, industry etc). Companies do not need to follow all recommendations but seek for critical suggestions in line with their context and objectives.
Although there is no fool-proof method for creating joint ventures, the beforehand preparation, trust building, continued monitoring and creation of overseeing committees will increase the likelihood for success. The success or failure of any joint ventures ultimately rests with trust. Communication of the goals of each partner is an essential element in dealing with the pitfalls of joint ventures.
Since the late 1980s, IJVs and wholly foreign-owned enterprises (WFOEs) have predominated over all other types of FDI, accounting for approximately 80% of the total foreign capital inflows into China. From 1997, with the relaxation of government regulations, WFOEs surpassed IJVs in popularity (Deng 2001). Given the very recent trend showing Chinese or Indians firms acquiring foreign companies (Lenovo for IBM PC, CNOOC for Nigerian offshore oil, etc), it is too early to find literature studying why these companies choose WFOEs over IJVs. Future research would help to confirm the hypothesis that costs of IJVs outweigh the advantages exposed in the literature and that WFOE, wherever possible, are the best options in the new world.
