The ASB has defined the objective of financial statements as being: "to provide information about the financial position, performance, and the financial adaptability of an enterprise that is useful to wide range of users in making economic decisions".
Financial statements are primary information that firms publish about themselves to the investors, who are the primary users of financial statements, to make reasoned investment decisions about alternative uses of scarce resources in the conduct of business and economic activities. The three main financial statements are the Balance Sheet, the Cash Flow statement, and the Income statement. These statements help analyze the business by translating economic factors into accounting numbers like assets, sales, cash flows and earnings.
Financial statement analysis is an art of extracting information from financial statements. Valuation models, which in turn provide the basis for understanding and evaluating the decision usefulness of accounting practices, are based on information in the financial statements and consistent forecasts of future performance.
In order to generate plausible predictions about the future performance, we should use industry, strategy and governance analysis in the forecasting process, differentiate between recurring and non-recurring items in the income statement, use the correct valuation model in step with the accrual system of accounting and clean surplus, and check that accounting policies are appropriate and do not give a misleading indication of future potential. Financial statement analysis 'is not an end in itself,'2 but is an information system that measures, processes, and communicates financial information about an identifiable economic entity.
According to Ben Best, Comparison of financial statements forms the basis for much financial analysis. 1, 2 Stephan H. Penman - Financial Statement analysis and Security valuation.
Financial statements contain information of varying quality, sometimes even poor quality. As Stephen Penman states, there are three reasons for poor accounting. First is the  'subversion of sound accounting principles' such as excessive restructuring charges, off-balance sheet financing, and capacity swapping. These are violations of sound principles of revenue recognition, expense matching and debt recognition stemming from conflict of interests between the different parties involved. The second reason is the compliance with regulations rather than capturing the economies and regulations that encourage form over substance. The last reason derives from poor thinking as well as the gaming of poor regulation. Many suspect practices are sanctioned by the GAAP and issues that need attention are unaddressed. Some of the problems hindering the use of the financial statements to present unambiguous results are:
The main valuation models can be systematically divided into two groups. The first group is the cash flow based valuation approaches consisting of the Free Cash Flow (FCF) model and Dividend Discount model (DVM), which calculate the value of the firm as the present value of the expected free cash flows or expected dividends. The second group is the profit based/residual earnings valuation approaches comprising the Abnormal Earnings valuation model (AEVM) and the Abnormal Operating profit model (AOPM). All valuation models give equal values, if consistent assumptions are used for each. The cash flow models are based on a simple concept, are real, easy to forecast and straightforward application of familiar present value techniques, but they suffer from several setbacks. Due to volatility of CFO and the negative association between investment and future CFO, correlation between the reported FCF and future FCF will often be noisy and complex, undermining its usefulness as a financial performance measure. As it does not encompass accrual accounting, cash flow statements do not link cash inflows to previous cash outflows, or recognize non-cash value. Analysts forecast earnings, not FCF, which pushes the need for accrual accounting. Profit based valuations overcome this limitation by using forecasts of accrual accounting figures and are therefore more in tune with reported financial information. Accruals in principle capture value added in operations i.e. non-cash value and treat investments differently from cash accounting to remedy problems in forecasting FCF. Residual earnings analysis by using the book value, utilizes the balance sheet and income statements as well, rather than just the cash flow statement. It focuses on value drivers such as book value, investment and growth, is versatile, and can be used with a variety of accounting principles. It is aligned with what people forecast and forecasts of residual earnings can be validated in subsequent audited financial statements.
Accounting analysis is concerned with adjusting historical financial statement data to reduce the impact of inappropriate accounting policies and manipulation on predictions of future fundamental performance. However, some widely implemented accounting practices supported by the regulatory bodies need to be assessed from a valuation perspective. Some of these are:
Comprehensive Income and Dirty surplus accounting - Comprehensive income reporting requires that earnings must include all sources of value added to the investors - this implies clean surplus accounting. Dirty surplus items are gains and losses that are not passed through the profit and loss account. It is often justified on the grounds that it separates items of transitory nature from net income and so is reported as part of equity rather than in an income statement. Examples - foreign currency translations risks, fixed asset revaluations, actuarial gains/losses related to pension fund liabilities, earnings that exclude depreciation, or interest income.
Hidden Dirty-Surplus Expenses - These are expenses that are not recorded in the financial statements at all. 'Efficient Market Hypothesis states, that buying and selling of shares adds no value at all, correspondingly issuing shares at less than market value, loses value for current shareholders and should be recorded in comprehensive income'. Another related case is that of stock options issued to employees and other parties. The difference between the market price and exercise price of options is the expense to the shareholder and compensation to the employee. The common argument here is that options are not an expense, as firms do not use cash to award them, however as Stephen Penman explains, this argument fails to appreciate the principles of accrual accounting. GAAP accounting thus promotes pyramiding of earnings.
Accounting for leases - This is an example of off-balance sheet financing, or arrangements to finance assets and create obligations that are not shown on the balance sheet. Finance and Operating leases are not in substance considered as purchases, unlike Capital leases, which are shown on the balance sheet. However, to bend the rules for capitalizing leases, lessees and lessors have been creative in writing these agreements.
Capitalized Interest - Under GAAP, interest that finances construction is capitalized into the cost of assets in the balance sheet. This practice confuses operating and financing activities. As it is depreciated along with other costs, it is hard to trace and also distorts operating profitability.
Goodwill - The major change of FASB 142 is that amortization of goodwill is no longer permitted, although it will still be recognized as an asset. Under the new rules a company, must:
Identify what its reporting units will be to test goodwill for impairment.
Allocate purchase prices of past acquisitions with existing goodwill to those units.
Determine identifiable intangible assets separate from goodwill. 3.
Goodwill impairment is defined as the difference between the book value of goodwill and the implied fair value of goodwill. Companies will now have to develop methodologies and use costly outside valuation experts for the reporting unit and identifiable intangible asset appraisals, but this does not necessarily provide useful information.
Research & Development (R&D) - Expensing R&D is the most conservative accounting, as it expenses all drug development costs when incurred, as required under GAAP. Then comes successful efforts method, which capitalizes development costs, writes off unsuccessful projects and amortizes successful projects. Full costing is the least conservative method, it capitalizes development costs and amortizes them straight line. Under expensing, firms with high R&D have high P/B ratios and ROE, while full capitalization leads to substantially lower P/B ratios and ROE. While capitalization and amortization undo accounting conservatism they introduce the problem of estimating amortization rates to measure the decline in the value of intangible assets.
Knowledge Assets - The conventional financial reporting was blamed during the bubble for not recognizing the value of knowledge assets. Such assets have value because they lead to earnings. Bill gates remarked "Our primary assets which are our software and software-development skills do not show up on the balance sheet at all".
Revenue Recognition - 'Internet companies are moving into areas where accounting rules do not exist' say Caroline Daniel and Michael Peel. The key concerns in start-ups are non-financial measures such as website hits, customer base and the commitment of the founders. These have brought forward questionable accounting practices such as:
Contingent equity securities - The liability for convertible debt and convertible preferred stock is understated by GAAP and losses on conversion are not recognized. Security equity-linked loans also need a contingent issue of stock possibly at much reduced share prices, resulting in a loss for shareholders.
Pro forma earnings numbers involve mismatching, typically omitting expenses. Lynn Turner 's witticism was to tag these low-quality earnings numbers as 'Ebs - Everything but the Bad Stuff'. The most pertinent pro forma earning number is EBITDA, which omits taxes and interest and depreciation. However this results in increased borrowing, substitution of capital for labor, investment in overcapacity and provides incentives to capitalize expenses. 3Craig Schneider, CFO.com - 'Get up to speed on the latest accounting rule changes for treating goodwill and intangibles.' 4 Financial Times, March 25, 2000.
Accounting quality refers to the impact of accounting practices on usefulness of financial statements data for predicting future operating performance. According to Penman, when analyzing the quality of accounting, we seek answers to five questions:
Are generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) deficient?.
Is the firm violating GAAP or committing outright fraud?.
Is the firm using GAAP accounting to manipulate reports?.
Is the firm manipulating its business to accommodate the accounting?.
Are disclosures adequate to analyze the business?.
He defines the purpose of accounting quality as distinguishing 'hard' numbers resulting from cash flows from  'soft' numbers resulting from accrual accounting. A broader assessment of the quality is that of the earnings quality analysis. Katherine Schipper and Linda Vincent, consider earning quality constructs derived from:
Accounting conservatism or liberalism does not necessarily lower accounting quality. However inconsistent application of accounting polices and manipulation of accruals leads to impaired accounting. Such manipulations distort the predictions of future performance and valuations. Manipulation that inflates current operating income to possibly increase the share price or managerial rewards is known as borrowing income from the future and one that reduces current operating income to increase future managerial rewards is known as banking income for the future. It undermines the ability of past RNOA to predict future RNOA. The term 'aggressive accounting' is best used to indicate manipulation that temporarily increases income and 'big-bath accounting' used to signify large reductions in income.
Detecting manipulation requires understanding the business and the accounting policy and then investigate business areas, institutional and accounting conditions most susceptible to manipulations. Indicators of manipulations are commonly referred to as quality diagnostics.
The constant research conducted on financial statement analysis, provide us with much food for thought. Different aspects of reporting and valuation have been tested to shed light on the grey areas and give rise to better accounting standards while at same time making sure that the value relevance of financial analysis is not diminishing.
A paper by Paul Hribar & Daniel Collins on 'Errors in Estimating Accruals: Implications for Empirical Research', describes the role played by measurement of accrual in the body of accounting. It is based on the presumed articulation between changes in balance sheet working capital accounts and accrued revenues and expenses on the income statement, which breaks down when non-operating activities like M&A, divestitures and translation of foreign subsidiary' accounts are present.
Another article by David Aboody, John Hughes & Jing Liu discusses 'Measuring value relevance in a (possibly) inefficient market'. They analytically examine the impact of market inefficiencies on the estimation of coefficients in value relevance regressions and derive a procedure that corrects potential biases caused by such inefficiencies in 1) the value relevance of earnings and book values; 2) the value relevance of residual income value estimates; and 3) the value relevance of accruals and cash flows. The findings show that cash flows map into returns with a statistically significantly higher coefficient than accruals after adjustment for future returns, while the two coefficients are statistically indistinguishable from each other when stock price is not adjusted.
The topic of stock options is another popularly tested one. Carol A Marquardt conducts an empirical analysis on 'The cost of employee cost option grants' and the results suggest that the Black-Scholes model adjusted for concavity in the time to exercise using the Hemmer, Matsunaga, and Shevlin [1994] procedure, provides reasonable estimates of ex post ESO costs.
Valuation models and their applicability have undergone several analyses. J. Francis, P.Olsson and D.R Oswald in their study on 'Comparing the accuracy and explainability of dividend, free cash flow and abnormal earning equity value estimates' find that AE value estimates are more accurate and provide larger explanation of the variation is security prices than do FCF or DIV value estimates. This superiority of the AE value is mainly driven by the sufficiency of book value of equity as a measure of intrinsic value and the predictability of abnormal earnings.
Accounting policy and financial standards must evolve. As the economy progresses, and the financial environment is revolutionized, it calls for a need for greater regulation, a better conceptual framework and global accounting standards that integrate differences in economy, allowing more transparency, reliability and non-manipulation of accounting statements.
Stephen Penman, in his article (2003) on the quality of financial statements, puts forth certain changes that need to be implemented:
An analysis of net revenue, a reconciliation of gross revenue to net revenue and a breakdown of booked and deferred revenue is needed.
Operating income/assets/liabilities should be clearly distinguished from those of a financial nature.
Transitory items need to be clearly displayed on the income statement.
Consolidation prevents proper understanding of how assets and liabilities are structured; this calls for more transparency and desegregations.
Clarity about accruals need to be established, to give readers a better sense of 'hard' and  'soft' numbers and the likelihood that earnings will be sustained.
Russell J. Lundholm in the article, 'Reporting on the past: A new approach to improving accounting today' proposes that financial reporting be amended to report on the expost accuracy of a firm 's prior estimates. This will identify firms that have abused their reporting discretion. With a system to report on the expost accuracy, regulators might be more willing to allow the booking of difficult-to-measure assets, such as the value of R&D expenditures.
Other issues are:
Accounting applicability in the dotcom business even though on the 'emerging issues task force' of the FASB, needs action taken.
FASB should look into explosive issues of accounting for pension costs, for post-retirement costs such as health and insurance plan, interperiod income tax allocation and translation of foreign currency financial statements.
Apart from new standards, a supplemental quality analysis is required.
In summary, the traditional way of accounting should be altered to incorporate the ever-changing ways of the economy, and reflect the true picture of a company to its investors. Only then can accounting statements justify the decision of investors and actions of firms.
In the words of Roger Davis, (ICAEW representative), ' ...the advance of corporate reporting will require innovation and experimentation rather than rule setting. The portrait of a company in a new era of accountability means crafting the picture rather than painting by numbers...'.
