In the late 1950s, the British economist A.W. Phillips demonstrated an inverse statistical association between annual changes in average wage rates and the unemployment. From the observation, Phillips found that one stable curve represented the trade-off between inflation and unemployment. During the late 1950s and the 1960s, many economists repeated Phillips 's procedures examining inflation and unemployment data from a number of other industrialized countries, in many cases finding a negative relationship between the two variables. The negative empirical relationship between unemployment and inflation is known as the Phillips curve.
This essay examines the ideas whether an inflation- unemployment trade-off exists, according to some both UK and US data; and if some relations exist, its implications for macroeconomic policy.
What might there be a trade-off? Firstly, Many Keynesian economists reasoned that: Because unemployment rates and wage increase rates are inversely related in the labour market, as unemployment falls, labour shortages may occur in industries where skilled labour is in short supply, rapid increases in average wages are bound to push up the general price level. This puts pressure on wages to rise, and since wages are such a large share of the costs of production, prices level may rise, vice versa. Secondly, in other factor markets, cost-push inflation can come from rising demand for commodities such as oil, copper and manufactured goods such as steel, concrete and glass etc. This increases inflationary pressures in the economy. Thirdly, in product market, rising demand and output can lead to suppliers raising prices in order to widen their profit margins.
Figure 2 shows a typical example of Phillips curve which took place in the US during the 1960s. The data produce an almost perfect downward - sloping relation between inflation and unemployment.
In Figure 3, we see an outward shift of the AD curve (AD1 to AD2). This creates a positive output gap. Excess demand in product markets and factor markets causes a rise in production costs and this leads to an inward shift in short run aggregate supply (SRAS1 to SRAS2). The fall in supply takes the economy towards potential output but at a higher price level, from P2 to P3.
There is a trade-off relationship between inflation and unemployment, and economic policy makers will have to choose the mix of inflation and unemployment that they find most acceptable. Keynesian demand management approach was fashionable in the UK government policies from 1945 up to mid 1970 (Sloman, 2000). It believes that business cycle is being driven by aggregate demand shocks. The theory suggest that policy makers can either expand AD in order to lower unemployment in the short term at the cost of higher inflation, or they can contract AD in an attempt to lower inflation at the cost of higher unemployment. Trade-off between inflation and unemployment can be seen as the core of Keynesian theory. Furthermore, Keynesian suggests that government can decide how much extra inflation to accept in order to bring the unemployment down. This can be done by choosing a point in the Philips Curve and set fiscal or monetary policies to achieve the desired level of AD and thus unemployment level.
Using the data from the 1950s and 1960s where the world economy tend to be stable, Philips Curve relationship proved to be true for many economies such as United States and not just UK (Griffiths and Wall, 1999). However, during 1967-1970 most countries such as US, Britain and France had doubled their inflation (Ormerod, 1995). This was the first sign that the downward relationship in Philips Curve was not always true. In 1970s the concept of a stable Philips Curve shows a break down as the economy suffered from high inflation and high unemployment simultaneously. The economists refer this situation as stagflation where stagnant economies and rising inflation occurs together. Figure 4 shows the US inflation and unemployment for the period 1970-2002. . In 1975, for example, unemployment reached 8.5% of the labour force and the annual inflation rate was 9.1%. High unemployment, together with high inflation, is inconsistent with the Phillips curve.
Why did the Phillips curve relationship, so apparent in the 1960s, but seem to disappear after 1970?.
Firstly, the reason suggested by the Friedman-Phelps analysis is that, in the period after 1970, the expected inflation rate and the natural unemployment rate varied considerably more than they had in the 1960s, causing the Phillips curve relation to shift erratically. Expected inflation probably varied more after 1970 because actual inflation varied more. The 1970s were a period of high and erratic inflation, the result of the oil price shocks and macroeconomic policies that again were probably too expansionary, especially in the latter part of the decade. In contrast, following the tough anti-inflationary policies of the Federal Reserve in US during 1979-1982, inflation returned to a relatively low level during 1980s.
The second reason for this break down was partly due to ignoring the role of supply shocks in the economic system. Adverse supply shock such as the increase in world oil price in 1974 and 1979 had resulted in output reductions, increase in costs and prices, which led to cost-push inflation, irrespective to demand pressure. The impact on Philips Curve was that any level of unemployment would be associated with higher levels of inflation. Thus this period of increased inflation were not followed by the reduction in unemployment (Griffiths and Wall, 1999). Overall, the Phillips curve should be particularly unstable during periods of supply shocks. The causes of supply shock also include increased power and militancy of trade unions, a growing concentration of monopoly power in industry, and rising commodity prices.
The third reason of broking down might be the ignorance of expectation. One way to explain the collapse of Phillips curve after 1970s is the developing Expectations-Augmented Philips Curve, which combined inflationary expectations theory with the concept of natural rate of unemployment (Griffiths and Wall, 1999). According to the Friedman-Phelps analysis, there was no stable negative relation between inflation and unemployment; instead, a negative relationship should exist between unanticipated inflation and cyclical unemployment, even if expected inflation and the natural unemployment rate are changing. Measures of unanticipated inflation and cyclical unemployment for each year during the period 1970-1998 are shown in Figure 5. The figure suggests that, despite the instability of the traditional Phillips curve relation between inflation and unemployment, a negative relationship between unanticipated inflation and cyclical unemployment did exist during the period 1970-2002. In particular, note that inflation was much lower than expected and that cyclical unemployment was high during 1982 and 1983, both years that followed Fed Chairman Volker (US), Thatcher (UK) attempting to reduce inflation through tight monetary policy. (Abel, 2005, P445).
Unanticipated inflation is the difference between the actual and expected inflation rates.
The cyclical unemployment is the difference between the actual and natural unemployment rates.
Furthermore, we can interpret the breakdowns in terms of a shifting short-run Phillips curve. Friedman argued that there is a specific short-run Phillips Curve (SRPC) for each level of expected inflation (Ormerod, 1995). For higher expectation, Philips Curve moves outwards, thus the movement of the SRPC was explained in terms of ever-higher inflationary expectations. This is shown in Fig.6. Supposed economy begins at zero inflation (A) and unemployment at the natural rate (U1) when the government increases money supply in attempts to increase output beyond the natural rate, more jobs would be created and unemployment would fall to U2. However this would increase the inflation to 1 as the economy moves along the SRPC to B. If the inflation rate was to stay at 1, workers would adjust the inflationary expectation accordingly and would ask for a higher wage rise. This would shift up the SRPC to the right (SRPC2) and the economy would adjust back to the natural rate but with continuing inflation at C.
In fact, an increase in both the Natural Rate of Unemployment and the expected inflation rate shift the Phillips curve relationship up and to the right. (Abel, 2005, P442) The effect of adverse supply shock was to push the short run Phillips curve outwards.
The Monetarist view is that attempts to boost Aggregate demand artificially to achieve faster growth and lower unemployment have only a temporary effect on output and unemployment. Friedman argued that a government could not permanently drive unemployment down below the NAIRU - the result would be higher inflation which in turn would bring about a return to higher unemployment but with inflationary expectations increased along the way.
In addition, Friedman and Phelps claimed that in the long-run, expected inflation adjusts to changes in actual inflation, and the short run Philips Curve shifts. As a result there would be no trade-off in the long-run and Philips Curve is vertical at the natural rate of unemployment (see Fig.7). The natural rate of unemployment (U1) is the unemployment rate when the labour market is in equilibrium in other word, full employment.
An inward shift in the long run Phillips Curve might be brought by supply-side improvements to the economy - and in particular a reduction in the natural rate of unemployment. For example reforms might be successful in reducing frictional and structural unemployment - perhaps because of improved incentives to find work or gains in the human capital of the workforce that improves the occupational mobility of labour.
It can be seen from Fig.8 that there seems to be no fixed relationship between inflation and unemployment as Prof. Philips once argued. Although there was no overall relationship between inflation and unemployment, we can see from the graph that there are several little curves over the past thirty years, which were shifting. A look at the evidence for the UK economy over the last ten years would suggest that the Philips Curve has changed. We have had almost a decade of falling unemployment together with stable inflation, suggesting a flat curve. Inflation expectations have also fallen which would lead to an inward shift of the expectations- augmented Phillips Curve. 1991-19941987-19901995-2000Source: Data from treasury economic model.
Figure9 displays the 1960s, mid1970s- mid 1980s, and 1990s Expectations- augmented Phillip curve arising in the UK. The short-run Phillips curve of the 1960s when the expected inflation was 2% and the natural rate of unemployment was also 2%, is SRPC. SRPC1 is mid-1970s to mid-1980s, during this period, there was a higher natural unemployment and a higher expected inflation. The oil price shock increased both the natural unemployment rate and the expected inflation rate in the 1970s. By the early 1980s, the effect of the oil shock and domestic supply factors had increased the natural rate of unemployment to over 10%. The 1990s short-run Phillips curve is SRPC2. The monetary policy and supply side reforms of the Thatcher government during the 1980s caused the natural rate of unemployment to decline to 6% and the expected rate of inflation to fall to 3% by 2000 as shown by SRPC2.
The use of inflation targets which were introduced in1992 has helped to reduce inflation expectations and has helped to embed low-inflation in the British economy. (from Figure 10).
Although there are different schools of though, we still can conclude that: in the short un, changes in aggregate demand will have an effect on output and employment; in the long run, changes in aggregate demand will have a smaller or even no effect on output and employment; expectations play a main role in determining the outcome of government policy changes. Almost all economists today agree that monetary policy influences unemployment, at least temporarily, and determines inflation, at least in the long run. This is all we need to believe to accept the inflation-unemployment tradeoff as a basic principle of economics.
To sum up, there has not been one steady curve showing the relationship between unemployment and inflation over the past thirty years. However, it appears that there are a number of curves showing a trade-off at individual periods. Philips Curve relationship nevertheless exists temporarily in the short-run despite the criticism on its break down in the 1970s. The length of short-run Philips Curve depends on inflation expectation and money supply. It is interesting to note that the curves becoming flatter in the recent period. This suggests that inflation is less volatile now therefore, for a given fall in unemployment, inflation rate would not increase as much as twenty years ago. As a result, it allows the economy to grow at a faster rate without experiencing inflationary acceleration.
