The euro was introduced to the world financial markets in 1999 and launched as a currency in 2002. It is the official currency for the following twelve European Union member states: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Greece (January 2001). What impact does it have on trade in the eurozone and is it significant?.
The most obvious reason for expecting significant increases in trade gains from the introduction of a common currency is that this eliminates totally all exchange rates related transaction costs. Even with fixed exchange rates, there is often a bid-ask spread of around 5 per cent associated with banknote exchanges and other retail transactions (eurocheques, credit cards etc.). For businesses, this ends any risk of exchange rate volatility and removes the cost of hedging through the use of forward contracts and other derivatives. In addition, a common currency signals a serious government commitment to long-term integration.
There are other indirect benefits. Consumers, used to evaluating prices in their own national currency, find it inconvenient and difficult to compare prices in different currencies. This allows firms to engage in price discrimination between national markets. The practice of retailers in border areas using approximate 'round' exchange rates, which are several per cent away from the true rates, indicate that this implicit information cost can be quite high. Hence a common currency removes exchange rate risk, removes conversion fees, and increases market and price transparency. These should promote intra-European trade.
There is a growing literature on the impact of common currency on trade. See Table 1. The most widely cited empirical study is Rose (2000), which added a currency union dummy to a gravity model of bilateral trade. Controlling for variables such as common border, common language, colonial links and memberships in the same Free Trade Agreement (FTA), Rose found that countries with the same currency trade over three times as much with each other as countries with different currencies.
Rose and Glick (2001) studied the impact of currency union from 1947-1997, providing country pairs with periods in which they shared currencies and periods in which they did not. Rose and Glick concluded that adopting currency unions increases bilateral trade by 400% among member countries. The study also used a model with fixed effects. The results were that that adopting currency unions double bilateral trade among member countries. Other studies such as Pakko, R. and Wall, J. (2001) and Anderson and Wincoop, E. (2001) also used models with fixed effects. They similarly found estimates of 69% and 59% that were significant but not as dramatic as using OLS.
In these studies, the sample included very poor and small countries, adopting currencies of richer and larger countries at different time periods. Also, the time frame of the papers terminated in 1990 (Rose) and 1997 (Rose and Glick), before the launch of the euro in 1999. The introduction of the Euro presents a golden opportunity to study the effects of joining a currency union on developed countries at the same time period.
Annual trade data deflated by the US CPI is obtained from the IMF Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS) between 1980 and 2004 for two samples, a Developed countries (25 countries) sample and a European sample (17 countries). These are the top 25 countries with the highest Human Development Index excluding Slovenia and Iceland. See Appendix: Table 2 for the list of countries.
GDP, GDP per capita (in constant dollars), surface area and population are obtained from the World Development Indicators. Country-specific data are taken from the CIA 's "World Factbook". The World Trade Organization publishes an excellent list of free trade agreements on its Regional Trade Agreement Gateway website, of which the European Union is taken into consideration for the EC dummy variable. The European Free Trade Association (EFTA), North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA), Closer Trade Relations Trade Agreement (CER), Israel-US and Singapore-US FTA are included in the FTA dummy variable.
Using the gravity model of international trade, which was developed independently by Tinbergen (1962) and Poyhonen (1963), the amount of trade between countries is assumed to be increasing in their sizes as measured by their national incomes. According to Bergstrand (1989), population is included to allow for non-homothetic preferences in the importing country and to proxy for the capital-labour ratio in the exporting country.
In the following model, country-pair fixed effects captures the effects of all omitted variables that are cross-sectional specific but remain constant over time. These include whether the two countries share a common border, a common language, are islands, are landlocked countries, the distance between the economic centres and their surface areas as well as any unobservable variables. Year dummies are included too.
Developed and European Sample.
Our Panel Data gives the study 552(24*23) country-pairs and 240(16*15) country-pairs or 13800 and 6000 observations respectively. Note that Belgium and Luxembourg are counted as one entity, following IMF DOTS data. Out of these, 99 (11*9) country-pairs shared a common currency from 2002 to 2004 and 90 (10*9) country-pairs shared a common currency from 1999 to 2004.
In this model, comparing trade for EMU country-pairs estimates the effect of the EMU before and after the creation of the currency union with the other country-pairs used as controls.
The results are reported in the Appendix: Table 5. All coefficients are statistically significant at the 5% level. As expected, the coefficients B 1 and B 2 are positive for both the Developed and European samples. This is economically reasonable because higher GDP should increase trade. A high level of income in the exporting country indicates a high level of production, which increases the availability of goods for exports. A high level of income in the importing country suggests higher imports.
Economic theory on the effect of population is ambiguous because it depends on whether the country exports less when its population is big (absorption effect) or whether a more populous country exports more than a small country (economics of scale). The coefficient on the importer 's population is unclear as well for the same reasons. The coefficients B 3 and B 4 are large and negative in both samples. This proves that for developed and richer countries the exporter 's population has a positive absorption effect and that bigger countries import more than smaller countries.
The European Union is a regional bloc whose agreement encompasses more activities (customs union, free travel etc.) beyond that of a free trade area. In recognition of this deeper agreement, the models separate free trade agreement dummy variables into European Community Dummy (EC) and Free Trade Agreement (FTA). Both the dummy coefficients are positive. Elimination of trade tariffs, quotas, and other preferences on goods lower trade barriers and serve to improve bilateral trade.
The coefficients on EMU B 7 are 0.126 and 0.146 for the Developed and European Samples respectively. The European Economic and Monetary Union has a notable effect on trade, boosting bilateral trade among EMU country-pairs by at least 12% (e 0.126).
While these results are significantly less than previous estimates by Rose (2002) and Rose and Glick (2003), they are nevertheless remarkable considering that the countries in the samples are all developed countries that already trade a great deal with each other. In the European context, this is further highlighted by the fact that the European Economic Area (EEA) came into being on January 1994 allowing EFTA countries to participate in the European Single Market. A single market is a custom union with common policies on product regulation, and freedom of movement of all the four factors of production (goods, services, capital and labour). All the countries in the European sample are members of the EEA with the exception of Switzerland who is still linked to the European Union by Swiss-EU bilateral agreements. This suggests that even within a custom union, a common market, the introduction of a common currency still benefits intra-EMU trade.
The major problem with the fixed effects model is that it does not allow us to track the evolution of the EMU coefficient over the more significant time periods. The fixing of euro exchange rates in 1999 removes exchange rate volatility. This should improve bilateral trade among EMU members. However, as long as there are national currencies, some exchange-rate conversion and information costs will continue to exist. Therefore only in 2002, with the launch of the euro, will intra-EMU trade truly reap all benefits of a common currency. The following model seeks to address these concerns.
Developed Sample.
European Sample.
Following Rose (2002), trade is defined as the average value of bilateral imports and exports in constant dollars. Fixed effects are now included into the equation to control for heterogeneous trading relationships. These are the surface area, whether the two countries share a common border, a common language or are members of the same free trade area and the number of islands and landlocked countries in each pair. The European Sample excludes the Island Dummy Variable because United Kingdom is the only island in that sample.
The same two Developed and European samples are included in the Panel Data giving the study 276(24*23/2) country-pairs and 136(17*16/2) country-pairs and observations each year respectively. Note that Belgium and Luxembourg are counted as one entity, following IMF DOTS data. Out of these, 55 (11*10/2) country-pairs shared a common currency. Therefore EMU dummy variable now takes a value of one even before the formation of the EMU. Furthermore, the gravity equation is estimated year by year, hence eliminated the need of year dummies.
By observing the change in the EMU dummy variable 's coefficient from year to year, this model captures the effect of EMU on bilateral trade, following the launch and introduction of the euro.
Note: White Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Standard Errors & Covariance t-statistics in parenthesis, *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 1%.
Table 7 illustrates that the EMU dummy coefficients in both models beginning in 1992 are consistently positive and statistically significant. This results show that even before 1999, member of EMU already trade more among each other. For example, in 1993, the EMU country-pairs traded 33.4% (e 0.287995) more than other country-pairs in the Developed Sample. Most importantly, there is an obvious and significant jump in the dummy coefficient in 1999, when the EMU was formally created. This is the case for both samples. If we take 1992 to 1997 as the typical pre-EMU years and 1998 to 2004 as the typical EMU year, the creation of the EMU increased trade among members by approximately 9% for the Developed sample and European sample. It is also noteworthy that the t-statistic tends to be higher after 1998 when the euro in introduced. A complete set of results is reported in Appendix: Table 8. In the next two figures, the EMU coefficients are converted to the marginal impact on trade for EMU country-pairs and plotted against time for further analysis. exp.(0.383736857)/(exp.(0.301609333)-1 (exp.(0.360339286)/(exp.(0.271868667)-1).
Figure 1 suggests that intra-EMU trade started to increase in 1998 in anticipation of anticipation of the formation of the EMU. There is a fall in the marginal impact of EMU membership on bilateral trade in 2000. This can be attributed to not controlling for the early 2000s recession. The recession affected the European Union mostly in 2000-2001, coinciding with the euro value plummeting. This hurt businesses based in Europe as the revenue made abroad had an unfavourable trade. US also experienced negative growth in the third quarter of 2000, the first quarter of 2001 and the third quarter of 2001. This had an adverse effect on the Canadian economy, which is closely linked to the US. Thus growth of international trade slowed down overall during this period.
However, in 2002, the value of the euro began to rapidly rise (reaching parity with the US dollar on June 15 2002) and business sentiment improved. This is shown in the sharp increase in the marginal impact of EMU membership in 2003. It is interesting to note that this coincides with the launch of the euro in 2002, which totally eliminated exchange-rate conversion, and most information cost. The one-year lag could be attributed to the recession as mentioned above. It is also possible that there exist some price-stickiness due to menu cost where companies require significant time lags to make adjustments.
Figure 2 also shows that the increase in intra-EMU trade started in 1998 in anticipation of anticipation of the formation of the EMU. There is no obvious decrease effect on trade in 2000 and 2001, which should be the case since the volatility of the Euro-US dollar exchange rate would not affect a European sample. However, unlike Figure 1, there is no further increase on bilateral trade that coincides with the launch of the Euro. Perhaps with common membership in the EEA, the European countries are already significantly integrated in a common market.
The objective of this study is to estimate the effect of the formation of the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in 1999 on bilateral trade. It is based on Panel data with the annual bilateral trade values of 25 developed countries from 1980 to 2004. In the Difference-in-Difference Model, it is estimated that adopting the euro will increase bilateral trade by at least 12%. The Year-by-Year Model says that intra-EMU trade increased by around 9% after introducing the euro. These results are much lower than previous estimates made by studies Rose (2000), Rose and van Wincoop (2001) and Rose and Glick (2002). Nevertheless, taking into consideration that these developed countries already trade a great deal with each other, the increase of bilateral trade caused by the adoption of the euro is significant and economically important,.
As hinted by the analysis, the major problem with the Year-by-Year Model is that it allows coefficients and other variables that are not controlled for to vary over time such as the early 2000s recession. Hence the results and analysis obtained from the Difference-in-Difference model using panel data with fixed effects to capture these unobserved variables are more accurate. Furthermore, since the data obtained are only for the first 5 years since euro has been introduced, it is likely that there are some adverse transitional effects. Hence, it is possible that the models underestimate the true effects on trade. In addition, several infrastructure variables (length of motorway and stock of public capital) could be introduced to more accurately model transport cost, instead of the more traditional distance. Exchange rate volatility could also be added to improve the predictive ability of the models. Another problem is that it is difficult to establish causality here. It is also highly possible that the increase in bilateral trade could be nudging countries towards economic integration.
