Hume 's two definitions of cause differ in a somewhat dualist way. The first requires regularities in the physical world; the second requires associations in the mind. Hume talks as if we can accept either or both but it appears that we need to accept both to fully grasp the intricacies involved in describing cause and effect.
The first, physical definition, says that something is a cause if it is contiguous and precedent to some other object and where 'all the objects resembling the former are placed in like relations of precedence and contiguity to those objects that resemble the latter' (Section 14, Treatise of Human Nature). It is not apparent what Hume means by objects resembling each other. Do they have to be identical to each other? Or is there some scope for variety? If there is some scope for variety and difference then it is difficult to see where Hume would draw the line, and say that an event no longer resembles the one being analysed, but resembles some other event instead. Depending on the criteria for what constitutes events resembling each other; it could be argued that all events that are contiguous and precedent to some other event resemble each other. This would suggest some underlying cause and effect principle in the world. As Hume presents no criteria for what makes an event different from another then there is no reason that we cannot assume that all cause and effect relationships resemble each other insofar that they are all cause and effect relationships. Hume 's first definition is lacking because it does not rule out the possibility that cause and effect actually exists as a principle or law of nature in the world, which Hume is evidently against.
Hume 's second definition of cause is a more psychological one; it is the constant conjunction of events that produces an impression of cause and effect in the mind. Hume claims that the cause is so related to it that it causes the mind to link the two and whenever there is one the mind anticipates the other. Again, it is difficult to see what exactly is required for this impression to occur; must identical events be repeated in order for a causal impression to be made? Or, again, does it just reduce to observing different sets of events that resemble each other in no way other than that they possess a causal connection?.
In Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding Hume professes a view on miracles and this is closely connected to his views on cause an effect. Hume essentially exerts that we must not believe in a miracle unless to not believe in an event would be more miraculous than to believe in it. Hume accounts for miracles as misperceptions in the minds of people and that there can never be enough people of sound enough mind to witness an event and provide a substantial claim for the existence of miracles. Hume also wants miracles to be placed under experimental procedures so that the event can be reproduced until it can be established that whatever miraculous event occurred did really occur.
This seems to suggest two things in regards to cause and effect relationships. The first being that cause and effect does seem to exist in the mind for Hume as he sees miracles being a product of misperception; the mind is creating a cause and effect impression on a set of events where such a relationship does not really exist. This could imply that it is possible for people to have some capacity for understanding cause and effect relationships in which they are lacking. Perhaps there are some people who do not understand cause and effect relationships at all and perhaps there are some who understand better than others. Although this is perfectly plausible, it does seem to show that cause and effect relationships cannot be the product of the mind alone. There must be some cause and effect impressions in the world; that those who have a poor capacity to understand simply cannot pick up on perceive.
The second issue with cause and effect that Hume 's view on miracles raises is that Hume wants to place them under repeatable scientific experiments. Although this would establish whether two events are causally related, they could no longer be defined as a miracle. If a miracle is freak occurrence against the laws of nature then if it continuously happens then it will become a law of nature itself. This seems to highlight the need for there to be cause and effect impressions receivable from the physical world. If we are to receive them from repeatable occurrences of the event then it must actually part of the world, Hume himself believes that the mind cannot create anything original but that everything is as a result of sense impressions. If a miraculous event becomes a law of nature under repeated conditions then it seems to follow that it is the mind that imposes what these laws of nature are on the world.
When psychological interpretations of events are imposed they seem to highlight that a physical element to cause and effect relationships is missing and, likewise, when physical interpretations of cause and effect are imposed on similar events, a psychological element is apparently missing. At first appearance the two definitions of Hume provides of cause seem at odds which other and seem to mirror a Cartesian type Dualism; the two of them together presenting a mind/body distinction. Although in Treatise Hume appears to suggest that we can accept either view as an adequate explanation of causal relationships it seems that we need the two views combined in order to fully understand causal relationships in a Humean way.
Together the two views seem to advocate that there is both a mental element to understanding causal relationships but that there is also an actual relationship that exists between two events that is necessary for us to understand such events. It appears that Hume is saying that there is an actual impression in the world and that we need to have the mental capacity to understand it, which is not far removed from any other impression that is to be had from the world. In viewing everyday objects there must both be the actual object to perceive and the mental capacity to perceive them. At first it seems puzzling why Hume presents two seemingly conflicting views only to find that the two complement each other. The reason must be that if Hume was to present the two views as one, all-encompassing view we would be left with a fairly dull view of cause and effect that is hardly earth shattering; namely that cause and effect relationship impressions arise from the real world and we have a mental capacity to perceive them. In first looking for a definition of cause Hume attempts to break down a compound idea into its constituent, simple parts. It appears that, for Hume, the two simple ideas are that of a mental one and a physical one, but the two are so dependent on each other that they amount to one compound idea. Each has holes that require the other to fill so that one cannot be explained without the other. It seems that the two simple ideas are so connected that they are, in fact, just one complex idea of cause and effect.
