The 'Drude' and 'Sommerfeld' free electron models were evaluated using solid state simulations [1] of these theories. The simulations were validated against the theories and subsequently used to probe the accuracy of the models with regards to fundamental laws. The Drude model was found to obey Ohm 's law, and both were shown to model the Hall Effect accurately for most metals but not for those with positive mobile charge carriers. This discrepancy was again shown in the Drude model by investigating cyclotron resonance, which was only allowed for left circularly or elliptically polarised fields in the model, when in fact certain metals can exhibit resonance in the opposite direction. It was shown that average drift velocity remains the same in a constant E x field and under Hall Effect conditions with the equal E x for both models. Sommerfeld and Drude both failed to account for the magnetoresistive properties of metals in this instance.
The Drude and Sommerfeld free electron models are two of the earliest ever of their kind, having been devised shortly after the discovery of the electron in 1897. Whilst both models do not fully describe free electrons in metals, they are suitably accurate and useful in certain scenarios where a more accurate theory might only add unnecessary complications.
In 1900 P Drude attempted to describe the motion of electrons in metal just three years after JJ Thompson discovered the electron. Drude 's classical theory of electrical conduction assumes that a metal is composed to stationary positive ions and a gas of valence electrons. The motion of the electrons in the metal was assumed to be governed by Boltzmann statistics. Thermal equilibrium is maintained by the scattering of the electrons (no assumption is made about the origin on the scattering). This probability of an electron scattering is taken to be in time interval   t where    is the scattering time and   t      [2]. The temperature is governed by the magnitude of the average velocity of the electrons. (1) with being the average thermal velocity of the electrons [2].
The Drude equation for the average electron velocity in applied E and B field is given by: (2)[4].
Supposing that the accelerating force acts on average for a time tau to produce a steady drift velocity the Drude model gives the magnitude of the Hall angle as (3) where is the cyclotron frequency of the electrons. [2].
The Drude simulation gives a two dimensional display of the positions of N electrons (up to 255) on the left hand (real-space) and their corresponding velocities on the right hand side (reciprocal-space). The electrons are shown five dots displaying their position in the last five time steps giving them worm-like appearance. Some of the electrons are coloured for ease of observation. The average position and velocity of the electrons is shown with a large green dot with a large red dot at the origin.
To investigate the behaviour of a classical gas of electrons the user has controls time varying x and y components of electric field, the z component of the magnetic field, temperature and scattering time. The individual magnitudes of these variables can be altered by using the  'sliders'.
With the development of quantum mechanical theories throughout the early 20 th Century, it was only appropriate that the classical free electron model was adapted to recognise the quantum behaviour of the conduction electrons. By 1928, A. J. Sommerfeld had finalised a quantum free electron theory by looking more closely at the collisions between electrons and the lattice ions, and also incorporating the Pauli Exclusion Principle [5]. As with the Drude Model, it is still assumed that the electrons behave as a non-interacting free gas of particles that move amongst a lattice of positive ions. However, whereas "Drude" considers specifically the behaviour of the electrons over time, this model monitors the evolution of states in reciprocal space. "Sommerfeld" models the electrons as localised wavepackets which move with a group velocity v, and hence their momentum p is characterised in both real and momentum space. (4)[4].
The approach taken with this model, is to solve the time-independent Schr  dinger equation for the wavefunctions    and the energies    of electrons inside a metal cube of edge length L. This describes a finite potential well where the wavefunctions are contained within the surfaces of the metal by a periodic boundary condition, such that the solutions will be planewaves that can be characterised by the wavevector k.
The wavefunction will only satisfy these conditions if the components of the wavevector k can be expressed in the form (5) where p, q and r are integers [2]. Therefore, our solution to the Schr  dinger equation in reciprocal space represents a 3 dimensional 'grid' of quantized k-states, equally spaced by a distance 2  /L, as shown in Figure 1.
The Sommerfeld Model looks at the progression of these k-states over time and the occupancy of electrons within them, as opposed to the actual electrons themselves which was the method adopted in "Drude". As electrons are fermions, in that they possess half integral spin, they obey the Pauli Exclusion Principle. This states that each state can hold no more than two electrons each, corresponding to one electron with spin +   and another of -    . The lowest energy state of N electrons within such a metal would be achieved by filling up the N lowest energy states up to an energy known as the Fermi Energy   F. At zero temperature all of the states within the Fermi sphere will be occupied, and all of those outside will be empty. The radius of this sphere is the Fermi wavevector k F. At any temperatures above absolute zero, the probability that a state is occupied is given by the Fermi distribution function, unlike "Drude" which is characterised by classical Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics.[4] (6).
The occupancy of states, particularly those near the Fermi sphere, gives rise to the many conduction properties of metals that shall be investigated using this model.
The Sommerfeld simulation shows the k-states of the free electron gas as they evolve with time, but in order to be seen effectively, it has restricted itself to a two dimensional display. Because of this, k z is effectively zero and the Fermi sphere is now the Fermi surface shown by a line containing the k x and k y states. Those states occupied by an electron are shown by white dots, and those empty remain black. Also on this k-space display is a green dot which signifies the average wavevector of all the electrons. "Sommerfeld" allows us to investigate the dynamics of this quantum electron gas by varying the Fermi Energy E F (eV) and also applying an electric field E in the x and y directions, and a magnetic field B in the z. Both of these fields are static with respect to time, but their magnitudes can be varied using the  'sliders'. The equation of motion for each state in response to these fields is very similar to equation (2) for "Drude" with the appropriate substitution made for k from equation (4).
The most prominent differences between this simulation and the classical "Drude" are the effects of the Exclusion Principle, and the scattering of electrons in different states. The Exclusion Principle ensures that only one electron may occupy a given k-state at any time. In actual fact, this should be two electrons of differing spins, but due to the simplistic nature of the simulation we assume that the electrons are  'spinless' and the principal still holds.
An important application of the Exclusion Principle is that of scattering. The  'scattering' of electrons is taken to be a random process which occurs when the particles collide with lattice ions and are moved to another k-state, leaving a previously occupied state empty. In "Sommerfeld" we can define two types of scattering; elastic and inelastic. For an inelastic collision, the electron loses on average an amount of energy     , which is a variable parameter. This loss of energy acts as a method of cooling the gas in the event of an applied field as well as providing momentum relaxation as found in the elastic collisions. As a result of the energy loss, the wavevector of the electron decreases in magnitude after such an event and continues in a new direction as chosen at random. The amount of inelastic scattering that will occur during a simulation can be controlled using the inelastic relaxation time parameter   i, given on the picosecond scale as is the time evolution (ps = 10 -12s). In an elastic event, no energy is lost and the magnitude of the electron 's wavevector before and after the collision will be identical, yet its direction will once again be randomized. For "Sommerfeld" the elastic scattering is governed by   e, the elastic relaxation time, or average time between elastic collisions.[2].
The first investigation made into the simulations was to test the response of both "Drude" and "Sommerfeld" to an applied field in the x-direction. We know in real life situations that if a linear electric field is applied to a metal it will create a flow of charge carriers (conduction electrons) around the metal with drift velocity v. For "Drude" this was studied by making simple reference to Ohm 's Law as a linear dependence between applied field, and induced current.
Fundamental to any electron model is Ohm 's Law: , as a basic validation of the Drude model, this law was investigated. Ohm 's Law can adapted by assuming that the current across the metal surface is proportional to the mean electron drift velocity and by replacing the voltage V with the electric field E (constant in time in this case), making it suitable for use in the "Drude" simulation. From equation (2) in equilibrium () Ohm 's Law becomes: (7)[4] where and are the charge and effective mass of the electron and is the average time between scattering events. This linear proportionality was confirmed, shown in Figure X, and the proportionality constant found: , showing a good agreement with the theoretical value: (with ), from (7).
However, with the Sommerfeld Model, the approach needed to carefully consider the effects of scattering and the exclusion principle when this E x was applied. Figure 2 shows the results obtained with "Sommerfeld" for an electric field of 1x10 6 Vm -1, and a Fermi Energy of 8eV. This   F was kept constant throughout all the investigations.
For the first 18ps of this recording both of the scattering times   i and   e were kept at very large values (10 5ps) and hence the scattering was assumed to be zero. In this time, the average k y component of the wavevector remained at zero   -1 whereas the k x component steadily and linearly decreases. This represents, for a field in the positive x direction, the electrons all travelling off in the negative x direction as we would expect. In k-space this is known as a drifting Fermi sphere, as shown in Figure 3.
The drift rate of the k-states in this direction, which can easily be related back to the drift velocity in position space and in "Drude", was proven to obey the k-space version of equation (2) as: (8)[2].
The green line in Figure 2 corresponds to the excess energy, which is the average energy of the electrons at time t less the initial average, in units of the Fermi energy,   F. This curve is effectively a measure of how much heating occurs as the electric field is applied, and in the first half of Figure 2, it can be seen to increase rapidly with time. However, at 18ps the inelastic scattering parameter   i was reduced to 1ps causing inelastic scattering to occur amongst the electrons. It is this that causes the Pauli Exclusion Principle to take effect and restricts the electric field from accelerating the electrons. Firstly, it can be seen that the average k x vector rapidly reduces towards zero but now only slightly displaced from equilibrium by as the inelastic scattering tries to return the system to a steady state. Fluctuations also occur in the k y direction due to this scattering. A more interesting effect is that E excess returns to zero as the inelastic collisions dissipate any net momentum and added energy to try an d maintain thermal equilibrium in the system.
The important of this inelastic scattering was further reinforced when "Sommerfeld" was used to test the equivalent equation to (7) as verified by "Drude" for Ohm 's Law. If both scattering times are kept suitably large so that the electrons all drift off from their equilibrium position as in figure 3 then, indeed, then varies linearly with E x as predicted by equation (8). This is shown in figure 4 by the blue line. The gradient on this graph should correspond to as shown above, but when computed, yields a theoretical relaxation time    as 18.4ps, which is not consistent with value used, as both    's were kept of the order of 10 5ps. This shows that although, the linear relationship of Ohm 's Law is obeyed, the relaxation times are completely inaccurate.
As soon as inelastic scattering is introduced with , as shown by the pink line, this linear dependence disappears, proving that in "Sommerfeld" the heating effects are still present to some extent, even with entirely inelastic scattering events.
Despite the above statement, the introduction of inelastic scattering into the system in vital in cooling the electron gas. Figure 5 shows that in the presence of an applied electric field, the excess energy of the electrons increases rapidly with only elastic scattering present. This corresponds to heating of the gas, whereas with inelastic scattering present the excess energy is dissipated during the collisions and the gas is sufficiently cooled.
Another point to note about this graph is that the average k x values for each type of scattering are roughly equivalent, showing that the removal of excess energy is the main effect accounted for by the electron scattering times.
Drude 's theory shows conductivity,   , is dependent on drift velocity: (9) where   c is the charge density. From equation (9) and assuming v d    vt can be shown that (10) where    is the mean free path [7]. Using equation (10) and from equation (1) it can be seen that . Unexpectedly a temperature dependence of mean drift velocity, and subsequently conductivity, was not found in the Drude simulation. This inconsistency is due to the simulation allowing temperature independent variation of , contrary to equation (10), as shown below. (11).
The true relationship was shown by determining independently from equation (11) as T was varied.
An E field in the positive x-direction and a B field in the positive z-direction were set up for both "Drude" and "Sommerfeld" models. The Hall angle was measured for a variety of values of B  . The data was plotted along for tan   verses B   along with values predicted from equation (3) in figures 6 and 8 for the Drude and Sommerfeld models respectively.
For "Sommerfeld",   i it was kept constant at 1ps as it had already proven to disobey certain linearities and B z was varied with , the angle between the electric field E x and the average centre of rotation of the k-states. The elastic scattering parameter was kept at a much higher value of 10 5ps and ignored during this part of the investigation. In terms of measurable quantities, the tan of the Hall Angle directly corresponded to / as demonstrated in Figure 7.
The experimental values of / were plotted against B z as shown by the blue best-fit line in figure 8, and this was compared to the theoretical / that we would expect for our B z and   i.
Figures 6 and 8 clearly demonstrate a consistency between both models and equation (3). However this result is not true for all metals. Both "Drude" and "Sommerfeld" assume electrons are the mobile charge carriers, this is not always the case. Some metals, for example Beryllium and Cadmium, have positively charged particles, 'holes', as charge carriers. When the current is being carried by a 'hole' the hall angle will actually be in the shifted by 180  .[7].
Both simulations were run using conditions for the usual Hall Effect experiment (figure 9) in order to investigate any further shortfalls in the models.
The metal was simulated to be in a constant B field in the positive z-direction and a hall voltage along the y-axis allowing current to flow along the x-axis. The direction of current flow is governed by the sign of the Hall coefficient, RH. (12)[4].
RH is negative when mobile charge carriers are electrons and oppositely signed for holes. The Hall Effect conditions were simulated both models with appropriate parameters so that the drift velocity was only along the x-axis. This corresponded to for both simulations and , , and , in "Drude" and "Sommerfeld" respectively.
The drift velocity, v D, was observed over a time period of 300ps for both models (figure 10). For the first half of the simulation the conditions described above we applied to the electrons, and after 150ps the E y component and the B field were switched off, corresponding to only a constant E field in the x direction. This was done to investigate any variation in resistivity caused by the presence of a magnetic field, known as magnetoresistance.
It is clear from the first 150ps that the RH is negative for both models. This complies with the fact that both models negate positive charge carriers, illustrated in section (2.5.1).
It was also observed, from figure 10, that the mean electron velocity and  remain the same as they are in constant E x under Hall Effect conditions with equal E x. Therefore it could be assumed both models appear to neglect magnetroresistance. However, although this is true of the Drude model Sommerfeld does actually go some way to explaining this phenomenon but fails in the case of the Hall Effect [7].
The "Drude" model was used to investigate electron motion in time varying electric fields of the form , where is the variation frequency of the field and is the phase angle between x and y field components, crossed with constant magnetic fields, . From section X we know that electrons will orbit at a cyclotron frequency , where . Figure 11 shows the variation of velocity (pink) and the E field (blue) of such a system over time, clearly largest oscillations are created by the two being in antiphase, by equation (X Ohm 's Law). Subsequently the frequency of the field, , was matched to , with set to a large number so that scattering could be ignored, achieving cyclotron resonance.
For perfect resonance one would expect the wavepacket to extend to infinity, this was not observed due to imperfect matching of the frequencies, however the wavepackets could become very long (~30,000ps) for accurate to eight decimal places, with reaching speed of the order . The solutions for to the Drude equation (2), given and are , and allow only for anticlockwise electron rotation and therefore resonance only for left circularly or elliptically polarised fields. This was confirmed using the "Drude" simulation.
These solutions of the Drude equation illustrate another major inconsistency between the Drude model and reality. Some real metals do allow for cyclotron resonance with right circularly or elliptically polarised fields. The reason for this discrepancy, as with the Hall Effect, is due to the existence of positive charge carriers in these metals.
While the simulations provide convenient visualisation of the Drude and Sommerfeld models, the limitation to 255 electrons means that accurate numerical values cannot be retrieved without applying large fields that slow down computing and data acquisition. This is largely because thermal noise is relatively large making values hard to retrieve accurately. A major pitfall of the Drude simulation is that shown in section 2.1.4 the independence of and temperature in the simulation. Although the model does not consider collisions to be with lattice ions, it would be far more suitable or the collision frequency related variable to be which is a constant for a given system.
The classical "Drude" model and the equivalent "Sommerfeld" (without scattering effects) prove well the linear dependence of the macroscopic Ohm 's Law, although the addition of the Exclusion Principle in the quantum picture distorts this slightly. Although the elastic and inelastic scattering introduced by "Sommerfeld" fails in this are, it generally increases the accuracy of the Free Electron Model in metals. The cooling effects of inelastic scattering, and the lack of this cooling in the case of elastic scattering helps to provide a better picture of electron collisions with lattice ions, but still lacks consideration of impurities and other vibrations that occur in real metals.
For the cases of combined electric and magnetic fields, the simple relationship explanation of the Hall Angle is approached ideally in both models, due to the simple geometry considered. But Both Drude and Sommerfeld fail to account for the existence of positive charge carriers in certain metals and hence magnetoresistance, and leading to only certain polarisations of fields allowed when later considering the cyclotron frequency.
The Drude and Sommerfeld simulations fall short of imitating the behaviour of real electrons within metals for a number of the investigations carried out during this experiment. The fact that "Drude" is based upon entirely classical principles almost guarantees its failure in areas that have already been proven with deeper quantum exploration. As "Sommerfeld" attempts to take some of the most basic quantum ideas into account it ultimately improves the model, despite using the same unrealistic parameters.
