1a) The ultimate aim of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) is to increase world trade by encouraging its members to reduce barriers to trade. One of the principle ways it can help to achieve this is to reduce tariffs, which are customs duties on merchandise imports. Article 36 'Principles and Objectives', paragraph 1a of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)   , states that 'the contracting parties [should] recall that the basic objectives of this Agreement include the raising of standards of living and the progressive development of the economies of all contracting parties.' However, there is a degree of flexibility, relating to the rules and regulations that govern the operation of the WTO, which can be exercised when a WTO member is facing the burden of anti-competitive measures (e.g. dumping) or the undesirable sourcing of supplies (that violate international environmental agreements) by other WTO members. These remedies will be considered in this essay. (Note: An important assumption made in this essay is that 'State A' is classed as a developed country and therefore cannot use special measures to promote their trade and development, which developing countries are entitled to do under Article 36.
The introduction to the essay question describes the concern of furniture manufacturers in State A about cheap imports. For the purposes of examining the remedies available to State A, it is necessary to determine the meaning of the word 'cheap'. If the price of these imports is cheaper than the price of State A 's domestic furniture products because of lower production costs, then the government of State A would be acting unlawfully if it were to impose a new tax on imported furniture. Article 3 'National Treatment on Internal Taxation and Regulation', paragraph 1, states that 'the contracting parties recognise that internal taxes and other internal charges, and laws, regulations and requirements affecting the internal sale...of products...should not be applied to imported or domestic products so as to afford protection to domestic production.' Such a measure would be purely anti-competitive and hence a form of protectionism, which the WTO is trying to prevent. Paragraph 2 state that 'the products of the territory of any contracting party imported into the territory of any other contracting party shall not be subject, directly or indirectly, to internal taxes or other internal charges of any kind in excess of those applied, directly or indirectly, to like domestic products.' Therefore, unless the government of State A is not currently imposing a tax on imported furniture of the same level as for its domestically-produced furniture, it is forbidden by the WTO to impose a new tax.
On the other hand, if these imports were being dumped (Art 5 defines dumping as 'products of one country are introduced into the commerce of another country at less than the normal value of the products) within State A 's territory, then its government would have a remedy which is compatible with its WTO obligations, to prevent this activity from occurring in the future. This remedy is described in Article 6 'Anti Dumping and Countervailing Duties', paragraph 1, whereby contracting parties recognise that dumping 'is to be condemned if it causes or threatens material injury to an established industry in the territory of a contracting party or materially retards the establishment of a domestic industry'. There follows conditions to determine a 'dumped' product (i.e. one that is imported into a country at less than its normal price and threatens established or establishing domestic industries). Paragraph 2 describes the remedy available thus: '...a contracting party may levy on any dumped product an anti-dumping duty not greater in amount than the margin of dumping in respect of such a product.' (The margin of dumping is determined in accordance with the conditions in paragraph 1).
To conclude, State A cannot legally impose a new tax on imported furniture, whether or not it is being dumped. However, if these imports can be proved to be dumped, then it can legally undertake an anti-dumping measure. If these cheaper imports are the result of lower production costs then the government of State A is powerless under current WTO laws. 1b) According to the WTO website   , 'there are approximately 200 multilateral trade agreements (MEAs) in place today.' One of these is the International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA)   , of which the latest variation came into force on 1 January 1997. 57 of its 59 members are also WTO members. Article 1 'Objectives', subsection K, states the [aim] 'to improve marketing and distribution of tropical timber exports from sustainably managed sources'. Therefore, it would seem that if the Government of State A had ratified the ITTA, then it would have the power to ban imports from countries that do not protect tropical forests, if they were members of the Agreement too. However, Article 36 states that 'nothing in this Agreement authorizes the use of measures to restrict or ban international trade in, and in particular as they concern imports of and utilization of, timber and timber products'. Neither are there trade measures being proposed nor decisions being taken to introduce trade measures within the sphere of the Agreement. Therefore, it appears that State A 's government is actually powerless under the ITTA.
Instead it would have to resort to Article 20 of GATT, which outlines the general exceptions to WTO rules i.e. the conditions under which trade restrictions are exempt from legal challenge. Under this Article, WTO members may adopt trade-restrictive measures for a variety of reasons, including those 'necessary to protect human, animal or plant life.' However, the article stressed that environmental regulations imposed under it should not be 'arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions apply' or 'a disguised restriction on international trade.' These conditions are imposed to prevent a nation from imposing environmental regulations that are really a form of protectionism. However, if the concerned environmentalists of State A can prove certain countries are exporting furniture that is made from tropical hardwood, then State A would not fall foul of disguised protectionism.
However, there is the problem of interpreting the meaning of specific words within the Article. For example, how severe would damage to plant life have to be before 'necessary' measures are enforced? Jenny Bates wrote (Multilateral Environmental Agreements and the World Trade Organization, 1999 4) 'that in the cases brought to the WTO so far, dispute settlement panels have interpreted the term 'necessary' to mean 'least trade restrictive.' ' A ban on imports is certainly trade restrictive, so countries that have had the ban imposed may be strongly inclined to take the matter to a dispute settlement panel, knowing their chance of succeeding would be quite high, based on previous settlements. Bates (ibid) states that 'the language does not refer specifically to MEAs. Hence, any MEA that includes a trade restrictive measure could potentially be subject to challenge, particularly by a WTO member not signed up to the MEA.'.
Therefore, under this article, State A 's government could legally ban furniture imports from countries that fail to protect plant life, as long as it does so in an objective manner. If it were to allow imports from countries that demonstrated the same level of disregard for tropical forests as the countries that it banned imports from, (possibly because it benefits from a strong trading association with that country), then it would be liable under Article 13, 'Non-Discrimination of Quantitative Restrictions' which states that 'no prohibition or restriction shall be applied by any contracting party on the importation of any product... unless the importation of the like product of all third countries... is similarly prohibited.'.
The case brought by Pakistan, Malaysia, India and Thailand against the USA illustrates governments do have rights under WTO rules to protect plant life, by banning imports that do not comply with environmental standards, but this can lead to an action under article 13 by those countries affected by the ban.
To conclude, if State A can prove that it is importing furniture that is made from tropical hardwood, then it could impose a ban on all countries that export furniture to them, legally, under WTO rules. Providing it does not discriminate against certain countries when imposing the ban, it should not fear any repercussion under Article 13. However, since Jenny Bates (ibid) states 'environmental policymaking and the international trade rules embodied in the WTO are already intersecting and clashing', I would advise State A 's government to prove that overseas furniture manufacturers are dumping their output within State A 's territory and take an action against the perpetrators via Article 6 of GATT.    'The text of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade'       4 2.) The TRIPS Agreement came into force on 1 st January 1995 and represents the most comprehensive international instrument on intellectual property rights (IPRs) and sets forth minimum standards to be applied by all WTO members. Intellectual property relates to creations of the human mind, which are protected by legal instruments such as copyrights and related rights, trademarks and related marks, trade secrets, industrial designs, patents and geographical indications. Global brands such as Microsoft and Apple are examples of how this form of property is of huge value to them, when it is protected by IPRs, since these ensure that the creator of a valuable piece of information enjoys exclusive rights to its use. However, since the protection afforded to brands such as these is not as extensive in the developing world, practices such as counterfeiting are rife and represent a significant leakage from these corporations' profits. Therefore, these corporations are less willing to supply their technology to developing nations and so theses nations cannot reap the benefits of new technologies. Therefore, greater protection of IPRs is certain to make corporations richer, but whether it will be detrimental to developing countries is a more complex question.
Economic theory suggests that increased protection of IPRs may stimulate economic development in developing countries in a number of ways. For example, firms are more likely to introduce costly yet efficient organisational structures when the risks of unfair competition and trademark infringement are small (Maskus, 2000, p.147   ). Also, entrepreneurship would be encouraged since creative ideas would be protected by IPRs. In terms of international transactions, developing countries would attract inflows of advanced technology which was previously withheld because of a weak IPR regime. This diffusion of technology would decrease firms' production costs and increase productivity in firms within developing countries. The sophistication of the technology would depend upon the exporter 's view of the strength of the IPR regime within the developing country.
However, (Maskus, 2004, p.30) argues that other policies have to be considered too: 'It is important to recognise that strengthening the IPR system alone, while bearing some potential for expanding access to trade, FDI and technology, is liable to be of little value unless done in a coherent framework of broader policies...for example...liberalisation of commercial policies and pursuit of appropriate competition policies... education and training...fair contracts...joint ventures and mergers.'.
Foreign direct investment, joint ventures and licensing contracts are other methods whereby technology can be transferred overseas. Maskus (2000, p.151) states that 'empirical work demonstrates that the strength of IPRs and the ability to enforce contracts have important effects on MNC decisions on where to invest and whether to transfer advanced technologies.' The secondary effects of MNC location could be massive for the wider community. Higher employment and wages as well as the introduction of minimum working standards and the spreading of knowledge and MNC organisational structures would be beneficial for those employed as well as the wider community (assuming MNCs do not abuse less stringent employment laws). There would also be increased contract certainty between enterprises and suppliers. Maskus, (ibid) states that 'enterprises would be willing to train workers because they would feel more pressure not to misappropriate trade secrets.' However, the likelihood of an MNC locating itself in a country without a basic level of infrastructure is unlikely, so middle and high income developing countries are more likely to benefit compared to the least developed nations. Thus, MNCs would help to stabilise the economy within which it locates, by increasing its productive potential, thereby creating economic growth and increased living standards: 'In general, developing economies with a good basis in skills, a competitive economy, good growth prospects, effective infrastructure and the like are more likely to see these [international technology transfer] flows increase.' (Maskus, 2004, p.40   ).
On the other hand, countries with weak IPRs will not benefit from inflows of modern technologies and so they may try to develop their own technical knowledge. However, these countries only have a fraction of the capabilities of developed countries in R&D, so this problem is both costly and slow and contravenes the law of comparative advantage. The resultant technologies would lag behind international norms and there would be fewer spill-over benefits.
In countries with inflexible labour markets, unemployment would rise because stronger IPRs would create higher product prices thus decreasing demand, and there would be no alternative employment for the unemployed. Maskus, (2004, p.40) states that 'a large increase in prices could be seriously detrimental to the very least developing countries... The LDCs are likely to find relatively little expansion in inward technology flows for some time to come.' This would occur simultaneously to the LEDCs incurring the large costs of implementing the agreement itself: 'One primary implication of implementation and enforcement of the rules, disciplines and procedures called for in the TRIPs Agreement will be the direct costs of generating or improving administrative mechanisms.' (United Nations, 1996, p.19)   .
To conclude, the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement has affected different countries to varying degrees. It is difficult to assess the overall effect of TRIPS because there are multiple external factors, such as fluctuating oil prices and wars which have affected the economic development of countries over the last eleven years. That timeframe itself is also relatively short in order to make definite conclusions as to its success. Maskus (2004, p.29) concludes that 'among the more important factors [that determine technology flows] are the local investment climate, market competition, governance policies, openness, proximity to markets, human capital (engineering and management skills) and labour mobility... and the extent to which foreign governments choose to place into the public domain the results of publicly funded research.'.
The TRIPS agreement does not appear to have taken into account the varying stages of development of the countries that it affects, thus only those that already had a reasonable level of IPR protection appear capable of benefiting from it. Since TRIPs inclusion to the GATT treaty in 1994 was the result of intense lobbying by the United States, supported by the European Union, Japan and other developed nations, it seems that it may have been borne out of desperation by rich countries who accounted their declining competitiveness to the losses from overseas piracy and counterfeiting activities. (Correa, 2000, p.4) 4.
Critics of the TRIPS agreement would argue that the WTO 's Council for Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights decision (following a decision reached by member governments on 29 November 2005) to allow least-developed countries an extension until 1 July 2013 (from 1 January 2006) to provide protection for trademarks, copyright, patents and other intellectual property under the WTO 's agreement, illustrates how harsh the original timescales were and that the timing of the agreement was premature.
