This question can be tackled in two parts: How do we characterise simplicity? In what ways does simplicity guide a theory to truth? There are several different theories about what truth actually is, however, truth in this essay is being taken as agreement with reality.
Simplicity is hard to determine. To show this I will repeat the documented example of curve fitting to a set of data, from Carl G. Hempel 's Criteria of Confirmation and Acceptability. First say that v is a function of u. We have four instances of u for which v is known. Namely for u = 0, 1, 2, 3 then v = 2, 3, 4, 5 respectively. There is no previously known functional connection for these two characteristics. In such case we can conjure up three hypotheses to exactly fit the data:
Hemple says that with no background information known or assumed then we would undoubtedly choose H 3 over the others purely because it is simpler. Solely because this hypothesis is simpler, it counts as more acceptable in our eyes.
But why is it simpler? Simplicity has to be objective, and there must be clear criteria of what constitutes simple as we intuitively know when an equation, or even a theory, is simple.
Is H 3 simpler because it contains less terms, namely it is of a lower polynomial order to the others? What then when we include trigonometric functions, exponents and logs? The functions sin(x), cos(x), and ex can be written as infinite polynomial equations, however it is clear that a hypothesis of sin(x) would be preferred over a hypothesis containing a polynomial of a dozen terms, even if they both fitted the given data.
Just as sin(x) can also be given as (ex - e-x)/2i, there exist many functions that mathematicians and physicists would call simpler because they have been assigned special names.
A straight line in Cartesian coordinates would appear curved in Polar coordinates, and vice versa. Similarly, complicated functions can be made to appear simpler through coordinate transforms. This transformation must be taken into account when attempting to characterise simplicity.
If we focus on theories instead of functions then it has been suggested that the number of independent basic assumptions is an indicator of how simple a theory is. However, these assumptions can be broken down or merged, which confuses matters. Also, separate assumptions would have to be weighted rather than just counted.
Despite this difficulty in characterising simplicity it seems that we follow Hempel 's principle of simplicity whereby in the case of two theories with the same number and diversity of confirmations, the simpler theory should be chosen; as it is more credible. This is easy to state but hard to justify. One attempt is by assuming that the laws governing nature itself are inherently simple. Although many scientists believe this to be true, belief alone cannot justify a principle.
Going on the past successes of natural laws being simple is no ground to take the natural laws as being simple on the whole. It is feasible that true reality - Truth - is too complicated to be mentally conceived and the best we can do is break it down into simple segments that we understand. From this it is obvious that all natural laws found are simple, as we cannot conceive the complicated ones.
A weaker argument is that the natural laws we have found so far are only simple because we have concentrated on the simple ones, and so they are not indicative of natural laws on the whole.
Also, it is a circular argument to state that the simplicity of the simplicity principle provides justification. An attempt of which has been tried.
Another justification states that the simplest theories should be preferred as they provide the most concise description of the given data. This is called the economy of science argument. It is argued that theories are not concerned with the underlying natural laws of reality but are just ways of summarising information from observations. Consequently, the theory which provides brevity in explaining all the data is preferred.
However, in the circumstance above, where we have to fit a curve to data points, we are more concerned with the reliability of the theory to guide us to correct future observations rather than the most economical description of the facts already observed.
Karl Popper tackles the question of simplicity by saying that all theories are more than likely to be false and that simplicity should be linked with falsifiability. Simple theories are preferred as they are more falsifiable. This can be shown, from the cited example, that falsifiability depends on how many observations are needed before a hypothesis can be concluded false. At least four points are required to show that a planetary orbit is not circular, and the same four points may be governed by an ellipse. It requires at least six points before we can falsify this hypothesis that the planetary orbit is elliptical.
Popper says that because the circular theory requires fewer observations to falsify, it is a simpler theory. However, if we consider the three hypothesis given on the first page, they all require only one observation at u = 4 to decide amongst them. Thus they all have the same level of falsifiability and so simplicity.
Also it is possible to have scenarios whereby a more falsifiable theory is not simpler, so Popper 's attempt to characterise simplicity is not suitable for all instances.
Over all it is accepted for now that the best characterisation of simplicity is what most people class as simple. If the majority say hypothesis H 3 is simpler, then it is.
In what ways does simplicity guide a theory to the truth? Working under the assumption that the laws of nature are inherently simple, which we have discussed, then it follows that as no natural laws are complicated, we should aim our theories to be as simple as possible. This view is demonstrated by Occam 's Razor, which one translation states as being "one should not increase, beyond what is necessary, the number of entities required to explain anything.".
As discussed, there is no justifiable reason for assuming the laws of nature are simple. If natural laws were inherently complicated then the simplicity of a theory would not guide us towards truth.
Simplicity of a theory is useful when thinking about higher level applications. Such as in chemistry, reactions are not worked out starting from the very successful (that is, it has survived serious attacks at falsifying it) theory of quantum electrodynamics (QED). Certain "natural laws" have been deduced from QED that are applied when chemical reactions take place so we can accurately predict the outcome.
For example, the theory governing a set of chemical reactions is simpler than all of QED, and it helps us understand more about the truth as we can then generalise such a theory to apply to more of chemistry. Deducing this 'generalisation' as it were from the complicated equations of QED would undoubtedly be very hard and since we are after predictions that agree with reality, ultimately using the simpler theory is a better guide to this end.
Many physical theories are models, or approximations, and so can never predict truth even though they get close. However, as better models get closer to the truth (the observed results) they often get less simple. Newton 's differential equations are simpler than Einstein 's fourth-rank tensor to describe metric space, and yet Einstein gets the better results.
However, in single experiments that produce a set of data there are many ways to draw a curve through the points. All we can really say is what the values are at such points and that they are undefined everywhere else. This would provide no help in predicting future results and guiding us towards truth. So we use our intuitive induction and draw a curve through the points we think best fits. This curve might predict interesting values that we can test. The outcome of this test will either confirm or deny our hypothetic curve, either way we have taken a step closer to the truth. This step was guided by our assumption that the values are related and by a simple relation as well.
We have seen what arguments can be employed to characterise simplicity but have failed to arrive at a satisfactory definition. Using simplicity as a guide to truth is seemingly standard practice. Although it does n't guarantee we are heading in the right direction with a theory, as the theory may turn out to be very complicated, simplicity provides a way we can summarise information and then use our intuition to best decide how to advance towards truth even further. Arguing that simplicity should be more falsifiable helps us to create a bolder theory that can say more with less. Although ultimately unjustifiable this method shows us that simplicity can be a guide to truth, assuming the truth is n't complicated.
