Human rights atrocities have become a focal point in this global era through the many egregious acts committed by individuals over the past few decades. These violations of humanity have taken place in various locations such as Cambodia, Rwanda, Yugoslavia, Sierra Leone, Iraq and the list goes on. Attached to the commission of these horrific acts is the notion of responsibility--individual criminal responsibility. As such international criminal law intervenes by initiating the legal processes of investigation, prosecution, trial, judgment and punishment in relation to an individual 's perpetration of international crimes: war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and crimes of aggression. These different processes are clearly embodied in the International Criminal Court (ICC). Furthermore the investigation process is readily apparent from the Chief Prosecutor 's communication concerning Iraq. The latter process reflects the factual, legal and procedural aspects in establishing the role of individuals accused of serious crimes. However the various legal processes are equally found in the national courts. Therefore individuals can also be held accountable for the commission of very serious crimes through the principles of jurisdiction and complementarity. As such the weaknesses of the ICC (as reflected in the Chief Prosecutor 's communication) in relation to the definition of international crimes, and subjective thresholds such as gravity and proportionality do not pose a major threat to international criminal law because of the opportunities for domestic prosecutions.
The establishment of genocide and crimes against humanity require fulfilment of the definitions in Articles 6 and 7 of the Rome Statute respectively. The crime of genocide requires specific intent that is targeted at particular groups of individuals as listed in Article 6 of the Rome Statute. This requirement sets a rather high level of intent and thus not every harmful act perpetrated will fall into the category of genocide. The essential elements are the numbers and specificity. This fact is highlighted in the Chief Prosecutor 's communication concerning the situation in Iraq. Although "genocide remains a central conceptual component of international criminal law..." certain factual and procedural aspects have to be satisfied before a thorough investigation procedure. This may be considered a hindrance to a further development of genocide if what is essentially required are statistics and pedantry. But of course it is arguable that these are exactly the components that lend to the legitimacy of international criminal law because of the notion of adherence to the rules. Furthermore international criminal law is concerned with the prosecution of individuals who have not adhered to the rules of the international community. The communication also raises the issue of the defining elements in relation to crimes against humanity (Article 7 of the Rome Statute). So long as the required elements attached to crimes against humanity cannot be satisfied a further investigation cannot occur. Hence it is clear that adherence is the key.
Ratner, Steven R. and Abrams, Jason S, (2001), Accountability for Human Rights Atrocities in International Law: beyond the Nuremberg Legacy, Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, p.26.
The crime of aggression has regrettably not been defined in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court because of power politics rather than a lack of consensus over definition. The development of a definition of this particular crime has been slow but steady ever since its inception at Nuremberg. Indeed Shukri observes that "over fifty years ago, it was authoritatively held by the International Military Tribunal (IMT) at Nuremberg that initiating a war of aggression was the supreme international crime." Therefore there is no question that the crime of aggression is a reprehensible act. There has been unanimity regarding only one aspect of definition and this was highlighted in the article by Antonio Y    ez-Barnuevo. The author observes the final comments by the coordinator Silvia Fern  ndez de Gurmendi that aggression is essentially a "leadership crime". With the guidance of both the definitions in the IMT and General Assembly Resolution 3314 (XXIX) with respect to the crime of aggression, it is then clear that the real impediment is the power struggle between the ICC and the Security Council. This fact has been elucidated by many jurists and commentators. This certainly does not bode well for the future of international criminal law because of the fear of politicization. But Lehto argues that "there may, in fact, be some legitimate overlap between the political and judicial functions..." of the ICC. This statement illustrates a realistic and practical approach to the role of the ICC. The ICC itself was founded mainly through the efforts of the United Nations General Assembly; the latter comprised of States with their own political views. Indeed international criminal law will perform better with the realisation that it can never be wholly divorced from politics. Any attempt will be futile. However realisation and acceptance are two different matters. The development of international criminal law should not be hampered by the acceptance of power politics as a justification for a delayed definition. Ergo how long before the ICC can invoke its jurisdiction to try leaders for the crime of aggression? This concern is clearly highlighted in the Chief Prosecutor 's communication regarding Iraq but the solution remains to be seen.
Politi, Mauro and Nesi, Giuseppe, eds., (2004), The International Criminal Court and the Crimes of Aggression, Aldershot; Burlington; Vt :Ashgate Publishing Ltd., p.33.
Ibid. p.111.
Ibid. p.146.
The analysis of civilian issues in war crimes will be sub-divided into two separate categories: (a) proportionality, and (b) the use of weaponry. In the Chief Prosecutor 's communication, Article 8(2)(b)(i) and Article 8(2)(b)(iv) were specifically mentioned. These articles deal with the civilian population. They are of much importance in understanding how the aforementioned categories are interpreted within the context of international criminal law.
This term means that "the commander must be able reasonably to foresee, before launching the attack on a target, its military utility, the likely civilian casualties and whether the latter would be excessive." As such there are many factual considerations to be taken into account in determining whether an attack is deemed proportionate. It is apparent that this term is a subjective concept because of the numerous value judgements and "the inherent difficulty of valuation". Thus it is a malleable concept that is susceptible to influences especially by the military commanders, who have to determine whether a planned attack is proportionate. International criminal law is therefore plagued with uncertainties and ambiguities which affects its credibility as a system of justice. Indeed many commentators have expressed their regret at the Final Report to the Prosecutor by the Committee Established to Review the NATO Bombing Campaign against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This Report illustrates an optimistic or rather biased view that a 'reasonable military commander' will be able to ascertain whether the injury to civilians is clearly disproportionate. This view is debatable since the ultimate goal of a military commander is to secure a military advantage, and collateral damage is thus to be expected. The term 'collateral damage' often appears in the law of international armed conflict and is arguably a term abused by military commanders. Thereby the interpretation of proportionality will always differ between that of the military commanders and the civilians themselves. Ironically this fact is acknowledged in the aforementioned Report but deference will ultimately be to military commanders. Therefore the actions of military commanders are unlikely to satisfy the requirements of Article 8(2)(b)(i) and Article 8(2)(b)(iv); as long as they are able to continually justify their decisions on the ground that it was proportionate. Therefore there may never be justice for injured civilians even with the establishment of international criminal law as a system of prosecution in these cases.
D  rmann, Knut, (2006), Elements of War Crimes under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p.171.
Breau, Susan C. and Jachec-Neale, Agnieszka, eds., (2005), Testing the Boundaries of International Humanitarian Law, London: The British Institute of International and Comparative Law, p.293.
ICTY, Final Report to the Prosecutor by the Committee Established to Review the NATO Bombing Campaign, para.50.
The prohibition of the use of specific weapons in the Rome Statute of the ICC is predicated upon the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. Hence the list of specified weapons and other methods of warfare are rather outdated since they reflect the technology which was employed during that particular time period. As a result of this antiquated approach many modern weapons such as cluster munitions and nuclear weapons have failed to be classified as prohibited weapons in the ICC. Advocates for the prohibition of cluster munitions and nuclear weapons have asserted that these weapons are indiscriminate in nature and cannot distinguish between civilians and military objects. Indiscriminate attacks are defined in Article 51(4)(a) to (c) of the Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions 1949. However military commanders and State officials often assert that these weapons are often able to discriminate even though there may be occasional failures. This argument is clearly highlighted in the Communication. Even the Chief Prosecutor acknowledges the statement released by the UK Ministry of Defence that "nearly 85% of weapons released by UK were precision-guided, a figure which would tend to corroborate effort to minimize casualties." This means that there is essentially a sliding scale or balancing act in weighing the failures and successes of the use of weapons. Has international criminal law thus been reduced to a lesson in arithmetic? Surely the law is concerned with legal considerations rather than factual and mathematical approaches. As such it is the role of international criminal law to campaign for a more legalistic approach which acknowledges the reality; the reality is that cluster munitions and nuclear weapons produce far more damage and long-lasting effects than some of the prohibited weapons. There has at least been a slight progress in recent times, for example Norway 's call for a treaty to ban cluster munitions. There is yet hope. This sentiment is reflected in the statement by Steve Goose (director of the arms division at Human Rights Watch), "this is a watershed moment in the international effort to combat cluster munitions. Any country serious about protecting civilians from the horrible effects of cluster munitions will join the Norwegian-led initiative right away." Therefore if cluster munitions were included in the list of prohibited weapons in the Rome Statute; there would be individual responsibility for those individuals who employ these weapons through prosecution and sanctions. As such this outcome would provide at least some sort of recognition with respect to the suffering of civilians. Furthermore this would satisfy the notion of "international criminal law [as] a body of international rules designed both to proscribe international crimes and to impose upon States the obligation to prosecute and punish at least some of those crimes.".
Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 8 June 1977.
International Criminal Court Chief Prosecutor 's communication concerning the situation in Iraq, (online) URL , p.7.
Human Rights Watch, Norway Opens Way to Cluster Munition Treaty, (online) URL (Accessed 3 January 2007).
Cassese, Antonio, (2003), International Criminal Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p.15.
What constitutes a reasonable basis? Is it reasonable information, reasonable amount of injuries and deaths or maybe reasonable witnesses? The answer is that a 'reasonable basis' varies. There is certainly an element of subjectivity and uncertainty in this term. The term 'reasonable' is interpreted according to the Chief Prosecutor 's analysis of the factual circumstances. This term is however flexible and is therefore useful in the ICC which deals with varied situations and cases. Not every case is similar and thus requires different considerations based on a 'reasonable basis'. International criminal law as a justice system for assigning responsibility cannot function without flexibility; this would lead to stagnation on the whole. In order for international criminal law to be a credible body it needs to possess the ability to adapt to the realities of the international community.
This term also require value judgments because of the inherent ambiguities. It also implies a certain threshold that needs to be established before an individual can be prosecuted for international crimes. Once again its interpretation is based upon the discretion of the Chief Prosecutor. This fact is highlighted in Louise Arbour 's statement, "...the real challenge posed to a Prosecutor is to choose from many meritorious complaints the appropriate ones for international intervention..." Gravity infers the notion of seriousness. Therefore is gravity measured by body count? The means used to achieve the ends? Or is it the effects? This term is similar to 'reasonable basis' because of its subjectivity, uncertainty but also flexibility. 'Gravity' will certainly be one of the many aspects in any international criminal trial in order to determine whether an international crime was committed. Thus its interpretation in the ICC will assist domestic proceedings and even future international criminal tribunals concerning international crimes. As such this will be of significant help in the development of international criminal law as a whole.
The Chief Prosecutor clearly states in the communication, at p.8, that "the Statue requires an additional threshold of gravity even where the subject-matter jurisdiction is satisfied.".
Arbour, Louise, 'Statement by Justice Louise Arbour to the Preparatory Committee on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court, December 8, 1997', pp.7-8, quoted in Schabas, William A., An Introduction to the International Criminal Court, (2004), 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p.122.
This means that "crimes are to be investigated and prosecuted at the national level first and foremost." "The ICC is designed as a court of last resort." National criminal proceedings will still be crucial for the prosecution of individuals accused of perpetrating international crimes. This can be seen through UK national proceedings initiated in response to the Abu Ghraib misdeeds. The deficiencies of the ICC (in relation to definitions and subjective thresholds) will not present much of a threat as long as domestic prosecutions are actively and effectively initiated. The Communication observes that national proceedings have been initiated with respect to the allegations of international crimes. Hence no action can be taken, reinforcing the view that the "[ICC] is a jurisdiction secondary to national courts." As such the development of international criminal law will rely much on the domestic sphere and the responsibility of States to initiate prosecutions. Fewer cases in the ICC do not mean a 'death sentence' for international criminal law because the latter also includes national prosecutions and international criminal tribunals. Louise Arbour suggests that fewer cases in the ICC imply that national courts are engaging in their international responsibilities, which may lead to an increase in the use of universal jurisdiction. This means that international criminal law can now further develop through its coverage of the acts of all individuals and in every State. In addition complementarity "may in fact play a regulatory role, directing interactions between international criminal law, applied by the ICC, and national criminal law." This may mean that the relationship between the international and national sphere can be moulded into more harmonious terms. This in turn will assist international criminal law to function as a more cohesive and efficient discipline. However Schabas argues that complementarity establishes an opposing and hostile interaction between international and national justice systems. In the end, international criminal law is essentially concerned about justice through prosecutions. Therefore it does not matter which system is adopted as long as genuine and effective prosecutions are initiated.
Sands, Philippe, (2005), Lawless World: America and the Making and Breaking of Global Rules, London; New York: Allen Lane, p.57.
Garraway, Charles H.B. (2004), Abu Ghraib - Another Black Hole? Military Excesses: Is There a 'Right Way' of Dealing? 2 Journal of International Criminal Justice 981, p.981.
Read Arnold, Roberta, (2004), The Abu Ghraib Misdeeds: Will There Be Justice in the Name of the Geneva Conventions? 2 Journal of International Criminal Justice 999 and Garraway, Charles H.B. (2004), Abu Ghraib - Another Black Hole? Military Excesses: Is There a 'Right Way' of Dealing? 2 Journal of International Criminal Justice 981.
Arbour, Louise, (2003), Will the ICC have an Impact on Universal Jurisdiction? 1 Journal of International Criminal Justice 585, p.587.
Ibid. pp.585-587.
Delmas-Marty, Mireille, (2006), Interactions between National and International Criminal Law in the Preliminary Phase of Trial at the ICC, Journal of International Criminal Justice, p.3.
Op.cit. note 13, p.85.
In conclusion, the issues that arise from the Chief Prosecutor 's communication such as definitions and subjective elements are criticisms which need to be addressed, in order to further develop international criminal law as an efficient, effective and genuine legal body of rules. Although these criticisms arise mainly from the workings of the ICC they provide a good indicator of the growth of international criminal law as a discipline. However it is to be reminded that international criminal law is not solely concerned with the ICC jurisdiction; it includes the domestic courts where prosecutions are established through the principle of complementarity and various principles of jurisdiction such as universal jurisdiction. As such international criminal law can continue to evolve and progress through the initiation of domestic prosecutions such as those concerning the Abu Ghraib events. These national justice systems are equally as effective as the ICC if not more so. International criminal law is certainly alive and well.
