This essay considers what makes an organisation a (successful) learning organisation and in so doing, raises the question of whether it is actually possible to achieve the status of a learning organisation. It reviews examples and situations of various organisations in their quest to be a learning organisation. In the process, how learning is acquired and how it is recognised (or not as the case may be) are also studied, as well as different theories about how people learn and how this knowledge can be used to benefit the individual and the organisation. Informal learning, in particular, is given attention and analysed in some depth. Several examples of how informal learning operates within a learning organisation are included and consideration is given to who benefits from recognition of informal learning in its various forms. Throughout the essay questions are raised about the usefulness of being a learning organisation, from where the push to become a learning organisation is coming, why informal learning should be considered valuable and who benefits from the recognition of informal learning within a learning organisation.
There are many ideas about what constitutes a learning organisation and a variety are discussed below, however one view is that it is a state that can never be achieved, but is a continual process (Hodgkinson 1998). A common theme is that companies wishing to succeed as learning organisations need to take into account what is happening in the world exterior to their organisation. Rover, for example, was considered to be a flagship of a learning organisations, but was unable to sustain success using this model alone. When it was taken over by BMW, broader influences were considered necessary to maintain success. Senge (1992) believes not only that learning must be looked at as a whole, not by splitting the organisation or the learning process into different sections as Argyris and Sch  n 76, 78, 83, 88 believe, but that  'systems' need to be linked to influences outside the organisation eg world economy, technological advances, environmental influences.
Technological advances are seen as one of the major reasons for organisations needing to transform themselves into learning organisations, (Lessen 1991, 1993, Peters 1987) as well as globalisation, dissolution of barriers and improved communication between countries, and competition between rivalling companies, providing much pressure to move more quickly (Field 2002). The main agreement is that learning must be undertaken by all members of an organisation, from the CEO to the workers on the shop floor and so the picture of a learning organisation emerges as one in which all members are learning. For whose benefit the learning is really being undertaken is questionable, as too is whether it is a top-down process - from CEO to shop floor workers or a bottom-up process - from shop floor workers to CEO. Pedlar et al (1991) and Burgoyne et al (1994) argue that the organisation must 'drive' the learning from the top. Watkins and Marsick (1992) believe that for the organisation to become successful all members 'must be learning and sharing knowledge to the benefit of the whole. Smith and Spurling (1999) give an example of a Rotherham company whose senior management set a strategy to introduce Investors In People, but this was not successful until the company involved the Trade Union and the shop floor workers and won their support. Whichever method is followed, the question remains - does everyone really want to be learning all the time? (Poell and Tijmensen 1996). Senge (1992) does not doubt that learning is a natural state of all human beings and through team working can be harnessed to produce extraordinary results. He also believes that society has moved away from working just to meet basic human needs, towards people wanting to aspire to greater things. Is this so, or it is a useful theory to use to persuade people that they do need to continually learn so that the organisation can be more successful (profitable)? (Grey 1998) Does a successful organisation really mean success for its employees? Field (2002) sights Unipart (who had their own University) and Rover as examples of learning organisations, where employees were empowered to take control of their own learning. However, he questions whether this process results in self-surveillance (Foucault 89), when specialised management functions are devolved to lower grade employees they take on responsibilities previously undertaken by their more qualified or experienced superiors (Field 2002). In VW when flatter management structures were introduced, employees complained at having to take on these higher level tasks for no increased recognition nor increased pay (Keep and Mayhew 1999 in Field 2002). In the author 's experience there is truth in this situation. As an employee of a large organisation, remuneration remained consistent with secretarial/low level administration employees, despite development of the role and the taking on of more responsible tasks previously performed by directors of the company. The transfer of more responsible tasks for no increase in remuneration eventually resulted in the author 's departure from the company and the loss to the organisation of substantial skills. If flatter management organisations bring increased stress levels for lower grade employees - how then does this translate into  'successful' learning? Additional stress may also be experienced from the reduced availability of promotion opportunities (Thomas and Dunkerley 1999 in Field 2002), so again, where is the success for the individual?.
If being a learning organisation is really the key to success, why are not all companies aiming to be one? The enormous amount of resources required to achieve this model could be one deterrent. Harrison (1990) refers the reader to the Institute of Personnel Management Code of Continuous Development (1987) which details (in a very authoritarian way) who is responsible for what within an organisation. Whilst this could be seen as the ideal situation, do companies really have or are they prepared to invest in sufficient resources to do this amount of work? Additionally, Senge (1992) believes there is a lack of the 'right' type of leadership - traditional 'look what I've achieved' needs to be replaced with 'look what we've achieved', but are companies ready to embrace this new ethos?.
Is the learning organisation just another form of continuous development? Whilst continuous development has been around since the 80s, what is new about the learning organisation definition? Reid (1997) defines continuous development by saying that a company supporting any form of continuous development style will find success, whilst a learning organisation requires a structure in order to encourage a learning environment. Megginson et al (1995) use the example of a sober and a drunk person progressing through a maze, both may reach their goal, but with varying degrees of success. The sober person will go cautiously when uncertain and speedily when the way is clear, reaching the goal within the minimum time and with the minimum disruption. The drunk person will weave about, bump into things, go the wrong way more often and may in the end incur damage to himself (sic) or other objects along the way. So the sober person represents the learning organisation and the drunken person represents the organisation that is not a learning organisation. Therefore, by being a learning organisation objectives will be reached more quickly with minimum effort, expenditure or disruption. The question about whether organisation  'should' become learning organisations or whether individuals  'should' participate in continuous learning is answered without any doubt by the publication of the European Commissions White Paper (1996) on education and training. This clearly states that, in order to succeed, companies must change quickly to keep up with an ever and faster changing world and this involves every member of the organisation. In addition, Appendix A contains survey results (NIACE undated) showing goals for improving lifelong learning in the UK - the increase required is considerable. There is little doubt, then, that a push to be a learning organisation is a real rather than a intangible goal.
So we return to how much influence can external forces play to promote or prevent the success of a learning organisation - government policies, Trade Unions pressure, market developments, changes in professional fields as well as those already mentioned, play a key part. The learning landscape seems to be ever changing. An example of the changes taking place can be seen in the development of BTs training policy. In 1988 BT had a training policy which was very structured and mainly consisted of training based learning which included residential courses, industrial language training and special training schemes. However now their policy is much less severely structured, it considers behaviours and practices, aims to 'enhance talents' of all groups and is especially concerned with minority groups, women and disabled people (Wilson 1999). The time frame of learning and assessment is another important consideration - measurements taken at different times will produce a different result as learning takes time to produce results and therefore results will vary according to the time of the measurement. This is particularly the case with informal learning, just how can it be assessed when people learn in different ways, within different timeframes and according to their personal needs (Bradshaw (1995). Boydell (1999) puts much emphasis on learning from each other, sharing learning and benefiting individuals, teams and organisation, but how long does it take to identify  'success'?.
For organisations to be successful in learning, Megginson et al (1995) emphasise the importance of companies achieving a deutero learning status - that is learning to learn. This status is achieve by traversing through the stages of single loop learning - where a company learns how to meet existing norms and standards. To achieving double loop learning - where the company works to improve standards and norms taking into account the views of those involved and anticipating changes and preparing to meet them. Finally transforming into deutero learning - finding the best way to learn/the best environment to promote learning and plan for long term company objectives. Their example of successful deutero learning status is given in Appleyards, a car sales business, whose company director regularly supported charitable activities. In this way much positive publicity resulted, the company was seen as an ethical business and people came to buy - increasing percentage sales above that of competitors. This example supports Tomassini 's (2002) statement that in the future companies will not be able to rely on traditional methods of learning, but will need to make considerable changes in order to be successful. Taking into account their place in the world and impact environmentally will play a major part in their success.
It can be seen that learning organisations vary considerably from organisation to organisation and to be successful as a learning organisation, or indeed a business, many factors need to be taken into consideration, and these too will vary from business to business.
When considering how learning contributes to the establishment of a learning organisation it is useful to reflect on the subject of learning itself. In recent times, the way in which adults learn has been differentiated from the way in which children learn - using the terms androgogy and pedagogy, respectively, to name the differences. Adults are seen as learning in a much less formal way to the 'I am the teacher with the knowledge to impart to you' method used with children. Wilson (2001) describes the adult process as receiving, taking in, assimilating, storing and using information to result in learning. In addition to there being different ideas about the ways adults and children learn, there are also various theories about the methods best used to bring about learning in adults. The three main theories are behaviourist, cognitive and humanist. The behaviourist theory works on the basis of changing behaviour by providing reward or punishment originally presented by Pavlov (1927) and Skinner (1974). This could be used in the workplace in such instances as a pay increase to reward good work, or a disciplinary as punishment for a poor attendance record. It is most extensively used in many instances in the lower levels of an organisation where 'mechanical' or repetitive tasks are undertaken. Critics of this theory state that it is open to abuse, since it negates the individual 's opinions or wishes and in the extreme could be an affront to dignity (McKenna 1987).
Cognitive learning borrows from psychology and is based on Piaget 's (1950) and Kohler 's (1925) work, it differentiates from behaviourist learning in that it is concerned with what is known rather than what is done. Examples of this in the workplace could be recruiting people with specific skills or knowledge eg chemists into a microelectronics company. In criticism, it is questioned whether this theory tries to bring too much order to a world that is not very orderly and rationale to irrational human thinking (Wilson 1999).
The most recent theory, humanist, is based on counselling strategies, whereby the teacher is seen as the facilitator, guiding students to learn and is based on the work of Rogers (1974). Key themes for this theory are nurturing growth and development, it is a very learner-centred approach. Teamwork, especially cross-functional teamwork, is a good example of where this learning theory works well in an organisation. However, the negative side is that it is not often possible to allow learners to learn at their own pace, some sort of 'deadline' is usually required. It is also questioned whether learners have sufficient knowledge to learn what they do not know without a more structured approach, they could end up blaming themselves if the learning process fails (Wilson 1999).
Blooms taxonomy (1951) of learning provides a model for using different learning methods to learn different things. Three categories provide the different domains used to learn appropriate to the task at hand. Cognitive learning for intellectual skills and abilities for example those required by managers. The Affective domain is concerned with attention, interest, feelings and values and is particularly useful in a caring or counselling environment. The third, Psychomotor domain, includes motor and physical based skills eg those required for welding or drawing (Petty 1993). By using the learning domain appropriate to the end task learning will result more efficiently. Organisations who take account of this in their training programmes will extract the maximum benefit from their 'investment'. Field (2002) sees a shift in the way learning is provided to a more self directed model although research by the Campaign for Learning in 1998 shows that there is still a higher preference for learning from books and magazines, with taught courses coming second, over learning by 'doing practical things'.
There are also different ways in which people learn, which would be useful for an organisation to identify in order to make the best of their employees in a given situation. Activists are considered energetic and live in the now, good for fire-fighting and generating new ideas. Pragmatists are practical and down to earth, they enjoy solving problems and tend to be impatient with open ended discussions. Theorists are consistently logical, analytical and dedicated to rational thinking, they are uncomfortable with anything flippant. Reflectors like to collect and analyse data, when they act they take account of the wider picture which includes the past as well as the present and other peoples observations (Honey and Mumford 1986).
By using Honey and Mumfords theory, once individual learning styles have been identified, teams can be created to address specific projects to ensure the most successful outcome. For example in a marketing environment it essential to generate new ideas, quickly before the competition, therefor a team made up predominately of activists would provide this result, it may also need some pragmatists to keep the ideas within a realistic framework. On the other hand a team of predominantly reflectors and theorists in this situation may come up with some sound ideas eventually, buy may lack the speed to ensure success in the marketplace ahead of the competition. So, by creating a team with appropriate members to address the task the organisation will benefit from in the speediest resolution; whether this is a manufacturing problem which has resulted in reduced quality product and resultant customer complaints, or seeking new markets to pursue to increase the company 's product portfolio and increase profit. Knowing the learning styles of the individuals of an organisation will also benefit the organisation by allowing them to put the most appropriate people in the job best suited to them. It will also highlight which method of learning may be lacking when employees are moved to different jobs eg via promotion a design engineer moving to a managerial position will need to learn to be more pragmatic (Harrison 1990).
Before considering what informal learning is or is n't, it is important to look at formal learning and contrast this with informal learning. According to Wilson (1999) formal learning is structured and intentional eg attendance at some sort of course or traditional schooling. Informal learning on the other hand is not so structured, but may happen in a structured setting. For instance when an employee learns something from watching a colleague undertake a task or during a conversation. The majority of learning in life, it is widely agreed, is informal learning, it is learning which happens almost all the time, unintentionally and this can therefore cause a dilemma about the value of informal learning and how extensive it is. Distinction can be made between informal and incidental learning in that informal learning will have some element of knowing what it is that needs to be learnt. Incidental learning, on the other hand, will not have such intent and may or may not be relevant to the work place. Bradshaw (1995) also raises the question of the value of informal learning where the interests of the individual and the employer differ - what then is the 'real' value of the informal learning? Likewise, how can it be measured and structured to award accreditation where, unlike traditional teaching methods, learning can be assessed via work assignments or examinations. Much informal learning can be learned external to the workplace, but can prove invaluable to a particular job or task or career eg housework skills transferred to providing a house cleaning service, yet no formal qualification has been achieved to do these tasks.
By comparing traditional to contemporary ideas about learning helps to understand some of the difference between traditional and contemporary learning processes. Traditional learning in the workplace was implemented via means of specific training eg apprenticeships to various trades carried out between the employer and a learning institution, usually local college. However, there are some important influences worthy of note, which have contributed to a change from traditional learning practices. More recently, the emphasis for learning has shifted from the employer to the employee and there is much encouragement for individuals to be learning as a continual process throughout their lives, this has been brought about by a variety of reasons as detailed above. Along with this need to establish a learning organisation or learning society, is the need to look more closely at what knowledge and skills exist and how they can be used in the workplace. This has resulted in the move towards informal learning or prior learning or skills being considered as transferable to workplace tasks, with minimal or no cost to the employer. Prior learning is increasingly being considered 'worthy of consideration towards an appropriate qualification' (Tight 1996) and falls into to categories APEL - accreditation/assessment of prior experiential learning and APL accreditation/ assessment of prior learning which has been formally assessed. This is particularly useful for adults who may have few formal qualifications, but who have years of experience either in the workplace or in areas that create a wealth of transferable skills. An example is of someone who has undertaken voluntary work whereby they may have gained good people skills by interfacing with customers, they may have been involved with fund raising or record keeping and this experience would be useful to some employers although it has not received any formal recognition. In the author 's experience, informal learning in the company 's quality system was imparted and this in turn was cascaded throughout the organisation via training sessions run by a group of training, including the author. This experience (APEL) was later used to gain access to a teacher training course and resulted in achievement of an official qualification. Additionally, this qualification was recognised as useful prior learning to form the basis of a degree module (APL). Whilst Brookfield argues that it will be employees with a wide portfolio of transferable and critical thinking skills who will be the ones with more opportunities and hold greater attraction to prospective employers, could it also enlighten employees and make them more selective in their choice of employer? The author left the organisation shortly after starting the degree course with the realisation that the employer 's and the author 's development objectives no longer matched.
Recognition of prior learning has become prominent with the introduction of New Deal system. It is necessary for applicants to participate in interviews to identify what prior or informal learning they possess which could be transferred to use in a place of employment, either with or without some additional training being undertaken (M Coles 1999). Another government initiative to promote learning in the workplace has been via the establishment of the University for Industry. One of their aims is to raise 40% of the workforce to NVQ level 2 skills by the process of engaging in e-learning using computer access either at home, work or in one of their 1,963 learndirect centres (ufi website 28.12.02). Cited on their web site is the case study of Kim Wilde, former pop star, who has pursued her hobby of gardening to create a thriving business, using learning gained via the learndirect service. So, there is little doubt that informal learning has increased in prominence in both the government and employers' views and is playing a major part in forming the learning landscape of the present and future.
With the introduction of NVQs - National Vocational Qualifications - in the 1980s, there has been a shift from traditional methods of assessment to a new way of assessing learning. The NVQ system is competency-based, that is, it can award accreditation for existing knowledge (or informal knowledge), so long as the set criteria are met. It is more concerned with the capacity and ability of the individual, rather than how the learning was achieved (Wilson 1999). Criticisms of this system have been that it is too inflexible and cannot therefore be used to its full potential and there is evidence to question whether NVQ qualifications do actually carry as much weight as other traditionally acquired qualifications such as GCSEs (Wilson 1999).
Having looked at learning organisations in details and reviewing the learning process, investigation of how informal learning operates in the workplace follows. Informal learning can be seen operating in the organisation in a variety and number of ways. There are many views about what constitutes informal learning and how it is used effectively, or not, within an organisation. Some of the ways informal learning is used, created, or generated in the workplace follow, in no particular order.
A common way informal learning is undertaken for new employees is via the induction programme when they join a new employer. Induction programmes themselves will vary from organisation to organisation and factors such as the type of job or the technological environment of the company itself may determine some of the components of the induction programme. A variety of personnel may be involved too, again depending on the job, ranging from the employee 's supervisor, Personnel department staff or Health and Safety Personnel. Although the induction is usually a structured process, the information transmitted is of an informal nature - one colleague passing information to another.
Appraisals or Personal/Staff Development Reviews are another common element within an organisation where informal learning takes place. In this process, both parties - the appraiser (usually the supervisor/manager) and the employee - have the opportunity to learn about themselves, each other and their place in the overall departmental or company structure. Harrison (1990) refers to this process as the 'heart of learning'.
Popular at various times has been learning in groups, sometimes this process has been given names such as Quality Circles or Teamworking, at others it might just form part of working on a project with a group of colleagues. Tomassini (2002) puts great store by this method of informal learning. He considers that it is not the passing of the knowledge which results in learning, but the passing of the knowledge plus the process of using that information in relation to existing knowledge which really creates something new, something learned. Jones (1995) refers to these groups of learning as 'communities of learning' who, in Pettiegrew 's (1992) terms, create 'islands of progress'. Again although the learning taking place is informal, Jones (1995) concludes that it needs direction from the company eg to put the right groups together and provide time to learn in a structured way, to maximise the learning potential from such exercises. Project groups also work well in times of crisis when quick action is needed which requires the involvement of a variety of people to address a particular problem (Coffield 1998).
Coffield (1998) identifies several processes of informal learning which are very valuable to the organisation. He explains that although many can be very labour intensive in terms of time out of busy schedules to provide information to colleagues, organisations should encourage this type of learning to take place because it has so much value to them. In areas where there is a need to keep up to date with skills he believes shadowing and rotation visits work well, especially in areas where there are safety issues. Employees share knowledge or skills in an informal way, thereby increasing the knowledge of both parties without the aid of any additional body or expense. So too with mentoring or coaching, the mentors or coaches need to give their time freely and actually want to help with this process or it may fail to be successful. Although the intention is that knowledge flows from the mentor or coach to the individual concerned, there must be some learning achieved on the part of the mentor or coach too. Customer and supplier contact is also another valuable source of informal learning, much can be gained from conversations or requests for feedback that will benefit the company and the group concerned. The customer/supplier will also learn valuable information about the opposite, for example key contacts or gaining a feeling of being recognised. Coffield (1998) concludes by stating that there is no doubt in theory that informal learning is very valuable, and in practice organisations should encourage their employees to be pro-active in seeking opportunities for success.
Some of the more mundane methods in which informal learning takes place is via internal communications - memos, newsletters, white boards, rules and the translation of rules (1996), briefing/company presentations, meetings and more recently Intranet sites; even time spent talking to a colleague from a different department can result in an exchange of useful information. All information gained from such communications can assist the employee to undertake their job in a more efficient manner, even if it is only knowing who to contact in the case of a question which they cannot answer themselves. Feeling part of the organisation and understanding its objectives, products and structure will help employees perform their jobs better.
In conclusion, there is little doubt that the trend is towards increasing learning by everyone, either within an organisation or external to it, and that this drive comes from both within and outside the organisation itself. The organisation by introducing procedures which promote continuous development and best use of its assets (mechanical or human) and the government by implementing initiatives to generate learning by all, whether they are employed or unemployed. Participation by all seems to be the key, but concern must be expressed for those individuals or communities who do not want to or who are incapable of participating in this continuous learning process. Has it become a system of survival of the fittest, being those who are the most educated, with more transferable skills and an aptitude for continuous learning?.
It is also clear that there are numerous ways informal learning can be used to promote successful learning, either by more structured procedures such as appraisals/staff development reviews and team working, or totally informally such as colleague discussions and visits. Are there kinds of informal learning which will not be valued by employers and therefore exclude individuals or communities from participating in the continuous learning process? Will, or do, employers only recruit and invest in the development of their employees where development needs meet the organisation 's objectives? Will employees become more discerning in their choice of employer?.
Experience so far shows that factors external to an organisation also need to be considered to ensure success, such as technological and environmental changes and globalisation. Despite gargantuan effort from organisations and individuals within organisations to achieve a state of continuous development, is this sufficient to ensure the success of the organisation. Does success of the organisation guarantee success for the individual or is the model of continuous learning and 'recognition' of informal learning another method of exploitation of the employees by the employers, organisation and the state?.
Whether the enormous effort by all concerned required to create a successful learning organisation will in fact lead to success in the long term is debatable - there is insufficient current data available to answer such a question.
