The rise of the Caudillismo in the years that followed independence in Latin America, represents a failure on the part of those who had promised liberal and constitutional ideals during the fight for national sovereignty. Francia and Carrera, two such caudillos, would rise to power as a result of the somewhat inevitable downfall of over-ambitious constitutional experiments. Similarities and contrasts can be drawn between the rule of these two caudillos, despite the fact that Carrera 's dominant position in Guatemala began a generation after Francia first ruled Paraguay. Historian John Hoyt Williams would conclude in his section on Francia, that 'he alone created a nation.' John Lynch claimed that Carrera had proved 'a natural leader....secure in his popular base, military power, and clerical support.' In order to evaluate these claims, it is necessary to compare the roles of these two caudillos both in their political positions and their social standpoint and support, including the roles given to the church. To begin, it is important to briefly explain how both Francia and Carrera rose to power. This will allow for a greater understanding of the political structures that would form following these struggles, and may also provide interesting comparisons involving important support groups who would play valuable roles during the political dominance of both caudillos.
The Rise and Fall of the Paraguayan Republic, 1800-1870, John H. Williams (Texas USA, 1979) p99.
Caudillos in Spanish America, 1800-1850, John Lynch (GB, 1992) p401.
Jos   Gaspar Rodr  guez de Francia lead Paraguay before all the other caudillos of Latin America. He was able to rise to power at such an early stage because he took charge of Paraguay directly following the struggle for independence. After becoming a member of the ruling Junta in 1809, Francia established a following, his diplomatic, financial and administrative skills attracting support from the nation 's farmers. Although he was able to use his unique organisation and forceful personality to help assure Argentina recognised Paraguayan independence in 1811, he became rather dissatisfied and impatient with the level of political control the military had established and promptly resigned from the Junta later that year. Whilst in retirement in his chacra in Ibaray, Francia informed ordinary citizens that the only change in government would see a Creole elite rule in the same fashion that a Spanish-born elite had before independence. This he claimed, would betray the revolution, and that only the extinction of an elite ruling class could help to avoid the perilous downward spiral toward crisis created by the insecure Paraguayan elite 's. The Junta realised they needed Francia 's skills in order to maintain independence from Argentina. He obliged, taking charge of foreign policy, but without an equal personality in the Junta, Francia took control of the government, a government which declared Paraguay a Republic in 1813 with Francia as first consul, a position he would n't need to share due the mass support he had established.
The rise to power of Rafael Carrera in Guatemala was different to that of Francia 's in Paraguay in almost every detail, with the exception of one key factor; support. Carrera was born into a poor mestizo family in 1814. At the age of nine in 1823, the United Provinces of Central America were formed, and although dominated at first by a conservative element, the Liberal party under General Francisco Moraz  n seized power. Moraz  n wished to confiscate properties of the clergy and proclaim freedom of religion as well as introduce educational reforms and trial by jury. The greatest contrast between Carrera and Francia was their political ideology. Carrera wanted to maintain stability and believed in the importance of an elitist conservative ruling class, as radical laws aimed at freeing the people had been introduced too quickly. The Indians, who made up the majority of the population, also opposed Liberal reforms. Carrera only became involved when the Governor of Guatemala City sent a cavalry to kill Indians and Carrera 's wife was murdered. He swore an oath never to lay his gun down until the Liberal party had been swept from Guatemala. With great Indian support he lead the peasant Mita rebellion of 1837 and following the so-called Carrera-Moraz  n War from 1838-42, installed himself in the government palace.
Much of both Francia and Carrera 's success can be attributed to the support they received from the non-elitist classes, namely the farmers of Paraguay and the Indians of Guatemala. However, whilst retaining Indian support on a large scale throughout his period of dominance in Guatemala, Carrera still relied on and pursued the need for an elite class. He brought back the catholic archbishop, allowed expelled Jesuits to return and restored titles of nobility. As an antitheses to the political ideology of Carrera, Francia pursued an anti-elite campaign, choosing to rule himself as 'El Supremo.' Declaring himself a revolutionary, his policies and ideals have been compared to those of French revolutionary Fran  ois-No  l Babeuf, 'a French utopian who wanted to abolish private property and communalise land as a prelude to founding a republic of equals.' This dictatorship, destroying the power of the elite, would contrast sharply with Carrera 's pro-elitist campaign. Yet their styles as political personalities did n't differ perhaps as much as their policies and ideology would suggest.
Paraguay Online Book, El Supremo Dictador, (created 1988).
Dr Francia 's period as dominant figure in Paraguay has been labelled 'The Supreme Dictatorship' by John Hoyt Williams, a title encompassing everything about the political institution of Paraguay during his period of rule. Known also as the 'Carai', Francia would spend his days and nights viewing reports, pleas, licences and other such documentation. In 1830 he wrote the Ytapua subdelegado, where he blamed the countries lack of functionaries on the 'lack of worthy men.' Contemporaries and political enemies who despised Francia 's style of government conceded that his evaluation was accurate. The Carai 's lifestyle was dictated by which affairs of state he chose to attend and control, and due to the sheer number of these, his rest was limited to the siesta period of the day. Although great subordinates to El Supremo 's autocratic and absolutist dictatorship, a few men did play important roles in the supreme government. During the Franciata, four treasury ministers served. They were reasonably well paid and met with the Carai reguarly. The only other real position of political importance was the government secretary, the most popular of these being Policarpo Patino, who rose through the ranks and served as secretary until the Carai 's death. Interior officials had three main functions, to supervise government in their areas, to scrutinise and protect commerce and to co-ordinate defence. There were several types of judge in Francia 's Paraguay responsible for day to day government, but Francia rarely concerned himself with their activities.
The Rise and Fall of the Paraguayan Republic, 1800-1870, John H. Williams (Texas USA, 1979) p82.
Unlike Francia, Carrera had been brought to power by Guatemala 's conservatives, but in a similar fashion to his Paraguayan counterpart, he was prepared to address the new legislative assembly and make it clear who held power. He was the dominant leader in Guatemala and through his military power, could impose himself on government. In theory, Carrera held no authoritarian position when addressing the national assembly in 1839, but in practice he had the power of a caudillo, the power to call upon his supporters who saw him as saviour and protector. The conservatives had no real control over him, they simply had to pacify him. He had no interest in joining a political party and 'conservatives had to accept that the creole elite 's...could not monopolise political power.' If Carrera became irritated with a government he would replace it. This style, although not based on the absolutist principle of Francia 's government, showed that Carrera had a strong, forceful sense of power, a belief that he was in total command despite the existence of political institutions and in this, he shared common ground with Francia.
Caudillos in Spanish America, 1800-1850, John Lynch (GB, 1992) p383.
Carrera only became president for the first time in March 1847 declaring Guatemala free, thus bringing and end to the United Province of Central America. Despite this appointment, the absolute power he craved still eluded him, and although no constitution existed, his national sovereignty did n't go unchallenged. The conservatives had staged a revolt in 1845, followed in 1847 by attacks instituted by mountain caudillos claiming they had appealed to the people. Carrera lacked Indian support at this time as his faithful supporters had been terrorised by these new enemies. In August 1848, Carrera decided the time was right to resign. British consul Frederik Chatfield claimed 'he was sorry to see him go, a statesman replaced by demagogues, a president who failed not through authoritarianism, but through indecision.' The new liberal government failed to rule competently, and in 1849 the Indians pledged their loyalty to Carrera who was welcomed triumphantly into Guatemala, becoming President in 1851 and President for life in 1854.
Caudillos in Spanish America, 1800-1850, John Lynch (GB, 1992) p394.
The styles of leadership brought to Paraguay and Guatemala by these leaders may not have differed as much as the political climate in which they existed, but if similarities can be made in that regard, the same can not be said for the social impacts that these two caudillos would make. One complete contrast between these two caudillos is their belief in the importance of a major institution; the church. The reasons for such divergence of opinion lie simply in the aforementioned doctrines of each caudillo on how the country should be run.
One such force in Paraguay that might have  'survived as a vehicle for discontent or rival authority was the church.' Francia ensured the removal of the bishop, (although apparently El Supremo did not badger him) and the government assumed financial stewardship over the church. Until 1825 though the church remained the only non-government economic and social power in the land. After this date the Carai removed any fear of domestic threat by reducing the churches power to an even greater extent. Carrera, in contrast, realised he required the support of the clergy and the elite as much as the support of the Indians. He enabled the church to recover some of the land it had lost during liberal rule and while Francia had overseen the expulsion of important church members, Carrera made sure they came back from exile, namely the archbishop, Ramon Casaus. Among many caudillos of Latin America 'Carrera was the only true son of the church.'.
The Rise and Fall of the Paraguayan Republic, 1800-1870, John H. Williams (Texas USA, 1979) p56.
Caudillos in Spanish America, 1800-1850, John Lynch (GB, 1992) p401.
The social structure that Francia would create in Paraguay depended on the objectives that he had created for his rule. The need to preserve the basic structures of this peculiar society was an objective in itself, and in order to do that, he would crush the threat of an elitist class that may rise against him. It is likely that Francia 's counter-measures against any and all political and social opposition began in 1818 and the tempo of repression would continue in 1819. Crimes committed may simply include any notable opposition to the desires of El Supremo in his policy or style of government and these mutinous tendencies were punished. Francia simply had no time for the elite, home-grown or foreign and arrests based on conspiracies became more frequent until 1823, although new documents show in 1825, Francia arrested a number of local and foreign merchants involved in the Pilar trade. These campaigns of terror, based on an increasingly high level of paranoia on Francia 's part 'earned him his grisly reputation as the worst kind of Latin American tyrant.'.
The Penguin History of Latin America, Edwin Williamson, (GB, 1992) p272.
This reputation may have arose due to his tyrannical nature, but such aggressive action was not aimed at poorer Paraguayan 's including the large Indian population. If Francia 's repressive action affected the common man it was usually for his benefit and  'seen from village level, Francia 's domestic policies were populist.' Despite his forceful and at times brutal treatment of certain sectors of the public, the positive impact his policies made in helping unify a largely rural society, sowed the seeds of future Paraguayan unity. Industries were encouraged to develop, agricultural administration advanced, and became more diversified than the previous export economy. Francia 's economic policy benefited both state and the poorer classes within the country, especially the farmers, whose support Francia had retained since independence.
The Rise and Fall of the Paraguayan Republic, 1800-1870, John H. Williams (Texas USA, 1979) p61.
Despite recognising the importance of other sectors in society and tending to distance himself from his Indian roots, Carrera never lost the support of his most loyal and popular constituency. Although Carrera lacked any real zeal for political reforms that favoured the lower classes of society, he did attempt to abolish poll tax and reduce the costs of living for the poor. Unlike Francia though, his 'record as protector of Indians and peasants....was a mixed one.' Nevertheless, he would always remain the Indian 's caudillo despite his extensive landed estates, and although he needed the Guatemalan aristocracy to rule, they needed him more, as a strong, universal protector. His Indian support gave him a similar power base to Francia, although the two differed greatly in their shaping of society. Carrera was not sentimental about Indians and was rather undisturbed by anguish, but Francia purified government and society with the kind of tyranny lacking in the Carrera leadership. Carrera did use force against political enemies but his was based more on spontaneous emotion and one comparison that could be drawn is that while Carrera was cruel, he lacked the terrorism of the Franciatan dictatorship.
Caudillos in Spanish America, 1800-1850, John Lynch (GB, 1992) p387.
Of Francia, Father Manuel Antonio Perez said a month after his demise, 'his greatness and activity extended to everything and provided for everything as if each one exclusively occupied his individual attention.' John L. Stephens, sent to Guatemala by the United States President commented, 'Carrera at the time of my visit was more absolute master of Guatemala than any kind in Europe of his dominions and by the fanatic Indians called "the Son of God" and "Our Lord."' The leaderships of Carrera and Francia inevitably differ because of great differences between their personal backgrounds, their views on the running of their own countries, and the differing social and political climates of these two Latin American states. Despite these factors, these two great Caudillos had in common a desire to rule and preserve order, an order they felt would be found wanting without there own personal commitment and leadership. It is this leadership that gained Francia and Carrera commendations from men such as Perez and Stephens, men who would meet, and learn to understand their value and importance in achieving a level of stability and to a certain extent, unity in their respective countries.
The Rise and Fall of the Paraguayan Republic, 1800-1870, John H. Williams (Texas USA, 1979) p81.
Marcus Garvey, World 's Great men of Colour,.
BIBLIOGRAPHY Books.
Ed. Leslie Bethell, Central America since Independence (GB, 1991).
John Lynch, Caudillos in Spanish America, 1800-1850, (GB, 1992).
John H. Williams, The Rise and Fall of the Paraguayan Republic, 1800-1870, (Texas USA, 1979).
Edwin Williamson, The Penguin History of Latin America, (GB, 1992) Websites.
Marcus Garvey, World 's Great men of Colour, viewed 13/01/04.
Paraguay Online Book, El Supremo Dictador, (created 1988) viewed 13/01/04.
Word Count 2350.
ENDNOTES.
