The potential function, V, belonging to an electrified system, is defined as the sum of all the electrical particles acting on a given point divided by their respective distances from the point. It is a simple way of representing the values of the forces which drive the electrical particles:
This integral is taken over every particle inside the body under consideration, which can be of any form as long as the distribution of charge is fixed. Here p' (x', y', z') is a particle inside the body with corresponding charge density   ', volume dx'dy'dz' and hence   'dx'dy'dz' represents the quantity of electricity it contains. p (x, y, z) is a point outside the body and r' =    ((x'-x)  +(y'-y)  +(z'-z)  ) is the distance between p and p'.(See Appendix Fig 1).
Green then moves on to considering the Laplacian of the potential function inside and outside the body. I will simply state these values, since Green uses results known from Laplace and Poisson 's work, and I find some of his calculations ambiguous despite the fact that the end results are correct. Outside the body, as Laplace had previously shown,    V is proportional to    (1/r') = 0 and hence    V = 0. However, if p is inside the body then this may not be the case. Green uses the result shown by Poisson in 1813, that in this case    V = -4     and hence    V+4     = 0.
I use the symbol    to represent the Laplacian throughout. This notation differs from Green 's.
All the charge distributed in a system of perfectly conducting bodies, in equilibrium, will be found on their surfaces, with none remaining in their interior. This is a consequence of electric repulsion, and can be proved by considering a point in the body with F x, F y and F z, the total forces impelling p in a positive direction in the x, y and z directions respectively. Then, due to equilibrium, V is a constant, hence   V = 0, so , where    is the charge density at p. Hence the density of electricity at any point in the body is 0.
One of the most important results proved is the following theorem, which I have presented in what I see as a more comprehensible way: "Let U(x, y, z) and V(x, y, z) be two continuous functions which do not have singular values within a solid body of any form. Then, " where ds represents an element of the surface, dv = dxdydz represents an element of the volume and n = (n x, n y, n z) represents a surface normal measured towards the inside of the body.
Defined by Green as points where the differential coordinates become infinite.
I use vector notation here although it did not exist at the time of Green 's writing.
The proof of this is extremely elegant when presented by Green. I use my amended notation. Consider:
Proceed by integrating by parts (See Appendix Equations 1a, 1b, 1c for the results of this step).
Considering the following:
Green did not put two separate integrals in for double integrals, but I have included them. where on the right hand side the first integral corresponds to values of U, V at x 1 and second corresponds to U, V at x . (See Appendix Equation 2 and Fig 2). The overall equation becomes.
For the left hand side of the equation interchanging the values of U and V will not affect its value since.
This means the right hand side not be affected when U and V are interchanged so equating the two versions of the right hand side together gives the required result.
There is a quicker way to do this by simply using Gauss' divergence theorem (comes about after the time of Green), but I like the originality that Green has shown by introducing the idea of reciprocity into his proof so I have left it as such.
The only assumption made on U and V was that they had no singular values. Now consider how the above theorem would change if either, or both, of the functions have a singularity within the body. Take extremely small spheres around each point where a singularity occurs. Then the whole area outside of these small spheres will not contain singularities and so will abide by the theorem just shown. If, for example, U has one singularity, then taking a sphere, and tending the value of its radius to zero, the formula becomes:
This can be calculated by using spherical coordinates, where the transformation is dxdydz=     sin  d  d  d  . where V' is the corresponding value at the singularity of U.
This can be extended to any number of infinite points, by considering small spheres around each of them.
It is possible to establish relations between the distribution of charge on the surface of a body and the forces which occur as a result of this. Green notices that the form of the potential function changes suddenly on passing from space inside the body to outside. Take V to correspond to the potential of a point within a body, and V' to correspond to a point outside such that they satisfy: 0 =   V, 0 =   V', , neither function takes a singular value and V' = 0 at an infinite distance from the body. Despite the fact that the two values of the potential are distinct, Green shows that only one value of charge at the surface will produce them. This value is where n' is the outward pointing normal.
Any function with a bar above represents the value of that function at the surface of the body.
Despite the fact that Green is trying to write about the subject in mathematical terms, there is no doubt that the next section is approached in a very physical way. The aim is to find a potential function which satisfies   V = 0 and has no singularities within the body. Take a function U with just one singularity within the body, at p, (so U=1/r close to p), and assume . Green gives a physical example of such a U, within a body which is an earthed, perfect conductor, and additionally satisfies U'=0 outside of the surface. I feel this example is slightly doctored, as Green feels the need to justify his actions, but provides evidence that he tries to link his work to the real world. Using the unique formula for charge density shown above, and the modified version of his Theorem:
U takes this value since then as r tends to zero, the value of U becomes infinite. and (  ) is the charge density induced at the surface by charge concentrated at p.
So, the value of the potential at any point inside the body can be found as long as the value of is known. He requires that such a V does actually satisfy   V = 0. Since is independent of the position of p(x,y,z), . Then split U into two parts: one due to the electricity concentrated at p, here U = 1/r, and the other due to electricity induced on the surface, U*, which therefore contains no singular values. , since is independent of p(x. y, z). Then, and at the surface, . So, and this result applies to any point in the surface. This means .
This particular U can be shown to imply a finite value of charge on the surface, so is physically realistic. Using a stated example of a sphere of any radius, with its corresponding charge density, he shows that on, and very close to, the surface itself, where this V takes no singular values within the surface. This whole argument can be extended to a number of closed surfaces, as long as the condition is imposed that V'=0 at an infinite distance from the surfaces.
The next result is another important intuition into the theory of electricity. The general idea is that, for a closed surface, the positioning of a unit of charge within a surface will not affect the potential function induced by the surface for this charge. Green takes two points, p and p', both within the surface and investigates how the potential changes when he fixes p' and moves p to the surface, then moves p' to the surface and vice versa (i.e. moves p' then p). He discovers that the resulting potential functions are identical. The extension of this to any number of bodies was later extended, although not by Green, into a reciprocity theorem which is still used today.
This reciprocity theorem may be represented as where e n ,   n , e n' ,   n' are charges and potentials on conductors in two different equilibrium states.
Finally, consider a body which has electricity spread over its interior as well as its surface. This is a more realistic model for nature, since, in reality, not many bodies are perfect conductors. The whole problem of calculating the charge at a point within the body is shown to reduce down to simply finding out the value of the potential exterior to the body (or bodies since the same logic applies to more than one body).
Even before the time of George Green potential theory had been recognised as an important area. Laplace introduced the idea of a potential function, without the name, to represent the components of a force in a problem. However, throughout the 18 th century, potential theory had been restricted to determining the amount of gravitational attraction one mass exerted on another, with applications to, for example, the motion of the moon. Kline says the emphasis on the potential equation for the calculation of gravitational attraction continued in the early 19 th century but was accentuated by a new class of applications to electrostatics. So, Green 's application of potential theory to the theory of electricity, a new and exciting topic, more easily captured people 's attention.
Kline[1972] Page 682.
In his essay Green sees his task as facilitating "the application of analysis to one of the most interesting of the physical sciences." He wanted to treat the idea of static electricity in a purely mathematical way, although I question how successful he is in achieving this aim. However this is not a criticism of Green 's work, which although not always mathematically rigorous, intuitively is generally correct. His presentation is clear and easy to follow, with only a few confusing uses of notation. He lays the foundations for other people to build upon.
Latimer Clark, a nineteenth century historian of electricity described the 1828 essay as "one of the most important works ever written on electricity." Relative to the time of writing, the ideas were cutting edge and held in high esteem by the mathematical community. His results provided mathematicians and physicists with new tools, and motivation, to investigate potential theory. Some say Green 's theorem is the natural way to Cauchy 's integral theorem, so the impact of his work is maybe not even just restricted to applied mathematics. In my opinion, the main measure of his success is that many of the theorems and ideas he presented in his Essay are still used today, even if some of them have since been slightly adapted or made more mathematically rigorous. The fact that his ideas have stood the test of time shows just how great a mathematician George Green was.
