.
In 1829 Johann Dirichlet published his paper exploring the convergence of trigonometric series. He is well-known for his conditions on functions in order for such series to converge accordingly. In order to make his ultimate claim on the limits of trigonometric series he began by proving the following theorem:
For a function that is monotonic and continuous for with , .
Let be monotonic and decreasing on with .
Consider . We will refer to this as . Let us divide this integral so that its limits are as follows: , , , , where is the greatest multiple of less than h. Integrals are alternately positive and negative since , (as each ), yet alternates in sign with each integral. Also, each integral has a smaller value than its preceding one: is decreasing each decreases as k increases; is increasing on is decreasing each decreases as k increases each decreases as k increases.
Consider , , and let . When , constant, is equivalent to since f is decreasing on each interval.
Let . Then as . We know . Split up this integral so the limits are , , ... and denote the absolute value of each integral by , e.g. . Each is alternately positive and negative, thus as . Denote the sum of the first n terms by , i.e. . Regarding we can choose an s.t. as k increases the number of integrals this splits into increases, and eventually , i.e. as , . Divide this integral into two: i) the first m integrals; ii) all integrals thereafter.
As , each (consider ) and respectively. Thus , i.e. .
By induction , i.e. , where . It is clear that . Combine these results to get . Choose an m s.t. becomes negligible. We now have that as as required.
Now let on . As in 1) each decreases as k increases, and as . If follows that if , c being some constant, as .
Suppose is monotonic and decreasing on but it is not necessary that . s.t. as . as .
Finally suppose is monotonic and increasing on . Then is as in 3) as .
This covers all cases and so the theorem is proved.    .
Now consider g s.t. . By Theorem 1 we have that and as . Taking the difference of these we get as . For consistency with Dirichlet 's paper we will refer to this result as Theorem 2. Note that if f is not continuous at g or h then we replace with .
Dirichlet continued with an attempt to find the limit of what we recognise today as the general Fourier series expansion of . Let us consider the first terms to see what happens as this can be written as:
Fourier series . We split this integral into two (and temporarily disregard the ) as follows: and . Let in the first integral and in the second. Solving for to find limits we have: and . Let us consider the second of these integrals.
Since , . Let , i.e. . It is clear the integral will be equal to 0.
Suppose , i.e. . Note can have breaks in continuity, say at . Divide the integral so its limits are now . This satisfies the conditions of Theorem 2, thus (due to the breaks in continuity of and since is arbitrarily small); all subsequent integrals converge to zero.
Now suppose , i.e. . Divide the integral into two as follows: and . The first of these integrals converges to by Theorem 1. Let in the second integral. Solving for to find limits we obtain . When , i.e. when this integral will converge to , otherwise the integral tends to zero.
To summarise: , , . is analogous to the integral we have just considered: , , . Putting these two integrals together, we have that the Fourier series converges to when (remembering to factor in ), and when . Note that breaks in continuity of cannot be consecutive by the nature of integrals, and if has no breaks in continuity the Fourier series is equal to when .
Early analysis of what we know today as Fourier series had been made by Jakob and Johann Bernoulli in the early 1700s, and later by mathematicians such as Euler and Lagrange. Joseph Fourier claimed that any function could be represented by a series of sines of multiples of the variable. Johann Dirichlet made his reputation with his first published paper on his work on Fermat 's theorem. He subsequently became acquainted with many other mathematicians, notably Joseph Fourier. Dirichlet was particularly interested in Fourier 's work in mathematical physics, especially his theory of heat. This was perhaps the origin of his interests in Fourier series.
M  moire sur l'impossibilit   de quelques equations indetermin  es du cinqui  me degr  .
Dunnington [1938] pp 173.
Although Fourier himself had used these series to solve differential equations, he failed to provide a thorough explanation of them due to the absence of precise definitions of a function and an integral during his time. At the time it was hardly considered that a series could not be integrated term by term, so Fourier series was the only trigonometric series used for representing a function. The question was, did it converge? As far as Dirichlet was aware the only paper to have been written on the subject of the convergence of Fourier series was by Cauchy in 1826. Riemann, Dirichlet 's student, claimed that Dirichlet was the first to have written a thorough account on the subject.
Cooke [1997] pp 380.
Cauchy shows in his [1826] how Poisson 's work on convergence had been non-rigorous, though ironically Dirichlet shows in his [1829] that Cauchy had also made an error: Cauchy took a convergent series, transformed it by means of complex function theory and resulted in the claim that the sum of a series of continuous functions is itself continuous. We see in Dirichlet 's paper that Dirichlet dismisses the notion of using complex numbers in this problem, and finds a counter example to Cauchy 's theorem. What is more is that Dirichlet upturns the problem by initially taking a function and proving that the Fourier series converges to it.
Cooke [1997] pp 380.
Aside from inspiration from Fourier, it seems that he recognised the value in doing mathematics at an abstract level without any application to the 'real world'. Rather than get stuck in formulae and long calculations "he preferred to clarify theorems on an intuitive or lower level, to analyse the foundations logically, and to avoid calculations as long as possible." In [1829] Dirichlet only proves the nature of convergence of Fourier series for monotonic functions. However, these conditions won Dirichlet his fame regarding the work of Fourier series, paving the way for future mathematicians to continue in the same direction. Riemann was later to become interested in the necessary conditions for a function to be represented by a Fourier series, leading to what we know today as the Riemann integral and the Riemann-Lebesgue lemma.
Dunnington [1938] pp 180.
